VOL. XXI. JULY 15, 1900. No. 14. 



CONTENTS. 



Views From the Watch Tower 211 

Is the China Trouble Prophetically 

Significant? 211 

The Shepherds Disappointed and 

Chagrined 212 

The Ministry of Comfort 214 

"Forgive Us our Debts as We Forgive 

Our Debtors" 216 

The Parable of the Two Debtors 218 

"Who did Sin, this Man or his 

Parents?" 219 

Orientalism, Mormonism, 

Theosophy 220 

Is All Sickness of the Devil? 220 

Christian Science Misbeliefs 222 

Out of Darkness Into Light 224 

page 210 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, N.Y. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



BRITISH BRANCH NO. 131 GIPSY LANE, FOREST GATE, 
LONDON EAST, ENGLAND. 



R2664 : page 210 
PROGRESS OF THE CAUSE IN GREAT BRITAIN. 

The Lord's blessing attends the British Branch. Four colporteurs 
are at work there with good success. Brother Henninges 
writes of their work thus,— "The results of their labors 
for the last two months show that any one of average intelligence 
and activity can, with the Lord's blessing, sustain himself 
in the work. Give a clarion call from the WATCH TOWER 
for more laborers for this great field, advising would-be laborers 
to write to the British Branch for terms, territory, etc." 

Respecting the "Volunteer" service Bro. H. says,— "The 
Volunteer work is progressing well; particularly in this city 
(London), where we have so far put out 14,000 copies. The 
work is going on in four sections of the city. Yesterday was 
the first day on "double turn" (A.M. and P.M.) and the total 
number of copies of the Volunteer TOWER distributed was 4000. 
At this rate we shall soon be obliged to call on you for funds 
for another 100,000 edition." 

Our Society has just rented a very desirable meeting place 
where Sunday meetings will be regularly held. It is a public 
hall opposite the Great Eastern Ry. station, and near Wansted 
Park station of Midland Ry. The entrance is No. 79 Woodgrange 
Road, Forest Gate, London E. All who trust in the precious blood 
of Christ will be cordially welcomed. Seats free. No collections. 

THE COLPORTEUR WORK AT HOME. 

We have had many additions to this service lately, but still 
there is room for consecrated laborers. The harvest is great, 
the laborers few, comparatively, and the time is short— "the 
eleventh hour." Write us for particulars if you have the desire 
and the opportunity to thus "preach the Word." 

page 210 

CHICAGO CONVENTION, SEPT. 1,2,3. 

ONE RAILWAY FARE FOR ROUND TRIP,-PARTICULARS NEXT ISSUE. 



R2662 : page 211 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 



IS THE CHINA TROUBLE PROPHETICALLY SIGNIFICANT? 



Apparently a serious crisis in the world's affairs 
is being reached in China. For the past sixty years 
Europeans have been intruding themselves upon the 
Chinese, ostensibly for the benevolent purpose of blessing 
the Chinese with European civilization, but really 
for commercial purposes;— supplying their needs for a 
money consideration. Subsequently, about forty years 
ago, under compulsory regulations forced upon the 
Chinese, Christian missionaries were permitted to enter 
the Flowery Empire to contradict its religious 
and moral ideas cherished for centuries. The new 
religion brought family strife— especially because it 
taught the people that their ancestors (whom the Chinese 
worship as demi-gods), not being believers in the 
only name wherein is salvation, were lost eternally- 
doomed to everlasting torments. 

These missionaries, and all foreign merchants who 
lodged with them, were specially protected by treaty 
laws and regulations, and thus were exempted from 
Chinese laws and became a favored people, possessed 
of greater privileges and liberties than the natives. 
Moreover, the missionaries (especially the Romanists, 
from all accounts) attempted to extend these special 
treaty rights to such Chinese as professed conversion 
—the priests became the attorneys of their people, and 
by arguments and threats, etc., generally got their 
faithful free from charges brought against them. 

Thus inch by inch the white man forcibly intruded 
upon the yellow man, until the war between 
China and Japan, which displayed to the civilized world 
the helplessness of China, the second greatest nation 
of the world numerically (400,000,000). Since then 
the white man's arrogance has increased, and the 
newspapers of the world have told the Chinese that it 
is only a question of time until their nation will no 
longer exist, being divided among the nations of Europe, 
who have grasped ports and whole districts, 
compelling a nominal acquiescence on the part of the 
Chinese. 

The Chinese are a thrifty people and peaceably 
disposed and not specially patriotic,— else they would 
not have submitted to these intrusions so long as they 
have. Indeed, they are quite tolerant toward foreigners 
who will adopt their civilization, submit to their 
laws and mind their own business. Understanding 
the circumstances, we cannot so much wonder at the 
recent uprising against foreigners under the auspices 
of an athletic society called the "Boxers." It is worthy 
of note that the present outbreak, while it has extended 
to all missionaries and all foreigners, nevertheless 
began with Roman Catholics exclusively. Much 
as we must deprecate the killing of many missionaries 
and many native converts, we must admit that such 
an uprising would have occurred long ago among 



white men of any nationality. Lack of patriotic sentiment 

amongst the Chinese, and inferior armament, 

etc., accounts for the delay of this outbreak: the people 

have been kept so busy providing for life's necessities 

that love of money has crowded out love of 

country. 

Europe is astounded at the late uprising, for two 
reasons. (1) It offers a suggestion that a patriotic feeling 
may yet take hold of the Chinese, which with 
their overwhelming numbers would make them a menace 

R2662 : page 212 

to Europe; for they could muster an army twice 
as numerous as could all Europe combined— an army 
accustomed to obedience, and very economical. (2) 
Even should the whites succeed in coercing the Chinese, 
and hold the kingdom as a vassal empire, or 
divide it amongst the "more civilized," the danger is 
that international jealousies over shares in the spoils, 
"spheres of influence," etc., would ultimately lead to 
great wars, far-reaching in their influence, and quite 
possibly involving all Europe. 

It is from this standpoint that affairs in China are 
of special interest to those who know that we are living 
in the harvest time of the Gospel age, and who are 
instructed from the Word of God to expect this age 
to close with a great time of trouble— beginning with 
international complications, and ending with anarchy. 

R2663 : page 212 

From this standpoint we examine the Scriptures and 
note the following as seemingly pertinent, indicating 
that every nation of earth will be involved in the trouble, 
but that "Christendom," "Babylon," "Sheshach," 
will be the last to drink the cup of wrath. We quote 
from Jeremiah 25:15-33, as follows:— 

"Thus saith the Lord God of Israel unto me: 
Take the wine-cup of this fury at my hand, and cause 
all the nations to whom I send thee, to drink it. And 
they shall drink, and be moved, and be mad, because 
of the sword that I will send among them. ...All 
the kings of the north, far and near, one with another, 
and all the kingdoms of the world which are upon 
the face of the earth: and the king of Sheshach shall 
drink after them. 

"Therefore thou shalt say unto them, Thus saith 
the Lord of hosts, the God of Israel: Drink ye and be 
drunken, and spue and fall, and rise no more, because 
of the sword which I will send among you. 

"And it shall be if they refuse to take the cup at 
thine hand to drink, then shalt thou say unto them, 
Thus saith the Lord of hosts: Ye shall certainly drink: 
...for I will call for a sword upon all the inhabitants 
of the earth, saith the Lord of hosts. ...The Lord 



hath a controversy with the nations: he will plead 
with all flesh; he will give them that are wicked to 
the sword, saith the Lord.... 

"Behold, evil shall go forth from nation to nation, 
and a great whirlwind shall be raised up from the 
coasts [boundaries] of the earth. And the slain of 
the Lord shall be at that day from one end of the earth 
even unto the other end of the earth: they shall not 
be lamented, neither gathered, nor buried." 

It is not for us to prophesy, but to seek to interpret 
and apply prophecy: and even then we are to 
learn from the past that it is not the divine purpose 
that matters prophetically revealed shall be understood 
in detail until during or after fulfilment;— and then 
by those taught of God. We therefore merely suggest 
that, in harmony with the foregoing Scriptures, 
it will not surprise us if the Chinese are entering now 
their share of the great day of wrath upon all nations; 
—about to drink their share of the cup of divine wrath, 
which is to bring all nations low, as an experience 
preparatory to the great blessing of all the world under 
the Millennial Kingdom. And if it was appropriate 
that Israel, the natural seed of Abraham, upon 
rejection of Messiah should be punished and destroyed 
nationally, eighteen centuries ago, will it be strange 
if other nations also be compelled to drink of the same 
cup of wrath?— See verse 29. 

India has already been severely scourged with 
famine and pestilence, yet these may be only the beginnings 
of her share in the cup of wrath, which we 
understand will be to every nation, as it drinks thereof, 
a time of trouble without precedent. Probably the 
trouble will extend from nation to nation during the 
next few years, until finally, despite every effort to 
avert it (verse 28), great Babylon's turn will come- 
probably within ten years from now, when she must 
drink the very dregs of the cup, suffering more severely 
than the heathen nations, even as she has enjoyed 
greater privileges and sinned against greater 
light. "Babylon— Sheshach— shall drink after them." 
—Verse 26. 

As the "Gospel of the Kingdom" was circulated 
throughout Palestine before its trouble and overthrow, 
so we believe the same Gospel of the Kingdom will be 
preached for a witness to each nation before its trouble 
comes. China probably contains but few fully consecrated 
Christians, and these chiefly among the missionaries, 
and hence the "harvest" message might 
quickly reach them all. In this connection it will be 
interesting to note, (1) that under divine providence 
our dear Brother H. A. Randle sent a special personal 
appeal to each Christian missionary in China, and 
later many tracts and DAWNS, about a year before this 
trouble broke out; (2) the Watch Tower Bible and 
Tract Society sent tracts and booklets extensively to 
the same missionaries last year. True, we cannot say 



that many have received the truth; but we had no 
reason to expect that many would receive it. Yet the 
witness was given to all before their great time of 
trouble came. And who knows but what this interruption 
of mission work, backed by the truth, may 
set others to thinking in another direction— to looking 
and praying for God's Kingdom to come, as the only 
hope of the world. 

THE SHEPHERDS DISAPPOINTED AND CHAGRINED. 



Reverses in the mission fields of the world, one 
after another, will be very discouraging to ministers 
who have been preaching to themselves and others 
that a peaceful conversion of the world to Christ is 
near at hand: that thus the Millennial Kingdom will 
be introduced. They will find that they have been 

R2663 : page 213 

uttering a false cry, saying, Peace, Peace, when there 
is no peace, and can be no peace satisfactory or lasting 
until the Prince of Peace, Immanuel, shall establish 
it through his Kingdom, by breaking in pieces the 
nations as a potter's vessel, and establishing his Kingdom 
on a different basis in their stead— on their ruins. 
Note now how the same prophecy refers to this despair 
of the pastors, etc., of nominal Christendom, at 
the spoliation of their pasture fields, as follows:— 

"Howl, ye shepherds [pastors], and cry; and 
wallow yourselves in the ashes, ye principal of the 
flock: for the days of your slaughter and of your dispersion 
are come; and ye shall fall [and be ruined] 
like a delicate vessel. And the shepherds shall have 
no way to flee, nor the principal of the flock to escape. 
A voice of crying from the shepherds [pastors] and 
an howling from the principal of the flock shall be 
heard; for the Lord hath spoiled their pasture."— 
SeeJer. 25:34-37. 



Lord Salisbury, the British Prime Minister, addressing 
The Society for the Propagation of the Gospel 
in Foreign Parts, recently said:— 

"Just look at this Chinese matter. You observe 
all the people who are slaughtered. Do you imagine 
that they are slaughtered simply because the Chinese 
dislike their religion? There is no nation in the world 
so indifferent on the subject of religion as the Chinese! 
It is because they and other nations have got the idea 
that missionary work is a mere instrument of the 
secular government to achieve the objects it has in 
view. In the East they have the proverb, 'First the 



Missionary, then the Consul, then the General.' 



The London Spectator, commenting on the general 
dislike of Europeans by Asiatics, now being exemplified 
in China, says:— 

"There is in China no race hatred, or color hatred, 
or, as we believe, hatred of creed for Chinese Christians. 
They could be tolerated quite well as mere 
idiots, but that those who dislike their ideas fear them 
also, and believe that unless those who propagate 
them are extirpated the ideas will win. The Europeans, 
they say, are already convincing many; they 
have almost persuaded our Emperor; year by year 
their views are advancing among the people,— if they 
and their disciples are suffered to live, our religion, 
our civilization, our social system, all are lost together. 
As for our literati, they will be ruined first, for they 
are our officials. People wonder that the harmless 
missionaries should be the objects of such a passion, 
that they should be disemboweled instead of merely 
beheaded; but think of the treatment of the Christians 
by the Roman Judges and we shall begin to understand 
the Chinese movement. Add but a little fear 
to the feelings already generated, and who would answer 
for the lives of Jews in France, or Germany, or 
Russia, or for those of Anarchists in any part of Europe? 
Asiatics in all ages have believed the amalgam 
of beliefs and social ways which constitutes their civilization, 
to be divine and unimprovable, and regard 
those who despise it, and preach against it, and shake 
it, as the intrusive Europeans certainly do, with a 
horror which of itself extinguishes the feeling of a 
common humanity. They have no more sense that 
slaughtering such is wicked, than the Parisians had 
when they massacred the Huguenots, or than English 
sportsmen have when they organize a battue of birds." 



General Lord Wolsley, of the British War Department, 
takes a very pessimistic view of the outlook in 
China, which is corroborated by the accumulating 
evidences that since the China-Japan war China has 
been quietly drilling her troops and arming them with 
modern weapons, machine guns, etc. He said 
recently,— 

"China possesses every requisite for overrunning 
the world. She has a population of 400,000,000, all 
speaking the same language, or dialect, readily understood 
from one end of the empire to the other. She 
has enormously developed wealth, and still enormous 
natural wealth awaiting development. Her men, if 
properly drilled and led, are admirable soldiers. They 
are plucky, and able to live on next to nothing. Moreover, 



they are absolutely fearless of death. Begin 
with the foundation of millions upon millions of such 
soldiers as those men are capable of being made, and 
tell me, if you can, where the end will be." 

A Chinese gentleman of education explains that 
the present trouble is occasioned by the Chinese lack of 
conscience: that well-meaning missionaries are duped 

R2664 : page 213 

by many of those professing conversion. He says for 
instance,— 

A Chinaman, an executor of a relative's will, may 
decide to cheat the orphans under his care. He arranges 
the matter readily with the Mandarin ruler by 
promising him one-half the booty. Later he concludes 
to give him but one-eighth, and to pave the way attends 
mission meetings, etc. Then he represents himself 
as terribly persecuted because of his new religion, 
and through the missionary secures consular protection 
which hinders him from being tried in a Chinese 
court. This step is taken months in advance of 
his refusal to give the Mandarin the promised one-half 
of his booty. 

The missionary, unused to such duplicity, labors, 
as he supposes, for justice for the oppressed, but the 
result of his efforts may be summed up thus,— 

"Net result: A misled missionary confirmed in 
his wrong-headedness; a would-be dishonest mandarin 
baffled and infuriated; two orphans robbed of their 
inheritance; food for nine days' gossip, and stirring 
up of hatred of 'foreign devils'; the whole a piece of 
rank injustice. 

"Let me deliberately state that I am quite certain 
there is not one town in the whole length and breadth 
of China that has been visited by missionaries, in which 
you could not at this moment find indisputable evidence 

R2664 : page 214 

of a case similar in all essentials to the example 
I have given you." 

We wonder how long it will require our dear 
friends interested in missions to learn that God 
is seeking as his "elect" not the lowest, but 
the highest types of man;— that now is not 
the Lord's time forjudging the heathen— that as the 
Apostle declares, "God hath appointed a day [the 
Millennial day— 2 Pet. 3:8] in the which he will judge 
the world in righteousness." (Acts 17:31.) When they 
learn this they will see the un-wisdom of attempting 
to forestall Jehovah's plan, and will cooperate rather in 
his great and gracious arrangement of first calling and 
preparing an "elect" Church, which by and by shall, as 
God's "royal priesthood," with their glorious Lord, 
Jesus, as fully competent missionaries, bless the heathen 



with the gracious opportunity of salvation promised. 
Perhaps a signal failure of present missions, and 
spoiling of pastures, may be God's method for awakening 
his true servants now deluded and blinded by false 
doctrines contrary to the Word. 



R2664 : page 214 

THE MINISTRY OF COMFORT. 



"The Lord hath anointed me. ..to comfort all that mourn; to appoint 
[promise] unto them that mourn in Zion, to give unto them beauty 
for ashes, the oil of joy for mourning, the garment of praise 
for the spirit of heaviness; that they might be called trees of 
righteousness, the planting of the Lord, that he might be glorified." 
—Isaiah 6 1: 1-3. — 

OUR TEXT is surely good tidings in a very 

broad and a very deep sense. Its message is 

one of "comfort," not only to Zion, the consecrated 

Church, but to all who mourn; and as mentally we 

cast our eyes over the world we are deeply impressed 

with the thought that the vast majority of mankind 

are in mourning: as the Apostle expresses it, "The 

whole creation groaneth and travaileth in pain together." 

There are undoubtedly a few who are full, 

satisfied, and who mourn for nothing, and who, therefore, 

under these conditions, are excluded from any 

share in this promised blessing; but they are exceptions 

to the rule. Some of them are wealthy in this 

world's goods, and feel that they have need of nothing, 

and are kept busy with their efforts to enjoy themselves. 

There are others of the same full class who, 

tho not wealthy, have a very self-satisfied feeling as 

respects their moral status: they do not realize themselves 

as sinners; they do not realize their daily imperfections 

nor their need of a Savior; and are not 

mourning for anything, and not therefore in the way 

to be comforted with any of the comforting assurances 

and promises and provision which the Lord has made 

for those who mourn. 

So far as the world is concerned, our Lord's ministry 
of comfort to them is chiefly a future work. We 
rejoice, however, that the time is sure to come when 
all that mourn, all the "groaning creation," shall be 
brought under the blessed influences and provisions 
of the Millennial Kingdom, and shall there come to 
know the consolations which God has provided in 
Christ:— the balm for every trouble, every wound; the 
cure for every blight, every sin and every imperfection; 
and their privilege of profiting by these to the 
fullest measure by giving themselves unreservedly 



into the care of the Good Physician. But the poor 
world, blinded and deceived by the god of this world 
as respects the character and plan of Jehovah, can 
neither see, hear, nor appreciate now the wonderful 
provisions made for them, and hence they cannot receive 
the blessing, the consolation, the "comfort" 
now, but must wait for it until the establishment of 
the Lord's Kingdom, the binding of Satan, and the 
opening of their understanding with the eye-salve of 
the truth. 

But as respects Zion, the consecrated Church, 
this comfort is now her privilege, and all children of 
Zion need to be comforted. First of all, they need the 
comforting knowledge that their sins are forgiven, 
and that they are no longer strangers and aliens and 
foreigners, but children of God, joint-heirs with Jesus 
Christ their Lord, if so be that they suffer with him. 
They need to be comforted, too, with the assurances 
of the Lord's Word that our God is very sympathetic, 
"very pitiful," and that if anyone be overtaken in a 
fault he may be restored, and "not be utterly cast 
down." If the children of Zion had no such consolations 
as these they surely would be utterly discouraged, 
disheartened, and faint by the way; hence the 
Lord has provided these comforting assurances, pointing 
out to them that having begun a good work in 
them he is desirous of completing it, if they will permit 
him to do so, and that to this end they must abide 
in Christ by faith, coupled with obedience to the extent 
of their ability. What Christian is there who 
has not shared these consolations, these comforts; and 
what Christian has not needed them, and realized that 
without them he would long since have been undone? 

The Scriptures point out to us that our comfort 
comes through fellowship with the heavenly Father 
and with our Lord Jesus: we are comforted, not by 
believing that they are ignorant of our weaknesses and 
shortcomings, nor that they have a low standard of 
righteousness and a sinful basis of fellowship, but 
quite to the contrary of all this, they comfort us with 
the assurance that altho our every imperfection is 

R2665 : page 215 

known to the Lord he is yet very sympathetic, very 
merciful; and that having provided, in the great sacrifice 
at Calvary, a full propitiation (satisfaction) for 
all sins, the Lord is very pleased to apply, on behalf 
of each of his adopted children, in full measure, the 
riches of grace necessary to the covering and offsetting 
of every unintentional, unapproved error and failure. 
What comfort is here! What consolation! What privileges 
of fellowship with the Father and with the Son! 

And this comfort, the Scriptures assure us, comes 
to us through the holy spirit— it is the channel, and, 
hence indeed, called the Comforter. (John 14:26.) 



Those who have the holy spirit may have the comfort; 
those who do not have the holy spirit may not have 
this comfort, this consolation. It is only as we receive 
of the spirit of the Lord, the mind of the Lord, his 
disposition, that we are able to understand and appreciate 
the lengths and breadths, the heights and depths 
of his love and compassion and provision for us, and 
to be comforted thereby. 

Nevertheless, this comfort of the holy spirit (the 
channel of divine favor), reaches us through the Scriptures, 
for the Scriptures are the medium, or sub-channel 
through which the knowledge of God's grace and the 
comfort of all knowledge reach us; in the Apostle's 
language, "Whatsoever things were written aforetime 
were written for our learning, that we through patience 
and comfort of the Scriptures might have hope."— 
Rom. 15:4. 

Yet while this comfort is of the Father, through 
the Son, by the holy spirit, communicated through 
the Scriptures, we are informed that in great measure 
it is communicated by the members of the body of 
Christ one to another, as the Apostle, for instance, after 
relating certain features of the divine plan respecting 
the deliverance of the Church, says, "Wherefore, 
comfort one another with these words." (1 Thess. 4: 18.) 
Similarly, the Apostle declares that he sent 
Timothy to the Church at Ephesus, and again to the 
Church at Colosse, that he might comfort their hearts. 
This, of course, signifies that he was to draw their attention 
to the exceeding great and precious promises 
of the Lord's Word, and that thus they might drink 
in the holy spirit of all the promises, and that thus 
they might be comforted, not only with respect to the 
things promised, but with respect to the loving compassion 
and sympathy of him who promises them. 

Writing to the Thessalonians, the Apostle says 
that he sent Timothy— "to establish you and to comfort 
you concerning your faith, that no man should be 
moved by these afflictions: for yourselves know that 
we are appointed thereunto: for verily, when we were 
with you we told you we should suffer tribulation, 
even as it came to pass and ye know. For this cause, 
when I could no longer forbear, I sent to know your 
faith, lest by some means the tempter had tempted 
you." (1 Thess. 3:2-5.) Here again it is evident that 
the comforting signifies and implies establishment in 
the faith once delivered to the saints, that all the terms 
and conditions of our covenant should be clearly held 
in mind, and that the promises of reward at the end 
of the journey might serve to comfort, strengthen and 
establish the children of Zion in their endurance of the 
tribulations as good soldiers. This comfort, again, was 
of the Lord, through the holy spirit, through the 
agency of Paul and Timothy. Again, the same Apostle, 
speaking in the same strain, says, "Wherefore, 
comfort yourselves together, and edify one another, 



even as also ye do."— 1 Thess. 5:11. 

All of the Lord's people need to remember that 
in proportion as they are ambassadors of the Lord, 
and his representatives, it will be their privilege not 
only by and by in the Kingdom to "comfort all that 
mourn," and to be the trees of righteousness, whose 
leaves will be for the healing of the nations (Rev. 22:2), 
but they should remember that in the present life they 
have a ministry of comfort to perform also, toward all 
who mourn in Zion— toward all of the Lord's people 
who are in any tribulation, physical or mental disquiet, 
dis-ease; and they should remember, too, that 
just in proportion as they are filled with this spirit 
now, it is their privilege to bind up the broken-hearted, 
and comfort the mourning ones. No one can have 
this spirit of helpfulness, this disposition to comfort 
and to strengthen, and to edify, and to upbuild the 
household of faith, except he have in considerable 
measure the spirit of the truth, the spirit of the Lord, 
the spirit of love: and in proportion as each seeks to 
cultivate this privilege of brotherly helpfulness, in 
comforting and upbuilding and strengthening, in that 
same proportion he will find the spirit of love developing 
and abounding in his own heart, and that his 
likeness to the Lord Jesus, the Head of the body, is 
becoming more pronounced from day to day and from 
year to year. 

Finally, in view of what we have seen respecting 
the Lord's goodness toward his people, and the methods 
by which he comforts them through the holy spirit, 
the Scriptures and the brethren, let us note one of the 
Apostle's expressions respecting the great comfort and 
consolation which God has provided for his consecrated, 
faithful people, saying— 

"Blessed be God, even the Father of our Lord 
Jesus Christ, the Father of mercies, the God of all 
comfort, who comforteth us in all our tribulation, that 
we may be able to comfort them which are in any 
trouble, by the comfort wherewith we ourselves are 
comforted of God."— 2 Cor. 1:3,4. 

R2665 : page 216 

So then, all of our lessons and experiences in life 
in connection with trials and difficulties and tribulations, 
if we are rightly exercised by them, should 
bring us larger experiences in the Lord's comfort, 
through the gracious promises of his Word and the 
spirit of the same; and should make us the more capable 
and efficient agents and representatives of the 
Lord, his Word and his spirit, in communicating 
comfort to others about us in their trials and 
difficulties. 



R2665 : page 216 

"FORGIVE US OUR DEBTS AS WE FORGIVE OUR DEBTORS. 

--MATT. 18:21-35.-AUGUST 12.- 

APPARENTLY this lesson grew out of the preceding 
one on the necessity for guarding against 
stumbling the least of the Lord's little ones. It would 
appear that Peter had immediately attempted to put 
into practice the instructions of the previous lesson, and 
it was his inquiry as to how often it would be his duty 
to exercise forgiveness toward a repentant brother, that 
gave our Lord the opportunity to inculcate a lesson upon 
the subject of forgiveness. 

The teaching of the Jewish rabbis on the subject 
of forgiveness was, that if the wrong-doer repented of 
his evil words or actions and came to the aggrieved person, 
acknowledging his wrong and asking forgiveness, 
he should be granted forgiveness as often as three times. 
They based their teaching on this subject on the statements 
of Job 33:29— margin, and Amos 2:4. Our Lord's 
teaching on the subject was, in many respects, the reverse 
of this, and required the offended one to go to the 
offender to make inquiry respecting the matter, and to 
show him his fault. This would require great humility 
on the part of the one who felt himself aggrieved, for it 
is much easier to resent and avoid the injurer, than to 
go to him according to the rule which our Lord has 
laid down. Peter seems to have gotten the impression 
that the Lord's rule, being different from that of the 
rabbis in this respect, would also probably be more 
generous and require that forgiveness be granted a larger 
number of times; hence Peter adds together the three 
and the four times mentioned by Amos, making seven 
in all, and inquires whether the Lord would have his 
followers be generous and forgiving to those who trespassed 
against them to that extent— seven times. What 
must have been his astonishment, and that of all the 
apostles, to hear the Lord say that forgiveness should 
be accorded, practically, times without number— seventy 
times seven. 

The thought would seem to be that those who become 
the Lord's people, partakers of his spirit, the 
spirit of love, will, in proportion as they are filled with 
that spirit and led by that spirit, be so generous, so 
magnanimous, so loving, that they would not only be 
willing but glad to forgive a repentant brother;— glad to be 
first to extend the olive branch and to make his way back 
to reconciliation and harmony as smooth as possible. 
From hearts full of pride, envy, malice and other elements 
of the spirit of selfishness and sin, and merely 
topped off with a coat of benevolence and generosity, 
it will be impossible to dip out very much of the spirit 
of forgiveness, without dipping out with it some of the 
bitterness and hatred; and even with this mixture forgiveness 



could not be granted very freely by an unregenerated 
heart. But with a heart emptied of malice, 
and hatred and envy, and filled with brotherly kindness, 
meekness, patience, gentleness, forbearance, love, we 
may dip a cup of forgiveness on every occasion and as 
oft as it may be applied for, and it will be without a 
mixture of evil, bitterness, sarcasm, etc., but pure and 
unadulterated, generous, loving forgiveness. 

We are to remember, however, that this holy spirit 
which we have in our earthen vessels did not abound 
there at first, but with all was merely a surface coating, 
as it were, to begin with. Gradually, as the holy 

R2666 : page 216 

spirit increased in our hearts and abounded, it displaced 

the wrong spirit; hence those who are able from their 

hearts to dip the cup of forgiveness repeatedly and without 

a mixture of evil thereby give evidence that they 

have been with Jesus and have learned of him, and 

that they have drunk deeply of his spirit, and that they 

have been purging out the old leaven of malice, and 

are being sanctified by the truth, being made meet for 

the inheritance of the saints in light. We are to remember 

that this growth in grace, while it has a positive 

time of beginning, in our consecration vow, is nevertheless 

a gradual work, requiring patient perseverance 

in well-doing, requiring also that the old nature, with 

its evil disposition, be mortified continually— deadened 

—so that our minds may be renewed under the transforming 

influence of the spirit of the truth, in which 

we are to grow daily. 

The "seventy times seven," mentioned by our 
Lord, we would not understand to signify a limited 
number of times, but rather an unlimited number- 
that whoever has the Lord's spirit will be glad at any 
time to witness a repentance of evil-doers and to accord 
them forgiveness. This does not imply, however, that 
there may be no penalties attached with the forgiveness; 
as, for instance, in the dealing of a parent with a child, 
the moral obliquity of the misconduct may be forgiven, 

R2666 : page 217 

and the parent's indignation against the disobedience 
or misbehavior pass away immediately, and yet it may 
be proper at times to impose some penalty on the trespassing 
child. In every such case, however, it should 
be clearly understood by the child that this is not because 
of the parent's disfavor, which has ceased in the 
forgiveness, but that his peculiar parental duty requires 
that a lesson shall be taught which will be helpful to 
the child in the formation of character. In such a case 
the love of the parent will of necessity be generous, 
sympathetic, and careful that the punishment shall be 
only such as might properly be of benefit to the child— 



correction in righteousness, not in wrath. However, 
such corrections as this belong only to parents and 
guardians, and do not properly extend to brethren in 
the Lord's family, who are not commissioned to judge 
and to punish one another, but to assist one another,— 
the Master's words to such being most positive and 
emphatic, "Judge nothing before the time." "Dearly 
beloved, avenge not yourselves, but rather give place 
unto wrath." "Remember him who hath said, Vengeance 
is mine, I will repay, saith the Lord." 
"Heir of the same inheritance, 
Child of the self-same God, 
He hath but stumbled in the path 
We have in weakness trod." 

In the family of God, the saints, begotten of the 
holy spirit, are all to be recognized as brethren, and to 
be dealt with accordingly. It is the new creature, and 
not the old creature, that is the brother in Christ; hence 
we may love the new creature, and in some respects 
have very little love for the old, just as all have disrespect 
for certain blemishes in their own mortal flesh, 
as they realize its weakness and imperfection,— and the 
more so in proportion as they grow in the divine likeness 
as new creatures. If, therefore, a brother should 
trespass against us it should be our first thought that 
this wrong done us is not by the brother, the new creature 
in Christ, but by his mortal flesh, which for the 
moment has gotten the upper hand with him or to some 
extent blinded him. Accordingly, instead of feeling 
angry with the brother, we should feel sympathetic, and 
our hearts should go out to him, and our desire be strong 
to do him good and to help him to overcome the weaknesses 
of his earthen vessel. 

It is in line with this thought that our Lord suggests 
that the proper course is for the aggrieved one to 
go quietly, without saying a word to anyone else, and 
have a kindly conference with the one who is doing him 
wrong, seeking to point out the merits and demerits of 
the question at issue, and if possible to gain the brother 
back to fellowship, righteousness, harmony with the 
Lord. If this shall be unavailing, the next step shall 
be still a secret one— the taking of two or three brethren 
of supposedly good heart and large experience, and that 
without attempting to prejudice their minds, and to ask 
these to hear the cause and to give counsel as to which 
one is in error. Whichever of the brethren is in error 
should be convinced by his fellow-pilgrims, whose arguments 
with him should be based upon the Scriptures 
and the spirit of love; but if differences still exist between 
them, and cannot be harmonized, then, as a court 
of last resort, the matter should be taken before the 
Church— the consecrated— and after being heard by the 
Church, its decision should be considered final, and be 
accepted by all. If either of the brethren still have 
doubts as to his receiving justice in the matter he may 
console himself with the thought that he will surely obtain 



a blessing by giving full and hearty assent to the 
Lord's arrangements, even if he have so large a measure 
of self-conceit that he still believes his side of the question 
to be right, notwithstanding the judgment of all 
the brethren to the contrary. 

Whoever will thus humble himself in obedience to 
the voice of the Church will have a blessing, and as we 
understand the Lord, it will be reasonable for him to 
expect that the voice of the Church in such a matter 
will be supernaturally guided, that truth and righteousness 
may triumph. But amongst the Lord's people, let 
us not forget that this is the highest tribunal, and that 
brother should not go to law with brother in the worldly 
courts, however much he may feel himself aggrieved: 
if he have the forgiving spirit he certainly will rest the 
matter where the Lord directs, and that too without 
harboring any unkind or ungenerous sentiments. This 
will be the certain effect of the indwelling of the spirit 
of holiness, the spirit of love. 

In respect to dealings with those who are without, 
in the matter of forgiveness, believing husbands dealing 
with unbelieving wives, or believing wives dealing with 
unbelieving husbands, or believing persons in business 
relationship with unbelievers: the same spirit of love 
and generosity and forgiveness will apply in every case, 
but not exactly the same way. The believer should be 
generous toward the unbeliever— he should expect in 
himself a larger measure of generosity than he would 
expect from the unbeliever, because he has had lessons 
and experiences in the school of Christ which the unbeliever 
never had; he has received the new mind, which 
the unbeliever knows not of. He should not only, 
therefore, be just in his dealings, but additionally, in 
proportion as he may be able, he should be generous, 
forgiving, not too exacting. 

However, if an unbelieving partner have attempted 
a fraud, the believing partner, while exercising a spirit 
of generosity toward him, if the matter appears to have 
been wilful, should deliver the offender to the world's 
courts, which he acknowledges, not prosecuting in a 

R2666 : page 218 

spirit of anger or malice or hatred, but as doing his duty 
toward society for the suppression of evil-doers in proportion 
as the laws and arrangements of the world are 
reasonable from a Christian standpoint. And even if 
he should fully forgive, concluding that there were extenuating 
circumstances which would not require that 
he should deliver the guilty one to the judges of earthly 
courts, he might properly enough esteem it to be his 
duty to have no further dealings with such a person, 
whom he could not trust. This would not imply any 
lack of forgiveness, but merely a reasonable and commendable 
prudence. 
Indeed, the consecrated people of God are admonished 



by the Apostle not to be unequally yoked with 
unbelievers, and this might not unreasonably be applied, 
not only to marriage, but also to business engagements 
and alliances. Similarly, the Apostle informs 
us that if the unbelieving husband or wife choose to 
depart from the believer, the latter may conclude that 
it is providential and for his deliverance from an unequal 
yoke, as the Apostle says, "Let the unbeliever 
depart"— permit him to cancel the marriage contract 
if he will. 

THE PARABLE OF THE TWO DEBTORS. 



As was his custom, our Lord illustrated his teaching 
on this subject with a parable: the king, in the 
parable, first forgives one of his servants a very large 
indebtedness— that is, he permits him to go free, as tho 
he had no such indebtedness against him, that he might 
do what he could toward the payment of the debt. 
This servant in turn finds a fellow-servant who owes 
him a trifling sum, and who likewise promises its payment: 
but the unmerciful servant, not having the spirit 
of the king, is ungenerous and exacting, and refusing forgiveness 
attempts to exact it through force. The matter 
reaching the ears of the king, he is justly incensed 
at such conduct on the part of one who has himself 
been so generously treated, and, in consequence, he puts 
in operation the machinery of justice which will punish 
the unmerciful servant by now requesting of him the 
payment of his full debt; and our Lord followed the 
parable with the statement, "So likewise shall the heavenly 
Father do to you if ye from your hearts forgive 
not everyone his brother their trespasses." 

Not only did our Lord address these words to the 
disciples and not to the multitude, but additionally he 
declared that the illustration was applicable to those 
reckoned members of his Kingdom, saying, "The Kingdom 
of heaven is likened unto" this parable. The parable, 
therefore, is not an illustration of the Lord's 

R2667 : page 218 

dealings with the world of mankind, but rather an illustration 
of his dealings with those who have become separated 
from the world through the forgiveness of their 
sins, and who additionally have become heirs of the 
Kingdom through consecration of themselves to the Lord 
Jesus, to suffer with him, if so be that they may also 
reign with him. The parable, therefore, is to the 
Church, and suggests to us that our original sin was 
not blotted out, not forgiven in the absolute sense of 
the word forgiven, but in the language of the Scriptures, 
"covered." "Blessed is the man whose sin is covered, 
to whom the Lord doth not impute iniquity."— Psalm 32:1,2; 



Acts 3:19. 

Our sins were covered from the Lord's sight, and 
we were treated as tho we owed him nothing, by his 
grace, exercised toward us through Christ Jesus and 
his atoning sacrifice; and this reckoned forgiveness will 
be made actual by and by, and the debt entirely canceled, 
if, according to the New Covenant we have made 
with the Lord, we shall prove faithful in cultivating 
his spirit of love and in becoming copies of his dear 
Son, our Lord Jesus Christ,— forgiving others as we 
would be forgiven by the Lord, loving, sympathizing 
with and helping others as we have been treated by 
the Lord, etc. 

The parable is but an illustration of the Golden 
Text of our lesson, taken from the Lord's prayer: it is 
only so long as we are willing to forgive our debtors 
that we may pray with confidence to our heavenly Father 
and hope for his forgiveness of our trespasses. If we 
forgive not our fellow-creatures, and that not merely 
in word, but in deed and from the heart, neither will 
our heavenly Father forgive our trespasses, and altho 
he has generously covered them from his sight, and 
treated us as justified by faith, he would immediately 
remember our trespasses against us, and thus our justification 
would lapse or be abrogated, by a failure on 
our part to exercise the holy spirit toward the brethren 
and toward all men as we have opportunity. 

From this standpoint the question of forgiveness 
of the brethren and forgiveness of all others is a very 
serious one to the Lord's people. It means that if they 
do not in a reasonable time develop this spirit of forgiveness, 
the spirit of love, the spirit of God, the holy 
spirit, they cannot continue to be recognized as Christ's 
disciples, they cannot continue to be recognized as children 
of God, they cannot be recognized as having their 
sins covered, but, on the contrary, will be treated as 
even more responsible than the world of mankind in 
general, and have executed upon them severer punishments 
than will be exacted from others who knew not 
the Master's will, and who have never tasted of his 
grace, and who therefore would be less culpable in the 
exercise of a selfish, uncharitable, ungenerous, unforgiving 
spirit. 

We cannot suppose, however, that the Lord would 

R2667 : page 219 

expect perfection in this matter at once, from those who 

are still but "babes" in Christ. But his expectations 

are reasonable, that we should grow in grace as we grow 

in knowledge of him, and as expressed in the lesson of 

the Vine and the Branches; every branch which in due 

time, after due opportunity, does not bring forth the 

fruitage of the vine, the grapes of love (including forgiveness), 

will be cut off by the great Husbandman,— 

no longer recognized as a branch. So in this parable, 



the one who had experienced such great blessing from 
the king, and who had been reckoned for the time an 
honored member of his kingdom-class, ceased to be so 
regarded and so treated, and, on the contrary, was 
treated by the king without favor. 

The statement that the unmerciful servant would 
be delivered to the tormentors, until he should pay the 
uttermost farthing of his debt, might be understood in 
either of two ways. First, we might understand it to 
represent the original debt resting against every member 
of the human family— the penalty of death— a 
penalty from which our Lord Jesus redeemed all, and 
from which he proposes to set free all who will obey him. 
In this view of the matter the unmerciful servant's penalty 
would signify a delivery to the Second Death. Or 
if the debt be understood as representing, in whole or in 
part, the obligations of his covenant as a new creature, 
then the penalty upon him for failure to develop and 
manifest the characteristics of the new creature during 
the trial-time might be understood to signify that such 
an one, tho an accepted servant of the Lord, would be 
required to comply with the full details of his consecration 
vow, by going into the great time of trouble, 
and there meeting to the full the demands of his covenant, 
and learning effectually the lesson of love and 
sympathy, and to appreciate the grace of God in the 
forgiveness of sins, as he never before appreciated it. 
However, we are inclined to think of this matter from 
the first of these standpoints, that the exaction of the 
uttermost farthing would signify a hopeless case, in any 
of the Lord's people who, after experiencing divine 
favor in forgiveness of their own sins, should fail within 
a reasonable time to learn to exercise mercy and forgiveness 
toward the brethren,— that such would, as a 
result, suffer the Second Death. 

The Lord's people very generally find themselves 
in considerable trouble along the line of justice. We 
all recognize justice as the very foundation of all order 
and righteousness, and when we feel that justice is on 
our side it is proportionately the more difficult to freely 
forgive the person whom we believe to have been acting 
from the standpoint of injustice. There is a general 
tendency to require others to measure up to our standard 
of justice, by some sort of penance, before we forgive 
them. It is against this very spirit that our Lord was 
teaching, and to counteract which he gave this parable. 
We are to remember that the Lord will require us to live 
up to the standards we set for others. If our standard 
in dealing with others be one of exact justice, we may 
expect no mercy at the Lord's hands. (See James 2:13.) 
And what would this mean as respects the sins that are 
past through the forbearance of God, and what would 
it mean as respects the obligations upon us every day 
and every hour, to whose full requirements we are unable 
to measure? As we cannot come to the Lord ourselves 
on the score of justice, so we are not to deal with 



others upon that standard. As we must ask of the Lord 
mercy, grace, forgiveness, so we must be willing to extend 
to others mercy, grace, forgiveness, when they trespass 
against us; and as heartily, quickly and freely as 
we ourselves hope for. 

The Lord has not laid down this rule in an arbitrary 
fashion, as simply saying, If you do not forgive 
others I will not forgive you. There is a deeper reason 
for it than this. He wishes to develop in us his own 
spirit, his own character, a likeness or copy of which 
was exhibited to us in the person and life of his dear 
Son, our Lord Jesus. It is absolutely essential, therefore, 
that we shall have the character he desires, or else 
we can never attain to the join t-heirship in the Kingdom 
which he is pleased to extend. Hence we are to 
understand that this requirement or command of forgiveness, 
etc., is with a view to develop us as copies of 
his dear Son, in order that he may bestow upon us, in 
due time, all the riches of his grace, contained in the 
exceeding great and precious promises of his Word. 



R2667 : page 219 

"WHO DID SIN, THIS MAN OR HIS PARENTS?" 

--AUGUST 19. -JOHN 9:1-17.- 

EVERY traveler in eastern countries is sure to be 
impressed by the fact that blindness is much 
more common there than in Europe and America. 
Tabulated information on this subject, in Encyclopedia 
Americana, shows that in 1 870 the proportion of blind 
in America was one in 1900 population; in Europe the 
proportion was larger; viz., 1 in 1094; while in China 
the average was 1 in 400 population. According to no 
less an authority than Dr. Geikie, Egypt has one blind 
person to every 100 of population. Palestine lying near 
to Egypt, and having conditions very similar, especially 
amongst the lower classes, may be supposed to have 
had at least half as many; viz., the terribly large proportion 
of 1 in every 200 of population. 

R2667 : page 220 

Canon Tristan, writing on the subject, says:— 

"Blindness is common in Palestine to a degree 
which we in western lands can scarcely realize. There 
is probably no country in the world, except Egypt, 
where this affliction is so prevalent. At Gaza, for instance, 
it is said that one-third of the population have 
lost one or both eyes; and from my own observation in 
that city I should unhesitatingly say that the statement 
is not exaggerated. But amongst these cases it is difficult 
to find any born blind." 



This blindness is in great measure the result of the 
scarcity of water and the neglect of children, whose 
eyes are in consequence attacked by the flies. The miracle 
brought to our attention in this lesson differs from 
the five other instances of the healing of the blind by 
our Lord, mentioned in the Scriptures, in that this man 
was born blind. In our Lord's time the science of surgery 
had not advanced so far as at present, and consequently, 
as herein stated by the one healed, the cure 

R2668 : page 220 

was a marvel, the like of which had never been heard 
of. Even yet we believe that there are only five cases 
on record of successful operations upon those born blind. 
Our Lord's cure of such blindness, with the simple 
prescription used, would therefore be a remarkable 
miracle to-day, and much more so was it in that day. 

ORIENTALISM, MORMONISM, THEOSOPHY. 



The question of the disciples, whether it was this 
man's sin or the sin of his parents that caused him to 
be born blind, implies either an extreme simplicity on 
their part, not to see that the man could not have sinned 
before his birth, or quite possibly it implied that some 
of the absurd notions of the far East— of India— had 
reached the Jews: one of these was and still is that each 
child born into the world had a previous existence, in 
which it had done either good or evil, the rewards or 
punishments of which were represented in the conditions 
of the present life. This absurdity is being revived, 
even in Christian lands, by so-called Theosophists, 
and by two bodies of people known as "Mormons," 
in the United States. It is scarcely necessary 
to point out that such a theory finds no support whatever 
in any statement of the Scriptures. Quite to the 
contrary, it is most emphatically contradicted by the 
Scriptures, which declare man's creation to have been a 
direct creation from God— not a reincarnation of some 
being which had previously existed. This thought is 
consistently maintained throughout the Bible, in that 
we are distinctly told that the child receives its life from 
its father, and inherits good or evil according to his 
course of life, and not according to any course of life 
of its own in a previous condition or in another world. 
Thus the Lord declares that he visits the iniquities of 
the fathers upon the children to the third and fourth 
generation, and shows mercy unto thousands of them 
that love him and keep his commandments.— Exod. 20:5; 
Deut. 5:9,10. 

This heredity, we see, comes in the natural order 
of things. The tendency of sin is not only to break 
down the moral character, but also to vitiate and impair 



the physical system, while godliness, altho it cannot 
repair and make good the impairments of sin, can check 
these, and hold them measurably in restraint. The 
Scriptures again contradict this thought, in the declaration, 
"By one man's disobedience sin entered into the 
world, and death as a result of sin, and thus death 
passed upon all men because [thus] all men became 
sinners"— by heredity. And if by heredity then not 
as Theosophy, Mormonism and Orientalism declare;— 
not in consequence of some previous existence and sin 
on the part of the child. 

The whole matter is squared by the doctrine of the 
ransom, as all may readily see: for if our present blemishes, 
with which we are born into this world, were the 
results of sins committed in some previous condition 
of existence, the death of our Lord Jesus could not 
cancel them, and the doctrine of a ransom would be 
disproved. The doctrine of the ransom is unchangeably 
linked to the doctrine that Adam was a perfect 
human being in his creation, and that it was his sin and 
condemnation that passed to all of his posterity, through 
the channel of natural birth. The ransom ("corresponding 
price") given by our Lord Jesus, was a man's life 
for a man's life: that, "as by a man came death, by a 
man also should come the resurrection of the dead." 
Our Lord's ransom sacrifice, being the complete and 
corresponding price and offset to father Adam's sin, was 
constituted thereby an offset to all the results of his 
sin as they appear in his posterity— and thus we all 
were redeemed by the one sacrifice of Christ, the just 
for the unjust. 

IS ALL SICKNESS OF THE DEVIL? 



An increasingly large number of Christian people 
—including those who refuse medicines— are reaching 
the conclusion that all sickness is the direct result of 
sin and the work of the devil; and therefore that godly 
living will prevent sickness: and that in the event of 
sickness, if it be punishment for sin, medicines should 
not be used, but, on the contrary, prayer should be 
made to God for the forgiveness of sin for which sickness 
is a punishment, and that the cure of the disease 
should be expected as a reward of repentance and faith 
exercised. 

We wonder how these Christian friends view this 
lesson. Like the disciples, they evidently would conclude 

R2668 : page 221 

that a man born blind must have been so born on 
account of sin— if not his own sin, the sins of his parents 
—for they account for all disease from this standpoint. 
Unfortunately they feel so satisfied with their 



conclusions on the subject that they do not inquire of 
the Lord, as did the apostles. And they do not hear 
his answer here given— that it was neither sin on the 
part of the man, nor on the part of his parents, which 
occasioned his blindness. 

If they were students of the Word they would note 
also the numerous statements of Scripture which clearly 
point out that calamities are not always punishments 
for sins: for instance, our Lord's declaration respecting 
the Galileans whose blood was mingled with the sacrifices, 
and those upon whom the tower of Siloam fell 
and slew them. (Luke 13:1-5.) Our Lord distinctly 
declares that these calamities did not indicate that the 
sufferers were sinners above other men. Likewise, in 
the case of the sickness and death of Lazarus. Our 
Lord declares, not that it was because of sin on the 
part of Lazarus, but that it was permitted in order to 
be for the glory of God. So in this lesson he declares 
that the fact that the man was born blind was not on 
account of sin, but on the contrary, "that the works of 
God should be made manifest in him." 

We are not denying that sin frequently brings sickness; 
on the contrary, we affirm this, and confirm this 
view with our Lord's words to some of those whom he 
healed, "Go, sin no more, lest a worse thing come upon 
thee." There is a great difference, however, between 
claiming that all sickness is of sin and the devil, and 
admitting that much of it is produced or intensified by 
sin. We go even further than this, and admit that in 
a general way all the blemishes of the present time may 
be indirectly traced to our great Adversary, Satan. For 
had it not been for his fall, and for the temptations 
which he presented to our first parents, we may suppose 
that there would have been no sin in the world; consequently 
no imperfection, no sighing, no crying, no dying. 
But it is thoroughly wrong to credit to Satan's 
power all the difficulties which we experience. We are 
glad indeed that he is limited and restrained; because 
under the weaknesses with which we are born we find 
quite sufficient of evil disposition and weakness received 
by heredity, and operating, not only between 
parent and child, but between neighbor and neighbor. 
We may be glad indeed that Satan's power to deceive 
is not permitted to vitiate our minds contrary to our 
wills, and not permitted to break down our wills, except 
as we give them over to sympathy and contact with 
evil things. We may be glad also that sickness and 
death working in man are not wholly subject to the 
prince of darkness, for altho the Scriptures declare that 
Satan's power is deathward, they also show us that he 
does not have this power unlimitedly, but can exercise 
it only under restraints and restrictions. This is most 
clearly indicated to us in the case of Job and his family. 
Rather, the Scriptures teach that Satan's power or 
influence is the result of the Adamic death operating 
in mankind and rendering all amenable to Satan's devices 



and deceptions.— Heb. 2:14. 

And, by the way, Job's case is another illustration 
of sickness and calamities of various kinds which were 
not the punishments of sin; for have we not Job's own 
testimony of his love for God, his confidence in him, 
and his faithful reliance upon him? "Tho he slay me, 
yet will I trust in him!" And more, we have the 
Lord's testimony to the same effect, in favor of his 
servant Job, and in reproof of his friends who wrongly 
represented that his sickness and calamities were punishments 
for sin. 

We conclude, then, upon Scriptural grounds, that 
not all sickness is in the nature of sin penalties, but 
that some sicknesses are as penalties. Hence, when 
the Christian shall find himself overtaken with sickness 
or other disasters, he should first of all inquire of himself, 
before the Lord, whether or not his difficulties are 
the result of— 

(1) A direct violation of the laws of his reason, 

as, for instance, indiscretion in eating, gratification of 
the appetite in respect to food which he knows is not 
suited to his physical conditions: or violation of recognized 
principles of conduct, as, for instance, the endorsing 
of a note, contrary to the instructions of the 
Lord's Word (Prov. 6:1,2), which has brought disaster 
to many. If he does not find his troubles to be the 
result of personal indiscretion he should look— 

(2) To see whether or not sin lies at his door; 
whether or not he has been living inconsistently, and 
might properly recognize his sickness or trouble as a 
punishment for his sin, his inconsistency. If he finds 
it to be so, he should of course immediately rectify the 
wrong to the extent of his ability, and seek forgiveness, 
mercy, at the throne of the heavenly grace, and expect 
that after suffering some chastisements he will be 
released. 

(3) Should he fail to find a cause for his difficulties 
in either of the foregoing, he should consider 

that quite possibly his difficulty, whatever its nature, 
was one of the ordinary casualties of life from which 
God does not wholly forfend his children— desiring 
them to walk by faith and not by sight: such casualties 
are necessary, that we may be very sympathetic with 
the world's troubles. 

(4) In some instances, as in Job's case and the 
case before us in this lesson, troubles may ultimately 
be found to have been permitted by the Lord, to be 

R2669 : page 222 

channels of mercy and blessing, if rightly received, as 
in these cases. 

(5) In all troubles, whether for discipline or for 
instruction in righteousness and the development of 
character, the children of God (and we are not considering 
others now) should forthwith begin to seek the 



blessing which they may be sure God has in store for 
them when he permits adversities. And this should 
not hinder their use of any means for relief upon which 
they can conscientiously ask the divine blessing: on 
the same principle that we labor for and eat the daily 
bread for which we pray, and which is none the less of 
divine provision. 

The work of God made manifest in this blind man 
was not merely in the miracle performed upon his natural 
eyes. It extended beyond this, and testified to 
the beholders the power of God, operating in Messiah. 
And it extended still further, in the case of the man 
who was healed: leading to the opening of the eyes of 
his understanding, it inducted him into discipleship to 
Christ. Had he not been born blind, had he not passed 
through just the experiences through which he did pass, 
how can we judge that he would have been in a better 
condition of heart to receive the Messiah than the educated 
Pharisees, who, with good natural sight, were 
thoroughly blinded respecting Messiah, his teachings 
and his work, so that they crucified him? 

And so it is in many instances with many who 
become the Lord's people. Looking back they can clearly 
see that things which at the time seemed to be adversities, 
disappointments, troubles, disadvantages, 
hardships, were really great blessings, in that they led 
to the opening of the eyes of their understandings- 
were really providences and blessings in disguise. Those 
who do so realize the divine care, looking back can 
praise the way God has led them day by day. 

CHRISTIAN SCIENCE MISBELIEFS. 



Amongst the various false doctrines of to-day none 
appears more inconsistent from the standpoint of science 
and Christianity, than the system which brazenly and 
defiantly, and in perversion of truth and conscience 
unites these two words as its name. It would be amusing, 
we may be sure, to hear one of the devotees of this 
theory explain this Scripture. For, notwithstanding 
the fact that their entire system is in opposition to the 
Scriptures, they make a cloak, a pretense, of believing 
the Scriptures, and of using them in support of their 
theory— chiefly with novices. We may be sure that 
they would attempt to twist and juggle it in some manner, 
and get it so far away from the truth and the subject 
as at least to confuse many people, who have very 
little knowledge of the Bible and shallow powers of 
reasoning, especially those "who have not their senses 
exercised by reason of use," in connection with Scriptural 
subjects.— Heb. 5:14. 

Their theory is that there is no such thing as blindness, 
that it is simply a mistaken thought, a misbelief: 
since the parents of the blind man could not have misbelieved 



that their child would be born blind, the child 
itself, we presume they would say, got this misimpression 
before its birth. And then we have the inconsistency 
increased, for every one of intelligence knows that 
the infant at birth has no thought, correct or incorrect, 
on any subject. The fallacy of this theory is likewise 
proven, in the case of those born deaf and dumb. But 
argument and reason have no more force with "Christian 
Scientists" than have the Scriptures. Their infatuation 
with their delusion is so great that they are 
fully prepared to wrest facts, reason, and Scripture— 
and then, in perversion of all truth and consistency, 
they call this "Christian Science." 

We are not contending with them respecting their 
use of the word "Science," for the most stupid should 
be able to see that there is nothing scientific in connection 
with their theory: but we do contend respecting 
their use of the word "Christian," because many do 
not recognize that they have not the slightest right to 
the use of this term. Our contention is that a Christian 
Scientist of full development, cannot be a Christian 
in any Scriptural sense of the word. 

(1) A Christian is one who believes in God the 
Father, and in our Lord Jesus Christ, whom he hath sent 

to be a propitiation for our sins, our Redeemer, and, ultimately 
the Deliverer of all these who obey him. But 
Christian Science denies the very existence of God, 
claiming to believe merely in a principle of Good. To 
whatever extent a man has a good principle, the God-quality 
is in him, say they; and to whatever extent a 
horse or a dog may have the good principles, to that 
extent these are Gods, and to be loved, etc., accordingly. 
Denying the Father, they of course deny also the Son 
whom he sent: and altho they acknowledge Jesus, it is 
not with a Christian acknowledgement. On the contrary, 
they hold that he was merely a member of the 
Adamic family, and that his preeminence above others 
was in respect to his character and teachings. And they 
claim that while, in these respects, he stood higher than 
other men of his day, yet he but feebly grasped at certain 
principles or truths which are to-day brought to 
the world by her distinguished highness, "Mrs. Dr. 
Eddy," who thus poses as being greater than Jesus, as 
an elephant is greater than a mouse; tho there be certain 
resemblances. 

(2) A Christian is one who believes in Christ as a 
Savior from sin as well as from its consequences;— death 
and its concomitants of pain, etc. But Christian Scientists 
deny that there is any sin, and deny also, that 

there are any consequences of sin; hence, logically, 
they deny the ransom, for how could there be a ransom 
for sinners, if none are sinners? Thus do they deny 
and ignore the very foundation of Christian faith, without 
which no one is a Christian— Scripturally. 

The absurdities of Christian Science commend 
themselves only to those who are either Scripturally 



ignorant, or mentally weak; and their chief attractions 
are therefore— 

(1) The fact that they put on, as a garment of 
light, gentleness and kindness of word and manner. 

That these do not grow out of hearts thoroughly converted 
to the Lord, and begotten of his spirit of love, 

R2669 : page 223 

is manifest: for altho kindness and patience and gentleness 
are manifested, the true essence of these is lacking, 
namely, love. Instead of manifesting love to be 
the mainspring of their meekness, patience, gentleness, 
they manifest ambition and money-love as their inspiring 
motives— so far as we are able to judge the tree by 
its fruits. So far as we are able to learn, their efforts 
to promulgate their views are confined to those who are 
able and willing to pay for the instruction good round 
prices; and so far as we are able to discern, their care 
of the sick shows a love of money, and love of fame; 
and hence very few of the poor of this world have been 
injured by the doctrines of Christian Science, or cured 
of disease by its treatment. 

(2) The cure of disease without medicine, and 
sometimes almost miraculously, is in the nature of 
things calculated to attract and interest the "groaning 
creation"— just as the advertisements of patent medicines 
attract them. We unhesitatingly assert our conviction, 
that this power, manifested through Christian 
Scientists, is not of God, but of the Adversary, directly, 
or indirectly. He no doubt directs his servants into 

the use of channels and means of which humanity in 

general, and even many learned physicians, are comparatively 

ignorant— channels of human nature which, 

possibly, in the future may be used by the Lord during 

the times of restitution of all things. Our justification 

in ascribing their cures to an evil source, instead of to 

a good source, lies in the fact that they utterly repudiate 

the principles of Christianity, and we may be sure 

God would not cooperate to assist with his power those 

who deny his very existence, and who make void the 

gospel of the redemption through the blood of Christ. 

The miracle-working power in them we believe to be 

the same as the miracle-working power in Spiritism and 

in Orientalism, and in the charms of other Occultists 

—namely, Satanic power. 

If it be asked, How could Satan be interested in 
doing a good work? we answer: He does no such work 
amongst those who are thoroughly and stupidly ignorant: 
he is doing these works merely in the most civilized 
lands, and especially amongst the most enlightened 
of the people in the various denominations of 
Christendom. The Adversary thus assumes the garment 
of an angel of light and mercy, not to lead to 
the Light of the world— not to lead to the cross of 
Christ— not to lead to the Bible— but to lead away from 



these, to another hope of salvation, and to another 
teacher: to deceive, if it were possible, the very elect. 
And be it remembered that our Lord's words indicate 
that when matters come to this condition, where Satan 
will cast out Satan and heal disease, it is a marked evidence 
that his throne is tottering to its fall— that, so to 
speak, this is the last extremity of the Adversary's efforts 
to deceive. 



The Lord's method of giving sight to the blind 
man, we may reasonably suppose, was parabolic— that 
is to say, it contains a lesson under a figure. Since 
our Lord did not explain the significance of his action 

R2670 : page 223 

in making a clay ointment out of dust with his spittle, 

and anointing the man's eyes with this, and sending 

him to wash them and receive sight at the Pool of Siloam, 

we may exercise our mental powers in thinking 

of what these different things would signify. But we 

are limited in our speculations, nevertheless, and 

may not run wild, but must restrain ourselves 

within the limits of plain statements of the Word of 

God respecting his plan of salvation. 

In harmony with these plain statements we may 
interpret our Lord's symbolical act thus: The blind 
man would fitly represent the world of mankind in 
general, who during the present life are mentally blind 
—who cannot now see the goodness, mercy, and love of 
God as these may be recognized by others who are now 
able to see them. His being born blind would harmonize 
with this thought, for the blindness that is upon the 
world is, to a large extent at least, a matter of heredity. 
His blindness does not represent a blindness on the 
part of those who have once seen God's grace, represented 
in his Word and plan, and who have then become 
blind thereto, and who would represent the class 
mentioned by the Apostle as having once been enlightened, 
and who subsequently lose that enlightenment. 
(Heb. 6:4-6.) If then the blind man represents 
the blind world (who do not see, in the sense 
that the Church sees, of whom the Lord said, "Blessed 
are your eyes for they see"), the time of the healing of 
such blindness is in the Millennial age, as Scripturally 
pointed out, when "All the blind eyes shall be opened, 
and the deaf ears unstopped." (Isa. 35:5.) And 
this agrees with the conditions of our Lord's miracle, 
because we are informed that this miracle took place 
on the Sabbath, or seventh day, which corresponds to, 
and typifies the Millennial day, the seventh-thousand 
year period. 

Our Lord's words, nevertheless, seem to indicate 
that some part of this symbolical picture relates to the 



present age, for he said, "I must work the works of him 

that sent me while it is day: the night cometh wherein 

no man can work." In this statement the word "day" 

would seem to belong to the present time, and to be illustrated 

in the making of clay with our Lord's spittle, 

and the anointing of the blind man's eyes. The washing 

of his eyes and the cure would seem to belong to 

the next age, the Millennial age. The Lord's spittle, 

the secretions of his mouth, might represent the truth 

as fitly as would the words of his mouth— it is another 

figure, but seemingly of the same force and meaning. 

He uttered the truth, brought it in contact with the dust 

of the earth— not in contact with all the dust of the 

earth, but with a limited portion, an elect or select portion, 

—and of this he made the anointing clay. The 

Scriptures do inform us, in harmony with this, that 

the Word of God's grace, delivered through and by our 

Lord Jesus, is designed in the present age to act upon 

a small fragment of humanity, and to consecrate them 

and make them meet for the Master's use in the blessing 

of the world, in the anointing of the eyes of the 

blind. From this standpoint of view, the making of 

the clay would represent the formation of the elect 

Church for the blessing of the poor, blind world. And, 

quite possibly, not only in this work of making the clay 

now in progress, but perhaps some portion of the anointing 

work is now being done, as is intimated by the 

Scripture which declares that the Gospel must first be 

preached for a witness in all the world, before the end of 

this age. The world must be witnessed to during this 

age, but the world will not have the eyes of its understanding 

opened during this age: it must wait until the 

R2670 : page 224 

great washing time of the Millennial age, of which the 
Scriptures declare, "In that day there shall be a fountain 
opened to the house of David for sin and for uncleanness." 
(Zech. 13:1.) In full agreement with this 
is the significance of the word Siloam. It signifies 
"The sending forth," or "The fountain." 

The Pharisee objected to the Lord's goodness, because, 
forsooth, it infracted some of their hypercritical 
dogmas and traditions. This is interesting, as showing 
to what extent religious forms and ceremonies may bind 
and blind intelligent and reverential people. And this 
should be a lesson to all the intelligent and reverent, 
leading them to great care in judging righteous judgment, 
according to the standard of the divine Word, 
and not according to their prejudices and revered creeds, 
and the traditions of the fathers. 

Still another lesson may be found in the fact that 
the man who confessed our Lord Jesus, and who stood 
up in bold defence of righteousness, was greatly blessed, 
in that after he had thus demonstrated his loyalty to 
principle, and had suffered as a result excommunication 



from the Church— then the Lord found him. Thus his 
faithfulness under trials and difficulties, and his willingness 
to suffer the loss of earthly fellowship and honor 
amongst men, led directly to a still greater blessing, 
even direct fellowship and communion with the Lord 
himself. How many are there whose mental eyes have 
been opened to the truth, who have been so loyal to the 
Lord and so appreciative of his goodness as to be faithful 
in declaring the facts? How many of these have 
found that such faithfulness means separation from the 
synagogue, from the church nominal? How many of 
these have feared to lose prestige and influence, through 
confessing the light of present truth? But all who have 
followed the noble course of thankfulness, loyalty, and 
obedience to God, have found that such obedience, 
while it led to a loss of fellowship in the nominal 
church, led also to a greater fellowship and communion, 
and a more intimate acquaintance with the Lord 
himself. 



page 224 
"OUT OF DARKNESS INTO HIS MARVELOUS LIGHT." 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I find DAWN VOL. V. 
a grand spiritual feast. I have read it and studied it 
and sent it away to a friend, and oh, how many good 
things we get from the TOWER office! I had thought, 
years ago, that we had all we needed to help us on to 
God, but it keeps coming, more and better. "Bless 
the Lord, O my soul, and all that is within me, for his 
goodness and his wonderful works to the children of 
men." And bless his holy name that he ever stooped 
to the low estate of his handmaid, to give insignificant 
me the privilege of reading the MILLENNIAL DAWN publications 
and learning the plan of the ages and of his 
will concerning us! "Great and marvellous are thy 
works, Lord God Almighty; just and true are thy ways, 
thou King of saints." And you, dear Brother Russell, 
the Lord has made you a dispenser of his present truth. 
May his grace continue with you as it ever has done! 

How many times I have had a vague idea of something 
and could not form it into words or thoughts intelligently, 
and the next WATCH TOWER would explain 
that very thing so nicely, that, even tho unlearned, I 
could understand it. Last fall I was thinking, Well, 
I believe Brother Russell is inspired, and his writings 
are equal to the Bible; but the next paper we got said 
that all matter, whether oral or printed, from any quarter, 
should be considered quite secondary to the Bible. 
Oh Lord, help us to resist the devil successfully and 
pity our helplessness! 



You remark that we should not judge too harshly 
those who make us trouble, because Peter, even after 
denying the Lord, became one of his most ardent followers. 
What courage and patience this thought gives 
us. Such words are as Solomon says, "Like apples of 
gold in pictures of silver." Bless the Lord! Oh, my 
dear brother, how much comfort I get from your counsel. 

The Scripture Index for the WATCH TOWER, prepared 
by the dear sisters, has done me a world of good. 
Lord bless them, indeed. Surely if prayers will bring 
blessings we shall all live in a rainshower of blessings 
night and day, for we are all praying for each other. 

I get great encouragement from some of the letters 
you print in your papers, especially Sister Sencerbeaux's, 
for I too had been feeling much discouraged 
on the account of my failings and blunders. Oh, the 
richness of the spiritual food we get from God through 
the TOWER! Can the Marriage Supper be much better? 
Yours in the love of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, 
MRS. H. K. TOWNSEND,-Wisconsin. 

R2678 : page 224 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-About one year ago 
your book, called THE PLAN OF THE AGES, fell into my 
hands. It came like the day-star arising in my soul, 
flooding my mind with new thoughts and conceptions 
as to the great plan of redeeming this old, lost world. 
Since 1897 I have been out evangelizing, preaching 
"Christ and Him crucified," to men throughout the 
States, but my "advanced" views soon gave dissatisfaction 
among the orthodox preachers, especially among 
the set to whom I belonged, the Methodist Episcopal 
Church Society. It was then that I began to read in 
earnest every thing I could find along the line of 
prophetic truth. I have read and re-read with great 
pleasure and profit the first five volumes of MILLENNIAL 
DAWN, and am only awaiting now further issue of 
Volume VI. I can not express to you my indebtedness 
to you for the light I have received from the perusal 
of the WATCH TOWER publications. 

May God continue to bless you with light, that 
you may be the means in his hands of leading many 
more pilgrims into the glorious light of the liberty of 
the gospel of Christ. Since seeing the fulness of God's 
truth, I have withdrawn from the M.E. Church and 
ministry. Pray for me that I may continue "to walk 
in the light as he is in the light." 

Yours in the Light, R. K. RICHARDSON.-Alabama. 

[To the Lord be all the praise for the light now 
"in due time" shining upon his Word and revealing to 
us his gracious character. I am glad to hope that withdrawal 
from human institutions and their service means 
a fuller appreciation and closer membership in "the 
Church of the first-born, whose names are written in 
heaven" and a more zealous and more wise participation 



in its ministry of the truth.— EDITOR.] 



page 225 

SEMI-MONTHLY 


