VOL. XXV. JULY 1, 1904. No. 13. 



CONTENTS. 

Views from the Watch Tower 195 

Arguments for Christian Unity 195 

The Judgments of the Lord 196 

Effect of the Eastern War 196 

The Hamilton Convention 197 

Universal Anarchy— Just Before 

or After October, 1914 197 

The Atonement for Sin— A Scientist's 

View 199 

Praying for Help in Time of War 202 

A Good King's Error 205 

Report of British Convention 207 

page 194 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-24 EVERSHOLT ST., LONDON, N.W. 
GERMAN BRANCH-MIRKER STR., 45, ELBERFELD. 
AUSTRALIAN BRANCH-32 JOHNSTON ST., FITZROY, MELBOURNE 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE, 5c (2-l/2d.) A COPY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER, will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE 



THIS JOURNAL IS PUBLISHED IN THE 

FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN LANGUAGES. 

SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



PASTOR RUSSELL'S DISCOURSES EVERY MONDAY. 



By a special arrangement with The Pittsburgh Gazette a stenographic 
report of Pastor C. T. Russell's discourses will be printed 
on Mondays. We will send you "The Pittsburgh Gazette" 
(daily) and ZION'S WATCH TOWER twice a month for a period 
of 12 months for $3.25, which is about the price of The Gazette 
alone. The subscriptions must be paid in advance and sent to us. 
For terms for extra copies of the Monday Gazette, see our issue of January 
15th. 

NOTICE.— Where Gazette agencies are established the issues 
desired can be readily obtained through them. The Gazette refuses 
to mail papers to towns where they would interfere with 
the agents already located. 

MARKED NEW TESTAMENTS. 



We have a good stock of these on hand— cloth binding, 
red edges, minion type. Convenient for the pocket. 
The special feature is the marking in red and black of the 
passages which refer to salvation through Christ. Price, 
15c; 2 for 25c, postpaid. They are not our publication, 
nor marked exactly as we should have preferred. 



R3388 : page 195 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 
ARGUMENTS FOR CHRISTIAN UNITY. 



RECENTLY at a Protestant Ministers' Meeting 

in the Y.M.C.A. building, St. Louis, Mo., 

the following argument was presented by 

Rev. Gilbert Dobbs, of the Coliseum Place Baptist 

Church:— 

"The churches of Jesus Christ are confronted by 
a gigantic problem. Nineteen centuries have passed 
since our Lord came in the flesh, and taught and 
wrought and died; nineteen centuries since he arose 
from the dead and said, 'Go, disciple all nations,' and 
yet the nations are still stumbling on the dark mountains. 
Only the apex of the great pyramid of humanity 
has thus far been brightened and transformed by the 
Gospel light, a diamond point flashing in the sun. But 
what about the great pyramidal base, the black carbon 
of ignorance and superstition and sin and all the marks 
of a lost and benighted race? 

"Nineteen centuries, and only 390,000,000 nominal 



Christians in all the world, and only 116,000,000 of these 
belonging to all Protestant denominations. That leaves 
more than one billion souls absolutely destitute of the 
bread of life. What a sad commentary on the sloth 
and strife of Christendom! This is the problem: How 
shall the great black pyramid be transformed by light? 
What concentrated energy and fervency must be displayed 
before the black can be burned out, and the 
huge mass become, as it were, a colossal kohinoor of 
divine splendor and glory? 

"You remember the part of that remarkable prayer 
of Jesus recorded by the Evangelist John, where he 
prays: That they all may be one, as Thou, Father, art 
in me, and I in thee; that they also may be one in 
us; that the world may believe that thou hast sent me,' 
and again he repeats it, 'that the world may believe 
that thou hast sent me and hast loved them as thou hast 
loved me.' The great utilitarian purpose of Christian 
unity is, therefore, that the world may believe.... 

"We must get closer together. We must cease 
looking at our denominational difficulties through the 
magnifying microscope of bigotry and prejudice, and at 
our essential agreement through the inverted telescope 
of indifference and selfishness. Of course Christian 
unity does not mean uniformity. The latter is perhaps 
not desirable; and at present it is certainly not feasible. 
It is not one form that we need, but one spirit, a spirit 
of brotherly kindness and a broad Christian charity. 
All arbitrary and coercive methods of attaining uniform 
religious observances are anti-Christian. God's children 
are freemen, and their service must be rational and voluntary. 
There is nothing more uniform than penitentiary 
life. The same shaven face, the same cropped 
pates, the same stripes, the same dull, slavish tasks. It 
is not the unity of the prison that we covet, but the 
unity of the family, where each preserves his individuality, 
and yet where all dwell together in love, sharing 
a common life and hope and purpose. 

"And just as there cannot be any uniform ritual, 
so there cannot reasonably be any uniform creed. Of 
course, we all admit that God's Word is our all-sufficient 
guide in matters of faith and practice, an infallible 
and inerrant standard by which we must be led; 
but as each man must interpret that Word as his mind 
and conscience shall direct, we cannot expect that all 
will see alike. The domain of God's truth is so wide, 
and the various paths of interpretation are so numerous 
and intricate, and the human understanding is such 
a complex matter, that all of us may not be expected 
to traverse the same paths. Perhaps God has so ordained 
it that every part of his divine truth shall have 
due emphasis by raising up different schools of 
interpreters. 

"You know the parable of the blind men and the 
elephant. In describing the elephant one felt his leg and 
said, 'He is like a tree.' Another felt his trunk and 



said: 'He is like a huge snake.' Another his ear: 'He 

is like a blanket.' And still another said: 'He is like a 

rope,' as he felt his tail. They were all right and all 

wrong. The part is never equal to the whole. Let us 

not suppose that our distinctive views are of more importance 

than the sum total of accumulated knowledge 

which the whole body of Christian theology sets forth. 

I think, however, that an occasional ecumenical council 

for the purpose of discussing in a brotherly manner our 

doctrinal differences with a view of arriving at a clearer 

conception of the truth, and the bringing of the various 

R3388 : page 196 

denominations into a closer sympathy and affiliation, 
would have an admirable effect... 

"The most inspiring utterance on the subject of 
Christian unity, aside from the beautiful prayer of our 
Savior, to which we have made reference, is from Paul. 
Writing to the saints at Ephesus, he says: 'I, therefore, 
the prisoner of the Lord, beseech you to walk worthy 
of the vocation wherewith ye are called, with all lowliness 
and meekness, with long-suffering, forbearing one 
another in love, endeavoring to keep the unity of the 
spirit in the bond of peace. There is one body and one 
spirit, even as ye are called in one hope of your calling; 
one Lord, one faith, one baptism, one God and Father 
of all, who is above all, and through all, and in you all.' 

"The argument is this: As the body of Christ is 
one, and all of God's people are members of that body, 
made members by the divine Spirit, whose sovereign 
call they have heard and obeyed; as they all have the 
selfsame hope of eternal life and the glad expectation 
of entering into the joys of their Lord, whom they love 
and serve in common; as they acknowledge but one 
Lord and master, Jesus Christ, and have exercised the 
same saving faith in him, and have been brought into his 
Church through baptism, the one symbol of their renewed 
nature; as there is but one God who rules over all, everywhere 
guiding and directing his people by his loving providence, 
and who has made his habitation in every renewed 
heart; then ought not all his people endeavor to recognize 
and preserve this spiritual unity, and live and labor 
together in peace? 

"The Indians speak of friendship as a golden chain. 
So may all God's people be linked together in the closest 
ties of fraternal love, and by keeping the golden 
chain forever bright, we will the best be able to bring a 
captive world in loving servitude to the feet of our God 
and Savior."— Times-Democrat. 



The above shows how easy it is to have "a form 
of godliness and deny the power thereof;" how easy 
it is to have a form of sound doctrine, but to misapply 



it! 

Neither our Lord nor the Apostle Paul referred 
to a union of denominations. They preached an individual 
union with Christ, and a consequent relationship 
of all justified and consecrated believers to each 
other in the one Lord, one faith and one baptism. 

This union already exists, except to the extent 
that denominational creed-fences and social usages 
separate the Lord's sheep. Wherever and whenever 
the Lord's sheep meet they may and do quickly identify 
themselves to each other, and the heart union and 
fellowship and joy in the Lord they experience cannot 
even be imitated by creedal bonds. 

The union of the Church to which our Lord referred 
in his prayer, "That they all may be one," 
was this union of heart already and always experienced 
by the true members of the "one body,"— and 
additionally he referred to the actual union of all such 
with himself by the resurrection "change" from flesh 
and blood to spirit being— to be with him and like 
him and to share his glory and power and great work 
for the world, which he mentions just following, viz.: 
"that the world [during the Millennium] may 
believe." 

THE JUDGMENTS OF THE LORD. 



The Scriptures declare that "when the judgments 
of the Lord are abroad in the earth the inhabitants of 
the world will learn righteousness" (Isa. 26:9), and 
the coming Millennial age is pointed out to us as the 
world's Judgment Day; and our Lord tells us that 
the dead world will be awakened from the death-sleep 
—"come forth" unto a resurrection [anastasis, an uplifting 
out of sin and death] by judgments. ~ 
John 5:28,29. 

Now we have an illustration well authenticated 
by the Chicago journals, showing one kind of judgments 
which will prevail during the world's Judgment 
Day, as follows:— 

Julian Renfro, 21 years old, while engaged with 
three chums at a game of cards, declared his unbelief 
in a God. He was a "higher critic" of the Ingersoll 
school and said: "Fellows, if God would demonstrate 
himself to me in some way— for instance, if he would 
strike me deaf and dumb, or blind— I might admit 
his existence." One of the young men was about to 
reply to the argument when he noticed Renfro turn 
pale. The next moment the skeptic threw his arms 
out before him as if warding off a blow, then he 
convulsively placed his hands before his face. An 
instant later he fell forward off his chair, and on to 
the floor. Since that time he has been unable to 
speak or hear. In writing he afterward expressed 



faith in the Lord and declares his intention to 
study the Scriptures, and if the Lord should grant a 
recovery he hopes yet to preach Christ. 

When the time shall come that the Lord's judgments 
of rewards and punishments will be promptly 
meted out, and in no uncertain manner, the whole 
world will be speedily converted and, like this young 
man, be glad to preach the One once blasphemed. 
But we must wait for this to become general until 
the Kingdom class shall be completed and the general 
"Judgment day" or age fully inaugurated. 

THE EFFECT OF THE EASTERN WAR. 



The London Spectator, commenting on the recent 
successes of Japan, in the battle on the Yalu river, 
says:— 

"It is the moral effect upon the world at large 
which is, and will be, so tremendous as to modify, possibly 
for all time, the relation of Europe to Asia. Until 
that battle had been fought the white race, though 
deeply impressed with the capacity of the Japanese and 
the devoted courage of Japanese sailors, was still unconvinced 
that a Japanese army could rival or defeat a 
European force of anything like adequate dimensions. 
The pride of the white continent had for three centuries 

R3389 : page 197 

seemed to be justified by history, and it created, 
consciously or unconsciously, a mass of belief which was 
perhaps the cause of many of its victories, and certainly 
of much of its daring. The struggle on the Yalu provides 
precisely the concrete evidence needed to dissipate 
this confidence. A Japanese army has crossed a mighty 
river in the teeth of European defenders, and then has 
marched upon those Europeans entrenched in a splendid 
hilly position; has driven them out by the close 
fighting which we still call fighting with the bayonet; 
has overwhelmed the European fire by the superior 
weight of cannon and shells made in Japan itself; 
has captured whole batteries of European guns; has 
driven European artillerymen in what seems to have 
been headlong rout: and— most notable fact of all- 
has taken hundreds of European prisoners, who have 
surrendered, not by a capitulation, but while fighting 
on the field. In other words, an Asiatic Power has 
arisen which, besides defeating a European war-fleet, 
is proving itself able to use three great armies of invasion, 
each sixty thousand strong, with the careful provision, 
the strategic skill, and the clenching courage of 
armies directed by the great masters of European 
warfare." 



R3389 : page 197 

THE HAMILTON CONVENTION. 

THE One-Day Convention held at Hamilton, Canada, 
was quite a success in its way. Delegations 
were present from every quarter of Ontario— 
sixty-seven from Toronto, thirteen from Buffalo, about 
the same number from Brantford, and ones, twos and 
threes from many points. 

The morning session was for the interested only 
and was not advertised. The attendance was about 400. 
A praise and testimony meeting for 45 minutes was 
followed by a discourse on the divine promise,— "No 
weapon that is formed against thee shall prosper, and 
every tongue that shall rise against thee in judgment 
thou shalt condemn. This is the heritage of the people 
of the Lord, and their righteousness is of me, saith 
the Lord." (Isa. 54:17.) A full report of this discourse 
appeared in the Pittsburgh Gazette of the day 
following, and many of our readers thus have it. We 
still have a few copies of the Gazette and will be 
pleased to send a sample on request. 

The afternoon session at 3 o'clock brought out a 
closely packed house, chairs being crowded in the 
aisles and probably fifty persons were seated on the 
platform behind the speaker. The friends estimated 
that at least 1,100 were present. Profound attention 
was given to our discourse on "God's Oath-bound 
Covenant to Abraham and His Seed." (Heb. 6:17-20.) 
This discourse appeared in full in the Hamilton Times 
of the next day, and thus reached many more than 
were able to hear it. 

The "Truth" people all looked and felt joyful in 
the Lord, and, as our train pulled away from the station, 
about fifty of us joined in singing, "God be with 
you till we meet again." 



R3389 : page 197 

UNIVERSAL ANARCHY-JUST BEFORE OR AFTER OCTOBER, 1914 A.D. 

WHAT seems at first glance the veriest trifle and 
wholly unrelated to the matter, has changed 
our conviction respecting the time when 
universal anarchy may be expected in accord with the 
prophetic numbers. We now expect that the anarchistic 
culmination of the great time of trouble which 
will precede the Millennial blessings will be after October, 
1914 A.D. —very speedily thereafter, in our opinion 
—"in one hour," "suddenly." 
Our readers familiar with the presentation of the 



subject given in MILLENNIAL DAWN, will recall that the 
date, October, 1914 A.D., is very sharply defined by two 
lines of evidence: (1) The Times of the Gentiles— 2,520 
years from the overthrow of the government of Zedekiah, 
the last typical king of the Jews, in 606 B.C.; and 
(2) the Parallels, both the length and various features 
of the Jewish and Gospel ages. We have found no 
flaw in either of these prophetic testimonies, nor do 
we believe that fault can be found with them along 
Scriptural lines by anybody. The matter that has 
just come to our attention is that in counting the 
forty years' harvest of the Jewish age, from October, 
A.D. 29, to October, A.D. 69, where the year 70 in 
Jewish reckoning began, we spoke of that harvest 
time as ending A.D. 70. This is a correct enough 
statement, because the full end of 69 A.D. is up to 
the beginning of 70 A.D. We pointed out that the 
parallels of time in the harvest of this Gospel age 
began October, 1874, and will end October, 1914— 
at the beginning of 1915, Jewish time. 

All these matters stand just as they were— we 
have nothing to fault or to alter. But in a recent 
examination of the closing of the Jewish harvest, 
with a view to closer scrutiny as to what might be 
expected in the end of the present harvest of Christendom, 
we noticed that the actual fall of the Jewish 
polity was not at the beginning of A.D. 70, but towards 
its close, and at once we perceived that the 
forty-year harvest ending 69 A.D. closed before the 
destruction in its fullest sense came upon the typical 
people. Instantly we thought of the parallel here 
and perceived, as above stated, that our forty years' 
harvest, ending October, 1914 A.D., should not be 
expected to include the awful period of anarchy 
which the Scriptures point out to be the fate of Christendom. 
The matter seems so plain and simple now 
that we wonder that we or our many critical readers 
did not notice it long ago. The only plausible explanation 
is that in the divine will our eyes were 
holden for the time respecting this matter— possibly 

R3389 : page 198 

with a view to our expectations that the harvesting 
opportunities would sooner close, causing our consequent 
greater zeal in the service. 

Looking back to the prophetic testimony respecting 
the Times of the Gentiles, we perceive that, although 
the Lord did not give to worldly governments 
a definite lease of power until 1914, nevertheless our 
Lord's words, "Jerusalem shall be trodden down of 
the Gentiles until the times of the Gentiles be filled 
full," gives the intimation broadly enough that the 
determined times or years in which the empire of 
earth would be in the hands of Gentile governments 
was a fixed one from the divine standpoint. And if, 



as we believe the Scriptures to teach, Gentile domination 

was provided for up to October, 1914, it would 

seem but a reasonable interpretation that divine power 

for the overthrow of the kingdoms of this world would 

not be exercised to their dethronement until after 

the time allotted for their reign had ended— October, 

1914. 

True, it was to be in the times of these kings 
that the God of heaven would take from the mountain, 
without hands [not by human power], the little 
stone which should eventually smite the image in its 
feet. True, also, it was to be in the days of these 
last kings— represented in the toes of the image- 
that the God of heaven should set up his Kingdom, 
which should break in pieces and consume all; but 
the setting up of that Kingdom we understand has 
been in progress throughout this harvest time, especially 
since 1878, since which time we believe that all 
the overcomers of the Church who die faithful are 
changed "in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye," 
and are immediately constituted members of the set-up 
Kingdom on the other side the veil. Quite probably 
this setting up will consume nearly or quite all of the 
forty years of harvest time apportioned to it; but in any 
event, the time for the smiting of the image in its feet 
will not come until October, 1914 A.D., however much 
trouble and distress of nations may result from the 
prior awakening of their peoples under the enlightening 
influences of the dawning of the Millennial morning. 
Already such distress or perplexity is felt in 
quarters national, financial and religious. 

Our previous expectation was that the anarchistic 
period would last some three or four years, and in our 
mental calculations of the opportunities for harvest 
work, we naturally cut off those years, and the time 
thus appeared shorter to us. Now, however, we see 
clearly that for some of the Church there probably 
remain fully ten years of experience, opportunities, 
testings, victories, joys and sorrows. Each year, 
however, we may expect that the signs of the times 
will more and more demonstrate the accuracy of our 
expectations both for the Church and for the world. 
As already pointed out, the harvest dates shown us 
in the Scriptures are October, 1874, as the beginning 
of the harvest; April, 1878, as the parallel to our 
Lord's death; October, 1881, as the parallel to the 
termination of the special favor to natural Israelites 
in the sending of the Gospel to the Gentiles, Cornelius 
being the first; and October, 1914 A.D., as the 
end of the forty years' harvest. Any other dates 
than these are purely speculative. We have never set 
forth any other dates as being presented by the Scriptures. 
We did indeed call attention to the date suggested 
by one of the measurements through the upper 
step of the Great Pyramid's "Grand Gallery," but in 
conjunction with the suggestion we particularly intimated 



that it was merely speculative. 
R3390 : page 198 

Our estimate of what may be reasonably looked 
for as the order of events in the next ten years is, of 
course, based upon what the Scriptures indicate to be 
coming, and is the result of our endeavor to put together 
these coming events in their seemingly logical 
order or sequence. We have already pointed out that 
the "symbolical image of the beast" began 1846.* 
We are now anxiously looking for the vitalizing of 
that image as foretold in Rev. 13:15. Our expectation 
is that this causing of the image to have life, 
speech and power will have its fulfilment in some 
pact or union or agreement amongst so-called Protestant 
denominations, with a sympathetic alliance and 
cooperation with the Church of Rome. Our expectation 
is that the spark of life to the organic union begun 
in the Evangelical Alliance will come from the Episcopal 
Church, which claims divine authority through 
apostolic succession— a claim which other Protestant 
denominations would be glad to be able to make. 
The Episcopal Church is quite ready to confer the 
spark of authority and vitality, and we opine that 
three or four more years will so greatly increase the 
tendency toward union and toward power amongst 
Protestants that they will be willing in some form to 
accept the so-called apostolic ordination and authority. 
If this be not accomplished by 1910, or evidently 
be very near to accomplishment at that time, we 
shall feel a measure of disappointment. 

Meantime Socialism (which, although not so intended 
by its best and ablest leaders, is incipient anarchy, 
because even its best propositions would prove 
unworkable under present selfish conditions) will be 
making strong headway throughout Christendom, 
and will be causing more and more perplexity to the 
great, the rich, the mighty, the wise, the influential, 
according to the course of this world. The quickened 
"image" will be closely related to the chief captains 



*See Millennial Dawn, Vol. III., p. 119. 

R3390 : page 199 

of industry, finance and politics, and the dread of 
Socialism and irreligion and anarchy will draw them 
more and more closely together and make each the 
more energetic in support of the other. 

As a result of these conditions we may expect an 
increasing disregard of the rights and constitutional 
prerogatives of all who are not directly active supporters 
of the powers that be, political, financial and religious. 



The freedom of speech and freedom to circulate 
literature will be greatly abridged, under the plea 
that such abridgment is necessary for the public welfare, 
which in some respects will be the truth. Anything 
not fully in line with the rulers of that time 
will be reckoned as in opposition; and notwithstanding 
our disposition for peace, and our good will toward 
all men of all classes and stations, the WATCH 
TOWER publications will probably come under the 
ban with those of Socialism— though their teachings 
be as opposite as the poles. The period following 
will seemingly be the time when the door will be closing 
—and opportunities for service will be increasingly 
diminished, though opportunities for suffering for the 
Truth's sake may increase. 

The lesson to us each and all seems to be that 
during the next five or six years we should labor 
with intensified zeal, because we know that the night 
is coming wherein no man can labor. How glad we 
are that in divine providence our lot has fallen in the 
present time! How glad we are that our eyes have 
seen and our ears heard the precious messages peculiar 
to this time! How glad we are that we are permitted 
even at this "eleventh hour" to engage in the 
harvest work! How glad we are for the prospect of 
continued opportunities for service— a little longer 
than we had previously supposed! How glad we are 
that, no matter how infinitesimal our talents and opportunities 
may be, the great Reaper deigns to use us 
still as his co-laborers, and has provided various instruments 
by which even the smallest, the weakest, 
the humblest, may through tracts or books or otherwise 
engage in the wonderful opportunities of the 
harvest of this age. 

In answer to many inquiries respecting the progress 
of the work, we take this opportunity of assuring 
the dear co-laborers that it is progressing greatly. 
The Volunteers are very energetic and we are continually 
noting favorable results: some of the Lord's 
truth-hungry sheep are being found and revived; the 
Colporteurs are finding more and more a readiness to 
hear as the people awaken to the fact that their theological 
professors and ministers and many of the membership 
of the various denominations are drifting farther 
and farther from faith in God and in his Book. 
As the chasm between faith and unbelief widens and 
deepens, as the higher critics become more and more 
bold, and the evolutionists more and more assertive, 
the true sheep are getting to listen more and more 
attentively for the Shepherd's voice, and to realize 
that they have been following to some extent false 
guides and have been too careless of the voice of the 
Shepherd. Now is the time for reaching these hungry 
sheep, who if not speedily nourished with the 
Truth will fall into the evolution theories and the 
higher critical pit of infidelity. 



R3390 : page 199 

THE ATONEMENT FOR SIN. 

-A SCIENTIST'S VIEW.- 

SIR OLIVER LODGE, F.R.S., D.Sc, of Birmingham 
University, England, has recently 
expressed his views on the above fundamental 
feature of the Christian religion. Such gentlemen in 
the past have kept their unbelief somewhat secret, but 
now they are encouraged, emboldened, by the temerity 
of the "higher critic" infidels in pulpits and seminaries, 
and are speaking their minds more freely. 
This man learned in worldly lore, and the trusted 
educator of many good people's sons, expresses his 
unbelief in the first proposition in his published article, 
thus:— 

"In the days when the vicariousness of sin could 
be accepted, and when an original fall of Adam could 
be held as imputed to the race, it was natural to admit 
the possibility of a vicarious punishment and to 
accept an imputed righteousness. In the days when 
God could be thought of as an angry Jehovah who 
sent pestilences until he was propitiated by the smell 
of a burnt-offering, it was possible to imagine that the 
just anger of an offended God could be met by the sacrifice 
of an innocent victim.... 

"As a matter of fact, the higher man of today is 
not worrying about his sins at all, still less about their 
punishment. His mission, if he is good for anything, 
is to be up and doing, and in so far as he acts wrongly 
or unwisely he expects to suffer. He may unconsciously 
plead for mitigation on the ground of good 
intentions, but never either consciously or unconsciously 
will any one but a cur ask for the punishment 
to fall on some one else, nor rejoice if told that it has 
already so fallen. 

"As for 'original sin' or 'birth sin' or other notion 
of that kind, by which is partly meant the sins of 
his parents, that sits absolutely lightly on him. As a 
matter of fact, it is non-existent, and no one but a 
monk could have invented it. Whatever it be, it is 
not a business for which we are responsible. We did 
not make the world; and an attempt to punish us for 
our animal origin and ancestry would be simply comic, 
if any one could be found who was willing to take it 
seriously. 

R3390 : page 200 

"Here we are; we have risen, as to our bodies, 
from the beasts; as a race the struggle has been 



severe, and there have been both rises and falls. We 
have been helped now and again by bright and shining 
individual examples— true incarnations of diviner 
spirits than our own— notably by one supremely bright 
Spirit who blazed out nineteen hundred years ago, 
and was speedily murdered by the representatives of 
that class whose mission it appears to be to wage war 
against the prophets, and to do their worst to exterminate 
new ideas and kinds of goodness to which they 
are not accustomed. Fortunately for the race, they 
are only able to kill the body; the soul, the inspiration, 
the germ of a new and higher faith seems forever 
beyond their grasp." 



Here we see the wretched effect of false doctrine: 
we see a noble mind poisoned against the Bible and its 
grand plan of redemption through the death of Christ. 
The time will come when grand men like this one will 
be relieved of their blindness. "All the blind eyes 
shall be opened and all the deaf ears shall be unstopped." 
Thank God! Now we cannot hope to influence 
such: we cannot hope to antidote the poison of 
error in those already poisoned, but we do hope to 
forewarn and forearm and put on guard those not already 
prejudiced and poisoned. This is our constant 
aim in this "evil day." 

Sir Oliver Lodge will not deny that "pestilences" 
and other forms of disease— death— have reigned over 
the world for centuries. He may deny that there is 
any personal God, and call Nature his God, and thus 
charge to irresponsible Nature all the evils that afflict 
men: but so surely as he admits a personal and intelligent 
Almighty God he must also admit that this Almighty 
being causes "pestilences," diseases, death, or 
else that knowing of these he is careless or indifferent 
to the interests of his creatures. This issue cannot be 
honestly dodged. The answer is one of the keys to 
the argument. 

The spiteful animosity against the Biblical teaching 
of vicarious atonement by Jesus for the sin of 
Adam is undoubtedly engendered by the labyrinth of 
hateful and unscriptural errors which ever since "the 
dark ages" has been associated with the doctrine of the 
vicarious atonement in all the creeds of Christendom. 

This wrong view (which has misled many honest 
minds into opposition to the true view) is briefly stated 
thus: God became enraged at Adam and Eve for their 
disobedience and damned them to an eternity of torture, 
and, still not satisfied, he included all their children 

R3391 : page 200 

that should ever be born. Later on Jesus, by 

his sufferings, caused a cancellation of part of the sentence 



so far as part of the people were concerned. Or, 
as some view it, God declared that he would never recede 
from his anger, would never forgive any, but let 
all roast forever unless Jesus would suffer for some 
and release them. No wonder every true man would 
reject such a conception of God, or if he accepted it 
would refuse to worship him or to regard him as even 
an equal with honest manhood. This is not the view 
of "vicarious atonement" which we defend, nor the 
one which the Bible presents. 

HOW DIFFERENT AND HOW REASONABLE IS THE BIBLE 
VIEW OF THE MATTER! 

The divine decree is, that absolute obedience to 
the divine commands shall be required of all and for 
the good of all. Because all unrighteousness is sin, 
therefore the decree, "The wages of sin is death"— 
to the intent that sin and its attendant misery may 
not be eternal— to the intent that perfection in holiness, 
perfection in life and perfection in happiness 
may forever be indissolubly connected. 

With such a righteous indignation against sin, 
with such a just and holy desire that it might not be 
perpetual, God made his law and explained it to 
Adam, and, when the latter had violated that law, 
pronounced the sentence, and has for six thousand 
years backed up the forces of nature which executed 
that decree, "Dying thou shalt die." 

Who can find fault with the sentence for original 
sin as it is expressed in the Bible— a death sentence. 
No reasonable man could deny that God has the right 
as well as the power to destroy in death any creature 
who will not conform to his just and wise law. This 
is the case as stated in the Bible, exactly. "The 
sting of death [the sting, or virus, which produces 
death and all its attendant sufferings] is sin; and the 
power of sin [to thus sting to death] is the Law,"— 
"The wages of sin is death."— I Cor. 15:56; 
Rom. 6:23. 

The dying processes affected the first perfect pair 
in every way— mentally, morally and physically. Degeneracy 
began at once, and once, and of course affected their 
offspring according to the laws of nature. Nothing 
can be charged to the dishonor or injustice of the Creator. 
In every particular he was well within the 
rights of his position— yea, he was in duty bound to 
make the condition such that the sinful and imperfect 
would not live on forever. And so it was that father 
Adam died "in the day" (the thousand year day— 
2 Pet. 3:8) in which he became a sinner, and none of 
his posterity ever lived more than 969 years. 

Now, let us not complicate the question by theological 
"smoke" from the "dark ages," but standing 
by the simple narrative of the Scriptures,— that "by 
one man's disobedience sin entered into the world, 



and death by [as a result of] sin, and so [thus] death 
passed upon all men, because all are sinners" (Rom. 5:12), 
let us inquire respecting the vicarious atonement 

R3391 : page 201 

and its necessity under the conditions set forth in the 
Scriptures as above. 

Granted that God did pronounce a just sentence 
of death upon Adam, the question is, How could he 
get rid of that sentence so as to ever grant mankind a 
resurrection from death to life, and all that was lost 
by the disobedience under its sentence? God is "unchangeable,' 
he assures us; hence this sentence of the 
great Supreme Court of the Universe is unalterable, 
unless it can be shown to be unjust or unwise. Neither 
of these could be acknowledged and hence the 
sentence is unalterable. 

But could not God devise some method for the 
rescue of Adam if he so desired? Although human 
wisdom could see no way, could not divine wisdom and 
love aid and find a way out of the dilemma? The 
Scriptures say, Yes; and proceed to tell us that it was 
in order "that God might be just and the justifier of 
them that believe in Jesus" that God provided a vicarious 
atonement (blood atonement) for Adam's sin. 
Blood-atonement means atonement by the sacrifice of 
a life to pay for the condemned life. 

Now, Professor Lodge acknowledges Jesus to 
have lived and to have died— there is no dispute as to 
the facts. The question at issue then is, Did the fact 
that Jesus died for Adam's sin make his death any 
the more severe or unjust or improper? 

We concede at once that God could not have 
justly demanded that his Son become a man, and then 
as a man die for the sins of the one man, who had been 
sentenced to extinction because of sin, and whose race 
in his loins at the time of his transgression shared his 
penalty and would equally share anything done for 
his relief. However desirable such a result, or however 
impossible to reach that result otherwise, Justice 
would forbid such an exaction. 

But the case is otherwise stated in the Scriptures, 
—and their testimony respecting the divine program 
must be taken as a whole. The Bible account shows 
that, so far from compelling the great sacrifice, God 
induced it: he offered the Only Begotten Son a great 
reward as compensation for the faithful performance 
of the service. The statement is, that "for the joy 
that was set before him [Jesus] endured the cross, 
despising the shame." Read carefully the context 
also.-Heb. 12. 

As to what the reward or "joy" consisted of, we 
may draw from the Scriptures very satisfactory conclusions. 
(1) "Lo, I come to do thy will, O my God. 
Thy law [will] is written in my heart." This undoubtedly 



would be the first moving impulse. (2) "He 
was moved with compassion for the multitude," and 
said, "The good Shepherd giveth his life for the 
sheep." "I lay down my life of myself,— no man 
taketh it from me." (3) At his resurrection the Father 
gave him a still higher form of life than he had ever 
previously enjoyed— life on a higher plane— "far 
above angels, principalities and powers;"— although 
he had always been the first and highest of all the 
heavenly sons of God— "the First-begotten," "the 
beginning of the creation of God," and who in all things 
had always had preeminence over others and been 
next to the Father. Henceforth, as a reward for his 
obedience, love and zeal, he was made a "partaker of 
the divine nature" with "life in himself"— a life inextinguishable 
and needing no supply or sustenance 
—immortality, in the strictest meaning of that word. 
What fault can be found with such a substitution, 
with such a vicarious atonement for the sinner? 
Had Jesus been compelled to "suffer for us, the just 
for the unjust," we might plead injustice. Had he 
even willingly died for us, but never been raised from 
the dead, we might have murmured that he was more 
obedient than the Father was kind. Had he been 
raised from the dead a man, and not as the Apostle 
declares, "a life-giving spirit," it would have meant 
the taking back of the "price," and would have implied 
also his perpetual degradation to a lower plane 
of being, because of his obedience to the Father's will. 
But, as the matter is outlined in the Scriptures, neither 
of these objections can be urged, for our Lord was 
raised from death "to die no more— death hath no 
more dominion over him." He could not die now because 
made possessor of immortality, "the divine nature," 
which cannot die, being death proof. 

SUFFERING FOR UNWISDOM ONLY? 

If it were only the foolish and the wicked that 
suffered now the Professor's logic would be more apparent: 
but if a man should expect to suffer for wrong 
and unwisdom should he not expect to prosper for 
well doing? But we all know that the wicked often 
prosper most, and that the good and the pure and 
the wise frequently suffer; witness the cases of the 
prophets of old and of our Lord and his apostles, and 
of all his faithful followers, of whom it is written: 
"All that will live godly in this life shall suffer persecution." 
(2 Tim. 3:12.) Indeed, is not almost all 
of the wickedness of the world practised at the expense 
of the innocent? 

How about the pains and death of infants, who 
constitute nearly one-half of our race: are they suffering 
for their wrong-doing? If not, for whose error do 
they suffer? Who gives a better answer to this query 
than the Bible gives— that they die because they have 



inherited the weaknesses and blemishes of Adam? 
The fact is that sin and death are upon our race, and 
that we are born to their influences. 

R3391 : page 202 

Men who think have indeed, as the Professor declares, 
ceased to concern themselves about "original 
sin" or "birth sin," but not because a monk invented 
the thought. They know that they were "born in 
sin," "prone to sin," and that its bonds are fast upon 
their every power. They know, if they will but think, 
that Moses, who first told of original sin, was not a 
monk. Neither was our Lord, who declared that he 
"came to seek and to save [recover] that which was 
lost." Neither were the apostles monks: least of all 
that logical man the Apostle Paul, whose words we 
have quoted foregoing. 

EVOLUTION THEORY THE PROFESSOR'S SNARE. 

The Professor's difficulty and how he fell into it 
are clear from the paragraph last above quoted. 
He was too logical to be held long by false conceptions 
of the atonement as a means of rescue from eternal 
torture, and in discarding that he discarded the 
Bible which he believed so taught. Next he was ensnared 
by human speculation and science, falsely so-called, 
into the Evolution theory. This is shown by 
his words, "Here we are. We have risen, as to our 
bodies, from the beasts." 

Illogically and without evidence the Professor is 
led into Theosophy— into the belief that each man is 
the incarnation of a previously unknown spirit being. 
This is evident from the words "true incarnations of 
diviner spirits than our own." Alas! how liable all 
of us would be to fall into confusion of thought if we 
were to reject the divine Word of revelation. How 
quickly such folly manifests itself, no matter how 
learned or brilliant the individual! 

R3392 : page 202 

The Professor's closing reference to "the germ 
of a new and higher FAITH" seems peculiar in view 
of the fact that he appears to have no faith in the Bible, 
very little confidence in a God of Nature. We 
are forced to the conclusion that the Professor's 
"germ of a new and higher faith" is self-faith or self-confidence 
respecting "reincarnations," and a gradual 
evolution from microbes to beasts and from beasts to 
men and from men to gods. Those who can be satisfied 
with such faiths are welcome to them. As for us, 
we prefer "the faith once delivered to the saints;" 
but we want it pure— free from traditions of the 
dark ages, which dishonor God and insult reason and 



lead on to such darkness of worldly wisdom as we are 
here criticising. 



R3392 : page 202 

PRAYING FOR HELP IN TIME OF WAR. 

--2 CHRONICLES 14:1-12.-JULY 17.- 

Golden Text:— "Help us, O Lord 
our God, for we rest on thee." 

OUR lesson relates to the two tribe kingdom of Judah 
under its good king Asa, the great grandson of 
Solomon. We have already noticed the tendency 
to idolatry stimulated by Solomon's marrying heathen 
women, and then, to please them, introducing their heathen 
religions. We have seen how only a small portion of the 
kingdom was left in the hands of Solomon's son Rehoboam, 
and that true religion for a time was stimulated by 
the adversities of the government. Nevertheless, idolatry 
flourished, not only in Israel under Jeroboam, but also in 
Judah under Rehoboam, and also under the reign of his 
son Abijah, mentioned in the opening verses of our lesson. 

CONFLICT BETWEEN LIGHT AND DARKNESS. 

Under all the circumstances one is inclined to wonder 
whence Asa received his aspirations for righteousness 
and loyalty to God. We are to remember, however, that the 
gathering to Judah of many of the religious people of the 
ten tribes and the Levitical tribe gave true religion a strong 
foundation in Judah. The heathen religions were fascinating 
to the people, not only because they were showy, 
but because they contained a large element of licentiousness, 
and it is a weakness of the fallen human nature 
to want to be right and yet to be wrong at the same time 
—to pretend to be doing good and serving righteousness 
and exercising the religious elements of human nature, 
while at the same time gratifying the lower and baser instincts. 
The entire human family is weak in this direction, 
as is evident by all the heathen religions of the 
world. The religion of the Bible is the only one that lifts 
its standard far above all baseness, and which demands of 
its followers the highest ideals, as represented in our text 
for the year,— "Brethren, whatsoever things are true, 
whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever things are just, 
whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things are lovely, 
whatsoever things are reputable, if there be any virtue, or 
any praise, think on these things."— Phil. 4:8. 

Our Lord, in telling us to let our light shine before 
men, informs us that the darkness will hate the light, 
that there will be continually a conflict between the two, 
and that this will cause the "children of the light" continually 



to walk in the narrow and difficult way. Nevertheless 

the light reproves the darkness wherever it shines. 

We may be sure that some such conditions prevailed in 

the kingdom of Judah when the best people of the whole 

twelve tribes had gathered in Judah and were letting the 

light of their faith in God shine before their fellows. The 

influence of the Truth took hold upon the heart of Asa, 

and upon his reaching the throne, at the death of his 

father Abijah, he promptly availed himself of the opportunity 

to strike a blow at idolatry— to take his stand on 

the side of the Lord and his Law, which the nation centuries 

R3392 : page 203 

before had accepted as the basis of their government 
with God through Moses. 

ASA'S COURSE NOT A PATTERN. 

The work of reform consisted in the destruction of 
the altars erected on various hilltops, at which the orgies 
of heathendom were practised. These altars were surrounded 
by groves for the worship of Baal and Ashtaroth by those 
who affected to be in a large sense worshipers of nature, 
and groves of trees on hilltops were their temples. Asa 
not only destroyed these unlawful accessories to a false 
worship, but he caused a proclamation to be made throughout 
the kingdom calling the attention of the people to the 
true God Jehovah, the God of their fathers, and to his 
Law and all the commandments connected therewith. 

Such action on the part of Asa has been misunderstood 
by many well-meaning Christian people to imply that 
other kings and rulers in other countries should similarly 
take active measures for the destruction of all false religion 
and for the establishment of what they conceive to be 
the true religion. This has meant religious persecution 
throughout the past. For instance, in Great Britain, 
Germany, France, etc., time and again Roman Catholics 
coming into power have overthrown Protestant worship 
and persecuted Protestant worshipers, and, reversely, 
Protestants coming into power have endeavored similarly 
to persecute Catholics. Sometimes the persecution has 
been between various sects of Protestants, sometimes between 
Mohammedans and Christians, etc. Of late years 
a more tolerant spirit has disposed intelligent people to 
let each other worship different gods or the same God according 
to the dictates of the conscience of each. Nevertheless 
there are many today, who, if they had the power, 
would feel it to be their duty to emulate the example of 
Asa, and destroy any and every religion disapproved by 
their consciences. 

Such misapprehensions of proprieties are built upon 
misunderstanding of the course of Asa and others of his 
time, who had God's approval in their course of opposing 
false worships. In order to grasp the situation thoroughly 
and to see the principles underlying it, we should remember 



that no nation in the world today occupies the same 
position toward God that Israel occupied in its day. God 
chose Israel— the natural descendants of Abraham and 
Isaac and Jacob— to be his peculiar people, to be his nation. 
They were thus separated from all other nations of 
the world, which were accounted heathen. In this his 
chosen nation God established his Law, and made a covenant 
with that people by which they were to be obedient 
to certain directions and to receive from him certain blessings, 
protection, guidance, etc. It was in harmony with 
this special arrangement that Asa was properly doing his 
duty in destroying any and every religious system in his 
nation contrary to the divine Law and Covenant. 

"YE ARE A HOLY NATION." 

However, Israel has ceased to be God's people since 
the time of their rejection of Messiah, and God has not 
adopted any other nation of earth to be his nation instead 
of Israel, and he is no longer in covenant relationship 
with any other nation. Believers in the Lord Jesus, consecrated 
followers in his steps, are, from the Lord's standpoint, 
his "holy nation," his "Royal Priesthood"— spiritual 
Israel. But these do not constitute a nation from the 
worldly standpoint. They are the embryo members of the 
coming nation, the Kingdom of God's dear Son, which 
will be established in power and great glory at the second 
coming of the Lord and the establishment of his Kingdom. 
For this reason it would be entirely improper to 
any king or governor or president or emperor of earth today 
to attempt to use any such power as that exercised by 
Asa with divine approval. During this Gospel age the 
Lord's plan is that his people shall be as lights in the 
world in the midst of the darkness of sin and error, and 
that the light which they let shine shall reprove the world 
of sin, not nationally but individually, so that those who 
experience conviction of sin and who go on to repentance 
may become associated with the light-bearers, the Lord's 
people, and while still in the world and still of the world, 
according to the flesh, and still bound to it by certain 
obligations and laws of men, nevertheless as our Lord expressed 
it, such, from the time they become members of 
the Royal Priesthood, the holy nation, are not of the 
world even as Jesus was not of the world, because he has 
chosen them out of the world. 

King Asa built fortress cities in the highways connecting 
the land of Judah with the outside world, as a 
protection against attack from Egypt on the south and 
west, from Syria on the north and east, and from the 
ten-tribe kingdom on the immediate north. He organized 
also a militia army subject to call. These preparations 
for war had the divine approval, but in no sense of 
the word indicated that we, the antitypical Israelites, 
should take a similar course. On the contrary, as the 
Apostle points out, we are to have on the armor of God, 
the armor of righteousness; we are to fortify our hearts 



against the attack of spiritual enemies in every direction; 
we are to note the quarter from which the enemies are 
to be expected— the world, the flesh, the Adversary. The 
battles of typical Israel represented or prefigured and 
illustrated the battles in which we spiritual Israelites are 
to engage and the victories which we are to win on a higher 
plane, for we contend not with flesh and blood, but with 
principalities and powers and wicked spirits in places of 
influence. 

The ten years of quiet mentioned in verses 1,5 and 6, 
in which Asa instituted reforms amongst the people 
and equipped them for defence, were evidently all needed 
for the struggle recorded in verse 9. Zerah, the Ethiopian, 
with an army of 1,000,000 men, is supposed by some 
to have been Osorkon II. of Egypt, who was of Ethiopian 
descent. Others suppose that Zerah was the general of 
this king. In the days of Rehoboam the king of Egypt 

R3393 : page 204 

had invaded Judah and conquered it, and had taken away 
from it an immense treasure in gold accumulated by King 
Solomon, including the solid gold shields which Solomon 
had hanging from the pillars of the Temple. It is assumed 
that Judah became practically a vassal nation to Egypt as a 
result of this war, and that Asa's organization of the nation 
on a military basis and the erecting of fortifications meant a 
declaration of independence and a refusal to pay tribute 
to Egypt, and that Zerah's army was sent to punish 
him, to bring away more spoil and to reduce the nation 
again to the condition of a vassal. 

KING ASA'S PRAYER FOR VICTORY. 

Asa called into requisition his army, which numbered 
only about one-half that of the invading foe, but his confidence 
was in the Lord, and he cried unto him in prayer 
for help that the war might result favorably to the Lord's 
people, the Jews. His recorded prayer is beautiful for its 
simplicity of faith:— 

"Asa cried unto the Lord his God, and said, Lord, 
there is none beside thee to help between the mighty and 
him that hath no strength: help us, O Lord our God; 
for we rely on thee, and in thy name are we come against 
this multitude. O Lord, thou art our God; let not man 
prevail against thee." 

The Lord blessed the forces of the Jews. The enemy 
was discomfited, scattered, routed, and pursued through 
the land of the Philistines, who evidently were in league 
with them as enemies of the Jews. This was one of the 
most remarkable victories ever achieved by the Jews over 
any foreign nation. 

Following the custom of Asa and David and Moses, 
and others of bygone times in Israel, it is the habit of 
Christian peoples of our day to offer up prayers for success 
in war. We recall well the prayers that were offered for 



the armies during the civil war of this country; we remember 
the accounts given of the prayers of the British and 
Boers during the recent British war; we remember in the 
Spanish war the prayers of the Catholics of Spain and of 
Italy for the success of the Spanish forces, and how the 
Pope's blessing was given to the Spanish war vessels. We 
have heard lately of how the Czar of Russia, on learning 
of the outbreak of the war, repaired to the Cathedral for 
prayer to God, and how the leading Russian generals have 
similarly gone to confession and to prayer and for other 
public recognitions of the Almighty and appeals to him 
for success to the Russian arms in the present war with 
Japan. We have seen pictures in the public press of how 
the regimental standards, flags, are blessed by the Czar 
and assisting priests, and the telegraphic reports declare 
that an image of the Virgin Mary, which was taken with 
the army in wars of long ago that were successfully waged, 
is to be taken to the far East as a kind of talisman to give 
good luck to the Russian side of the warfare. How shall 
we view these appeals? Shall we view them as others do 
as being on a parity with the appeal of Asa in our lesson? 
Shall we consider that they are equally appropriate in 
God's sight and that they are bringing a blessing and victory? 
We answer, No. The prayers offered for the success 
of the Confederate armies did not bring them victory; 
the prayers and blessings upon the Spanish forces and vessels 
brought them no victory; the prayers of the Boers 
brought them no victory; the prayers of the French in 
their war with Germany brought the former no victory; 
the prayers of the Russians have in no sense of the word 
stayed or turned the tide of battle as yet. 

GOD'S INTEREST AND CARE AND OURS. 

We would not be understood as declaring or even implying 
that God has no interest in the affairs of the world, 
and that he does not in any measure take a hand in the 
results of the wars of our time. Quite the contrary. We 
believe that the Lord's power, especially in this day, especially 
in this time of "harvest," is supervising and shaping 
the affairs of the nations with a view to bringing about 
the grand consummation of the age so long foretold in the 
Scriptures, which will result in a great time of trouble 
through a social, political and financial upheaval which 
will prepare the way for the Kingdom of God's dear Son 
in its due time. But we deny the propriety of Christians 
attempting to pray or otherwise direct the Lord in connection 
with these matters, and the outworking of the 
divine program, which we cannot fully and clearly comprehend. 
No nation in the world today is God's nation 
in the sense that Israel was his people. With no nation 
in the world today has God made a covenant such as that 
which subsisted between himself and Israel for the centuries 
between the giving of the Law at Sinai and the rejection 
of the Lord at the time of his crucifixion. No 
nation or kingdom in the world can claim divine authority 



or right or backing. The title, "Christian nations," is 
entirely a misnomer, unauthorized by anything in God's 
Word. All these nations, from the Scriptural standpoint, 
are "kingdoms of this world," Gentile kingdoms. The 
Lord acknowledges none of them, but describes them 
unitedly as great Babylon, which in due time would fall 
and give place to the glorious kingdom which the Lord 
has promised— the antitype of the Jewish kingdom under 
a still more favorable covenant, under a still better Mediator, 
under a still more grand and glorious king than 
David or Solomon or any other. 

The proper attitude, therefore, for the Lord's consecrated 
people to occupy is that of neutrals. "Ye are not 
of this world, even as I am not of this world; for I have 
chosen you out of the world, and ordained you, that you 
should go and bring forth fruit, and that your fruit should 
remain." The fruit which the Lord's people are to 
bear is not strife and enmity and vain glory, but 
love, joy and peace in the holy Spirit. This does 
not mean either that we are to quarrel with the world 
and seek to bring all mankind to the same position that 
we occupy. On the contrary, we are to realize that the 

R3393 : page 205 

world is of one nature and the Lord's consecrated and accepted 
ones are of a new nature; that the Lord has 
not given to the world the same law that he has given to 
his consecrated ones, and that he is not expecting of the 
world the same course of conduct that he is expecting of 
the house of sons begotten of his Spirit, adopted into his 
family and guided by his Spirit and his Word. 

Let the world fight its fight: the Lord will supervise 
and the results will be glorious eventually. Let us who 
belong to the new nation, to the new Kingdom that is not 
of this world, who use no carnal weapons, but the sword 
of the Spirit— let us fight the good fight of faith, lay hold 
upon the glorious things set before us, and not only stand 
ourselves, but help all those begotten of the same Spirit 
and members of the same heavenly army corps to stand, 
complete in him who is the Head of the body, the Captain 
of our salvation. By and by God's loving care over 
all his creatures will be manifested in the glorious Kingdom 
of his dear Son, which shall bless and rule, instruct 
and uplift mankind in general. "The groaning creation" 
will then be delivered from the bondage of corruption 
into the glorious liberty of the sons of God— so many of 
them as will then accept the blessing. Then all will see 
that God so loved the world as to give his Son to die 
for us and to thus open the way for his Kingdom 
blessings. 



R3393 : page 205 



A GOOD KING'S ERROR. 

-2 CHRONICLES 19:1-1 1.--JULY 24.- 

Golden Text:— "Deal courageously, 
and the Lord shall be with the good." 

JEHOSHAPHAT is noted as one of the best kings in 

the history of Judah. He was the son of Asa, of 

our last lesson. He had been reigning twenty 

years at the time of the events narrated in this lesson. He 

was a still more vigorous reformer than his father Asa, his 

record being that he utterly destroyed all the groves 

where idolatry was practised, the implication being that 

his father had permitted some of them to remain. Additionally 

he established the true religion throughout his 

kingdom, and evidently was zealous for righteousness in 

every sense of the word. The record certainly shows his 

reign in the most favorable light. 

He got into error through ambition. He made a 
marriage alliance for his son with the daughter of Ahab 
and Jezebel of the ten-tribe kingdom— Israel. Doubtless 
his ambition was that ultimately through this union the 
two nations might become again united as one under his 
son. Alas! how many good men and good women have 
been injured by ambition and expediency. How many 
parents think more of the earthly prospects of their children 
than of their real happiness and spiritual prosperity. 
However good and noble and well intentioned such parents 
may be, their course in such matters indicates 
lack of faith in God or lack of submission to his will, 
without the realization that his arrangements faithfully carried 
out will mean greater blessing than any other. 

ALLIANCES WITH EVIL DANGEROUS. 

The ambition which led to the intermarrying with 
the royal family of Israel led also to fellowship and sociability 
between the two royal families, and the effect, as 
might have been expected, was an evil one. "Evil communications 
corrupt good manners," says the Apostle. 
A son once asked his mother why she did not permit him 
to play with certain boys of the neighborhood. She replied 

R3394 : page 205 

that she feared their influence over him would be for 
evil. He inquired why she should not expect that his 
good example would influence these neighbor boys rather 
than that their example would influence him unfavorably. 
By way of illustrating her thought, she requested her son to 
bring her a tumbler full of clean water and a bottle of ink 
and a pen. When he had brought these she asked him to 
put a drop of the ink into the tumbler of water. He did 
so, and she asked him to notice the clouded effect that 
even a drop of the ink produced; and then suggested that 



he put one drop of the water into the ink bottle and note 
how little change would be manifested. The lesson is a 
good one: there is a corrupting power in evil, a downward 
tendency to which nothing in righteousness corresponds, 
and reversely. 

The lesson to us is that we need to "keep ourselves 
unspotted from the world," and, more than this, to seek 
divine aid in so doing— to appropriate to ourselves the 
instructions and encouragements, the reproofs and exhortations 
of God's Word. A little leaven of sin can affect a 
whole community; it has a power of self-development in 
fallen human nature that righteousness does not possess. 
The more we realize this the more we are led to look to the 
Lord for the great relief that the world needs, and the 
more we are inclined to pray as well as to labor that the 
Lord's Kingdom may come, and that through it righteousness 
may be established in the world, and the divine 
will be done eventually on earth as it is done in heaven. 

The sociability between the king of Judah and the 
king of Israel led the former to visit the latter, and on 
such an occasion the host proposed that he would attempt 
to retake from the king of Syria a certain city that had 
once belonged to Israel. He requested his guest, the king 
of Judah, to accompany him to the battle, which was evidently 
expected to be a victory. Out of courtesy, and 
from his desire to cultivate the friendship of Ahab, Jehoshaphat 
yielded and accompanied him, the result being a 
disastrous battle from which the king of Judah barely escaped. 
The Lord, through the prophet Jehu, sent him a 
message on his return from the battle, saying, "Shouldst 

R3394 : page 206 

thou help the ungodly and love them that hate the Lord? 
therefore is wrath upon thee"— indicated by his ignominious 
return without any evidence of divine favor especially 
promised to the kings of Judah so long as they were in 
harmony with God. 

BE YE SEPARATE, SAITH THE LORD. 

This whole matter teaches an important lesson for 
the Lord's people: it is for us to seek first the Lord's will 
in every matter and to leave to him the direction of our 
affairs and interests. We should be specially on guard 
against associations with the ungodly— against fellowships, 
matrimonial alliances, etc., as between them and ourselves 
and families. We are not to wonder so much that one of 
the best kings of Judah should commit such an error, but 
we do wonder that members of the Royal Priesthood, begotten 
of the holy Spirit, could ever be so negligent of 
their relationship to the Lord and responsibility to him 
and to their children, that they should to any extent follow 
the course of Jehoshaphat; and yet we well know that 
those who thus attempt to take the guidance of their own 
affairs and the affairs of their children into their own 



hands, and hence to ignore the Lord in the matter, are a 
considerable number. As we grow in grace and in knowledge, 
and sometimes profit by our mistakes, we should be 
more and more free from them and therefore more and 
more pleasing to the Lord. 

The Lord's instruction to the new creation is that 
we should not only love righteousness, but hate iniquity; 
we should not only love and fellowship with all who are 
the Lord's people, but we should strictly avoid the fellowship 
of those who are not his people, who are enemies of 
righteousness. This does not mean that we are to hate 
the wicked, but that, hating the wickedness, we will avoid 
any fellowship with those who are in sympathy with it, realizing 
that they are either blinded to the right or ensnared 
and influenced by the Adversary. What fellowship hath 
light with darkness, truth with error, righteousness with 
sin? Let all who love righteousness depart from iniquity: 
"Be ye clean that bear the vessels of the Lord's house." 

While thus reproving Jehoshaphat, the Lord graciously 
mentioned his approval of his course in destroying the 
idolatrous arrangements and the tendency of the king's 
heart to seek the Lord. Evidently the experience was a 
profitable one and led Jehoshaphat to still greater zeal for 
righteousness, for he went out amongst the people, either 
personally or through heralds and representatives, and 
effected a religious revival, bringing the people back to a 
higher appreciation of the Lord and observance of his 
statutes. Evidently the king had a very high sense of justice 
and honor, as indicated by his judicial appointments 
in all the cities of his kingdom. His message to the 
judges, "Take heed what ye do: for ye judge not for 
man, but for the Lord, who is with you in the judgment. 
Wherefore, let the fear of the Lord be upon you; take 
heed and do it: for there is no iniquity with the Lord 
our God, nor respect of persons nor taking of gifts." 
These are grand sentiments, worthy of a saint of this Gospel 
age! Surely such a king would be a blessing to any 
people because of his approximation to the divine ideal of 
righteousness. What may the world hope for when the 
great king Immanuel— whose right the kingdom is, and 
who shortly will take it in the name of Jehovah— shall 
exercise the powers of the kingdom, and with superhuman 
knowledge and wisdom shall order the affairs of the world 
in the highest interests of every creature, in accord with 
the principles of righteousness. 

JUSTICE IS THE FOUNDATION OF GOD'S THRONE. 

Very evidently the majority of people— even Christians, 
"saints"— have not sufficiently high ideals respecting 
justice. The more we realize what a detestable thing 
injustice is in the sight of the Lord, the more must we 
strive to exercise ourselves continually along this line. 
Justice is not so high an attribute in some respects as love, 
but it is of primary importance, for the adage is a true one 
that we should be just before we are generous. The Lord's 



people should make sure that they render to no man in 
any respect less than is due him in business transactions, 
in social affairs, in private conversation, in every way. 
The saint is to go beyond this, and not only be just but 
generous— to render nothing less than justice to any, and 
to be willing to accept from others less than he might 
justly demand if they seemed not so highly to appreciate 
the principles of Justice. 

We are to remember the wide difference that exists 
between the Lord's people and the world, and are not to 
measure ourselves with others in this respect. The majority 
of the world have not been in the same school as we— 
the school of Christ— as it is written of the Lord's people, 
"They shall all be taught of God." As we have been 
learning in the highest school from the best of teachers for 
years, it would be strange indeed if we did not have a 
higher standard both of justice and of love than that which 
generally prevails amongst men. Let us learn to cultivate 
justice, let us be diligent students in the school of Christ, 
that we may be fitted for the graduation tests and thus be 
accounted worthy to be associated with our Lord as teachers 
in the great Millennial age school, in which the whole 
world of mankind shall receive instruction along these 
lines. 

The officers of the court were largely selected from 
amongst the Levites— the tribe specially consecrated to 
the Lord's service. Apparently the king could not have 
acted more wisely in all these matters; nevertheless we are 
not to expect the kings of Christendom to follow his example 
and select only consecrated men forjudges, court 
officers, police duty, etc. The kingdoms of this world 
will by and by become the kingdom of our Lord and of 
his Anointed, and then undoubtedly during that Millennial 
period only the consecrated will be granted positions 
of power, authority or responsibility in connection with 

R3394 : page 207 

the government of the world. At present, however, the 
"god of this world," the "prince of this world," Satan, 
has largely to do with all the politics of the world, and 
sees to it that the majority in places of influence and 
power are faithful to himself. 

True, there is today outwardly a good moral tone 
and a general desire on the part of the public not to be 
abused or defrauded by those in ruling positions, and a 
certain amount of decency and order must be maintained 
and a high standard must be claimed. Nevertheless, we 
are all witness to the fact that there are various standards 
of honesty, and that the majority of people both in and 
out of office have standards that are too low. It is not for 
us to specially pry into the present condition of things, 
which rather seems to us to be as good as we could expect, 
better than we could have hoped, all things considered. 
We rejoice, nevertheless, that the time is coming when 
absolute perfection will be secured in the conduct of the 



world's affairs. God is now selecting his Royal Priests to 
be his kings and ministers in the administration of the 
affairs of the Kingdom of his dear Son. Let us be faithful, 
and learn well the lessons of the present time, that 
we may be counted worthy a share in this honor. 

"JUDGE RIGHTEOUS JUDGMENT." 

Jehoshaphat's charge to the Levites who constituted 
this superior court at Jerusalem is grand also. "Thus 
shall ye do in the fear of the Lord, faithfully, with a perfect 
heart. And whensoever any controversy shall come 
to you from any brethren that dwell in their cities, between 
blood and blood, between law and commandment, 
statutes and judgments, ye shall even warn them that they 
trespass not against the Lord, and so wrath come upon 
you and upon your brethren." The judging between 
blood and blood would signify the decision as to the degree 
of culpability in the event of a murder— to determine, 

R3395 : page 207 

as we do today, whether or not the death were manslaughter, 
accidental killing, or in the second degree— murder 
unpremeditated or incited by anger or fear— or, third, if 
it were murder in the first degree, intended, premeditated. 
Similarly they were to discern which offences were against 
the common law, which against the divine law, and which 
against the usages of society, and were to see that justice 
would be meted out to all. As we think over those conditions 
of olden time, we wonder how such matters as these— 
such evidences that people of thousands of years ago were 
just, noble, thoughtful, reverential— are regarded by 
our Evolutionist friends. They seem inclined to think 
that at that time mankind must have been near the 
monkey scale of intelligence, but the facts are against them. 
Here was a king in whose empire justice was no doubt dispensed 
equally as well as it is with us today in this most 
favored land at this most favored period. 

The closing words of the lesson constitute our Golden 
Text— "Deal courageously, and the Lord shall be with 
the good." We commend these words to the Lord's 
faithful people. Whoever has a duty to perform let him 
not fear, and while seeking to do unpleasant tasks in a 
kindly manner, both justly and lovingly, let us fear not 
man, but rather fear the Lord and be intent on pleasing 
him. May the words of our mouths as well as the meditations 
of our hearts be acceptable in thy sight, O Lord, 
our strength and our Redeemer! 



R3395 : page 207 

REPORT OF THE BRITISH CONVENTION. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

Our first British General Convention has come 
and gone! It brought us much joy in the Lord, and 
left us with a greater desire to "spend and be spent" 
in the Master's service. With general consent it is 
acknowledged that the meetings have been the best 
we have had in this country. But this was according 
to expectation, for the convention brought together a 
larger number of friends than has hitherto been the 
case, and because all should have more of the holy 
Spirit now than ever before. The predominant feeling 
was the love of the brethren for each and all, and 
with it was the appreciation of the grace of God 
which produced such a grand result. Each of the 
meetings added its quota to the good derived from the 
Convention: the Praise and Testimony, and the Colporteurs' 
and Workers' meetings being specially helpful. 
Already we have heard of fresh or renewed 
efforts as a result of these talks with each other. On 
the Monday morning forty-three brothers and sisters 
signified by immersion their consecration to the Lord, 
and their desire to be accounted worthy to suffer with 
him. It was a most impressive time as we reviewed 
with each other our privilege of suffering with the 
Lord, as well as believing on him. And we rejoiced in 
anticipation of the "glory to follow." 

All the meetings were well attended, and there 
was the usual eagerness to get as much as possible 
of the food the Lord provided. The largest contingent 
of friends came from Glasgow, the most distant 
place represented. Ireland was represented by Bro. 
Walker, while England was represented by friends 
from all parts. We were glad to have Bro. Koetitz 
with us. It was hard to part, but we all realized that 
the Lord had given a work to our charge, and that 
the King's message demanded haste. A good proportion 
of the Colporteurs were with us also, and to these 
we bade "God-speed," commending them to the grace 
of God. We felt the shortness of the time, and the 
coming of the Kingdom for which we work and wait 
and there was a greater determination to do all possible 
for the accomplishment of the work committed to 
the hands of those who know the Lord. 

You and your work were specially remembered. 
We would have been glad to have had you with us, but 
we shall hope that, in the Lord's providence, you may 
be permitted and we may be privileged to have you 
with us in our next convention. The friends desired 
me to express on their behalf the gratitude they felt 
towards the Society. 

Your brother in the Lord, J. HEMERY. 



page 209 



SEMI-MONTHLY. 