Are You a Desirable Person?
THE world has its own standards by which it judges whether a person is desirable or not. Unless you excel in politics or sports, in art, in wealth or in the entertainment field, the world is not likely to consider you very desirable. But do not let that worry you. When Jesus Christ, the Son of God, was on earth, men did not consider him desirable.—Isa. 53:2.
What counts is not whether you are desirable to men, but whether you are desirable to your Creator, Jehovah God. But can a weak, imperfect human creature really appear desirable to the grand Creator of the universe? Indeed he can.
If that idea seems strange to you, then just note what the Bible, when quoting an angel of God, has to say about the prophet Daniel: “O Daniel . . . I myself have come to make report, because you are someone very desirable.” “O Daniel, you very desirable man.” “Do not be afraid, O very desirable man.” (Dan. 9:22, 23; 10:11, 19) Thus three times Daniel is described as not only desirable, but “very desirable.”
What made Daniel a very desirable person in the eyes of God? It was not his personal appearance, nor was it his learning, although he was highly educated. God judges not by the outward appearance, but by the heart. He made this clear when on one occasion he said to his prophet Samuel: “Not the way man sees is the way God sees, because mere man sees what appears to the eyes; but as for Jehovah, he sees what the heart is.” Daniel had a good heart.—1 Sam. 16:7.
Daniel’s good heart manifested itself in his sterling honesty, his probity. Though occupying a very high governmental position, he did not exploit it for selfish advantage. In vain his envious enemies tried to find some occasion against him, for we read: “There was no pretext or corrupt thing at all that they were able to find, forasmuch as he was trustworthy and no negligence or corrupt thing at all was found in him.” (Dan. 6:4; Prov. 4:23) If we would be persons found desirable to God, we, too, must guard our hearts and live lives above reproach.
Another way in which Daniel doubtless made himself very desirable to God was by his praising God. He was concerned about God’s name. When God answered his prayer by revealing to him Nebuchadnezzar’s dream and its interpretation, Daniel said: “Let the name of God become blessed from time indefinite even to time indefinite, for wisdom and mightiness—for they belong to him.” And when telling the dream and its meaning to Nebuchadnezzar, Daniel emphasized the fact that it was God alone who was able to reveal these things. Daniel also pleaded for the deliverance of his people on the basis of God’s name.—Dan. 2:20, 28; 9:19.
Further, it is apparent that Daniel ‘in all his ways took notice of Jehovah.’ (Prov. 3:6) One of the ways he did this was by his prayers. When faced with the threat of execution if unable to interpret Nebuchadnezzar’s dream, the first thing Daniel did was to go to God in prayer. (Dan. 2:18) And Daniel continued faithful in his praying even at the risk of his life. Certainly this made him very desirable in God’s sight.—Dan. 6:10, 11.
If we would be persons desirable to Jehovah we also must be concerned about God’s honor and name and appreciate the precious privilege of prayer. As the apostle Paul counsels us, we should “persevere in prayer” and “pray incessantly.”—Rom. 12:12; 1 Thess. 5:17.
Daniel also made himself desirable to Jehovah by reason of his fully trusting Him. Jehovah God values highly his creatures who do this. Daniel had such confidence in Jehovah that he was willing to risk being thrown into the lions’ den. And because Daniel trusted God, God delivered him, even as we read: “Daniel was lifted up out of the pit, and there was no hurt at all found on him, because he had trusted in his God.”—Dan. 6:23.
Similarly, if you would be found to be a person desirable to Jehovah God you must trust him even when your life is threatened. As the apostle Paul expresses it, your attitude must be one of good courage as you say: “Jehovah is my helper; I will not be afraid. What can man do to me?”—Heb. 13:6.
If your course in life is above reproach, if you are concerned about praising Jehovah and bringing honor to his name, if you take notice of God in all your ways, persevering in prayer, and if you so trust God that you will not fear what man can do to you, then you, too, will become a person truly desirable to God. And you may thus be counted among the “desirable things” of whom God speaks: “‘And I will rock all the nations, and the desirable things of all the nations must come in; and I will fill this house with glory,’ Jehovah of armies has said.”—Hag. 2:7.
Today, as a result of the preaching of this good news of God’s kingdom in all the world, Jehovah God may be said to be rocking the nations. The message that God’s judgments are soon to be executed upon them causes the nations consternation. But, at the same time, this preaching is causing honest-hearted lovers of God to manifest themselves as “desirable things.” They are, in effect, being shaken out of the nations, and being gathered into the Christian congregation. As they take their stand for Jehovah and his kingdom they can be said to be filling the house of Jehovah with glory, even as the prophet foretold.
To expedite this rocking of all the nations so that all the “desirable things” may be freed is one of the main purposes of the magazine you are now reading. Jehovah’s witnesses in your community stand ready to assist you further to be among the “desirable things.” O how grand it is to be judged desirable by God! It will mean winning his favor and life. As the Bible says: “Being under his good will is for a lifetime.”—Ps. 30:5.

