Eagerly Share the Good News
1 How favored we are to have received the good news of the Kingdom! No longer do we put our trust in men who cannot fulfill their promises. Our confidence is in Jehovah and in the assured hope of everlasting life under his Kingdom government. (Ps. 146:3; Titus 1:2) All mankind need to hear the good news of Jehovah’s Kingdom, and we are eager to share it with them!
2 Jesus instructed his followers to be his witnesses “to the most distant part of the earth.” (Acts 1:8) We hear that command today and are glad to obey, for he is the King of the Kingdom and to him we joyfully subject ourselves.​—Matt. 28:19.
SUMMER ACTIVITY
3 The summer months open up for many of us greater opportunities to share the good news. While we are on vacation or when traveling to conventions, we may find numerous occasions to give a witness. When we stop for fuel, eat at a restaurant, ride public transportation, or stay somewhere overnight, there will be people whom we may be able to engage in conversation. We can tell them about our convention or the peace God’s Kingdom will bring, and we may be able to leave tracts or magazines with them.
4 In planning your summer activities, you may find it helpful to set goals for yourself and your family. One important goal would be to attend all four days of the “Divine Peace” District Convention and fully benefit from the rich spiritual program. Joining with our brothers in such united worship is a joyous privilege. (Ps. 95:6; 100:2) Auxiliary pioneering is another excellent goal for the summer. Why not spend school vacation time during July and August as an auxiliary pioneer? Invite others to do the same, and work together in sharing the good news.
5 Your congregation may have as a summer goal a more complete coverage of territory, and you can support that too. It may be possible to assist a nearby congregation in working territory that has not been covered for some time. How about not-at-homes in your own congregation territory? If certain residents are consistently not at home, are not such homes like unworked territory? With more daylight hours, try making late afternoon or early evening calls. Those not home on Sundays may be found during the week or on Saturdays. We want to search out all interested people and tell them of the Kingdom hope, do we not?
6 If we are to reach the hearts of people as we tell them the good news, we will want to improve the effectiveness of our ministry. The July offer of the Live Forever book is not new to us, but can we enhance our ability to present it to people? Carry the Reasoning book, and try using various presentations from it. If objections are raised, use it to find an answer. Or, between calls, check to see what you might say in order to be even more effective at the next door.
7 Because we are favored with the Kingdom good news, we have the privilege of sharing it with others. May we all be confident of Jehovah’s blessings and increased happiness as we do our utmost to help others learn the truth during July.​—Acts 20:35.

