Meetings to Help Us Make Disciples
WEEK STARTING JUNE 29
Song 43
13 min: Local announcements. Demonstrate following alternate Topic for Conversation. Theme: Living on Earth Forever​—Is It Possible? Use Titus 1:2 to point out that we have a sure promise of everlasting life. Then, Proverbs 2:20, 21 can be read to show that everlasting life is to be enjoyed on earth by righteous ones. Appropriate portions of the Live Forever book can be used to illustrate these points. This optional topic will allow for greater variety, especially where territory is worked frequently. Encourage all to share in field service on first Sunday of July. Review arrangements for witnessing on July 4.
15 min: “Eagerly Share the Good News.” Question-and-answer discussion.
17 min: Reasoning From the Scriptures. Discussion between elder and young brother who finds himself attracted to the world. Elder uses material in Reasoning book, pages 389-93, “Spirit of the World.” Elder defines spirit of the world and explains why being tainted by it is cause for concern. (1 John 5:19; Rev. 12:9) Elder draws brother into discussion and reasons along following points: Damage to our spirituality if spirit of world influences our thinking and desires. World’s spirit based on pride and rebellion against Jehovah. What must be done to break free from spirit of world. Need to avoid Eve’s self-willed course and resist tendency to rebel against authority. Ways in which spirit of world manifests itself in conduct of people today. Pitfalls of materialism; its relationship to spirit of world. How improper speech and actions contribute to wrong spirit. Contrast Bible makes between spiritual and physical man. Do not idolize humans. Elder concludes with experience showing we really do not miss out on anything if we do not get involved in worldly activities. In African land, at age of nine, young girl had to leave land where work was banned and move with family to another country where she spent 14 years in a refugee camp. All her teen years devoted to peaceful life revolving around Bible study and meetings. Now she is in full-time service. Although she did not have access to world and its entertainment, did not miss anything! Young brother expresses appreciation for discussion.
Song 80 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING JULY 6
Song 69
10 min: Local announcements, selected Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry, and April service report. Encourage all to share in magazine activity this Saturday. Demonstrate two 60-second magazine presentations as time permits. Feature current Watchtower in one and current Awake! in other.
20 min: “Will You Join the Pioneer Ranks Soon?” Discuss material with audience. Draw experiences from those who are or have been pioneers on how pioneering has enriched their lives and allowed them to help others. Encourage those who can to join pioneer ranks.
15 min: Arrange locally according to needs of congregation or present instructive talk based on article “How to Make Your Bible Reading Fruitful,” pages 5-7 of June 15, 1985, Watchtower.
Song 167 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING JULY 13
Song 100
10 min: Local announcements and accounts report.
20 min: “Not Neglecting the House of Our God.” Questions and answers. Outline specifically what can be done locally to improve care of Kingdom Hall and its grounds.
15 min: Two elders discuss continuing need for parents and children to be concerned about conduct at Kingdom Hall and at assemblies. Discuss local situation, which may include children running in aisles after meetings, loud talking outside hall that may disturb neighbors, and danger of children running around in parking lot at night. Commend those who have worked to control children. End on positive, encouraging note of wanting to do all things as pleasing to Jehovah.
Song 164 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING JULY 20
Song 68
15 min: Local announcements. Encourage magazine activity on fourth Saturday. Discuss talking points from current issues that could be used in field service this week. Remind all to bring brochures for August offer to Service Meeting next week.
15 min: “Presenting the Good News​—With Empathy.” Questions and answers.
15 min: Keep a Positive Attitude. Encouraging talk based on article beginning on page 28 of June 1, 1986, Watchtower.
Song 147 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING JULY 27
Song 177
10 min: Local announcements and Theocratic News.
20 min: Using Reasoning Book to Encourage One Another. Talk and demonstrations based on pages 117-21. Barnabas was known as a warmhearted and generous person. He willingly gave of himself to help his brothers. His visit to Antioch was a stimulus to the new disciples. His warm words and thoughts moved the new disciples “to continue in the Lord with hearty purpose.” (Acts 11:23) Giving encouragement effectively brings results. The recipient benefits by receiving courage, hope, and confidence to face a difficult situation.
We all need encouragement and to be encouraging to one another. What can we say and do to help each other face problems and continue serving Jehovah with “hearty purpose”? DEMONSTRATIONS: (1) Publisher visits older publisher. Older publisher is unable to attend meetings regularly because of illness and is down in spirit. Publisher shares thoughts of appreciation for older publisher’s many years of faithful service and perhaps relates a good experience publisher had with older one in field service. Conversation lends itself to 2 Corinthians 4:13, 16 and related material in Reasoning book. (2) Two brothers having a chat after meeting. Conversation turns to day’s activities and secular work. Brother relates how his job is in jeopardy because company might fail. They live in economically depressed area, and brother is already having a hard time making ends meet. Other brother sympathizes with brother’s feelings; he, too, is having a hard time. Finds peace of mind in what Scriptures have to say. Reasoning book under “Economic Problems,” page 120. Discussion based on Matthew 6:33 and Romans 8:35, 38, 39.
15 min: Literature offer for August. Discuss talking points from brochures that can effectively be used by younger and newer publishers as well as those more experienced.
Song 52 and concluding prayer.

