Presenting the Good News​—With Empathy
1 ‘Lovers of themselves, self-assuming, haughty, and puffed up with pride.’ (2 Tim. 3:1-5) How aptly the Bible describes the generation in which we live! The materialistic way of life and the me-first philosophy of today have caused men to isolate themselves and to be unconcerned with their neighbor’s welfare. Empathy, the ability to put oneself in the other person’s place, is not frequently observed among people in the world.
2 Showing empathy is a necessity if we are to be successful in our ministry. This is not always easy. We, too, are confronted with problems and anxieties that can hinder us from thinking of others. What can we do to make sure we do not become lax in this regard?
CULTIVATING EMPATHY
3 We should consider the needs of our neighbors. By doing so we will be imitating our heavenly Father. Jehovah loves people and appreciates their needs. He likes to see his creatures happy. Hence, he was moved with pity and compassion to provide mankind with a ransom, saving them from their sinful state.​—John 3:16.
4 The world of mankind is in dire need of God’s Kingdom. It alone can provide a lasting solution to the problems that plague us. Learning about this Kingdom has helped us to cope with our problems and has set us free from Babylonish religion. By putting ourselves in the place of the householders, we will be moved with pity and compassion to share with them the truth from God’s Word, enabling them to experience the joy we have come to know.​—John 8:32, 36.
5 Jesus carried out his ministry with love and heartfelt feelings for mankind. He showed deep concern for people, and those that listened to him knew that he cared for them and sympathized with their situation. (Luke 5:12, 13; Mark 6:32-34) Our personal love for neighbor will also become evident if we cultivate and demonstrate empathy just as Jesus Christ did.
HOW DEMONSTRATED
6 How can we demonstrate that concern in our ministry? We need to be discerning, take note of the householder’s circumstances and comments, and put ourselves in his place. Ask yourself: If I were in his place, what words would console or interest me? Then proceed according to what you discern to be of interest to him. If you see that he is not in a position to converse, then shorten the discussion, perhaps offering the latest magazines or a tract and promising to call at a more convenient time. By discerning what concerns the householder and being empathetic, we are in a better position to share the Kingdom message in a heartfelt manner.
7 Experienced publishers especially need to demonstrate empathy when helping new ones in field service. Recalling our own initial hesitancy and feelings of nervousness when starting to go from door to door, or perhaps when giving our first talk, can help us to maintain the proper mental attitude. Reflecting on how others helped us will enable us to know what to do and say when giving counsel and instruction to new and inexperienced ones. By showing patience, love, and a genuine willingness to assist, we will be able to help them make spiritual progress.
8 Showing empathy for those in the field and to our brothers and sisters reflects the Christian personality. Let us always look for opportunities to demonstrate it, following the example of Jehovah God and of his Son, Christ Jesus.​—Eph. 5:1, 2.

