Will You Join the Pioneer Ranks Soon?
1 About this time last year, thousands of our brothers and sisters were giving prayerful consideration to entering the regular pioneer work. Careful planning helped many to start serving Jehovah in this special way, thus swelling the regular pioneer ranks from 37,220 in August of 1985 to 42,209 in September, an increase of almost 5,000. Are you among those who are giving thought to entering the regular pioneer ranks during the 1987 service year?
APPRAISING YOUR CIRCUMSTANCES
2 Perhaps the exciting reports of recent theocratic expansion have awakened in you a desire to have a greater share in the harvest work now under way. (Matt. 9:37, 38; Isa. 60:22) Fine! However, to become a reality, your desire must be coupled with careful planning and complete reliance on Jehovah. (Rom. 12:1; Luke 14:28) Could your employment be adjusted to make room for the pioneer service? Can you simplify your life-style to make more time and energy available for Jehovah’s work? (Luke 11:34) Some families have been able to sponsor one or more of their members in the pioneer work.
INCREASING YOUR FAITH AND ZEAL
3 Entering and remaining in the regular pioneer work require strong faith. If you want to make your faith grow, plan to spend additional time in the preaching work and experience Jehovah’s help. (2 Thess. 1:3) For many, auxiliary pioneering has proved to be a stepping-stone toward the regular pioneer work. Perhaps it can be the same for you.
4 Those considering the pioneer work would also do well to speak with the elders about their plans. (Prov. 15:22) They can offer practical and helpful suggestions.
YOUTHS​—PLAN WISELY FOR THE FUTURE!
5 Many of you younger brothers and sisters have recently finished your required schooling or now have a reduced schedule during your final years of high school. No doubt you are giving much serious thought to your future. As you make such plans, be sure to ‘remember your Grand Creator’ and consider His timely counsel. Take seriously what he has in store for the earth and obedient mankind. (Eccl. 12:1) Entering the pioneer work during the new service year could safeguard you from settling into less worthy pursuits that may sidetrack you from your real purpose in life. (Prov. 10:22) As you “taste and see that Jehovah is good,” may the joy and satisfaction you experience in full-time service motivate you to make it a lifelong career.​—Ps. 34:8.
6 Our appreciation for Jehovah should move us to do all we can in his service. For those whose circumstances permit, this may mean entering the pioneer ranks. But circumstances of others may not allow for it at this time. However, we can all keep the matter before Jehovah in prayer, thus giving evidence of having the pioneer spirit. Some currently serving as regular pioneers felt at one time they could not pioneer. However, circumstances can change or be changed if we couple our desire with careful planning and sincere prayer for Jehovah’s blessing on our efforts to serve him to the fullest extent possible. (Prov. 16:3; Mal. 3:10) May we all work toward that end and wisely plan for the future.

