
Introduction




Scriptures for Christian Living will make it easy for you to locate Bible verses and accounts that can help you deal with the challenges you face. It will also aid you in finding just the right Bible passages to encourage others and to help them make decisions that honor Jehovah. Simply locate the topic you need, and let the pointed questions and short summaries of Bible accounts guide you along. (See the box “How to Navigate This Publication.”) You will soon find a wealth of relevant and useful counsel, guidance, and comfort from God’s Word. You will also find treasures to share with others—Bible verses that will lift their spirits, help them with their problems, and provide them with counsel and encouragement.
How to Navigate This Publication
To find a topic, you can use the search box, or you can browse through the categories. Scriptures for Christian Living is divided into seven broad categories: Challenges, Conduct, Congregation, Daily Life, Family, Spirituality, and Qualities. Most topics will fall under one of those categories. Select an appropriate category, and scroll down the list of topics. However, if you are not sure which category would feature the topic that interests you, select All and scroll down the list of topics until you find the one that best suits your needs. Under each topic, you will find a number of bold headings. Some are statements; others are questions. As you read the cited verses in bold type that follow the heading, reason and meditate on how they support the statement or answer the question. In some cases, a topic will be divided into subsections to help you navigate through the headings. In some cases, “See also” verses are included. These offer thoughts that are related to the topic. In many cases, you will also find “Relevant Bible account(s)” listed. A sentence introduces the key point or the lesson in the cited scripture. As you read the scripture, use the provided sentence to guide your thinking.


This publication does not list all the scriptures on a given topic. But it is an excellent starting point for your research. (Pr 2:1-6) To dig deeper, use the marginal references and the study notes in the New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures. Use the Research Guide for Jehovah’s Witnesses or the Watch Tower Publications Index to study more fully the meaning of a scripture or its application. Consult what has been published most recently to be sure that you have the latest understanding of Scriptural truths.
May Scriptures for Christian Living help you uncover the wisdom, knowledge, and understanding contained in the Holy Scriptures. As you use this publication, you will be ever more convinced that “the word of God is alive and exerts power.”—Heb 4:12.




