VOL. XVII. JUNE 15, 1896. No. 12. 



CONTENTS. 



Special Items 130 

Views from the Tower 132 

Modern Delusions 134 

The Attempt of Ritualism 136 

An Eruption of Evil Spirits 137 

Questions and Answers 138 

Poem: "A Cup of Cold Water" 141 

Bible Study: "The Lord is Risen" 141 

Bible Study: David, King of Judah 142 

Encouraging Letters 144 

page 130 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
--ADDRESS TO- 
TOWER PUBLISHING CO., BIBLE HOUSE, 58 & 60 ARCH ST., 
ALLEGHENY (NORTH PITTSBURG), PA., U.S.A. 

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 

INCLUDES A SUBSCRIPTION TO "THE OLD THEOLOGY TRACTS"-QUARTERLY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, NY. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, 

OR REGISTERED. FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN 

MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS: 

Those of the interested, who by reason of old age or accident, or 
other adversity are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, 
if they will send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and 
requesting the paper. 



THE objectionable Post Office ruling, unfavorable to our mailing of 
tracts and DAWNS, has been withdrawn. Join with us in acknowledging 
to God the answer of our united prayers; and in using effectually 
this "open door." 



R1995 : page 130 

A Brother residing in St. Louis reports preservation from the terrible 
tornado which recently visited that city. He says, "The storm 
did damage all around us, but we escaped injury or damage." 

In another quarter all the houses were wrecked but two. One of these 
unharmed is a barber shop owned by a son of a sister in the truth. This 
suggests not only the Lord's power to protect whom he may please, 
but also his interest in and care over the friends of his saints. 
We anticipate that there will be some remarkable preservations during 
the fierce trouble, after the Church has been glorified. 



THE "new branch" of the work prospers. Bro. Draper is now in Eastern 
New York and Pennsylvania, Bro. McPhail in Missouri and Kansas 
and Bro. Cone in Illinois. A blessing seems to attend their efforts. 
They aim to build up and not to tear down the most holy faith. They 



are blessed themselves as well as a blessing to others. The Colporteur 
work is blessed also. MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. I., is in preparation 
in French and in Polish and VOL. III. in Swedish. Over 500,000 
copies of VOL. I. are now in circulation. The signs of the times are 
awakening some to study who heretofore scoffed. Let us all take courage 
for greater diligence, thanking our Lord for the privilege of being his 
"servants" to feed his "household." 



R1989 :page 131 

VIEWS FROM THE TOWER. 



THE North American Review has recently published 

four articles from the pen of Hon. Wm. 

E. Gladstone, ex-Premier of Great Britain, on the subject 

of Natural Immortality of the Soul. The subject 

is ably discussed, from records of earliest times to the 

present— Biblical and profane. He states his own convictions 

with becoming moderation. He believes that 

many confound "survival" of the soul, with "immortality" 

of the soul, but he does not so err. He sees 

that the resurrection hope was the one which the Lord 

and the apostles held out, that the Scriptures do not 

declare that probation terminates with the present life; 

that eventually some will "survive," some will be 

granted immortality and some become extinct in the 

second death. 

We, of course, recognize no man, lay or cleric, as 
authority upon this or any other subject revealed in 
God's Word. Whoever speaks in harmony with God's 
Word deserves respect to that extent. It is the test. 
We are glad, however, that so able a thinker has drawn 
attention to the fallacy cherished by so many, and which 
is the basis of the eternal torment theory— natural immortality 
—immortality out of Christ. See our issue of 
Oct. 15, '95. 



People who talk about the barbarism of the past, 
and the greater genius and ability of the present along 
lines of Evolution; and particularly all who talk about 
"Some Mistakes that Moses Made," are respectfully 
requested to carefully consider the following item:— 

"The Prussian government has recently issued an 
order that the commissary of the army shall use no other 
meat as food for the army and navy except such as is 
slaughtered by the Jewish method. The tests made by 
the chemical and medical departments showed that such 
meats were far more wholesome and susceptible of preservation. 
Notwithstanding this the anti-Semitic factions 
in Saxony and Switzerland enacted laws prohibiting 



the Jewish method of slaughtering. But 350 

scientific non-Jewish authorities in physics and physiology 

in leading European universities have declared 

that the Jewish method is by far the most humane and 

best adapted means for obtaining animal flesh for food. 

Many intelligent Christians in European capitals use 

no meats unless the animal be slaughtered by Jewish 

methods." 



The general M.E. Conference, recently held at 
Cleveland, O., demonstrated, what we have already 
called to attention, that a democratic spirit is at work 
in that denomination which ere long will transform it, 
removing the control from the clergy and putting it 
where God puts it, into the hands of the church. 

Speaking of this a daily journal remarked.:— 

"The next indication, and the most important up 
to this time, was the action of the seventh district during 
a meeting discussing lay representation. Almost 
at the opening of the meeting this resolution was 
introduced: 

"Resolved, that it is the sense of the seventh 
general conference district that lay representation in 
the church shall recognize in some form the right of 
the members of the church to a voice in the election of 
their representatives. 

"This alarmed some of the more conservative 
members, but it was not enough for the radicals, one of 
whom offered a substitute, which reads: 

"Resolved, that we favor the election of all class 
leaders, stewards and trustees by direct vote of the 
adult members of the church. 

R1989 : page 132 

"The substitute was lost, but the original motion 
was passed with hardly a dissenting voice. In the 
course of the debate there was much complaint of the 
concentration of power in the clergy, and although 
most of the speeches were guarded in form, their meaning 
was unmistakable. One clergyman who was present 
said that in the matter of church government Methodism 
is approaching Congregationalism, 'and must inevitably 
reach that point.'" 

This will have a bearing upon the coming Protestant 
federation. As the people tend toward freedom and 
power, the ministers will all the more seek to hold 
their present position. Before long they will see that 
their interests will be best conserved by accepting the 
proffered hand of "the historic Episcopacy." 



"When the priests spoke of the Czar as the God-selected 



man, the God-ordained man, my blood grew 
warm. It is not true that God selected this Czar to 
rale and rob a hundred millions of human beings. It 
is all an ignorant, barbaric, superstitious lie— a lie that 
pomp and pageant, and flaunting flags and robed 
priests, and swinging censers cannot change to truth." 
—Robert Ingersoll. 

Very rarely are we able to quote the great Infidel 
with approval; but we can endorse him heartily when 
he assails the theory of "the divine right of kings." 
Yet this same doctrine supports all the thrones of 
"Christendom." The Church of Rome set the example, 
followed by the Greek and the Anglican 
churches. Her head, the Pope, claimed authority as 
Christ's representative to supply the thrones of earth 
with rulers, and to call them divisions of Christ's Kingdom 
("Christendom"). When the other systems broke 
away from Papacy, they carried along her doctrines 
and practices on many subjects, including this one. 

All of these kingdoms have over and over again 
demonstrated their unlikeness to Christ's Kingdom; 
cruel, selfish and bloody they all have been and are, 
and the Czar's is one of the worst of them. At the recent 
coronation of the Czar and Czarina this false doctrine 
of the "divine right" of kings to squander the 
substance of their subjects was illustrated. The gown 
worn by the Czarina is reported to have cost two hundred 
thousand dollars; the carriage in which she rode 
was "worth almost its weight in gold"; the harness of its 
six horses cost eighty thousand dollars; and every thing 
else was proportionately gorgeous and wasteful. The forty 
millions of dollars wasted in this vain coronation show 
were wrung from his poor subjects, who in their ignorance 
almost worship him. To charge the misrule of 
earth upon our gracious Creator from whom cometh 
every good and perfect gift is blasphemy. Thank 
God! very shortly now the world will witness the close 
of "the times of the Gentiles" and the beginning of 
"the times of restitution." The desire of all nations 
will come when "the powers that be" shall give place 
to him whose right the Kingdom is, and who will cause 
that God's will shall be done on earth as it is done in 
heaven. 



"The excitable and superstitious people of Madrid 
have distinguished themselves by a gorgeous religious 
ceremony as a means of invoking the aid of the Almighty 
in bringing to a speedy close the devastating Cuban 
war. It is said to have been a most striking and singular 
demonstration. At least one hundred and fifty thousand 
persons joined in the religious procession which 
marched the streets of the city, so say the dispatches, 
while nearly the whole of the population showed signs 
of deep enthusiasm. 



"But what avails such religious mummery. The 
prayers that ascended bore no plea for justice or mercy, 
but implored instead that Spain might triumph in her 
cruel and barbarous warfare against a people striving 
to throw off the chains of slavery, and establish their 
own independence." 

As we clipped the above from a secular journal we 
thanked God that he is raising up, outside the nominal 
churches, those who can see principles of justice, and 
point the people to them. 



The subject of baptism is being stirred up considerably 
in various quarters. While two congregations 
of the "Disciples" or "Christian" denomination 
(which has always made "baptism for the remission of 
sins" its specialty) concluded to receive members without 
baptism, the Methodists are discussing the removal 
of the rule which for years has prevented its membership 

R1990 : page 132 

from practicing immersion, if they had been 
sprinkled in infancy. One minister who favored the 
change remarked that this rule had driven thousands 
of Methodists into Baptist churches. 

The following will show that Presbyterians also 
are forced to consider the subject. The result no doubt 
will be that within a few years all denominations will 
remove restrictions, and permit each individual to 
choose for himself. And this in turn will prepare for 
the great confederation which will take form and power 
just before the total wreck of Babylon. The matter 
referred to is a second letter from Rev. A. T. Pierson 
to the Philadelphia Presbytery, which the Philadelphia 
Press says was in substance as follows:— 

'"I had foreseen that my course might compel a 
change of denominational connection, but I have preferred 
that such sundering of former ties should become 
necessary by your act rather than mine. 

'"I can only say that to submit myself to baptism 
as a believer had come to be a condition of my peace 
and of unclouded fellowship with God. For years the 
conviction grew upon me that the basis of infant baptism 
is traditional and ecclesiastical, rather than Scriptural; 
and side by side with this conviction grew another; 
viz., that by New Testament standards baptism is the 

R1990 :page 133 

act of a believer confessing Christ as Savior and Lord, 
and by typically claiming identification with him in his 
death, burial and resurrection. Hence I came, somewhat 
slowly and reluctantly, I confess, to the conclusion 
that I had never been baptized in a New Testament 



sense, and, therefore, should yield my implicit 
obedience to a plain command.' 

"It must, however, be my solace that whatever 
discord it may create in my business relations, it has 
brought conscious harmony with God, consistency with 
gospel teaching and practice, and liberty to preach a 
full gospel message, from which nothing is eliminated 
by a tortuous exegesis. As your action in my case 
seems to compel my withdrawal, perhaps you will forbear 
with me if I first state briefly why I have previously 
stated that 'this act was not meant by me as a 
change of denomination.' 

'"Not only was it very natural preference not to 
have changed my church relations after forty years of 
such identification, but I have ventured to hope my divergence 
from Presbyterian doctrine and usage might 
not be deemed radical and fundamental. Even while 
doubting the legitimacy of infant baptism, I have never 
questioned the right of parental covenant or the privilege 
of infant consecration, nor, indeed, the peculiar 
relation sustained by the children of believers to the 
Church of God; but I cannot see the warrant for applying 
to infants an ordinance meant for regenerate 
believers, and implying a voluntary putting on of 
Christ. 

'"It seems to me to lower the dignity of baptism 
to encourage a loose administration of a sacramental 
ordinance, and to lead to at least a modified form of 
baptismal regeneration, however the latter may be 
disclaimed. 

'"While thus holding substantially the same views 
as most of the godliest Presbyterians I have known, it 
is not yet clear to me that my Baptist brethren have a 
Scriptural warrant for making immersional baptism the 
condition of church membership and of approach to the 
Lord's table, which implies, also, a serious barrier to 
fellowship with other denominations. Hence, while 
largely sympathizing with the Baptist position in other 
respects, I had hoped that the body of disciples to which 
I had so long been attached might prove sufficiently 
flexible to allow me to continue among them. 

'"Had I this act again to perform I would only 
do it more promptly, for in the nature of the case there 
could be no motive prompting it but a desire to fulfill 
all righteousness. 

'"If, after the hearing of this final statement, the 
Presbytery still regards my position as a renunciation 
of my life-long connection with the Presbyterian body, 
I can only request that my name be erased from the roll 
as one who has withdrawn to another body of Christians, 
and I will return the letter which your action has revoked.' 
Dr. Pierson concluded by thanking the Presbytery 
for its 'very considerate course' toward him." 

The Presbytery was as much in doubt as before as 
to what action it should take, and held the matter for 
further consideration. 



A missionary in India notes that the census of 1891 
revealed the fact that while 500,000 had been nominally 
converted from 1881 to 1891 there had been an 
increase of population of 30,000,000 during the same 
period. In this he sees the futility of hoping to convert 
the world by present agencies. He is now hoping 
and praying— "Thy Kingdom come." 



We live in a day of wonders and rumors of wonders. 
The most skeptical age is fast becoming the most credulous 
in all matters related to invention. It is an enforced 
credulity. The following, from the Philadelphia Press, 
relates to the latest marvels. Should it prove true, it 
will render useless present power machinery— such as 
engines, boilers, etc., and throw out of work nineteen 
coal-miners out of every twenty. 

"In addition to the magic names of Edison and 
Tesla two other electricians now claim attention. They 
are McFarlan Moose and Dr. W. W. Jacques. Mr. 
Moose has attacked the glow lamp problem and seems 
to have solved it, getting light without heat, and Dr. 
Jacques has attacked the coal pile and gets electrical 
energy, which can be used for any purpose, by the 
direct oxidation of carbon without the loss of energy 
through heat, as occurs in the ordinary combustion of 
coal. By heating carbon with caustic soda and passing 
air through the liquid mass of soda Dr. Jacques 
obtains 82 per cent, of electrical energy from his coal, 
which burned in a boiler in ordinary manner would 
give only 6 per cent, of electrical energy. 

"This is revolutionary enough, to be sure, but Mr. 
Moose seems to cap it at the other end of the wire, for 
he is able to take the ordinary commercial current of 
electricity, and, by using a converter in a vacuum, to 
transform it into a current of such a character that it 
will light up a vacuum tube with a beautiful glow. His 
converter, the electrician says, costs but $1 against 
Tesla's $10,000 oscillator, and the amount of energy 
that is represented in actual illumination is vastly increased. 
Not only that, but his entire apparatus is 
simplicity itself." 

Mr. Edison also has a new and powerful light— an 
X-ray light— from a "Crooke's tube." The lights, 
and powers, and machinery for the Millennium are 
rapidly preparing, and the whole world bears witness 
and marvels, but believes not in the great event. Mistaught, 
it is facing to the West instead of the East. 
Heeding the "traditions of the elders," it is looking to 
its own efforts to establish righteousness, and sees not 
the Millennial dawn, the plan of the ages consummating, 
the time at hand, the Kingdom come, and the 



day of vengeance near, to be followed by the results of 
the great ransom— "times of restitution." 



R1990 :page 134 

MODERN DELUSIONS. 



THIS ARTICLE FROM THE PEN OF REV. DR. GORDON, ENGLAND, 
IS IN REMARKABLE ACCORD WITH THE PRESENTATIONS 
OF MILLENNIAL DAWN. 

"RITUALISM is an ecclesiastical eccentricity 
into which men of unquestionable piety 
and consecration have fallen. But at the risk of a 
seeming breach of Christian charity I must classify it 
where its origin and history place it, among the strong 
delusions which have come in to corrupt the Church 
and despoil it of the simplicity that is in Christ. Most 
gladly do I bear tribute to the humble self-denial 
which many of the Ritualistic priests are practising, 
and to the much sound theology which they are setting 
forth from their pulpits. Nevertheless, I must remind 
you how often, in the history of the Church, the highest 
saintship has been found in intimate conjunction 
with the lowest superstition. 

"John Henry Newman, in a work which he put 
forth as a justification for his departure to Rome, makes 
this striking concession. In speaking of holy water 
and some other elements of the Roman Catholic ritual, 
he declares that originally they were 'the very 

INSTRUMENTS AND APPENDAGES OF DEMON WORSHIP,' 

though 'sanctified by adoption into the church.' Literally 
true is this statement, and as comprehensive as 
true, for it covers almost every element and particular 
of the Ritualistic service. 

"Going into a church where this system is in 
vogue you see the congregation turning reverently toward 
the east at certain stages of the service. It seems 
innocent enough to assume this position, though you 
know no reason for it. But open your Bibles to the 
eighth chapter of Ezekiel, and there hear God denouncing 
the abominations which Israel is committing by 
mingling the worship of Babylon with the service of 
God. Among these abominations was the spectacle in 
the 'inner court of the Lord's house' of 'about five and 
twenty men with their backs toward the temple of the 
Lord and their faces toward the east; and they worshipped 
the sun toward the east' Such is unquestionably 
the origin of the eastward posture— a relic and 
remnant of primitive sun-worship. In the same chapter 



of Ezekiel there is a reference to the ceremony of 'weeping 
for Tammuz,' Tammuz being another name for the 
pagan god Osiris. Remember that, if in the Ritualistic 
church you see some making 

R1991 :page 134 

THE SIGN OF THE CROSS, 

this was originally a pagan and not a Christian ceremony; 
for though X, the initial letter of Christ, very early 
became a Christian symbol, the T-shaped cross was 
originally simply the mystic Tau— the initial letter of 
Tammuz, and this sign was used in Babylonish worship 
and emblazoned on Babylonish vestments fifteen hundred 
years before the crucifixion of Christ. If the 
Ritualism is sufficiently advanced to make use of 

THE WAFER 

in the Communion, turn again to the description 

of Jewish apostacy contained in Jeremiah 45: 19, where 

the Israelites confess, 'We burned incense to the queen 

of heaven and poured out drink-offerings unto her, and 

we did make our cakes to worship her.' Here the pedigree 

of the wafer is suggested, and if one will examine 

the literature of the subject, we challenge him to resist 

the conclusion that it has come down directly from this 

Babylonish cake. This cake was round, for the reason 

that it was an image or effigy of the sun, and was worshipped 

as such, and when it became installed as part 

and parcel of Christian worship the shape was strenuously 

insisted on, and is to this day. John Knox, in 

referring to this fact, says with his usual vigor of speech: 

If, in making the roundness, the ring be broken, then 

must another of his fellow cakes receive the honor to 

be made a god, and the crazed or cracked miserable cake 

that was once in hope to be made a god must be given 

to a baby to play withal.' 

LIGHTED CANDLES. 

"So, too, in regard to that which is universally 
characteristic of Ritualism, the lighted candles about 
the altar. In the Apocryphal Book of Baruch there is 
a minute and extended description of the Babylonish 
worship, with all its dark and abominable accessories. 
Of the gods which they set up in their temples it is 
said that 'their eyes be full of dust through the feet of 
them that come in.' And then it is added that the 
worshippers 'light for them candles, yea more than for 
themselves, whereof they cannot see one.' In the pagan 
worship at Rome, which was confessedly borrowed 
largely from Assyria and Egypt, we have accounts of 
processionals in which surpliced priests marched with 
wax candles in their hands, carrying the images of the 



gods, and we find a Christian writer in the fourth century 
ridiculing the heathen custom of 'lighting of candles 
to gods as if he lived in the dark,' which he certainly 
would not have done had the practice formed any part 
of Christian worship. 

HOLY WATER, ALTARS, INCENSE, ETC. 

"And time would fail me to tell of the confessional, 
so closely reproducing that imposed on the 
initiates in the ancient mysteries, and of holy water, 
whose origin has already been pointed out, and of ceremonies 
and vestments nameless and incomprehensible. 

"Granting, for the sake of charity, that altars and 
incense were borrowed from Jewish worship, which 
things indeed were done away in Christ, it still remains 
true that the great bulk of the Ritualistic ceremonies 
were originally part and portion of primitive idol worship. 
I am ready to challenge anybody who will make 
a candid investigation of the subject to disprove it. 

THE CLAIM OF NEWMAN. 

"But what if it be said with Newman that these 
things are 'sanctified by adoption into the Christian 
Church?' 

"Our answer would be, Alas, how has the Christian 
Church been unsanctified by their adoption! For of 

R1991 :page 135 

what are they the accessories? What have they brought 
in with them as they have crept stealthily back into the 
sanctuaries that were once purged of them? These two 
central errors— baptismal regeneration and transubstantiation 
—falsehoods of Satan which have done more 
to deceive souls, and accomplish their present and eternal 
undoing, than is possible for the strongest language 
to set forth. 

"Concerning the doctrine of transubstantiation, 
let me quote the words of a godly English rector, whose 
soul is stirred within him as he is compelled to see what 
he calls 'the centre and sum of the mystery of lawlessness' 
gaining recognition in his own church. He says: 
The crowning error in the process of Satanic inspiration 
is this, that the priesthood possesses a divine power 
to locate the Lord Jesus Christ on an earthly altar, and 
to lift Him up under the veils of bread and wine for 
the adoration of the people.' It is in this blasphemous 
fraud that the Apostle Paul's prophecy finds its accurate 
fulfilment. Of the apostacy forerunning the second 
coming of Christ, he says that the deluded followers of 
the lawless one should believe the lie. 'Of all the impostures 
that the father of lies ever palmed upon a 
credulous world this doctrine, which, both logically and 
theologically, repeats millions of times the humiliation 



to the blessed Redeemer necessarily transcends all.' It 
is worthy by pre-eminence to be called the lie. 

THE ABOMINATION. 

"Admitting now that Ritualism is of pagan origin, 
what is the conclusion to which we are brought? To 
this: that by its revival in the Church there is a repetition 
of that sin which God so constantly denounces in 
the Scriptures as an abomination— the mingling of the 
worship of demons with the worship of God. Here we 
go expressly by the Book. In Deuteronomy (32:17), 
when the Israelites are charged with provoking the 
Lord to jealousy by strange gods, the ground of offence 
is declared to be that 'they sacrificed unto devils, not 
to God.' In the Septuagint version of Psalm 96:5, it 
reads: 'For all the gods of the nations are demons.' 
And in 1 Cor. 10:20, it is written: The things which 
the Gentiles sacrifice they sacrifice unto demons and 
not to God; and I would not that ye should have fellowship 
with demons.' Dr. Tregelles, commenting on this 
last passage, says: 'Did the ancient heathen think they 
were adoring evil spirits— demons— when they sacrificed 
to their gods and demi-gods— when they honored 
Jupiter and Hercules? And yet the Scripture thus 
teaches us that the worship did actually go to demons; 
it was thus directed by Satan. And this put the idolatrous 
nations under the distinct tutelage of demons, 
whose power showed itself among them in many ways. 
We should form, I believe, a very inadequate estimate 
of Romish idolatry if we were to overlook the solemn 
fact that it is demon worship commingling itself with 
that of the living and true God, so that Romish nations 
stand under demoniacal tutelage, just as did the Gentiles 
of old.' And this conclusion accords as closely 
with the teachings of history as with the teaching of 
Scripture. 

SATAN THE REAL POPE. 

"How can we account for the course of the 
Roman apostacy for the last twelve hundred years— 
that career of blood and blasphemy unmatched by anything 
in human history, except under the supposition 
that behind the scene it is Satan who is the real pope 
and his subordinate demons who are the real cardinals 
—that just as through the mystery of godliness the 
Holy Spirit became incarnated in the body of Christ to 
guide and enlighten it, so through the 'Mystery of Iniquity' 
the evil spirit became incarnated in the great 
apostacy to inspire it with 'all deceivableness of unrighteousness. 
Is then Ritualism an ecclesiastical pastime 
—a harmless freak of religious aestheticism? So it 
seems to many, even of those who have no affiliation 
with it. But look at it just as it is. Trace the history 
of the ceremonies piece by piece back to their original 



source, till you find that true of almost every one of 
them which Newman admits of a part of them, that 
they were 'the very instruments and appendages of 
demon worship,' and then imagine the exultation 
among these demons as they see Christian priests, 
clothed in their paraphernalia, marching in their idolatrous 
processions and preaching their delusive doctrines. 
And how must their joy be enhanced by the anticipation 
of the yet greater triumphs still to come in the 
culmination of idolatry and man-worship. 

THE ANTICHRIST. 

"Some, looking for a future infidel Antichrist, have 
imagined how easily some master genius, inspired with 
infernal energy and magnetism, might evoke a worldwide 
allegiance to himself, and out of the restless elements 
of Socialism, Atheism and Paganism get himself 
worshipped as a god. 

"But I ask you to look not at what may be possible, 
but at what has actually been accomplished along 
the line which we are considering, and this, too, not merely 
in the first centuries of the papacy but in our own day. 
It is hardly more than fifty years since the Tractarian 
movement began in Oxford. From among the company 
of its originators we may select two, Newman and 
Manning, as noble and sincere souls, so far as we can 
judge, as any age of the Church has produced. But 
they came under the fascination of Ritualism; and it 
threw its spell little by little over their minds. Watch 
their course from the beginning to the present day. 
Observe the mental struggles, the ill-concealed reluctance, 
as fold after fold of mediaeval delusion closes 
about them. Almost can we hear cries of pain here 
and there as the process of branding the conscience 
with a hot iron goes on. But at last the work is complete; 
they have reached old age and with it the dotage 
of superstition. And where do we find them now? 
Prostrate on their faces before a defiled man; all the 
ascriptions which could be claimed by a god on earth 
they yield without reluctance to the Pope. Infallibility 
in his decrees, indefectibility in his conduct they now 
ascribe to him who sits upon the throne of Rome. 
Cardinal Manning, speaking for the line of Popes, 
says: 'In the person of Pius IX. Jesus reigns on earth, 
and He must reign till He hath put all enemies under 
His feet' Words, which as I read them, constrain me 

R1992:page 135 

to ask of this sovereign: 'Art thou the Antichrist that 
was to come, or do we look for another?' 

"Cardinal Newman, voicing the sentiment of the 
Church, which he calls 'a never-failing fount of humanity, 

R1992 : page 136 



equity, forbearance and compassion,' uses, with emphasis, 
these words: 'We find in all parts of Europe scaffolds 
prepared to punish crimes against religion. Scenes 
which sadden the soul were everywhere witnessed. 
Rome is the one exception to the rule. The Popes, 
armed with a tribunal of intolerance, have scarce spilt 
a drop of blood: Protestants and philosophers have 
shed it in torrents'— so 'drunk with the blood of martyrs' 
that she does not even know that she has been 
drinking ! 

"Here is the goal which the advance-couriers of 
Ritualism have reached in half-a-century; is it unlikely 
that the thousands of clergymen and laymen who 
have within a few years entered upon the same path 
will fail to arrive at the same destination? 

THE ATTEMPT OF RITUALISM. 

"To sum up this part of our subject, then, I believe 
that Ritualism is a desperate but marvelously insidious 
attempt of the great enemy to regain for the 
Man of Sin what was wrested from him by the Reformation. 
It is a scheme so fascinating that already 
many of the very elect [?] have been deceived by it, and 
are being led back to Rome as sheep to the slaughter. 
To such I would commend again the solemn words of 
Tregelles: 'A recurrence to Romish connection, a recommingling 
in any way with the maintenance of 
Romish idolatry, would place a Protestant nation again 
under the sway of those demons to whom idolatrous 
worship really ascends, whether the name under which 
they are adored be that of Jupiter or Simon Peter, the 
Apostle of Christ' 

"All this is hard to say for one who prefers the 
charity which covers a multitude of faults to the criticism 
which lays them bare. And in dwelling on this 
subject we are not insensible to the perversions of another 
kind which have crept into our non-liturgical 
bodies. For, so far as we know, the liturgical churches 
have not fallen into the cooking stove apostacy which 
is turning so many of our church basements into 
places of feasting; nor have they been ensnared with 
the entertainment heresy which sets up all sorts of shows 
and exhibitions for amusing the unchurched masses into 
an interest in the gospel. We deplore these things, 
and here and now lift up our warning against them as 
another device of the enemy for corrupting and enervating 
the Church of God. 

"But while considering ourselves, lest we also be 
tempted, we must none the less warn our neighbors 
against the fatal infatuation of Ritualism. We take up 
a Ritualistic catechism, and find it streaked through and 
through with the tinge of the scarlet woman— baptismal 
regeneration, eucharistic sacrifice, apostolic succession, 
prayers for the dead, intercession of departed 



souls,— we find its eminent author so enamored of 

the papacy that he draws away from all Protestant 

bodies and embraces her, declaring that the three chief 

branches of the holy Catholic Church are the Church 

of Rome, the Greek Church and the Anglican Church, 

and that the body thus formed is the true Church Catholic, 

'because she endures throughout all ages, teaches all 

nations, and maintains all truth.' When we find Protestant 

ecclesiastics so smitten with what the reformers 

used to call 'the trinkets of Antichrist,' as to allow themselves 

little by little to be reinvested with the cast-off 

clothing of Babylon, so that a recent writer describes 

the Bishop of Lincoln as 'adorned with mitre and cloth 

of gold, his orpheys so lavishly decorated with amethysts, 

pearls, topazes and chrysolites set in silver, as 

fairly to dazzle the beholder'; when we see all these 

we are moved to repeat with solemn earnestness the 

warning of Bradford, the Smithfield martyr, 'O England, 

beware of Antichrist; take heed that he doth not 

fool thee.' 

THEOSOPHY AND SPIRITUALISM. 

"Theosophy is the latest religion of transcendentalists. 
In it, the attenuated unbelief of our times is 
seeking to find relief from the ennui of denial. How 
to describe that which takes for itself the name of 
'Occultism,' how to give an idea of doctrines which 
claim to be hidden from all but the initiated, we do not 
know. It is enough to say that substantially it is 
Buddhism seeking conquests in Christian lands; 'the 
light of Asia' offering itself to those who have turned 
away from 'the light of Christ' It has its circles in 
many of our great cities, where its occult philosophy is 
diligently studied; though its following is small compared 
with that of Spiritualism, it being the religion of 
the literary elite, as the other is of the common people. 
If we question it in regard to its doctrines, it tells us 
that they are the same as those of 'the sacred mysteries 
of antiquity.' It inculcates a very attenuated philosophy 
of evolution; it teaches the pre-existence and the 
transmigration of souls, and instructs its disciples how 
by a rigid asceticism they may cultivate what is called 

'THE INTUITIONAL MEMORY,' 

by which they can enter into profound recollection of 
what they knew in far distant ages. In a couplet which 
it is fond of repeating it declares that 

"Descending spirits have conversed with man 
And told him secrets of the world unknown." 
And these words give the most reasonable hint of 
its origin. For its creed is 'the doctrines of demons 
from beginning to end.' No personal devil, that which 
is mystically called the devil being but the negative and 
opposite of God; no atonement except man's 'unification' 



with himself; no forgiveness of sin, souls being 

required to wear away their guilt by self-expiation; 

miracles, mysteries, ultimate deification— these are specimen 

articles of its delusive creed. Its whole character 

and contents, so far as we can comprehend them, 

are yet another phase of Satanic delusion. Now if we 

compare these three systems, counting ritualism as incipient 

Popery, we find them agreeing remarkably to fill 

up the outlines of the predicted apostacy. The 'forbidding 

to marry' realized in the celibacy of Romanism; 

the enforced continence of Theosophy, and the anti-marriage 

doctrine of Spiritualism; the 'commanding to 

abstain from meat' appearing in the superstitious fasts 

of Ritualism, and the rigid abstinence from flesh enjoined 

on the initiates of esoteric Buddhism; the 

doctrines of demons manifested in the magic and idolatry 

which Ritualism substitutes for the chaste and 

simple doctrines of ordinance of Christ, and which in 

many particulars hold a common ancestry with those 

of Theosophy and Spiritualism; and the fantastic miracle-working 

R1992 : page 137 

which characterize them all. All three 
of these delusions give a practical denial of Christ's 
second advent— that doctrine at which demons tremble- 
Spiritualism and Theosophy declaring that in them the 
promised Epiphany of Christ is taking place; while 
Ritualism by its doctrine of transubstantiation makes 
the Communion declare the 'real presence of Christ' 
in flesh and blood, when the Lord ordained it to declare 
his real absence 'till He come'— I mean, of course, 
bodily absence. 

AN ERUPTION OF EVIL SPIRITS. 

"What now is the prophetic significance of all that 
we have said? This, it seems to me: that according to 
the predictions of Scripture we are witnessing an eruption 
of evil spirits who are again working powerfully 
along their favorite lines— Ritualism, Superstition and 
Philosophy. 

"We hear much about infidelity and communism 
'heading up' in a personal Antichrist. Believing as I 
do, that Antichrist came long ago, and that he was 
crowned a few years since in St. Peter's at Rome as 
the deified man— infallible and supreme, I see in the 
present aspect of affairs his final bodying forth, rather 
than his ultimate heading up. As in the case of Christ, 
so in the case of 'the Man of Sin': the head is revealed 
first, and the body gathered throughout all generations 
grows up 'in all things into him who is the head'; 
for the career of Antichrist is the exact parody and evil 
counterpart of that of Christ. If you say 'the Antichrist 
cannot be a system, but must be an individual 
as certainly as Christ is,' I remind you that the word 



Christ does not always stand for a single individual in 

description; for in 1 Cor. 12 the Apostle describes the 

body of believers, gathered to the Lord through all 

time, with its divers gifts and administrations, and this 

corporate whole, with its many members, but 'all baptized 

by one spirit into one body' he names Ho Christos 

—the Christ. So that evil system, with its various 

offices and administrations, yet baptized into unity by 

'the spirit which now worketh in the children of disobedience,' 

is the Antichrist. The one is the head of 

the ecclesia, and the other is the head of the apostasia; 

but [in each case] the head and the body are so identical 

that they bear the same personal name. 

'"But he is called the Man of Sin,' you say, 'and 
therefore must be an individual.' Not of necessity. 
For the line of believers, extending through all ages, 
is declared by the Apostle to be taken out from Jews 
and Gentiles to 'make of twain one new man.' 

"I cannot believe that 'the Mystery of Iniquity,' 
which Paul declared to be already working in his day, 
has been toiling on for nearly two thousand years in 
order to bring forth a single short-lived man, and he so 
omnipotently wicked that the Papal Antichrist, with 
the blood of fifty millions of martyrs on his skirts, is 
too insignificant a sinner to be mentioned in comparison. 
And now I hear the objections coming thick and fast. 
'But is he not an open infidel since he is said to deny 
the Father and the Son?' Search your concordances 
for the meaning of the word 'deny,' and observe how 
constantly it signifies the denial of apostacy and false 
profession. But is he not 

R1993 : page 137 

THE INCARNATION OF SATAN 

since he is called 'the son of perdition?' Yes; Judas 
was named 'the son of perdition'; and 'Satan entered 
into Judas Iscariot'; but so far from atheistically denying 
Christ he openly professed Him, saying, 'Hail, 
Master,' and then betrayed him with a kiss. But is 
he not a godless blasphemer, since he is declared to 
have 'a mouth speaking great things and blasphemies?' 
The counterfeit of Christ again, for Christ was twice 
falsely accused of blasphemy, because in claiming to be 
the Son of God he made himself equal with God, and 
because he presumed to forgive sins. The Pope is justly 
accused of blasphemy on both these grounds; for he profanely 
calls himself God, and assumes to forgive sins. 
Said Alexander VI.: 'Caesar was a man; Alexander 
is a God.' But must he not be a Jew, established in 
Jerusalem, since it is said that 'He sitteth in the temple 
of God, showing himself that he is God?' No. This 
particular phrase, 'temple of God,' is never in a single 
instance in the New Testament applied to the temple 
at Jerusalem, but always to the Church, the Body of 



Christ, to its head or to its members, in heaven or on 
earth. But could the Holy Ghost call that 'the temple 
of God' which has become apostate? Just as possibly 
as Christ could call the apostate Laodiceans whom he 
spues out of his mouth 'the Church in Laodicea.' 

"But does not this view commit one to the year-day 
interpretation, since the career of Antichrist is three 
years and a half, and the papal system extends through 
centuries? Yes, for the one instance of prophetic 
time which has by unanimous consent been fulfilled, 
the seventy weeks of Daniel is demonstrated to have 
been upon this scale, since the period was actually 
490 years— a day for a year— and this may be taken as 
a clue to the prophetic time of Revelation. But if the 
holy Spirit meant years in the Apocalypse why did he 
not say years? you reply. Why, when he meant 
churches and ministers and kingdoms and kings and 
epochs, did he say candlesticks, and stars, and beasts, 
and horns, and trumpets? Yet, having used these 
miniature symbols of greater things, how fitting that 
the accompanying time should also be in miniature! 
To use literal dates would distort the imagery— as 
though you should put a life-sized eye in a small-sized 
photograph. 

"I have said that Antichrist is the evil counterpart 
of Christ. When Satan offered Christ all the kingdoms 
of the world if he would fall down and worship 
him, he refused, accepting present rejection and crucifixion, 
and waiting the Father's time for the kingdoms 
of the world to become the kingdom of our Lord and of 
his Christ. The Papal Antichrist accepted the kingdoms 
of this world when the temptation was presented 
him, and proceeded to announce himself the 'King of 
kings' and that the kingdom had come, and that in 
himself was fulfilled the Scripture, 'He shall have 
dominion from sea to sea, and from river to river, unto 
the ends of the earth.' 

"The Bride of Christ— the Church— was left in 
the world to share her Lord's rejection and cross, enduring 
present suffering and widowhood, and waiting 
for the return of the Bridegroom. But the harlot bride 
of Antichrist accepts an earthly throne and a present 
glory, boastfully saying, 'I sit a queen and am no 

R1993 : page 138 

widow and shall see no sorrows.' Do we not see that 
it was this usurpation of the headship of the Church 
by the Man of Sin; this premature grasping of the 
kingdom, and the setting up of a mock millennium under 
the rule of a pseudo-Christ, that destroys the millennial 
hope of the Church, and has infected generation 
after generation with 

THE DELUSION OF A PRESENT REIGN 



and a present kingdom, while Christ is yet absent from 
his flock? But this enemy of God and his saints must 
soon come to an end. In Daniel and in Thessalonians 
this end is predicted in two stages; gradual, and then 
sudden and complete. 'They shall take away his dominion 
to consume and destroy unto the end,' says 
Daniel. 'Whom the Lord shall consume with the breath 
of his mouth and shall destroy with the brightness of 
his coming,' says Paul in Thessalonians. The consuming 
process has been going on mightily in our generation 
by the breath of the Lord's mouth in the worldwide 
diffusion of the inspired Scriptures. 'And now 
the devil is come down with great wrath because he 
knoweth that he hath but a short time.' He is putting 
forth the energy of despair. He is sending his 
legions to work along various lines, which all centre, 
visibly, or invisibly, in one head. On the line of 
sacerdotalism he is seeking to thwart the work of the 
Reformation by again insinuating popish worship into 
our churches; on the line of superstition he is aiming 
to bewitch the godless and curious multitudes through 
the energy of unclean spirits; on the line of culture he 
is moving to foist upon the literary elite a diluted Paganism 
as an extra fine religion. But these things cheer 
us rather than sadden us, for all the shadows point to 
the dawn. The Church's salvation means Antichrist's 
destruction, and the same Scripture which speaks to us 
so powerfully to-day in the light of evils, 'Yet a little 
while and he that shall come will come and will not 
tarry,' says also, 'And the God of peace shall bruise 
Satan under your feet shortly. The grace of our Lord 
Jesus Christ be with you, Amen.' 

BEWARE OF THE STRONG DELUSIONS OF 
ANTICHRIST. 

"All this which I have set forth I have declared 
with unutterable sorrow. All this I can think of only 
with weeping, crying, 'O Bride of Christ, how are 
they increased who would rob thee of thy chastity!" 

"Men and Brethren: We are here for a candid 
and courteous discussion of certain great prophetic questions. 
Among these none are more important as affecting 
our present testimony than the one upon which 
I have just now touched. 

"I need not remind you that one of the first tasks 
which the Ritualistic leaders fifty years ago felt called 
upon to undertake was that of getting rid of the Protestant 
interpretation of Antichrist as headed by the 
Pope of Rome. How desperately they wrought at this 
task will be apparent to those who read Newman's 
essay on 'The Man of Sin,' and observe especially his 
earnest wrestling with the ominous saying of Gregory 
the Great, that 'Whosoever adopts or desires the title 
of universal bishop is the forerunner of Antichrist.' 

"If I must take sides between parties on this question, 



my sympathies will be with Latimer and Cranmer 
and Bradford, whose vision was clarified by the fires of 
martyrdom, to recognize their persecutor and call him 
by name, rather than with Manning and Newman, 
whose eyes are holden by the charm of mediaevalism. 

"But our appeal is not to man, but to the sure 
word of prophecy. I speak rather of The Book than of 
any human books, and avow my conviction that the 
Papal 'Man of Sin' was accurately photographed on 
the camera of prophecy thousands of years ago; that 
no detective searching for him to-day would need any 
other description of him than that which is found on the 
pages of the Bible. Taking those photographs of Daniel 
and John and Paul, and searching the world upside 
down for their originals, I am confident that this same 
detective would stop at the Vatican, and after gazing 
for a few moments at the Pontiff, who sits there gnawing 
the bone of infallibility, which he acquired in 1870, 
and clutching for that other bone of temporal sovereignty 
which he lost the very same year, he would 
lay his hand on him and say: 'You are wanted in the 
court of the Most High to answer to the indictment of 
certain souls beneath the altar, who were slain for the 
word of God and for the testimony which they bore, 
and who are crying, How long, O Lord, holy and true, 
dost thou not judge and avenge our blood on them that 
dwell upon the earth?' 

"My brethren, let us search the Scriptures anew, 
and let us be sure that they do not require it of us before 
we silence our testimony against the Man of Rome 
[system] as Antichrist." 



R1993 :page 138 

QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS. 



"IS COME" OR "COMING"? 

Question.— Some quote 1 John 4:2 and 2 John 7 
as evidence that our Lord Jesus is to return in the flesh, 
claiming that the verb "is come" should be "coming." 
Is this claim well founded? 

Answer.— In reply we give, by the kindness of Bro. 
J. M. Blose, a written opinion on these two texts furnished 
him by J. R. Rinehart, Ph.D., Professor of 
languages in Waynesburg College, a thorough scholar. 

After quoting the above passages in Greek, Prof. 
Rinehart says:— 

"(1) The foregoing quotations are from the Emphatic 
Diaglott of Wilson, purporting to be from the original 
Greek text of the New Testament. The word eleluthota 
is the accusative, singular, masculine, of the second 



perfect participle of the verb erchomai, having the same 
relation to this verb that any other perfect participle 
has to its verb. It stands with the verb homolegei in 
indirect discourse, and represents a finite, perfect tense, 
according to ordinary Greek syntax.— Goodwin's Greek 
Grammar, No s. 1588, 1288. 

"The following translation of the first quotation 
is, therefore, essentially correct. 'Every spirit that confesseth 

R1993 : page 139 

that Jesus Christ has come in the flesh, is of God.' 

"(2) The word erchomenon in the second quotation 
is the accusative, singular, masculine, of the present 
participle of the verb erchomai, and is subject to the 

R1994 : page 139 

same rules of syntax as the word above. Its relation 

to eiselthon through homologountes, as well as the context, 

justifies its translation as of past time.— Ibid, No. 1289. 

"The translation of the second quotation, therefore, 
is properly given as follows: 'For many deceivers 
went forth into the world— those who do not confess 
that Jesus Christ did come in the flesh.'" 

In our issue of March, '87, we published a report 
from the Professor of Greek in Rochester, N.Y., to 
the same effect. Indeed, we have never known a Greek 
scholar to take any other view, and do not believe that 
any Professor of Greek in any creditable University 
would hesitate for one moment to pronounce the above 
and our Common Version rendering correct. Only 
those who have first of all formed the opinion that our 
Lord's second advent will be in the flesh find anything 
whatever in these texts over which to confuse and 
stumble themselves and others. 

TABLETS AND CHRONOLOGY. 



Question. -In the TOWER for June 1, '94 (page 2), 
reference is made to the "Tellel-Amorna tablets" and 
the deductions of Rev. T. Harrison in "Science," that 
these corroborate the Bible account— "The date fixes 
that of the Bible." You then cite 1 Kings 4:1; Josh. 10:3; 
and 11. Now my question is,— Do these tablets 
corroborate your chronology? Or in what way do they 
fix Bible dates? 

Answer.— The word "date" is indefinite and does 
not indicate any particular moment, hour, day, year, 
or even century. It would have been better had we 
said, "The record corroborates that of the Bible." Read 
the references cited and you will see that none of them 
give dates. Nor do the "tablets" mentioned give 
dates. As already pointed out in MILLENNIAL DAWN, 



VOL. II., Chap. 2, and again in the WATCH TOWER of 

May 15, '96 (pages 104-106), dates were not attached 
to ancient records (sacred or secular),— "The first effort 
to bring time-order into the world's general history 
was in the second century of the Christian era." The 
hitching together of the broken pieces of the world's 
history is mere guess-work back of the first year of 
Cyrus, B.C. 536. The Bible chronology which we 
present, and for which we give chapter and verse, connects 
from Adam down to Cyrus, 536 B.C., and thus 
we get the chronology which we present but which is 
not ours more than yours. God's Word is for us all. 

Keeping these facts in memory we should understand 
Rev. T. Harrison to mean that these "tablets" 
mention the names of certain prominent generals and 
kings in Israel and the surrounding nations. These 
corroborate accounts and names mentioned in the Bible 
and thus corroborate Bible records (rather than fix 
Bible dates). 

SERVANTS RENDER SERVICE. 



Question.-In the WATCH TOWER for March 1, '96, 
in the treatment of the Sunday School lesson for March 
22d, you pointed out "that servant," "his fellow-servants" 
and the Lord's general "household" in what 
seems to me an orderly manner; but you failed to 
particularize whom you understand to be represented by 
the three parties mentioned— "that servant," "his 
fellow-servants" and the "household." I can readily 
recognize the "household" as meaning the believers of 
this time; and his "fellow-servants" would seem to be 
associated servants engaged in serving truth to the 
household; but who is "that servant?" Your article 
does not say who "that servant" is, and I am somewhat 
puzzled over it. Could it refer to ZION'S WATCH 
TOWER? or to the Tract Society? 

My second query is,— Should we understand that 
"that servant" must be divinely inspired, so as to be 
infallible; and that "his fellow servants" and the 
"household" would be cut off by his service from fellowship 
with the Lord through the Scriptures? 

Answer.— (1) We purposely avoided making an 
application of "that servant." We merely corrected 
a former too careless criticism of the lesson; and showed 
that the language of the Scripture was so carefully 
chosen as to leave no room to question its reference to 
some one servant (animate or inanimate) whom the 
Lord would specially use in the present time to dispense 
the present truth to "his fellow servants" as well as to 
the "household." 

The account contains no suggestion of either the 
inspiration or infallibility of "that servant." This 
distinction belongs only to the Lord, the Apostles and 



the prophets. The whole force of the statement shows 
"that servant" to be merely a special channel for 
distributing the truth. His business is not to make 
truth, but to circulate it;— to put it into the hands of 
"his fellow servants" and the truth-hungry "household." 
There certainly is no intimation that the "household" 
is cut off from access to, or feeding on, the Word 
of God; neither by "that servant" nor by "his 
fellow servants." None of the "servants" are to come 
between the "household" of faith and God's Word. 
On the contrary, each one of the "household" is to 
prove all that he accepts as spiritual food, whether he 
gets it from the Bible himself or from "that servant" 
or from "his fellow servants." None of these servants 
are "lords over God's heritage"; their highest privilege 
will be to serve, and the only difference between 

R1994 : page 140 

"that servant" and "his fellow servants" will be that 
his service will be more general, a wider service. 

More perhaps than any other servant, ZION'S 
WATCH TOWER has opposed the thought that the 
Church of Christ is composed of a clerical class commissioned 
to teach, and a lay class not commissioned 
to teach the divine Word: it specially has held up the 
inspired words, "all ye are brethren" and "one is your 
Master"; and has pointed out that all consecrated believers 
are of the "royal priesthood" each fully commissioned, 
not to "lord it" over others, but to sacrifice 
himself in the service of the truth, doing good unto all, 
especially to the household of faith. So with the servants 
of Matt. 24:49; service is their only commission, 
not lordship or self-appointment. 

All the members of the "body" are "anointed to 
preach" the gospel, and instructed to search the 
Scriptures, as we have heretofore clearly shown. 
This has been true ever since Pentecost, and is as true 
as ever to-day. But the plan of the ages, as a general 
arrangement and "feast," provided by God for his 
people, was not provided until its due time. Each one 
who is served with the present truth may invite others 
to sit down while he joins the servants in ministering 
to them. There is abundant opportunity for all who 
desire to be "servants"; for the majority of the household 
of faith have as yet barely "tasted that the Lord is 
gracious"— not yet tasted of "the riches of his grace in 
Christ Jesus our Lord." 

IS INTEREST USURY? 

Question.— A brother desires your views on Rom. 14:23. 
Does this apply to other acts of this life? For 
instance, the brother had a small sum left him, invested 
and bearing interest. This interest he has collected 
and used, the principal not being available. Now, from 



Ezek. 18:8; Psa. 15:5, and other Scriptures, he is inclined 
to think he should not receive interest or increase, 
but not being fully persuaded, he is in doubt. He 
wishes to know if it is sin to him, as it is not of faith. 
Please answer privately or through the TOWER. 

Answer.— No: we would not think that the brother's 
case comes under Rom. 14:23. His mind is merely in a 
quandary. He is merely questioning the subject with 
a view to doing whatever he considers to be the Lord's 
will. If he is using reasonable energy to reach a decision, 
it is not to be considered that meantime he is in 
the condition of the doubter of Rom. 14:23. But if 
after he has reached a conclusion in his mind, he violate 
his conscience, and does not act in accordance with his 
belief, he will then be under condemnation as a violator 
of his conscience. 

We do not understand the taking of a reasonable 
interest to be usury. The laws of God under which 
the Jews were placed left very little room for judgment 
on their part in any sense. It was decided for them 
beforehand what they should eat and should not eat, 
what they should do and what they should not do, and 
their consciences and judgments of right and wrong 
were ignored. In the present age, in God's dealing 
with the Christian Church, it is wholly different. Everything 
is left to the judgment and nothing is particularized. 
Upon them that are in Christ Jesus and who are 
walking not after the flesh but after the spirit, God imposes 
no special regulations concerning their financial 
dealings, their food, etc., except such as are implied 
in the general principles of the New Covenant; namely, 
truth, righteousness and love. 

Under our covenant (according to our understanding) 
it might sometimes become our duty as well as our 
privilege entirely to give something away, principal and 
interest, where love and righteousness would seem to 
our judgment so to dictate. In another instance it 
might be entirely proper to loan to another for use and 
for profit money which we could not use as advantageously 
ourselves, and it would be proper also to stipulate 
for a share of the profit, and that share might be either 
a larger or a smaller share, depending upon the amount 
of risk involved and the amount of profit made by the 
user. A reasonable proportion of the profits made 
would not be "usury" in the sense of oppressive interest 
or extortion. 

On the other hand there might be circumstances 
under which the acceptance of even a small interest 
might mean oppression and injury to the neighbor. 

If the brother is loaning his money at a high rate 
of interest, taking advantage of the necessities of the 
borrower (as pawnbrokers are represented to do), then 
it would be in the nature of injury. But if the party 
using the money is making something out of it, and 
paying a portion of that profit to the brother, it is not 
usury in the sense of oppressive charge, but interest in 



R1995 : page 140 

the sense of reasonable profit. This is the sense that 
our Lord commended in the parable of the pounds and 
talents, when he said to the servant, "Thou oughtest 
to have put my money to the exchangers, that at my 
coming I might have received mine own with usury." 

The meaning of the English word "usury" has 
somewhat changed from early times, and now is always 
used to indicate oppressive interest. Formerly its 
meaning was simply interest. 

ARE SOME SPARED TO COMPLETE THEIR TRIAL? 



Question.— The recent death of a relative has set 
me thinking. I do not know how it is with the truly 
consecrated in other places; that is, those of them who 
have accepted the present truth, whether or not they 
pass away as rapidly as those who are not fully consecrated. 
I notice that among the denominations frequently 

R1995 :page 141 

their best and most faithful workers are taken 
(die), while the faithful and physically weak among us 
are spared. Would this mean that we will all go 
together? 

Answer.— We have ourselves noticed and remarked 
what you mention. It would seem that the testing of 
those who have come unto the "harvest" light is to 
be specially severe and prolonged. The test of endurance 
is one of the severest; but we have the assurance, 
though "the love of many shall wax cold, because iniquity 
shall abound," yet "he that shall endure unto 
the end, the same shall be saved." (Matt. 24:12,13.) 
If we are together approaching some crisis, so much 
more necessary is it that we improve the present favorable 
opportunity to put on the whole armor of God that 
when the "fiery darts" come we shall be able to quench 
them and to stand. Note the Apostle's very explicit 
direction as to the articles constituting this armor 
(Eph. 6:10-18), not forgetting that they cannot be 
put on at all until the body be washed and clothed in 
the garment of Christ's imputed righteousness.— 2 Cor. 7:1; 
Rom. 4:7,8,24,25. 

However, we do not think it probable that all the 
living faithful will die and be "changed" together. 

R2458 :page 141 

"A CUP OF COLD WATER" 



The Lord of the harvest walked forth one day 

Where the fields were white with the ripening wheat, 

Where those he had sent in the early morn 
Were reaping the grain in the noonday heat. 

He had chosen a place for every one, 

And bidden them work till the day was done. 

Apart from the others, with troubled voice, 

Spoke one who had gathered no golden grain: 

"The Master has given no work to me, 
And my coming hither has been in vain. 

The reapers with gladness and song will come, 

But no sheaves will be mine in the harvest home." 

He heard the complaint and he called her name: 
"Dear child why standest thou idle here? 

Go fill the cup from the hillside stream, 

And bring it to those who are toiling near; 

I will bless thy labor, and it shall be 

Kept in remembrance as done for me." 

'Twas a little service, but grateful hearts 

Thanked God for the water so cold and clear; 

And some who were fainting with thirst and heat 
Went forth with new strength to the work so dear; 

And many a weary soul looked up, 

Revived and cheered by the little cup. 

—Selected. 



R1995 :page 141 

"THE LORD IS RISEN INDEED." 

-JUNE 21. -Luke 24:34-53.- 

ALTHOUGH the disciples had been informed 
concerning our Lord's resurrection, they 
seem to have but imperfectly comprehended his words. 
At all events, they evidently were not expecting him 
to rise from the dead, and hence, when he appeared in 
their midst, they were greatly affrighted and troubled. 
Our Lord foreknew how they would regard the matter, 
and had chosen the most favorable manner for manifesting 
himself, and communicating to them the wonderful 
fact of his resurrection. He could have appeared 
to them as the angel appeared to Moses in the burning 
bush. They would then have seen a flame, as Moses 
did, and could have heard his voice, and could have 
been impressed with the dignity of his presence by being 
commanded, as Moses was commanded, to take off 
their shoes because the ground was holy. This would 
have made a deep impression upon their minds, but it 
would not have made the kind of impression the Lord 



desired to make. It would not have convinced them 
that their Master, whom they had seen crucified and 
buried three days before, was no longer dead, but risen 
and alive. 

Our Lord could have chosen another method. He 
could have appeared as a glorious angel and have manifested 
something of his spiritual glory, as he did later 
to the Apostle John on the Isle of Patmos (Rev. 1:13-18), 
and as he did to Saul of Tarsus on the way to 
Damascus. He was just as truly a glorious spirit being 
at this time as he was afterward, and as he will be to 
all eternity. He had been put to death in the flesh, 
but, as the Apostle assures us, he had also been quickened 
(made alive) in spirit. (1 Pet. 3:18.) This change 
had come to him in his resurrection, just as it is promised 
that a similar change will come to his faithful 
Church,— "sown in dishonor, raised in glory; sown in 
weakness, raised in power; sown a natural body, raised 
a spiritual body." (1 Cor. 15:43,44.) But had he 
appeared to the disciples a glorious, shining being, as 
he appeared to Saul, the effect upon them no doubt 
would have been similar to the effect upon Saul. They 
would have fallen before him, and perhaps also have 
lost their sight as Saul lost his. This might have impressed 
them powerfully, but it would not have led 
their inexperienced judgments to accurately connect 
this glorious being with the man Christ Jesus whom 
they had followed for three years. 

The manner chosen by our Lord for revealing himself 
was much more favorable for the disciples. He 
wished to gain their attention, and to avoid anything 
that would unnecessarily excite them, and hinder them 
from learning the lessons which he wished to impart. 
Hence he appeared as a man on several occasions,— 
once as a gardener to Mary, again as a stranger to 
the two who went to Emmaus, and on another occasion; 

R1995 : page 142 

and in each case, he revealed his identity by his conversation 

or by his manner so that they recognized him as 

their crucified Master,— Jesus. But on the occasion 

mentioned in this lesson he appeared in a body of flesh 

and bones, similar to that which had been crucified. 

The body which they saw was not he for he had 

been "changed" in his resurrection and was now a 

spirit being with a glorious body such as John and Saul 

saw. But he appeared to them in a body of flesh and 

in ordinary garments specially prepared for the occasion, 

just as angels (using the same power) had appeared 

as men previously. Just as our Lord (centuries before 

he became a man) appeared as a man to Abraham, and 

ate and talked with him, so now, after he had ceased 

to be a man, and had been changed and was a spirit being 

highly exalted, far above angels, he again appeared 

as a man because this was the best means of communicating 



to the disciples the grand truths which he 
wished to communicate. Hence also he assured them, 
to allay their fears, that what they saw was not a spirit. 
He at that time was a spirit (1 Cor. 15:45; 1 Pet. 3:18; 
2 Cor. 3:17), but they did not see him, but merely the 
body of flesh which veiled yet represented him; and 
which, as he intended, helped their imperfect faith and 
knowledge to grasp the important lesson that he was no 
longer dead but alive for evermore. 

Then he reminded them of his own previous utterances 
on the subject of his resurrection; he quoted to 
them and expounded the prophecies which bore the 
same testimony, and showed them the necessity for the 
great transaction which he had accomplished, saying, 
"Thus it is written, and thus it behooved Christ to 
suffer and to rise from the dead the third day." All 
of this discourse probably is not given, but we may 
presume, reasonably, that he explained to them particularly 
the necessity for the ransom-sacrifice, and something 
concerning the wonderful results which must yet 
flow therefrom to all the families of the earth. 

He was present with them for forty days before 
his ascension, yet was invisible to the "brethren," except 
during the few times of his manifestation; and 
these manifestations were but brief; during all this 
period of forty days none except the "brethren" saw 
him; and, as we have seen, they saw him only by reason 
of the miracle which he performed, appearing in 
their sight as a man; because human beings cannot see 
spirit beings. In this our Lord fulfilled his statement 
made before his death— "Yet a little while and the 
world seeth me no more."— John 14:19. 

Those who hold the view that the flesh of our dear 
Redeemer given for us (John 6:51) was resumed by 
him, and constitutes his resurrection body, miss the real 
lesson taught the disciples during those forty days preceding 

R1996 : page 142 

his ascension. The lesson of the occasional 

appearances, and then in different forms or bodily appearances, 

and of his vanishing after each manifestation 

was (1) that he was no longer dead but risen; 

(2) that his resurrection conditions were totally different 

from those of the man Christ Jesus. 

To imagine the care-worn, thorn-marked features 
and the wounded hands and feet, of "flesh and bone," 
to be Christ's resurrection body would be thoroughly 
inconsistent every way. If his marred, fleshly body 
is his resurrection body, why did the Apostle so carefully 
explain that "there is an animal body and there 
is a spiritual body"? (1 Cor. 15:44) And why tell the 
saints that "it doth not yet appear what we shall be" in 
the resurrection? (1 John 3:2.) If we shall be like as 
we are now, with all of our present blemishes and scars, 
then it doth appear and surely would be very disappointing 



to those who have believed the Lord's word that 
flesh and blood (human nature) cannot inherit or enter 
the Kingdom of God, and that therefore we, who are 
alive and remain unto the second coming of our Lord, 
must be "changed"— that we may "be like him and 
see him as he is." Originally a spirit being, our Lord 
humbled himself and was changed to our nature and 
was "made flesh" "for the suffering of death" as our 
ransom price. He then was "made like unto his 
brethren:" but now, having redeemed us, he has been 
glorified with the glory which he had with the 
Father before the world was created, and now his 
promise is that the "brethren" shall be "changed" 
and made like unto him and share his glory.— 1 John 3:2; 
1 Cor. 15:41-46,51-53. 



page 142 

JUNE 28.-REVIEW STUDIES OF THE QUARTER. 

Golden Text— "Repentance and remission of sins 
should be preached in his name among all nations."— 
Luke 24:47. 



R1996 : page 142 

DAVID, KING OF JUDAH. 

-JULY 5.-2 Sam. 2:1-11.- 

Golden Text— "The Lord reigneth, 
let the earth rejoice."— Psa. 97:1. 

DAVID was a man of a high and varied order 

of natural ability, a combination of the rare 

qualities of the successful statesman, warrior, musician 

and poet. His disposition was, in the main, noble, 

generous, humble, kind, enthusiastic and heroic. He 

was reverential toward God, and seemed from his youth 

to have almost implicit faith in the promises and providences 

of God. Yet David was not a model saint: 

there were some strange inconsistencies in his character 

which stand out the more prominently in contrast 

with the beautiful and noble traits which fill us with 

admiration. But since these, so far as he was able to 

see them, were most sincerely repented of, we can appreciate 

the humility that led to repentance, and regard 

David from the same standpoint of that loving and 

merciful consideration from which God regards all his 

fallen and weak followers who struggle against inherent 

depravity, humbly acknowledging their shortcomings, 

and leaning upon his tender mercy. While in his youth, 



when God was about to anoint him king of Israel, it 
was said of David, "The Lord hath sought him a man 
after his own heart" (1 Sam. 13:14), the same in many 
respects might also have been said later, notwithstanding 
his faults, in view of his deep contrition. This 

R1996 : page 143 

statement, however, is not to be regarded as a testimony 
to the perfection of either the youth or the man, 
but rather to his fitness for the office to which God had 
appointed him; and as the office was one of great honor 
and trust, fitness as God's choice for the office implied 
a high order of character and ability, especially at the 
time he was chosen. So it was also in the case of Saul 
at the time of his anointing, of whom Samuel the prophet 
said, "See ye him whom the Lord hath chosen, 
that there is none like him among all the people?" 

The peculiar experiences of David's early life had 
much to do toward preparing him for his life work as 
king over Israel. His encounter with the lion and the 
bear when a shepherd boy, his later conflict with the 
giant Goliath, his experience at court with Saul, his 
acquaintance and friendship with Jonathan and others, 
his flight from the pursuit of Saul, all served to develop 
and prepare the chosen man for the office he was to 
fill after the death of Saul. In this school of experience 
he learned the valuable lessons of courage, fortitude, 
reliance upon God, how to act wisely under peculiar 
difficulties and under severe temptations and 
trials. He also became acquainted with the circumstances 
and conditions of court life; and his subsequent 
seven years in exile among other nations acquainted 
him with their characteristics, and were doubtless of 
service to him later in knowing how to deal with them. 
In his exile there gathered around him a company of 
discontented people, mostly victims of Saul's oppression. 
Among these were a number of prominent men 
of the nation, and these were of service to him later. 

Thus God not only chose, but trained, his servant 
for the duties to which he had called him. And this 
providence in David's case reminds us of God's providences 
in general, how wisely he adapts means to ends 
and guides in all things to the accomplishment of his 
will. Many of the most comforting psalms of David 
were the results of his hard experiences in this time of 
his exile. In fact, the peculiar and varied experiences 
of the man, and the lessons derived from those experiences 
as expressed in his psalms, have been the comfort 
and blessing of God's people in all ages since. In a 
general way, David's experiences correspond to those 
of the gospel Church whom God is similarly preparing 
for the Kingdom of heaven. And doubtless it is for 
this reason that the lessons of David's experience find 
an echo in so many of our hearts. 

The record of David's course from the time of his 



anointing to his establishment in the kingdom shows 
an implicit trust in God— that he who had called and 
anointed him was able also in his own good time to 
bring him to the throne and to establish his kingdom. 
He took no measures whatever to displace Saul, nor to 
undermine his authority, even when Saul was pursuing 
him to take his life. And when Saul was unconsciously in 
his power, so that he could have slain him, he would not 
put forth his hand to touch the Lord's anointed. He 
was willing to wait patiently the Lord's time, knowing 
that what God had promised he was able also to perform; 
and so, even after Saul's death, he was not in 
haste to claim the vacated office, but he first inquired 
of the Lord to know if his time had come. 

The Lord's time having come, David was directed 
to Hebron with his family and the men that were with 
him and their families, and there, without ostentation or 
any assertion of his rights, he calmly waited the further 
indications of providence. "And the men of Judah 
came, and there they anointed David king over the 
house of Judah"— thus falling in line not only with 
the divine anointing, but also with their own preferences. 
Thus the kingdom came to David, not only by 
divine appointment, but also by choice of the people. 

In David's course in all this and in the course of 
divine providence with him there is a wholesome lesson 
for the anointed people of God of this age— the gospel 
Church. Having been called and anointed of God to 
be kings and priests unto him, heirs of God and joint-heirs 
with Jesus Christ of his Kingdom and glory, it is 
our part to wait patiently the Lord's time for that exaltation; 
and in the meantime, like David, to patiently 
endure all the discipline which God in his providence 
sees to be necessary to fit us for the position of authority 
and power we are to hold in the future, and to exercise 
with loving consideration for the blessing of all 
the families of the earth. 

On coming to the throne David's course was marked 
with the same wisdom and magnanimity that had characterized 
him previously. Among other wise measures 
the honor he paid to the memory of his deceased rival 
and enemy is very notable, and without a precedent on 
the pages of history. David sent messengers to the 
men of Jabesh-gilead to express his appreciation of 
their kindness in rescuing the bodies of Saul and his 
sons from the ignominy to which the Philistines had exposed 
them, and giving them a decent burial. This 
the men of Jabesh had done in remembrance of a kind 
service Saul had once done for them. (1 Sam. 11:1-11.) 
And David said to them, "Blessed be ye of the Lord, 
that ye have showed this kindness unto your lord, even 
unto Saul, and have buried him. And now the Lord 
show kindness and truth unto you: and I also will requite 
you this kindness, because ye have done this 
thing." 

How different is this from that evil spirit which 



would triumph over the death of a powerful rival and 
relentless enemy. Instead of doing so, David seemed 
to call to mind all the good traits of Saul and to lament 
the evil spirit that had come upon him in his later 
years and driven him to such a wicked course; and the 
memory of the love of Jonathan was ever precious to 
him. In this, more than in any thing else, David triumphed 
over his enemy. 

While David was thus the acknowledged king of 
Judah, the other tribes of Israel, ignoring the divine 
anointing of David, made Ish-bosheth, the surviving 
son of Saul, their king. In this David set up no opposition 
claims, and his course with reference to the rival 
kingdom was merely defensive, not aggressive. However, 
in various battles and skirmishes his forces were 
victorious; and his strength and influence grew while 
those of his opponent declined. Would that the same 
spirit of forbearance and disinclination to assume authority 
were general among both political and religious 
leaders. The usual course is for leaders rather to force 
themselves upon the people— to seek the office, instead 
of allowing the office to seek the man. 

The golden text— "The Lord reigneth, let the earth 
rejoice"— is prophetic of that blessed time when the 
antitype of David's throne, the Kingdom of Jehovah's 
Anointed, our Lord Jesus, shall be established in all 
the earth. Then indeed may the earth rejoice; for 
that king will reign in righteousness, and justice and 
judgment will be the habitation of his throne. 



R1997 : page 144 
ENCOURAGING WORDS FROM FAITHFUL WORKERS. 



Michigan. 

DEAR FRIEND:— I never can be thankful enough that a colporteur 
introduced the TOWER and DAWNS to my notice. They are to me like 
a bright light in a very dark place. I lend and give them where I hope 
they will do the most good. One good old Congregationalist minister 
accepted the truth at once, and died rejoicing in the light. Another 
could with great difficulty be persuaded to read them, but has accepted 
their teachings, rejoices that he has been enlightened, and now persuades 
his congregation to believe also. 

Sincerely yours in Christ, MRS. C. W. G. 



Kansas. 
DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-In sending this remittance to pay my 
account, I say as a word of cheer in passing, I know in whom I am 
trusting, and, having placed all in his hands, I have no desire to draw 
back. My health is poor, and I often think I will soon pass over; but 



I am in my Father's hands, and am content. I am learning to know 
him as I never did; and oh, how wonderful the knowledge! To know 
Him is to love Him; and we cannot love Him without knowing Him. 
I so like the Diaglott translation of Eph. 3:18,19. 

In the raising of Lazarus is there not an evidence of the great love 
which Jesus had for him? Dying before his Master he could be only 
one of the ancient worthies; but dying after him he may be one of the 
"body." [Yes!] 

Well, dear Brother, God bless you in your work. I appreciate it 
greatly. See Heb. 13:20,21. 

Yours in the faith, W. H. HOUGHTELIN. 



England. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-Just a line that you may rejoice with 
us in our happiness in the Lord. Our little church met on New Year's 
eve to draw near the Lord through praise and thanksgiving for having 
preserved us from harm during the year that is past. Oh, what gladness 
fills our hearts as we recognize his care and blessing to us through 
the past year! How he has fed us from his table! We also carried 
out the suggestion given in Nov. 15 TOWER, with regard to order in the 
Church, appointing Brother Hemery as "elder" or overseer for the 
coming year, recognizing in him the Lord's choice. 

Before we parted we renewed our consecration to the Lord. Believing 
the past year to have been a notably prosperous one to us as regards 
our building up in love and knowledge, also as regards the spread 
of the truth, we look in faith to the dear Master for his grace in the 
coming year, believing that he will perfect that which he has already 
begun. The Church sends greetings. 

Yours in His service, E. SHARPLES. 



California. 

DEAR SISTER AND BROTHER RUSSELL:-I have had it on my 
mind to write to you ever since coming to California. We are enjoying 
so many blessings that I like to tell you of them. We are abiding in 
Christ and rejoicing in his love, and in favor from God the Father. 
What a gracious plan it is that we may come into this family of God, 
even though we be poor and unlearned, having nothing to bring. I 
pray always to God that I may never bring reproach on his holy name. 
We have every blessing— home and peace and quiet and freedom to 
give out words of truth on all sides, and are privileged to meet together 
with God's saints, and to partake with them of the feast spread before us. 

I have taken a new interest in my boys. I have come to realize 
that they are not my boys, but the Lord's, bought and owned by him, 
and perhaps consecrated to him (they always say they are); so I am 
trying to be more careful of them, and I feel free to admire them as 
never before. I can see what precious little souls they are, and how all 
their intentions are for righteousness. It is pleasing to notice that they 
are perfectly truthful and always scrupulously honest in all business 
matters. They are always more interested in spiritual things about 
Passover time. Laurie (the eldest) made a dollar and twenty-five 
cents on his rabbits. He says it is not his money, and he thinks God 
would be better pleased to have his money put into the Tract Fund, so 



he asked me to send it in for him. I can see he has some conception 
of what consecration means. 

Here is a blessed little company of DAWN readers. We have two 
meetings every Sunday; and I don't believe there is one enemy among 
us, nor one cold one: we do enjoy such freedom and fellowship. In 
the morning we have some lesson, and in the afternoon we have testimony 
and singing and prayer and questions. We sisters have started a 
Wednesday afternoon meeting, and we are going through the second 
volume of DAWN. I often wish you knew these dear people personally. 

May God's blessing rest on you both and the work he has put into 
your hands. Christian love to all. MRS. W. J. WEBB. 



Texas. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-Our little Baptismal service came off 
very nicely last Monday afternoon. We had the use of the baptistry in 
the Disciple church, and opportunity to speak to a little audience of 
about twenty. They listened attentively as I reasoned from the Scriptures 
that the baptism unto repentance and for the remission of sins was applicable 
only to those who were under the Law Covenant, that the real 
baptism is into Christ's sacrificial death, that it commenced with our 
covenant to present ourselves a sacrifice to God, and did not end until 
our offering was consumed in death. 

A noted Free Thought speaker lectured in Denison recently. 
Two young men from the Y.M.C.A. assisted me in giving out about 
400 Do You Know tracts. His talk was against Churchianity rather 
than against Christianity. 

Yours in the Master's service, H. W. DEMING. 

[We commend to all, reasonable cooperation with other Christians 
in any good work. Only let us be careful not to sacrifice principles for 
the sake of human sympathy or Christian cooperation.] 



Indian Territory. 

DEAR BRETHREN:-Some one told an infidel that I sold "an infidel 
book." So he hailed me on the street and bought "What Say the 
Scriptures About Hell," without looking into it. He was surprised and 
very glad to learn that the doctrine of eternal torture was not a feature 
of the Mosaic law. His wife (a Baptist) says she twitted him about 
"reading that old infidel book and neglecting the customers." When 
he had read it all, he told her and his mother that if they would read it 
they might learn something good about the Bible. They also were overjoyed 
and praised God that he had touched the heart of the honest skeptic. 

Our new friend listened like a little child while I told him the old, 
old story of God's and Christ's love, and bought the DAWN without 
urging, because he now believes in the Bible. I think the new tract is 
having the same effect on many others. 

My heart is made glad occasionally by the evidence of the Lord's 
providence in feeding those that hunger for his truth. One evening, recently, 
I started to a meeting which is conducted by an Evangelist who 
is quite interested in "The Plan of the Ages." I missed the meeting place, 
and came upon some campers at the edge of town. One man from Texas 
was telling them about MILLENNIAL DAWN, and our Bible talk which the 
Elder interrupted in Sherman. How God makes the wrath of men to 



praise him! They were all anxious to know more about it. I offered a passage 
of Scripture, and another, until he knew me. We talked till 1 1 P.M. 

"The Lord knoweth them that are his." I am glad for this great 
privilege of sowing the precious truth. Pray for me. 

Yours in Him, H. T. BLATCHLEY. 



page 145 