Kingdom Proclaimers Report
Witnessing Bears Fruit at Home and in School
THE life of a Christian involves doing good to others, especially by sharing with them the good news of God’s Kingdom. Proverbs 3:27 says: “Do not hold back good from those to whom it is owing, when it happens to be in the power of your hand to do it.” In Argentina a young Witness in his third year of high school wanted to share the good news of the Kingdom with a school friend. His doing so had far-reaching results.
One day the young Witness mentioned to his friend that not all religions are good. When the young man replied that he did not do anything bad, the Witness said: “Neither do you do anything for God.” This caused the youth to think. Later the Witness explained that these are the last days and that in order to have God’s approval, one must get accurate Bible knowledge and apply it. His school friend agreed. But would his family permit him to have a Bible study? To give his friend something to think about, the Witness asked him to read the book You Can Live Forever in Paradise on Earth.
Time passed, and the friend quit school. Nothing was heard of him for more than a year. Then one day the young Witness was surprised to receive a telephone call from his friend who said that he could see that Bible prophecies were really being fulfilled. Immediately the Witness arranged to study the Bible with him.
When he went to his former school friend’s home, he noticed that his friend’s parents were quite concerned as to what their son was getting involved in. Even the friend’s younger brother thought that he was going crazy. So the parents had the younger brother sit in on the next study. Afterward, with tears in his eyes, this young man reported to the parents that his older brother was not crazy, to which the mother exclaimed, “Instead of one problem, I now have two!”
Hence, at the next study she herself was present and had to agree that the boys were not crazy. Later a Bible study was arranged with her and her husband. Soon the whole family began to attend the congregation meetings at the Kingdom Hall. In time, the grandparents too began to study the Bible and started going to the meetings. Since then, the first young man has been baptized. He got married, and he and his wife are zealous publishers.
Furthermore, through informal witnessing at school, the young Witness has helped two other schoolmates as well as the mother and the sister of one of them to begin studying the Bible. In all, 11 people learned the Bible’s truth because the young Witness did not hold back from doing good to his schoolmates. What a happy outcome! Truly, “Happy is the people whose God is Jehovah!”​—Psalm 144:15.

