‘Impart Your Soul’ to Your Students
 1. What is required to help a Bible student?
1 In order to help a Bible student to the point of dedication, more is required than simply conducting a regular Bible study with him. The apostle Paul compared his relationship with those he taught to that of a nursing mother cherishing her children. We too are pleased to impart “our own souls” in order to help our students to grow spiritually.​—1 Thess. 2:7-9.
 2. Why should we demonstrate personal interest, and how may that be done?
2 Take a Personal Interest: As a Bible student applies what he learns, his conscience will prompt him to discontinue close association with those who do not conform to Bible principles. (1 Pet. 4:4) His family may disown him. (Matt. 10:34-36) We can help fill the emotional void by demonstrating warm personal interest. One experienced missionary recommends: “Do not rush away from the study after it is over. If appropriate, stay and talk for a while.” Be alert to offer your student practical help. For example, could you telephone or visit him when he is sick? Can you sit with your student at meetings and help with the children, if fitting?
 3. How can we help our student receive encouragement from the congregation?
3 Help From the Congregation: If you are working in the ministry near your student’s home, why not visit briefly to introduce your service companions? When appropriate, from time to time invite different publishers, including elders, to accompany you on the study. Also, soon after you establish a study, encourage your Bible student to attend meetings at the Kingdom Hall. This will enable him to enjoy upbuilding association with members of the congregation who may become his spiritual family.​—Mark 10:29, 30; Heb. 10:24, 25.
 4. How may our diligence be rewarded?
4 A parent who tirelessly assists his children spiritually is overjoyed when they take a stand for Jehovah and walk in the truth. (3 John 4) We can experience similar joy as we impart our souls to help our Bible students.

