Kingdom Proclaimers Report
Young Ones in Italy Make Opportunities to Witness
THOSE who appreciate God’s wonderful purposes are delighted to help others learn of the marvelous Kingdom hope. This often involves taking advantage of opportunities that arise, as the following report from Sardinia shows.
□ “A 12-year-old publisher was traveling back from field service by bus. Also on the bus were two young boys and a girl, all about 18 years of age. The young publisher sat near the girl and began reading the Awake! magazine, hoping to arouse her curiosity. She noticed the magazine and asked what he was reading. He explained he was reading an article dealing with the solution to problems young people have to face. He said that he had greatly benefited from this material and that it could help her also. She gladly accepted the magazines.
“Having listened in on the conversation, the other two youths asked for magazines. While they were getting the contribution, the driver told them not to waste their money on such useless things. The youths answered that they were intelligent, and the magazines were interesting. At this the bus driver pulled over to the side of the road, stopped the bus, and wanted to see what was so interesting in these magazines. He also accepted copies.
“The young Witness who related this experience said: ‘I am really glad I began witnessing on the bus.’”
□ Another young Witness took advantage of a situation in school. This youth relates: “Our schoolteacher taught us a study method that was quite different from the traditional one. After considering the material, we were to work up an outline including main points and secondary points and then give an extemporaneous talk on the subject.
“‘I am very familiar with this method,’ stated the Witness. ‘It is the one suggested by the Theocratic Ministry School Guidebook.’ The teacher soon noticed I was the only one who was successful in applying this method. He asked why there was such a difference between my work and that of the others. I explained that I had learned this method in the Theocratic Ministry School. He was very pleased and invited me to illustrate it to the class, using the Theocratic Ministry School Guidebook. This I did.
“When I went home, I told my family what had happened. My father, who is not a Witness, had always said that being one of Jehovah’s Witnesses was a handicap at school, but after listening to my experience, he was forced to change his mind.”
What a grand privilege you young ones, as well as you older ones, have to uphold and make known Jehovah’s name!​—Psalm 148:12, 13.

