page 1 
VOL. XVIII. JANUARY 1, 1897. No. 1. 



CONTENTS. 



Items. Our General Pulpit, etc 2 

View from the Tower 3 

Poem: Renewed Devotedness 4 

"All the Israel of God" 5 

The Standpoint of the Future 9 

The Holy Spirit 11 

Pentecostal Preaching 13 

Encouraging Letters 15 

page 2 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
--ADDRESS TO- 
TOWER PUBLISHING CO., BIBLE HOUSE, 58 & 60 ARCH ST., 
ALLEGHENY (NORTH PITTSBURG), PA., U.S.A. 

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 

INCLUDES A SUBSCRIPTION TO "THE OLD THEOLOGY TRACTS"-QUARTERLY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, N.Y. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, 

OR REGISTERED. FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN 

MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS: 

Those of the interested, who by reason of old age or accident, or 
other adversity are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, 
if they will send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and 
requesting the paper. 



R2084 : page 2 
OUR GENERAL PULPIT. PLEASE TAKE NOTICE. 



ZION'S WATCH TOWER is the Editor's general pulpit. As he 
does not wish to preach to any except willing hearers, it is as proper 
that your copy of the TOWER should stop at the end of your subscription 
as that he should cease to be pastor of the Allegheny Church if not 
re-elected. Hereafter, therefore, except in very exceptional cases, the 
TOWER will be stopped at the end of the subscription year. All who 
wish the TOWER for 1 897 should send word at once. The terms are so 
liberal as to leave no excuse. It is provided free to the Lord's poor 
who will send a card each year stating the fact. Those who can pay, 
but not now, will please send a card so stating. 

By responding promptly you will save us much trouble and expense 
in connection with our mailing list. 



R2083 : page 3 

VIEW FROM THE TOWER. 



WE wish the WATCH TOWER readers, all and 

everywhere, a very happy New Year— 1897. 

And whether or not they get the fulfilment of our wish 

depends almost exclusively upon themselves, individually, 

—in the cases of those who belong fully to the 

Lord, by a full heart consecration, a full self-surrender 

to his will, as expressed in his Word. 

Circumstances may change, hopes or health may 
fail, trusted friends may become cool or even become 
enemies, poverty and lack of life's necessities may stare 
some in the face; yet none of these, nor all of them, 
should they fall to our lot, need hinder the true Christian 
from having a happy year. 

To the worldly this will be both impossible and 
incomprehensible; for the world has no sources of comfort 
and peace and joy other than the creature-comforts 
of the present life. When deprived of these they have 
nothing but misery and despair; and these evils are 
only increased as knowledge and refinement increase 
the appreciation of earthly good things. Hence the 
remarkable increase of suicides in recent years, especially 
in the most civilized lands, and wherever civilization 
extends;— for instance, in Japan, where it is said 
that the average of suicides per year is over seven 
thousand. Respecting suicides here and in Great Britain 
the Rev. P. S. Henson, D.D. (Baptist) of Chicago 
said recently in a sermon:— 

"There never was such unrest in the world as now. 
The old world is threatened with an upheaval. What 
is the matter with New York and Chicago? Humanity 
is not constituted to be satisfied. People are going mad 
faster than you can build mad-houses to put them in. 
In London the suicides number ten a day [3,600 a year], 
New York is not much better. There was never such 
unrest. What the world wants, the rich want, all 
classes want, is Jesus Christ." 

But the child of God has other than earthly friends 
and joys and hopes and prospects. He is rich, whatever 
his outward condition may appear; rich in the fact 
that his debt of sin has been paid for him; rich in the 
assurances of God's Word that his present experiences 
are all under the supervision of divine wisdom and love, 
and are all being overruled for his highest good (Rom. 8:28); 
rich in joy and hope through the present trials 
and experiences faithfully and patiently endured. God 
is preparing him for future honors, and so he is enabled 
to reckon those trials which once would have utterly 



crushed him as "light afflictions which are but for a 

moment," and which, faithfully accepted, "will work 

out a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory." 

Thus he looks, not at the transitory things that are 

seen, but at the invisible and eternal things. Thus, 

like Moses of old, he endures as seeing him who is invisible, 

a present help in every time of trouble. Whatever 

he may possess of earthly luxury and comfort he 

accepts with gratitude, realizing himself not more deserving 

than millions less favored. Whatever he may 

lack, he reflects that the faithful of every age have been 

required to "endure hardness as good soldiers," and 

that our blessed Savior and his noble apostles, in choosing 

the course of faithfulness to the truth, denied themselves 

and endured hungerings, thirstings, privations 

R2083 : page 4 

and loss of friends, and yet, though poor, they made 
many rich (2 Cor. 6:10) with the true riches of grace 
—"godliness with contentment," "great gain," which 
the world can neither give, nor take away. In every 
condition these may hear the Word of God saying,— 
"All things are yours, ...for ye are Christ's, and 
Christ is God's." 

"Why should the children of the King 
Go mourning all their days?" 

The Christian's secret of a happy life lies in his 
knowing and trusting the Heavenly Father and the 
Heavenly Bridegroom. Even worldly physicians, sceptics, 
are coming to recognize the fact that the peace of 
God ruling in and keeping the heart is not only an excellent 
medicine, but a great preservative of health. 
How many, looking back, can see that not only their 
spiritual but also their physical health has improved 
since they found the Lord "a very present help" in time 
of trouble! If they had nervous troubles which formerly 
caused them sleepless nights and haggard looks, 
and which almost unfitted them for life's duties and 
responsibilities, they have doubtless found some improvement 
since they have heard the voice sayings- 
Cast all your care upon the Lord, for he careth 
for you.— 1 Pet. 5:7. 

Behold, what manner of love the Father hath bestowed 
upon us, that we should be called the sons of 
God.-l John 3:1. 

Like as a father pitieth his children, so the Lord 
pitieth them that fear (reverence) him.— Psa. 103:13. 

Be of good courage, and he shall strengthen your 
heart. -Psa. 31:24. 

The Lord is my Shepherd, I shall not want: His 
goodness and mercy shall follow me all the days of my 
life, and I shall dwell in the house of the Lord forever. 
-Psa. 23:6. 

True, the exceeding great and precious promises 
of God's Word may not hinder us from feeling pain, 



but it will modify the severity of the pain and its frequency. 

Physicians are of one opinion on this subject, 

that the mind, the brain, the nervous center of our being, 

exercises a great influence over all of our physical 

sensations, either an aggravating or a pacifying influence. 

Truly did Solomon, the wise, say that the Lord's 

word is a valuable "medicine."— Prov. 3:8. 

But we have said that these blessings come through 
knowing and trusting God: some fail to get the blessings 
because of a lack of knowledge; others having the 
knowledge lack the trust, the faith; still others, and 
they are probably in the majority among consecrated 
Christians, enjoy a small measure of these blessings 
when they might have them in abundant measure by 
a more thorough knowledge of God through his Word 
(accompanied, of course, with obedience to the spirit 
of their knowledge) and by the exercise of greater 
trust in the Faithful Promiser. 

We exhort all the consecrated TOWER readers to 
join with us at the beginning of the New Year, in a 
remembrance and renewal of our covenant with the 

R2084 : page 4 

Lord,— to be obediently and lovingly his, in thought, 
word and deed— and in harmony therewith, and to the 
intent that we may enjoy his blessings to our fullest 
capacity and under all conditions, let us put on the armor 
of truth and righteousness; fastening the same 
upon us with the graces of the spirit. As an assistance 
we suggest as a text to be remembered and practiced 
daily, the words of the Apostle Paul (2 Cor. 7:1)— 

"Having therefore these promises, dearly beloved, 
let us cleanse ourselves from all filthiness of the flesh 
and spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of the Lord." 

And whoever would have success in carrying out 
the foregoing resolves should not only make the engagement 
at the throne of the heavenly grace, but 
should at all times and under all circumstances preserve 
the spirit of thankfulness and prayer. As the Apostle 
expresses it, he should "pray without ceasing, and in 
everything give thanks." For what son is he that the 
father chasteneth not? If ye be without chastisements 
and lessons, then are ye not sons. The Heavenly Father 
chastens for correction, every son whom he receives. 



R2086 : page 4 

RENEWED DEVOTEDNESS. 



Come, let us anew our journey pursue, 
Roll round with the year, 



And never stand still till the Master appear. 
His adorable will let us gladly fulfill, 

And our talents improve, 
By the patience of hope, and the labor of love. 

Our life, as a dream, our time, as a stream 

Glides swiftly away, 
And the fugitive moments we would not delay. 
Haste, haste ye along, dark moments be gone, 

For the Jubilee year 
Rushes on to our view, and its dawn is now here. 

at close of our day may each of us say, 

"I have fought my way through; 

1 have finished the work thou didst give me to do!" 

O that each from his Lord may receive the glad word, 

"Well and faithfully done! 
Enter into my joy, and sit down on my throne!" 
—Charles Wesley. 



R2084 : page 5 

"ALL THE ISRAEL OF GOD." 



A Brother writes: I have been in the habit of speaking 
of the true Church as spiritual Israel; 
recently the propriety of so doing has been called in 
question by certain "advanced teachers" who claim 
that since the time of Rehoboam the name Israel is 
Scripturally applied to the revolting ten tribes only. 
I have looked up the question in Young's Concordance, 
but find nothing satisfactory. I cannot find that the 
term Spiritual Israel is used a single time in the Bible. 
Please give us some help on this question. 

We reply: We are aware that there are a few 
who confine the term Israel to the ten tribes which revolted 
from Rehoboam and the two tribes (Judah and 
Benjamin) which upheld him. And they have an object 
in so doing,— they have a theory about the ten 
tribes having been "lost," and claim that they have now 
"found" them;— that the English-speaking people of 
the world are the ten lost tribes— Israel. Earthly patriotism 
no doubt has much to do with the theory in 
those who have not taken a strong enough hold upon 
the heavenly citizenship. Although we also are Saxons 
according to the flesh, yet we have learned that as 
there is neither Jew nor Greek, bond nor free, male 
nor female, in Christ Jesus, so there is neither French 
nor English, German nor Spaniard; for all who are in 
Christ are one "royal priesthood," a holy nation, a 
peculiar people, of which Christ is the Head. The 
spread of British influence during the past century and 



a half has indeed been remarkable; but let us not forget 
that similarly Spain "ran over the wall" three centuries 
ago, and ruled much of North America, all of 
Central and South America, and many of the isles of 
the sea; and that her language still dominates a territory 
almost or quite as extensive as that in which English 
is the prevailing tongue. Did Spanish prosperity 
prove them to be Israel? If not, why should Anglo-Saxon 
prosperity be recognized as a foundation for 
such an assumption? 

The endeavor to uphold their theory (which is not 
even a "tradition of the elders"), seemingly blinds 
those who become interested in it, so that they ignore, 
and apparently cannot see the plain teaching of the 
Scriptures on this subject,— Israel. The fact is that 
the phrase, "ten lost tribes," cannot be found in the 
Bible; it can only be found in the writings of those who 
have adopted the theory by which they are blinding 
themselves. Nor is the term, "lost Israel," nor any 
analogous expression, found in the Scriptures. The 
expression, "lost sheep of the house of Israel," twice 
used by our Lord (Matt. 10:6; 15:24), has no reference 
to lost tribes, but to individuals who had wandered 
from the Lord and were lost in the wilderness of sin 
and darkness. 

As is well known to Bible students, there was a 
split in the twelve tribes for four hundred years,— ten 
tribes separating from the king's tribe, Judah, on the 
ground of kingly oppression. 

It was natural enough that at the time of the revolt 
of the ten tribes the name Israel should be held 
by the majority, while Rehoboam's kingdom was naturally 
known as Judah, the name of his tribe, which 
constituted the majority of his supporters,— the tribe 
of Benjamin being very insignificant in numbers. This 
distinction continued for several centuries— until the 
captivity to Babylon. The ten tribes were captivated 
first, and their people scattered throughout Babylonia; 
the two tribes (Judah and Benjamin) were captivated 
later, and were similarly scattered in Babylon. From 
that time the pride and rivalry between the two divisions 
of Israel grew less and less. Common adversity 
made them feel their kinship again, and the name Israel 
became, as at first, the common name for "the 
whole house of Israel." 

OLD TESTAMENT PROOFS OF THIS FACT. 



If in the Old Testament writings which recount 
the return from the Babylonian captivity we find the 
returning ones no longer recognizing themselves as two 
nations (Judah and Israel), but, on the contrary, find 
the whole people spoken of as one, and called "Israel," 
"the twelve tribes of Israel," etc., it is proof positive 



that the two sticks (representing the divided people— 
Ezek. 37:16,20) had become reunited in Babylon before 
the return from the Babylonian Captivity. Indeed, 
as already shown,* the proclamation of King Cyrus releasing 
the captivity proves that at that time the petty 
jealousies between the two divisions had subsided, and 
that the two parts had again become one nation with the 
common name Israel; for the proclamation ignored Judah 
entirely, and was to all the people of the Lord God 
of Israel. And, as already shown,* people of various 
tribes did return to Palestine, although the tribe of 
Judah appears to have been specially loyal to the city 
and land; probably because to that tribe belonged the 
kingly promise, and because the "scepter" of influence, 
by divine intention, was to remain with that tribe until 
"Shiloh" should come. Besides, the ten tribes had 
gone into captivity more than one hundred years earlier, 
and their children had become more settled and 
rooted in the various parts of Media and Babylon than 
the tribe of Judah, a few of whose youth, who had seen 
the city of Jerusalem and the temple, lived long enough 
to return. However, many people— the vast majority 



*See MILLENNIAL DAWN, Vol. Ill, Chap. 8. 

R2084 : page 6 

—of the various tribes, including Judah and Benjamin, 
although reverent toward God and his worship, did 
not return to reside in Palestine. The total number of 
those who returned of all Israel was less than fifty-five 
thousand, whereas we have reason to suppose that 
"Judah" numbered several hundred thousand at the 
time of the captivity, and the ten tribes still more.— 
See2Chron. 28:6,8,15. 

Even before the captivity a fellowship had sprung 
up between the people of the two divisions, so that 
when Josiah, king of Judah, instituted reforms, repaired 
the temple and made the great Passover celebration, 
the remnant of the ten tribes (for the mass had 
gone into captivity nearly a century before) joined in 
the work of repairing, by contributing money, etc., 
and joined in the feast of Passover at Jerusalem. (See 
2 Chron. 24:9,10; 25:18.) And at a still earlier date 
the piously inclined of the ten tribes left their king and 
allied themselves with the tribe of Judah, and were 
known as "Jews."— 2 Chron. 15:9. 

The record of the return from the captivity is given 
by Ezra and Nehemiah; and if the breach were not already 
healed it would show itself in their accounts. But as 
Cyrus set free "all the people of the God of Israel," so the 
records show that Ezra and Nehemiah and the people 
regarded themselves as Israel. Let each one prove 
this for himself, by turning to and noting their use of 



the words "children of Israel," "people of Israel," 
"tribes of Israel," "all Israel," and the offering of 
sacrifices for all Israel, according to the twelve tribes, 
in the following passages:— 

Ezra 2:2,59,70; 3:1,11; 4:3; 6:16,17; 7:7,11,13,28; 
8:25,35; 10:5,10. 

Nehemiah 1:6; 2:10; 7:7,61,73; 9:1,2; 10:33,39; 
11:3,20; 12:47; 13:3,18. 

NEW TESTAMENT PROOFS THAT ISRAEL WAS NOT 
TEN TRIBES, BUT TWELVE, AND 
WAS NOT LOST 
IN THE DAYS OF OUR LORD AND THE APOSTLES. 



The term, "lost sheep of the house of Israel," 
twice used by our Lord (Matt. 10:6; 15:24) most positively 
contradicts the theory that the ten tribes were 
lost in the days of our Lord's first advent; and also contradicts 
the thought that the term "Israel" now belongs 

R2085 : page 6 

to the ten tribes only. Read the passages cited, 
and see that the "lost sheep" were individuals— not 
tribes, and that Israel was not lost, because Christ had 
come to the only Israel whom he recognized; and, with 
his disciples for three and a half years, he went through 
"the cities of Israel" seeking therein "the lost sheep 
of the house of Israel. "-Matt. 10:23. 

That the term "Jew" had come to be synonymous 
with the term "Israel" is proved by the fact that those 
terms are repeatedly used interchangeably. For instance, 
Pilate wrote for the cross— "Jesus, the King of the 
Jews," while the soldiers and others mocked, saying, 
Let Christ, "the King of Israel," come down from the 
cross. -See Matt. 27:42; Mark 15:32. 

Nathaniel was an "Israelite indeed," and his testimony 
to our Lord was, "Thou art the King of Israel." 
(John 1:47-49.) The people never thought about a 
king of Judah, but rather, when the Lord rode on the 
ass as King in fulfilment of the prophecy of Zechariah, 
the people strewed the way with palm branches, etc., 
shouting, "Blessed is the King of Israel." (John 12:13.) 
Neither were the disciples thinking of Judah as a 
kingdom; for they asked the Lord, "Wilt thou at this 
time restore again the kingdom to Israel?" And talking 
over the matter on the way to Emmaus they said, 
sorrowfully and disappointedly,— "We trusted that it 
had been he which should have redeemed [recovered, 
delivered] Israel." (Luke 24:21; Acts 1:6.) Is it 
reasonable to think that these all erred in their choice 
of language and said Israel but meant Judah? No ! 
but it is proof positive that they recognized no "lost" 
tribes, but a reunited Israel— part "dispersed among 



the Gentiles," but coming to Jerusalem occasionally to 
keep the national festivals, and part at home in the 
land of Israel, in the cities of Israel, also trodden under 
foot by the Gentiles. 

The angel, when directing Joseph to return from 
Egypt with Mary and the infant Jesus, said, "Go into 
the land of Israel." And the Apostle Matthew says, 
"He arose, and.. .came into the land of Israel." 
(Matt. 2:20,21.) Were the angel and the apostle mistaken? 
What would they answer present-day teachers 
who would say to them, "You were mistaken, the land 
of Israel was then Great Britain and Ireland, and the 
savages of those islands were the true Israelites, and 
they had the only genuine king of Israel represented 
in 'King Fergus' or some of his posterity, and today 
represented by Queen Victoria?" 

John the Baptist, when introducing Christ, declared 
that his ministry was to Israel. (John 1:31.) 
His ministry surely was to the Jews; and if they are 
not Israel John was mistaken and told an untruth; yet 
the power of God was upon him from his mother's 
womb, and there never was a greater prophet. (Luke 7:28; 
Matt. 11:11.) If John erred, how great a prophet 
must he be who could be relied upon to correct him? 

Our Lord sent his disciples throughout Palestine 
to seek "the lost sheep of the house of Israel," and he 
went also himself to "all the cities of Israel," and when 
commending the faith of the Gentile centurion, he 
said, "I have not found so great faith,— no, not in 
Israel." And, addressing Nicodemus, he called him 
"a ruler in Israel." Was our Lord mistaken? Had 

R2085 : page 7 

he missed the place in not going to the British isles? 
Or shall we not conclude that those who would pervert 
these plain testimonies of Scripture to support a 
theory are greatly mistaken? "Let God be true!" 

APOSTOLIC TESTIMONY RESPECTING ISRAEL. 



The Apostle Peter on the day of Pentecost, preaching 
the gospel under the influence of the holy spirit, 
addressed himself to the Jews, saying, "Ye men of 
Israel," hear these words,— Jesus of Nazareth, a man 
approved of God among you by miracles and wonders 
and signs, which God did by him in the midst of you, 
as ye yourselves know: Him. ..ye [men of Israel] 
have taken, and by wicked hands have crucified and slain. 
...Therefore, let all the house of Israel know that 
God hath made that same Jesus, whom ye [men of Israel] 
have crucified, both Lord and Christ.— 
Acts 2:22,23,36. 

John was with Peter at the healing of the impotent 



man, a few days after the above discourse, and therefore 

joined in the statement,— "Ye men of Israel, why 

marvel ye at this?" (Acts 3:12.) The same two were 

together preaching a few days later, when they were 

arrested and agreed in the testimony of Peter recorded 

in Acts 4:8,10: "Peter, filled with the holy spirit, 

said unto them, Ye rulers of the people and elders of Israel, 

...be it known unto you and unto all the people 

of Israel," etc. Evidently these Apostles knew nothing 

about any "lost ten tribes" nor of any other people 

than the Jews entitled to the name Israel. Further 

along, verse 27, a prophecy which specifies Israel is 

quoted as fulfilled by the Jews, in the crucifixion of 

Christ; and proves to whom the name Israel belongs 

in prophecy. 

All the Apostles were together when "all the senate 
of the children of Israel" convened, and Gamaliel, a 
leading doctor of the law (of whose pupils Saul of Tarsus 
was one), a man noted among the people for his 
learning, showed that if Israel were lost he did not 
know of it, for he said to all the senate of the children 
of Israel, not, Ye men of Judah, but, "Ye men of Israel," 
etc. -Acts 5:21,35. 

The Apostle Paul, one of the learned men of his 
day, and one of the most exact and logical men of any 
day, did not know of it if the ten tribes were "lost," and 
surely thought quite the contrary, as is proved by the 
following statements of his respecting Israel:— 

He went to Antioch in Pisidia— among the Gentiles 
—and had no trouble in finding the "dispersed" 
Israelites, "the twelve tribes scattered abroad," and 
their synagogue; and getting opportunity to speak to 
the people (being recognized by the ruler of the synagogue 
as a man of education) he said, "Men of Israel, 
and ye [Gentiles] that fear God, give audience: The 
God of this people of Israel chose our fathers;. ..God 
according to his promise raised unto Israel a Savior, 
Jesus, when John [the Baptist] had first preached before 
his coming [manifestation] the baptism of repentance 
to all the people of Israel." (Acts 13:16,17,23,24.) 
In verses 43,45 and 50 these "men of Israel" are 
called by the common name by which all Israelites are 
known to-day; namely, Jews. And it is worthy of note 
that, while a small band of Jews recently returned to 
Palestine claim to be of the tribe of Dan and another 
band claiming to be of the tribe of Gad, yet, as a rule, 
the Jews to-day do not know from which of the twelve 
tribes they sprang— so completely have the twelve tribes 
amalgamated into one nation. 

When Paul returned to Jerusalem after several 
years' absence among Gentiles, and especially among 
the people of Israel scattered abroad and dwelling everywhere 
among the Gentiles as to-day, he went into the 
temple and was recognized; and a tumult was raised 
by a man crying out,— "Men of Israel, help!" etc. 
(Acts 21 :28.) That Jew evidently thought the same 



as all the rest, that Israel was again a united nation, 
and that all Jews were now, as before the rebellion,— 
"men of Israel." 

When Paul pleaded his cause before King Agrippa, 
he said, "I think myself happy, King Agrippa, because 
I shall answer for myself this day before thee,... 
especially because I know thee to be expert in all customs 
and questions which are among the Jews." When therefore 
he said, "Our twelve tribes instantly serving God, 
day and night, hope to come" to the promises which 
God made to our fathers, it proves conclusively that 
neither the Jewish scholar and lawyer, Paul, nor the 
well-informed Roman governor, had any knowledge of 
the ten tribes being longer separated from the two tribes; 
nor did they know that the ten tribes were "lost;" nor 
did they in any manner or degree recognize the then 
heathen savages of the British isles as any part of the 
twelve tribes; for of the latter he expressly says, that 
they were serving God and hoping in the promise made 
to Abraham, Isaac and Jacob. (Acts 26:2,3,7.) The 
Epistle to the Hebrews was written to those same 
"twelve tribes instantly serving God" and hoping; 
especially such as were Israelites indeed and had accepted 
Christ: it is applicable therefore also to all those 
who from among the Gentiles have been grafted into 
the promises of God to Abraham, by union with Christ, 
the true, faithful "Seed." Similarly, the Epistle of 
James was addressed to the "twelve tribes scattered 
abroad."— James 1:1,2. 

In his epistle to the Romans the Apostle Paul has 
much to say about Israel having rejected Christ and thus 
having brought blindness upon herself, unquestionably 
referring to the rejection and crucifixion of Christ by 

R2085 : page 8 

the Jews, "all Israel." He points out that so it was 
foretold by the prophets, and thus shows that the 
prophets are in accord with this fulfilment; and that 
they, when speaking of Israel, have no reference to our 
savage forefathers who, when found by "Saint Patrick" 
and "Saint Augustine," were totally devoid of knowledge 
of Jehovah, and of Moses and the Law, and of 
David, and of Solomon, and of the prophets, and of all 
expectation of a Messiah. Such total ignorance and 
forgetfulness are not supposable in any people, even in 
longer period;— much less in Israelites who never lose 
their respect for Abraham and circumcision, nor for 
Moses and the Law— even when they become 
"Free-thinkers." 

The Apostle then proceeds to show that it is the 
same Israel that was blinded because of rejecting Christ 
that is to be saved from that blindness at the second 
coming of Christ. (Compare Rom. 9:27,31-33; 10:1-3; 
11:2,7,15,24-28.) Is it supposable that if there 
were another Israel recognized by the holy spirit and 



R2086 : page 8 

the Apostle they would have been ignored in the comprehensive 

statement of the entire plan of God from 

first to last, given in this wonderful and logical Epistle 

to the Romans? It is not supposable! 

Furthermore, the Israelite according to the flesh 
who would lay claim to anything under God's Covenant 
with Abraham must indicate his adherence to that 
Covenant by observing the ordinance of circumcision. 
If, therefore, it could be proved that the Anglo-Saxon 
people have any Israelitish blood in their veins (and 
we deny that this has been proved), we may know that 
from the time they failed to perform the Israelitish ordinance 
of circumcision, that long they have been cut 
off from all share in the promises made to Israel. The 
law on this subject is found in Genesis 17:14 and is very 
explicit. It says: "The uncircumcised man child... 
shall be cut off from his people [from Israel— shall no 
longer be an inheritor of the promises made to Israel; 
for in neglecting thus to indicate his fealty to the covenant] 
HE HATH BROKEN MY COVENANT." 

So then, if it could be proved that the Anglo-Saxons 
are descendants of Abraham (which we deny), it would 
avail nothing for them; for, having been uncircumcised 
for two thousand years, or as far back as their history 
extends, the covenant of God would be broken, so 
far as they were concerned, and they could inherit 
nothing under it. Neglect of circumcision by an Israelite 
constituted him an alien, a foreigner to the covenant 
of promise,— a Gentile. 

Our conclusion, therefore, respecting the blessing 
upon the Anglo-Saxon people is that, whoever their 
fathers may have been, they have no hope for any divine 
favor or blessing as Israelites according to the 
flesh; for such they are not. Their blessing has resulted 
from the fact that some of them became members 
of the body of Christ— the higher, the spiritual 
Israel; and that a larger number have been blessed 
through the influence of these, and become members 
of "the household of faith"; and that in general the 
light of the gospel, and the spirit of liberty which it always 
induces, has been shed abroad abundantly upon 
that people— bringing with it great responsibilities, as 
well as great blessings. 

SPIRITUAL ISRAEL. 



Freed from some false conceptions on the subject, 
we come now to our correspondent's principal question 
—"Is there a spiritual Israel which has taken the place 
of natural Israel? And, if so, Why cannot I find frequent 
references to her in the Scriptures?" 



We answer, There is a spiritual Israel, but she has 
not taken the place of the fleshly Israel: her hopes are 
spiritual, not earthly; they are built upon heavenly or 
spiritual promises, not upon earthly promises: they are 
therefore called by the inspired writers "better promises." 
Nor does spiritual Israel desire to take the 
place of fleshly Israel: rather, she rejoices that, although 
fleshly Israel for the past eighteen centuries 
and more has been treated as enemies of God and blinded, 
for spiritual Israel's sake, yet the time is coming 
when she (fleshly Israel) shall obtain mercy through 
spiritual Israel's mercy and inherit the chief earthly 
blessing as the natural Seed of Abraham, when spiritual 
Israel, with Christ Jesus her Lord, shall have been 
exalted to heavenly glory.— Rom. 11:25-30. 

Some who see that Christ and his Church, "his 
body" or "bride," constitute the real Seed of promise 
(Gal. 3:16,29) are blinded to the fact that there is 
also an earthly "seed" which through Christ shall inherit 
earthly good things of divine favor, and be used 
also in blessing all the families of the earth;— as earthly 
representatives of the spiritual (Seed) Israel. During 
this Gospel age the "elect" Church is constituted the 
Seed by being joined to Christ Jesus as his bride or joint-heir. 
During the next age fleshly Israel will be favored 
with the opportunity to be the first-born of the 
children of Christ— who, as "the man Christ Jesus," 
gave his human life for them and for all of Adam's 
race; and will give the human life, thus purchased, 
to all who will receive it (by restitution) on the terms 
of the New Covenant;— "to the Jew first." 

There is the best of reason, therefore, for the holy 
spirit by the apostles not wholly appropriating the name 
Israel to spiritual Israel: it will be wanted later on by 
the natural seed. We do, however, find just what we 
should expect with a proper view before our minds; 
namely, the suggestion that the Gospel Church is the 
higher Israel, the spiritual, which gets blessings which 

R2086 : page 9 

natural Israel never possessed, but which she was given 
the first opportunity to possess, and failed to obtain 
through unbelief and lack of consecration.— See Rom. 1 1:7; 
9:31,32. 

For instance, the Apostle (1 Cor. 10:18) mentions 
the customs of the Jews, and calls them "Israel after 
the flesh," which implies a spiritual Israel, or Israel 
after the spirit; especially when he draws a comparison, 
as here, between their customs and our higher, more 
spiritual customs and arrangements. Again (2 Cor. 3:7,13-18) 
he refers to Israel's Law Covenant and 
Israel's mediator, Moses, and the vail he put on to hide 
the glory, and shows that those who are only fleshly 
Israel are still hindered from seeing anything more 
than the vail, the outward, the ceremonial, while we 



(spiritual Israel) may see with open face the glory of 
the Lord, and be changed into the same glory as his 
joint-heirs. "Nevertheless," the Apostle declares, 
"when it shall turn to the Lord, the vail shall be taken 
away" from the eyes of Israel after the flesh;— after 
spiritual Israel has been selected and changed to the 
Lord's glory. Again (Gal. 6:16) the Apostle evidently 
refers to spiritual Israel, when he speaks of "the Israel 
of God." Again (Eph. 2:12,13), writing to the Church 
concerning the time when they were Gentiles, he says: 
"At that time ye were without Christ, being aliens 
from the commonwealth of Israel, and strangers;... 
but now. ..ye. ..are made nigh by the blood of 
Christ." This means that by God's grace the middle 
wall of partition has been broken down, and that the new 
creatures in Christ are made sharers of those spiritual 
blessings and opportunities first offered to fleshly Israel. 
Indeed, that we get the choicest portion of blessing 
proffered to fleshly Israel is clearly stated by the same 
writer. (Rom. 11:17-24.) He describes our relationship 
to the promises under the illustration of an olive 
tree whose natural branches have been broken off, and 
into which wild-olive branches have been grafted, 
and whose natural branches may yet later be reengrafted. 
The Gospel Church, as the engrafted branches, are 
partaking of all the fat and richness of the root— the 
Abrahamic promise. Evidently, then, these engrafted 
branches constitute spiritual Israel. 

Besides, have we not on a higher or spiritual plane 
all that Israel after the flesh ever had? They came 
under a Covenant with God— the Law Covenant sealed 
with the blood of bulls and goats: we come into covenant 
relationship to God under the New Covenant 
sealed with the precious blood of Christ. They had a 
mediator between God and them— Moses: we have a 
better "mediator between God and men— the man 
Christ Jesus who gave himself a ransom for all." They 
had typical sacrifices for sins: we have the "better sacrifices" 
—the real, efficacious sin-offering. They had a 
priesthood under a high priest, and holy places made 
with hands, with their vails, candlestick, table of shew 
bread and a golden altar and incense and a mercy seat: 
we have the realities therein typified; for the fullness 
is of Christ (head and body), the antitypical "Israel 
of God," the "Royal priesthood," the promised seed 
of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob. We might multiply 
such proofs which clearly identify the true Church as 
the higher or spiritual Israel, but more is unnecessary. 
He that hath an ear to hear, let him hear! 



R2087 : page 9 

THE STANDPOINT OF THE FUTURE. 



"Thine eyes shall see the king in his beauty: they shall 
behold the land that is very far off."— Isa. 33:17. 

IT is always the part of wisdom to regard the present 

from the standpoint of the future, and to regulate 

the conduct of the present with a view to worthy 

future possibilities. Any other conception of life, or 

any other course in life, is unworthy of the dignity 

of man and dishonoring to his Maker who endowed 

him with those mental qualities of reason 

and judgment which, if used, place him far above the 

plane of a mere animal life of present gratification. The 

beasts that perish may indeed properly live for the 

present only, but not so man who was created in the 

image of God, and with the possibilities of eternal life 

and everlasting bliss before him. Howbeit, though 

that image was marred by the fall, yet, having been 

redeemed from the fall, the full restoration of that 

image is made possible by the assistance of divine grace; 

and it is only in the endeavor, in harmony with the divine 

directions, to regain that image, by daily overcoming 

sin, that true manhood can be reasserted and 

maintained. Otherwise, if any man persist in ignoring 

the future possibilities of worthy manhood, and, 

like the beasts that perish, live only for present gratification, 

then, like the beasts, he too will be esteemed 

of God unworthy of eternal existence, and must die. 

This verdict, however, will not be passed upon any until 

divine love and mercy and discipline have utterly 

failed to impress upon the heart a true sense of the dignity 

of manhood, and the obligation of honoring God 

in rising to that dignity by his assisting grace. 

But here the question arises, How far into the 
future shall we look to find the standpoint from which 
to view and properly estimate the things of the present? 
That, we answer, must depend upon circumstances. 
In some instances we need to look only an 

R2087 : page 10 

instant ahead; while in others a week, or a year, or a 
few years, as indicated by the time necessary to develop 
the project. In infancy we learn by experience 
to look just a short distance ahead, reasoning that it is 
best not to put the hand into the fire, because the fire 
will surely burn again, as it did yesterday; that this 
or that disobedience will bring the censure of parents 
or teachers, while the opposite will bring approval; and 
by and by childish plans are formed and carried forward 
with a view to anticipated results in the near 
future. In maturer years wider plans are formed with 
a view to desirable results a few years hence; as, for 
instance, plans for fame, or fortune, or for the good of 
others— the training up of children to noble manhood 



and womanhood, etc. 

In all this there is a measure of wisdom; but the 
man whose thought and planning, either for himself or 
others, is based upon the standpoint of the future of 
this life only, is not a wise man in God's estimation, 
however wise he may appear in the eyes of his fellowmen; 
as it is written, "The wisdom of this world is 
foolishness with God." (1 Cor. 3:19.) It is not, therefore, 
the standpoint of the future of this life only that 
should be a criterion of present valuation with those who 
would be truly wise, but the standpoint of a possible 
destiny in the life which is to come, and which may be 
eternal if we so wisely and prudently conduct ourselves 
as to prove worthy of eternal life. It is to the future 
standpoint of a possible eternal life and blessedness and 
to the glorious consummation of the divine plan, that 
the Scriptures invite the attention of all the people of 
God. We are shown that God has a wise and benevolent 
plan for all his creatures, both in heaven and in 
earth; that the plan is wide and deep, requiring ages 
for its fulfilment; that the victory of that plan is assured; 
that it will culminate in that glorious victory at 
the end of Christ's Millennial reign; and that its victory 
will be the victory of truth and righteousness. 

The truly wise man is the man who takes all this 
into account, accepting by faith all of the divine revelation 
concerning it, who, in this faith, makes and 
pursues all his plans, both for himself and others, with 
the ends of ultimate victory and eternal life in view; 
and who therefore seeks daily to become more and more 
established and confirmed in righteousness. 

Such a man the Prophet Isaiah describes as one 
that "walketh righteously, and speaketh uprightly; 
that despiseth the gain of oppression [refusing to be 
profited by any unrighteous scheme]; that shaketh his 
hands from holding of bribes [that cannot, by any consideration, 
be bribed to do evil], that stoppeth his ears 
from hearing of blood [from any scheme of oppression 
that would cause a brother's blood to cry unto God for 
vengeance], and shutteth his eyes from seeing evil [from 
beholding evil approvingly, or with quiet acquiescence.]" 
-Isa. 33:15. 

Such a course of conduct is one squared by those 
principles of truth and righteousness to which ultimate 
victory is assured through Christ, whose reign of righteousness 
will fully establish them in the earth, so that 
the will of God will then be done on earth as it is done 
in heaven. Such a man, the prophet further assures 
us, is fireproof even in this day of trial, when the fire 
is trying every man's work of what sort it is. He shall 
dwell in the midst of the devouring fire and the lasting 
burnings of this day of wrath, which shall burn until 
all opposition to God and his righteous way is consumed. 
(Isa. 33:14.) And not only shall these, like 
the three Hebrews in the fiery furnace, come out of the 
flames without even the smell of fire upon them, but 



they shall come out of every such fiery trial triumphantly. 
"He shall dwell on high [in the place of divine 
favor]: his place of defence shall be the strongholds of 
rocks [in the Rock of ages]: bread shall be given him, 
his waters shall be sure"; for "no good thing will God 
withhold from them that walk uprightly," even in this 
present life while they tread this valley of humiliation 
and vale of tears.— Vs. 16; Psa. 84:11. 

It is to these also that the words of our text are 
addressed: "Thine eyes shall see the king in his beauty: 
they shall behold the land that is very far off." 
"The land that is very far off" is not visible to the natural 
eye; but to the eye of faith, looking through the 
telescope of God's Word, it is a glorious vision. There 
is the King in his beauty reigning in power and great 
glory, and with him all his elect, crowned at his side. 
There is the happy condition brought about by the victory 
of truth and righteousness, when all tears are 
wiped away. There the will of God is done on earth 
as it is done in heaven, and peace and everlasting joy 
are upon all heads. There the hitherto desert earth 
blossoms as the rose; for there is no more curse. And 
there the lion and the lamb shall lie down together, 
and a little child shall lead them; and there shall be 
nothing to hurt nor to offend in all that holy Kingdom. 
-Isa. 11:9. 

O what a vision of rest and peace, of glory and 
blessing, of joyful fellowship, of deathless love, of unsullied 
purity and unending bliss! Who, but those 
who have caught a glimpse of its glory, can estimate 
its power to inspire to holy zeal, to earnest endeavor, 
and to patient endurance of all the losses and crosses of 
the path of discipline that leads to it? It is no matter 
of surprise that not all who name the name of Christ 
are filled with the inspiration of this blessed vision; for 
but few, even of those who theoretically know these 
things, really behold the vision, and by faith realize 
that they have a place in it. Only those who do the 

R2087 :page 11 

will of God can thus know of the doctrine,— as a guide 
and inspiration to the perfecting of holiness in the fear 
of the Lord. Only such can really see afar off with a 
realizing sense that what God hath spoken he is abundantly 
able also to perform. Only such can have the 
inspiration of such a faith. If thou art a faithful doer 
of the Word of God, and not a hearer only, then, even 
now "thine eyes" of faith shall catch the inspiration 
of the glory to be revealed, and thy steps shall be 
quickened in the paths of righteousness. 

The Apostle Peter reiterates the same truth in a 
negative form, when, after enumerating the virtues of 
the truly righteous character, he adds,— "But he that 
lacketh these things is blind, and cannot see afar off." 
(2 Pet. 1:9.) That is, he cannot see them as an inspiring 



and impelling power, though he may know of 
them theoretically, and hold the truth even in unrighteousness. 
(Rom. 1:18.) It is only those who truly 
love righteousness, and whose daily walk and conversation 
are therefore in harmony with the principles 
of righteousness, who can be in any measure inspired 
with the vision of faith of the ultimate victory of truth 
and righteousness and its firm establishment in all the 
earth. Who is so blind to the glories of righteousness 
as the man who is out of harmony with any of its principles? 
Can he who glories in oppression rejoice in the 
assurance that "the oppressor shall cease," and that 
the gain of oppression shall perish? Can he who despises 
the truth rejoice in the promise that the knowledge 
of the truth shall fill the whole earth as the waters 
cover the sea? Can he who hates his brother rejoice 
in the assurance that none shall have eternal life save 
those in whose hearts is written the law of love? No; 
to thus by faith behold afar off the blessed land of rest 
and peace, all radiant with the glory of the King in his 
beauty (Rev. 21:11,23-25; 22:4,5), the heart must 
be in sympathy with that glory and that beauty of holiness. 
No matter how much we may know about it, 
we cannot thus see it, unless, as both the prophet and 
the apostle assure us, we are lovers of righteousness- 
doers of the word, and not hearers only. 

R2088 :page 11 

There is a note of solemn warning in these words 
of the Apostle, which all would do well to carefully 
consider; for not only does he affirm that the one lacking 
righteousness cannot see afar off, but he further 
states that he is blind— blind even to things near as 
well as afar off. A little reflection will show how very 
true this is; for there is a philosophy in the course of 
life which constantly tends either toward ultimate perfection, 
or toward ultimate degradation and ruin, according 
as the ways of righteousness or sin are pursued. 
The two principles, good and evil, tend to exactly opposite 
results, and their opposite fruits mature on the 
philosophical principles of cause and effect. Consequently, 
as the Apostle declares, only a blind man,— a 
man mentally blinded or deceived so that he cannot 
perceive the fruits that must inevitably result from his 
course— could expect ultimate good results from an evil 
course of life. Such a one is blinded by his prejudices 
and preferences: his judgment is warped so that he 
cannot see ultimate results, being infatuated with the 
present gratification of his desires. 

Let all who now see the King in his beauty and 
the land that is afar off continue to feast their eyes on 
the glorious vision, that they may catch more and more 
of its blessed inspiration, and let our treasure and our 
hearts be there. And let us guard carefully against any 
perversity of will which would so pervert the judgment 



as to hinder us from continuing to see afar off, and so 
blind us both to present and eternal interests. 
MRS. M. F. RUSSELL. 



R2088 :page 11 

THE HOLY SPIRIT. 

JAN. 10.-ACTS 2:1-13. 

"They were all filled with the holy spirit."— Acts 2:4. 

OUR last lesson contained a promise of the holy 

spirit, the "Comforter," and instructed the 

apostles and believing brethren to tarry at Jerusalem 

until thus endued with power from on high for the work 

of the ministry, in harmony with the Lord's commission, 

to preach the gospel to every creature. In that 

lesson we noted the methods adopted by our Lord to 

prove to the disciples his resurrection and the change 

from human to spirit nature, and his ascension to the 

Father, in harmony with his declaration that he would 

go into a far country to be invested with his kingly authority, 

and would come again and receive his faithful ones unto 

himself. Some have endeavored to make of this Pentecostal 

outpouring of the holy spirit upon the Church a 

fulfilment of the Lord's promise to "come again." But 

nothing could be further from the meaning of the 

Lord's words and from the expectations of the apostles, 

as can be readily proved. While telling them that he 

would come again and receive them unto himself, he 

also told them that in the interim of his absence they 

were to preach the gospel to all the world, for a witness, 

before the end of this age. He assured them 

that during this interim of his absence they would 

suffer persecution and be despised of all men for 

his sake; that they were incompetent for so great a 

work, and therefore must not begin it until they would 

R2088 : page 12 

be endued "with power from on high"— the promise of 
the Father, the evidence of the Father's acceptance, 
the foretaste of his blessing, which shall be completed 
and fulfilled on the glorification of the Church in the 
Kingdom. (Rom. 8:23.) The Lord did not represent 
that the holy spirit would be himself, but merely a 
power or influence emanating from the Father and 
from himself.— Acts 1:4,5. 

None of the apostles had the idea that the holy spirit 
was the Lord, nor that its outpouring represented the second 
advent. Quite to the contrary, they spoke of this outpouring 
as being only the "earnest" or "first fruits" of 
the spirit, a divine blessing upon the Church. The Apostle 



Peter in preaching under the power of the holy spirit, 
after declaring the death and resurrection of Christ, 
said, "Therefore, being by the right hand of God exalted, 
and having received of the Father the promise of 
the holy spirit, he hath shed forth this, which ye now 
see and hear." (Acts 2:33.) There is no intimation 
here that "this" outpouring of the spirit was the second 
coming of the Lord; but to the contrary it is stated 
that the Lord at the time was highly exalted, with the 
Father, and had shed forth this spirit or power upon 
his Church; having received authority of the Father to 
shed it forth, by virtue of the atonement which he had 
accomplished by the sacrifice of himself. 

There could not be better proof that the apostles 
did not understand the outpouring of the holy spirit to 
be the second coming of Christ, the establishment of 
his Kingdom, etc., than the fact that speaking under 
the influence of this miraculous power, they continually 
and repeatedly exhorted the Church to wait for 
and to expect still greater blessings at the Lord's return, 
assuring them that what they had already received 
was but a foretaste. Not merely one of the apostles so 
points forward to the second coming of Christ, but all 
of them without exception— Paul, Peter, James, Jude 
and John in their most earnest exhortations point to 
the second advent of the Lord as the greatest hope 
and inspiration for faith, courage, patient endurance 
and hope, for the things that shall be brought unto 
us at the revelation of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. 
Those expositors of Scripture, therefore, who endeavor 
to turn the attention of God's people from the hopes 
set before us in the gospel, of the "glorious appearing 
of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ," so as to induce 
them to believe that our Lord's second advent took place 
at Pentecost, are guilty of gross perversion of the Word 
of God. And from the abundance of the testimony 
against such a view and the absence of all testimony in 
its favor, it seems difficult to see how their course can 
be anything short of a wilful "wresting of the 
Scriptures." 

And in view of the fact that some of those who 
thus pervert the divine Word, so as to make its testimony 
of none effect through their traditions and false 
theories, are seemingly earnest people, it behooves all 
who would not be blinded to rid their minds of everything 
in the way of prejudice in coming to the Word 
of the Lord; that we may see light in his light and not 
confuse ourselves by our own or other men's darkness. 
How strange it would be indeed for the Apostle John 
in his great vision (Revelation), nearly sixty years after 
this Pentecostal blessing, to be shown and to be 
commanded to record for our information, symbolic 
pictures of the events of this Gospel age, and of its 
close, and of the second coming of Christ, and of the 
Millennial judgment, and of the final destruction of 
Satan and evil, and of the introduction of the everlasting 



Kingdom beyond— how strange and inconsistent 

all this would be if our Lord's second advent took place 

sixty years before, and the beloved disciple John, although 

blessed by the holy spirit and especially inspired 

to be an instructor of the Church, were left in 

total ignorance of the truth and inspired to pray, 

"Come, Lord Jesus." Come quickly! 

(2) It is not said that the holy spirit came as a 
rushing wind, but merely that a sound came, as of a 
rushing mighty wind. A wind is an invisible power, 
and so is the holy spirit an invisible power. The choice, 
therefore, of a sound of wind as a symbol of the holy 
spirit, and as a means for drawing the attention of the 
apostles to the wonderful blessing coming upon them, 
was an apt one. We cannot think what would have 
better represented the invisible power with which they 
were imbued. The word "spirit" is from the very 
same Greek and Hebrew words as the words "breath" 
and "wind:" not that the holy spirit is merely breath 
or wind, but that nothing else so well symbolizes God's 
invisible power. 

(3-11) The cloven tongues, that is, the split or 
parted tongues of light, like fire, which sat upon each 
of them, were also evidently symbolic, representing illumination, 
—the intelligence which comes through the 
holy spirit. The holy spirit might have come upon 
them with equal power without either the sound of 
rushing wind or the tongues of light; but these accessories 
were no doubt intended to help the Church to 
grasp the situation, to expect and to appreciate the 
blessing then conferred and to make the matter the 
more notable and satisfactory to them. 

The number of believers who were together in the 
upper room at the time of the outpouring of the holy 
spirit was about one hundred and twenty. They were 
all immersed in the holy spirit, because the holy spirit 
filled the house. But whether or not the tongues of 
light rested upon any others than the apostles we cannot 
surely know. It may have rested upon them only, 

R2088 : page 13 

by way of distinguishing them as mouthpieces of the 
holy spirit. Certain it is that in the subsequent preaching 
with various tongues there seems good reason for 
supposing that the apostles only preached; because it 
was said of the speakers, "Are not all these which 
speak Galileans?" We cannot suppose that the entire 
company of one hundred and twenty were all Galileans. 
It is quite probable, indeed, that the majority of them 
were Judeans; but the eleven apostles were all from 
Galilee, and hence it is probable that they alone did 
the preaching; and probably also that they alone had the 
manifestations of the tongues of light in the upper room. 

The number of Israelites, otherwise called Jews, 
residing in the surrounding nations "dispersed amongst 



R2089 : page 13 

the Gentiles," where they were engaged in business, 
was much greater than the number who permanently 
resided in Palestine. Yet there was amongst them a 
reverence for the Holy Land and the Law; and the 
latter commanded an assembling, at least representatively, 
at the Passover or at Pentecost. In consequence 
great numbers came to Jerusalem from the surrounding 
countries as representatives of families and communities 
to bear tithes and to offer prayers and sacrifices 
at the temple, on these occasions. "From a census 
taken in the time of Nero, more than 2,700,000 were 
gathered at the Passover, and still greater numbers 
came to Pentecost." The larger numbers in attendance 
at Pentecost was doubtless because this feast came in 
the Summer. These gathered multitudes were not 
drawn from idle curiosity, but were "devout men." 

The countries from which many of them came are 
mentioned, and include a radius of several hundred 
miles and the most enlightened portions of the world 
at that time. Although Greek was the ruling language 
of that period in official matters and amongst the 
learned, the majority of the people evidently understood 
little more than their native tongues and dialects, 
nor did the character of the worship at Jerusalem make 
it necessary that they should be very fluent in one 
language. They came together to worship and to present 
offerings rather than to hear preaching. Yet 
doubtless the Lord's arrangement through Moses with 
reference to this feast had in view the very opportunities 
for publishing the good tidings recorded in this 
lesson. The miracle of speaking various tongues was 
appreciated by some at least of these representatives of 
true religion throughout the world. And the testimony 
of the apostles heard there was no doubt carried 
to every quarter; if not in sufficient power to convert 
to Christ, at least in sufficient measure to prepare 
the way in some degree for the message which was to 
be carried throughout the world by the apostles and 
believers in general who subsequently, as a result of 
persecution in Jerusalem, were scattered also and 
"went everywhere" preaching the gospel. 

(12,13) Although the people mentioned were religious, 
"devout men," it does not appear that the 
miracle of the apostles speaking in various languages 
did more at first than to excite curiosity in some, while 
with others it was attributed to an evil influence— intoxication. 
Thus Satan, who endeavored to calumniate 
our Lord as a "wine bibber" and possessed of Beelzebub, 
the prince of demons, would now fain hinder 
the people from hearing the message of the gospel 
preached with the power of the holy spirit sent down 
from heaven, and accompanied with wonderful manifestations. 
Then as now the servants of God were traduced 



even by "devout men."— See 2 Cor. 6:8. 

R2089 : page 13 

PENTECOSTAL PREACHING. 

-JAN. 17.-ACTS 2:32-47.- 

"The promise is unto you, and unto your children, 
and to all that are afar off."— Acts 2:39. 

THE major portion of the New Testament consists 

of written addresses to the Lord's people, and each 

Epistle shows great order and ability in presenting 

truth logically and forcefully. The Book of Acts, however, 

contains records of several preached discourses, 

amongst which none are more interesting than the one 

now before us for consideration. 

Apparently the eleven apostles had been talking 
to little groups of people, here and there, as they came 
together after hearing of the miraculous manifestation 
of divine power in connection with the Pentecostal 
blessing. Whether the apostles spoke each in a distinctly 
separate dialect and were heard by different groups 
of different tongues, or whether they spoke in one 
tongue and were miraculously heard and understood in 
different tongues by their different hearers we are not 
informed, but the miracle would be about equally great 
either way, and the result the same. After being 
charged with intoxication Peter seems to have become 
the main spokesman and "lifted up his voice," and 
thus changed the matter from private conversations by 
a number to a public discourse by himself. He protested, 
not indignantly but mildly, against the charge 
of drunkenness, in very reasonable and logical form; 
showing that it was too early in the morning to suppose 
the apostles to be drunken. The third hour would 
be what we term nine o'clock, a.m., and would imply 
that the disciples had met quite early in the upper 

R2089 : page 14 

room, and that after the blessing they immediately improved 
the opportunity for letting the light shine out 
by preaching the truth to the curious. 

Peter immediately connected the outpouring of the 
holy spirit with the prophecy of Joel, and connected 
this with our Lord and his crucifixion and the prophecies 
concerning him, pointing to his resurrection.— 
Acts 2:15-32. 

(32,33) After thus laying before them the basis 
of the gospel, the death of Christ, he most forcefully announces 
that himself and all of the apostles were witnesses 
of the fact that our Lord Jesus was not left in 



death, but the Father had raised him up to life and exalted 
him to his own right hand. Upon this, the only 
proper foundation of gospel hope and preaching, the 
Apostle proceeded to build the discourse of this lesson 
and to account to the people for the power of the holy 
spirit which they saw manifested. 

(34,35) Realizing that his hearers did not understand 
the prophecy which he had just quoted from the 
Psalms (Psa. 16:8), Peter proceeded to prove to them 
that David could not have been speaking these words 
respecting himself; but that his words were an inspired 
prophecy respecting the resurrection of our Lord Jesus 
from the dead. In proof of this he called their attention 
to what they would all very readily admit; namely, 
that David was dead and in his sepulcher; that David 
was not risen; that David had not been exalted and 
made to sit at God's right hand; and that consequently 
some one else than David must have been meant; 
and he proceeded to show that Messiah was referred to 
by the prophet. 

Very many Christian people are surprised when 
first they notice this positive statement by the Apostle, 
that the beloved Prophet David is not in heaven: so 
used are they to thinking of all the prophets as being 
now in heaven, instead of remembering as is clearly 
pointed out in Heb. 11:39,40, "that they without us 
should not be made perfect"— that the ancient worthies 
will not receive the blessings which God has provided 
for them, and intends to bestow upon them, until first 
the Church, the bride, the body of Christ, has been 
perfected with her Lord at his second advent. 

The character of this discourse by the Apostle 
Peter is not only worthy of notice and remembrance, 
but worthy of imitation, by all who would preach the 
true gospel with power. His discourse was not to the 
effect that this manifestation of power was the second 
coming of Christ and the establishment of his Kingdom 
and glory; but to the very contrary of this he shows 
from David's prophecy that Jehovah said to Christ, 
David's Lord and Master, "Sit thou on my right hand 
[that is, occupy the chief place of my favor and power] 
until I make thy foes thy footstool." This implies 
that the Heavenly Father has engaged to honor the 
Son and to bring all things into subjection to him. In 
his discourse the Apostle does not intimate that this 
has already been accomplished and that all foes are 
overthrown, but merely that the first step in this programme 
has been accomplished; that Christ had suffered, 
that Christ had been raised from the dead, that 
Christ had been exalted to the right hand of power. 
This he emphasises by saying, "Let all the house of 
Israel know assuredly, that God hath made that same 
Jesus, whom ye have crucified, both Lord and Messiah." 
Peter's discourse was not about the stars, nor about 
the leaves, nor about politics, nor about finances, nor 
about eternal torment; but about the great central 



features of the gospel, that Messiah had come, had 
suffered the just for the unjust, and had been glorified 
and was yet to be recognized Lord of all. Nor did he 
fail to point out the responsibilities of the Jews before 
him, as a part of the nation, for the death of Christ. 

(37-41) The effect of this preaching, on a right 
theme and in a direct and forceful manner, was the 
conviction of some of his hearers that if these things 
were true they were under a responsibility, and an inquiry 
as to what should be their course. We look with 
intense interest to see whether or not the Apostle advised 
them, as some preachers of today would advise 
—that they come to a mourners' bench and pray and 
agonize and cry aloud to the Lord to receive them, 
while he and the apostles gather around them and sing 
hymns and pray also for them. We find nothing of 
this kind, nor do we find the Apostle losing his senses 
and his argument and logic in excited declamation 
without meaning, intended to terrify the repentant 
ones. On the contrary, he proceeds in the same earnest, 
logical manner as before to answer their questions 
and to inform them, not that they need to urge God to 
forgive them, but on the contrary, that God has already 
provided forgiveness in Christ and is waiting and 
ready to receive them, and that the proper steps for 
them to take are (1) repentance, reformation of life, 

R2090 : page 14 

"the turning over of a new leaf," and (2) that as repentant 
believers they be baptized in the name of Jesus 
Christ— thus consecrating themselves to him and to his 
service, and outwardly and publicly acknowledging 
the same. And he assures them that upon so doing 
they shall receive the gift of the holy spirit also. He 
points out that the promise of the holy spirit included 
them (as Israelites), and that the Lord had specially 
called them, through the hearing and understanding 
of the truth, that they might become heirs of these 
promises and recipients of this seal of acceptance. 

The astounding fact that three thousand were 
converted to the Lord, as the result of the Apostle's 
clear presentation of the simple facts and how 

R2090 : page 15 

they fitted to the prophecies, is not to be accounted 
for by supposing that the holy spirit operated upon the 
hearers as well as upon the speaker; for the holy spirit 
is never given to any except consecrated believers. Nor 
are we to suppose that the Apostle spoke with such an 
intensity of power as would of itself have produced 
such results upon any congregation of hearers. The 
explanation lies in the fact that his hearers were specially 
"devout men," and the work of that day and of a 
succeeding period was merely the gathering of the ripe 



grains of "wheat" from that nation, which had for 

over sixteen centuries been the recipients of Divine 

favor with "much advantage every way, chiefly in that 

to them were committed the oracles of God." The 

same Apostle and the other apostles under the power 

of the same holy spirit and with probably increased natural 

ability in the handling of the sword of the spirit, 

the Word of God, did not subsequently succeed in accomplishing 

similar results so far as numbers were 

concerned. 

It is worthy of note also that the holy spirit's 
method was not to send the apostles, when imbued 
with power, off to heathen lands to preach to those who 
had never heard of God; but, on the contrary, divine 
providence so ordered matters as to gather some of the 
most worthy Jews out of every nation under heaven to 
the apostles, for the purpose of hearing and being 
blessed with the truth. These "strangers" from various 
parts were all Jews, although their language differed 
because born in foreign parts; furthermore, it 
was not until about three and one-half years after this 
that the Lord sent the good tidings beyond the Jews 
to the Gentiles— Cornelius being the first Gentile 
convert. 

So we hold that the present harvest message is now 
sent primarily to the "devout" of Christendom: and 
we therefore seek and use the means provided for 
preaching to these first, "for the perfecting of the 
saints"; rather than neglect this work by going after 
those who can and will be so much more successfully 
reached in the Millennium, by the glorified Church— 
the seed of Abraham in which all the families of the 
earth shall be blessed. 

(42-47) We cannot wonder that such a group of 
consecrated children of God, after being illuminated 
with the holy spirit of promise, felt an instinctive desire 
to be in each other's company; nor can we wonder 
at the unselfish, loving spirit manifested in the arrangement 
that they should have "all things in common." 
No, such a course is only what would suggest itself to 
all true Christian as a desirable one. Their zeal 
toward God is also attested by their application to the 
study of the doctrines of Christ, their daily prayers, 
etc. And this, as verse 47 informs us, resulted in 
attracting others of kindred spirit to the truth. Thus 
the Lord added to the Church daily such as should 
be saved,— such as were in a condition to be saved 
from the blindness of their nation (Compare Rom. 1 1:25,26); 
such as were the "wheat," ready to be separated 
from the "chaff" and gathered into the "garner" 
of the Gospel age, and away from the "fire" of trouble 
that presently came upon all the "chaff" of that nation. 
-Luke 3:16,17. 

Although the Lord specially blessed this Communistic 
arrangement in the beginning of the Gospel age, 
it was, we believe, for the purpose of drawing to the 



truth the unselfish lovers of righteousness and peace. 

For the same reason he blessed the Church at that time 

with peace, and with "favor with all the people." After 

the Communistic arrangement and the favor with 

the people had been permitted for a time, and had accomplished 

their work, of gathering certain characters 

to the Church, the Lord broke up the arrangement entirely, 

and scattered the Church through persecution 

and disfavor with the people "everywhere." Nor do 

we believe that it was ever the intention of the Lord 

that his people should live in a communal manner during 

this Gospel dispensation. But on this subject we 

refer the reader to an article in our issue of Sept. 1, '95, 

entitled,— "They Had All Things in Common." 



R2090 : page 15 

ENCOURAGING LETTERS. 



We publish the following as an evidence of the 
fact that the Lord is pleased occasionally to grant physical 
healing, probably as an indication of the approach 
of the "times of restitution." (Acts 3:19-21.) The 
sister does not mention the tenor of her prayer; but 
anticipating queries we would refer inquirers to the 
articles on prayer and faith healing in our issues of 
July 1 to Sept. 1, and suggest further that if in her 
place the strongest prayer we could offer consistent 
with our consecration of all to the Lord, would be,— 
to tell the Lord (1) of our unbounded confidence in 
his ability to heal, if he saw best so to do; (2) of our 
desire to have his will done whether it be for our life 
or death, our sickness or health; (3) of our earnest desire 
to serve him, and our determination to use whatever 
strength and health and ability he saw best to 
grant in his service— as called out of darkness into his 
marvelous light. (4) There we would rest the case— 

"Content, whatever lot I see, 

Since 'tis my God that leadeth me." 

Indiana. 
DEAR FRIENDS:-I have been in the valley of the 
shadow of death, and my restoration to life and health 

R2090 : page 16 

is thought by many to be little if anything short of a 
miracle. Having been crippled for over thirty years 
by spinal and sciatic rheumatism, I had no hope of 
ever recovering and was resigned to the Lord's will. 
In January, '94, 1 fell on the ice, resulting in concussion 
of the spine and fracture of the hip joint, breaking 



two principal bones. For three months I was unable 
to move a finger. Friends sent me three of the best 
surgeons they could find, and all three agreed that it was 
useless even to prescribe for me, that recovery was impossible. 
Finally, when all looked for me to die at any 
instant, a poor old colored friend, a Christian woman, 
said to me, "You never tried Doctor Jesus. He can cure 
you. Now pray with me, and rejoice; for we will be 
heard." So we prayed, and soon I noticed an improvement. 
To-day I am not only better in health, but I can 
walk better than in thirty years, and all traces of my 
old infirmity are gone. 

While I lay helpless, I thought how I would try 
to lead others to the light. I had often thought to devote 
my time and labor to the Lord and his kingdom 
work, and am longing to do so now, if it be his will. 
I thought of your tracts, and especially of "Do You 
Know." I have delayed too long now, God forgive 
me this sin. I can offer something on "Good Hopes," 
as the Lord has sent me a pension. The time is at 
hand, the Kingdom is at the door. O may I be found 
worthy to work for it, and to enter into its glory, is 
the prayer of 

Your friends and servant in the Lord, 
MRS.E. S. L 



The following letter is from a "Quakeress" or 
"Friend" who had long followed the Lord according 
to the light possessed, but failed to recognize him as 
having "bought us" by the sacrifice of himself. Thank 
God, she has found the only "door," the only "way" 
to God, and has entered as a true sheep into the 
fold of the true Shepherd. Alas! how many excellent 
moral people, blinded by the Adversary, fail to 
find the only gate to the true "narrow way." Thank 
God! the hour is near when all the blinded ones, who 
are now feeling after God, shall have the eyes of their 
understandings opened and shall find the "way." 
(Compare Acts 17:25-27; Isa. 29:18; 42:16.) But 
what shall we say to comfort or encourage those whose 
eyes have seen the love of God and of Christ, manifested 
in the "ransom for all," and whom the love of 
Christ has not constrained to love in return nor to be 
his disciples? Ah! theirs is a much more serious case; 
and we know of nothing in God's Word for their encouragement, 
except it be the suggestion of beating 
with "many stripes," which may be understood to signify 
some hope of a blessing through tribulation, if 
then properly exercised by it. 

There is a good suggestion in the letter for some, 
respecting the propriety and necessity of definitely accepting 
the Lord by faith, and of making a positive 
covenant with him upon the only terms,— full, free, 
unreserved, joyful self-surrender, as preceding the evidences 



of full acceptance. 

Pennsylvania 
DEAR FRIEND:— Just a word to thank you for your 
letter and prayer, which has not been altogether without 
answer, and for the WATCH TOWER which came 

R2091 :page 16 

two or three days ago. 

I think my error has been that I have taken the 
right of sonship too much as a matter of course, instead 
of realizing that the disobedient child is not in the 
true sense a child of God. From the condition of 
disobedience Jesus has purchased me at the heaviest 
possible cost, and I have been enjoying the redemption 
or the purchased blessings without rendering to him 
due gratitude in return. I have not taken him into 
account as I ought. 

By degrees it came to me that a definite act of 
faith was required of me. I must cast myself unreservedly, 
without doubt or fear, upon Jesus Christ as 
a Savior, and trust him for righteousness. I winced at 
the thought of such a complete surrender; but, when 
Jesus bent to ask me to give him my heart "once for 
all" and "now," I found there was no escape, I was 
already a captive; and that the sweetest possibility in 
all the world would be to be his "prisoner," "bond-servant,' 
subject, slave, only to follow and serve him 
henceforth; relying upon him alone, in God, for the 
ability to do so. 

And so, "once for all," with Bunyan's Pilgrim, I 
have dropped my burden at the foot of the cross. Now 
I go to my comparatively neglected Bible, having given 
myself once for all to a neglected Savior. And if to 
be baptized into Jesus Christ is to be baptized into his 
sufferings and death,* I will choose these in preference 
to any present health or exemption from trial, unless 
it be made very clear to me that I am to do otherwise. 
I believe that the redemption gives us health sufficient 
to do all that the Father expects of us, and I will not 
ask for more. Very gratefully, 

[That is a good point to keep in memory: preservation 
of health and faculties is as truly to be esteemed 
providential as restoration when impaired; although 
not generally so esteemed. And afflictions (physical 
or financial) are sometimes blessings: One of old wrote, 
"Before I was afflicted I went astray." Another wrote, 
"My son, despise not thou the chastening of the Lord, 
nor faint when thou art rebuked of him; for whom the 
Lord loveth he chasteneth, and scourgeth every son 
whom he receiveth." 

All of the saints, "sons," receive some chastisements: 
some in one way, some in another; some in 
ways that all can see, some in ways that none but 
themselves know: some learn the lessons slowly, and 



some more rapidly: but all have need of divine direction 

and correction. Unless disciplined and pruned 

they will not bear the fruits of the spirit in such profusion 

as the Master seeks; and unless fruitbearers 

they are cumberers of the Vine and will be "cut off." 

-EDITOR.! 



*See Baptism and its Import; discussed in our issue June 15, '93. 



page 17 
VOL. XVIII. JANUARY 15, 1897. No. 2. 



CONTENTS. 



Item, About Traveling Brethren 18 

View from the Tower 19 

Program for a Triumphal Church 
Reign 19 

A Christian Nation 21 

An Evolutionist Enthroned Lord 

Archbishop, Primate of England 22 

Christian Fellowship 22 

The Lame Man Healed 25 

"They Had Been with Jesus" 27 

page 18 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
-ADDRESS TO- 
TOWER PUBLISHING CO., BIBLE HOUSE, 58 & 60 ARCH ST., 
ALLEGHENY (NORTH PITTSBURG), PA., U.S.A. 

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 

INCLUDES A SUBSCRIPTION TO "THE OLD THEOLOGY TRACTS "-QUARTERLY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, N.Y. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, 

OR REGISTERED. FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN 

MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS: 

Those of the interested, who by reason of old age or accident, or 
other adversity are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, 
if they will send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and 
requesting the paper. 



R2093 : page 18 

TRAVELING BRETHREN ON TIME. 



When you get word that any of the "Pilgrim" brethren are coming 
to your vicinity at a particular date, you may expect them and prepare 
accordingly. Do not delay arrangements for meetings until their 
arrival; else there will be little time left for meetings; for rarely do 
they remain over two days at one place. The routes are arranged in 
the WATCH TOWER office, and the time apportioned according to 
circumstances and interest— sometimes but one day at a place. 
These "pilgrims" are not slothful, but fervent in spirit serving 
the Lord; so arrange for two or three meetings each day, as will 
suit your convenience. Improve such opportunities for having your 
friends and neighbors, whom you have been trying to interest by conversations 
and reading matter, hear a connected delineation of the Plan 
of the Ages from the Chart of the Ages. We commend to you as a 
privilege the entertainment of these brethren of whose coming we send 
you notification (Heb. 13:2; Rom. 12:4-18); but they do not take up 
collections, all needful expenses being provided from the Tract Fund. 



R2091 :page 19 

VIEW FROM THE TOWER. 



TENDENCIES already noted, toward a combination 

of religious sentiments in sympathy with 

"political reform" movements, are step by step making 

headway, preparing for the predicted politico-religious 

"Confederacy." (Isa. 8:12.) These give evidence 

of four things: (1) that the "form of godliness" 

and outward ceremony flourish as the Apostle predicted 

(2 Tim. 3:5); (2) that personal, vital godliness 

and clear appreciation of the divine mind are decreasing; 

(3) that the nominal church contains so much of 
the world and its spirit as to be ready for the move; 

(4) that the worldly, while unconverted in the true 
sense, are greatly influenced by respect, fear and public 
sentiment, and see no danger from the movement. 

We are far from claiming, as many do, that our 
day is witnessing a general decline of moral and religious 
sentiment. On the contrary, we hold that these 
sentiments are more general perhaps than ever before, 
as witnessed by the philanthropies and charities of 
both public and private support, and the increase of 
humane and kindly sentiment. But we claim that 
while the civilized world is much brighter and better 
as a whole than it ever was, because of the diffusion 
therein of the Gospel light, yet the mass of the church, 
the light-bearers, are declining in intelligent faith and 
zeal and approaching the worldly standard about as 
fast as the world has been approaching the Christian 
standard, so that the world and the nominal Church 



have again come close together;— closer than at any 
time before during the present century; so close that 
to many it appears that, to fully install the Millennium 
—the triumphal reign of the churches— only the three 
following "reforms" are needed; viz.— (1) Insert the 
names of God and Christ in the United States Constitution; 
(2) compel professing Christians to take a 
more active part in politics, form Good Citizenship 
Leagues, etc., and learn to outwit Satan at his own 
game; (3) by so doing obtain prestige and power 
enough to influence legislation to the enactment of 
stringent Sunday laws which would at least make us 
look like a religious people; also suppress the social evil 
and break up present "rings," or else convert them to 
the new religio-political program. Later on it will 
do to enforce religious worship and have the public 
servants attest their fidelity by attending in squads and 
in uniform. The appointing of obligatory fast days and 
thanksgiving days as is and has long been the case in 
countries thoroughly dominated by Roman Catholicism 
will follow later. The next step would be to suppress 
all literature antagonistic to this union; symbolically 
behead it (Rev. 20:4— like John the Baptist) for pointing 
out the wrong of the professed bride of Christ being 
united to the world. Then, later, when questions 
would arise as to what would constitute Christian worship, 
the Supreme Courts could be called upon to define 
more and more explicitly what is, and what is not, 
Christian faith and worship. 

Such a reign of the churches will be but the counterpart 
to the reign of Papacy during the "dark ages," 
except that it will be a more enlightened reign, from 

R2091 : page 20 

the fact that general civilization has progressed, and 
general intelligence will have some weight. 

But that reign will be short. Worldliness, being 
merely covered with a thin outward veneer of religion, 
will speedily assert its true nature— selfishness, envy, 
malice, hatred and strife. But it will not be left thus 
to disintegrate: its fall will be sudden; it will be utterly 
disrupted by the "great earthquake" (Rev. 16:18), 
the revolt of the masses, precipitating the anarchy 
foretold in Scripture, in the midst of which the dominions 
of this world shall pass into the hands of the true 
Kingdom of God, when the true Millennial reign will 
begin. 

The fact is that the faith of the Church has always 
been the most pure and fervent when under opposition 
and even persecution from the world. There can be 
no ground for union between the Church and the world 
except as the Church wholly or in part loses sight of 
or abandons the divine program. Our Lord's example 
and precepts are applicable to all of his followers 
yet, and will continue to be so until the "present evil 



world" shall give place to "the world to come" and its 
Messianic Kingdom. Our Lord declared, "Ye are not 
of the world. I have chosen you out of the world. 
Marvel not if the world hate you, ye know that it hated 
me, before it hated you. If ye were of the world, the 
world would love its own." 

The present effort to unite the Church and the 
world more closely, like the successful efforts of the 
past, is only a trap and a snare by which the great Adversary 
would divert attention from the true work of 
the Church— her self purification and separation from 
the world, by which her light would shine upon the 
world with greater clearness, convincing of sin, of 
righteousness and of a coming judgment. 

But as in the past a falling away of the majority 
into worldliness served to separate the Lord's "jewels," 
so now such a separation is in progress. And it is for 
this "jewel" class that God is supplying the light of 
present truth;— clearer light on the "ransom" and its 
present and future results; on the "royal priesthood" 
and its present sacrificing and future glory; on Covenants 
and their fulfilment; on the Kingdom now in embryo 
suffering violence, and by and by in glory and 
power the blessing of all the families of the earth; on 
the fulfilment of prophecies which prove that we are in 
the "harvest" of this age, and that the great Reaper 
is present, "gathering together his elect," his jewels. 



The champions of Church and State have been rejoicing 
considerably over two incidents which they consider 
favorable to their cause,— 

(1) A Supreme Court decision which, although 
indirect, can be, and no doubt later on will be, construed 
to signify that the United States Government is 

in some sense a religious, a Christian government, and 
become a basis for Christian laws and regulations, and 
not merely laws of Justice. All should know how many 
narrow meanings have been given to the term, "Christian 
regulation," by various well-meaning, but grossly 
deceived, parties in the past. 

(2) President Cleveland in his last Thanksgiving-day 
Proclamation departed from all past usage by mentioning 

R2092 : page 20 

in it the name of Christ, and what might be 

construed as partisan politics in the suggestion of thankfulness 

that the Silver Party had failed to carry the 

election. His example was followed by the Governors 

of several States in their Proclamations. There is nothing 

in the Constitution giving any authority for such 

Proclamations: they are therefore merely suggestions; 

and in making the suggestions all previous Presidents 

have wholly separated politics, and in consideration of 



the fact that millions of citizens (including Jews, infidels 
and skeptics) do not acknowledge Christ, have 
merely suggested that thanks be rendered to Almighty 
God for his blessings, etc. The framers of the National 
Government were not devoid of religious sentiment, 
but they were logical when they said, "Who does not 
see that the same authority that can set up the Christian 
religion over all other religions, can with the same 
ease set up some particular sect of Christians in exclusion 
of all other sects?" Acting upon this thought, 
they sought to found a government of the people entirely 
free from religious bias, under which every citizen 
and stranger shall have liberty to worship God or 
not to worship him, according to his own conscience. 

So intelligent a journal as the Independent proves 
the wisdom of the foregoing, for while defending President 
Cleveland's proclamation, it says,— 

"Suppose the President had been a Roman Catholic 
and referred to the invocation of Mary as a mediatrix, 
he would have made a mistake, because the prevailing 
sentiment of the land would be against him." 

The intimation is that so broadminded a man as 
the Editor of the Independent would be inclined to allow 
the majority to rule the minority, especially if he were 
on the side of the majority. 

Indeed, the United States Constitution seems to us 
almost miraculous: we believe that God must have 
providentially guided in its preparation— so remarkably 
does it guard religious liberty even against the will of 
a majority; and that in a land where majorities rule in 
general matters. 

Considerable opposition was aroused by these two 
evidences of religio-political combination, as well as 
considerable approval; but the masses of the people are 
apathetic and care little one way or the other, and do 
not see the danger. In answer to criticisms the Cleveland 

R2092:page21 

Plain Dealer seems to suggest an Amendment to 
the Constitution, establishing rules (to be drafted by 
experts) for such occasions as Thanksgiving-day 
Proclamations. 

The Reform Bureau, commenting appreciatively 
on the proclamation, says,— 

"Thus at last we have a proclamation in accord 
with the Supreme Court dictum, 'This is a Christian 
nation.'" 

Again, in the Washington Evening Star, the same 
Bureau says,— 

"The Thanksgiving proclamation is in this respect 
the first one that might not have been appropriately 
issued in China or among the Choctaws, or wherever a 
Supreme Being is recognized. This is the first proclamation 
in accord with the long list of historic facts 
on the basis of which the Supreme Court said, on Feb. 



29, '92, in a unanimous opinion (Trinity Church case): 
'This is a Christian nation.' This proclamation, with 
the burial of the spoils system and the arbitration 
treaty, will make this administration distinguished in 
history above any other since the war." 

"On the other side we quote from the Chicago Israelite 
as follows:— 

"Between undue sensitiveness and a just appreciation 
of insult and rightful apprehension of encroachments 
upon liberty, there are great differences. No 
one familiar with the systematized efforts of the numerous 
Christian organizations to obtain recognition of 
Christ in the Constitution; of the tendency of the decision 
of the United States Supreme Court, that this is 
a Christian nation; and of the natural results which 
must follow upon the arrest and conviction of Seventh-day 
Adventists in various States of the Union, can view 
with indifference President Cleveland's departure from 
the precedents of all the presidents who have gone before 
him. Mr. Cleveland has done what no previous 
president has ever dreamed of doing, what all have 
taken pains to avoid doing.... 

"There is an untiring effort being made to turn 
this country into a Christian State and to place on a 
footing of toleration only, all those who do not profess 
the Christian religion. The danger of the eventual 
success of this scheme is much greater than many are 
inclined to believe. Eternal vigilance is the price of 
liberty, and it behooves every lover of freedom to be 
on his guard against its foes, and, more especially, 
against such an evident attack as is made in President 
Cleveland's message, whether it was intended or not. 

"Those who close their eyes to the strength of the 
movement which has for its aim the Christianization of 
our country, and the consequent death blow to all of 
its boasted freedom, either know little of what is going 
on or sadly underestimate the number and influence 
of those engaged in this revolutionary and retrogressive 
movement. Ignorance and indifference only 
can account for the tendency to make little of President 
Cleveland's breach of the unwritten law which has 
hitherto been held sacred. ...Those who are inclined 
to underestimate the influence of his action will have 
a chance to estimate it at its true value when the jubilations 
of Christianizing elements have had time to 
make themselves heard. That they will be heard in 
tones unmistakably loud, only those who know nothing 
of the fight being made can doubt." 



The desire to rule others and to compel obedience 
is very strong in some people. The Christian Standard, 
for instance, is urging a rigid religious observance of 
Thanksgiving Day, and would like to have all religious 
people oppose foot-ball and other recreative games on 



that day. 

The Christian Endeavor Society wants to make its 
mark also, and proposes another holy day. It proposes 
to give to Washington's Birthday a "religious tone." 

The Christian Endeavorer says:— 

"Many Christian Endeavor societies last year utilized 
Washington's Birthday for Christian Citizenship 
day. They found this plan to be helpful to the cause 
of Christian Citizenship.... 

"As Washington was distinctly a Christian citizen 
and showed his loyalty to his divine Master on every 
occasion, there is every reason why the celebration of 
his birthday should have a religious tone to it." 

It says that about six hundred C.E. Societies will 
follow the plan this year. It is proposed to make it 
general at the next convention. It will not be long, 
probably, until those who hold aloof from these church 
and world combination schemes will be esteemed religious 
anarchists. 

All this is of a piece with Rome's saint days, only 
modified to suit our times. 



Advocating Sunday observance before the "Iowa 
Sabbath Rescue State Convention," Rev. E. L. Eaton 
gave the key note of the present movement when he 
said,— 

"We want to touch legislation; we want to go over 
yonder into that Capitol building and sit there among 
the law makers with as much serenity and with as 
much right as do the lobbyists of the great corporations. 
We want to put our finger on the moral pulse 
of the legislature until they feel the power of our influence 
to the extent that they dare not refuse our 
demands. 

"He added that Catholics, Lutherans and all other 
Protestants could as brothers work together in a great 
cause that is worthy of their effort." 

As usual, false doctrine, ignorance of and opposition 
to the divine plan expressed in the Word, lies at 
the foundation of these well-meant but really evil 
movements. 

Let all who can read the signs of the times draw 
specially near to the Lord and his Word, and seek the 
more grace and wisdom to walk circumspectly and to 
labor while it is called day, before the night shall close 
our opportunities and indicate that the gathering of 
the elect is complete. 



R2092 : page 22 

The "Evangelical Alliance" has taken a specially 
active part in Christian Union efforts of late. It is 



worth while remembering that in this association directly 

the union movement took its start in the formation 

of the "image," as marked in prophecy, in 1846 A.D. 

It is altogether probable that it will also play an important 

role in connection with its receiving "life." — 

Rev. 13:15. 



A remarkable sensation was created in London recently, 
in connection with the public consecration of 
Rev. Dr. Temple as Archbishop of Canterbury, Primate 
of the Church of England, and next to the Queen the 
head of that church. As the ceremonies (which took 
place in the Church of Saint Mary LeBow) commenced, 
the Rev. Edward Brownjohn of Bath arose and solemnly 
and earnestly protested against the consecration, 
"on the ground that Rev. Dr. Temple was a confessed 
believer in the full doctrine of Evolution, a doctrine 
incompatible not only with the Bible but also with the 
Book of Common Prayer and Articles of Religion of the 
Church of England." 

The Queen's commissioners refused to entertain 
the protest of one man; and considering that they had 
the backing of practically the entire Church of England 
in favor of Evolution, and the Queen's choice of Primate, 
the ceremony proceeded. This was on Dec. 22, '96. 

On Jan. 8 the Archbishop was enthroned, as the 
following dispatch describes:— 

R2093 : page 22 

"The mandate for the enthronement was presented 
by the vicar-general to the chapter of Canterbury, 
in the treasury. After this ceremony the chapter proceeded 
to the deanery and conducted the archbishop to 
the great West door. The procession was then formed. 

The archbishop was attired in full archiepiscopal 
robes, his long scarlet train being borne by two boys, 
king's scholars of the cathedral school. They wore, 
according to immemorial custom, surplices of pure 
white linen, yellow sandals and little purple caps. 

"There was a dramatic incident as the archbishop 
was traversing the nave at the end of the procession. 
A voice shouted loudly: 'The whole proceedings are a 
fraud.' The interruption came from an elderly gentleman 
of clerical appearance. He was speedily and forcibly 
ejected amid considerable excitement. 

"The order of installation was read in Latin, and 
the archbishop was conducted to the marble chair, accompanied 
by the archdeacons of Canterbury. The 
marble chair, known as the patriarchal throne, is said 
to have been used by St. Augustine, and in it during 
many centuries the archbishops of Canterbury have 
been enthroned. 

"The new Archbishop of Canterbury is one of the 



most advanced Liberals among English churchmen. He 
is a professed advocate of Darwin's theory of evolution." 



The reaction in the Church of England against 
Papacy is showing itself in an increased desire to form 
a Universal Protestant Organization. The Bishop of 
Salisbury at a public meeting recently said, of the 
Pope's recent deliverance which repudiated Anglican 
Orders and union,— 

"It has set us free to do work which lies nearest 
hand, without so much regard to ulterior consequences. 
We are free to follow the path opened to us by a Divine 
Providence, and to create an independent world-wide 
communion." He suggests that the first step should 
be toward a union with Presbyterians. 



R2093 : page 22 

CHRISTIAN FELLOWSHIP. 



"He that hath my commandments, and keepeth them, he it is that loveth 
me: and he that loveth me shall be loved of my Father, and I will 
love him, and will manifest myself to him. Judas saith unto him, 
not Iscariot, Lord, how is it that thou wilt manifest thyself unto 
us, and not unto the world? Jesus answered and said unto 
him, If a man love me, he will keep my words: and my 
Father will love him, and we will come unto him, 
and make our abode with him."— John 14:21-23. 

IN these words the people of God have set before 
them the blessed privilege of intimate communion 
and fellowship with our Heavenly Father and our 
Lord Jesus, the privilege of a realization of the divine 
presence, of which the world cannot know, and which 
realized is an earnest of our inheritance with Christ beyond 
the vail of the flesh. If we be one with Christ 
here, his faithfulness is our assurance that nothing can 
separate us from him now or when we shall have finished 
our course and proved our faithfulness even unto death. 
"Who," says Paul, "shall separate us from the love of 
Christ? shall tribulation, or distress, or persecution, or 
famine, or nakedness, or peril, or sword?. ..Nay, in 
all these things we are more than conquerors through 
him that loved us. For,. ..neither death, nor life, 
nor angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things 
present, nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor 
any other creature, shall be able to separate us from 
the love of God which is in Christ Jesus our Lord." 
-Rom. 8:35-39. 
This is the blessed assurance of faith that springs 



spontaneously from the realization of a present and vital 
union with Christ. Such fellowship and intimate communion 
should therefore be the longing desire of every 
child of God, whose prayer and constant attitude of 
heart should be,— 

"O God, this is my plea,— whate'er the process be, 
This love to know." 

R2093 : page 23 

It is only in heart-to-heart fellowship that we become 
truly acquainted with another; and only so can 
we realize the depth and sweetness of divine love. But 
the conditions of this fellowship, the process by which 
we may come to really know him in whose favor is life, 
and his dear Son, our Redeemer and Lord, must not 
be overlooked. The conditions are that we have and 
keep the divine commandments. The having and keeping 
of the commandments, our obedience to the heavenly 
wisdom, constitute the proof of our love to God. 
Thus also is proved our love of righteousness; for the 
law of God is the law of righteousness, commending 
itself to the highest moral instincts of our nature. To 
the soul, therefore, that loves righteousness the commandments 
of the Lord are not grievous (1 John 5:3); 
for they are the expression of the most exalted virtue, 
the noblest benevolence, the purest love, and all the 
beauties of holiness. 

In the inspired words of the Lord and the apostles 
and prophets we have the divine will expressed, explained, 
illustrated and enforced, line upon line and 
precept upon precept. And yet, with all this teaching, 
it is possible, even for the consecrated people of God, 
to be forgetful hearers and readers of the Word, so that 
its most explicit directions for daily living, its most 
faithful warnings against snares and besetments, and 
its most careful expositions of the principles of righteousness 
and truth, may avail little or nothing in the 
education and training of character. "Therefore," 
says the Apostle, "we ought to give the more earnest 
heed to the things which we have heard, lest at any 
time we should let them slip;. ..for. ..how shall 
we escape [the wrath of God] if we neglect so great 
salvation"— the salvation which comes only through 
faith and obedience to the Word of the Lord diligently 
laid up in our hearts, and its principles carefully and 
prayerfully wrought out in our lives. (Heb. 2:1-3.) 
The promise of the divine favor and blessing is not to 
the forgetful, listless hearers who fail to apply their 
hearts unto instruction, but to the attentive hearers 
and faithful doers of the Word.— James 1:25. 

It is not enough, therefore, that we have read the 
Word of God and gained a general knowledge of its 
principles and precepts and the plan and purpose of 
our God: there is yet more, much more, to be learned 
and done. There must be a daily laying up of its 



treasures of wisdom and counsel in the heart, and the 
working out of its principles in the life. "Thy words 
were found, and I did eat them," said one of the saints 
of old; "and thy word was unto me the joy and rejoicing 
of my heart." (Jer. 15:16.) So must we also feed 
upon them in our hearts. 

Moses, addressing the typical people of God, shows 
with what carefulness God would have all his people 
regard his testimonies, saying, "Ye shall lay up these 
my words in your heart and in your soul, and bind 
them for a sign upon your hand, that they may be as 
frontlets between your eyes. And ye shall teach them 
your children, speaking of them when thou sittest in 
thine house, and when thou walkest by the way, when 
thou liest down, and when thou risest up. And thou 
shalt write them upon the doorposts of thine house and 
upon thy gates." (Deut. 11:18-20.) Joshua also said 
to them, "This book of the law shall not depart out of 
thy mouth; but thou shalt meditate therein day and 
night, that thou mayest observe to do according to all 
that is written therein."— Josh. 1:8. 

Again we read (Prov. 7:1-3), "My son, keep my 
words, and lay up my commandments with thee. Keep 
my commandments and live; and my law as the apple 
of thine eye. Bind them upon thy fingers, write them 
upon the table of thine heart." 

It is those who thus carefully lay up the treasures 
of divine wisdom that they may in deed and in truth 
live by them, that truly keep the commandments of 
God. It is very manifest that our Lord would have us 
apply not only our heads, but also our hearts, to the 
instructions of his Word. (Prov. 23:12.) This implies 

R2094 : page 23 

the study of ourselves, as well as of the divine Word, 
that we may see just what portions of the Word apply 
to our individual present necessities. We know that 
as members of the fallen race we are all afflicted with 
the malady of sin; and though through faith in Christ, 
our Redeemer, we are freely forgiven and reckoned of 
God as free from sin, even this reckoned standing before 
God, through faith in Christ's merit applied to us, 
is accorded to us only in view of our hatred of sin, our 
love of righteousness, and our earnest heart-desire to 
be pure and holy. It would indeed be a vain thing to 
trust for eternal life in the imputed righteousness of 
Christ, and at the same time to love and continue in 
sin. If any of the world of mankind do so in the next 
age, they will never reach perfection and eternal life. 
Accepting first, the favor of redemption through 
Christ they must then work out their salvation by obedience 
and persevering effort to eradicate sin and put on 
righteousness. The same principle applies also to the 
Church now on trial. We should ever bear in mind 
that justification through faith in Christ does not 



directly, and beyond all peradventure, insure to the 
believer eternal life; but it does secure that legal standing 
before God upon which believers, both of this age 
and the next, must work out their salvation with fear 
and trembling.— Phil. 2:12. 

Having, by faith, accepted this legal standing before 
God, our subsequent course of life must make 
manifest our heart-desires to be cleansed from all 
sin: "Shall we continue in sin that grace may 

R2094 : page 24 

abound? God forbid;" for if we continue in sin, the 
grace of God will not abound; and if we give up the 
struggle against sin and allow it to take possession of 
our mortal bodies, the grace of God must eventually 
be withdrawn. 

Sin is a disease inherited from our fallen progenitors: 
it affects one individual in one way and another 
in another: and even though, through faith in Christ, 
we are reckoned of God as free from sin, nevertheless 
the actual tendencies to sin are still present with us. 
Like the children of Israel, we are led into Canaan 
(the rest of faith and of the divine favor), but we have 
still a great work to do in the way of routing the enemies 
of righteousness long intrenched there; and for 
this work both persevering effort and divine grace are 
needed. While the precious blood of Christ applied by 
faith is the great atoning remedy for sin whereby we 
are justified to life, the only restorative remedies are in 
the law and testimonies of the Word of the Lord, all 
which would, however, be unavailing except as supplementary 
to the great atoning remedy; and these must 
be carefully and prayerfully sought out and applied with 
persevering effort for our cleansing and healing. To this 
end it is important also to remember that a correct diagnosis 
of our case is one of the first essentials to a cure. But 
who is sufficient for this?— "Who can understand his 
errors?" who is able to look into his own character and, 
without prejudice, to mark its defects? Surely none 
who are intoxicated with the spirit of the world, with 
pride, or selfishness, or vain glory. 

It is for this reason that the Apostle Paul counsels 
sobriety and humility, saying, "For I say, through the 
grace given unto me, to every man that is among you, 
not to think of himself more highly than he ought to 
think, but to think soberly."— Rom. 12:3. 

A sober estimate of self is a humiliating, not an 
exalting, exercise; yet it is healthful and beneficial. 
It reminds us continually that we are "men of like passions" 
with other men, and thus enables us not only to 
strive against our own weaknesses and besetments, but 
also to sympathize with those of others, and to bear 
with them as we wish them to bear with us. It makes 
us continually to realize that our fallen nature gravitates 
toward sin, and that we must resolutely strive 



against it or else float with its downward current to 
destruction. 

A sober estimate will remind us too of our mental 
infirmities; for, however favorably we may compare 
with some other members of the dying race about us, 
we are very imbecile as compared with human perfection. 
How slowly and laboriously does the mind act; 
how dull are the perceptive faculties; how inert the 
reasoning powers; how unskilled the judgment; how 
feebly we discern the great principles of truth, and 
how stupidly we go about applying them; how repeated 
are our blunders and failures, and how tedious and 
slow our progress ! Surely no man, however favorably 
he may compare with some of his fellows, has 
anything whereof to boast in a sober estimate either of 
his mental or his moral capacity or development as 
compared with the standard of perfection. 

In a sober estimate of character how painfully 
manifest are those overestimates of pride and vainglory 
which are due to the intoxicating spirit of the world! 
How unlovely it is, how absurd and ridiculous, how 
mean and contemptible, how vain and foolish! and how 
effectually it impedes progress toward actual perfection! 
No man can make commendable progress toward perfection 
in any direction who does not recognize his 
shortcomings. If we say we see, our blindness remains; 
if we say we are wise, our ignorance remains, and our 
folly is manifest to others while we glory in our shame. 
-Phil. 3:18,19. 

Such is the spirit of this world. It is blind to the 
highest interests and noblest ends of life; it intoxicates 
the mind and heart and sends the man staggering along 
the downward way to destruction, wise only in his own 
conceit. Against the intoxicating spirit of this world it is 
the duty of the Christian to set a vigilant guard. He 
has covenanted to live apart from the world with all 
its ambitions, pride and vainglory, and apart, too, from 
its selfishness, greed and strife. Let us, therefore, be 
sober and watch unto prayer; and let the burden of 
our prayer be, "Cleanse thou me from secret faults 
[show them to me that I may put them far from me]. 
Keep back thy servant also from presumptuous sins; 
let them not have dominion over me." "Search me, 
O God, and know my heart; try me and know my 
thoughts, and see if there be any wicked way in me, 
and lead me in the way everlasting."— Psa. 19:12-14; 
139:23,24. 

We need to know and clearly recognize our errors, 
if we would indeed be cleansed from every secret fault. 
If there be any secret fault in us, what though no human 
eye might detect it, if we are indeed lovers of 
righteousness, we will want the cleansing power of the 
Word applied to take it away, remembering always 
that "all things are naked and opened unto the eyes of 
him with whom we have to do."— Heb. 4:13. 

Yes, it is in the diagnosis of our case that we are 



most likely to err, and it is here that sobriety of mind 
and meekness are so much needed. Self-love does not 
like to admit the faults that are in us, to particularize 
them and look them squarely in the face with the 
searchlight of God's Word clearly revealing them. It 
is much more conducive to complacent ease of mind to 
generalize, and to overlook particulars;— to say, Yes, I 
know I am not perfect, etc., etc. But it requires a 

R2094 : page 25 

great deal more of moral courage to say, Yes, I see 
now, in the light of God's Word, that I have been selfish, 
or unkind, or unfaithful to my obligations, or 
whatever the fault may be. It requires meekness, humility, 
to admit these things, even to one's self; and 
still more, to confess them to those who have been injured 
or grieved by them. Yet how necessary are the 
recognition and the confession— the proper diagnosis 
of the case— to the healing. "Confess your faults one 
to another, and pray one for another," says the Apostle 
James, "that ye may be healed." (Jas. 5:16.) The 
recognition and the confession, as well as the prayer, 
are thus seen to be very important in order that the 
heart may be in the proper attitude to receive an answer 
to the prayer. 

Careful reflection will show at once how necessary 
to the cure is a correct diagnosis. For instance, suppose 
a case of extreme selfishness. For a time it moves 
along and prospers, and the disease grows worse and 
worse until, by and by, some of its bitter fruits begin 
to appear. Now if the patient fails to discern or admit 
the selfishness, he may regard the bitter fruits of it, 
not as the penalty for wrong-doing, but as sufferings 
for righteousness' sake. And with this incorrect diagnosis 
he may come to the Word of God and take away 
the wrong remedy. If he should go at all, he will 
probably look for words of consolation designed for 
those only who are truly suffering for righteousness' 
sake. And that will not help his selfishness, but will 
make it worse: he will go on cultivating the selfishness 
and take comfort in the promises that are not his; 
whereas, if he realized and admitted the selfishness, 
he would be considering the warnings against it and 
praying for grace to overcome it; he would be acknowledging 
it to those concerned, and endeavoring to make 
amends for it; and in so doing its bitter fruits would 
begin to wither, the peace of God would come into his 
heart, his heart would enlarge, and the love of God 
and of his fellow-men would begin to fill it. 

This is what it means to keep the Lord's commandments 
and to apply our hearts unto instruction. It 
means, not self-gratification, but self-abnegation, and 
self-purification: it means that, in meekness and humility, 
we must deny ourselves, and take up our cross 
daily, and follow Christ. This is the narrow way; walk 



ye in it. There is no other way to life, and certainly 

no other way to the Kingdom, than the way of righteousness, 

humility and true holiness, and of faith in 

the Lord Jesus Christ, whose abundant merit, applied 

by faith, will make up for all our deficiencies that are 

not wilful. It is those who walk this narrow way that 

may even now enjoy the sweets of fellowship with the 

Father and our Lord Jesus and with all who are led of 

R2095 : page 25 

the spirit of God. 

Let as many, therefore, as would follow on to know 
the Lord, whom to know is life eternal, studiously apply 
their hearts unto instruction, and in meekness and 
humility receive the ingrafted word, and let it do its 
purifying work. Hear the exhortation, "Submit yourselves 
therefore to God. Resist the devil, and he will 
flee from you. Draw nigh to God, and he will draw 
nigh to you. Cleanse your hands, ye sinners; and purify 
your hearts, ye double-minded.... Humble 
yourselves in the sight of the Lord, and he shall lift 
you up."— James 4:7-10. 

Paul speaks of the great profit to the Corinthian 
Church of their humble recognition of and godly sorrow 
for sin, saying, "Now I rejoice. ..that ye sorrowed 
to repentance;. ..for godly sorrow worketh repentance 
to salvation;. ..for behold this selfsame thing, 
that ye sorrowed after a godly sort, what carefulness it 
wrought in you; yea, what clearing of yourselves; yea, 
what indignation; yea, what fear; yea, what vehement 
desire; yea, what zeal; yea, what revenge [against the 
evil]. In all things ye have approved yourselves to be 
clear in this matter." (2 Cor. 7:9-1 1.) Such are the 
results of sober self-examination in the spirit of meekness 
and prayer and with a view to cleansing our hearts 
and minds from all the defilements of sin, both small 
and great. O Lord, keep thy servants in the way of 
thy commandments, in meekness and soberness, and 
let the rich reward of divine fellowship be ours, both 
here and hereafter! 

MRS. M. F. RUSSELL. 



R2095 : page 25 

THE LAME MAN HEALED. 

-JAN. 24. -ACTS 3:1-16.— 

"His name, through faith in his name, hath made this man strong 

THE stirring scenes of the Day of Pentecost were 

past, and this lesson introduces us to another 

notable discourse by the Apostle Peter, delivered probably 



not long after the day of Pentecost in company 
with the Apostle John. They had gone up to the temple 
at the hour of prayer. The clear intimation is that the 
apostles were praying men and that under the leading 
of the holy spirit they were guided in their ministrations 
of the truths connected with the new dispensation to 
the praying Jews, "devout" people, rather than to the 
godless. And so it is with the true gospel ever since. 
There is a message or a call to repentance which is 

R2095 : page 26 

applicable to every member of the human family; but 
the special message of the gospel is not to the unregenerate, 
but to the repentant, to the forgiven, to the 
reconciled. The Jews who assembled to worship the 
Lord at the temple were of course not believers in the 
Lord Jesus Christ, and therefore were not justified by 
faith in his blood, but, under their Jewish covenant, 
the Law covenant, and by means of its typical sacrifices, 
they were up to this time typically justified as a people, 
and the grace of God was offered to them from 
that standpoint: they were not treated as strangers, 
aliens, foreigners, but as heirs of all the divine promises 
and blessings. And as a people the Jews continued to 
occupy this position for three and one-half years after 
our Lord's crucifixion and their national rejection. 
The Lord's favor according to promise continued with 
them individually until the full end of their "seventy 
weeks."* 

(2,3) At that time hospitals, homes for incurables, 
blind asylums, poor houses, etc., apparently 
were not thought of, and were not instituted as we 
have them to-day in civilized lands; nor are they yet 
institutions in the East. Thus public alms-giving was 
probably considered a duty. We might here remark 
that, in our judgment, the course adopted by civilized 
nations of taxing all property and wealth for the reasonable 
and comfortable support of the incapables of society 
is eminently proper, and should be so completely 
carried out as to make public begging unnecessary. 

(4-7) Peter's statement would indicate that he at 
least was a very poor man. "Silver and gold have I 
none." Although he said, "Look on us," thus directing 
the cripple's attention to the Apostle John as well as 
to himself; yet, speaking of their financial condition, 
he does not say, "Silver and gold have we none." The 
fact is that there is good ground for supposing that the 
Apostle John had some property. We remember that 
our Lord with his dying words commended his mother 
to the care of John— possibly not merely because of his 
love for John and John's love for him, but also because 
John had some means wherewith to care for Mary. We 
remember furthermore that the account states that 
John took Mary "into his own home."— John 19:27. 

The Apostle Peter seems to have exercised his individual 



gift in the healing of the cripple— "Such as I 
have give I thee:" nevertheless, it was not in his own 
name that the miracle was performed, but properly all 
credit was given to the Lord Jesus. This was evidently 
not a case of "prayer cure," for we have no record that 
the Apostles prayed over the man, nor that they anointed 
him with oil in the name of the Lord. It was on the 
contrary an exercise of "the gift of healing," which 
was then with the Church for the purpose of introducing 
the apostles and the gospel which they preached. 

Although fully conscious of the power of God 
operating through him to perform the miracle, Peter, 
apparently to assist the exercise of faith on the part of 
the cripple, stretched forth his hand and helped him to 
his feet; thus illustrating the propriety of acting according 
to our faith, and permitting the influence of 
our faith to reach others in a natural and helpful 
manner. 

(8-10) It is very evident that the poor cripple was 
not an impostor, for such a one instead of leaping about 
and enjoying his blessing, and praising God, would 
have regretted any circumstance which would deprive 
him of the opportunity for preying upon the sympathies 
of the people in order to avoid working for a living. 

(11,12) We may reasonably suppose that the going 
of Peter at this particular time to the temple was 
of premeditation; we may suppose that he had been 
there frequently before; and that frequently before he 
as well as the others who attended at the temple had 
seen this same cripple. If Peter did not plan this particular 
visit and healing, we may reasonably suppose 
that the holy spirit planned and directed it for him. 
At all events the whole matter was very successful in 
that it drew the attention of the most devout, prayerful 
Jews to the gospel of Christ. The Apostle Peter 
was quick to use any and every opportunity to tell the 
good tidings. He began by modestly assuring the people 
that it was nothing wonderful in John and himself 
that had produced the miracle, and that the man was 
not cured either by their holiness or by their power, 
but by the power of the risen Christ Jesus. It is 
worthy of note that although in addressing the man 
Peter exercised his own faith only, yet now in speaking 
of the matter he associates John with himself as a 
sharer in whatever honor might belong to them as the 
instruments of God. How unselfish and how beautiful! 
What a lesson is in this verse for all who attempt 
any service for the King of kings. How necessary 
that we should realize not only our own insufficiency 
and nothingness in connection with the work of God, 
but how proper that self should sink entirely out of our 
thoughts and the glory all be given to Him whose 
right it is. 

(13-15) The apostles' discourse as narrated was 
a short one, but well directed and right to the point. 
Beginning with a statement by which his hearers would 



understand him to be also a devout Israelite, he proceeded 
directly to the point— Christ, a crucified and 
risen Savior. Nor did he spare his hearers, but drove 
home the truth that the nation of Israel were the real 
crucifiers of God's dear Son, even when a Roman 
governor found no fault in him and desired to set him 
at liberty. 



*See MILLENNIAL DAWN, Vol. II., Chap. 3. 
R2095 : page 27 

"Ye killed the Prince of life!" What a thought! 
They all realized themselves as death-condemned and 
dying creatures. They felt their need of life, eternal 
life, and had been praying for it and hoping that according 
to the divine promise it should come through 
Messiah, a Savior— a Life-giver, and now they were 
almost staggered by the Apostle's words, "Ye killed 
the Prince of Life"— the Life-giver! It is presumed 
that our Lord and the Apostles spoke in the Syriac 
language; and in the Syriac version of the New Testament 
the word "Life-giver" is used where in the English 
the word "Savior" occurs. The Apostle must have 
struck a very tender chord in the hopes and aspirations 
of these devout, prayerful Jews. We fancy them looking 
with incredulity, and saying within themselves, 
"Could it be possible that Jesus of Nazareth was indeed 
the Messiah, the Life-giver?" 

(16) While they were yet wondering on the subject, 
the inspired Apostle quickly drew their attention 
to the evidences before them in the healing of the 
cripple, which attested the truth of his declaration 
that Jesus was no longer dead but risen. Here was 
just such a miracle as those which he a few months 
before had performed in their midst. It was another of 
Jesus' miracles; the apostles themselves performing it 
in his name and utterly disclaiming any ability to do 
such things themselves. 

(17-21) Thus pointing them to the fact that Jesus 
was still a living, powerful, sympathetic and gracious 
Savior, he urged them to repent, assuring them that it 

R2096 : page 27 

was God's intention to send great blessings through 
Jesus and to send Jesus himself back again a second 
time: assuring them also that at his second coming 
there would be an abundance of such manifestations 
as these which they had just witnessed, saying,— 

"Times of refreshing shall come from the presence 
of the Lord; and he shall send Jesus Christ which before 
was preached unto you whom the heavens must receive 
[retain] until the times of restitution of all things 



which God hath spoken by the mouth of all the holy 
prophets since the world began." 

Note that the Apostle began by expressing confidence 
in the "fathers" and in Israel's hope, built 
upon Jehovah's promise to them. Note also that after 
connecting those promises and hopes with Christ and 
his sacrifice, and linking it with the cure of the cripple, 
he points them down to the Millennial age as the 
grand consummation-time for all the blessings, all 
the good things, which God had promised by the 
mouth of all the holy prophets since the world began. 
Is it any wonder that such testimony— both reasonable 
and comprehensible— delivered to such devout 
Israelites, drawn together by a desire to worship the 
Lord, resulted as it did, in the conversion of about five 
thousand? As in the case of those noted in our last lesson, 
these were the "wheat" of that Jewish age, which the 
Lord was gathering out preparatory to the blinding of 
all the remainder of that people for the period of the 
Gospel age, at the close of which their blindness will 
be turned away.— Rom. 11:25,26. 



R2096 : page 27 

"THEY HAD BEEN WITH JESUS." 

-JAN. 31. -ACTS 4: 1-14.- 

"There is none other name under heaven, 
given among men, whereby we must be saved." 

AS the apostles were preaching Christ, taking for 
their text the manifestation of his power 
through Peter in the healing of the impotent man at 
the temple gate "Beautiful," and while the devout 
worshipers heard them gladly and repentantly, the 
theologians were disturbed; it seemed monstrous to 
them that any but themselves should undertake to 
teach the people, and that the people were giving more 
interested attention to these "laymen" than they gave 
to them,— the chief priests, religious rulers and doctors 
of the law. In this they but manifested the usual 
worldly spirit, which in every religious system except 
the true one manifests special opposition to any light or 
teaching which does not emanate from those recognized 
as "ordained" teachers. True, these apostles were 
ordained by the very highest authority in the universe 
—the spirit and power of God, communicated by Christ; 
but such ordination, such authority to teach, was not 
recognized by those doctors of divinity who, like their 
successors to this day, failed to recognize the ordinations 
of God and merely recognize human authorizations 
to preach. 
Not only were they envious that others than 



themselves should have the ear of the people for religious 
instruction, but they had listened sufficiently to 
the discourse themselves to ascertain that the apostles 
were really imparting to the people some knowledge of 
spiritual things. The people were actually being 
taught, and that upon subjects concerning which they, 
the recognized doctors of divinity and theology, knew 
nothing and could teach nothing. If, therefore, such 
teachings were permitted, the worshipers would very 
soon know more than their religious rulers, which 
would never do. They were unable to teach the people 
themselves, and were not humble enough of heart 
to receive instruction, and hence were quite ready to 

R2096 : page 28 

be overcome by the spirit of envy, hatred and malice, 
against those whom the Lord had appointed and was 
using, while passing them by. They had power to stop 
the preaching and to imprison the apostles, and they 
made haste to use it. 

This same spirit was equally manifested, and even 
more unrighteously, by the Roman Catholics during 
the dark ages: they not only imprisoned but tortured 
and put to death those who ventured to instruct the 
people in spiritual things without their permission, ordination, 
etc. This same spirit was manifested to a 
considerable extent by the reformers also, we are sorry 
to say: Calvin, Luther, and numbers in authority in 
the Episcopal Church from the sixteenth to the eighteenth 
centuries were similarly grieved with efforts to 
instruct the people outside their own channels; and the 
same spirit to a considerable extent followed some who 
fled from persecutions, in the Mayflower, to this free 
land. We need not accuse any of these of intentional 
wrong: they lived in a time when religion and politics 
were blended, and they verily thought they did God 
service in opposing as they did that which they considered 
to be "heresy." Had they opposed the heresy 
with force of logic and Scripture merely, and sought 
thus to vanquish what they believed to be errors, with 
what they believed to be truth, they would not only 
have been worthy of approval, but also of admiration, 
and they might have been led into the truth; but their 
zeal misled them into the use of unjust means, and 
they more or less fought against God. But be it noted, 
all these improper efforts were unavailing to suppress 
the truth, and merely served to purify and refine the 
saints, as "gold tried in the furnace." 

Intelligence and liberty during the last century 
have to a large extent annulled the power of the spiritual 
rulers, and unwillingly confined their opposition 
against advancing truth to anathemas, excommunications, 
insinuations as to "unorthodox," and social 
ostracism. And as each reform grew in strength and asserted 
itself, these oppositions gradually died out;— as, 



for instance, the opposition to the "Quakers," to 
"Baptists," to "Disciples," and others. But as we read 
the signs of the times in the light of the divine revelation, 
we have every reason to believe that the present 
movement in favor of "Christian union" will eventuate 
in such a combination of all the powerful and influential 
religious systems as to affect politics and laws, 
and put into the hands of theologians the power 
to head off the further advance of divine truth and to 
stop the spirit-ordained ambassadors of Christ from 
teaching the people advanced truths respecting the 
close of this and the dawn of the new dispensation. 

Arrogantly accustomed to overawing the common 
people with their titles, learning and authority, 
the High Priest and all the priestly family, and 
the religious rulers, and elders, and learned scribes, 
met as a court to hear, to overawe, to browbeat and to 
condemn Peter and John for their temerity in attempting 
to teach the people. 

They were surprised when the two men whom 
they had judged from their general manner, dress, etc., 
to be "unlearned," not theologians, but of the "common 
people," addressed them meekly, simply, yet 
with holy boldness, concerning Jesus of Nazareth and 
his power to heal:— as much since his crucifixion and 
resurrection as before. Peter if speaking of himself 
might have been inclined to avoid mentioning the guilt 
of his hearers in connection with the crucifixion of our 
Lord; but as a chosen vessel for this very purpose he 
was specially under the control of the holy spirit; and, 
although in no bitter or acrimonious language, he told 
his hearers the plain truth concerning their guilt as 
the crucifiers of Jesus, and showed them from the 
prophets that they had set at naught the chief stone of 
the spiritual temple of God; but that nevertheless God 
had highly exalted him to be the Head over the 
Church, which is his body— the spiritual temple— into 
which we as living stones are being built up. 

There is no ambiguity in preaching done thus, 
under the inspiration of the holy spirit: it is direct, to 
the point. Peter did not say that Jesus of Nazareth 
was one of the great teachers of the world, and as worthy 
to be heard as Moses or Confucius or others; neither 
did he say, It makes no difference whether you ever 
hear of the historic Christ or not, as some false teachers 
now declare. Peter's spirit-inspired teachings were 
evidently not at all in harmony with what is known as 
the "new theology," nor with what is known as the 
"higher criticism," nor with what is known as the 
"broad theology," espoused by the Chicago Parliament 
of Religions, and advocated by many of the 
"great theologians" of our day. Peter gave the message 
direct and with force— "There is none other name 
given, under heaven or among men, whereby we must 
be saved." In these words he told his learned hearers 
that there was no hope of salvation in Moses and in the 



Law, any more than in the heathen systems of theology 
—that knowledge of, and faith in, and obedience to 
Christ was the only God appointed way of salvation. 

What could they say! What could they do! under 
such circumstances? They had utterly failed to 
overawe these humble fishermen, and instead had received 
a discourse from them, which was wholly unexpected 
under such conditions. They were not in 
the humble attitude of heart to be affected as were 
the three thousand who on the Day of Pentecost were 
pricked to the heart and converted; nor were they of 
the humble, worshipful, teachable spirit of the five 
thousand worshipers who had been converted by hearing 
the apostles in the temple the day before. They 
could do nothing but marvel. But they took knowledge 
of the fact, that the same meek and quiet spirit 
of Jesus was in these, his disciples, and the same powerful 
logic, directness of discourse and humility of manner. 

So let it be with each of us, the followers of Jesus! 
If we have opportunity for testifying to his grace and 
gospel, let us not fear to declare the whole counsel of 
God, but let us not do it rudely nor unkindly, but 
with the gentleness and force which are of the spirit of 
the truth. 



page 29 
VOL. XVIII. FEBRUARY 1, 1897. No. 3. 



CONTENTS. 



Special Items 30 

"Ye are Bought with a Price" 3 1 

The Salt of the Earth and the Light 

of the World 35 

"The Spade and the Bible" 37 

Concerning the Epistle of James 38 

Was Mother Eve Ransomed? 38 

Lying to the Holy Spirit 39 

"Obey God Rather than Men" 41 

Letters from Distant Colaborers 42 

page 30 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
--ADDRESS TO- 
TOWER PUBLISHING CO., BIBLE HOUSE, 58 & 60 ARCH ST., 
ALLEGHENY (NORTH PITTSBURG), PA., U.S.A. 

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 

INCLUDES A SUBSCRIPTION TO "THE OLD THEOLOGY TRACTS"-QUARTERLY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, NY. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, 

OR REGISTERED. FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN 

MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS: 

Those of the interested, who by reason of old age or accident, or 
other adversity are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, 
if they will send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and 
requesting the paper. 



READERS, PLEASE TAKE NOTICE. 



When you write to us, please begin by giving your full address. 
We cannot possibly keep in memory the streets and numbers of our 
many correspondents. 



When you order your address changed, state the old as well as 
the new address. 



Those who sent in their subscriptions before the end of 1896, should 



find the date on the address tag changed accordingly. Those who have 
sent in renewals since, will please not expect to see the date changed 
until March 1st issue, as this is our busy season, and some renewals are 
delayed that long. 

PATENT BINDERS FOR YOUR WATCH TOWERS. 



We supply these at sixty cents each, holding two years' issues of 
ZION'S WATCH TOWER— each issue to be added as received. These are 
very convenient. Price includes postage. 



R2097 : page 31 

"YE ARE BOUGHT WITH A PRICE." 

-1 COR. 6:20.- 

WHAT different sentiments these inspired words 
awaken in different hearts! To the heart of 
the natural man these sentiments are very objectionable; 
but to the heart fully in harmony with God and the 
divine plan they are precious words, full of comfort and 
joy. The unregenerate heart, full of pride, convinces 
itself that it did not need to be bought; that it did not 
need to be redeemed; that it had no very serious ailment 
of sin. It is perhaps ready to admit, and would 
surely find it difficult to dispute, that it is imperfect; 
that tried in the balances of justice it would be found 
wanting; but to itself these lacks of perfection are very 
slight, and deserving of but trivial punishment of some 
kind, and that punishment it expects to bear and believes 
that it does bear to the full in earthly troubles. 
The natural heart believes in a Great First Cause, of 
some kind, which it calls God: it believes also in certain 
laws of nature which it holds are irrevocable and 
unalterable. It denies that there is forgiveness. It is 
therefore wholly out of harmony with the gospel proposition 
of a "Sin-offering," a "ransom for all," and consequent 
forgiveness of sins under the terms of the 
New Covenant, to whomsoever will accept the 
conditions. 

This class of unbelievers is in many respects the 
most hopeless; because they have a sort of worldly-wise 
philosophy which so fills their minds that it hinders 
them from seeing the beauty of the true Bible 
philosophy. They are usually blind to the very simplest 
logic that could touch this question as presented 
in the Scriptural declarations, "The wages of sin is 
death," and "The soul that sinneth, it shall die." 
While they cannot and do not claim perfection, it seems 
never to have occurred to them that all imperfection is 
unrighteousness, sin, and that the judgment of a perfect 



God would properly and naturally be the destruction 

of that which he does not approve, and the blessing 

and perpetual continuance of those things only 

which are acceptable in his sight, perfect things and 

perfect beings. Not until this view is grasped are any 

properly prepared for the message of the gospel— the 

message that God is operating in Christ for the reconciliation 

of the world unto himself. Only as the natural 

man learns that "the wages of sin is death" does 

he appreciate the fact that eternal life is a gift of God 

through Jesus Christ, our Lord; so that "he that hath 

the Son hath life, and he that hath not the Son of God 

hath not life" eternal.— 1 John 5:12. 

But our inspired text gives offense to the natural 
man, and to the man fallen from grace, in another respect; 
it hurts his pride. It implies that he is being 
treated as a mere slave, or chattel, to be bought and 
sold. What could be more galling than such a thought 
to the proud, unregenerate heart? 

Nevertheless, this thought is kept up throughout 
the Scriptures, and the meek, the humble-minded, 
alone are able to appreciate it. They hear the apostle's 
statement that all were "sold under sin" (Rom. 7:14), 
and they realize the truthfulness of the declaration. 
They find abundant evidence in themselves and in the 
entire race that all mankind are "slaves to sin;" they 
find "the law of sin in their members" and in others. 
They find the power of Sin so strong that it cannot be 
broken by any; that, although it may be fought against, 
nevertheless it holds over all mankind a mastery which 
the enslaved ones cannot fully overcome. They see 
thus, in the apostle's words representing Sin as a great 
task master ruling the world, a very grim but very 

R2097 : page 32 

truthful picture of the facts. They inquire of the Word 
of God, How comes it that God, himself good, pure 
and perfect, has brought forth human children under 
such a bondage to Sin through imperfection? They 
inquire, Do not the Scriptures declare of God, "His 
work is perfect?" Why then this imperfection, why 
this subjection to the power of Sin? An answer can 
come from one quarter only— the Word of God; and 
that answer is the only satisfactory answer, the only one 
which meets all the requirements of the conditions as 
they are known to men. 

That answer is, that, although God's work was 
perfect in the creation of man, yet the creature, being 
endowed with free moral agency, rebelled against the 
law of his Creator and thus by self-will, self-gratification, 
brought himself under the sentence previously 
prescribed,— "Dying thou shalt die." This deliberate 
act on the part of our first parent not only brought 
himself under this penalty, but since his posterity proceeded 
from himself, all of his posterity shared in his 



subjection to death, and in the slavery to Sin consequent 

to his alienation from God and his failing powers 

as he gradually passed under the power of death. So 

then the fact that father Adam sold himself and the 

posterity yet in his loins to Sin, for a momentary gratification 

of self-will, meant not only his own enslavement, 

but also that all of his posterity would be born 

in such slavery to Sin. And such are the facts of the 

case: all of his posterity can say with one of old, "I was 

born in sin and shapen in iniquity, and in sin did my 

mother conceive me." 

Here we come to the thought which was evidently 
in the minds of some of the early reformers when they 
promulgated the doctrine of Total Depravity, which is 
held by many at least theoretically, but from which we 
must dissent. We hold with the Scriptures that as a 
result of Adamic transgression there is a general depravity 
which extends to every member of the human 
family, so that "there is none righteous, no, not one;" 
but we deny that this depravity is a total depravity; 
we deny that any individual of the human race is totally, 
hopelessly, in every particular, wholly without 
anything that is good or commendable. The only 
sample of total depravity of which we have any clear 
knowledge is Satan himself,— the father of lies and of 
every wicked work. 

But general depravity is general enough; and, being 
general, no man should have any difficulty in finding 
to some extent the portion of it which he himself 
has inherited, as well as discerning it in others. True, 
although the depravity is general, it is not alike general. 
Some are more depraved than others; some have 
the original moral likeness of God less blurred and defaced 
than others. In harmony with the Scripture 
statement that we are born in sin, every discerning 
person whose eyes have been opened to what depravity 
is can note the evidences of it even in childhood. Self-will 
and passionate obstinacy are often to be noted in infants 
but a few weeks old, and very patient should 
the parent be, as well as very attentive and thorough 
the correction of his child, when he remembers that 
the very traits which need correction have come down 
to the child from himself. Thus the Christian parent 
should be not only the most thorough in the matter of 
training up a child in the way it should go, but also 
the most patient, considerate and kind in giving this 
correction. 

We have then before our minds the fact and general 
prevalence of sin and whence it comes; and we see 
the force of the apostle's words when he personifies Sin 
as a tyrant master, and represents mankind as his slaves, 
to whom he pays his wages— death. "The wages of 
sin is death." We have seen that God is not blameable 
for this enslavement, but, as the Scriptures declare, it 
was by one man's disobedience that all were brought 
under the power of Sin and subjected to the wages 



which it pays. While the extreme wages only are mentioned 

—death— yet, before the payment of the full 

wages, we all received, incidentally, many of the aches 

and pains and difficulties, mental, physical and moral, 

imposed by this great task master, Sin. And as a groaning 

creation travailing in pain together under this hard 

task -master and suffering from his cruel lashes, all long 

for deliverance, and some of us have cried out to God 

for help— for salvation from sin and death, into righteousness 

and life. 

God wishes us to learn very thoroughly the lesson 
of the "exceeding sinfulness of sin," of its gall and 
bitterness, and of the hopelessness of any deliverance, 
except that which he will provide. Personal experience 
has proved to us that we cannot deliver ourselves from 
this slavery, that, in order to overcome the wicked one 
and his wiles and arts, which take firm hold of us because 
of the weaknesses of our flesh and through the fall, 
we need a power that we do not by nature possess. 
Finding ourselves powerless to help ourselves, we 
would naturally look to each other for aid; and indeed 
might get some aid from each other; but we all know 
how little aid can be given or received from natural 
sources. And when we learn the lesson which the 
Scriptures teach that all are slaves, that all were sold 
under sin, that "there is none righteous, no, not one," 
then we see the utter helplessness of our condition as 
a race. All who realize the situation and feel the bondage 
and seek deliverance may thus see that the only 
hope is in God. If they reflect that it was God himself 
who pronounced the sentence of death, and that he 
could not annul his own sentence nor transgress his 

R2097 : page 33 

own laws, let them reflect also that as he has superior 
power to ours, he has also superior wisdom, and that 
he may know how to do that which to us would seem 
an impossibility. 

And this was the case: When there was no eye 
to pity and no arm to deliver, then God pitied and his 
arm (power— in Christ) brought salvation. (Psa. 69:20.) 
But how? How will God deliver? How can God himself 
continue to be just and yet release his condemned 

R2098 : page 33 

creatures from the sentence of his own law? Our text 
answers: God provided that these slaves of sin, sold 
into slavery by disobedience of their father Adam, 
are to be delivered by a great savior, who first of all 
would purchase them and afterwards set free all who 
will accept freedom upon his terms and conditions. 

The price in the original sale was disobedience, 
and its sentence death; the price of the purchase 
was obedience unto death. Not only so, but, this is 



expressed in the meaning of the word "ransom," a corresponding 

price: the redemption price by which the 

race is purchased must correspond in all particulars to 

the original sentence. The purchase price, the ransom 

price, must in every sense of the word correspond to 

that which was forfeited by the transgression. Adam 

was perfect as a man before he sinned, hence, whoever 

will be his redeemer must be a perfect man. A perfect 

angel would not do, nor would a perfect arch-angel be 

a suitable price; they would be as inadequate as a sacrifice 

to meet the conditions, as an imperfect man would 

be, or a lower animal. God has placed the matter in 

such a form by his own law and sentence, that only a 

perfect man could be a ransom, a corresponding price, 

for the perfect man who sinned, and in whom the whole 

race of mankind had been sold under Sin and under its 

penalty, death. 

It was in order to prepare the great sacrifice for 
sin, and in harmony with the divine wisdom and plan, 
that the only begotten of the Father, full of grace and 
truth, full of perfection, submitted himself to the Father's 
will, that he should humble himself to (without 
dying) be transferred or translated from his high and 
glorious nature and condition to a lower nature and 
condition, lower than that of the arch-angel, lower than 
that of ordinary angels, down to the condition of man; 
—not to the condition of sinful man, but to the proper 
condition in which God had created man (in which 
Adam was before he sinned). Obedient to this arrangement, 
our Lord Jesus "was made flesh," became 
of the same nature as the race which had gone into 
the slavery of sin, but he did not share in its sin nor in 
its imperfections. The apostle's declaration is that, in 
harmony with this divine purpose, our Lord, the only 
begotten of the Father, left the glory of his original 
nature and "was made flesh" and dwelt among us, and 
that for the purpose "that he, by the grace of God, 
should taste death for every man." When, therefore, 
our Lord appeared in this humble condition, divested of 
the glories of his original spirit nature,— humbled to 
human conditions— it was not that he had died to his 
previous spiritual condition, for, although he came to 
die, he had not yet died. It was the man Christ Jesus 
who gave himself our ransom in death, and not the 
spirit being who previously became the man: the humbling 
from spirit conditions to human conditions, laying 
aside of the glory which he had with the Father before 
the world was, and becoming poor for our sakes, 
was only incidental to his great sacrifice begun at Jordan 
and finished at Calvary. But the man Christ Jesus 
was the same one who previously had been rich in 
spiritual nature and glory, and who could and did say, 
"Before Abraham was, I am"— thus particularly emphasizing 
the fact that he had not ceased to exist at 
any time in the transfer of his being from the higher 
to the lower condition. 



Had our Lord been born as the son of Joseph, or 
received his life from any other human source, he would 
have been a partaker of the sentence upon our race, 
and of the weaknesses of the fallen flesh, and of the 
slavery to sin through that weakness. And the Scriptures 
are very careful to point out to us that his life 
did not come through such a channel and that it had 
none of this imperfection, declaring that "in him was 
no sin." He was holy, harmless, separate from sinners; 
although partaker of human nature, he was not 
a partaker of a fallen human nature, but of its perfection. 
If it is inquired whether he did not receive contamination, 
sinful nature, etc., through his mother, 
we reply, No; and we are ready to support the testimony 
of the Word of God by showing its reasonableness 
upon philosophical principles. But for this phase 
of the subject we must refer our readers to 
an article under the caption, "The Undefiled One," 
in our issue of July '90. 

He who came to be our Ransomer, our Purchaser, 
to pay for us the debt on account of which we were all 
made slaves to sin and death, was in fullest sympathy 
with the divine purpose, and made haste so that at the 
very earliest moment possible he began the work which 
the Father had given him to do. Since Adam at the 
time of his transgression was a perfect man, and since 
under the law manhood was reckoned as beginning at 
the thirtieth year, therefore, it was needful that our 
Lord should delay the work of sacrifice on our behalf 
until he had become, in the full legal sense, the man 
Jesus; then he began the work by consecrating himself 
even unto death, baptism in water being the symbol 
of this; and during the three and a half years which 
followed he was but carrying out that covenant of 

R2098 : page 34 

death, dying daily; and at the close of three and a half 
years he could say upon the cross, "It is finished." 
What was finished? the release of the slaves of 
Sin? No; the slaves of Sin for whose redemption he 
gave his life were still in bondage, their slavery was 
not finished. What was finished? The sacrifice was 
finished, nothing more; it was not yet even accepted. 
The presentation of that sacrifice on our behalf and its 
acceptance by the Father did not take place until nearly 
fifty days after he who redeemed us had been 
raised from the dead by the Father's power, thus giving 
assurance to all that his work was well and satisfactorily 
done, and that it would be accepted in due 
time. And he ascended up on high, and, as the High 
Priest, appeared before the Father and applied his merit 
on our behalf as believers. The sacrifice offered, the 
price paid, is sufficient; it covers every member of the 
human family. For, since all men came under the 
slavery of Sin and under the sentence to death through 



the transgression of Adam, now that the corresponding 
price has been paid for Adam, it implies full satisfaction 
for all the posterity of Adam, the sharers of his sentence. 
The race had been bought; and, more than this, 
the world had been bought, including the earth itself, 
because the earth was given to man as his inheritance, 
and when he himself became a slave, all of his possessions 
passed with him into the slavery of Sin, and so 
the curse has rested upon the world. And now that 
Adam and his race have been bought, how could it 
mean less than the redemption also of the earth from 
the dominion of the curse? 

But we see not yet the earth's release from the 
curse, we see not yet mankind delivered from the slavery 
to Sin, we see that still the race is going down daily 
into death; "Dying thou shalt die" is still written 
against the race of Adam. Why is this so? The Scriptures, 
and the Scriptures only, answer this question. 
They declare that God is at present selecting the "royal 
priesthood" and "joint-heirs with Christ," who shall 
by and by share with him in the Kingdom which shall 
break off the shackles of sin and open the prison doors 
of death and set free all the captives who long for freedom 
upon the divine conditions. This, we remember, 
was our Lord's declaration on this subject: He declared 
at his first advent that the ultimate result of his work 
would be "to proclaim liberty to the captives and the 
opening of the prison to them that are bound. (Isa. 61:1; 
Luke 4: 18.) As we gladly accept the divine 
arrangement and realize it to be best, so we must also 
accept the divine times and seasons, and realize that 
they are wisely ordained; and indeed all whose eyes 
are anointed with present truth may already see much 
of this wisdom. 

While all mankind, therefore, have been bought, 
so far as our Lord Jesus' sacrifice is concerned, it being 
once for all, nevertheless, the only ones who are yet 
received of the Lord, who are yet brought into relationship 
to him through Christ, are those who recognize 
his sacrifice, and who, whether they understand the 
subject philosophically or not, believe what the Scriptures 
so distinctly declare, that we were bought with a 
price— the precious blood of Christ. It is this class 
that the apostle addresses; these who realize that they 
were slaves of Sin, and who now realize that they have 
been bought with the precious blood of Christ, and who 
having accepted of him and his power to save, are no 
longer yielding themselves as instruments of unrighteousness 
unto sin, but are seeking to yield themselves 
as servants of righteousness unto God. It would be 
useless for the Apostle to address any others than these 
in this manner, but pertinent and forceful is his argument 
to those who realize the true situation, and who 
are clinging to Christ as their Redeemer who shall ultimately 
be their Deliverer. To these he says,— "Ye 
are not your own." Your time, your talent, your influence, 



your money, all that you consider precious or 

in any degree valuable, all properly belongs to God. 

It was not only his by right, in that it originally was 

his creation, because all that we have that is valuable 

in any sense of the word, has come from the heavenly 

Father; but now it is his in a second sense, in the sense 

that he has redeemed or bought it back from the destruction 

to which by sin our first parent delivered it. 

The apostle uses this argument as though it should 
be a conclusive one with all who are right-minded; and so 
we believe it is. And those who are rightly exercised 
by this knowledge of divine grace in Christ not only 
accept the forgiveness of sins with thankfulness and 
joy, and with meekness and humility acknowledge 
that they were slaves of Sin and that they were redeemed 
therefrom, but they also gladly acknowledge the new 
Ruler, the Purchaser, and that to him they owe all 
they have and all they ever hope to be. 

R2099 : page 34 

Personal responsibility to the Redeemer who purchased, 
and to the heavenly Father who provided the 
gracious arrangement, lies at the foundation of all true 
consecration to God in Christ. As soon as the believing, 
grateful, justified one hears of the blessing that has 
come to him, he properly inquires,— Lord, what wilt 
thou have me to do? He finds that the new Master 
does not wish for any except voluntary servants, and 
that, having provided them release from the sentence 
of death, he nevertheless would permit them, if they 
chose, to go back and become again voluntarily the 
servants of Sin, and to receive the wages of sin, the 
Second death, as the reward for their voluntary submission 
again to that task-master. He learns that 
to be the servants of the new Master is a great privilege, 

R2099 : page 35 

a privilege that is enjoyed by all who have the 
proper spirit. Such hear the words of the Apostle, 
"I beseech you, brethren, by the mercies of God, that 
ye present your bodies a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable 
to God, and your reasonable service." They see 
the apostle's own example, how, laying aside not only 
the works of the flesh and the devil, but also laying 
aside earthly ambitions, aims, prospects and hopes, he 
gave himself, his time, talent, influence and all he had 
to the service of the new Master, the Redeemer, and 
thus to God. They read in his living epistle, in his 
trials and triumphs through faith in Christ, lessons 
which some of them at least heartily accept; and as a 
consequence there have been throughout this Gospel 
age some who have been glad to own themselves as the 
bond-servants (slaves) of the Lord Jesus Christ and of 
our God, whose representative Christ is. 



At the opening of the new year, what lesson could 
be more important to us than this one, that we are not 
our own, but belong to another; that we are not, therefore, 
to seek to please ourselves, but to please him, nor 
to seek to serve self but to serve him, nor to seek or 
obey self will, but on the contrary his will. This means 
holiness in the most absolute and comprehensive sense 
of the word (not only separation from sin to righteousness, 
but separation from self to the will of God in Christ). 



R2099 : page 35 

THE SALT OF THE EARTH AND THE LIGHT OF THE WORLD. 



"Ye are the salt of the earth. ..Ye are 
the light of the world. "--Matt. 5:13,14. 

SALT and light are two essentials to humanity, 

and in nature both are abundantly supplied. 

Salt enters largely into the composition of both 

animal and vegetable organisms, and its use as a 

condiment is much appreciated and to a greater or 

less extent required by both man and beast. At a 

very early stage of human progress salt became an important 

element of commerce, and it is believed that 

the very oldest trade routes were created for traffic in 

this needful and much valued commodity. Among inland 

peoples a salt spring was regarded as a special gift 

of the gods, and so a religious significance began by 

and by to attach to it; and it was, therefore, as a precious 

substance, mingled with their offerings to the 

gods. Homer voiced this sentiment, calling salt divine; 

and Plato referred to it as "a substance dear to the 

gods." 

In harmony with its uses and its general appreciation 
the term salt early came to have a generally recognized 
symbolic significance (which our Lord utilized 
and perpetuated) to teach important lessons, both under 
the old dispensation of the law and under the new dispensation 
of grace. As a savory article of diet, it 
symbolized hospitality; and as an antiseptic it signified 
durability, fidelity, purity. Hence the Bible expression 
"a covenant of salt" (Num. 18:19), as covenants 
were ordinarily made over a sacrificial meal in which 
salt was an important element.— "With all thine offerings 
thou shalt offer salt." (Lev. 2:13.) The preservative 
qualities of salt make it, when so used, a fitting 
symbol of an enduring compact. The purifying property 
of salt was referred to in its symbolic use by 
Elisha in his miracle of the healing of the waters. ~ 
2 Kings 2:20-22. 

The symbolism of salt, therefore, in the above 



words of our Lord, is clearly this,— that the influence 

of the true Christian upon the world is a healing, purifying 

influence, tending always to the preservation of 

that which is good from the adverse elements of putrefaction 

and decay. "Ye are the salt of the earth." 

How significant the comparison! 

These words also indicate a responsibility on the 
part of Christians toward the world in general. Though 
they are not of the world, even as Christ was not of 
the world (John 17:16), but separated from it, a peculiar 
people, chosen of God, they are not to forget 
that this very separation and exaltation to fellowship, 
communion and cooperation with God, is, not to cultivate 
in them a pride of aristocracy, but for the purpose 
of blessing the world; for God so loved the world 
that he gave his only begotten Son to redeem them 
(John 3:16), and Christ likewise so loved the world as 
freely to become the instrument of Jehovah for its 
salvation.-John 6:51; 10:18; Heb. 2:9; 
Rom. 5:18,19. 

We note further that these statements are in the 
present tense,— Ye are the salt and the light,— even 
now, before the time for the general blessing of all 
the families of the earth through the Church glorified. 
We call to mind also the exhortation of the Apostle 
Paul,— "Walk in wisdom toward them that are without, 
redeeming the time. Let your speech be always 
with grace seasoned with salt," the appetizing salt of 
purity, righteousness, truth.— Col. 4:5,6. 

The proper attitude of the Christian toward the 
world is thus shown to be, not that of a proud, stoical 
indifference, but that of a noble, generous, loving benevolence 
which, while it keeps entirely separate from 
its spirit, from its unholy aims, ambitions and doings, 
is ever ready to bless and, by precept and example, to 
point to the way of life and holiness. It is not that 
attitude which proudly says, "I am holier than thou," 

R2099 : page 36 

but which, on the contrary, says, "I am no better than 
thou, except for the influences of divine grace, which 
are free to all who will accept them. By grace, I am 
what I am; yet still my shortcomings necessitate the 
merit of my all-sufficient Advocate." It is not necessary 
that these sentiments should be expressed in words; 
for actions speak louder than words, and their testimony 
is much more potent. The testimony of a holy 
walk and conversation cannot fail to be to the glory of 
God, to the wisdom and excellence of righteousness, 
to the reproof of unrighteousness, and to the fact of a 
coming judgment in which righteousness shall surely 
triumph.-John 16:8; Acts 24:25. 

"Salt is good," said Jesus, referring to its symbolism 
of purity, righteousness, and to its cleansing, healing 
and preserving influence; "have salt [purity, righteousness] 



in yourselves." (Mark 9:50.) If we have 

not the salt in ourselves, how can we be the salt of the 

earth? If we are not truly and sincerely righteous, 

how can we exert upon others the cleansing, healing 

influence? Mere outward profession of righteousness 

will not avail as a substitute for the salt of actual and 

sincere holiness. Mere profession has no healing properties, 

and can never fulfil our obligations toward the 

world. Therefore, let us have the salt of actual holiness 

in ourselves; so shall we be known and read of 

men to the praise of God. 

Under this same speaking symbol our Lord also 
adds a word of warning, saying,— "If the salt have 
lost his savor, wherewith shall it be salted? It is thenceforth 
good for nothing, but to be cast out, and to be 
trodden under foot of men." So if the Christian who 
once had the salt of righteousness in himself should 
turn again like the sow that was washed to her wallowing 
in the mire; if he should wilfully and persistently 
fall away from his righteousness, he is "thenceforth 
good for nothing." (Heb. 6:4-8; 10:26-31,38,39.) 
How important then that we not only have salt in ourselves, 
but that we continue to retain its healthful 
properties! 

This same class Jesus also declared to be "the light 
of the world." Although they do not yet shine forth 
as the sun in the Kingdom of God for the enlightening 
of the whole world, they are nevertheless luminous 
even now, and their light may shine within a smaller 
radius for the blessing of all who will receive it. And 
the Lord's solicitude for the benighted world, as well 
as for his saints, is shown in his exhortation to the 
latter to let their light shine.— "Let your light so shine 
before men, that they may see your good works, and 
glorify your Father which is in heaven." He also 
counsels the setting of our light in a position where it 
may dispel as much as possible of the darkness of this 
world. We are therefore not to put it under a bushel, 
but on a candlestick. Zeal for the Lord needs no further 
exhortation to this duty and privilege; for, like 
him, all who have his spirit or disposition in the matter 
will find in this duty and privilege their meat and 
drink. It will be their joy to let the light that has illuminated 
their darkness— the light of God's truth and 
of his holy spirit— shine out through them upon the 
darkness of others. 

Thus, through the salt and the light of God's people, 
a measure of blessing comes to the world, even before 
its day of blessing. And at this end of the age we 
may with some degree of definiteness sum up their effects. 
A little observation shows that all the blessings 
of temporal prosperity included under the term "civilization" 
are due to the influences, direct and indirect, 
of those comparatively few people who, during this 

R2100 : page 36 



Gospel age, have been the salt of the earth and the 
light of the world. Civilization is simply the indirect 
result of the measures of salt and light that have been 
in the world up to this present time. The faithful 
people of God have held up the light of divine truth as 
prominently as they could; and from it they have reasoned 
of righteousness and of a coming judgment; 
they have endeavored to salt the minds of men with 
as much as possible of the knowledge of the principles 
of righteousness exemplified in their own characters, 
and have urged their adoption; and to the extent to 
which these have operated the world has been 
profited. 

The Lord, who foresaw the end from the beginning, 
knew that, with all their salt and all their light, 
his people would not be able to accomplish for the 
world in general more than this, until the appointed 
time for their exaltation with himself to power and 
great glory. But even this work of civilization is of 
great value as preparatory to the greater future work 
of restitution, and also in facilitating the special work 
of this Gospel age, of taking out a people prepared for 
the Lord, to be kings and priests unto God and joint-heirs 
with Jesus Christ. 

Then, beloved heirs of the promises of God, to 
whom it is the Father's good pleasure to give the Kingdom, 
"have salt in yourselves," and forget not that, 
being thus salted, ye are the salt of the earth, so that 
your very presence is a rebuke to iniquity, and its continuance 
a living testimony to the beauty of holiness 
and the power of divine grace. Let us endeavor also 
so to focus the light of divine truth and its holy spirit 
that from the glowing focus of a chastened and purified 
character the light may radiate again to the blessing 
of all who will heed it, to the warning of all who 
will not, and to the praise of the great center and source 
of all light— God himself. 

MRS. M. F. RUSSELL. 



R2101 : page 37 

"THE SPADE AND THE BIBLE." 



"IT has been tacitly assumed by the critical school 
that the art of writing was practically unknown 
in Palestine before the age of David. Therefore little 
historical credence can be placed in the early records 
of the Hebrew people. The events not being recorded 
at the time of their occurrence, the Bible history of 
them became traditional and mythical before they were 
finally written. 



"Even Renan allies himself to this theory in his 
'History of Israel.' He distinctly says that writing 
was unknown in the day of Abraham, and Isaac, and 
Jacob, and laughs at the mistakes of Moses. 

"In 1888, some Fellahin in upper Egypt, while 
digging for nitrous soil to enrich their gardens, accidentally 
dug in upon certain clay tablets. It was a discovery, 
and the scholars were soon on the trail. Several 
hundred tablets were found. Prof. Sayce, of Oxford, 
has been at work deciphering these tablets found at 
Tel El Amar-na, and what do they turn out to be, now 
that they are deciphered? They turn out to be documents 
older than the Exodus, and copies of letters between 
Egypt and the nations of the East. Among 
these are communications from Palestine. From these 
tablets Prof. Sayce tells us that he learns that knowledge 
was far advanced in that early period, and that 
philosophy and science were common. That ancient 
period had advanced schools of learning, and many 
cities had as a possession large public libraries. For 
example, the old name of Hebron, a town of Judah, 
was Kirjath-Sepher; this was the name of the town before 
the Hebrews took it. That name literally means 
Book-Town, and it was called Book-Town because it 
was the seat of a public library. That was away back, 
centuries before the organization of the kingdom of 
Israel. 

"But this is not all. What is more remarkable 
is this: The site of the city Ur of the Chaldees, the 
native place of Abraham, has been unearthed, and even 
there a library has been discovered showing that Abraham's 
people were a literary people. There are to-day 
in the British Museum some of the sacred songs which 
they sung in that far-off age, and also a carved signet 
which they used for the stamping of deeds and contracts. 
This marvelously confirms the story in the Book 
of Genesis and testifies to the correctness of Moses who 
tells us that Abraham bought the cave of Machpelah 
from the children of Heth in a business way. 

"You see the point of all this. It is this: The 
credibility of Scripture has been assailed, since the beginning 
of the present century, on the ground that the 
narratives contained in it are not contemporaneous with 
the events they profess to record, because they represent 
an incredible amount of civilization as existing in 
the ancient Eastern world, and because they are inconsistent 
with the accounts of classical writers, and because 
writing was little known or practiced at so early 
a date. Discoveries show that there is absolutely no 
ground for such adverse reasoning, and that its premise 
is wholly false. There was a high civilization back 
there; the art of writing was well known, and the state 
of things was precisely what the Bible represents and 
requires. The spade has actually uncovered the old 
civilization, and we see it. Its products are before our 
eyes, and seeing is believing. 



"Sargon's name occurs but once in the Old Testament. 
(Isa. 20:1.) As no trace of Sargon could be 
found in classical writers, he was objected to as fictitious. 
The finger of the skeptic pointed to the name 
'Sargon' in ridicule, and the Bible was charged with 
putting off fiction as history. How strange! The quaint 
old tablets of Nineveh have been exhumed, and with 
them the history of Sargon. It is found that so far 
from being a fiction he was one of the greatest monarchs 
that ever ruled in Assyria, and that his reign 
lasted seventeen years. The very event recorded by 
the prophet Isaiah, in connection with which his name 
is mentioned, is recorded in Sargon's annals, and unexpected 
light is thrown upon the Scripture. 

"In the Bible there are several allusions to a people 
called the Hittites. Objectors to the historical 
truth of the narratives of the Old Testament, like Professor 
F. Newman, declared that these allusions destroyed 
the credibility of the Bible. There was no reference 
to this people anywhere in classical writers. The 
Bible stood alone in affirming that they once existed. 
It had no witnesses to confirm or corroborate its statements. 
Thus it was until a few years ago. But now 
Hittites' monuments, disinterred, are in all the leading 
museums of the world. This lost kingdom has been 
reclaimed. Its very wealth has been dug up, and it is 
found that it existed before the days of Abraham and 
long after his days, and was equal in greatness and 
civilization and in military progress to Assyria and 
Egypt. Whole volumes full of real thrill have been 
written during the past ten years, upon this wonderful 
find of the Hittites. 

"Take one other case. In 2 Chron. 33:11, it is 
said that when Esarhaddon, King of Assyria, took 
Manasseh captive, he carried him to Babylon. For a 
long time the objectors to the Bible pointed their fingers 
at this record and said, here is one of the mistakes 
of the Bible. 'It could not be, for Nineveh was the 
capital of Assyria, and not Babylon.' In his excavations 
of Nineveh, George Smith unearthed a whole library, 
in the palace of King Assur-banapal. It is called 
the stone library, for its books were clay tablets baked 
into stone. On these clay tablets he found written the 
very story of the Chronicles, and written there as it is 
written in the Bible. And more than that he found it 
explained how it came that Esarhaddon carried Manasseh 
to Babylon and not to Nineveh. To keep down 
discontent in Babylon, which was a province of Nineveh, 
the king built a palace there and made it his second 
capital, and carried prisoners of war to it and thus 
honored it. 

"Even in the nineteenth century God keeps on 
confirming his own Book by unexpected surprises. And 
what is noticeable is this: These surprises come as needed 
rebuttals of specific objections against the Bible. 
Now remember this, that every wonderful answer to 



the scoff and objection of the skeptic which exploration 
gives us is not only a foe of skepticism, it is at the 

R2101 : page 38 

same time a friend of faith. A solid and irresistible 
answer to an objection against the Bible is a solid and 
powerful argument in support of the Bible. 

"As we behold the nineteen centuries after Christ 
confronted, by means of the pick and spade of the explorer, 
with the nineteen centuries before Christ, and 
learn for the first time how to answer objections, which 
for ages seemed to be unanswerable, and to explain 
difficulties which until now seemed too inexplicable, 
may we not learn a lesson of faith and of patience? 
Learn patience, and wait for God's own time as to the 
removal of difficulties that are still unsolved. Learn 
faith, and sit down as calmly in the presence of acknowledged 
objections as you do in the presence of objections 
which have been reconciled and which you now 
call harmonious facts. By means of the story of the 
past learn to trust the Bible for the future. 
—Dr. David Gregg." 



R2100 : page 38 

QUESTIONS OF GENERAL INTEREST. 



CONCERNING THE EPISTLE OF JAMES. 



Question. I notice in the columns of the WATCH 
TOWER frequent reference to the Epistle of James, applying 
its statements to Christian believers, the same 
as the other New Testament writings. In the October 
'96 issue you called attention to the remarkable fulfilment 
before our eyes of a prophecy by James (5:1-8); and 
his exhortation, "Be patient, brethren," you applied 
to Christian believers. Also frequently you have quoted 
James 1:18, applying it to Christians. In the TOWER 
discussing Faith and Prayer Cures, etc., you cited James 5:14-16, 
claiming that it referred to Christians seriously 
sick as a chastisement for sins of omission or commission, 
and that the prayer should be for the forgiveness 
of confessed sins and the restoration of the transgressor 
to divine favor, as in verse 16;— and that the word "if" 
of verse 15 would be better translated though, etc. And 
finally, in the January 1 issue (page 7), discussing the 
true Israel, you apply James 1:1, as meaning the true 
Jews residing in various parts of the civilized world, to 
whom the gospel was preached "first" (Acts 3:26) and 



who believed— many of them at and shortly after 
Pentecost. 

Now my question is, How can we harmonize these 
teachings with an article which appeared in the WATCH 
TOWER, representing the Epistle of James as addressed 
not to Christians but to Jews? 

Answer. You are correct in supposing that the 
two positions are antagonistic and not harmonizable. 
The article to which you refer last, as being in conflict 
with our general presentations, was not an editorial 
article. Nevertheless, the Editor does not claim that 
his negligence in the matter is a sufficient excuse. It 
is a part of his duty to be critical, and to exclude whatever 
his judgment does not approve; and he now 
promises that by the Lord's grace he will hereafter be 
still more careful of his stewardship,— to the end that 
ZION'S WATCH TOWER may ever speak as an oracle 
of God. 

Now that this matter is corrected a weight is lifted 
from our conscience. Had the article in question been 
an editorial we would have corrected it long ago. 

WAS MOTHER EVE RANSOMED? 



Question. If it be true, as you seem to prove that 
the Scriptures teach, that the man Christ Jesus gave 
himself as the ransom or corresponding price for Adam, 
and an ungenerated race in his loins for the ungenerated 
race of Adam in his loins at the time of his disobedience 
and which since born has shared, naturally, 
every feature of his sentence,— how would it be with 
Mother Eve? She was not in Adam at the time of 
transgression, but was a separate individual accountable 
for her own deeds and the first to participate in 
the sin of disobedience and hence a sharer before Adam 
in the sentence of death. How was her ransom paid? 
Or was it ever paid, and will she ever be released from 
the sentence? 

Answer. Originally Eve was a part of Adam's 
body; and after she was separated from him physically 
she was not separated from him actually; but, as he expressed 
it, she was still bone of his bone and flesh of 
his flesh;— they were not twain but one flesh. Adam 
was not given to Eve to be her help-mate, but she was 
given to him to be a help meet (suitable) for him. Not 
that this signified a right on Adam's part to treat Eve 
as a slave, or to be cruel, or abusive, or even unkind to 
her, as some of the fallen race today seem to suppose. 
Quite the contrary, Adam was a true man and loved, 
planned for and cared for Eve "as his own body." In 
the divine division care had been taken to adapt each 
to the other's necessities. Adam, the stronger physically 
and mentally, enjoyed having just such a helper 
as needed his care and love. Eve, as the "weaker 



vessel," possessed delicacy of mind and manner as well 
as of physique which drew toward her the tenderest 
and noblest sentiments of her royal husband, whose 
pleasure it was to grant her a share in all the blessings 
and honors of his realm, as a queen. 

But they were not twain, but one; and of that one 
Adam was the head. In dealing with them God did 
not recognize them separately but as one. Adam represented 
not only his own individual person but also 
his wife's person; for she was "his own body," "bone of 
my bone and flesh of my flesh;"— she was part of himself. 

R2100 : page 39 

Hence it is written, "All in Adam die:" Eve's 
identity was so linked with Adam's that, even if she 
had not sinned in partaking of the forbidden fruit, she 
would as part of him, as his partner, have shared his 
penalty— death. And, similarly, although Eve was 
"first in the transgression," her act did not imperil the 
race; because the race was not in her, but in Adam. 
(1 Cor. 15:22.) It was "By one man's disobedience" 
that "sin entered into the world and death 
by [as the result of] sin."— Rom. 5:12-19. 

Moreover, it is evident that, the accountability being 
in Adam as the head of the family, Eve's deception 
and transgression need not necessarily have brought 
death even upon herself: she probably would have been 
disciplined, however. The principle of this judgment 
is shown by the Lord under the Law Covenant, which, 
formulated by the same Creator, upheld the same arrangement 
and recognized the husband and father as 
in every way the head and representative of the family. 
For instance, if any man vowed a vow to the Lord he 
could not escape it; but if a wife or a daughter vowed a 
vow unto the Lord it was void except as ratified by the husband 
or father. (Num. 30:2,5,8,13,16.) In other words, 
God has not only established the family relationship by 
the laws of nature in adapting the man to be the head 
of the family and the woman to be his helper, but he 
clearly expressed this in the Law given to Israel which 
is "honorable," "just" and "good."— Rom. 7:12. 

Looking along these strongly marked lines of divine 
providence we can see clearly that Eve had recognition 
of the Lord only as a part of Adam: hence we 
can see that this not only involved her in his transgression 
and its penalty, death, but also that the redemption 
of Adam implied also the redemption of Eve 
as a part of Adam, "his body." This close relationship 
between the husband and wife in the divine order 
is clearly stated by the Apostle Paul.— Eph. 5:22-33. 



Now many marriages are not after the divine pattern. 
The fall of the race, mentally, morally and physically, 



has affected its various members, some more 

and some less. All men and all women have lost more 

or less of the noble character possessed by the first perfectly 

adapted pair. It is not surprising, therefore, 

that there are now many mis-fit unions and consequent 

unhappiness; especially when the divine order of adaptability 

is not recognized. Following the divine model 

a man should avoid marrying a woman who is his superior 

as much as one who is his inferior: because in 

the inferior he could not have real fellowship, she being 

unequal as a mate in life; while with the superior 

there would be a continual conflict because of his incapacity 

to fill properly the office of husband or head to 

a superior. Likewise a woman should guard specially 

against marrying a man her inferior, whom she could 

not look up to as a fit husband and head of the family 

according to the divine command, "Wives submit yourselves 

unto your own husbands, as unto the Lord. For 

the husband is the head of the wife, even as Christ is 

the head of the Church: and he is the savior of the 

body."-Eph. 5:22,23. 

R2101 : page 39 

As man has sunken into barbarism, woman sank 
with him; as man has risen in civilization, woman has 
risen with him; so also have man's subjects, the lower 
animals, and the vegetable kingdom, been cursed or 
blessed by his degradation or elevation. It is the operation 
of the divine law. The schools and seminaries for 
girls are the provisions of the men as truly as are the 
schools for boys. The gradual changing of the laws, 
adapting them to the advancing civilization, takes cognizance 
of woman's rising conditions as well as of man's, 
yet these laws are framed by men. 

Human laws, based upon divine laws, take cognizance 
of the husband and father as the representative 
not only of his wife, who is a part of himself, but also 
of his minor children, in matters of general welfare, 
just as it was with Israel, and just as it was before sin 
entered Eden. The endeavor in modern times to destroy 
the unity of the family and to make husband and 
wife twain instead of one is in harmony with other delusions 
after which mankind are clutching in the hope 
of thereby remedying present evils. The mothers who 
have no influence upon their husbands and sons, and 
the sisters who have no influence upon their brothers 
and fathers, thereby prove themselves unworthy of a 
franchise. Those who have such an influence have no 
need of a franchise, are better in harmony with the 
Lord's order, and generally realize it. 



R2101 : page 39 



LYING TO THE HOLY SPIRIT. 

--FEB. 7.-ACTS 4:32-5:11.- 

"Man looketh on the outward appearance, but 
the Lord looketh on the heart."— 1 Sam. 16:7. 

THE number of believers in Jerusalem was now 

considerable. Their new faith broke down the 

walls of prejudice and tended to bring rich and poor to 

the plane of common brotherhood in Christ. This is 

always the tendency with those who receive the gospel 

of the Lord Jesus into good and honest hearts: they are 

"pitiful," "kind one to another" and "love as brethren." 

Experience teaches us, however, that so long 

as there are hypocrites, who follow merely for the 

loaves and fishes, and so long as we are without the inspired 

R2101 : page 40 

apostles, possessed of superhuman wisdom in 
discerning spirits and rebuking them, and so long as 

R2102:page40 

even the true-hearted have such various developments 
of character and judgment, it is unreasonable to expect 
that believers could dwell together harmoniously 
and to mutual benefit. The incapable ones always feel 
themselves the most capable, and are the least willing 
to be guided by the judgment of others. The most 
capable are the most humble, the least disposed to grasp 
authority and to "exercise Lordship" such as would 
be necessary for the proper control of the incompetent. 
Hence, Christian people of experience and judgment 
have reached the conclusion that general communism 
of goods such as was practiced for a time in the early 
Church as narrated in this lesson could not be profitably 
practiced by Christian people in any age or country, 
for the same reasons that it was unsuccessful in 
the early Church. When that which is perfect shall 
have come, it will be possible for those possessed not 
only of perfect hearts (wills) but also possessed of perfect 
brains and bodies, to use communistic principles 
properly and to their general advantage. But all people 
of judgment and experience know that this time 
has not yet come. The failure of this early Church 
community and the failure of scores of communities 
since then is ample proof of this.* 

(33) Evidently the chief subject of discourse with 
the apostles was the resurrection of our Lord Jesus 
from the dead and the proof which this afforded of several 
things: (1) That he was approved of God, that 
he was what he claimed to be, the Messiah, and not an 
impostor; (2) that his death was the great sin-offering, 
the ransom price for the whole world; (3) that in 



his name was forgiveness of sins and all power for reconciliation 

with the Father; (4) that a New Dispensation 

of grace, mercy, forgiveness of sins had displaced 

the Law Dispensation of Justice, and that, now, not only 

could there be acceptance with God through Christ, 

but a high calling to jointheirship with the Messiah in 

his Kingdom soon to be established, in which all the 

families of the earth shall be blessed. The apostles 

hung the entire weight of their testimony upon this 

one matter— the resurrection of our Lord. And the 

Apostle Paul's preaching, later, is no less emphatic 

upon this than the Apostle Peter's at the time of this 

lesson, for he declares,— If Christ be not risen your 

faith is vain, our preaching is vain, ye are yet in your 

sins, and we (apostles) are false witnesses, because we 

have testified that God raised up Christ from the dead, 

whom he raised not up, if so be that the resurrection 

of the dead is an impossibility.— 1 Cor. 15:15-18. 

(34) The true spirit of Christ is indicated by the 
fact that the needy were not suffered to lack while the 
others had plenty. The Apostle James calls attention 
to this matter, saying, He who seeth his brother have 
need and shutteth up his bowels of compassion against 
him, how dwelleth the love of God in him? And again, 
we are told by the divine Word, that it is not sufficient 
that we should express sympathy and good wishes, 
saying, Depart and be fed and clothed, but give not 
those things which are necessary to these ends. Undoubtedly, 
it is the design of the divine plan that the 
inequalities of the present time— poverty in the midst 
of wealth— shall be to some extent an opportunity to 
those who have this world's goods, and a test to them 
of their faithfulness as stewards. And the Scriptures 
pertinently inquire, If ye love not your brother whom 
ye have seen, how can ye love God whom ye have not 
seen? Hence, the Lord's work and the Lord's poor 
are permitted by him to be in need sometimes, in order 
to furnish opportunities to test those who have means 
entrusted to them. He who is unfaithful as a steward 
of earthly wealth need scarcely expect to be entrusted 
with spiritual riches. 

It appears from the account that the apostles did 
not institute the community of goods in the early 
Church, rather it was the spontaneous sentiment of the 
believers; and the apostles under the divine guidance 
did not hinder it, evidently to the intent that an object 
lesson might be furnished and the importance of consecration 
illustrated in the story of Ananias and Sapphira. 
The writer first mentioned instances of those who honestly 
consecrated all of their property to the general 
good. Notable amongst these was Barnabas who afterwards 
was the associate of the Apostle Paul in doing a 
great work. The principal figures in the lesson, however, 
are Ananias and Sapphira. None had been commanded 
of the Lord to give all their property to the 
general treasury; nor had there been any request to do 



so, although it is only a reasonable service for all who 

realize that they were "bought with a price." But 

God wants only a free-will consecration. Ananias and 

his wife saw others do this and were probably anxious 

for the honor and praise bestowed upon such liberal 

givers, and concluded that they would make a reputation 

for themselves among the believers; and at the 

same time hold back a sufficiency for future requirements. 

There was nothing necessarily wrong in such 

a provision, reserving for their own personal use a portion 

of the proceeds of the sale of their property. The 

wrong came in the attempted deception of the Church, 

in the attempt to have the apostles and the fellow-believers 

think that they were exercising all the faith and 

practicing all the self-denial, which some others had 

practiced. The Apostle Peter indicates that this was 

not merely lying to the Church and attempting to deceive 



*See article, "They Had All Things in Common," in our issue 
of Sept. 1, '95. 

R2102:page41 

the Church, but more, it was an attempted deception 
of the Holy Spirit. 

The penalty was death to both the participants, 
for husband and wife alike united in deception. The 
Lord would evidently thus teach the Church, (1) that 
while men might be deceived, it was impossible to deceive 
God; and (2) that such a fraud is a very heinous 
sin in God's sight. 

The question naturally arises, Was this death of 
Ananias and Sapphira merely a prompt infliction of the 
Adamic death, under whose sentence they already were? 
Or, was it the infliction of the Second Death, and does 
it teach us that the attempted deception of the Holy 
Spirit is punishable by the Second Death; and that 
there is no hope in any sense of the word for Ananias 
and Sapphira. No one, we believe, can satisfactorily 
answer this question, because the facts relating to the 
matter are too indefinite. For instance, we do not 
know whether they had "passed from death unto life" 
(reckonedly from the Adamic death to life in Christ). 
We do not know that they had more information on 
this subject than some who followed the Lord and to 
whom he said, "Ye follow me, because of the loaves 
and the fishes." Ananias and Sapphira may never 
have been true converts at heart, but merely, yet in 
their sins, have been struck with the possibilities of the 
growing community, and acquainted with some in it; 
they perhaps thought it a good opportunity to fix themselves 
for future days, and in order to have a standing 
and place in the community were willing to give part 
of the proceeds of their property. If this was their 



state of heart, if they had never really received the 
grace of God, then we believe that their death was 
merely a sooner accomplishment of the general sentence 
of the Adamic death and not Second death; and 
we should expect that the due time will come in the 
Millennial Kingdom, when the blinded eyes of their 
understanding would be opened, and they should see 
matters in a full, clear and proper light with the opportunity 
of either accepting or rejecting God's provision. 
But if they had come to a clear knowledge of the truth, 
had tasted of the heavenly gift and had been made partakers 
of the holy spirit, and then sinned willfully in 
this matter, we should understand that their death was 
the Second death, the penalty for their own willful 
transgression. The particulars are not stated, nor was 
it necessary to the narrative. The lesson to the early 
Church and the lesson to us is the same in either case; 
namely, that it is impossible to deceive God who discerns 
the thoughts and intents of the heart. 

This entire lesson brings forcibly to our thought 
the fact that every "new creature in Christ" has consecrated 
something to the Lord. Our offering should 
be not merely a portion of our substance, but all of it, 
including ourselves— time, influence, possessions— and 
these we may lay not at the apostles' feet, but at the 
feet of our Lord, in consecration. We cannot refrain 
from the thought— How many who have consecrated 
their all to the Lord are attempting not only to deceive 
the Lord, but to deceive also themselves, and to give a 
portion only of that which they have consecrated? 

This is the great point of this lesson to all who are 
of this consecrated class; and the Apostle Peter's words 
to Ananias should be carefully weighed and applied by 
each one who has professed full consecration to the 
Lord— "While it [thy possessions] remained was it not 
thine own? and after it was sold, was it not in thine own 
power?" We may apply this to ourselves, and say, 
The Lord did not compel my consecration; it was a 
voluntary thing, even though admitted to be a reasonable 
service; and as we have hitherto seen in the Lord's 
estimation, it is a very serious matter to make vows 
and afterward to re-consider, or attempt to take back, 
that which we have consecrated to him. 

No wonder great fear came upon all the Church— 
the feeling of responsibility; a feeling that in contracting 
with the Lord they were engaged in serious business. 
And so the Apostle says to the consecrated, 
"Let us fear, lest a promise having been left us, any of 
you should seem to come short of it." 



R2103 : page 41 

"OBEY GOD RATHER THAN MEN." 



--FEB. 14. -ACTS 5:17-32.- 

THE phenomenal success of the gospel under the 
apostles' preaching, in the power of the holy 
spirit, soon awakened bitter opposition on the part of 
the rulers of the Jews. In a previous lesson we saw 
that they did not hesitate to put the apostles in prison; 
and how they sought to convict them of crime for healing 
the lame man, in the name of Jesus. Their opposition, 
instead of dying out, increased as they perceived 
the wonderful strides of progress made by the new 
doctrine. They felt compelled to make another attempt 
to head off what they considered the heresy of 
the Nazarene. 

(17,18) The two principal sects amongst the Jews 
at this time were the Pharisees and Sadducees. The 
Pharisees made loud professions of "holiness," and did 
much in the way of outward display, which our Lord, 
who could read the heart, declared was hypocrisy; 
while the Sadducees, better educated as a class and less 
orthodox, were more after the sort called "higher 
critics" to-day; or even beyond them, they might be 
termed to some extent agnostic,— their faith considerably 
resembling that of the "Reformed Jews" of to-day. 
They believed something of the divine promises, 
but expected them to be fulfilled in a partial manner 

R2103 : page 42 

and in a natural way. They evidently did not expect 
a supernatural Messiah. They did not believe in the 
resurrection of the dead. They denied that there are 
angels or any spirit beings not visible to flesh and blood. 
The chief priest at this time, we are told by the lesson, 
belonged to this party. He and his sect were filled 
with indignation against the new doctrine, for in every 
sense of the word it specially opposed their teaching- 
much more so than it opposed Phariseeism. 

The expression, "the high priest rose up," does 
not signify that he had been sitting or lying down and 
merely stood upon his feet, but might more properly 
be translated "the high priest was aroused." He and 
his party, the Sadducees, had hitherto been content to 
very generally disdain the masses and their views, and 
to pay little attention to them as inferior in wisdom and 
judgment on such questions. But now seeing the interest 
being taken by the public in the apostles' preaching, 
which declared not only the resurrection of our 
Lord, but that through the merit of his sacrifice a resurrection 
to a future life would be provided for all, 
they were thoroughly "aroused." In the teachings of 
the apostles they were meeting with a logic which they 
had never encountered in arguing with the Pharisees. 
Accordingly they again sent and laid violent hands 
upon the apostles and put them into prison. 

(19-23) In harmony with the other miraculous 



interventions of Providence at that time, for the establishment 

of the Church, the Lord wrought a miracle 

for their deliverance from prison; but instead of telling 

them to flee for their lives, he instructed them to go 

immediately again into the temple and preach as before; 

and this they did, going early in the morning. 

Great was the surprise of the General Synod or Great 

Council of the Jews, which had been convened for the 

purpose of condemning the apostles, when they learned 

that the prisoners were not in prison, but preaching as 

before in the temple. 

(24-26) The officials were in consternation. It 
was bad enough to have men teach the gospel with 
such power and demonstration as they could not gainsay 
or resist, but to find that these men even when shut 
up in prison got out again by miraculous power, was 
enough to startle them, enough to make them consider 
afresh whether or not they might not be fighting against 
God. But they were self-willed men, not in a condition 
of heart to be influenced by anything, ordinary or 
extraordinary, which still left them their place and 
power. They would continue their investigation and 
endeavor to stop the preaching of the gospel, consequently 
the apostles were arrested again; but this time 
with great moderation, for fear of the people. The 
rulers were beginning to feel that an impression was 
being made upon the people and that in proportion as 
the new doctrine progressed they as teachers and rulers 
fell into disrepute. Indeed, so clearly did the apostles 
state the matter that those who believed their teachings 
could not well regard their spiritual rulers in any 
other light than that of murderers— murderers of the 
Messiah, the "Prince of life." 

(27,28) The language of the Council to the apostles 
when they were arraigned indicates that they realized 
the situation when they said, you evidently "intend 
to bring this man's blood upon us,"— to make the 
people think that we are responsible for his death. 

(29-32) The answer of the apostles shows that 
they were courageous men. They did not deny their 
preaching, nor its logical inference as understood by 
the rulers, for it was so. They merely said: "We 
ought to obey God rather than men." God sent us to 
preach the gospel, to tell the truth about this matter, 
and we have merely followed divine instructions. How 
beautiful, how reasonable, how consistent! There was 
no braggadocia in the apostles' language. They did 
not say, You brought us more carefully to-day than 
yesterday; you are getting a little afraid of the people; 
you have found that you cannot keep us in prison, for 
our Lord will deliver us; you are perhaps getting a 
little in awe of us by this time. They did not say, We 
will denounce you still more before the people and raise 
an insurrection and overthrow your power as sacerdotal 
rulers. Nothing of this kind; merely the unassuming 
statement, We have merely obeyed God in what we did. 



Then follows another discourse similar to the one 
given the previous Council, explaining about Jesus, his 
resurrection and exaltation to divine place and power, 
and to be the Savior and pardon the sins of Israel. 
They wound up their testimony by citing them the 
holy spirit which operated through them as corroborating 
their witness respecting our Lord, his character, 
his resurrection, his present glory, and his power to 
save unto the uttermost all that come to the Father 
through him. 

There is a valuable lesson here for all servants of 
God to-day. We too have a commission from the Lord 
to preach the gospel, and if we would be approved and 
hear his "Well done, good, faithful servant," we must 
obey God rather than men. Should faithfulness to God 
bring us into conflict with the religious great ones, we 
are to be bold for the truth, but moderate and humble 
in manner and language. Children of God are never 
anarchists lawless; and their opposition to human 
arrangements must only be because moved thereto by 
higher, divine laws and arrangements. 



R2103 : page 42 

LETTERS FROM DISTANT COLABORERS. 



Russia. 

MY DEAR AND BELOVED BROTHER RUSSELL:-At 
the close of the year I cannot help thanking you for the 
spiritual pleasure you are rendering me by your esteemed 
journal, ZION'S WATCH TOWER, which I receive 
regularly. It is to me like the merchant's ship 
—bringing spiritual food from afar. My constant prayer 
for you is that Jehovah our God may preserve you and 
Sister Russell for a long time that you may be able to 
continue the King's work to convince many souls of the 
true, blessed hope the whole world may have in the 
appearance of "this same" Jesus Christ. We are all 
well. With Christian love and best wishes to yourself 
and Sister Russell for a happy New Year 1897. 

Ever yours in our Lord, JOSEPH RABINOWITCH. 



China. 
GENTLEMEN:— Four years ago I was brought into 
contact with the WATCH TOWER, and, reading a little 
here and there, I supposed it to be the organ of some 

R2103 : page 43 

peculiar sort of Universalists, outside the pale of orthodoxy, 
and threw the papers on one side. 



However, I have recently read the three volumes 
of MILLENNIAL DAWN and am again going through the 
first volume more carefully and prayerfully; and I have 
been led to feel that, if this is God's truth, I want it at 
any cost. The Plan of the Ages magnifies the goodness 
of God ten thousand times more than any other 
system of interpretation or theology I have ever read. 

I now turn up the old WATCH TOWERS of 1892 
which I carelessly threw aside, and read them with 
avidity. I think inquirers should begin with the MILLENNIAL 
DAWN. I enclose $6, and wish you to kindly 
send me what you can for it. Yours faithfully, 



England. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-We are having some 
good times here. Our brother Hart has been amongst 
us and helped us on. Our class is gradually becoming 
larger. For the last three weeks our room (which 
holds about 25) has been almost too small for us. Our 
tracts (which the Tract Society so kindly sent us) are 
doing a good work. Brother Guard and myself often 
go to different parts to circulate them, and now and 
again a request comes for a DAWN. One brother has 
already had over twenty copies, as the result of a tract 
left under his door. 

As we go about we find that the harvest is ripening 
fast; but the laborers are very few. Let us pray 
with all earnestness that the laborers may increase. I 
think we may want another supply of tracts soon. This 
is a very poor neighborhood, and we have had to loan 
many DAWNS. Yours in Him, W. THIRKETTLE. 



R2104:page43 

Australia. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I am deeply thankful 
to say that we are still holding fast to the truth, and 
endeavoring to the best of our ability to spread it 
amongst others. It seems almost miraculous that any 
should be able to stand, when all the delusions and 
snares that abound everywhere are taken into consideration; 
but by the grace of God alone, certainly not 
by any special ability or firmness on our part, we are 
thankful to be in the liberty of the truth. 

Our work here is moving, though we are not able 
to chronicle any very remarkable success, if such is to 
be gauged by the general standard— numbers, etc.; but 
we are conscious of an increased interest generally, and 
a joyful acceptance here and there. We earnestly trust 
the Lord will graciously increase the number, but, dear 
Brother, as you well know, this is a hard battle; foes 
within and without are to be met constantly; and we 



have the ever present consciousness of our own utter 
weakness and unworthiness. But oh, what a blessed 
comfort the truth is! How it makes every cross 
lighter, every problem luminous, in very truth. I know 
not how I should live through this present period did I 
not possess its healing and life-giving support; but the 
sweetest comfort of all is that God is perfect Master of 
the situation, and that all things will be brought to the 
best interests of his creatures. If the eternal happiness 
or woe of our fellow men were absolutely dependent 
upon our efforts, what a terrible thing life would 
be; but God and his blessed Son are a thousand times 
more anxious for the well-being and happiness of mankind 
than any mortal. With brotherly love to all the 
brethren and sisters, from Bro. Flack and myself. 
Yours in love and service, ALFRED PEARSON. 



Scotland. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-The amount of blessing 
I have derived from studying the Bible, helped by 
the DAWNS, I cannot describe. Before I knew of them, 
I plodded wearily through "Butler's Analogy" and 
"McCulloch's Calvinism" and, I might truly say, hundreds 
of other books, in search of something to satisfy 
me that Christianity was not cant. I must confess that 
though I had an earnest desire to know God, and 
though it is many years since I was converted, yet I 
did not study the Bible, but only read it now and then. 

I have been careless of God, but he has not been 
careless of me; I have been often unfaithful, and he 
has ever kindly rebuked me. Now I see his love clearer; 
now I grasp heavenly things more tenaciously and dare 
not let go even for a moment. I fail in many things: 
it grieves me to fail in any thing; and I thank God for 
his many tokens of love and forgiveness of my follies. 
Blessed be God for the gift of memory which, though 
it shows me my sins and shortcomings in the past, 
also points out the many blessings my poor unworthy 
self has received in Christ Jesus. 

In endeavoring to prove to many professed Christians 
that "hell" does not mean eternal torture, they 
have nearly one and all triumphantly pointed to the 
parable of Lazarus and the rich man. Now, in addition 
to using your arguments, I have often put the following 
question, in order to prove that Jesus simply 
used the story as an illustration, and did not tell it as 
an actual reality: "Was there any member of the human 
family who died and went to heaven before Christ 
died on the cross?" I point out that Jesus tells the 
story of what happened in the past— "There was a 
rich man," etc. If they say "Yes," I show them they 
deny that Christ is the only Way to heaven, and this 
staggers them. If they answer "No," they condemn 
their own belief and they stand confounded. 



Yours in Christ Jesus, STEWART J. BELL. 

[Our Lord said, "No man hath ascended to Heaven 
save the Son of Man. "--EDITOR.] 



Denmark. 
DEARLY BELOVED BRETHREN IN CHRIST:-I was 
greatly rejoiced over the good news of your dear letter 
received a few days ago. I have not been so glad for a long 
while as when I read the statement of my account and 
saw how good the Lord had been to me that he had 
put it into some good heart to help me over the great 
debt I had gotten into. "Thank the Lord, O my soul, 
and forget not all his benefits." It was the best news 
you could tell me just now; and I most heartily thank 
you for it, and pray that God will bless you and the 
dear brother who has been such a great help to so many 
of the Lord's servants. The WATCH TOWER for Dec. 
15th received today and most of it read— with delight. 
I am so glad with the truths it presents and am perfectly 
in harmony with you; it is so good and grand to 
me, and I prize it above money or anything else. I 
thank the Lord that he has ever brought me in contact 
with the blessed good tidings proclaimed from God's 
Word. I know it is the plain truth, and it is my heart's 
desire that I might live in the way that is most pleasing 
to God, and in all things be subject to the will of 
God, our blessed Heavenly Father. 

R2104 : page 44 

It is becoming more and more light for me since I 
commenced to hold little meetings here in Denmark. 
We meet every Friday evening and have Bible readings 
with explanations, prayer and praise, and it has 
been very profitable to myself as to many of the dear 
Christians that have been attending. The circulation 
of Danish and Swedish tracts and DAWNS progresses, 
and although the results are not so great as we could 
wish, nevertheless the truth is spreading and finding 
some of the Lord's jewels. Your brother and fellow-servant 
in our dear Lord, JOS. S. WINTER. 



Columbia, Central America. 
DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-Your very kind, loving 
and refreshing letter bearing date of the 19th ult. 
is duly received; also that containing Invoice, etc. We 
are truly glad that Brother Maxon arrived safely and 
gave you a clear description of the state of affairs. We 
are truly thankful for kind proposition made. We rejoice 
in Brother Hay's good fortune, of which we are 
partakers. How blessed are they who, possessing this 



world's goods, turn the same to good account. 

Now, dear Brother, contrary to misunderstanding 
through communication concerning preaching, we had 
properly begun with it among the unintelligent, if by 
any means they could be aroused to an interest in securing 
DAWN, which would preach more lasting sermons. 
Being totally blinded, the people exhibited no 
appreciation for the truth, and we withdrew. We discern 
the necessity of associating preaching with the 
circulation of the Dawn. We gather from "Suggestive 
Hints to Colporteurs" that a house to house circulation 
is preferable, though preaching may not be ignored; 
and we are again preparing to go out preaching. 
We are experiencing severe storming by the Adversary; 
but occasionally realizing a gleam of sunshine 
amid the storm. We are having daily manifestations 
of divine providence and favor. 

Our warfare out here is manifold, having to fight 
against the depressed state of things, the depravity of 
our surroundings, our own internal and external conflicts, 
etc.; so that we must be very often at the throne 
of grace, to implore the aid of our sovereign Lord and 
Head. We trust you will not cease to pray for us. We 
believe that grace will be given God's people equivalent 
to, or much more than, the evil with which they are 
surrounded. Thank God, we are growing in grace. 
The beam is in process of being cast entirely out of our 
own eyes; then shall we be able to see the motes of others. 

It affords us great joy to see the report for 1896 in 
last TOWER, and to know of the active interest taken 
in the work by the brethren and sisters everywhere. 
May we all continue faithful unto the end. 

Yours in the hope of the High Calling, 

ISAIAH RICHARDS & LOUIS A. FACEY. 

[These two brethren were formerly representatives 
of the American Bible Society. After they got hold of 
present truth and it got hold of them they could do no 
less than spread it and are now colporteuring for DAWN as 
"Bible Keys," preaching and circulating O.T. TRACTS. 
They are full-blooded Jamaica negros. 

Brother Maxon, a white man, converted by these 
brethren last year, called on us recently and gave a most 
excellent report of their zeal, patience, energy, devotion, 
ability and full consecration to the Lord.— EDITOR.] 



Switzerland and Germany. 
DEAR BROTHER RUSSELLr-Inclosed you will find 
an order for books. My labors with translations into 
French continue. Meantime I am using the German 
literature and making efforts to reach some of the 
many Germans of Switzerland and Germany itself. I 
have sent out over 4,000 tracts and, praise God, here 
and there some are awaking and are writing for more 



reading matter. Have also put notices of M.D. into 
different papers, having received $15.00 from a brother 
for that purpose. Several booksellers are now offering 
it for sale; another puts it into his showwindow; and 
with another I am corresponding about arrangements. 

One editor of a religious Sunday paper printed the 
notice of M.D. twice free of charge. I sent him the 
three volumes. In the notice I offered to loan the first 
to all lovers of the Truth and received many a friendly 
request for the same, mostly from among the poor. My 
German correspondence is thus increasing. While my 
efforts have been chiefly among the Germans of Switzerland, 
I am of the opinion that there remains much 

R2105 : page 44 

work to be done on the mainland of Europe. 

The whole month of December I had almost daily 
some orders or requests for the German DAWN; some 
came from old Deaf Hospital women. It seems that a 
great hunger and seeking after the truth— to know 
more about the glorious Millennial day, the dear Gospel 
of the true Kingdom and the wondrous plan of the 
ages— is prevailing in Switzerland. Praise the Lord! 

A German periodical would be very appropriate at 
this time, containing TOWER articles and probably answers 
to correspondents; and thus the bond of fellowship 
amongst the true believers would be strengthened 
and the interest, I believe, much increased. There are 
a number scattered here and there who would rejoice 
much over such an undertaking and support it according 
to their means. We hope that something may be 
done soon. I took the matter to the Lord in prayer. 
Hope you will think favorably of the suggestion and 
give us your idea and advice in the matter. 

The other day I received a request from a missionary 
in a neighboring city for the loan of some DAWNS 
for a number of earnest Christians. Thus the interest 
increases. Will close with saying that I am always glad 
to receive the TOWER, and constrained to give thanks 
for, and pray for the continuance of, the blessings and 
favors of God our Father and our Lord Jesus toward 
me and you all and those that are His in every place. 

Yours in our dear Redeemer, ADOLF WEBER. 

[Sister Mattern reports that while as a nurse in a 
hospital in Hamburg she introduced DAWN and that 
five other Sisters there are deeply interested in the subject 
and are having Bible-study meetings and suffering 
reproaches, being in danger of losing their positions. 
Sister Giesecke is also doing a good work loaning 
DAWNS, circulating tracts, etc., in Germany. 

All things considered, it has been about decided 
that we will start a small (4 page monthly) German 
TOWER. The price will be 12 cents per year for single 
copies; 5 copies monthly for a year 50 cents; 12 copies 



monthly for a year $1.00. We shall be glad to hear 

from all of our interested German friends, soon as convenient, 

respecting their interest in this part of the 

one harvest work.— EDITOR.! 



page 45 

VOL. XVIII. FEBRUARY 15, 1897. No. 4. 



CONTENTS. 



Views from the Watch Tower 47 

Misfit Ethics 47 

Wounded by Professed Friends 48 

Brother Moody's Alarm 50 

Modern Exegesis 50 

The Undefiled One 52 

The First Christian Martyr 55 

Persecution Overruled for Good 57 

The Ethiopian Convert 58 

Letters of Interest 60 

page 46 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
-ADDRESS TO- 
TOWER PUBLISHING CO., BIBLE HOUSE, 58 & 60 ARCH ST., 
ALLEGHENY (NORTH PITTSBURG), PA., U.S.A. 

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 

INCLUDES A SUBSCRIPTION TO "THE OLD THEOLOGY TRACTS'-QUARTERLY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, N.Y. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, 

OR REGISTERED. FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN 

MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS: 

Those of the interested, who by reason of old age or accident, or 
other adversity are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, 
if they will send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and 
requesting the paper. 



R2108 : page 46 

THE GERMAN WATCH TOWER. 



OUR German friends express their joy at the prospect of having 
even a small monthly publication devoted to the spread of the truth 
amongst readers of German. Promises have been made of large subscriptions 



for gratuitous circulation. Accordingly we have made a very 
moderate scale of prices, as follows— 

America. Germany. Switzerland. 
Two copies each month, a year 25c Mk. 1.30 Fr. 1.50 
Five " " " " 50c " 2.50 " 3.00 

Twelve $1.00 " 5.00 " 6.00 

Postage included. 

Those of the interested who by reason of accident or infirmity are 
unable to pay will be supplied free upon application. We believe that 
divine providence is guiding in the undertaking, and will proceed 
with it shortly. Let us hear from all who favor it at once. 

A TRACT FOR HEBREWS. 



We have calls for a tract for Hebrews— to help honest Israelites 
to find the Lord, Redeemer and Messiah. We would like to hear from 
all who consider that there is an opening for such a tract; how many 
they could judiciously use and in what language it would best serve its 
purposes— English, German, Polish or Jargon. 



R2105 : page 47 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 



ETHICS OF SAINTS MISFITS ON WORLDLINGS. 



We are living in a day when history is being made as 
never before. Before us lies an account from the Chicago 
Times-Herald, stating that at a meeting of the 
Chicago City Federation, recently, the secretary of the 
Bureau of the Associated Charities of that city declared 
that there are 8,000 families in Chicago actually starving 
to death; and that the President of the South Chicago 
Relief and Aid Society says, "There is greater 
poverty here than there was in 1893, for we are less 
able to care for the poor now than we were then." 
The pastor of the First Congregational Church declares 
also that "at every turn one finds an object of misery. 
People crowd to our services and beg for food for their 
children. This is the hardest winter we have had. We 
can get no work for the men." 

Another account is from Louisiana, of which Congressman 
Boatman declares that there are one hundred 
thousand destitute people in the Northern part of that 
State on account of the failure of crops in that vicinity. 

The London Chronicle sums up a total of eighty-four 
millions of the population of India affected by the 



famine, and says, "We are only at the beginning of the 
existing scarcity, which must now under any circumstances 
go on increasing until June next." And the 
famine has recently been supplemented by the Bubonic 
plague, which is making terrible ravages. 

Before us also are accounts of the now celebrated 
Bradley-Martin dress ball, at which about eight hundred 
of the elite of New York City, and indeed contingents 
from various parts of the world were present in 
silks, satins, velvets and broadcloth— both men and 
women ablaze with jewels. The newspaper accounts 
tell us that this was the grandest affair of the kind ever 
witnessed on this continent; that the ladies and gentlemen 
who participated were dressed to represent 
kings, princes, queens and noble ladies of the 15th, 
16th, 17th and 18th centuries, and that the entertainment 
as a whole cost $223,000. 

The Rev. Dr. Rainsford, in whose congregation 
are quite a number of millionaires, found it his duty to 
warn his hearers that it would be very unwise to attend 
this ball, giving as the reason that at the present time 
there are many people in New York city who are in 
very straitened circumstance and that such a display of 
luxury and extravagance would surely excite and 
strengthen the envy and hatred already felt by many 
of the poor against the wealthy and aristocratic. This 
started quite a hubbub, and the opinions of many of 
the prominent ministers were sought and published in 
the daily press. Some agreed with Dr. Rainsford; 
some were fearful to express an opinion if they had 
one; and some took an opposite view, claiming that the 
expenditure of the money would be a benefit to the 
poor, etc. The Rev. Thos. Dickson, Jr., was one of 
the most pronounced in his difference of view, declaring, 
according to the public press, "If I had millions, 
would I spend all in charity? No! Why, the position 
is nonsensical. If I had millions I would build a boat 
that could go around the world and would spend solid 
years of my life in rounding out my education. If I 
should have one million of dollars, and if the public 
should dictate to me how I should spend it, I would say 
as did a certain member of the Vanderbilt family, 
'The public be d d.'" 

In these conflicting views respecting the responsibilities 
of wealth and the proper uses to be made of it, 
we perceive the grand confusion into which nominal 
Christianity has fallen, which unbalances its reason 

R2105 : page 48 

upon every subject. The continued failure in judgment 
upon such subjects arises from the fact that the 
Bible lays down certain lines and conditions of Christian 
responsibility which do not fit a merely nominal 
Christianity, hence the misfit in attempting to apply 
the terms and conditions of true cross-bearers to those 



who bear none other than diamond crosses— however 
polite, refined and educated the latter may be. Our 
opinion of those who patronize such extravagant displays 
is, that they are Christians merely in name— after 
the manner of the man who, when asked, Are you 
a Christian, sir? replied, "Well, I am not a Jew nor 
heathen; I presume, therefore, I must be a Christian." 

Let us learn to distinguish in our minds between 
nominal Christians and those who bear about in their 
person the marks of the Lord Jesus,— who are fully 
consecrated to him; whose will is to do the will of the 
Father in heaven, and to finish his work. Such being 
fully consecrated to the Lord will have neither time, 
nor influence, nor money to spend in such extravagant 
displays as this bal-masque. The restraining influence 
upon such will not be the point chiefly suggested by 
Dr. Rainsford— lest the display excite the cupidity and 
envy of the poor;— nor will it be merely to parsimoniously 
save money in the hand, where it will do no 
person very much good; but the object will be to spend 
the time and the means in some better channel, calculated 
to bring greater and more permanent blessings 
and happiness, both to others and to themselves. 

But those who have this consecration of heart, 
whether they have much or whether they have little, 
need not feel envious of the rich; nor indeed should 
they seek or expect to force "the children of this 
world," who are not actuated by the same motives of 
consecration to the Lord's service and appreciation of 
divine things, present and future, to act as they act in 
such matters. Let the worldly who have wealth spend 
it in luxury, and in any manner not immoral. This 
will not only circulate the money amongst the people, 
better than if it were hoarded in banks, but it will help 
to manifest more clearly than ever the difference between 
the consecrated and unconsecrated condition of 
heart and conduct of life, and thus it will make wider 
the breach between the true Church and the worldly 
class which falsely under deception of false teaching 
bears the name of Christ but is none of his. 

WOUNDED IN THE HOUSE OF (PROFESSED) FRIENDS. 



Dr. Abbott, of the Plymouth pulpit, Brooklyn, continues 
to lead along the paths of "higher criticism." 
In some lectures on "The Bible Literature," recently, 
he provoked his congregation to laughter by the amusing 
manner in which he made reference to the story of 
Jonah and the great fish, which he termed a "fiction," 
—"the Pickwick papers of the Bible." The worldly-minded 
newspaper reporters could see through the absurdity 
of a man pretending to be a Christian minister 
and yet thus making light of the very basis of Christian 
faith— the Bible. The reports in the New York papers 



put the matter in its true light, and in consequence 
the Manhattan Ministers' Association took it up at 
its meeting and strongly rebuked the language. We 

R2106 : page 48 

are not to forget, however, that probably a large majority 
of the ministers in New York City, and in all 
large cities, are already in full agreement with Dr. 
Abbott along the lines of "higher criticism" and, so 
far as faith in the inspiration of the Bible is concerned, 
might be termed rationalists, agnostics or even infidels: 
there are good reasons for such convictions. We must 
therefore suppose that the Manhattan Ministers Association 
were not so much in opposition to Dr. Abbott's 
agnosticism, called "higher criticism," as to the public 
statement of this agnosticism in Dr. Abbott's mirthful 
vein. As a minister of this city once said to the 
writer, "It is very well for us ministers to study these 
subjects, but it is not prudent to tell them to the people." 



Dr. Abbott, noting the criticism, made two very 
significant remarks: (1) "No minister should criticize 
another minister in public;" and (2) "I have every 
reason to believe the Plymouth Church is an absolute 
unit in supporting its pastor." The latter statement 
shows to what an extent this modern infidelity called 
"higher criticism" has already taken root and born 
fruit among the people, the "laity." The former statement 
shows how ministerial etiquette is expected to 
intimidate and seal the lips of any disposed to obey the 
Word of the Lord and lift up their voice like a trumpet 
to show God's people their sins and dangers. Only 
those who fear to offend God rather than men will escape 
this influence which the prophet declares will 
make the majority like "dumb dogs, they cannot bark" 
-Isa. 56:10,11. 

Meantime, the Rev. J. H. Barrows, D.D., famed 
as the president of the Chicago Parliament of Religions, 
of similarly broad and indefinite ideas of the Bible and 
Christianity, is now lecturing in India, having for his 
topic, "The Harmony of Religions." Surely, it is 
these people who have repudiated the Bible, and incidentally 
all of Christianity except civilization and refinement, 
who probably see no reason why they should 
not as truly fellowship the deluded believers in the 
creeds of the Orient, as that they should fellowship 
those of us whom they believe to be the deluded believers 
in the Bible. 



Another bold man who denies the faith and is yet 
"worse than an infidel" in that he still masquerades 



R2106 : page 49 

as a minister of the Gospel of Christ, while doing all 
in his power to undermine that gospel, is the Rev. M. 
J. Savage, pastor of the "Church of the Messiah," 
New York City. One would think that few except 
those "of the synagogue of Satan" (Rev. 2:9) would 
enjoy or support such preaching. From his recent 
sermon, as reported in the New York Sun we clip the 
following malodorous morsel as a sample. He said:— 

"Archaeology has established that man has been 
on earth not for a thousand years or ten thousand, but 
for at least two hundred thousand. Evolution, as developed 
by Herbert Spencer, and biology, the province 
worked out by Darwin, are no longer the subjects for 
debate by educated and intelligent people, though prominent 
theologians, who show that they don't know 
what they are talking about by the first words that 
they utter, will discuss it. Man was not created in 
the garden of Eden or anywhere else, but began in the 
ooze of far-off primeval seas. What we know, then, 
means that there has never been any fall of man, but 
a continuous ascent. This one fact compels the complete 
reconstruction of all the theological theories of 
the past." 

It is time that all who have faith in the Word of 
God and its message of a fall and a redemption by our 
Savior's precious blood should be no less outspoken 
than are the enemies of the truth. Whoever denies the 
fall into sin, denies the redemption from sin and its 
penalty and such are no more Christians than are Hottentots 
or Mohammedans or other unbelievers. 

We pointed out in 1879, in this journal, that the 
great "falling away" from the faith predicted of the 
close of this age would come along this line;— the denial 
of the need and of the fact of the ransom. The 
cross of Christ (the great ransom-sacrifice) is to the 
Jew a stumbling block and to the Greeks (the worldly 
wise) foolishness, but to us who believe it is the power 
of God and the wisdom of God.— 1 Cor. 1:18-24. 

The true light, the true plan of God, is now clearly 
manifested for the succor of all who are truly his people. 
The true "sheep," as they realize the confusion, 
will turn attentively and humbly to the great Shepherd 
to listen to his voice to guide them. Such only 
will be guided and kept in his way, led to the green 
pastures and still waters of present truth. These will 
be delivered from the great delusions of this evil day, 
which, if it were possible, would deceive the very elect. 
All others we may expect will be more or less deluded 
or blinded. Only a remnant will escape the blinding 
influence now as in the end of the Jewish age. 

CHURCH UNION. 



Along the same lines of "union" with anything 
and everything that will help to support our present 
social arrangement is a prominent article in the New 
York Evangelist which after giving a number of reasons 
for federation and cooperation among Protestants 
includes also Roman Catholics, and urges peace and 
fraternity with them, saying:— 

"We differ from them in some points, but we 
cannot deny that they hold the main truths of our religion. 
[It is, alas ! too true that Protestants hold still 
to many of Papacy's perversions of the truth.— EDITOR.] 
...There is another reason why we should have a 
care how we disparage the Catholic priests, namely, 
that some day, not so far off in the next century, we 
may have to call upon them for help against political 
and social dangers. The late Professor Roswell D. 
Hitchcock has often said to me that the time might 
come when the Roman Catholic Church would prove 
the greatest bulwark and safeguard against the Socialism 
and Communism which have been imported into 
our country from abroad. That is what all Europe 
is afraid of at this moment— a cataclysm, not from 
above, but from beneath: an earthquake that will yawn 
so wide and so deep as to swallow up civilization itself. 
If such destruction sweeps over the Old World, it will 
not be long in crossing the ocean to the New. Let us 
be on our guard that we do not break down any strong 
barrier against it." 

Thus we see how one error leads to another, 
and helps still further to blind and prejudice the mind. 
How many Protestants there are who are totally unable 
to see in the Papal system the fulfilment of the 
prophesied Antichrist,— the result of the great "falling 
away" from the faith; because, having unscriptural 
views of the present social economy, they are drawn 
toward Papacy or anything else which will help to 
sustain the social structure with which all that they 
have and are is intimately associated;— their spiritual 
interests, the nominal Church institutions and their 
temporal interests. Can we wonder that under the 
lead of "higher criticism" and under the pressure of 
the supposed necessity for the continuance of the present 
social order, the majority of the nominal Church 
are drifting further and further away from the Bible 
and from its teachings— respecting Romanism as Antichrist; 
respecting the Babylon-confusion of sectarianism; 
respecting the social change to be inaugurated by 
the fall of present institutions and the erection in their 
stead and upon their ruins of the Kingdom of God's 
dear Son? We cannot wonder at the tendency to fall 
away from "the faith once delivered to the saints." We 
find a general tendency to lose faith in the Bible and 
to rely upon human wisdom and the light of conscience 
merely, except among those who in some manner or 



degree are looking for the second coming of Christ and 
the establishment of his Kingdom. 



A Federation of Churches and Christian Workers 
has been formed in New York City, including educational 
and charitable institutions. The New York 
Journal says, "One hundred and forty churches and 
eleven such institutions are now included in the membership, 
and it is expected that the number will be 
doubled this winter." 

R2106 : page 50 

BROTHER MOODY SOUNDS AN ALARM. 



The New York Independent publishes a lengthy 
account of what is termed the progress of Christianity 
during the past year, which makes an extremely favorable 
showing so far as denominationalism is concerned; 
but all familiar with such matters know that such reports 
are quite unreliable, that the lists of nearly every congregation 
contain names of many who are dead physically 
and of many others who have departed from all 
spiritual life and interest and who have not attended 
meetings for years. 

Evangelist D. L. Moody has been looking over 
the reports of last year, and as a result sent in the following 
to the editor of the Independent:— 

"In a recent issue of your paper I saw an article 
from a contributor which stated that there were over 
three thousand churches in the Congregational and Presbyterian 
bodies of this country that did not report a 
single member added by profession of faith last year. 
Can this be true? The thought has taken such hold 
of me that I can't get it out of my mind. It is enough 
almost to send a thrill of horror through the soul of 
every true Christian. 

"If this is the case with these two large denominations, 
what must be the condition of the others also? 
Are we all going to sit still and let this thing continue? 
Shall our religious newspapers and our pulpits keep 

R2107 : page 50 

their mouths closed like 'dumb dogs that cannot bark' 
to warn people of approaching danger? Should we 
not lift up our voice like a trumpet about this matter? 
What must the Son of God think of such a result of 
our labor as this? What must an unbelieving world 
think about a Christianity that cannot bring forth any 
more fruit? And have we no care for the multitude 
of souls going down to perdition every year while we 



all sit and look on? And this country of ours, where 
will it be in the next ten years, if we don't awake out 
of sleep? 

"I wish some of you editors of the influential 
papers, who are in close touch with the ministers and 
churches, would tell us what the matter is. Is this the 
result of what they call the 'Modern Criticism' of the 
Bible? Is this a specimen of the better times, when we 
get rid of the old stories about Moses writing the Pentateuch, 
and the sun and moon standing still, and the 
fish swallowing Jonah? How much of all this is owing 
to the politics our ministers have been preaching 
lately, and the talks on the labor question, and the 
stereopticon shows on Sunday evenings, and all these 
other things that have been driving out the blessed 
gospel of Jesus Christ? When ministers go into preludes 
on current topics, how can they expect any 
afterludes of conversions?" 

Bro. Moody gives evidence of being awake to the 
real situation; but all the more, his expressions are 
thorny to the average minister and Church member, 
and many are crying out against him. Like some of 
old they say, "Prophesy unto us good things!" or 
"Let us alone!" 

"MODERN EXEGESIS" OR "HIGHER CRITICISM." 



It would appear that the theological colleges are 
becoming the very hot-beds of unbelief and repudiation 
of the Scriptures, under what is termed "modern 
exegesis" and "higher criticism." Professor S. I. 
Curtis, of the Congregational Seminary of Chicago, is 
the latest who has made himself a name and fame by 
some published articles in which he endeavors to refute 
the application of the so-called Messianic prophecies to 
Christ;— thus repudiating the interpretations of those 
prophecies given by our Lord and the apostles as recorded 
in the New Testament. Professor Curtis simply 
gives the Jewish interpretation of these prophecies; 
namely, that they referred to God's dealings with 
the nation of Israel. The Interior (Presbyterian), 
criticising Professor Curtis and defending the interpretations 
of prophecy given us by our Lord and the 
apostles, says:— 

"The situation then is this: It is admitted by this 
new school of scholarship that the New Testament 
writers were all of the 'old school of exegetes,' that 
they all gave the weight of their authority to the exegesis 
which finds in the Old Testament specific, particular 
and personal descriptions of our Lord, his deity, 
his birth, history, sufferings, death and the divine 
purpose in his incarnation and vicarious sacrifice— and 
that the authority of our Lord and of the New Testament 
writers, in affirming this fact, has universally 



prevailed for nearly 1,900 years, but is now set aside 
as 'not in accordance with modern views.' 

"They admit that what they denominate the 'old 
school of exegetes' included our Lord himself and his 
evangelists and apostles. But they say this exegesis 
did not originate with our Lord and the writers of the 
Gospels who found it prevailing among the Jews of 
their times, and were not able to free themselves from 
it. Besides, it was to the interest of our Lord and of 
the New Testament writers to employ the false exegesis 
which they found in the public mind. 

"Thus are the Scriptures plowed, harrowed and 
sown with the salt of perpetual desolation. But let us 
remember that salt-plains and bitter waters are found 
only in arid lands. Where the rains fall and the white 
snows drift there are none. The showers of spiritual 
blessing, falling upon the church of God, dissolve and 
wash away these alkaline destroyers of spiritual life, 
and leave her fountains of water pure, her trees laden 
with fruit, and her vales waving with corn." 

We are glad to see that the Bible has still some 
friends in the nominal church and that higher criticism 
has not perverted the judgments of all. 



Since the so-called higher criticism of the Bible 
began in Germany, it is interesting to notice its progress 
there. Reliable authorities inform us that, "In all the 
faculties of the twenty Protestant Theological Universities 
of Germany, there is not a single representative 
of the 'older views' and traditional teachings of 

R2107 : page 51 

the Church, in reference to the Mosaic origin of the 
Pentateuch, the integrity of the book of Isaiah, etc." 

Professor Zockler of Griefswald is an acknowledged 
authority upon this subject. In a recent article in 
German he expresses himself about as follows:— 

The Old Testament criticism is raging now with 
more intensity than ever before. The contending parties 
are the liberal or advanced and the conservative. 
The differences between these two schools of thought 
have as a consequence become sharply defined, and in 
some cases quite bitter, and the interest in the struggle 
is widening. Outsiders also are beginning to appreciate 
the fact that great issues are at stake; that the 
new views practically remove from the sacred books of 
the Old Testament the basis of revealed religion, the 
historic faith-foundation upon which the Church has 
rested for more than eighteen centuries. The Church 
in general is realizing the destructive consequences of 
the critical teachings of the Wellhausen-Kuenen school 
of thought. What began as a controversy respecting 
the Pentateuch twenty years ago has now become a 



contest of radical criticism covering the entire Old 

Testament, and a question of principle for the life of 

the Church. The professor adds that the defendants 

of the "old views" are found in the ranks of the ministry 

only, and none of them amongst the university 

men. 



Likewise the American college professors are leading 
in this attack upon the Scriptures. They seem to realize 
that they might live and die comparatively unknown, 
except as they may come into prominence by attacking 
the Bible. Professor Paul Haupt of Baltimore has 
begun a translation of the Bible in conjunction with 
certain other professors of this country and Europe. 

These gentlemen make such bold statements that 
not only the world but modest and moderate humble-minded 
Christians are inclined to suppose that they 
must have found some very positive information upon 
which to rest such wonderful and positive claims. 
They even attempt to indicate when and which certain 
words, sentences and sometimes paragraphs were added, 
here and there, at various times and by various persons. 

These gentlemen, of course, profess to be more wise as 
well as more honest than any who have ever undertaken 
such work before. Their edition of the Bible, they 
inform us, will be printed in various shades of color 
and thereby indicate different features of the text. Of 
course, the world is ready and waiting for any and 
every thing that would cast discredit upon the Book 
which has successfully withstood the assaults of its 
enemies for many centuries. Consequently, it is not 
surprising that the world-pleasing and success-seeking 
publishers of New York journals are very willing to 
advertise such works as these freely. Thus a New York 
Sunday paper of January 31st illustrates what the new 
Bible is to be, giving selections from Genesis, showing 
the coloring of the text as it will appear, heading the 
whole thus:— 

"AMAZING DISCOVERIES CONCERNING THE BOOK OF 
GENESIS. IT IS A PATCHWORK OF FOUR OR 
FIVE WRITERS AND IS NOT THE FIRST 
BOOK OF THE BIBLE." 

Few of those who read the bald and brazen 
claims of these modern wise men and their advertisers 
have any conception of the character of the information 
possessed by these schoolmen, which authorized 
their division of Genesis and other Bible Books into 
"patchwork." Have these gentlemen found the original 
manuscript of Genesis, and there seen the various additions 
they claim, in various styles of handwriting, 
some with more and some with less faded inks? Is it 
upon such evidences as these that they base their strong 
statements? No! They never saw the original manuscripts, 
nor has any one else now living seen them. 



Critics have access to nothing to which other men have 

not access to-day. Upon what, then, do they base 

their conclusions which they state with such positiveness? 

may be asked. We answer, They merely fancy 

that they notice a little change in the phraseology here 

and there. They find that certain words are used in 

one paragraph or section freely and that those words 

do not occur in another paragraph or at least are not 

so freely used. And on the strength of this flimsy 

foundation they decide, and declare with great positiveness, 

and unholy boldness, that the two paragraphs 

were written by different persons. They not only undertake 

to say about what time they were written, but 

presumably men of such keen discernment could almost 

tell what the men looked like who wrote the different 

passages. 

The Scriptures do not declare that Moses was the 
author of the Book of Genesis in the sense that he 
wrote it of his own personal knowledge. It is to be 
presumed that since much of it was history, covering 
the two thousand years preceding Moses' day, the record 
may have been kept and handed down from father 
to son, some of it from Adam and Seth and Enoch, 
Methuselah, Noah, Abraham, Isaac and Jacob. All that 

R2108 : page 51 

is claimed for the Book of Genesis is, that Moses was 
its editor and that he as a servant of God was granted 
a superior wisdom and grace in bringing together into 
proper form, thus, the items of past history and of divine 
revelation which God designed for his people— 
"That the man of God might be thoroughly furnished." 

It is quite sufficient for those who have learned of 
the wisdom of God's Book from its internal evidences 
and harmonies, to know that the records of Genesis 

R2108 : page 52 

are in complete harmony with the entire Word of God; 
and that it was one of the Books of the Scriptures at the 
time our Lord prayed, "Sanctify them through thy 
truth: thy Word is truth;" that various of its items 
were referred to by our Lord and by all the inspired 
apostles, without the slightest suggestion that either 
the whole or part of it was unreliable or a "mere human 
patchwork." Anyone who will compare the account 
of Creation as given in Genesis with any account of 
Creation given in any of the so-called sacred books of 
heathendom will be convinced that it is as far in advance 
of them all as the daylight is brighter than midnight. 
And we hold that the account of Creation in 
Genesis, rightly understood, is in full accord with all 
that science has been able to prove; although it disagrees 
with some things which science claims without 
a sufficiency of evidence. The harmony between the 



Bible account and the proved positions of science was 
shown in a series of articles by T. J. Conant which appeared 
in our issues of Jan. 1, Feb. 1, and Feb. 15, '94. 



R2108 : page 52 

THE UNDEFILED ONE. 



"Who can bring a clean thing out of an unclean? Not one.— Job 14:4. 

THAT the preexistent Son of God "was made 

flesh and dwelt among us," is clearly stated in 

the Scriptures (John 1:14); that he was "holy," "undefiled," 

and "separate from sinners," is plainly stated 

(Heb. 7:26-28 and Luke 1:35); and that he knew no 

sin, while all other men are sinners, is also stated. (2 Cor. 5:21; 

Rom. 5:18,19; and 1 Pet. 2:22.) The 

Apostle's argument, that he was able to, and did, give 

himself a ransom or corresponding price for the forfeited 

life and right of Adam (Rom. 5:17-19; 1 Tim. 2:6), 

proves the same, because the first Adam was 

perfect until he sinned; hence one who could give a 

corresponding price or ransom must have been likewise 

perfect, without sin and free from its condemnation. 

The same thought is logically deduced from the statement 

that Jesus fulfilled all the requirements of the 

Law (Matt. 5:17; John 8:46); for we know that the 

Law of God was the full measure of a perfect man's 

ability. Hence the conclusion is irresistible that he 

must have been a perfect man when able to do what 

no imperfect man had done or could do.— Psa. 49:7; 

Heb. 1:3; 4:15; 9:28; 10:5-10; Isa. 53:9-12; John 1:29; 

IPet. 1:19. 

But notwithstanding the mass of Bible testimony 
as to his human perfection, some inquire, Can the possibility 
of this be scientifically shown? Others assert 
that it is an impossibility, and that the laws of nature 
are in direct opposition. They give unbounded weight 
to their imperfect understanding of nature's laws, and 
lightly cast aside the weight of Bible testimony. 

The question, however, is well worthy of an examination 
from a scientific as well as from a Scriptural 
standpoint, in order that the agreement of science and 
Scripture may be clearly seen. Science and Scripture 
always agree when properly understood. There is no 
law against our seeking evidence from every good 
source, but only egotism, or blindness, or both, will 
exalt human reasonings above the divine testimony. 

We raise the query then: How came it that "the 
man Christ Jesus" was perfect, holy, harmless, undefiled, 
separate from sinners, while his mother was imperfect; 
a partaker of the weaknesses of the fallen and 



condemned race?— Who can bring a clean thing out of 
an unclean? 

Seeking to answer this query, the Church of Rome 
promulgated the doctrine of the "Immaculate Conception:" 
not the doctrine that Jesus was miraculously 
conceived by the holy power of God, as recorded by 
the Evangelists, and hence was immaculate or spotless; 
but that Mary, the mother of Jesus, was miraculously 
conceived, and hence that she was pure, holy and free 
from Adamic sin and imperfection. But the originators 
of this doctrine could not have been far-seeing, or they 
would have known that by the same reasoning it must 
be proved that Mary's mother was of immaculate conception, 
and so all the way back to Eve, "the mother 
of all living," whose fall into sin before she bore any 
children is clearly stated in the Scriptures.— See Gen. 3 
and 1 Tim. 2:14. 

However, this subject is perfectly clear and plain 
now, from a scientific as well as from a Bible standpoint. 

The Scriptures hold out the thought that all EXISTENCE, 
LIVING ENERGY, OR BEING, comes from the father 
and not from the mother. The mother receives the 
sperm or seed of life from the father, furnishes it a cell-nucleus 
out of which a form or body is produced, 
and nourishes the germ of being until it is able to maintain 
an independent existence; i.e., until it is able to 
appropriate to its maintenance the life-sustaining elements 
which the earth and air supply— then it is born. 

The word father has the significance of life-giver. 
Accordingly, God was the "FATHER," or life-giver, 
while the earth was the mother of Adam, and hence of 
the human race. (Luke 3:38.) Adam's form or organism 
was of and from earth (which therefore served 
as a mother); but his spark of life which constituted 

R2108 : page 53 

him a man came from God (who thus was his Father 
or life-giver): and in the male has since resided the 
power to communicate that spark of life or living seed 
to progeny. 

In harmony with this principle, all children are 
spoken of as being of or from their fathers, and borne 
by their mothers. (Gen. 24:47.) Thus the children 
of Jacob, counted through his sons, were seventy when 
he came down to Egypt. (But if Jacob or the twelve 
patriarchs had daughters, which we cannot doubt, the 
children of those daughters were not counted as Jacob's 
children; such children were counted to their own 
fathers.) All of those seventy souls or beings are expressly 
said to have come out of the loins of Jacob. 
(Gen. 46:26,27, and Exod. 1:5.) So of Solomon it is 
said, that he came out of the loins of David. (1 Kings 8:19, 
and 2 Chron. 6:9.) So also the Apostle Paul and 
Israelites in general claimed that they all came out of 
the loins of Abraham; and of Levi it is written that 



"he was yet in the loins of his father when Melchisedec 
methim."--Heb. 7:5,10. 

Thus also the whole race was in and sprang from 
Adam their father, but not from Eve. And thus it is 
written that all in ADAM die, but not all in Eve. Because 
the race came of Adam, it was tried in his trial, 
condemned in his failure and included under his 
sentence. 

This, which the Scriptures teach, is the latest deduction 
of science on this subject of Progeneration, as 
applied to humanity and to all mammalia. Scientists 
find abundant and conclusive proof in nature that life 
or being comes always from the male. The simplest 
form of illustration is a hen's egg; Of itself it originally 
contains no life; but is merely a cell-germ ready 
to produce an organism as soon as vivified or fecundated 
or impregnated with the life-germ or life-seed by 
the male bird. 

The egg contains not only the germ-cell but also 
the proper elements of nutrition and in proper proportion, 
adapted to the minute organism begotten in it by 
the sperm or life seed; and under proper conditions 
that organism develops. The yolk becomes wholly absorbed 
into the body, while the clear liquid albumen 
serves as its later nourishment until it breaks the shell 
and is able to sustain itself by appropriating cruder 
elements of nutrition. The principles here involved 
are the same in human and other animals. 

In view of these harmonious testimonies of the 
Bible and science, it is a reasonable deduction that if 
the father were perfect, the child would be so. Under 
even moderately favorable conditions a perfect sperm 
or life-seed in uniting with the female germ-cell would 
produce a living germ so vigorous and healthy as to be 
capable of appropriating the proper elements of nutrition 
and avoiding, throwing off or neutralizing the unfit; 
and thus would develop a perfect being; continually 
throwing off without self-injury, through its perfect 
functions, all elements not beneficial. On the contrary, 
if the sperm or life-seed be imperfect, the living germ 
will be proportionately weak and unable to overcome 
the unfavorable conditions of its environment, it will 
appropriate whatever its mother furnishes— good or bad 
—and will be the prey of disease. Being imperfect, it 
will be unable to reject wholly the poisonous elements 
of disease. 

This is on the same principle that if two persons 
eat of strong food, the one with good digestive powers 
can appropriate its nutriment and pass off its unwholesome 
qualities, while the other with weak digestion 
could appropriate little nutriment from the same food 
and would be injured by its evil qualities. 

It follows, then, that had mother Eve alone sinned, 
the race would not have died. Had Adam remained 
perfect, his life unforfeited and unimpaired, his offspring 
would have been the same. And even had death 



sentence passed upon mother Eve, bringing imperfections, 
these would not have impaired her offspring; 
being perfect, they would have appropriated good elements 
and have passed off naturally any unwholesome 
elements without injury. 

On the other hand, suppose that Adam had sinned 
and Eve had remained sinless, Adam's condemnation 
and death would have affected the entire posterity just 
the same; however perfect the germ-cells and nourishment 
provided by mother Eve, only imperfect dying 
beings could be produced from diseased sperm of life-seed 
from Adam. Hence the appropriateness of the 
Scriptural statement that "All in Adam die," and "By 
one man's disobedience. ..death passed upon all." 
(1 Cor. 15:22; Rom. 5:12,19.) How wonderful the 
correspondence here between the first and second Adams 
and their brides. As the death of the race depended 
not upon Eve but wholly upon Adam, and yet she 
shared in the bringing of it, so the restored life of the 
race redeemed depends not at all upon the bride of 
Christ, but upon Jesus, though by divine favor it is 
arranged that his bride shall share in the restitution of 
"that which was lost." 

The fountain, Adam, having become contaminated 
by sin and death, none of his posterity can be free from 
contamination; for, "Who can bring a clean thing out 
of an unclean? Not one." The reference here must 
be understood as applying to the man, and not to the 
woman: none coming from or out of the contaminated 
fountain can be clean. Hence, "There is none righteous, 
no, not one;" none can redeem his own life, nor 
give to God a ransom for his brother.— Rom. 3:10; 
Psa. 49:7. 

R2108 : page 54 

It follows, then, that the only obstacle to the generation 
of a perfect man is the lack of a perfect father 
to give a perfect life-sperm; and hence the teaching of 
Scripture, that in the case of Jesus a perfect life-sperm 
(not of or from the Adamic fountain) was transferred 
by divine power from a preexistent condition to the 
embryo human condition, was born "holy" (pure and 
perfect), though of an imperfect mother (Luke 1:35): 
That he was uncontaminated with any imperfection- 
mental, moral or physical— which his mother in common 
with the entire human race shared, is entirely reasonable 
and, as we have just seen, in perfect accord not 
only with Scripture but also with the latest scientific 
findings and deductions. 

Another fact which scientists are demonstrating to 
themselves, which seems to concur with Scripture testimony, 
is, that though life or being comes from the 
father, form and nature come from the mother. The 
scientific proofs of this are more abstruse and less easily 
grasped by the ordinary mind; and this, because in 



wisdom God has not only separated the various kinds, 
or natures, but in great measure has limited them, so 
that they cannot mix or blend beyond certain limits 
without losing all fecundity. A common illustration 
of this is the mule. 

The old idea that form and nature came from the 
male is abandoned by modern students of nature, who 
now agree that the female furnishes organism as well 
as sustenance— in fact all except the life-seed or sperm, 
which comes from the father or life-giver. Take as a 
Scriptural illustration of the foregoing claims, the improper 
union between "the daughters of men" and 
those angels which kept not their proper estate or condition. 
(Gen. 6:2,4; Jude 6; 2 Pet. 2:4.) The angels, 
when they assumed human form being perfect in 
vitality begat children far superior to the then greatly 
fallen race of Adam in mental acumen as well as in 
physical powers, so that the record is— "the same were 
men of renown." These wonderful men, let us remember, 
were born of imperfect, dying mothers, but were 
begotten by vigorous, unimpaired fathers. 

The dying race of Adam would have had hard 
masters in those superior Nephilim (Hebrew, fallen 
ones) which had not been recognized by God either by 
a trial for life, nor by a condemnation to death. It was 
a mercy indeed which, not having authorized their existence, 
blotted them from existence in the flood and 
spared only Noah and his family with the comment— 
"Now Noah was perfect in his generation," which almost 
implies that the remainder of Adam's race had 
become more or less a new race by association with the 
angels in human form and powers. We say a new race because 
of their new life and vigor coming from new fathers. 

So great was the renown of these "Nephilim," that 
it is to be found with more or less distinctness in heathen 
mythologies to this day, and hundreds of years after 
their destruction in the flood, the false report that some 
of these were yet alive caused a panic among the Israelites 
while flushed with the victory of recent battles. 
(See Num. 13:33; 14:36,37.) No doubt there were 
some large men in Canaan, as other Scriptures show, 
but never except in this "evil report" are they called 
Nephilim.— See our issue of July 15, '94, "Sons of God 
and Daughters of Men." 

Another illustration of this principle that life comes 
from the father and nature from the mother is found in 
the fact that Jehovah, himself of the divine nature, has 
begotten sons of various natures. He is the father or 
life-giver of those of the angelic nature (Job 2: 1 ; 38:7; 
Heb. 2:9), and of the human nature (Luke 3:38), 
as well as of the "new creatures" who shall be made 
partakers of his own divine nature. (2 Pet. 1:4.) The 
spirit or energy of Jehovah operating upon spirit-substances 
produced and developed angels; operating upon 
earthly substances (Gen. 2:7; 1 Cor. 15:47), man was 
produced. And when he would give us a clear conception 



of the generation of the new creatures to the divine 
nature, he represents them as begotten of his word of 
promise in the womb of the Covenant which he made 
with Abraham, which he symbolized by a woman, 
Sarah, telling us that as Isaac was the heir of Abraham 
and child of promise (by Sarah), so we, as or like Isaac, 
are children of God, being children of the promise, or 
Sarah covenant-See Gal. 4:23-31; 1 Pet. 1:3,23; 
2 Pet. 1:4. 

The same principle is illustrated in the fact that in 
the typical Jewish dispensation, prior to the Christian 
age, a child inherited blessings and privileges of its 
father, according to the favor and standing of its mother, 
thus again declaring that the mother's nature, 
rights, privileges and liberties attached to the child, 
though not of necessity the father's.— See Gen. 21:10; 
Ex. 21:4; Gal. 4:30. 

The foregoing arguments are clinched by the fact 
that our Lord Jesus was born of a woman. The "holy 
thing" born of a woman partook of the woman's 
nature, i.e., human nature— "of the earth earthy." 
Though retaining all the purity and perfection of the 
preexistent (spirit) state, the transferred germ of being 
(in harmony with this law we are examining) partook 
of the nature of the mother and was "made flesh" 
by being "born of a woman." Yet the "clean thing" 
came not out of the unclean race, but "proceeded forth 
and came from God" and was merely developed and 
nourished in Mary. 

It is yet further in harmony with this same principle 
that though Christ has been highly exalted to the 
divine nature, and is no longer human, yet it is declared 

R2108 : page 55 

of him that he shall be the life-giver or "father" 

of the whole human race, while it is also shown that 

his work for the race is to restore the perfection of human 

nature, which was lost for all through Adam's 

sin. Thus, while their "father" or life-giver will be 

on the divine plane, the children will be on the human 

plane, born out of a covenant of restitution, illustrated 

by Keturah, Abraham's third wife. 



R2108 : page 55 

THE FIRST CHRISTIAN MARTYR. 

-FEB. 21. -ACTS 6:8-15; 7:54-60.- 

"Be thou faithful unto death, and I will 
give thee a crown of life."— Rev. 2:10. 

APPARENTLY Stephen's martyrdom occurred 



not a great while after Pentecost, but the 

interim had been a period of considerable progress. At 

the time of the ascension "about one hundred and twenty" 

were reckoned as being in full and deep fellowship 

in Christ; ten days later at Pentecost three thousand 

converts were added; shortly after five thousand more 

as recorded in our last lesson; later (Acts 5:14) "multitudes, 

both men and women, were added to the Lord;" 

still later, "the number of the disciples was multiplied 

in Jerusalem greatly, and a great multitude of priests 

were obedient to the faith." (Acts 6:1-7.) This period 

of gathering the ripe wheat and establishing them in 

the doctrines of Christ was a very necessary prelude to 

the period of trial, persecution and suffering which 

shortly followed. The persecution, however, was no 

less a divine mercy than the previous peace and prosperity: 

the divine rule for the Gospel Church evidently 

is that each member shall be "made perfect through 

suffering." The stoning of Stephen was merely the 

beginning of the general persecution which in one form 

or another has continued ever since, and must continue 

until the last members of the body of Christ shall have 

proven themselves faithful even unto death and been 

accounted worthy of the crown of life mentioned in 

our golden text. 

Stephen, it will be remembered, was chosen as one 
of the assistants of the apostles and was known as a 
deacon— minister or servant— the original intention 
being that the service should be chiefly with reference 
to the temporal interests of the Church. His choice 
would indicate that he was considered at the time a 
man of ability, and that faithfulness to the work entrusted 
to him led on to still greater privileges and opportunities 
for service. Accordingly we find him in 
this lesson ministering spiritual things with imbuement 
of the spirit and ability closely approaching that of the 
apostles. He was full of faith and power, says our 
common version, and no doubt truly, but the oldest manuscripts 
render this "full of grace and power." Both 
were true, because he could not have had the grace 
and the power without the faith. "This is the victory 
which overcometh the world, even your faith." In 
Stephen's case the faith working by love had produced 
zeal for the Lord and his cause; and the faith and zeal 
blended with the spirit of holiness gave Stephen extraordinary 
grace and power, as pointed out in verse 8. 
And the same combination will produce like grace and 
power in all of the Lord's people in proportion as these 
elements of character are found in each. 

Tradition has it that Stephen's ability as a speaker 
(verses 9,10) brought him into special prominence and 
that as a religious logician he met with the learned men 
of his time, amongst whom it is said Saul of Tarsus 
was one. The Jews, while in a general sense one in 
religious matters, were nevertheless broken up into 
various little cliques and schools of thought, much after 



the manner of the denominations of Christendom today. 
The classes here mentioned as disputants with 
Stephen are supposed to have represented the advanced 
philosophies of that day, combined with Judaism; 
but all of their philosophy could not cope with 
the wisdom and spirit of the truth which were with 
Stephen. Naturally this led wicked hearts to envy, 
malice and hatred; for those who are not above all 
things lovers of the truth are always moved to more or 
less hatred when successfully opposed by the truth. 

(11-14) Many have supposed that Stephen met 
his death at the hands of a mob. But this is incorrect. 
Those who were his enemies because unable to resist 
the force of his arguments had no authority to stone 
him, nor did they wish to appear before the people in 
the light of persecutors of their opponent. They therefore 
suborned or procured witnesses outside of their 
own cliques to bring charges against Stephen before 
the Sanhedrin and then while he was disputing with 
them the official representatives of the Sanhedrin came 
upon him and "caught him" and brought him before 
the council,— as though caught in the very act of 
blasphemy. 

At the trial the witnesses testified falsely in the 
sense that they misrepresented the words and arguments 
of Stephen, putting them in a false light. There was, 
nevertheless, probably considerable truth in the charge 
that Stephen said that Jesus of Nazareth would destroy 
their city and change the customs of Moses. Had they 
confined themselves to a strict statement of the matter 
as Stephen represented it, they would not have been 

R2108 : page 56 

false witnesses; but, evidently anxious to serve those 
who employed them as witnesses, they exaggerated 
Stephen's statements to the extent of misrepresentation 
of certain connecting facts and statements in his 
discourse. 

(15) It is recorded that when the apostles, Peter 
and John, stood before a similar council, a short time 
previous, their judges marveled at their courage in view 
of the fact that they were unlearned men. So also 
Stephen was courageous. Notwithstanding the fact of 
his arrest, and that he was on trial, and that if found 
guilty the punishment would be death by stoning, according 

R2109 : page 56 

to the law, Stephen was not daunted. Instead 

of a look of fear and servility, or of anger, malice, hatred 

and defiance, the record is that they beheld his face 

"as it had been the face of an angel;"— a face beaming 

with love, kindness, interest in their welfare, desire to 

do them good, of purity and holiness of motive, combined 

with humble confidence in God and fearlessness 



of men. We believe that to a greater or less extent 
this is the case with all who receive the holy spirit, in 
proportion as they progress in the knowledge, faith, 
love, zeal and character of Christ their Lord. This 
change does not come instantaneously; it comes gradually. 
The spirit of the world places the marks of selfishness 
and hardness upon the countenances of all the 
slaves of sin, in proportion as they are faithful thereto. 
But when the spirit of the truth is received and these 
become freed from the slavery to sin and become the 
servants of righteousness, the result is a proportionate 
displacement of the marks of slavery upon the countenance 
and an illumination instead, which more and 
more approaches the angelic. Look the worldly man 
or woman in the face, and see how the cares and battles 
of and for sin have left their traces: look then into the 
faces of those who are fully and intelligently the Lord's, 
and notice how the marks of care are superseded by a 
look of confidence and trust and peace proceeding from 
the hearty acceptance of their new Master's spirit. And 
this illumination will be found most remarkable and 
conspicuous when such saints are actively engaged in 
telling the good tidings, and particularly when opposing 
the error. 

Stephen's discourse before the Sanhedrin (Acts 7:1-53) 
marks him as having been a man of great ability. 
It reads more like the language of the Apostle Paul 
than that of any other New Testament writer. And 
the Apostle Paul, then Saul of Tarsus, is supposed to 
have been one of his hearers, a member of the Sanhedrin. 

The closing of Stephen's address (verses 51-53) 
laid upon the Jewish people, and especially upon the 
Jewish Sanhedrin as the representatives of the religious 
law, the full responsibility for the death of the "Just 
One"— as his betrayers and murderers. This pointed 
application of Scripture and facts, as might have been 
expected, only aroused the evil hearts of the judges. 
Of those converted by Peter's discourse it was said, 
"They were pricked to the heart;" but of these it is 
said, "They were cut to the hearts" by the words of 
truth— the evil of their natures was aroused to the full, 
they gnashed on him with their teeth— they were exceedingly 
incensed. 

(55-58) Full of the holy spirit, Stephen was wholly 
unmoved by their manifestations of anger. He was 
testifying for God and for the truth, and instead of fear 
of man his heart was brought into the closer sympathy 
and union with the Lord. The Lord knew all about 
the termination of the trial and what the sentence would 
be, and no doubt gave Stephen a vision of heavenly 
glory— of the Father, and of Christ at the right hand 
of his majesty. This no doubt was for the strengthening 
of Stephen's own faith for the martyrdom just at hand; 
and perhaps also intended to act as it did upon his unjust 
judges. His declaration of the vision which he 
saw capped the climax of their indignation, at his supposed 



opposition to God and to Moses and to themselves 
as representatives of the Law. They construed this to 
be additional blasphemy— that Jesus of Nazareth, whom 
they condemned as a blasphemer, and whose crucifixion 
they had procured, was acceptable to God; and not 
only so, but made next to the Father— at the right 
hand of God, or place of power and influence. Using 
this as a pretext, they terminated the trial and executed 
the sentence of stoning— stopping their ears as though 
they would thus say, what no doubt some of them actually 
felt, that such an exaltation of Jesus next to Jehovah, 
far above Abraham, Isaac, Jacob and the prophets 
was gross blasphemy which they could not justify 
themselves in hearing and felt bound to resent by stoning 
the blasphemer. 

According to the Law, those who heard the blasphemy 
did the stoning; and they laid their outer garments 
at the feet of Saul, which would seem to indicate 
that he not only consented to the verdict that Stephen 
was a blasphemer worthy of death, but that he was 
one of the leaders in the prosecution, as well as an influential 
man in the Sanhedrin. 

(59-60) Without attempting to dissuade them 
from their course, Stephen offered up prayer to the 
Lord, and a beautiful prayer it was— not only for the 
preservation of his spirit, but also that the sin might 
not be laid to the charge of his murderers. 

Thus he "fell asleep." This testimony respecting 
Stephen is in full accord with the testimony of other 
Scriptures. Abraham, Isaac and Jacob and the prophets 
"slept" with their fathers in death; and the Apostle, 
after enumerating some of the faithful ones of the past 
(who were stoned, etc., in hope of a better resurrection), 

R2109 : page 57 

grouping them all together, says (Heb. 11:39,40), "These 

all... received not the promise; God having provided 

some better thing for us, that they without us should 

not be made perfect." They all are represented as 

sleeping and waiting for the morning— the resurrection 

morning— the Millennial morning— the morning of 

which the prophet David spoke, saying, "Weeping 

may endure for a night, but joy cometh in the morning;" 

the morning of which the prophet Job spoke, 

saying, "Hide me in the grave until thy wrath be 

past [the reign of death during the present age with 

all of its concomitants of sorrow, trouble and pain, are 

evidences of divine wrath]. Thou shalt call, and I 

will answer thee: thou wilt have a desire to the 

work of thine hands." Our Lord, speaking of the resurrection 

morn, the same great day of awakening from 

the sleep of death, corroborates Job's statement, saying, 

"All that are in the graves shall hear his voice and 

shall come forth." (John 5:28,29.) Stephen slept 

with the others, but as one of the overcomers of the 



new dispensation he will have a share in the first resurrection 
(Rev. 20:6), and thus awake earlier in 
the morning than others not winners of the prize of the 
high calling of this Gospel age.— Psa. 46:5, margin. 

The expression "Lord Jesus, receive my spirit" 
signifies that Stephen understood that the spark of life, 
the spirit of life, was passing from his control; and by 
this expression he gave evidence of his faith in a future 
life, committing it wholly to the care of him who redeemed 
him from the power of the grave and who is 
shortly to deliver therefrom all who trust in him. 

Stephen's faithful witness unto death was followed 
in turn by that of many others likewise faithful unto 
death and heirs of crowns of life according to the promise. 
The beneficent influences of the gospel of Christ have 
since Stephen's day so permeated the civilized world, 
and so affected it, that the followers of Christ are not at 
present in danger of being stoned to death for preaching 
his gospel. Nevertheless, the Apostle's words still hold 
good, "All who will live godly in Christ Jesus shall 
suffer persecution." It is still necessary to suffer with 
Christ, if we would be glorified with him and share his 
coming Kingdom. But the persecutions of to-day are 
more refined than in any previous period. The faithful 
to-day are not stoned with literal stones or shot 
with literal arrows or literally beheaded, but it is still 
true that the wicked shoot out arrows at the righteous, 
"even bitter words," and many because of faithfulness 
are reproved and slandered and cut off from 
fellowship— beheaded for the testimony of Jesus. (Rev. 20:4.) 
Let all such emulate Stephen, the first Christian 
martyr. Let their testimonies be given with radiant 
faces like his. Let their eyes of faith perceive 
Jesus at the right hand of the majesty on high as their 
Advocate and Deliverer. Let their words be with moderation 
as were Stephen's, and let it be true of them, 
as written of him, "full of grace and power" and "filled 
with the holy spirit." 



R2109 : page 57 

PERSECUTION OVERRULED FOR GOOD. 

-FEB. 28.-ACTS 8:1-17.- 

"They that were scattered abroad went 
everywhere preaching the Word."— Acts 8:4. 

THE tendency of the early believers, as we have 
seen, was to gather together— to swarm. This 
was evidently in harmony with the divine program, to 
foster and establish the Church in the religious capital 
of the world. Those first few years were evidently 
designed of the Lord to permit the Church to put on 



the armor of God, to grow from babes in Christ, 
by the use of the sincere milk of the Word, and afterward 
by its strong meat, up to the stature of Christian 
manhood;— thoroughly furnished unto every good word 
and work. This gathering at Jerusalem was in harmony 
with our Lord's direction before his ascension, 
when, after instructing them to preach the gospel, he 
added "beginning at Jerusalem." But now Jerusalem, 
having had its full period of favor, the Church having 
been rooted and established, the divine plan led on to 
a wider work; and the persecution which arose at the 
time of Stephen's martyrdom became very general in 
the city of Jerusalem, and very grievous, and led to the 
flight of many of the faithful who, we are told, went 

R2110 : page 57 

every where— especially throughout the regions of Judea 
and Samaria. The apostles no doubt considered it 
a part of duty that they should remain at Jerusalem as 
a kind of center of influence; partly because they had not 
yet fully learned the lesson that the gospel they 
preached, although to the Jew first, is also to the Greek 
and the whole world. 

(3) Saul of Tarsus was an energetic man, on whichever 
side of a question he stood. When an opponent 
of the Lord Jesus and his Church and gospel, he was 
its most active enemy, and we cannot doubt that his 
activity in the matter was backed, as he himself afterward 
declared, by a "good conscience," which believed 
that he "verily did God service" in opposing what he 
considered to be the sect of the Nazarene. God seems 
to be specially on the lookout for just such earnest 
characters, and they are far more certain to get the 
truth than are the cold, listless and indifferent kind 

R2110 : page 58 

who neither love nor hate either righteousness or sin. 

Peter and James and John were of this positive and 

strong character, and they with the Apostle Paul, consequently, 

were the ones most freely used by our Lord 

in conveying the blessings of the gospel to us and to 

the world. 

(4-13) It will be noticed that in the primitive 
Church there was no such distinction of class as there 
is in the nominal church to-day. There was no division 
into clergy and laity, but they were "all one in 
Christ Jesus." The division of the church into clergy 
and laity took place when the great falling away came, 
which developed into Papacy; and from that baneful 
influence many have not yet fully escaped. All of the 
early Church were preachers, and if persecuted they 
went everywhere preaching the Word. An instance is 
given respecting this preaching. One, Philip— not the 
Apostle— did successful work in a city of Samaria and 



was used of the Lord in casting out devils and healing 
the sick, the means then in use for drawing attention 
to the gospel. The results of his preaching were marvelous 
—even Simon the sorcerer became a believer. 

Sorcery, witchcraft and enchantments of olden 
times were manifestations of Satan and demons for the 
delusion of mankind, and were strictly forbidden under 
the Mosaic law. The same evil spirits in more recent 
years have slightly altered the character of the demonstrations, 
and so-called Spiritualists are their "mediums." 
The change is merely made in conformity to 
the changed conditions, and both are to be reckoned 
amongst "the works of the flesh and the devil." There 
can be no fellowship between the power of the adversary 
working in his agents for witchcraft and Spiritism 
and the power of Christ working in his agents and 
representatives and through the Word of truth. The 
two are in opposition, however much at times the evil 
may claim relationship to the good. So it was in Samaria, 
as related in this lesson: the gospel opposed the 
doctrines of devils propagated through witchcraft and 
sorcery, the effect was to make the people free, and 
even Simon the medium was convicted and professed 
outwardly a conversion and was baptised. 

Philip's discourse is but briefly outlined, but it 
was along the same lines as the discourses of the apostles 
noticed in the previous lessons. He preached the 
"things concerning the Kingdom of God." How fully 
he explained these things— that the Kingdom would 
be a spiritual Kingdom, that flesh and blood could not 
enter it or even see it, and that not the Jewish nation 
would be heirs of that Kingdom with Messiah, but only 
such as become believers in Jesus, devoted to him 
and suffer with him, thus attesting their loyalty to the 
divine plan. We cannot doubt, however, that Philip 
preached the second coming of Messiah to establish 
and exalt with himself the Kingdom heirs now being 
sought out, and subsequently through that Kingdom, 
to bless the world of mankind. We cannot doubt that 
he urged them to believe in Christ, and by a consecration 
to him to become joint-heirs with him in the Kingdom, 
if so be that they suffered with him, that they 
might also reign with him. Nor did his preaching omit 
the things pertaining to "the name of Jesus Christ," 
and connecting his name as Messiah with all the Kingdom 
hopes which were before the Jewish mind. We 
doubt not that he pointed out to them that the names 
of Moses and of Abraham and of the prophets, although 
great, were insufficient for salvation— that there is none 
other name given under heaven or amongst men whereby 
we must be saved. 

(14-17) It is worthy of note that Philip the 
evangelist, although possessed of the holy spirit and 
possessed also of certain gifts of the spirit, did not possess 
the power to communicate such gifts to others. 
Evidently that power resided only in the twelve apostles 



—Paul being the twelfth in place of Judas. Consequently, 
two of the apostles were sent to lay their 
hands upon the believer and to communicate the gifts 
of the holy spirit. 

After seeing the wonderful gifts and powers which 
the apostles were able to communicate, and no doubt 
after he had received a gift from them himself, Simon 
the sorcerer offered the apostles money in order to be 
endued with this apostolic power of communicating 
gifts of the spirit to others. Hence the name, "Simony," 
given to any attempt to purchase spiritual powers. Up 
to this time Simon had passed for a thoroughly converted 
man; but on the strength of this evidence of his 
non-appreciation of spiritual things the Apostle Peter 
tells him with very great plainness of speech that he 
has neither part nor lot in the matter but is yet in the 
gall of bitterness— is still unregenerate— merely a spectator 
and not a participator in the spiritual things. 

Alas! how many to-day, like Simon, are associated with 
spiritual things, but have neither part nor lot in them; 
who merely give their money in hope of some advantage, 
and not with an appreciation of the spiritual things. 



R2110 : page 58 

THE ETHIOPIAN CONVERT. 

-MARCH 7.-ACTS 8:26-40.- 

"Then Philip opened his mouth, and began at the same 
Scripture, and preached unto him Jesus."— Acts 8:35. 

WE are not to suppose that up to this time the 

gospel had been preached to any except Jews. 

The eunuch, the story of whose conversion is before 

us, was a Jew. The law made special provision by which 

an alien could become a Jew, and this Ethiopian evidently 

had availed himself of that provision. He was 

R2110 : page 59 

a devout Jew, an Israelite indeed, a man of influence 
and some wealth; his devotion had led him to the Holy 
City, to which hundreds of thousands came yearly from 
various quarters. 

His sincerity as a worshiper of the true God was 
evidenced by his desire to know the will of the Lord, 
as indicated by his searching the Scriptures. It is to 
such that the Lord draws nigh and reveals himself: 
not by whispering to him an understanding of the passage 
in question, but by sending a Philip to him to expound 
the Scriptures; just as in the case of Cornelius, 
Peter was sent to tell him words of salvation that 
should be for the saving of himself and household. 



Philip was evidently a zealous servant of the Lord, and 
hence was used of the Lord in the especial manner recorded 
in this lesson; the Lord seems to look out for 
those who are of a ready mind, emptied of self and 
filled with his spirit, and zealous, to be used in his 
hand, and such are his special servants. Let us all 
more and more be emptied vessels for the Master's use 
made meet. 

Philip's inquiry— "Understandest thou what thou 
readest?" was a very pertinent one; a question that 
might be applied to a great many Christian people today 
who, if they answered truly, would admit that very 
much of the Scripture is to them "as a book that is 
sealed"— some claiming that it is sealed, others claiming 
that they are unlearned and therefore unable to 
interpret. (Isa. 29: 1 1-14.) Would that more had the 
spirit of the eunuch— a desire to understand the Scriptures 
and to avail themselves of such humble instruments 
as the Lord may be pleased to send to them for 
their aid. 

How the Lord drew the attention of the eunuch 
to the particular passage of Scripture which perplexed 
him is not recorded; but no better one could have been 
found as a text from which to preach Christ crucified, 
a sin-offering, a sin bearer, a ransom for all. And 
Philip improved the opportunity to preach Jesus as the 
fulfilment of this prophecy, the propitiation for our 
sins, by whose stripes we are healed. Whoever will 
read over the announcements of discourses for fashionable 
churches in almost any large city will be struck 
with the dissimilarity of the themes discussed from 
those upon which Philip and the apostles discoursed with 
so much power and with so great results eighteen centuries 
ago. And who will say that this has nothing to 
do with the admitted coldness and deadness in the 
nominal church? The gospel which is the power of 
God unto salvation is not the gospel of politics, nor of 
social reform, nor of temperance, etc., but the gospel 
of salvation from sin and death by a Savior who has 
bought us with his own precious blood. 

Philip's directness of discourse is worthy of note. 
He did not ride along in the eunuch's company avoiding 
the principal theme, making inquiries about Ethiopia, 
the condition of crops, the business outlook, etc., 
but, as having a particular business to attend to as a 

R2111 : page 59 

servant of the Lord, he got to preaching immediately. 
But then, the eunuch was an attentive inquirer. As a Jew 
he had been waiting and hoping and praying for the Messiah 
and his Kingdom. He knew of certain passages 
of Scripture which extolled the glory of that Kingdom 
and the blessings that would flow from it: other passages 
which seemed somewhat in conflict he did not 
understand, and now an explanation had been offered 



to him which in every sense of the word fitted the 
prophetic statement and reconciled all differences. What 
else could he or any honest man do than accept the 
facts of the case? Quite possibly indeed he had already 
heard of Jesus, and possibly had heard this very Scripture 
referred to as fulfilled in him. 

Now that the matter was set clearly before his 
mind— what it meant and how it was fulfilled— he wasted 
no time in acknowledging Jesus the Messiah; he straightway 
inquired whether or not anything hindered his 
espousal of the cause of the Nazarene and his recognition 
as one of his disciples by baptism? We should 
mark also the directness of Philip's answer. He did 
not say, You will have to go to the mourners' bench 
and be prayed for, quite a while, before God will accept 
you; nor did he say, The proper thing for you to do 
is to join this or the other denomination after you have 
studied its catechism and made a profession of its 
lengthy man-made creed or covenant. On the contrary 
he said, If you believe with all your heart, you may 
properly perform this symbol of union with Christ, 
burial into his death. 

It is well to note also that Philip did not say to 
the eunuch, It is sufficient if you have the real baptism, 
the real consecration of your life to the Lord, the burial 
of your will into the Lord's will, and you need not perform 
the outward symbol in water. Philip said nothing 
of this kind; nor had he or anyone else authority 
to thus offset the word of the Lord and the apostles, 
directing all believers to thus symbolize their faith and 
consecration. It is worthy of note, also, that Philip 
did not say to the eunuch, "I will go yonder and fetch 
a little water in the palm of my hand, and sprinkle it 
upon your forehead;" but the record says that "they 
both went down into the water" and came "up out of 
the water." 

In what manner the Lord by the spirit caught 
Philip away is not stated, but we should remember 
that this was at a time when means of locomotion were 
limited and when God was pleased to exert his infinite 
power in various ways in connection with the establishment 
of his Church. 



R2111 : page 60 

LETTERS OF INTEREST. 



Indiana. 
DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I feel that I owe you 
an apology for my long silence, and wish to say that 
it has been more carelessness on my part than anything 
else. I have felt less the necessity of writing you often 
since others of our company have written, and in this 



way you heard from us, and we from you. 

We have just had a week of meetings: meeting 
every evening for counsel, prayer and song, in which 
all were benefited who attended, and this included 
nearly all our number, though some were kept away 
through sickness and other causes over which they had 
no control. We all felt the need of a closer walk with 
our dear Lord, and to this end sought a deeper work 
of grace in our hearts, and the Lord responded to our 
petitions by meeting with us and granting to all that 
sweet subtle communion which every true child of God 
has experienced and yet cannot describe. I can see 
the benefits of the meetings already in the increased 
zeal of those who attended. Some are suggesting that 
we hold a series of public meetings, and it looks just 
now as though the way would open up for a series of 
meetings in Pool's Hall, about 1 1/2 miles east of here. 

The churches in Indianapolis are making a special 
effort now to arouse a fresh interest in religious things. 
The ministers all seem to realize their spiritual deadness, 
which has come (as one of them expressed it to 
me) like a mighty wave over all the churches. I attended 
the meeting of the Indianapolis Ministerial 
association the 1st Monday of this month. I noticed by 
the papers that the subject for discussion was, "Is 
there a lack of spiritual life in the churches?" and 
what are the causes? and the remedy? The gentlemen 
who had the first part of the subject did not even debate 
the subject but spent the first four minutes of ten 
allotted to him in reading and commenting on statistics 
which might well arouse them to greater energy. 
The next speaker was Pastor of the 1st Presbyterian 
Church, and said among other things that the increase 
for the year just closed in four of the leading Presbyterian 
churches of the city was less than 4 per cent, 
and that in 1600 (if I remember rightly) of the Presbyterian 
churches of the country there were no accessions 
whatever. A dark picture, surely, to all those 
who believe that all efforts for the salvation of the 
race will end with this age. 

This same speaker mentioned the fact that he had 
attended Moody's meetings in New York about 20 years 
ago and that then the Word seemed to go out with 
power and take hold of the people, especially church 
people. But that in Moody's recent meetings, which 
he had attended also, there seemed to be a total lack of 
power, for which he was unable to account. 

The gentleman who took the next phase of the 
subject, i.e., "What are the causes of this deadness?" 
after naming various causes, mentioned as perhaps the 
principal cause a tendency among ministers to speculate 
on various subjects "thereby dividing the thought 
and confusing the minds of their audience." He mentioned 
as a particularly detrimental subject of speculation, 
"The Second Coming of Christ," and then added 
by way of apology "that he did not wish to criticise 



those who had views upon this subject, as doubtless 
some present did, but as for himself he had no views 
at all." Poor "blind leader of the blind!" Had he 
the least conception of the depth of shame involved in 
such a confession as this, falling from the lips of a so-called 
minister of the gospel, he would surely bow 
his head in shame. But no, as Paul puts it, he seemed 
to "glory in his shame;" and not a minister present 
raised his voice in rebuke of such shameful ignorance. 
The gentleman who took up the last division of the 
subject, whose business it was to suggest a remedy for 
existing evils in the church, was a "Holiness man" 
and, of course, suggested a baptism of the "Holy 
Ghost." Some seemed to coincide with this view and 
feel their own deep needs, while others sleepily listened 
and seemed to think that everything was in a fairly 
prosperous way, though none of them were very hilariously 
jubilant. Surely, "the wisdom of her wise 
men shall perish." 

The last speaker mentioned the fact that he too 
had been present at Moody's meetings in New York 
20 years ago, and that he had recently heard from 
friends in the East who attributed Moody's lack of 
power to his speculations as to the Second Coming of 
Christ. Is it not significant that two out of three 
speakers gave as the most potent factor in producing 
this "spiritual deadness" and "lack of power" the agitation 
of the second coming of our Lord? I think it is. 
It seems to be an index showing how unpopular this 
subject is among the D.Ds. It seemed so queer to me: 
everybody addressed every other body as Doctor. I 
could not help thinking how ridiculous it would sound 
to say, "Doctor Peter," and what the impetuous old 
fisherman would have thought. I really felt sorry for 
these men. But as I witnessed their anxiety and seeming 
helplessness, I felt like suggesting that preaching 
the gospel would be an experiment worth trying at 
least as a remedy for the deadness of their churches. 

With Christian love, in which Sister Owen joins, 
to yourself and Sister Russell, I am as ever, 

Yours in our dear Redeemer, C. A. OWEN. 



Ohio. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-We have had some 
very peculiar experiences of late. We have been holding 
public meetings (lectures from the chart), and announced 
them in the papers. At our first meeting a 
lady attended (a stranger) and at the next brought 
along four more. After attending four meetings they 
desired us to fill an appointment at one of their homes, 
which I did. The room was well filled; subject, "The 
Church, and Her Steps to Glory;" and they all expressed 
themselves as well pleased, and have asked for 
regular meetings. 

This is all a great surprise to us. We learned that 



there are some fifteen or twenty, nearly all women, who 
have come out of the churches and are holding meetings 
among themselves. No objections have been offered 
to any of our views, but many intelligent questions 
were asked; reading matter was acceptable, and 
we distributed a lot of tracts. 
Your brother in Christ, S.J.ARNOLD. 



page 6 1 
VOL. XVIII. MARCH 1, 1897. No. 5. 



CONTENTS. 



Can You Do More? 62 

Views from the Watch Tower 63 

"Collapse" of Foreign Missions 63 

The Arbitration Treaty 64 

The Problem of Church Unity 66 

Real Import of Modern Criticism 67 

The Memorial Supper 68 

Millennial Dawn Misrepresented 70 

"Why Persecutest Thou Me?" 72 

Christian Liberty and Self-Restraint 74 

page 62 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
--ADDRESS TO- 
TOWER PUBLISHING CO., BIBLE HOUSE, 58 & 60 ARCH ST., 
ALLEGHENY (NORTH PITTSBURG), PA., U.S.A. 

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 

INCLUDES A SUBSCRIPTION TO "THE OLD THEOLOGY TRACTS"-QUARTERLY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, NY. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, 

OR REGISTERED. FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN 

MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS: 

Those of the interested, who by reason of old age or accident, or 
other adversity are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, 
if they will send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and 
requesting the paper. 



R1910 : page 62 

CAN YOU DO MORE TO SERVE THE TRUTH? 



WE hope that each TOWER reader will ask himself this question; 
and then act according to his answer. Furthermore, we want 
to assist whoever will accept our assistance. 

The past three years of financial depression have greatly hindered 
what we esteem to be the chief branch of the work— the colporteuring 
of MILLENNIAL DAWN— and the circulation, instead of increasing 
yearly, has been decreasing, because many of the colporteurs, unable 
to make expenses, have been obliged to go into other employment. 

It occurs to us that if this fact were realized by the friends of the 
truth it would lead them each and all to say, "In that event I must step 



into the breach; I must be that much more active in the service; I must 
devote that much more time in letting the light shine out upon others." 
And to such we proffer cooperation as follows:— 

(1) We cannot make any concession on tracts, for they are already 
supplied by the Tract Fund free, in any quantity, post free, to any 
TOWER reader. Avail yourself of this arrangement. No other tracts 
were ever offered so cheaply. The poorest, who desires to serve the 
Lord and his cause thus, has no excuse. 

(2) The price of the paper-bound DAWNS, when sold by Colporteurs 
will hereafter be 25 cents instead 35 cents, which will enable a 

larger number to purchase. 

(3) We will hereafter supply the paper-bound edition of MILLENNIAL 
DAWN (any language or any assortment) in packages of ten volumes 

to one address, post paid, for one dollar;— larger orders at the 

same rate. Five or more volumes, to various addresses, at 15c. per Vol. 

Let all who can avail themselves of this offer. If the new postal 
bill now pending would pass, it would make the postage alone seventy 
cents on these packs of ten, and would necessitate the cancelling of 
this offer,— except by freight. 

(4) The DAWNS bound in leatherette, embossed (English only), 35 
cents per vol., we will supply in packs of six for one dollar, post free; 
or by freight, at colporteurs' charges, for 12-1/2 cents per volume. 

(5) Where a town has been thoroughly canvassed for DAWN we 
advise a canvass for "Tabernacle Shadows" and "Reply to Robt. 
Ingersoll," leatherette, embossed, 10 cents, three for 25 cents; or for 
What Say the Scriptures About Hell? For this purpose we will supply 
these pamphlets at 50 cents per dozen, assorted as you may please. 

Those who use one hour or one afternoon a week may by these 
terms be enabled to devote two hours or two half-days per week. 
Those who loan the DAWNS may increase their work. (One sister in 
Allegheny has eighty copies constantly loaned out— changing them, 
about every three weeks.) 

Let us, dear Brothers and Sisters, by the Lord's help, take a fresh 
hold of his work. The people never needed the truth more! It is the 
only thing that will keep them from Infidelity! People never were 
more ready to receive the truth! They realize that some great changes 
are at hand, and many want to understand them. "When the judgments 
of the Lord are abroad in the land, the inhabitants of the world 
will learn righteousness [truth— justice]." If we are anxious to serve, 
the Lord will give us an opportunity. Here it is! 



R2112:page63 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 



DANGER OF THE "UTTER COLLAPSE" OF FOREIGN 
MISSIONS. 

THE Missionary Review of the World has been edited 
by Rev. A. T. Pierson, D.D., for ten years. 
Its editor is well posted in everything pertaining to 
missions, has written a number of books and pamphlets 



and delivered hundreds of addresses on this subject. 
Its opinions therefore are entitled to the greatest respect. 
In its January issue it declares:— 

"Without claiming any undue capacity for observation, 
sagacity in discernment, or accuracy in judgment 
and induction, the calm conclusion reached after 
thirty years of study of this theme and of active participation 
in the actual machinery of missionary enterprise, 
is, that at no time during the half-century now 
closing have missions to the heathen been at greater peril 
of utter collapse! Wide doors are open, immense fields 
invite, some soil calls for the sower, while harvests 
demand the reaper; we never knew so well how much 
territory there is to be possessed, and how deep is the 
need of mankind; never had the church such opportunities 
and facilities, never such large numbers and 
wealth at her disposal; and yet, with doors open wider 
than ever, and candidates offering in unprecedented 
numbers, the giving of the people of God is so utterly 
inadequate and disgracefully disproportionate, that 
where every divine sign of the times is a call for rapid 
advance and expansion, our drums beat a retreat, and 
our boards loudly call for retrenchment! 

"And— what is to our view most fraught with 
risk— there is a growing apathy about the whole question 
of the world's evangelization, which seems to argue 
a decay at the very root of missionary enterprise. The 
causes for this we can not for ourselves either doubt or 
deny. On one hand there is laxity of doctrine, which, 
at least, leads disciples to indulge a vague 'eternal 
hope,' like Dean Farrar, that the heathen are not 
really lost without Christ: and on the other hand, there 
is a laxity in practice, which leads to a practical recognition 
of all religions as belonging to a universal 
brotherhood of faiths, and to the fellowship of their 
representatives as entitled to our 'Christian charity,' 
forgetful of the famous proverb quoted by Dr. John 
Ryland to Robert Hall, that 'charity is an angel while 
she rejoiceth in the truth, but a harlot when she rejoiceth 
in iniquity," embracing those whom she should 
rather pity and weep over." 

The following is given by the same journal as a 
survey of the condition of the nominal church which 
has led, and is leading, to this threatened "utter collapse." 
It declares the cause to be the decline of "vital 
godliness." It says:— 

"Look at the church pervaded by sectarianism, 
sacramentalism, ritualism and Romanism, and an even 
more fatal secularism. Behold the awful lack of gospel 
preaching, the reckless extravagance that reigns 
and practical denial of stewardship, the low level of 
piety, the prevalence of prayerlessness and the encroachment 
of virtual infidelity. See the church confronting 
the world with its more than thousand million unconverted 
souls, scattered over a wide unevangelized territory, 
with its unoccupied and neglected fields continental 



in breath; yet unable to grapple with the awful 
problems of society, conscious of a widening gap or gulf 
between itself and the world, yet unable to bridge the 
gulf, while the intemperance, licentiousness, and anarchy 
of society takes on a more and more revolutionary 
aspect." 



It was necessary that the gospel should be preached 
in all the world, to every nation, for a witness, before 
the end of this age should come. This work, we believe, 
has been accomplished. We should be glad indeed 
if as good a civilization as our own could be carried to 
the uttermost regions of earth, but the civilizing and 
social uplifting of the world we clearly see from the 
Scriptures does not belong to this age, but to the next, 

R2112 : page 64 

the Millennial age. Those who are hoping for the 

conversion of the world along the lines of present missionary 

effort, or any effort possible under present conditions, 

are hoping against hope. Not only can they 

see such discouragements as are above pointed out by 

the Missionary Herald, a "danger of utter collapse" 

because of lessening of interest in civilized lands, but, 

on the other hand, they must look squarely in the face 

the fact that while their most sanguine and exaggerated 

estimates of this century's success with the heathen 

claims one million converts, the same period of time 

has witnessed a natural increase of those heathen peoples 

of over two hundred millions. Why cannot all 

true Christian hearts, which long for the blessing of 

their fellow creatures, see that there is something wrong 

with their expectations, which now after fifteen centuries 

are as far as ever from realization, so far as the 

complete conversion of the world is concerned? Why 

will they not turn to the Word of the Lord and there 

see with us that the divine purpose in this age is the 

election or selection of a Church, a "little flock," of 

which our Lord Jesus is the Head and of which all his 

fully consecrated and faithful ones are members? Why 

can they not see that this Church, through trials of 

faith and oppositions from the world, the flesh and the 

devil, and through much tribulation, is being prepared 

of the Lord to be "his Kingdom and priesthood," 

through which, clothed with divine power— glory, honor 

and immortality— God will be pleased shortly to bless 

all the families of the earth according to his original 

promise as made to father Abraham.— Gal. 3:16,29. 

Those who have been blessed by the Lord with 
the light of present truth have no such cause of despondency 
as others; nor have they any lack for fields 
of work. The Chief Reaper sends us, as he did the 
disciples in the Jewish age, with the message of present 



truth— "the kingdom of heaven is at hand,"— not 
to the wild savages of foreign lands, but to the 
fields "white already to harvest"— to those who 
have already heard the gospel,— to gather the "wheat" 
into his garner before the "fire" of the great trouble 
shall come upon the "field"— the whole civilized world. 

And wherever there are ripe grains of "wheat," 
there we believe the Lord is sending the sickle of truth. 
In our last issue we gave letters from some interested in 
present truth from the various quarters of the world, 
and we might have added to them others from 
South America, Africa and India. Wherever there are 
ripe grains of "wheat," thither we believe the Lord 
will send the separating present truth. It will be first 
of all a test as to loyalty to him, and worthiness to be 
gathered into his "garner," as one of his faithful ones; 
secondly, if the test of faithfulness be passed successfully, 
it will serve to bless and uplift and strengthen, 
and to prepare the true believer with an understanding 
of many things that were, many things that are, and 
much respecting the things that are yet to be,— that he 
may not walk on in darkness and stumble into the 
ditch of unbelief with the masses. 

RELIGIOUS AND SECULAR AFFAIRS COMMINGLING. 



The general tendency for religion and politics to 
draw together is illustrated by the recent decision of a 
New York supreme judge, denying a Jewish organization 
a certificate of incorporation because its annual 
meeting was fixed for Sunday. The journals of the 
larger religious denominations very generally approve 
the judge's decision, while the organs of the smaller 
denominations, and Hebrew papers, very generally, 
condemn the decision as unjust and an attempt to control 
by the power of the state questions that are purely 
religious. The smaller denominations very properly 
see that if the views of the majority are permitted to 
control in any religious matter, it will be an entering-wedge 
for almost absolute majority control in all religious 
matters and liberties. The Jewish Messenger, 
commenting on this decision, says:— 

"It has served the purpose of again making the 
Jew appear as under proscription, and at the hands of 
a jurist who, both by birth and training, was supposed 
to be above such bigotry. One cannot but feel 
ashamed that our age and city should witness such a 
revival of the blue laws. Perhaps Judge Pryor has 
been influenced by the recent opinion of the New York 
Presbytery as to the doubtful character of Jewish moral 
environment. Judge Pryor's ruling should not go unchallenged, 
and his violation of American civil and religious 
liberty merits a more effective rebuke than it 
has yet received." 



THE ARBITRATION TREATY. 



The U.S. Senate has not yet confirmed the Arbitration 
Treaty between the United States and Great 
Britain; but there is every probability that it will be 
approved with perhaps slight amendments. The 
measure is extremely popular both in Great Britain 
and here, and that with all classes. The disposition 
with many is to consider this the beginning of universal 
peace, with Reason as the arbiter instead of the 
Sword. The suggestion is freely made that it will not 
be long before all the nations of Europe will practically 
disarm. In this, and in connection with the hope for 
"union" amongst Protestant denominations, the 
worldly Church is looking for the realization of its 
ideal of the Millennium, when the whole world will be 
converted; not by the preaching of Christ, and him crucified, 
as the only name given under heaven or amongst 
men, but by harmonizing the Christian religion with the 
various religions of the world, saying, "There is some 

R2113 : page 65 

good in every religion, and the important things are 
civilization and prosperity, with some outward form of 
religion." 

Alas! how far short all this would come of the 
grand hopes set before us in the gospel— even if it 
could be attained. If the whole world were as peaceful 
and as unarmed as are these United States, and if 
the whole world had a great civilization and prosperity 
as have these United States, and if the whole world 
had as much formalistic and true religion as have these 
United States; alas, how far we would still be from the 
blessed condition for which our Master taught us to 
hope and to pray, when he said, after this manner 
pray ye— "Our Father which art in heaven. ...Thy 
Kingdom come, thy will be done on earth as it is done 
in heaven." 

The following from the Jewish Exponent shows 
that the Hebrews are looking at the matter in a very 
proper light: — 
"THE BEGINNING OF INTERNATIONAL ARBITRATION. 

"And it shall come to pass in the last days that 
the mountain [kingdom] of the Lord's house shall 
be firmly established on the top of the mountains, and 
shall be exalted above the hills; and unto it shall flow 
all the nations. And many people shall go and say, 
come ye, and let us go up to the mountain of the Lord, 
to the house of the God of Jacob; that he may teach 
us his ways and we may walk in his paths. ...And 
he will judge among the nations and decide for many 
people; and they shall beat their swords into ploughshares 



and their spears into pruningknives; nation shall 
not lift up sword against nation, and they shall not 
learn war any more' 

"This prophecy of Isaiah and Micah dates at least 
as far back as the eighth century before the Christian 
era. At the end of the nineteenth century of the 
Christian era it begins to find actual realization in the 
affairs of two great nations. 

"In presenting the treaty of arbitration between 
the United States and England to the Senate of the 
United States, President Cleveland intimates that the 
result reached may not meet the views of the advocates 
of immediate, unlimited and irrevocable arbitration of 
all international controversies." 

How far from such an ideal the present measure 
is may be judged from those of its provisions which 
limit its duration to five years, and make it include but 
a limited class of subjects within its scope. Compare 
this with Isaiah's prophecy of universal and perpetual 
arbitration, disarmament and peace, under the guidance 
of divine justice and law, and then judge how far 
off yet are those "last days" of which the prophets 
speak. Over two thousand six hundred years have 
elapsed, and this is all that the most enlightened and 
most closely affiliated of nations are as yet prepared for. 

"Nevertheless, the President declares that this 
treaty cannot fail to be everywhere recognized as making 
a long step in the right direction, and will mark 
the beginning of a new epoch in civilization. If this 
be true, Israel's prophetic writings can hardly be considered 
obsolete. On the contrary, they promise to 
attain a new and increased importance from the fact 
that the policies they prescribe are now beginning to 
be practically carried out among the nations. As in 
many other fundamental principles, a remarkable 
unanimity is here seen between the teachings of 
Israel's faith and the highest ideals of the American 
people." 

"As it was in the days of Noah," men do not 
realize that we are now in the last days of this "present 
evil world [order]." The new dispensation is coming 
so differently from what they expect. Alas! how the 
bright hopes of this nineteenth century must shortly 
be dashed to pieces. What chagrin there will be as, one 
after another, present institutions shall be drawn into 
the vortex of the great time of trouble which is near 
at hand and hasteth greatly. The Lord has not only 
declared through the prophets that the sword shall be 
beaten into plowshares and the nations learn war no 
more, but he has also declared through the same channels 
that this blessed time shall be introduced by a 
time of trouble such as was not since there was a nation. 
And of that time of trouble it is declared that then 
many shall beat their ploughshares and pruninghooks 
into spears, and the whole world be involved in the 
great battle. The battle will eventuate in the utter 



prostration of the world in the zenith of its power and 
glory. But, praise God, those days of trouble will not 
be permitted to continue, else as our Lord declared, 
"there would no flesh be saved." For the sake of the 
elect— because of Christ, the elect Head, and the Church, 
his elect body, and the acceptableness of the sin-offering 
—the Kingdom of God shall be established under 
the whole heavens, to lift up and bless the groaning 
creation, and to grant eternal life and joy to all who 
will accept them under the conditions of the New 
Covenant. 



Meantime even the blind can see that the common 
hopes of peace are not built upon a change of the 
controlling principles of human hearts from selfishness 
to love. For instance, note the fact that the French 
government appointed M. de Kerjegn to examine into 
and report upon the French Naval equipment as compared 
with that of Great Britain. He has filed his report, 
which, after pointing out the great superiority of 
the British Navy, urges a large increase of the French 
navy, and concludes thus: "The aim of every patriotic 
Minister of Marine ought to be to push on to the 
possession of a fleet capable of ruining the commercial 
supremacy of England at a given moment." Germany 
also is increasing her naval armament, so are the United 
States, Japan and Russia, while Great Britain feels 

R2113 : page 66 

bound to keep her fleet ahead of all, to prevent the 
ruination of her commercial supremacy. Evidently the 
lion and the lamb are not yet ready to lie down together 
in peace;— the lion must first get a new disposition. 

Lord F. von Luttwitz, writing recently in a Berlin 
journal, commenting on the determination of the German 
government to greatly increase its navy, says:— 

"A second partitioning of the world is at hand. 
We need only remember the dissolution of Turkey and 
the opening of China in order to realize what great opportunities 
for colonial enterprise [commercial warfare] 
still exist. Nor should the restless condition of some 
of the South American republics be forgotten, for these 
to many offer future advantages. But we will miss 
our chance again unless we have a fleet. We must 
become so strong at sea that nations which can afford 
to snap their fingers at our army cannot afford to ignore 
us in partitioning the world. We must have a 
navy, and we must not lose time in getting it. Our 
alliances are of no value in this matter. We cannot 
afford to go to war for the sake of some miserable little 
piece of land far from us, yet we will have to do so if 
we have no navy. It may be assumed that the next 
partitioning of colonies will be eminently peaceful. 



But unless we have a navy powerful enough to take 
possession of our share and to defend it, the maritime 
powers will not even consider us as competitor, and we 
will go out empty." 



On the other side of the question a new factor is 
discovered. The soldiers of Europe are beginning to 
think, and are not so anxious as they once were to give 
up their lives at the behest of kings and princes. A 
recent dispatch from Brussels, which will be read with 
interest, is as follows:— 

"The disaffection in the Belgian army, founded 
on the Socialist propaganda against the use of armed 
force, appears to be making headway. The Soir announces 
the discovery of organized Socialist clubs in 
barracks, whose members, while submitting to the rules 
of the service, are pledged to refuse active service 
should occasion arise. 

"Inquiry in one large center has already revealed 
the existence of a club of this description, and seventeen 
non-commissioned officers have been suspended." 

THE PROBLEM OF CHURCH UNITY. 



Under this caption the Christian Statesman says:— 
"What we maintain is no mere speculative theory, 
away up in the ecclesiastical clouds, and impossible of 
realization in this matter-of-fact world. On the contrary, 
it is the simple, practical, Scriptural rule by 
which the Church of Christ, according to her divinely 
ordained nature, is under obligation to order her 
earthly life.... We believe that the church cannot 
effectively meet concentrating hostility in her present 
divided condition, with her separate denominations 
often failing to cooperate and not infrequently working 
at cross purposes. We further believe that she 
will be compelled in the near future to search for the 
true solution of the problem of her imperatively needed 
organic unity. We are constrained, therefore, to point 
out what we are fully convinced is the remedy that 
must soon be applied for the healing of her sectarian 
divisions. ...The church, like the state, is a social 
being made up of individual members. Each of these 
collective beings, by divine ordainment, is clothed with 
authority in its appropriate sphere of action. And in 
each of these collective or social beings are found subjects 
of authority. Christ is the Sovereign Lord and King 
over both church and state. His Word, given in the 
sacred Scriptures, contains supreme law for each of these 
social bodies in its distinct sphere. 

"Due regard in the state for the law of Christ 
secures for it the balance of political authority and the 



liberties of the citizen, and thus the establishment and 
preservation of national organic unity. And in like 
manner due respect for the law of Christ will secure to 
the church and all her individual members the balance 
of ecclesiastical liberty and law and consequent enduring 

R2114 : page 66 

organic unity. The admitted differences between 
the sphere and functions of the church on the one 
hand and the sphere and functions of the state on the 
other hand will not affect this analogy. Ecclesiastical 
authority wields no material sword. Its penalties are 
spiritual." 

It is seldom that we find the advocates of Church 
Federation so outspoken as this; but we admire honesty 
and frankness even in a bad cause;— and as our readers 
well know we esteem the movement for the proposed 
organic union of the churches and then their 
cooperative union with the state a very bad cause;— 
one fraught with danger to the liberties of all classes 
—but foretold in the Scriptures as associated with the 
great trouble with which the social and ecclesiastical 
order of this Gospel age will come to an abrupt end. 

We deny every proposition of the quotation. 
(1) We deny that the church (collectively) is "clothed 
with authority." On the contrary, we hold that the 
individual Christian is free from authority except that 
of the head of the true Church— Christ. His fellows 
may advise with him or may withdraw from his fellowship, 
but they have no "authority" over him according 
to the Scriptures. Since there are none "clothed with 
authority," there can be no "subjects of authority." 
The object of Satan, and unwittingly of those whom he 
deceives, has ever been to deprive the individual 
Christian of the liberty wherewith Christ has made 
him free, and under one pretext or another to sink the 
individual in the mass, under human heads and authorities. 
Papacy is a woeful illustration of Satan's successes 
in this direction in the early centuries of this 
age; and the Protestantism of the sixteenth century, 
which never entirely rid itself of that influence, is now 
being drawn into the same snare. 

(2) It is not true, as stated, that God's Word 
given in "the sacred Scriptures contains supreme law 
for each of these bodies." On the contrary, the Lord's 
commands and counsels and promises were first to the 

R2114 : page 67 

little nation of Israel only, and secondly to the peculiar 
people, royal priesthood and holy nation— the Church 
called out of the world and begotten of a new spirit 
through that Word. And the Lord's words to the 
Church are not as an organization but as individuals 
only. "If any man [individually] will be my disciple, 



let him deny himself, and take up his cross, and follow 
me. He that hath an ear let him [individually] hear." 
So far from recognizing the state, the nations, and 
giving them laws, the Lord's Word declares that they 
are all "kingdoms of this world" and under "the Prince 
of this world"— Satan. And through the prophet he 
has pictured these Gentile governments or states as 
ferocious beasts, and told of their utter destruction at 
the time of the establishment of his Kingdom for which 
he taught us to pray, "Thy Kingdom come!" 

(3) It is not true that "Due regard in the state 

for the law of Christ secures for it the balance of political 
authority." Quite to the contrary, the balance in 
politics often goes to the side of the corrupt and the 
saloon element. The history of the various so-called 
Christian States of Europe, written in blood, shows 
that none of them have ever been controlled by the 
laws of Christ, but all of them per force on contrary 
lines. Christ gave no national laws because his kingdom 
is not of this world. He rules individually each 
citizen of his heavenly kingdom. 

(4) The claim that such an organized and dominating 
Ecclesiastical Authority would need no sword 

but would merely execute spiritual penalties is delusive. 
This was Papacy's claim in the zenith of her power. 
For instance, she damned the Huguenots as "heretics," 
told how God would torment them in the future, and 
declared that "heretics" had no rights which governments 
or people were bound to respect, and promised 
eternal rewards to all who would oppose them. And 
when the French king, thus incited, entrapped and 
massacred them Papacy struck medals to his honor 
and made him a saint. Thus spiritual penalties and 
rewards was interpreted not very long ago. We do not 
presume that Protestant authority would at once become 
so arrogant, but in some form all dissenters would 
be considered "heretics" or "anarchists," and persecuted 
to the extent that public sentiment would sanction. 

THE REAL IMPORT OF MODERN CRITICISM. 



The editor of the New York Sun has devoted considerable 
space to the discussion of modern criticism 
of the Scriptures, as recently publicly voiced by Rev. 
Lyman Abbott. The editor shows himself as ever to be 
a logician. Of course, his editorials have aroused opposition 
from many who seek to defend this modern 
infidelity. Referring to these defenders, the Sun of 
Feb. 9, says:— 

"They all miss the point, which is that if there is 
not supernatural authority for Christianity it becomes 
simply a system of moral philosophy, regarding whose 
soundness disagreement is justifiable and inevitable. 
If it is not believed in as coming from God by supernatural 



revelation, but is treated as simply human in 

its origin, it will be criticized on its merits alone, as 

the Jews, for instance, criticize it, and as it was criticized 

by the Romans. The Romans opposed the Christian 

system and tried to destroy it as essentially inimical 

to the state and the established social order. They 

viewed the Christians and dealt with them as we now 

regard and treat Anarchists. If, then, the supernatural 

origin and character of Jesus are denied, his teachings 

will be examined in a light radically different from 

that in which their discussion has proceeded hitherto. 

They will cease to be the foundation of a religion imposing 

an obligation of belief as essential to obedience 

to God, and become debatable propositions made by a 

human teacher of philosophy, and therefore properly 

and necessarily examinable to determine their intrinsic 

value.... 

"It is this destruction in which Dr. Abbott and his 
defenders are now engaged. If the Biblical story of 
Jonah and the whale is to be regarded as purely a parable, 
an allegory, whose actual occurrence was impossible 
and therefore unbelievable, Christianity must descend 
from its exaltation as a religion of divine authority, 
and drop to the level of a system of religious philosophy 
or speculation, of human authorship. If the 
story of Jonah is merely allegorical, a fable, every other 
Biblical tale, from the creation of Adam and Eve up to 
the supernatural birth and resurrection of Jesus, is 
likewise allegorical, for they conflict equally with the 
possibilities under merely natural law. In other words, 
the arguments of Dr. Abbott and his defenders shatter 
the whole fabric of religion built by faith, and put the 
Scriptural reports of supernatural occurrences in the 
same category with the tales of mythology. This is a 
conclusion which the theologians of the school of Dr. 
Abbott try to avoid, with a timidity which may be 
natural in view of their ecclesiastical relations, for it 
takes away the reason for their existence.... 

"Our correspondents who discuss the case of Dr. 
Abbott, have no conception of the tremendous revolution 
in sentiment of which it is a symptom. All the 
infidelity of past periods has been of no consequence 
as compared with the present infidelity, of which, for 
the moment, he has made himself an example. It is 
an infidelity which strikes at the supernatural basis 
upon which Christianity rests, and therefore relegates 
the religion of Christendom to the position of mere 
mythology and fallible human philosophy." 

We freely endorse the editor's arguments and his 
definition of modern criticism as the rankest infidelity. 



The disposition of many to fail to discriminate on 
such subjects is witnessed by the fact that Dr. Buckley, 
of the New York Christian Advocate is rated as an utter 



repudiator of the Bible, worse than Dr. Abbott,— simply 
because he declared his disbelief that every word, 
punctuation and fly-speck of our English translation 
of the Bible is inspired. Nobody of sense could dispute 

R2114:page68 

his proposition. It is the original Scriptures 
that we hold were inspired; not the translations of it. 
Vastly different is Doctor Buckley's position from that 
of Doctor Abbott. 



The start of modern criticism or "higher criticism" 
may be said to have been in the theory of Evolution— 
which is diametrically opposed to the Bible theory of the 
creation of man in God's likeness, his fall into sin, imperfection 
and death, his redemption by a ransom and 
the restitution to come. 

"But according to the following clipping from 
the New York Tribune, the most intelligent Christians 
are already perverts from the Bible faith to the protoplasm 
and monkey doctrine of Evolution, and hence 
to its associated doctrines known as "higher criticism." 
It says:— 

"To-day, though evolution is not a demonstrated 
truth, and perhaps never will be, it is practically accepted 
by most intelligent Christians as the best explanation 
of life.... 

"Quite as terrible at first seemed the blow which 
evolution aimed at the literal interpretation of the 
Scriptures. Most of those who first read The Origin 
of Species believed literally in the creation stories in 
Genesis; and, of course, any theory that made such a 
belief impossible must have seemed a denial of God's 
Word. That view of the matter has been abandoned 
long ago by Christians. ...Thirty-six years ago it was 
Darwin against the whole Christian world. To-day Darwin 
lies among Christian England's honored dead in 
Westminster Abbey, and the man who publicly protests 
against elevating to the chair of St. Augustine a clergyman 
who holds the views of Darwin is contemptuously 
brushed aside as a crank." 



The man referred to, who was treated as a "crank," 
is the clergyman mentioned in our issue of January 15, 

R2115 : page 68 

who protested against the enthronement of Dr. Temple 
as Archbishop of Canterbury and Primate of all England, 
because as an Evolutionist he was necessarily 
lacking in all the fundamentals of Christianity. Now 



hear Brother Moody, the Evangelist. Before a large 
audience in Carnegie Hall, New York City, he said:— 

"Nineteen hundred years have rolled away since 
Christ found no place on earth to lay his head. His 
gospel is now preached in all parts of the world, but is 
it not a fact that even now there is not room on earth 
for the Son of God, and no nation wants him? 

"Does America want him? It is a Christian nation. 
England claims to be the most Christian nation, 
but if a man stood up in Parliament to-morrow to advocate 
—could it be possible— that Christ should come in 
person to rule England, he would be hooted down. 
France, Germany, Italy and Spain are Christian nations. 
Is there room for him in either? 

"Has not Christianity settled down to be a mere 
lifeless form? Suppose it were possible to petition 
Christ to return to earth to rule us. How many of the 
people of New York would sign the petition? Would 
business men sign it? They would have to change 
their methods first. Would stock-brokers sign it? It 
would smash up their business pretty quick. Would 
saloon-keepers sign it? They would find their occupation 
gone should they do so. 

"I'll bring the question closer home to you. How 
about the churches? Do they want him? Pride and 
form and dignity in the church would have to step down. 

"But we can bring the question even closer to 
us. How many ladies here would vote to have him 
come? I think but few hands would be raised should 
the vote be taken this afternoon. Thank God, there 
are a few who have stepped out of the world who 
would welcome him!" 



R2115 : page 68 

THE MEMORIAL SUPPER. 



AS instituted by our Lord, and perpetuated by the 

apostles and the early Church, the Memorial 

Supper took the place of the Passover Supper— on 

the fourteenth day of the Jewish first month Nisan. 

This custom of the early Church is still preserved in 

the English, Roman, Greek, Armenian and other so-called 

"Catholic" churches and by Lutherans. But 

soon after the death of the apostles, ceremonialism 

gradually crept in and very greatly altered the original 

simple Memorial services. Then, too, the idea of the 

Mass was evolved— a fresh sacrifice of Christ as the basis 

for forgiveness of special sins. Masses are not figurative 

sacrifices, remembrancers of the great sacrifice at Calvary, 

but meant as new and real sacrifices. The priest is specially 

commissioned to turn plain ingredients of bread 



and wine into the actual body and blood of Christ in order 
that the priest may make a fresh sacrifice of Christ, 
with fresh efficacy for the forgiveness of the special 
sins for which the Mass (sacrifice) is performed. These 
Masses appear in many respects to merely elaborate 
the Lord's blessing and breaking of the bread and wine 
at the institution of the Memorial Supper, only that 
they may be and are celebrated at any hour of any day 
or night. 

It is not surprising that after a thousand years of 
false teaching and false practice along these lines, Protestants, 
when awaking and seeking to find the old 
paths, failed to discern all of the Papal error on this 
and other subjects. Accordingly, while discarding the 
Papal Mass (called in Scripture "the abomination that 
maketh desolate") as additional sacrifices for sins, and 
properly holding and teaching that "by one offering he 
[Christ] hath perfected for ever them that are sanctified" 
(Heb. 10:14), they overlooked the fact that the added 

R2115 : page 69 

times for what they term "Communion" were added 
for Masses, and that the anniversary of our Lord's death 
is the only appropriate and the only appointed time 
for its commemoration. 

Accordingly, some celebrate three times a year, 
some four and some weekly. If the contention, "the 
oftener the better," be correct, why should they not 
celebrate it every day? While we cannot say that done 
in sincerity it is at any time a sinful abomination like 
the Mass, we may be sure that men of to-day are not 
wiser than our Lord and the inspired teachers of the 
Church— the Apostles— and that any change from 
the original institution must result unfavorably. The 
occasion loses its weight and impressiveness by repetitions 
disconnected with the fact memorialized. How 
national memorials would lose their intended significance 
if repeated three to fifty times a year! The fourth 
of July, for instance, celebrates a great event, the institution 
of the United States Government, and it is 
generally celebrated. But suppose instead it were celebrated 
weekly or quarterly— would not this deprive the 
celebration of weight and influence? Assuredly; and 
so with the Memorial of our Lord's death— its anniversary 
is its only proper or designated occasion for celebration. 
But once the origin was lost sight of, general 
carelessness and indifference prevailed, so that although 
always mentioned in the Scriptures as a "Supper," it 
is now generally observed at dinner time; and rarely 
or never as a supper or evening meal, like its pattern. 

The expression, "As oft as ye do this, ye do show 
forth the Lord's death, till he come," has been misinterpreted 
by many to mean,— Do this as often as ye 
choose. But the emphasis should be put upon this— 
As oft as ye celebrate this annual Memorial, instituted 



by our Lord, ye are showing forth his death, and are to 
so do until his second coming— until the establishment 
of his Kingdom and your glorification therein will fulfill 
or complete all that is symbolized in the Memorial. 

As the people of God "seek for the old paths" (Jer. 16:6), 
the light of present truth spreads and the number 
who celebrate the central fact of redemption (the 
great Sin-offering) on its anniversary increases; and 
this year probably more than ever before, since the 
fifth century, will "Do this" in remembrance of their 
Redeemer, on the anniversary of his death. 

The "Catholic" churches slightly changed the 
method of reckoning the anniversary so that they always 
celebrate a Friday for our Lord's death (Good 
Friday) and, on the Sunday following, his resurrection 
(Easter Sunday). The early Church, however, followed 
the Jewish custom of counting, regardless of the 
days of the week, and so we do. In fact, it is claimed 
by some that, as the Jews had an abrupt beginning of 
months every Spring, with the appearance of the new 
moon at or after the vernal equinox, so they had an abrupt 
beginning of weeks with the beginning of Passover, 
which was always counted a Sabbath and the new start 
of the cycle. However this may be, their Passover 
week always began with the fifteenth day of Nisan by 
divine direction.— Exod. 12; Num. 28:16,17. 

We Christians, however, do not celebrate the 
Passover week. That will find its anti-type by and by, 
when the glory of the Kingdom shall be enjoyed. We 
celebrate the fourteenth; a day of which the Jew takes 
little or no account. It would appear that the fourteenth 
of Nisan should have been generally observed, 
but that the Jews seemed to begrudge the time, and 
generally crowded the supper over onto the fifteenth 
day, to gain one more day for business. Certain it is 
that it was proper to both kill and eat the Passover 
lamb on the fourteenth, for our Lord and the twelve 
apostles so did, and our Lord was crucified on the 
same day; this being provided for in the Jewish arrangement 
of time, which began each day at six P.M. 
-Lev. 23:5,6. 

Reckoning according to the Jewish rule, the fourteenth 
of Nisan will this year commence Thursday, April 
15, at six P.M. At 8 P.M. a few earnest Christians 
all over the world, including a little company in 
Allegheny, will break the memorial bread and taste 
the memorial fruit of the vine, in grateful remembrance 
of him who loved us and gave himself for us; 
and in pledge of our fellowship with him and all 
who are his, in the sufferings and trials of this present 
time; and in testimony of our hopes of fellowship by 
and by in his glory. Reader, will you not join with us 
at that hour? Whether alone, or as little groups, hundreds 
of miles asunder, we will surely have a special 
blessing; and, if we seek it, no doubt we will be welcomed 
specially near to our Heavenly Bridegroom, 



and be specially strengthened to share his cross, and 
to withstand the wiles of the devil. 

We do not invite a general convocation to Allegheny 
as formerly, for two special reasons: (1) we are 
so situated as to be unable to entertain as formerly; 
and (2) we believe that the cause in general is benefited 
by having all of each little group meet together 
on this occasion. Every family together, was the law for 
the Jews; and it seems appropriate and profitable for us. 

As we have heretofore pointed out, anyone of the 
Lord's people, the choice of the company, may serve 
the emblems of our Master's broken body and shed 
blood. The distinctions of "clergy" and "laity" are 
not of God, but of mistaken men. All who are true 
"disciples" are invited to take, eat, drink and distribute 
the emblems. It would surely require a great 
amount of authority and ordaining to qualify any man 
to "create God" out of bread and wine, as it is claimed 

R2115 : page 70 

the Catholic priests do; but it requires only a fully 
consecrated, humble believer to do any and every thing 
commanded by our Lord in respect to this beautiful 
Memorial. Let us, therefore,— all who are his and 
who see the beauty of his arrangement— obey, and "do 
this" in remembrance of him. Unleavened bread is 

R2116 : page 70 

best to use, as an emblem of our Lord's purity, his 
freedom from sin, which leaven symbolizes. Fruit of 
the vine may be wine or (preferably, we think) unfermented 
grape-juice, or the juice from stewed raisins; 
—"fruit of the vine" is quite a broad term. 

MAKE DUE PREPARATION. 



In the type only the circumcised were allowed to 
eat of the Passover supper. Circumcision of the heart 
is the antitype, as the Apostle explains, and signifies 
a full consecration to the Lord and a separation from 
the filth of the flesh and sin in general. Let us note, 
also, that none but those consecrated to be broken with 
him, and to share his cup of suffering and self-denial, 
are truly "disciples," and invited to "do this."— See 
Matt. 20:22,23. 

Note, also, that even the "circumcised" were to 
cleanse their dwellings and put away sin, symbolized 
by leaven. And faith in the blood must be publicly 
confessed as symbolized by its being sprinkled on the 
front of their houses. All these things represented 
Christian life during this Gospel age. The eaters are 
to be Pilgrims who seek a heavenly country; our "bitter 



herbs" are the trials and persecutions and revilings 
and disappointments, incident to our faithfulness to the 
Lord;— they will only sharpen our appetites for more 
of our Lamb— Christ our Passover (lamb) slain for us. 
(Exod. 12:8,11,12; 1 Cor. 5:7.) And, inasmuch as 
the law provided that none of the lamb must remain 
over to be eaten on the morrow, it seems to signify, 
typically, that the privilege of participation in the 
Lord's sacrifice is meant by the eating; and that this 
fellowship or communion in sufferings is confined to 
this Gospel age. This is intimated also by the Apostle. 
-1 Cor. 10:16,17. 

Let all of the Lord's people examine themselves 
to see that their hearts are circumcised, separated from 
the will of the flesh and fully subjected to the will of 
God in Christ. Let us see to it that we purge out any 
of the old leaven of malice, envy and strife (1 Cor. 5:8), 
that the thoughts and intents of our hearts are 
pure and sweet and clean, and that unavoidable weaknesses 
are under cover of the precious blood. Although 
the Lord and the Apostles gave no command to fast 
forty days, as is the custom of the "lenten season" 
with many, and although we deprecate such formal 
commands of men, nevertheless, we believe that those 
who as a preparation voluntarily do some fasting, as 
well as praying, will be blest according to their faith 
and love and devotion. 



R2116 : page 70 

MILLENNIAL DAWN MISREPRESENTED. 



A SEVENTH-DAY Adventist journal contains 
the following misrepresentation:— 

"If it was expedient that Christ should pass the 
portals of the tomb to save men from the Adamic death, 
then it is equally expedient that he should pass the 
second death tomb, in order to save those who fail in 
the first opportunity, that they might have the second 
probation as per Millennial Dawn theology. A second 
probation for all mankind, and especially the heathen, 
is a corner-stone in Millennial Dawn theology. We 
ask, Where is the scripture to show that Christ passed 
the second-death tomb? If not, can he, or will he, 
save man from the second death, through a second 
probation?" 

As a Seventh-day Adventist, the writer of the above 
no doubt acknowledges himself amenable to the command 
which says, "Thou shalt not bear false witness 
against thy neighbor." In the above statement he 
violates that rule: he bears false witness against MILLENNIAL 
DAWN and should make amends by reading 



the book unprejudicedly and then correcting the 
misrepresentation . 

MILLENNIAL DAWN teaches the very contrary of 
what is here attributed to it. It teaches that there will 
be neither redemption nor recovery from the Second 
Death, but on the contrary, that it is the everlasting 
punishment predicted for all intelligent and wilful 
evil doers. 

The merest babe in spiritual things should know 
that under the divine sentence against Adam, which 
was shared by all of his race, not one of the human 
family could have everlasting life;— no, nor even a 
trial for it, which was what Adam had and lost,— except 
as the ransom-price first secured a release from 
that original Adamic sentence. This is the plain argument 
of the great Apostle Paul in Romans 5:12,17-19. 

This one opportunity or chance for life, secured 
by the great sin-offering finished at Calvary, is the only 
one recognized in MILLENNIAL DAWN. And it is quite 
sufficient. The Scriptures assure us that it was "for 
all," for "every man," "a propitiation for our sins, 
and not for ours only, but also for the sins of the whole 
world;" and logically this implies that "all," "every 
man," "the whole world," will be granted an opportunity 
to profit by it, and, if they will, to come into 
harmony with God, under the merciful provisions of 

R2116 : page 71 

the New Covenant, and thus gain the gift of God, eternal 

life, through Jesus Christ our Lord. This one 

chance is to be so complete, so ample, that there will 

be no reason for another. It will be a second chance, individually, 

to but one person, Adam. It can only be 

considered a second chance for the entire race by reckoning 

the entire race as having its first chance while in 

the loins of Adam, in Eden. That Eden chance or 

trial resulted in loss to Adam and all in him; none 

gained life under that chance or trial; and it is from 

that loss that all have been redeemed by the Second 

Adam who came to seek and to save that which was lost; 

and who under the New Covenant, sealed with his own 

blood, provides an opportunity for the whole race to 

return to life and harmony with God— (1) the Church 

as his bride; (2) the world as his children, to the willing 

and obedient of whom he shall become "the everlasting 

father."— Isa. 9:6. 

This chance, secured by Christ for all through his 
atoning-sacrifice;— this chance which dates from our 
Lord's resurrection (except as in a typical manner it 
was previously faintly revealed to the faith of the 
patriarchs and prophets and in the Law to Israel);— 
this chance, call it first or second as any may please, 
is the only one we find in the Scriptures, and the only 
one presented in MILLENNIAL DAWN. But let us see 
how ample it is, and how few have yet enjoyed this 



chance of trial for eternal life, secured by the precious 
blood. 

Did the millions who lived outside of the favored 
nation of Israel for the period of over forty-one centuries 
before Christ, whom the Apostle describes as 
being "without God and having no hope,"— did those 
millions have any share in this chance or trial purchased 
by the precious blood? Surely not!— See 
Eph. 2:12. 

Did the millions of Jews who lived and died before 
Christ, and who at the very most had only typical 
atonements for sin, year by year, which could never 
take away sin, nor make the worshipers perfect;— did 
these have a chance or fair trial for eternal life under 
the New Covenant, which had not in their day gone 
into effect? Surely not!-See Heb. 9:9; 10:4. 

Did the Jews of our Lord's day who rejected him 
have a full chance? No; for our Lord and the prophets 
and the apostles testify that "they were blinded" and 
that "through ignorance" they crucified Christ, "as 
did also your rulers." (Acts 3:17.) And we are 
clearly informed that their national blinding was for a 
purpose, and is to be removed; and that then the New 
Covenant will go into effect toward them as a people.— 
See Rom. 11:25-27-33. 

How about the heathen of to-day, and the hundreds 
of millions of the same class who have died since 
the true Light, the great Light came, since the Atonement 
sacrifice was slain at Calvary;— have they had 
any chance of everlasting life, in the remotest sense, 
never having so much as heard of the New Covenant 
or of the only name given under heaven or among 
men, whereby we must be saved? Knowledge is essential 
to a trial for life everlasting. 

How about the other millions who have lived in 
so-called Christian lands, and have heard church 
bells ring and seen Bibles, and heard perhaps the preaching 
of clashing creeds— that we are saved by works 
and it matters not what is believed;— that we are saved 
not by works but by faith; that we are saved by both 
faith and works;— that we are saved by water baptism; 
—that it should be done by sprinkling;— that it should 
be by immersion;— that it is for the forgiveness of 
sins;— that it is not for the forgiveness of sins, but for 
induction into the elect Church;— that there is but 
one true Church, one Lord, one faith, one baptism;— 
that the Roman Catholic Church is that one and all 
others false;— that the Lutheran is the one, and all 
others false;— that the Presbyterian is the one, and all 
others more or less in error;— that the Methodist 
church is the one, and all others confused. What shall 
we say of those who in all this din and confusion 
("Babylon") do not believe, because they know not 
what to believe? 

Shall we say that such have had a full, fair chance 
for eternal life; and that their failure to believe marks 



them as fit for the Second Death? No; we will rather 
hear the Word of the Lord on the subject. (1) The 
Apostle's declaration that "the God of this world hath 
blinded the minds of them that believe not, lest the 
glorious light of the goodness of God should shine into 
their hearts. (2) We will remember the promise of 
our Lord's Word, that times of refreshing and restitution 
shall come at his second advent (Acts 3:19-21), 
and that then Satan, who now blinds and deceives men, 
shall be "bound" and "deceive the nations no more" 

R2117 : page 71 

for the thousand years of our Redeemer's reign. (3) 
We will remember the promise through the prophet 
(Isa. 29:18; 35:5; 42:7,16) that in that Millennial 
day all the blind eyes shall be opened, and the light of 
truth made seven-fold clearer,— perfectly clear— so that 
the knowledge of the Lord shall fill the whole earth, 
ocean deep (Isa. 1 1:9); and then all the families of 
the earth who have not had "ears to hear" during this 
age shall be blessed with a chance or trial for life under 
most favorable conditions, according to the blessed 
terms of the Abrahamic Covenant through the Seed 
of Abraham (Christ Jesus, the head, and the Church, 
the body). -Gal. 3:16,29; 1 Cor. 6:2. 

Let us remember that trial always precedes sentence. 
Adam was on trial for everlasting life: the 

R2117 : page 72 

result of his failure was the penalty, Adamic death, in 

which we all share. Adam and all of his race were 

bought back from that sentence by the great sin-offering 

which God accepted. As a result another "chance" 

or opportunity for trial for everlasting life comes to 

Adam and to his race. But since the race is no longer 

"in Adam" this trial must be an individual one. 

(See Jer. 31:29-34; Ezek. 18:2-4.) As a full, fair 

opportunity was necessary under the first trial in Eden, 

so now all must come to a clear knowledge of the conditions 

of life and death before he can be condemned 

or justified. This trial will be so complete that there 

would be no use for another, a third trial, and hence 

there is no provision for recovery from the Second Death. 



R2117 : page 72 

"WHY PERSECUTEST THOU ME?" 

-MARCH 14.-ACTS 9:1-12,17-20.- 

"This is a faithful saying, and worthy of acceptation, that Jesus Christ 
came into the world to save sinners; of whom I am chief."— 1 Tim. 1:15. 



SAUL'S transformation, from an enemy of 
Christ and his Church to a friend and zealous 
servant, is generally termed his conversion. In our 
opinion, however, the term "conversion" would scarcely 
be appropriate in such a case. Saul of Tarsus was 
either a bad man and a hypocritical Pharisee, a money-lover 
and self-lover, as were many, or else he was an 
Israelite indeed, whose aim and object was the service 
of God, and whose persecution of the early Church was 
prompted by his fidelity to God. We believe that the 
latter description is the one which fitted his case; it is 
in harmony with his own testimony on the subject: "I 
verily thought that I did God service." If then Saul 
was not only a member of the favored nation of Israel, 
but a true and loyal member of it, thoroughly consecrated 
to the Lord and serving him to the best of his 
knowledge and opportunity, but merely blinded for the 
time by prejudice and misconception, we can no more 
think of his case as a conversion than the cases of the 
other apostles. The Lord chose the original twelve 
because they were Israelites indeed; and he gave them 
the needed instruction for his service; and this he did 
also for Saul, though in a more striking manner. The 
word convert signifies to turn about in an opposite direction. 
But Saul was already going in the right direction; 
namely, in a whole hearted service of God, though 
his efforts were expended upon the wrong thing in the 
right direction. The Lord merely opened the eyes of 
his understanding and showed him the better how his 
efforts should be used. Saul needed no conversion and 
needed merely to be shown aright; and he proved this 
by as much fidelity and energy in the Lord's service 
afterward as he had ignorantly misused previously. 

Saul was one of those Israelites who lived amongst 
the Gentiles, but who occasionally went up to Jerusalem 
to certain of the feasts. His home was in the city 
of Tarsus, one of the notable cities of that date— said 
to have been excelled in scholarship and fine arts by 
the cities of Alexandria and Athens only. He not only 
had the advantages of a home in such a city, but his 
family was one of the influential ones, as is implied in 
the fact that he was not only a citizen of Tarsus but also 
a citizen of Rome. In addition to the education of his 
home city he had received a special course in theology 
or Jewish Law at Jerusalem, under Gamaliel, one of 
the greatest teachers of that time. His early training, 
therefore, and all of its conditions were favorable to 
producing in him a breadth and refinement of thought 
equaled by few; and these conditions combined with 
his honesty of heart and his zeal for God, though not 
at first according to knowledge, fitted him to become 
just what the Lord subsequently made of him; namely, 
"A chosen vessel unto me to bear my name before the 
Gentiles and kings and the Children of Israel."— 
Acts 9:15. 



(1) It would appear that the circumstances connected 
with the stoning of Stephen only incited Saul 

to the greater energy in stamping out what he believed 
to be a very injurious doctrine— a heresy. Our own 
experience confirms the thought that an earnest, conscientious 
opponent is more to be respected than a cold, 
indifferent professed friend, and we are reminded of 
the Lord's words, "I would thou wert cold or hot. So 
then because thou art lukewarm, and neither cold nor 
hot, I will spew thee out of my mouth." Let us have 
respect, therefore, for all who are warm-hearted and 
zealous; remembering that there is more hope of their 
being pleasing to God, and being accounted worthy to 
receive the truth, than for the lukewarm. 

(2) The Jewish priesthood was granted and exercised 
considerable power under the arrangements of the Roman 
government. It had come to exercise very much 

of the power subsequently used by the Popes of Rome. 
They had power to authorize arrests and imprisonments 
for the infractions of their religious rules and regulations. 
Saul, exercising the same respect to law and 
authority that subsequently marked all of his dealings 
and teachings as a Christian, did not attempt to take 
matters into his own hands in the persecution of the 
Christians, but went about it in the manner recognized 
as legal— under the sanction and authority of the 
highest religious tribunal. Let us remember that nearly 

R2117 : page 73 

all persecutions have been sanctioned by some human 
law, and regulate ourselves under the divine code. 

(3-9) The account here given of the opening of 
the eyes of Saul's understanding is that of Luke, and 
was doubtless received directly from the Apostle Paul 
himself— with whom he traveled for a time. Two other 
accounts are given by the Apostle Paul himself. (See 
Acts 22:6-11; 26:12-20.) The three accounts are in 
practical agreement, and show only such variations as 
might reasonably be expected, considering the fact 
that they were delivered under different conditions; as 
it was sought to emphasize or elaborate different points. 
Had the three accounts been exactly alike, word for 
word, there would have been just ground for supposing 
a special preparation of the text with this harmony 
in view. Even the seeming discrepancy of the account, 
when rightly seen, are additional evidences of the 
truthfulness of all. The account itself being simple, 
we need give attention only to those points which apparently 
conflict. All three accounts say that Saul 
himself heard the voice, saw the light and fell to the 
ground. One of the accounts adds that all with him 
fell to the earth as well. The account in our lesson 
tells that the men of his company "stood speechless, 
hearing a voice but seeing no man." Another account 
says, "They beheld indeed the light, but they heard 



not the voice of him that spake to me." These accounts 
can be harmonized in this way: Saul himself was evidently 
the center of manifestation— "a great light shone 
round me." His companions doubtless saw something 
of this light in a general way, but they did not see 
the source of the light; they did not see the glorious 
body of our Lord Jesus— "seeing no man." Saul, however, 
saw the glorious body of our Lord Jesus, as he 
himself subsequently testified, "last of all he [Jesus] 
was seen of me also." Although none but Saul was 
smitten to the ground, the others who stood speechless 
and terrorstricken no doubt soon kneeled reverently 
about their leader. Respecting the voice— Saul and 
all that were with him heard a sound, "the voice," 
but only Saul could distinguish the words— which were 
meant for him alone. A similar case is recorded in 
John 12:28,29, where it is stated that our Lord Jesus 
heard a voice from heaven, saying, "I have both glorified 
it, and will glorify it again." But the people that 
stood by and heard the voice understood not the words, 
but said that "it thundered." Saul and all of his company 
in one sense of the word heard the sound or voice, 
but in another sense of the word he alone heard the 
voice. We use this same form of expression in our 
daily conversation to day. If some one speaks to us in 
a low or indistinct voice, we say that we did not hear 
—we mean that although we heard the voice we did 
not understand or comprehend it. 

The feelings of Saul, as he heard from the Lord 
of glory a reproof of his misdirected zeal, can be 
better imagined than described. Nevertheless, we 
can but admire the promptness with which he at once 
laid down the arms of his opposition, and placed himself 
on the side of the one whose cause he had so recently 
persecuted. We can imagine him praying, Lord, 
teach me! In my blindness and ignorance I have 
been fighting against thee, the Only Begotten of the 
Father, the Messiah; while "I verily thought I did 
God service." Having made such a great mistake I 

R2118 : page 73 

am thoroughly humbled, I can no longer trust to my 
own wisdom nor to the wisdom of those in whom I 
have heretofore confided;— the chief priests, the scribes 
and Pharisees. Now Lord, I come to thee: Show me 
how I can undo some of the great wrong I have done 
ignorantly: show me, and I will be glad to promptly 
follow and obey. 

How deep a hold the matter took upon the mind 
of Saul may be judged from the fact that he neither 
ate nor drank for three days. He could not think 
lightly of his own blinded course. Deep contrition is 
always a good evidence of genuine repentance of wrong. 
No doubt his thoughts were busy, and, well educated 
in the Law and in the Prophets, and familiar with what 



he had learned concerning the Nazarene and his teachings, 

we may reasonably suppose that those three days 

of blindness and fasting were days of prayer and reflection, 

in which he diligently compared the testimony 

of the Law and the Prophets with what he knew of the 

Nazarene and his teachings. His natural sight had 

been destroyed, but his mental vision had been opened, 

and he now saw matters in a new and wonderful light. 

(10-17) The name Ananias in a previous lesson 
was associated with ungodliness and falsehood, but 
here we find another Ananias of a totally different character 
—a true servant of the Lord. His hesitation (vs. 13-16) 
does not seem to have been caused by opposition, 
nor faithlessness, but rather a reasonable caution. 
He had heard of Saul and possibly also knew Saul's 
host to be an enemy of the cause of Christ, and therefore 
wanted to assure himself that he was not misunderstanding 
the Lord. The Lord very graciously made 
the matter clear to him, as he always does to his faithful 
ones, and Ananias promptly fulfilled his mission. 
Here again is an illustration of divine methods: The 
Lord sent upon this important errand one who apparently 
was a very humble member of the Church. He 
did not send Peter and John and James the apostles 
from Jerusalem with great pomp and show to receive 
the penitent enemy of the cross and to make a public 
triumph, but used an instrument ready and willing 
that was nearby. This should be a lesson to us that 
the Lord is both able and willing to use in his service 

R2118 : page 74 

the humble ones who are ready and waiting— 

"Emptied, that he might fill them, as forth to his service they go; 
Emptied, that so unhindered his life through them might flow." 

(18-20) The scales which fell from the eyes of 
Saul would seem to indicate that a certain portion of 
the eye had been thoroughly destroyed by the great 
light; and the healing may be said to have been in 
a natural way by the removal of the injured cornea. 
Although informed that he received his sight, we are 
not informed that his eyes were made whole. Indeed, 
it seems very evident, from subsequent statements, 
that to his dying day his eyes never recovered their 
soundness and his sight was never again normal. It 
has been surmised, and we think with good reason, 
that the continued weakness of his eyes constituted 
what he terms "a thorn in the flesh." Although under 
the power of the holy spirit he was granted many gifts 
of the spirit, amongst others the gift of healing, and 
although he exercised this gift of healing upon many 
(see Acts 19:11,12), yet the Lord did not relieve him 
from his own weakness in this respect. This must 
have been all the greater trial; it would seem all the 



more strange that he who could heal others could not 
heal himself; that he who had divine power for the 
blessing of others in this way, should not have the divine 
power for his own blessing. Our Lord's answer 
to his petition was, "My grace is sufficient for thee, 
my strength is made perfect in weakness." The noble 
Apostle exclaims, Therefore most gladly will I suffer, 
if thereby the grace of God toward me shall be the 
greater: and thereafter he never requested the removal 
of this "thorn." Several incidents in his experience confirm 
this conclusion. (1) Although an educated man, he 
seldom wrote his own letters; and of the one letter which 
he did write, although one of the briefest, he remarks 
(Gal. 6:11), "Ye see how large a letter I have written 
unto you with my own hand." The Greek would even 
give the thought that these words apologize for the use 
of very large characters in the writing,— such as a 
semi-blind person would use; (2) the Apostle comes 
down to us in history as "the bleared-eye Jew;" (3) 
when standing before the tribunal of the chief captain 
he declares that he did not know Ananias as the high 
priest; whereas, if his eyesight had been good, he 
could not have well helped knowing him, on account 
of his gorgeous apparel (Acts 23:5); (4) in writing to 
the Galatians he tells them (4: 15) that, when he first 
met them, their love and sympathy for him were such 
that they would willingly have plucked out their own 
eyes for him— an expression which would be meaningless, 
unless his eyes were defective. 

After a few days to gain strength from his fasting 
and the nervous excitement incidental to his experiences, 
days of communion with those whom he had 
come to persecute, and whom now in his renewed condition 
of mind he recognized and fellowshiped as dear 
brethren, he promptly began to preach Christ as the 
Son of God— publicly using the opportunities afforded 
in the Jewish Synagogues. 

Those who think of the Apostle Paul's experiences 
as on a par with the conversion of sinners 
greatly err. Such conduct as is here related is not the 
conduct of sinners, enemies of God. The account of 
the Apostle's enlightenment in the gospel is the account 
of a most noble character which commends the respect 
of every class in every time. And we are inclined to 
regard the Apostle Paul as in some sense of the word a 
figure, or likeness, or type of his race— Israel— and the 
opening of their eyes now shortly due to take place. 
Amongst the Jews are many who seem to be Israelites 
indeed, merely blinded, as the prophet and the apostle 
have described. (Rom. 11:7-12.) That nation whose 
blinding took place in the fifth (1,000 year) day, and 
which has been blinded throughout the sixth (1,000-year 
day), is to have its eyes opened on the third day, 
which will be the seventh (1,000 year) day— the Millennial 
Day. Israel also has been without food or drink 
of a spiritual kind during all this time. Israel also 



is to be a chosen vessel in the Lord's hand as connected 
with the earthly agencies in bearing the message 
which shall bless the Gentiles and all the families of 
the earth. We are near to the time for the opening of 
Israel's eyes. When the time shall have fully come, the 
Lord will send some Ananias whose touch and blessing 
under divine favor shall bring sight. The name Ananias 
signifies, "Jah is gracious." 



R2118 : page 74 

CHRISTIAN LIBERTY AND SELF-RESTRAINT. 

--March 21.-1 Cor. 9:19-27.- 

"Every man that striveth for the mastery 
is temperate in all things."— 1 Cor. 9:25. 

DOUBTLESS it was in great measure because 
of his breadth of learning, as well as the result 
of his deep consecration, and hence his nearness to the 
Lord and fellowship in the divine plan, that the Apostle 
Paul was enabled to grasp the conditions of the New 
Covenant and the Gospel dispensation more quickly 
than did the other apostles. Although the Apostle 
Peter took as broad a view as others of the original 
twelve, and although in addition the Lord gave him 
the vision to indicate that the Gentiles were no longer 

R2118 : page 75 

to be considered unclean by the Jews, and sent him 
direct to preach the Gospel to Cornelius, the first 
Gentile convert, and although he witnessed the gifts 
of the holy spirit communicated to him, yet the Apostle 
Paul seems to have grasped the whole situation 
much more comprehensively than did even Peter; so 
that when Peter was confused on this subject, and 
stumbling, Paul was both able and willing to help him 
to clearer views. (Gal. 2:14.) It was Paul who 
first saw "that the righteousness of the law is fulfilled 
in us, who walk not after the flesh but after the spirit"; 
and that amongst those who have come under the new 
order of things there is no distinction of Jews and 
Gentiles, male and female, bond or free, because they 
are all one in Christ Jesus. It was Paul who recognized 
the fact that those who had accepted Christ were 
entirely free from the Law of Moses; that to them 
Moses was dead and they were married to another, even 
Christ, and were under his law;— the law of the spirit 
of life in Christ Jesus which made Israelites free from 
the law of sin and death.— Rom. 7:4,6. 

(19-23) But though realizing his liberties in Christ, 
his freedom from all bondage, as of holy days, new 



moons, sabbaths, meats, etc. (Col. 2:16; Rom. 14:5), the 
Apostle was not anxious to use his liberty except as 
between the Lord and himself, and such of the brethren 
as could appreciate the matter. Those who were weak 
and bounden by laws and ceremonies and human traditions 
received from the elders, found in the Apostle 
one who did not seek to triumph over them by boasting 
of his liberty and their bondage. On the contrary, 
if they were in bondage to the Law he waived for the 
time his own liberties that he might thereby through 
sympathy and patience help them to the same liberty 
which he enjoyed at heart. And so we find him advising 
and urging others. He said:— 

You find yourselves free from the law and those 
restraints which are upon your brethren, the Jews, 
you now say they are no longer bondages to you. You 
are thus greatly relieved: nevertheless, use not your 

R2119 : page 75 

liberties for an occasion of the flesh. You may know 

that an idol is nothing, and that meat offered to an 

idol (the custom amongst Gentiles) is not thereby injured, 

and you may feel perfectly free to eat that meat; 

but if a brother is with you who does not yet realize 

this freedom and see matters from this loftier standpoint, 

do not put a barrier between your heart and his 

by using your liberties, but rather for his sake avoid 

the use of that liberty that you may have the greater 

influence with him and bring him to appreciate the 

still greater liberties which are ours through Christ. 

The blessings of the Kingdom of God are not 
merely these liberties to eat what we please without 
condemnation, and to be without restraint from fast 
days, new moons and sabbaths! No, no; the liberties 
which we have as the incipient Kingdom of God are 
far better than these, though they include these. The 
more important things are the freedom from sin, the 
communion and fellowship with the Lord, and the 
prospect of a glorious inheritance in the future. Righteousness, 
peace, joy in the holy spirit, these are the 
fruits of our new relationship to Christ which are to 
be specially enjoyed, and in comparison to which our 
liberty to eat and not to eat what we please and to observe 
such holy days as we may please are insignificant. 
-Rom. 14:17-20. 

This is the Apostle's meaning in this lesson. He 
did not mean that he dissembled or deceived or pretended 
to be a Jew, etc., but that having and realizing 
his liberties, he did not always choose to exercise his 
liberties in Christ if he found better opportunities for 
usefulness by simply neglecting to claim or use liberty. 
Principles may never be abandoned for any consideration; 
but liberties and personal rights may be ignored 
in the interest of others, frequently and to divine 
pleasing; the Apostle was ready to go any length in 



defense of principle, and could not be budged an inch 
(Gal. 2:5,1 1); but in the sacrifice of his earthly rights 
and privileges and liberties for the sake of Christ and 
his Church, the Apostle evidently came next to our 
Lord Jesus, and is a noble example to all the Church, 
as shown in this lesson. 

An illustration of such a proper ignoring of liberties 
without abandonment of principle is found in connection 
with Sunday observance. To our understanding 
Sunday, the first day of the week, is in no sense of 
the word the Sabbath Day that was commanded to the 
Jews,— which was the seventh day. The Christian is 
not commanded by the Bible to keep any particular 
day, in any particular manner different from other days; 
but by his covenant with God he is to keep every day 
holy unto the Lord. He has no more right to do wrong 
on one day than on another. His rest in Christ under 
the New Covenant is not the physical rest of the Jew 
under the Law Covenant. It is higher: it is a rest of 
faith that brings joy and refreshment; not only physical, 
but mental and spiritual. 

This rest is not merely for one day in the week; 
the true Christian is to rest in Christ, and have joy and 
peace in believing every day. Instead, therefore, of 
having a seventh day rest in each week the Christian 
has seven days of rest in each week— a rest and a 
peace which the world can neither give nor take away. 

Not by divine appointment but of their own volition 
the early Church began to keep as a day of special 
gathering together the first day of the week, as a 
Memorial of our Lord's resurrection from the dead, 
and the new life and new joy which began with that 
day. For a time they continued to observe also the 
seventh day, until they learned through the apostles' 
instructions that they were dead to the Jewish law and 
had become "new creatures" in Christ under the law 
of the spirit of life,— which has but one commandment 
and that an all comprehensive one,— Love. 

The majority of Christians to-day seem to have 
drifted away in part from the liberties and appreciations 
of the New Covenant and to be attempting to 
mix the Jewish Covenant with the Christian Covenant, 
the Jewish law of ten commandments with the Christian 
law of one commandment— love. Accordingly Sunday, 
the first day of the week, is by many regarded as the 
Sabbath day of the Jews; and they mentally attach to 
it all the requirements of the Jewish law, and yet they 
continually feel a heart-condemnation in respect to it, 
as did the Jews, because they rarely or never live up to 
the requirements of the Law for that day. The law 
demanded that no work of any kind should be done by 
parents, children, servants or cattle; and as exemplifying 

R2119 : page 76 

the rigor of that law there is a record in the 



Scriptures that a man was stoned to death because he 
gathered sticks for a fire on the Sabbath day. By reason 
of this false conception that the first day is the 
Sabbath day or that somehow or other (they know not 
how or when or where) the authorities and ordinances 
respecting the Jewish Sabbath Day were transferred to 
Sunday, the first day, many are continually under condemnation 
to conscience— a consciousness of sin. 

With some of those who learn the truth on this 
subject there is a combative disposition which leads 
them to wish to display their liberties by doing on the 
first day of the week that which their fellow Christians 
regard as improper— sinful. Such a combative 
spirit is a sign that the spirit of Christ is not dwelling 
richly within— that more knowledge has reached the 
individual than he has been able to wisely use. It indicates 
that such have need to grow in grace, in love, 
proportionately as they grow in knowledge. 

The Apostle's declaration, in the lesson before us, 
is an illustration of the right spirit concerning every 
such question. If our neighbors meet in worship on 
the first day of the week, because they believe it to be 
the command of God, our liberty can be just as fully 
exercised meeting on the same day; not from a sense of 
obligation, not under law, but in the full enjoyment of 
the liberty wherewith Christ makes free. Indeed, we 
can enjoy the day very much more when we realize it 
as a liberty and privilege rather than as a duty and 
command. Yet there are trifling liberties which we 
should yield; for instance, our neighbor, thinking that 
he is under the Jewish law, might consider the driving 
of a tack to be a violation of the day of rest. We who 
know that we are not under the law but under grace, 
realize that no sin would be committed in driving a 
tack; but nevertheless we can well and properly set 
aside our liberties in that matter and conform and cooperate 
in the maintenance of the peace and quiet of 
the day. Indeed, we realize that the mistake of our 
friends is in many respects a blessing and a mercy to 
us. For if many appreciated the matter as we do, as 
a liberty and privilege and not as a law of God, quite 
probably a majority would pay no respect whatever to 
the day, and very soon it might be as other days. We 
are very glad, therefore, that a day for rest and quiet 
and study and meditation on holy things is set aside 
by the laws of the land in which we live. But even if 
we saw no reason whatever for observing the day, the 
fact of its legal secular appointment is a sufficient 
ground for abstinence from earthly labors. But on 
the contrary we see the wisdom of having a day for 
special fellowship in spiritual things and the day 
adopted by early Christians is eminently proper. The 
opening day of a new week symbolizes our new rest, 
new hopes and new life— all of which spring from the 
resurrection of our Lord. 

We advise those who are seeking to walk in the 



"narrow way" to follow the Apostle's counsel and example 
closely, and while realizing themselves free in 
Christ to make themselves servants unto all— "doing 
good unto all men as we have opportunity, especially 
to the household of faith." 

The Apostle was not moved to this abrogation of 
his own liberties from any selfish motives, but by his 
love of the gospel and his desire to supply to others its 
blessed healing balm, which had come to his own spirit. 
Wherever the spirit of Christ is, this spirit is received; 
and if developed it will manifest itself sooner or later 
by this disposition of self-negation in the interest of 
other— especially in spiritual interests and affairs. 

(24-27) The Apostle would have us see that while 
we are granted liberties in Christ, nevertheless the essence 
of Christian teaching is to deny ourselves the 
use of those very liberties. As slaves of sin we were 
set free in order that we might become the voluntary 
bond-servants of righteousness— serving with self-sacrifice 
"even unto death." The Jews, as a house of 
servants under Moses, were bound as servants by rigorous 
laws, the meaning and object of which were not 
even explained to them. But the house of sons, of 
which Christ is the Head, is left free from any law, 
except the one— to love God with every power of being 
and our neighbor as ourself. But this very liberty, 
which is granted to us on the one hand, is the greater 
trial on the other hand. It leaves with us each the 
responsibility of proving our love to God and to his 
cause and to his people, and our sympathy for the world, 
by the extent to which we are willing to abandon our 
liberties for these— as their servants. 

The Apostle illustrates this by the Olympic games 
of his day, prominent amongst which was foot-racing. 
Racers were set free to run, so we as Christians are set 
free from the law that we may run our race and win 
the great prize; but he that complies with certain recognized 
conditions, and "so runs," shall be crowned 
an overcomer. 

Consecrated Christians have entered the lists, to 
run the great race for the prize of our high calling 
in Christ Jesus— the prize of joint-heirship with him in 
the kingdom of glory, to be established at his second 
coming. We start on our race course not aimlessly, 
not hopelessly, not simply for the sake of denying 
ourselves, not to do penance for sins, nor simply for 
the sake of developing character; but the Lord has 
graciously arranged the matter so that we will have a 
grand and noble incentive to self-denial. The prize at 

R2120 : page 76 

the end of the race is his "Well done, good and faithful 
servant;" and to the faithful little flock "the crown 
of life" and the glory of the Kingdom. Therefore 
we are not running uncertainly, doubtfully, not knowing 



what the prize will be, for we are instructed by 
the Lord's own words. 

The Apostle points out in this connection that if 
we hope to be overcomers and approved of the Lord 
we must be moderate, temperate, self-denying in all 
things. This he emphasizes in verse twenty-seven. 
It is not only necessary that our whole being should 
be consecrated to the Lord at the beginning of the 
race, but it continues necessary all along the way, that 
it shall be continually subject to the new mind, the 
mind of Christ, which is to dwell in us richly and 
abound. Otherwise, if we allow the old, fallen nature 
to rise up and hinder the new mind, the mind of Christ 
in us— if we permit the will of the flesh thus to come 
into control again, we may count the race as ignominiously 
terminated and ourselves as "castaways;" because 
the mind of the flesh leads to death, but the mind 
of the new spirit of life in Christ, by which we are begotten 
through the Word of truth, leads to life everlasting, 
and through faithfulness to eternal glory. 



page 77 
VOL. XVIII. MARCH 15, 1897. No. 6. 



CONTENTS. 



Special Items 78 

The Unconditional Oathbound 

Covenant 79 

The Law Covenant Added 81 

The New Covenant Added 82 

"Our Sufficiency is of God" 84 

Interesting Questions Answered 86 

13 Questions on the Anglo-Israel 

Theory 86 

Miracles at Lydda and Joppa 90 

Interesting Letters 91 

page 78 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
-ADDRESS TO- 
TOWER PUBLISHING CO., BIBLE HOUSE, 58 & 60 ARCH ST., 
ALLEGHENY (NORTH PITTSBURG), PA., U.S.A. 

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 

INCLUDES A SUBSCRIPTION TO "THE OLD THEOLOGY TRACTS "-QUARTERLY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, N.Y. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, 

OR REGISTERED. FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN 



MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS: 

Those of the interested, who by reason of old age or accident, or 
other adversity are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, 
if they will send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and 
requesting the paper. 



THINGS ACCEPTABLE TO GOD. 

"...We cannot always be doing a great work, but can always be 
doing something that belongs to our condition. To be silent, to suffer, 
to pray, when we cannot act, is acceptable to God."— Fenelon. 

"Charge not thyself with the weight of a year, 
Child of the Master, faithful and dear; 
Choose not the cross for the coming week, 
For that is more than he bids thee seek; 
Bend not thine arms for to-morrow's load— 
Thou may'st leave that to thy gracious God; 
Daily only he saith to thee, 
'Take up thy cross and follow me.'" 

R2126 : page 78 

"Never let your Christian life disown its past. Let every new 
and higher consecration and enjoyment into which you enter be made 
real to you by bringing into it all that Christ has already trained within 
you of grace and knowledge."— Bishop Phillips Brooks. 

"Only love seeks after love. If I desire the love of another, it can 
surely only be because I myself have love toward him. We care not 
to be loved by those whom we do not love. It were an embarrassment 
rather than an advantage to receive love from those to whom we would 
not return it. When God asks human love, it is because God is love." 
— Spurgeon. 

ALLEGHENY CHURCH MEETINGS. 

"THE MEMORIAL SUPPER" will be celebrated April 15, at 7.30 
P.M. Baptism services and worship at 4.30 P.M. of same day. See our 
last issue. 

Preaching and divine worship every Sunday afternoon in Bible 
House chapel, No. 56 Arch Street, at 3 P.M. 

Cottage Meetings— for prayer and testimony on Wednesday evenings; 
and Dawn Circles for Bible Study on Friday evenings— various 
localities-inquire at WATCH TOWER office. 



R2120 : page 79 

THE UNCONDITIONAL OATH-BOUND COVENANT 



AND THE "OLD" AND "NEW" COVENANTS ADDED THERETO. 



"Though it be but a man's covenant, yet if it be confirmed, 
no man disannulleth, or addeth thereto."— Gal. 3:15. 

A CLEAR appreciation of the divine covenants is 

important and valuable to the Christian. In 

the knowledge of these he possesses the key to the understanding 

of the entire plan of God. 

THE NECESSITY FOR A COVENANT. 



It was because of man's fall into sin, and its accompanying 
degradation, mental, moral and physical, 
which followed ejectment from Eden, and especially 
because of the sentence of death pronounced against 
him, that he had need of the divine arrangements for his 
recovery and blessing provided in these covenants- 
original and added. The failure of Adam had cut off 
himself and his race from divine favor and placed them 
under divine sentence; and nothing that man could do 
would restore divine favor. The initiative toward reconciliation 
must come from God if at all; and the Covenants 
were his statements of his proposition for a reconciliation, 
and how and with whom and by whom it 
should be accomplished. God did not make his plan 
because of Abraham; but merely made known his predetermined 
purpose to faithful Abraham; and chose his 
family as the one through which Messiah would be 
sent, for the accomplishment of that plan. The plan 
itself was, we are told, predetermined— from the foundation 
of the world. Abraham's faithfulness merely 
brought him and his family into relationship to that 
plan of the ages. 

To enforce the sentence of death, Adam was at once 
driven out from Eden and its grove of life-giving trees 
into the wilderness of earth, infested with thorns and 
briers, "accursed" or unfit for the sustenance of life. 
There he was permitted to prolong his days as best he 
could, until the sentence which was upon him should 
accomplish his destruction— dust to dust. 

From the moment of his rejection and sentence, degeneration 
set in; affecting all his posterity. The unfavorable 
conditions of the soil and climate have since 
had their effect upon the physical man, and incidentally 
upon his mental and moral status; for since an imperfect 
body cannot sustain a perfect mind, the elements 
of decay quickly fastened themselves on the mental 
powers; and mental and moral impairment are the result. 
The undesirable conditions of the new surroundings, 
so different from what had previously been experienced, 
gradually developed selfishness as the 



leading characteristic of his being. Thus did the sentence, 
"dying thou shalt die," surely go into effect 
along all the lines of his organism. 

With all the race since, the tendency has been 
downward; so that in the course of six thousand years 
man's physical powers have become so impaired that 
instead of living nine hundred and thirty years, as did 
Adam, the average of life is now only about thirty-five 
years, despite all the efforts of medical science to 
lengthen the span of life. And although improved 
nursing and medical skill and surgery have lately increased 
the average of life about five years (from thirty 
to thirty-five years), yet this longer survival of the 
physically impaired evidently means a general weakening 
of the race as a whole. Surely all can see, and 
should admit, that everlasting life is abundantly proved 
to be beyond the reach of Adam's race. Nothing that 
any of the condemned can do can perfect himself or his 

R2120 : page 80 

fellows. Hence, as death reigned from Adam to Moses, 
and from Moses till now, so it must continue to reign 
over the race unless God shall interpose for the relief 
of his condemned creatures, and in some manner 
provide a release from the death sentence. 

Many are inclined to consider the term "sin" applicable 
only to murder, theft, and such like heinous 
crimes; and not having been guilty of these, they consider 
themselves good, exemplary people. They fail to 
see that from God's standpoint and standard of righteousness 
anything short of perfection is imperfection, 
wrong, out of harmony with his original creation, "sinful." 
"All unrighteousness [imperfection] is sin," 
and the "wages [result and penalty] of sin is death." 

It is written, "All his [God's] work is perfect." 
It was so in Adam's case and with the angels. Whatever 
imperfection— mental, physical or moral— there 
may be, is therefore, directly or indirectly, the result 
of disobedience to divine arrangement and command. 
Imperfection, therefore, is an evidence of disobedience 
to God and the laws which he ordained for the well-being 
of his creatures;— an evidence that sin lieth at 
the door. 

But although God "could by no means clear the guilty," 
he nevertheless sympathized with his fallen creatures, 
and made provision for their uplifting,— from degradation 
back to the plane of perfection, where he can 
fellowship and bless them as at first. In order to accomplish 
this gracious plan, God "gave his only begotten 
Son, that whosoever believeth in him [obediently] 
should not perish, but have everlasting life." (John 3:16.) 
Thus the man Christ Jesus became the mediator 
between God and man. 

In his dealings with mankind God is manifesting 
to all his creatures, angels as well as men, the various 



attributes of his character— Justice, Wisdom, Love and 
Power. In his condemnation of Adam's sin, God brought 
forcibly to the notice of all the attribute of Justice, the 
basic principle of his character; as it is written, "Justice 
and judgment are the foundation of his throne." (Psa. 89:14; 
97:2.) This feature of his character (viz., Justice) 
God continued to make prominently manifest for more 
than four thousand years; until Christ came and suffered 
and died, the just for the unjust, by which act 
the beautiful, divine quality, Love, was made manifest; 
as it is written, "In this was manifested the love of God 
toward us, because that God sent his only begotten 
Son into the world, that we might live through him. 
Herein is love, not that we loved God, but that he loved 
us, and sent his Son to be the propitiation for our sins." 
(1 John 4:9,10.) "God commendeth his love toward 
us, in that, while we were yet sinners, Christ died for 
the ungodly."— Rom. 5:8. 

Until then the world knew nothing of God's love, 
practically. There it was demonstrated. He had indeed 
made some gracious promises to the seed of Abraham, 
but as yet they were unfulfilled, while all others 
of mankind were without God and without hope.— 
Eph. 2:12. 

THE UNCONDITIONAL OATHBOUND COVENANT. 



It was in view of his desire and intention to bless 
the world of sinners, Adam's race, that God, as indicating 
that intention and the lines or conditions to be 
followed, made the great Abrahamic Covenant, and 
later its two dependents— (1) The Law Covenant, (2) 
The New Covenant. The original covenant or promise 
includes all that its added or dependant covenants include 
in the way of blessing; while the latter constitute 
but proper and reasonable limitations and regulations, 
by which the blessings promised may be made everlasting 
blessings to all the worthy. 

Though little is said of Abraham prior to God's 
making the covenant with him, we may suppose that 
he was a man of honesty of heart, of good intentions, 
and one who had already manifested a strong faith in 
God. When Abraham was living in the land of the 
Chaldeans, God called him out from his relatives and 
friends, and directed him to go into the land of Canaan, 
where he would make of him a great nation; promising, 
further, that in his seed all the families of the 
earth should ultimately be blessed. This covenant was 

R2121 : page 80 

a definite declaration of God's benevolent intentions 
toward humanity in general, and that it had pleased 
him to select Abraham's posterity as the line through 



which to communicate the great and much needed 
blessing. The only condition to the covenant was obedience 
in going a stranger into a strange land. Abraham's 
obedience manifested his faith; and his continuance 
in Canaan marked the continuance of his faith 
(see Heb. 11:15); and this faithful obedience was the 
only condition imposed or connected with this great 
Covenant. If Abraham would exercise obedient faith, 
God would do all therein promised through his seed. If 
Abraham had failed in faith and obedience, the same 
good things would in due time fulfil the divine purpose, 
but through another man's seed. 

Abraham no doubt wondered at times how God 
intended to fulfil his Covenant, seeing that the Canaanites 
continued to live in the land, while he was never 
more than a sojourner in it. God's promise concerning 
his seed seemed also to fail; and after many years, 
when Isaac was born, he proved to be only a type or 
foreshadow of the true "Seed" through whom the 
promise of great prominence and world-wide influence 
and blessing would be fulfilled. 

Four hundred and thirty years after making this 
Covenant with Abraham, God manifested another feature 

R2121 : page 81 

of his plan. When bringing Abraham's posterity 

out of Egyptian slavery to establish them in the promised 

land of Canaan, he brought them to Mount Sinai, 

and there entered into an additional covenant with 

them, known as,— 

THE LAW COVENANT, ADDED. 



God wrote his law in ten commandments upon two 
tables of stone, as representing his requirements, and 
appointed Moses the mediator between himself and the 
people of Israel, to ratify the covenant and in his name 
to promise the people escape from death and from every 
evil and blight, upon condition of their living up to the 
requirements of that law; as it is written, "The man 
that doeth them shall live in them."— Gal. 3:12; Lev. 18:5; 
26:3-11,14-44. 

Israel, hopeful that the long deferred blessing of 
the original promise was now to be fulfilled, readily 
assented to the terms of this Law Covenant addition, 
and said, "All that the Lord hath spoken we will do" 
(Ex. 19:8); and no doubt they honestly intended full 
obedience and considered it possible. Moses, fulfilling 
his part, ratified the covenant on behalf of God and the 
people, by sprinkling the blood of the sacrifice on the 
people and on the tables of the Law, saying, This is 
the blood of the Covenant which God hath enjoined 
unto you,— or by which you and God are joined in 



Covenant. -Heb. 9:19,20; Exod. 24:8. 

This covenant was unlike the original Abrahamic 
Covenant, which required no mediator, because it was 
unconditional on Abraham's part except as to obedient 
faith. When Abraham entered Canaan, the terms on 
his part were complete, and God at once announced the 
Covenant and confirmed it with his own oath, thus assuring 
Abraham, and all who are similarly full of faith 
in God, that all of its provisions will surely be fulfilled 
regardless of human cooperation. Abraham's Seed 
shall bless all the families of the earth. 

The Law Covenant, whatever its object, the Apostle 
assures us, could not (and hence it did not) make 
the original or Abrahamic Covenant useless, nor could 
it in any manner or degree impair its gracious promise; 
for it was complete in itself, and God had confirmed it 
most absolutely.— Gal. 3:8,17. 

What, then, could be God's object in making the 
Law Covenant with Israel, and (so far as they were 
concerned) adding it to the Abrahamic Covenant? The 
Apostle answers our query, saying, "It [the Law Covenant] 
was added because of transgression [sin], till 
the promised seed should come." (Gal. 3:19.) The 
promised seed of Abraham, which God had in mind 
when he made the Covenant with Abraham, was Christ 
our Lord (and incidentally the Church which is his 
body, his bride, whose blemishes he covers). And by 
giving Israel the Law Covenant God purposed— (1) to 
show them their own sinfulness and unworthiness to be 
the "Seed" which could and should bless all mankind. 
(2) The Law addition to the Abrahamic Covenant insured 
that the "promised seed" would be a perfect 
man, able to keep all the requirements of the Law Covenant 
perfectly, as our Lord Jesus alone did or could 
do. (3) If the Israelites learned the lesson of their 
own inability to fulfil the requirements of the Law 
Covenant, it would prepare them to expect Messiah's 
birth out of the usual order, to insure his freedom from 
Adamic condemnation and weakness. 

Thus the Abrahamic Covenant and its confirmations 
assured that the "Seed" must be of Abraham's 
descendants, while the Law addition just as surely 
proved that he would be "holy, harmless, undefiled and 
separate from sinners." 

It would appear that Israel never fully appreciated 
the requirements of their Law Covenant, which no 
one but a perfect man could fulfil; for a very large 
class, Pharisees and others, claimed that they kept it 
inviolate— "trusted in themselves that they were righteous, 
and despised others" (Luke 18:9), who made no 
such claim. But our Lord's definition of the Law 
showed that anger with a brother may contain the spirit 
of murder and be a violation of the command, "Thou 
shalt not kill;" and that the command, "Thou shalt 
not commit adultery," may be broken in the secret 
thought of the heart. And, summing up the whole 



Law, as meaning supreme love for God (more than for 

self) in every word, thought and act, and love for our 

neighbor as for one's self, his teachings brought conviction 

to all honest Jews who heard him, that none of 

them ever had kept or ever could hope to keep the conditions 

of that Law Covenant perfectly. Such saw that 

they could no longer hope for eternal life through their 

Covenant, and said, like Peter, "Lord to whom shall 

we go? Thou hast the words of eternal life." Such 

honest Jews realized what the Apostle Paul so graphically 

describes in Romans 7, that their Law Covenant 

was not able to deliver them from death because of 

their inherited imperfections, the "dead body," sin-impaired, 

which hindered the obedience they would 

gladly have rendered to God's just, wise and good law. 

But by these the gospel of Christ was then seen to be 

a God-send; and the Jew whose heart was in proper 

condition, catching sight of the mercy of God offered 

in Christ, exclaimed, as represented by the Apostle— 

"I thank God [for deliverance and life] through 

Jesus Christ our Lord; for what the Law [Covenant] 

could not do [for us Jews], in that it was powerless 

because of [our fallen] flesh, God accomplished [in 

another way; viz.,] by sending his own Son in the likeness 

of the flesh condemned for sin and as a sin-offering 

R2121 : page 82 

for sin-condemned flesh; that [under the mercy of 
the New Covenant] the righteousness of the divine 
Law might be reckoned as fulfilled in us, who [however 
imperfectly], walk not after the flesh, but after 
the spirit of the divine law.— Rom. 7:25; 8:3,4. 

Our Lord Jesus could and did fulfil the demands 
of the Law Covenant: he proved his supreme love for 
the Father by his obedience to the divine arrangement 
"unto death, even the death of the cross." Thus he 
demonstrated that he was the Seed of Promise, and 
became sole heir to all of the provisions of the Abrahamic 
Covenant, promised to Abraham's Seed. Hence, 
now, in him, and in him only, "shall all the families 
of the earth be blessed." 

Thus our Lord Jesus, having fulfilled the conditions 
of the added Law Covenant (thus proving himself 
the "Seed," and heir of the Abrahamic Covenant), 
made an end to the Law Covenant to every Jew who 
believed, nailing it to his cross (Rom. 10:4; Col. 2:14), 
and was ready to begin the work of blessing. 

THE NEW COVENANT, ADDED. 



The Law Covenant did indicate the perfect one, 
the "Seed," the true heir; but it was God's purpose, 
additionally, to select "brethren" of Christ to be his 



"joint-heirs" in carrying out the original, the Abrahamic 
Covenant of general blessings to the world; and, 
as we have just seen, the Law Covenant could avail 
nothing in this selection— its requirements being too 
severe for any except perfect beings, and our race being 
all imperfect. 

On the other hand, to bless the world with a knowledge 
of God and the lengths and breadths and heights 
and depths of his wisdom and love and power, and yet 
to have made no provision for the race, for justification 
to life everlasting, would have been but a temporary 
blessing; for after seeing and tasting they would have 
been obliged to die under their original just sentence. 

It was expedient, therefore, and as an addition to 
the blessing of the Abrahamic Covenant, that divine 
mercy added the New Covenant, that through it the 
original blessings may become everlasting— to all who 
conform to the terms of the New Covenant. The "New" 
Covenant addition is to indicate the way by which convicted 
sinners may return to divine favor, obtaining mercy 
and finding grace to help in the merit of its Mediator, 
Christ— in whom their holy efforts and intentions 
can be accepted as perfect, although actually imperfect. 
The "Law" addition was to the Jew only; the 
"New" addition is for "all the families of the earth;" 
for whoever of Adam's race may choose to accept its 
provisions. 

Since all men are sinners and consequently incompetent 
to make a covenant of full obedience to all 
the requirements of the perfect, divine law (as was 
proved to be the case with Israel), the New Covenant 
must needs have a mediator, as did the Law Covenant. 
Moreover, it required a better, more capable mediator 
than Moses, or else it could be no more efficacious to 
mankind in general than was the Law Covenant to Israel. 

The work or office of Moses as a mediator was to 
effect reconciliation (harmony) between God and 
Israel— the two parties to the Covenant, both of whom 

R2122 : page 82 

desired reconciliation. Similarly, the work of our 
Lord Jesus, as the mediator of the New Covenant, is to 
bring into harmony with God so many of Adam's race 
as may wish peace with God upon his terms; viz., 
faith and obedience to righteousness. 

Question:— What did our Lord Jesus do as a mediator 
for all mankind that Moses could not do, and did 
not do, for Israel? This: (1) he, being holy, harmless 
and separate from sinners, fulfilled the requirements 
of the Law in his own person; and (2) he gave 
himself ("the man Christ Jesus" and the seed of 
an unborn human race in his loins) as a ransom-price 
or corresponding purchase-price for Adam and his race 
(which was an unborn race in Adam's loins at the time 
of his trial and failure and death sentence). Because 



this was done in obedience to the divine will and plan, 
our Lord Jesus was perfected as a "new creature," 
partaker of the divine nature, in his resurrection from 
death, and is now highly exalted "far above" men, 
angels, principalities and powers, in heavenly glory;— 
sharer of the Heavenly Father's throne. 

By means of his sacrifice of himself as "the man 
Christ Jesus," a ransom-price for the first man, Adam, 
he, as we have just seen, redeemed (purchased) Adam's 
race from the divine sentence— death, extinction. Not 
that the race was set free by his sacrifice, but that the 
divine law (justice) having been met, the race is delivered 
over to him who "bought" it with his own 
precious blood, that he may release from death and 
bring to everlasting life the willing and obedient.— 
John 3:36. 

Thus, by purchase, by the full satisfaction of the 
claims of Justice against Adam, the new Mediator has 
a great advantage over Moses, and is thus a "better 
mediator," competent to do all that can be done to 
reconcile, or make at-one, God and his sinful, fallen 
creatures. As the sentence of death brought exclusion 
from the grove of life-sustaining trees in Eden (Gen. 3:22-24), 
and death as the result, so now by reason 
of having paid man's ransom-price, the great Mediator 
is permitted to feed his people with "the bread of 
life which came down from heaven," and thus to revivify 
them. 

But the Mediator can do nothing for the redeemed 
except in harmony with the spirit of the divine Law, nor 

R2122 : page 83 

does he otherwise desire. Hence the New Covenant, 
sealed and ratified by the Mediator's blood, and under 
which alone the blessings are obtainable, demands:— 

(1) Faith in God, acknowledgement and repentance 
of all sins, a full recognition of the Mediator, and 

of the fact that this, the only covenant of grace, mercy 
peace, was sealed and ratified by "the precious blood 
of Christ"— his sacrificial death. 

(2) It requires also obedience and reformation from 
sin to the extent of the sinner's ability, and a full desire 
of heart and effort of life to live righteously, soberly 
and godly— a desire to know and to do the heavenly 
Father's will, under the guidance and help of the 
Mediator.— James 1:25. 

WHO WILL BENEFIT BY THE NEW COVENANT? 



Thus the rights, privileges and blessings of the 
New Covenant, while open to all, as required by the 
original Covenant, will be of everlasting benefit only 
to the willing and obedient— such as desire and seek 



God and his [standard of] righteousness; and they 
alone will gain everlasting life under this Covenant, 
either in this or in the coming age. 

Since the trial for everlasting life under the New 
Covenant has as its primary qualification faith, it is 
evident that only a very small proportion of the world's 
inhabitants have yet benefited by it. As the Apostle 
says,— "How shall they believe on him of whom they 
have not heard? and how shall they hear without a 
preacher? and how shall they preach except they be 
sent? (Rom. 10:14.) But any doubt that the blessings 
of this New Covenant are to be extended ultimately 
to every member of Adam's race, by bringing 
each one to this necessary knowledge, is not only set 
at rest by the Apostle Paul's declaration that it is the 
will of God that all shall come to the knowledge of the 
truth, and that it shall be testified to all "in due time" 
(1 Tim. 2:4-6), but it is guaranteed by the oath by 
which God attested the original covenant with Abraham, 
saying, "In thy Seed shall all the families of the 
earth be blessed. "-Gal. 3:16,29. 

The whole subject becomes transparent when we 
see that the Abrahamic Covenant (which needed no 
mediator because it was God's unconditional promise, 
confirmed by his oath) is the full, broad statement of 
the divine plan, and that as the Law Covenant was 
added (to illustrate the inability of sinners to help themselves 
and) to manifest Christ Jesus as the Seed of 
Promise, so the New Covenant is added (to the Abrahamic 
Covenant) also,— not to hinder the "blessing" 
of every creature, but to make that "blessing" of 
knowledge and the Millennial Kingdom opportunities 
more effective,— even unto everlasting life— to those 
approved under it. 

THE FULFILMENT OF THE ABRAHAMIC COVENANT. 



From this standpoint we can see that the only steps 
thus far taken in the fulfilment of the original and 
comprehensive statement of the divine plan, the "Covenant 
with Abraham" (which, as the Apostle declares, 
was an advance declaration of the whole gospel— the 
good tidings in an epitomized form— Gal. 3:8), are:— 

(1) The manifestation of God's only begotten 
Son as "the man Christ Jesus," and his approval as 
perfect under the Law. 

(2) By the same act of obedience and faithfulness 
he "bought" Adam and his race; and by meeting the 
terms of their sentence, according to the divine plan, 
he has made it possible for God to be just and yet be 
the justifier of him that believeth in Jesus; and made 
it possible for himself, as the divinely proposed and 
foreordained "Seed of Abraham," to make the blessing 
upon the willing and obedient an everlasting blessing. 



(3) According to the original divine plan a multitudinous 
"Seed" was contemplated from the beginning 

(Gal. 3:29; Eph. 1:4)— the fullness, power and authority 
of which should always reside in Christ Jesus, 
our Lord and Redeemer. The next step in the divine 
plan has been the selection from among men of this 
special class,— called the Church of Christ— of which 
Jesus is the Lord and head (Eph. 1:22,23); called 
the Bride, the Lamb's wife and joint-heir (Rev. 19:7); 
called also "members of his body," controlled by him 
as the Head (1 Cor. 12:27); called also his "brethren" 
(Heb. 2:11); called also the "royal priesthood," 
under him as the High Priest or Chief Priest, and 
sharers of his glory, honor and immortality, and joint-heirs 
in his Kingdom and in his inheritance in the 
Abrahamic Covenant as the "Seed" to whom belongs 
the promise.— See Rev. 20:4; Gal. 3:29. 

This selection of the Church is along lines of severe 
testing; for God has predestinated that all who will 
constitute members of the multitudinous Seed must 
"be conformed to the image of his Son, that he might 
be the firstborn among many brethren." (Rom. 8:29.) 
And since none are "called" to this high honor except 
the "justified," and none justified except through 
faith, under the terms of the New Covenant, it follows 
that, since the vast majority thus far are blinded by 
the prince of this world so that they cannot believe 
(2 Cor. 4:4), and since even after believing and being 
called many fail to make their "calling and election 
sure;" therefore this elect Church, when completed 
and perfected and glorified at the end of the "narrow 
way" which few find (Matt. 7:14), will be a "little 
flock,"— containing "not many great," rich or wise, 
according to the estimate of this world.— 1 Cor. 1:26-28; 
Jas. 2:5. 

R2122 : page 84 

(4) When the elect number has been selected, 
and been glorified with their Head, Christ Jesus, as 
associates and joint-heirs in his Millennial Kingdom- 
then, and not till then, will the "Seed of Abraham," 
contemplated in the divine Covenant and oath to Abraham, 
have fully come. And then, immediately, the 

way being all prepared, the blessing of all mankind 
(eventually "all that are in the graves") shall begin. 
All shall be blessed with the knowledge and opportunity 
of the gracious provisions of the New Covenant, 
and all who heartily accept its provisions shall have 
life and joy everlasting. 

(5) Incidentally, Abraham, Isaac and Jacob and 
the holy prophets, faithful before the New Covenant, 
will receive a special blessing and be associated as 
earthly or human representatives of the spiritual Kingdom 
of God in blessing the world; but their part and 

service will be under the direction of the Church, God 



having provided some better thing for US, that they 
without US should not be made perfect."— Heb. 1 1:40; 
Luke 16:16. 

(6) Incidentally, also, another class, "a great 
multitude whose number no man knows" (Rev. 7:9,13-15) 
will be developed; but not being "overcomers," 

having failed to "make their calling and election sure 
—although they will be privileged to "serve"— will 
constitute no part of the elect "Seed" in whom will 
reside the blessing power of royalty and priesthood. 

(7) Incidentally, also, the preaching of the gospel 
in connection with the "calling" of the "Seed" has 
had a civilizing influence throughout the world. It 
has scattered some of the "gross darkness" by 
which Satan and sin have enshrouded the world of 
mankind. But still it is dark;— still "gross darkness 
covers the people;" still the god of this world blinds 
the minds of them that believe not; still "the whole 
creation groaneth and travaileth in pain together," 
waiting for the glorious Millennial morning which shall 
accompany the shining forth of the Seed of Abraham, 
the Sons of God in glory, as the "Sun of Righteousness 
with healing [restitution] in his beams."— Isa. 60:2; 
Rom. 8:22,19; Mai. 4:2; Acts 3:19-21. 



R2123 : page 84 

"OUR SUFFICIENCY IS OF GOD." 

-2 COR. 3:5.- 

"Wherefore,...work out your own salvation with fear and 
trembling; for it is God which worketh in you, both to will 
and to do of his good pleasure."— Phil. 2:12,13. 

THE thoughtful reader of the Scriptures must often 
be impressed with that intensity of zeal and 
earnest striving urged upon all the followers of Christ 
who would so run as to obtain the prize of our high 
calling which is of God in Christ Jesus. For instance, 
we read:— 

"Strive to enter in at the strait gate; for many I 
say unto you will seek to enter in, and shall not be able, 
when once the Master of the house is risen up and has 
shut to the door"; "Strait is the gate, and narrow is 
the way, that leadeth unto life, and few there be that 
find it"; "Whosoever he be of you that forsaketh not 
all that he hath, he cannot be my disciple"; "Let us 
lay aside every weight, and the sin that doth so easily 
beset us, and let us run with patience the race that is 
set before us, looking unto Jesus"; "Fight the good 
fight of faith, lay hold on eternal life"; "Watch unto 
prayer"; and, then, "Be sober, and hope to the end for 
the grace that shall be brought unto you at the appearing 



of Jesus Christ." And Peter again adds, "Beloved, 
seeing that ye look for such things, be diligent, 
that ye may be found of him in peace, without spot 
and blameless. ...Seeing that all these [present] 
things shall be dissolved, what manner of persons ought 
ye to be in all holy conversation and godliness."— 
Luke 13:24; Matt. 7:13,14; Luke 14:33; Heb. 12:1; 
1 Tim. 6:12; 1 Pet. 4:7; 1:13; 2 Pet. 3:14,11. 

How different all this appears from that easy-going 
Christianity which seems but a very little removed 
from the spirit of the world, and which is so common 
that the zeal which strives and runs and fights and 
watches with sober vigilance that the sacrifice of self is 
kept upon the altar is generally regarded as extreme, 
peculiar, fanatical and foolish. Nevertheless, in the 
face of this latent opposition, as well as of all open opposition, 
the course of the overcomer is right onward. 
It is a course of self-denial and cross-bearing, even 
unto the end. It is a dying daily to the spirit, hopes, 
aims and ambitions of the world which control other 
men and women, so that in the end of our course we 
may be of that happy "little flock" of "overcomers" 
of whom it is written, "Blessed are the dead that die 
in the Lord. "-Rev. 14:13. 

These thoughts are strongly suggestive of what it 
is to be an overcomer. It is, as the Apostle Paul expresses 
it, to become dead with Christ;— "Now if we 
be dead with Christ, we believe that we shall also live 
with him"; "If so be that we suffer with him, that we 
may be also glorified together." (Rom. 6:8; 8:17.) 
If we would reach that point of deadness to the world 
which will in the end constitute us overcomers, we 
must die daily. But herein is a deeper significance 
than may be apparent at first glance. To die daily, to 
deny self and humbly take up and patiently bear the 

R2123 : page 85 

daily cross, to mortify the deeds of the body (i.e., to 
put to death the former dispositions, etc.), means a 
great deal. It means more than merely the putting 
away of sin. As human beings we have no right to 
sin, and must renounce it when we first come to Christ, 
as only such can be accepted of him. But as new creatures, 
partakers of the divine nature, through a subsequent 
more intelligent re-dedication of all our ransomed 
powers to the service of God alone, and a consequent 
begetting of the holy spirit to a new divine nature, our 
business is to die daily to the ordinary and otherwise 
legitimate ambitions, hopes and aims of the present 
life. Or, as Paul expresses it:— "Be not conformed to 
this world, but be ye transformed, that ye may prove 
what is that good and acceptable and perfect will of 
God" (Rom. 12:2); that is, we are to submit our minds, 
not to the earthly, but to the heavenly influences which 
will dictate to us in every matter great and small. 



The heavenly influences draw a distinct line of demarkation 
between things earthly and things heavenly. 
Upon the one side are the lust of the flesh, the lust of 
the eyes, and the pride of life, which are of the world 
(1 John 2:16); while on the other side is that "simplicity 
and godly sincerity" whose delight is in the beauty 
of holiness, and whose adornment is a meek and quiet 
spirit, submissive to discipline, patient in tribulation, 
always abounding in the work of the Lord and delighting 
only in his manifest favor.— 2 Cor. 1:12. 

But who is sufficient for these things? Who can 
walk so contrary to the course of this present world? 
Surely none who have any considerable measure of the 
world's spirit. It is only as we become filled with the 
spirit of God that we can do these things. Our sufficiency 
is not of ourselves; but "our sufficiency is of 
God." "It is God that worketh in you, both to will 
and to do of his good pleasure." (Phil. 2: 13.) He it 
is who, for the asking, will so fill us with his spirit that 
we can go forth from victory unto victory.— "If ye... 
know how to give good gifts unto your children, how 
much more shall your heavenly Father give the holy 
spirit to them that ask him."— Luke 11:11-13. 

God bestows this grace upon all that diligently 
seek it of him, through our Lord Jesus Christ, our Redeemer, 
our Head, our Leader and Teacher. Therefore, 
says Paul, "I can do all things through Christ, 
who strengtheneth me"; and again, "The love of 
Christ constraineth me." (2 Cor. 5:14.) Those who 
have the spirit of Christ, which is also the spirit of 
God, the holy spirit, are his disciples under his teaching 
and training. "If any man have not the spirit of 
Christ, he is none of his." Thus it is, that God works 
in us through Christ to will and to do his good pleasure, 
while in his strength we work out our own salvation 
with fear and trembling. (Phil. 2:12.) And he also 
further works in us to this end by all the incentives of 
his exceeding great and precious promises, his providences, 
his discipline, training and teaching and also 
by the sweets of that fellowship with himself, with 
Christ and with his saints, which is our present and 
daily privilege. 

It is plain, therefore, that as Christians we 
have a life work before us. It is not enough that we 
covenant with God to follow the Lamb whithersoever 
he goeth, and that we find ourselves accepted in the 
Beloved: that is only the beginning of this higher life. 
Then begins the work of overcoming, of dying to self 
and to the world. And who ever found it easy to die? 

But now, look away from the struggle of this death 
to the old nature, and consider the new nature that at 
the same instant is developing its powers. Every victory 
gained in the crucifying of the flesh gives the new 
nature more room to develop and to expand its powers; 
and as the spirit of the world and the will of the flesh 
recede, we find ourselves more and more in the company 



and fellowship of our Lord. True, it is, on the 

one hand, the fellowship of his sufferings, but on the 

other, it is the fellowship also of his joys. We enter 

with him into the joy of knowing and doing our 

Father's will. Like him, we have meat to eat that 

others know not of; and we sit together with him in 

the heavenly places of communion and fellowship. The 

deep things of God are ours, the precious things symbolized 

by the gold within the typical Tabernacle,— 

"the exceeding great and precious promises" and a 

lively appreciation of them, the deeper experiences of 

divine grace, the abiding presence of the Father and 

the Son realized, the fellowship with the Father and 

with the Son, and the communion of saints. 

These are some of the present rewards of dying 
daily to the world and becoming correspondingly alive 
toward God. The new nature, daily becoming more 
and more alive toward God, has an increasing sense of 
the value of these spiritual blessings; and with such appreciation 
comes a more earnest, ardent longing after 
more and more of the fellowship and favor of God, and 
more intense longings after holiness. The language of 
every such heart is beautifully expressed by the Psalmist, 
—"As the heart panteth after the water brooks, so 
panteth my soul after thee, O God. My soul thirsteth 
for God, for the living God: when shall I come and 
appear before God?"— Psa. 42:1,2. 

This hungering and thirsting after righteousness, this 
reaching out after God, this patient, loving submission to 
all the heavenly influences of divine grace through whatsoever 
channels they may flow to us; these are all parts of 
the transforming work that will, in the end, make us 
overcomers. To resist continually those influences 
which would conform us to this world is to die daily to 

R2123 : page 86 

the world, to overcome the world, and to refuse to be 

conformed to this world; while to cultivate the higher 

spiritual aspirations is to be transformed, changed, 

to be developed as new creatures begotten to the divine 

nature. This process of dying daily to the things 

that belong to this world and of being transformed by 

the renewing of the mind to the divine nature and 

likeness is the Christian's most important life work; 

and if it be diligently pursued we shall at last be accounted 

worthy to be of the spiritual seed, which, in 

the resurrection, shall receive its own appropriate body, 

like unto Christ's glorious body. (1 Cor. 15:38,48,49.) 

But this selfward work does not end with self, 

for it includes a glowing zeal for God which, by example 

and precept and diligent service, ever strives to 

push forward the great work of the Lord. 

In this view of the matter it is clear that this great 
work before us requires patient, watchful diligence, 
spiritual ambition and effort, fervency of spirit and persevering 



energy and faith in God. Only those who 

have and who cultivate these qualities can ever hope 

to be "overcomers"— "dead with Christ." It was 

R2124 : page 86 

such considerations that prompted those earnest exhortations 

of the Lord and the apostles to faithfulness 

and diligence in our warfare against the world, 

the flesh and the devil. We are reminded, too, that 

in our warfare we wrestle not with flesh and blood, but 

with the invisible powers of darkness strongly intrenched 

both in the world and in the downward tendencies 

of our fallen flesh; besides which there are innumerable 

arts and wiles of the adversary, against 

which we must maintain a vigilant watch. 

We cannot afford, therefore, to slacken our diligence, 
or to grow negligent in availing ourselves of any 
of the means of grace, or to waste the precious time 
granted to us for this overcoming work in idly dreaming 
of the crown, while we fail to bear the cross. Let 
us be up and doing, for "the time is short," the work 
is great, the way is narrow, the obstacles are many, 
the foes and their devices increase: let us be sober, let 
us be vigilant. But let us not forget that the work is 
the Lord's, in the sense that his strength supplied to 
us is vouchsafed to accomplish it, and that he who has 
begun the good work in us is able to complete it; and 
he will do so, if we let him; i.e., if we obediently follow 
his leading, doing his will. 

To do this requires faith: "This is the victory 
that overcometh the world, even your faith." A wavering 
faith will hold on, with one hand at least, to the 
things of this world, as "something tangible," being 
afraid to let go and trust in the things unseen and to 
live for them alone. But our Lord encouragingly says, 
"Be of good cheer, I have overcome the world." (John 16:33.) 
Having overcome, he has long since entered 
into his glory; and it is the Father's good pleasure 
to permit those to share that glory with him who, 
when tried and proved, as he was proved, under the 
discipline of fiery trial, shall not be found wanting in 
faithfulness and zeal for God. 

Let us, then, as many as would be counted worthy 
to live and reign with Christ, take heed, not to the examples 
of the multitudes of those who name the name 
of Christ, but, first of all, to the perfect pattern, Christ 
Jesus, and secondly to those most faithful ones who 
follow in his footsteps of self-denial and of zeal for the 
cause of God. M. F. RUSSELL. 



R2124 : page 86 

INTERESTING QUESTIONS ANSWERED. 



RECKONING THE PASSOVER DATE. 



Question.— How do the Jews reckon the date for 
the Passover? 

Answer.— Their first month Nisan (also called 
Abib) was reckoned as beginning with the first new 
moon after the Spring equinox, in Palestine,— not 
quite the same as here. And if the new moon preceded 
the equinox a day it did not matter: the important 
point was that the moon should be at her full 
on the 14th of the month, the day for the killing of 
the Passover lamb. 

The importance of the moon's being at her full 
was that the moon symbolized the Law Covenant as the 
sun symbolizes the Gospel or New Covenant (Rev. 12:1) 
and the offering of our Lord to Israel as their 
King, the day before he was crucified, represented the 
full of their blessing: from his rejection, then, they as 
a nation began to wane. 

THIRTEEN QUESTIONS ON THE ANGLO-ISRAEL THEORY. 



One who read the treatise on this subject in our 
issue of Jan. 15, asks several questions, which we answer 
in order below:— 

Question.— (1).— If the "ten tribes" do not exist 
as a nation, but returned to Palestine with the Jews 
under Cyrus, how do you account for the failure of 
Amos 9:15? 

Answer.— We did not say that the ten tribes returned 
to Palestine with the Jews under Cyrus. We 
said that during that long captivity the division and 
jealousy disappeared; and that then, and ever since, 
the names Jews and Israelites no longer distinguished 
as between descendants of the two and the ten tribes, 
but were used indiscriminately in referring to the same 
people. We proved this by many New Testament references; 
and referred to the fact that no Jew to-day 
will pretend to say from which tribe he descended. 

R2124:page87 

Although the tribal lineage of but few of the early believers 
is given, these show that the Jews were mixed 
tribally;— Paul was of the tribe of Benjamin, Barnabas 
of the tribe of Levi, and Anna, the prophetess, of the 
tribe of Asher. We proved that only a few of all of 
the tribes returned to Palestine when Cyrus gave the 
permit to all under the name (not of Judah but) of 



Israel. We proved from the Scriptures that such of 
all the tribes (a remnant) as accepted Christ became 
spiritual Israel, that many ("all Israel") were blinded 
and will not have their eyes opened until the full 
number to complete the bride of Christ has been taken 
from the Gentiles. (Rom. 11:25-33.) We showed 
that all of that nation who abandoned the promises and 
circumcision ceased in every sense of the word to be 
of either natural Israel or spiritual Israel. 

We are not obliged to account for the failure of 
Amos 9:15, for it has not failed. It is not yet fulfilled 
in the return of the "Jews," "all Israel" to Palestine. 
This Scripture was evidently in the mind of the 
Apostle James, when, after hearing Peter's explanation 
of God's sending him to preach the gospel to the 
Gentiles, he said:— 

"Simeon hath declared how God at the first did [or 
made a beginning to] visit the Gentiles, to take out of 
them a people for his name. And to this agree the 
words of the prophets: After this I will return, and 
will build again the tabernacle of David."— 
Acts 15:14-16. 

The throne of David was over all the tribes and 
here represents the throne of the greater David— the 
Beloved Son of God— about to be established after this. 

Question. (2).— Zechariah, who prophesied about 
250 B.C., after the return of the Jews from Babylon, 
mentions the return of Joseph as yet future. Why, if 
Joseph had already returned? 

Answer.— Your question indicates great prejudice 
and blindness which you must get rid of if you would 
see the truth. You say, "the return of the Jews from 
Babylon," but Ezra (3:1; 7:13; 9:1) says that it was 
Israel that Cyrus set free, and Israel that came to 
Palestine with him. And the next company under 
Nehemiah, ninety years after (and after Zechariah's 
prophecy), knew no division in Israel.— See Neh. 9:1,2; 
11:3,4,20. 

Turn now to Zechariah's prophecy. Note that 
the theme beginning chap. 9:9 and concluding chap. 10:4 
relates to and was fulfilled at our Lord's first advent; 
as also the 1 1th chapter. (See particulars in 
MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. Ill, chap. 8.) Chap. 10:5-12, 
to which you refer, evidently applies to the 
second advent of our Lord. Notice that while Judah, 
Joseph and Ephraim are mentioned (See 9:13; 10:6,7) 
they are not, as formerly, mentioned as antagonistic or 
even rival kingdoms, but as unitedly sharing divine 
favor;— of the same kind and at the same time. The 
Lord does not mention Israel as one nation and Judah 
as another; but mentioning the chief tribe of each part 
of the once divided nation, he so to speak clasps their 
hands and assures them that the coming favor will be 
to both and to all the tribes of the covenanted seed. 

Question. (3).— At what time in the forgotten history 
of the race did the house of Joseph enjoy the 



birthright blessings of Gen. 48: 19? 

Answer.— The birthright, with its "double portion" 
of the promised land (Deut. 21:15-17), went to 
Ephraim and Manasseh, the sons of Joseph; and the 
blessing, "let them grow into a multitude in the midst 
of the earth [margin, land]," made the double portion 
almost a necessity. Nevertheless, notice carefully that 
the ruling power went to Judah.— See Gen. 49:8-12. 

You possibly refer specially to Jacob's declaration, 
Ephraim "shall become a multitude of nations." The 
marginal reading corrects this to read "fulness of nations." 
But the fulness of what nations? We answer, 
Ephraim became the fulness of multitude to the tribes, 
or nations, or peoples* of Israel. Look in your "Teacher's 
Bible" at a map showing Canaan as divided 
among the tribes, and note the goodly portions given 
to the children of Joseph (Ephraim and Manasseh) on 
the west of Jordan; and then note how the "branches 
went over the wall" or river; see the large tract east 
of Jordan. In all they had about one-half of Canaan. 
These large appropriations of the best of the land were 
because these tribes were multitudinous amongst the 
tribes or nations of Israel. The map shows Manasseh 
more numerous than Ephraim at the beginning: but 
soon, as Jacob had prophesied in this blessing, Ephraim 
became the greater, so that when the federation of 
tribes split and formed rival kingdoms the influence of 
Ephraim's multitudes among the nations or tribes was 
so great that the side which he espoused took the name 
Israel, and sometimes because of his numbers and influence 
all were called Ephraim. 

Now turn to Gen. 49 and compare the blessings 
upon Judah in vss 8-12 with those upon Joseph (including 
Ephraim and Manasseh) in vss 22-26. Both 
blessings are great, but that of Judah is by far the 
greater. 



*The same Hebrew word rendered nations in Gen. 48:19 is 
rendered the people in referring to the twelve tribes, in the following 
passages:-Josh. 3:17; 4:1; 5:6,8; 10:13; Judges 2:20. 

R2125 : page 87 

The statement, "The archers have sorely grieved 
him, and shot at him, and hated him: but his bow 
abode in strength, and the arms of his hands were 
made strong by the hands of the mighty God of Jacob, 
by the name of* the Shepherd, the Stone of Israel; 



*Preferred reading of old MSS. 
R2125 : page 88 



even by the God of thy father, who shall help thee," 
is not a promise for the future but a recounting of 
Joseph's past experiences at the hands of his brethren. 
His blessings, as enumerated, are multitudes of children 
and estate. If any think the prosperity of 
Joseph's children among the tribes does not fulfil all 
this, let them recognize the fact that Ephraim and 
Manasseh constituted a majority of the dispersed Israelites 
now commonly called "Jews" after the name of 
their great capital city, Jerusalem. Surely, the Jews 
are a fulness amongst all nations, and prosperous as no 
other people. They are, as predicted, lenders to many 
nations (Deut. 28:12), and in a peculiar manner are 
pushing or goring all peoples to the ends of the earth. 
(See Deut. 33:17, Revised Version.) So much so 
that every nation is seeking to get rid of them.— 
"These are the ten thousands of Ephraim and the 
thousands of Manasseh." 

Question. (4).— Must not Israel exist as a nation 
before the fulfilment of Jer. 3:18? 

Answer.— No; neither will Judah exist as a nation 
at that time. This verse merely tells of the gathering 
of Israel and Judah for the purpose of reestablishing 
them in their own land. This prophecy corresponds 
to that of Isaiah 11:12-16. They walk "with" each 
other and "come together out of the land of the North 
[where they have been together, all recognized as Jews] 
unto the land that I have given for an inheritance unto 
your fathers." Those who think erroneously that the 
Jews are only two of the tribes, and that the peoples 
of Great Britain and the United States and the British 
colonies are parts of the ten tribes, would have all 
these peoples— over one hundred millions— go with the 
Jews to the little corner of the earth called Palestine. 

Do you ask, why are Judah and Israel mentioned 
separately by the prophets if they are to be one people, 
dwelling together as Jews, at the time of the fulfilment 
of the prophecy? We answer: Because these 
prophecies were written before all had gone into captivity 
to Babylon; and had the national name Israel 
alone been used Jeremiah's hearers would have supposed 
that Judah was not to share in the promised 
blessing. For this reason also it is shown that there 
will no longer be factional differences between the two 
members of the one nation,— as there had been for over 
two centuries up to that time. 

Question. (5).— Has Deut. 32:26 ever been 
fulfilled? 

Answer.— This prophecy by Moses was not concerning 
a part but against "the whole house of Israel." 
If taken literally as it reads in our common version of 
the Bible it has not yet been fulfilled, for the remembrance 
of Israel continues. The Hebrew word here 
used, translated remembrance, does not signify knowledge 
(as the questioner evidently supposes), but rather 



memorial or scent* Pleasant remembrance of Israel 
is to cease— we may say has very generally ceased (except 
with themselves and the true spiritual Israel). The 
modern name for Israelites— "Jews"— is becoming a 
stench instead of a scent in the nostrils of the world, 
which shortly will "drive them" into their own land 
as predicted in the Word of the Lord. 

Do you object to this answer? Then we will refer 
you to the inspired Apostle Paul. Let him settle 
the matter as to whether or not "all Israel" as he 
knew them in his day— not lost— is here referred to by 
the Prophet Moses. Paul quotes part of verse 21 verbatim, 
with other prophecies against Israel, and applies 
them without qualification or limitation to "all the 
house of Israel" living in his day— not lost, but well 
known, called "Jews"— living at Jerusalem and scattered 
throughout the world. He specially addressed 
some living at Rome.— See Rom. 10:19-21; 
11:1,7-12,25-32. 

Question. (6).— What did the Jews mean when 
they said, "Will he go to the dispersed among the 
Gentiles?"— John 7:35. 

Answer.— The meaning of this is plain. There 
were probably more "Jews" living outside Palestine, 
among the nations, than resided in Palestine. The 
latter, however, were accounted the more faithful and 
devoted, in that they clung to the land of promise as 
well as to the promise. It would not occur to a Jew 
that anyone claiming to be the Jewish Messiah would 
go to the Gentiles; and so when our Lord spoke of going 
away they wondered if he would go to the Jews 
residing in the surrounding nations. The Apostles did 
this afterward— preaching to the Jew first and afterward 
to the Gentiles. It was to these "dispersed" 
"Jews," "Israelites" of "our twelve tribes" that 
James and Peter wrote epistles. 

Question. (7).— Can we imagine all the branches of 
the olive tree broken off, and only wild branches in 
their stead? 

Answer.— If you refer to the Apostle's illustration, 
we refer you to his own words, Romans 11:15-21. 
The Apostle does not say that all, but some, of the 
natural branches were broken off. Our Lord and the 
Apostles and the several thousand brought to Christ 
shortly after Pentecost were Israelites, natural branches, 
and were not broken off. And doubtless many others 
among the Jews were found worthy of the light and 
blessing then due. 

Notice that none of the savages living at that time 
in Britain and Ireland (without knowledge of God or 
of Moses or of the Law, or of Abraham, or of the 



*The same Hebrew word here rendered remembrance is rendered 
"scent" in Hos. 14:7 and "memorial" in Esther 9:28. 



R2125 : page 89 

promises, or of circumcision) could be here referred to. 
Such could not be branches of the "olive tree" to which 
the Apostle refers, whoever their ancestors may have 
been. The olive tree existed complete in the Apostle's 
day;— then some were broken off and cast away, in 
order that the wild branches from the Gentiles might 
be grafted in. 

Question. (8).— Does the declaration of Matt. 21:43, 
"The kingdom of God shall be taken from you 
[Jews], and given to a nation [Greek, ethnos] bringing 
forth the fruits thereof," mean what it says, or that it 
was to be given to the conglomerate mass of nations 
known as the Gentile Church? 

Answer.— The church which you describe as the 
"Gentile church" (or churches?), composed of a "conglomerate 
mass of nations," is not recognized of the 
Lord's Word, except it be as mystic "Babylon." Your 
description fits Babylon,— it is "conglomerate;" it is 
composed of "nations," gentiles, aliens; it might 
therefore perhaps be called a "Gentile church." But 
it will inherit nothing but tribulation and destruction, 
as promised.— Rev. 18:4-12. 

The Kingdom heirship was taken from "Israel," 
the "Jews," as the Apostle testifies. (Rom. 11:7.) It 
was transferred to the nation bringing forth the proper 
fruits. (See Luke 22:27; 12:32; 2 Tim. 2:12; Matt. 11:12.) 
Which nation? do you ask? Well, not the 
British nation nor any nation of "this world." None 
of these "bring forth the fruits thereof." The best 
of them are Ishmaelitish. In none of them can we see 
even a prospect of the fulfilment of our Redeemer's 
prayer, "Thy kingdom come, thy will be done on earth 
as it is done in heaven." 

Let us ask the inspired Apostle Peter to definitely 
and positively point out to us the nation to which the 
promise of the Kingdom was transferred when it was 
taken from Israel after the flesh. The Apostle 
replies:— 

"Ye [new creatures in Christ are neither Jew nor 
Gentile, bond nor free, but ye] are a chosen generation, 
a royal priesthood, an holy nation, a peculiar people." 
— 1 Pet. 2:9; compare Exod. 19:6. 

Is the questioner a member and heir of this Kingdom 
and yet ignorant of it? Perhaps he has been so 
mistaught in the "Gentile church" (good name!) that 
he knew of no other church than "the conglomerate 
mass" called Christendom, and had not heard of "the 
gospel of the Kingdom" and the "peculiar people." 

Question. (9).— Jeremiah says, "Behold the days 
come, saith the Lord, that I will make a new covenant 
with the house of Israel and with the house of Judah." 
(Jer. 31:31.) Does not this mean that the covenant 
made with the Hebrew race is for them alone? 



Answer.— The Law Covenant was with the Hebrew 
race alone; but the original promise to Abraham was 
for the blessing of all the families of the earth. The 
New Covenant began to operate as soon as it was sealed 
with the precious blood of Christ, and throughout 
this Gospel age it has "justified" all who come unto 
God through Christ— the household of faith. When 
this age ends it will be made effective as a covenant 
with "all the house of Israel" whose blindness will be 
turned away that they may "look upon him whom 
they have pierced." But next in order the light and 
knowledge of the blessing and privileges of this New 
Covenant will be granted to every creature— for all 
of whom it was sealed. See the leading article in this 
issue. Jeremiah's prophecy mentions both Israel and 
Judah because when he wrote they had not been reunited, 
and to have used the name Israel alone or even 
"all Israel" might at that time have been misunderstood 
as not including Judah, whereas he specially addressed 
Judah, with whom he resided. 

Question. (10).— What is implied by Simeon's 
words,— "Mine eyes have seen thy salvation, which 
thou hast prepared before the face of all people, a light 
to lighten the gentiles [heathen] and the glory of thy 
people Israel?"— Luke 2:30-32. 

Answer.— Jesus is not only to be the glory of Israel, 
but the light of the world;— eventually, he shall lighten 
every man that cometh into the world. (John 1:9.) As 
to Israel— What Israel is here meant? is probably 

R2126 : page 89 

your inquiry. We reply, (1) Christ is the glory 
of the Church, the true Israel of God (Rom. 1 1:7); 
and (2) he will be the glory of fleshly or natural 
Israel when their eyes are opened and they are received 
by him under the New Covenant. Earthly Israel 
(under Abraham, Isaac and Jacob and all the prophets) 
shall then as the agents and representatives of the 
heavenly Zion become a blessing and a praise in the 
whole earth— as the earthly representatives of the 
spiritual Kingdom of Christ. 

Question. (11). -When will Isaiah 41:21,22 be 
fulfilled? 

Answer.— Evidently at the close of this Gospel 
age, as indicated by the Apostle Paul, who almost 
quotes the words.— See Rom. 11:26,27. 

Question. (12).— Isa. 48:11,12 says, "I will not 
give my glory to another. Hearken unto me, O Jacob, 
and Israel, my called." Will this glory ever be given 
to Gentiles? Is it not for Israel only? 

Answer.— You totally misapprehend the Scripture 
you quote. God gives his glory to no one (neither 
to Jews nor to Gentiles), but keeps it for himself. 
Read verses 9 to 1 1 as one subject. Verse 12 begins a 
new subject. Compare Isa. 42:8. 



Question. (13). --Does the Apostle Peter (1 Pet. 2:9,10,25) 
refer to Gentiles? If so, when were they 

R2126 : page 90 

sheep, and when did they wander away so as to make 
return possible? 

Answer.— Peter was the Apostle to the circumcision, 
Paul to the uncircumcision. (Gal. 2:7,8.) 
Peter accordingly addresses those who had been Jews, 
Israelites, non-residents of Palestine. But please note 
carefully that he is not addressing "lost" Israelites; 
but the large class of Israelites of all tribes, who after 
the Babylonian captivity made their homes amongst 
the Gentiles. Peter knew and tells where they resided. 
See 1 Pet. 1:1. 

However, do not lose sight of the fact so clearly 
stated (Gal. 3:5,6) that these called from amongst 
the Gentiles are fellow-heirs and of the same body, 
priesthood, or holy nation, with the remnant of all 
Israel which received Christ— Eph. 3:6. 



R2126 : page 90 

-(MARCH 28.-S.S. LESSON, REVIEW)- 



MIRACLES AT LYDDA AND JOPPA. 

-APRIL 4.-ACTS 9:32-43.- 

"Jesus Christ maketh thee whole."— Acts 9:34. 

THIS lesson calls us back to the period when the 

Church had rest from persecution— probably 

about A.D. 40. In divine providence it was a time for 

the rooting and establishing of the Christian faith. 

The general dispersion of believers noted in a previous 

lesson had not yet taken place; but the apostles were 

actively circulating throughout the towns and villages 

of Palestine;— as is here stated of Peter's visit to the 

believers at Lydda. We pause to remark that believers 

in the days of the apostles lived lives so separated 

from the world, that the name "saints" (holy ones) 

was appropriate to them. So let all true Christians today 

live— consecrated, holy, separated lives, copies of 

God's dear Son, to the extent of their ability. The habit 

in the Roman Catholic Church is to wait several centuries; 

until his evil deeds are forgotten, and then to 

canonize a man or woman as a "saint," often in recognition 

of services rendered to Papacy and against the truth. 

The healing of the paralytic, Eneas, was a very 
notable evidence of the power of the Lord, very similar 



to the healing at the temple gate, Beautiful. Here, 

as always, the great Apostle made sure that none 

should think the power exercised to be his own;— distinctly 

affirming that Jesus, the Messiah, whom their 

rulers had crucified, had performed the cure and was 

therefore not dead, as they supposed, but risen. 

The valley called Sharon, very fertile, was thickly 
settled, and Lydda was one of its towns. We are 
not to presume that all the people became true Christians, 
but that they were convinced of the power of 
Jesus; and doubtless some of them consecrated themselves 
to him and became true disciples. 

The holy spirit was evidently guiding the apostle 
and using these occasional miracles to draw attention 
to the Gospel which Peter preached. Thus he "found" 
the man who, under divine providence, was to be 
cured. Thus also at the right time, when he was near 
(about nine miles away), Tabitha (Aramic language) or 
Dorcas (Greek) died, and afforded the opportunity for 
one of the most remarkable miracles ever performed;— 
a parallel to our Lord's greatest. It would not, however, 
be correct to suppose that thus our Lord's words 
were fulfilled, which say, "He that believeth on me, 
the works that I do, shall he do also; and greater works 
than these shall he do." (John 14:12.) These words 
can only be understood to refer either (1) to a future 
work, in which the Church will share with her Lord, 
during the Millennium, or (2) it may be understood 
as ranking the works of spiritual quickening and revival 
as higher than physical healing and revival. Our 
Lord's ministry was prior to his offering of the 
sin-offering, and the general impartation of the holy 
spirit to believers; and hence his work was chiefly physical 
healing and the uttering of parables and dark sayings 
not to be fully understood by any not imbued with 
the spirit of adoption. 

We must dissent also from the views of some, that 
this power or gift, exercised so readily by the Apostle 
Peter, is a general power possessed by all of God's 
people— then or now. Peter did not upbraid the believers, 
the "saints," saying, Why did you not heal 
Dorcas, when sick, or revive her, when she died? Even 
Peter himself healed comparatively few; probably there 
were plenty of palsied and blind and otherwise sick in 
the valley of Sharon; surely, there were multitudes of 
dead. But every evidence proves that these powers 
were special and for a special purpose— to introduce 
the Gospel to the attention of the people, and not for 
the purpose of dispelling sickness and death, either in 
or out of the Church. On the contrary, the Apostles 
taught that this age is the time in which the faithful 
are to suffer, if, by and by, they would reign with 
Christ: to rejoice in tribulations, knowing that these, 
rightly endured and enjoyed, will work out for the 
faithful a far more exceeding and eternal weight of 
glory, in the Kingdom. 



The name Tabitha signifies Gazelle; "called Dorcas 
by the Greeks on account of its bright, flashing 

R2126 : page 91 

eyes." Whether or not this name was appropriate, 
whether Dorcas was a graceful, bright and beautiful 
woman, we cannot know; but it evidently fitted her 
well as a noble Christian woman. Nay, her face must 
have beamed and her eyes must have sparkled; for she 
had a warm, generous spirit, as testified by her sympathetic 
and energetic helpfulness of others. O that 
the spirit of loving self-sacrifice for others might more 
and more abound in God's people, male and female! 
O that more might be able to surround the coffins of 
true Christians and testify to evidences of loving service 
—earthly food or clothing or, better still, spiritual 
food and robes of Christ's righteousness or, still better, 
if possible,— both. 



page 9 1 

INTERESTING LETTERS. 



Illinois. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-Yours of Feb. 15, explaining 
Isaiah 40:3, etc., was received. Many thanks 
for your help to me. May the Lord richly reward you ! 
The truth grows brighter and brighter every day, and 
though there is much darkness most everywhere, yet 
the glorious truth of Jehovah's love as revealed to us 
through Jesus Christ doth illuminate my heart, and 
cause me to rejoice, yea, even more and more, so that 
my delight is to do God's will at any cost. 

I desire the prayers of the saints; and I want to 
keep so meek and humble, that any lesson which I need 
to learn may be quickly understood; for, above all 
things else, my heart's desire is to learn and to do the 
will of our kind heavenly Father, who doeth all things 
well. 

My prayers continually ascend to God for your 
blessing— that you may be blessed yet more and more 
in the giving out of truths both "new and old." O! 
what blessings are already ours: reconciled to God, accepted 
in the Beloved, given exceeding great and precious 
promises, and sealed in our foreheads with the 
truth— the present truth, the wonderful plan of redemption, 
and the knowledge of our Lord's presence. 
Surely, it is a joy to know these things; and I pray 
that I may be loyal and faithful as a true follower of 
our blessed Master. 

I am glad to say that we have found a few who 



are much interested in the truth, so far as learned, and 
it appears that they are wheat, or else will become such, 
as soon as they know what the Lord requires of them. 
I will not trouble you for an answer to this, as your 
time is very valuable. Again I thank you for your 
brotherly kindness; and we both send Christian greeting 
and love to you and all the brethren and sisters at 
Allegheny. May the Lord bless Sister Russell also. 
Your brother in Christ, JAS . MCFARLAND . 



Michigan. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-We are still striving 
daily to make our calling and election sure; and we can 
do this only by God's grace. Praise him for his great 
grace manifested in Christ Jesus our Lord! 

Our meetings during last Summer were hindered 
somewhat by not having a convenient place for them, 
but we have held a few meetings out of town, and we 
trust some good may have been done. We have commenced 
our meetings again here. At one time we 
spoke on the subject, "What manner of persons ought 
we to be." (1 Pet. 3:11.) We realize more and more 
that it is not safe to neglect the assembling of ourselves 
together, but to be more diligent in this matter as we 
see the day approaching. We find that we need each 
other's prayers, encouragement and help; especially in 
the present hard times the cares of life bear down heavily 
upon some of us; and the enemy takes every advantage. 
In reading again the chapter on the "Times 
of the Gentiles," in DAWN, Vol. II., I have been more 
forcibly struck than ever with the thought of the shortness 
of the time. And while I am led to rejoice that 
the struggle will soon be over, I am also led to renewed 
energy in the use of all my consecrated powers in the 
blessed Master's service. God help us to be faithful 
to the end! 

The TOWER continues to be a great help. Each 
number seems better than the one preceding it. Please 
send me a few dozen tracts for free distribution. I send 
greetings on behalf of the Church here. 

Yours in the Lord, JOHN N. LATHWELL. 



California. 
DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-Brother Florey (colporteur) 
thought I ought to write to you and let you 
know how great a blessing to me has been your MILLENNIAL 
DAWN series. I published in a recent number 
of my paper a favorable review of the first volume, 
a copy of which paper Brother F. sent you. Since 
then I have read the second and third volumes, and 
have given the first two as close a study as my duties 
will permit. I am already quite satisfied that you have 



the exact key to the "Plan of the Ages," and the more 
I study the subject with the aid of that key, the stronger 
and more completely satisfying the evidence becomes. 
The second volume I regard as a complete mathematical 
demonstration of the time features of the Plan. 

Having had, in my student days, a special delight 
in Thomas Dick's works on Astronomy, I am prepared 
to say that I can surely discern in the complex 
yet beautiful harmony of the divine plan in reference 
to man the same Architect who adjusted the motions 
of the planets in their orbits and made the starry systems 
of the "heavens declare his handiwork." 

The Colporteur found me in the ripest condition 
possible to accept and appreciate the truth which is 
now "due" to be revealed. I had considered and rejected, 
one by one, all the creeds and theories of the 
churches and the scientists as wholly speculative and 
unsatisfying. I could see abundant evidence of an all-wise 
God in everything but the affairs of men. There 
all the harmony of creation was reduced to "confusion 
worse confounded." My observations as an editor revealed 
to me an irrepressible conflict between the contending 
elements of society which threaten the near 
destruction of the whole existing order of things. That 
selfish and shortsighted man is incapable of controlling 
the destructive forces, or of properly distributing the 

page 92 

blessings which modern invention has called into existence, 
has been long so clear to my mind that, without 
the intervention of a higher power, I could see no 
possible escape from utter collapse. What to expect 
beyond, I knew not. 

At this critical point of my threatened descent into 
pessimism your MILLENNIAL DAWN series turned a 
flood of blessed light upon my benighted mind. It has 
given me a new and glorious lease of enthusiasm, where 
every hope for myself and the world had been abandoned 
to despair. My only regret is that I cannot yet 
see my way clear to reconciling my duties as editor of 
a local paper, and in the support of my family, to any 
active work in this new field of the "harvest." I trust, 
however, that, with divine assistance, I may. 

In my earlier days, before the cares of the world 
dragged me from my first love, I found peace in the 
Master, and had an era of joyous meditation on his 
promises. Whether, since my backslidden state, I may 
yet be counted worthy of the high calling is not now 
clear to my mind, though the facility with which I 
have been led to see the truth when properly presented, 
and the boundless desire I feel of witnessing its fulfilment, 
I am thankful to construe as a favorable indication. 
With a lively hope and faith in the continued 
success of your work, I am 

Sincerely Yours, C 



[Yes, dear Brother; the fact that the Lord has 
counted you worthy to see the light, coupled with the 
fact that you love it and are anxious to serve it, argues 
that your "backslidden state" was largely, if not wholly, 
the result of prevalent misrepresentations of the 
divine plan of the ages. Ah yes, our Lord's words, 
"Sanctify them through thy truth," is pertinent: sanctification 
through error and fear tends to backsliding. 
Ten thousand WATCH TOWER readers rejoice with you 
as they read your letter, and we join in prayer that, as 
you see the great privileges of service in the Lord's 
cause and the obstacles in the way, you may have grace 
and strength to overcome them and at last have an overcomer's 
reward. -Rev. 2:7,11,17,26-28; 3:5,12,21.- 
EDITOR.l 



Illinois. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I will write a few lines 
to-day in answer to your kind letter which reached me 
at— almost three months ago. I am still rejoicing 
in the Lord and present truth, and am still "looking 
unto Jesus" who is the author and who will be the 
finisher of my faith,— if I submit fully to him, as it is 
my desire to do. Because of my poor success at colporteuring 
I have sometimes thought that the Master 
did not want me to serve in this way, but I now seem 
to see the matter in a different light. I think it is for 
my good that I am not more successful. It seems that 
the Lord would teach me a lesson of confidence and 
trust in him. If this be so, then I can rejoice in poor 
success; if it be part of the "fire" that is to try my 
faith, I can say, Amen. I desire the transforming 
work to go on to the end of my race, and want to submit 
cheerfully to whatever our wise Heavenly Father 
sees best for me, for— 

"God knows— not I— the devious way 

Wherein my faltering feet must tread, 
Before into the light of day 

My steps from out this gloom are lead. 
And since my Lord the path doth see, 
What matter, if 'tis hid from me." 

I certainly would be glad if I could put out five 
thousand DAWNS a year, as I know that those who 
read them will be blessed thereby; but if I can put out 
only five hundred a year, it will still be a little mite for 
the Master, and it may cheer some weary pilgrim along 
the rugged way. I wish to continue in the work as 
long as possible, for this favorable time will evidently 
not last many years longer. 

I was much pleased with the Tract Society's report. 
I felt a little solicitude for the Society, as money 
seemed so very scarce; but the Lord does surely provide, 
and we praise his name for the funds so graciously 
provided through Bro. Hay and others. I trust that 



the present year may be better for all lines of the work. 
It seems impossible for me to realize the great importance 
of the work as I would like to do. And I feel 
that I need above all things more burning zeal and 
love. Oh! how I long for such zeal, devotion and love 
as characterized so many of the Lord's dear saints all 
the way down the Church's history to the present time. 
And I know that there are some to day just as zealous 
as the Apostle Paul. 

May the Lord bless you abundantly in the great 
work that he has committed to you, is my earnest 
prayer. I trust that 1897 may be a grand year for the 
spread of the truth, and for the upbuilding of the prospective 
members of the Christ. 

With Christian love to you and Sister Russell and 
the Church at Allegheny, R. H. BRICKER. 



England. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-It gives me much 
pleasure to report an increasing interest in the truth 
and in opportunities of telling the glad tidings. 
We have now four Bible classes in friends' houses, 
one every week, one every fortnight, and two 
once a month. Beside this, a small mission hall work 
is becoming a general centre for the saints of like 
precious faith to meet together on Sundays— morning 
and evening. Bro. Ashton, one who has been abundantly 
honored by the Lord, was the beginner of it. 

This dear Brother is a remarkable man: converted 
from Romanism at Oakfield Mission shortly before your 
visit there. He has made astonishing progress in the 
truth and has been a constant witness in that place. 
Last month he had given him an opportunity of speaking 
upon the second parousia [presence] of our Lord, 
in the Mission, and he spoke freely— on two occasions. 
His testimony, however, was not received nor in any 
way supported. 

How careful we all should be to hold fast the faith 
once delivered to the saints, and, being established, to 
"walk by the same rule." Would like a supply of 
tract No. 1, when convenient to send them. With 
good wishes for a bright and successful New Year in 
the Lord's work, to Sister Russell and yourself, in 
which my wife joins, 

Yours in the Master's service, JAMES HAY. 



page 93 
VOL. XVIII. APRIL 1, 1897. No. 7. 



CONTENTS. 



Special Items 94 

God's "Peculiar People" 95 

Relative Values of the Heavenly 

and Earthly Treasures 98 

"To be Testified in Due Time" 100 

Interesting Questions Answered 102 

Is There No Hope for Poor Judas? 102 

Truths Seen More Clearly 103 

Friday, The Close of Our Lord's 

3-1/2 Years' Ministry 105 

God's Acceptance of Cornelius 105 

The "Christians" of Antioch 107 

page 94 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
--ADDRESS TO- 
TOWER PUBLISHING CO., BIBLE HOUSE, 58 & 60 ARCH ST., 
ALLEGHENY (NORTH PITTSBURG), PA., U.S.A. 

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 

INCLUDES A SUBSCRIPTION TO "THE OLD THEOLOGY TRACTS"-QUARTERLY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, N.Y. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, 

OR REGISTERED. FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN 

MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS: 

Those of the interested, who by reason of old age or accident, or 
other adversity are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, 
if they will send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and 
requesting the paper. 



THE GERMAN EDITION OF ZION'S WATCH TOWER. 

Our first issue, now ready, is a double number (8 pages) for April 
and May. We have received a considerable number of subscriptions, 
but have published a large quantity for gratuitous sample copies. You 
are invited to send in as many addresses as you may please of German 
Christians likely to have an ear to hear the harvest message. Free 
samples will be sent to them promptly. 

We again mention subscription terms as follows:— 

America. Germany. Switzerland. 
Two copies each month, a year 25c Mk. 1.30 Fr. 1.50 
Five " " " " 50c " 2.50 " 3.00 

Twelve " " " $1.00 " 5.00 " 6.00 



Postage included. 

R2134:page94 

"MY SOUL, BE ON THY GUARD!" 

Do not forget that our ever active Adversary seems to be granted 
additional liberty and power of temptation at the Passover season. Let 
each soldier of the cross be specially on his guard to resist him— steadfast 
in faith and good works and love. Let each also be on guard to 
help and not to stumble the "brethren" at this time. Pray for one-another 
and for us; as we also remember all of you at the throne of 
the heavenly grace. 



R2127 : page 95 

GOD'S "PECULIAR PEOPLE." 



"Ye are a chosen generation, a royal priesthood, a holy nation, a 
peculiar people; that ye should shew forth the praises of him 
who hath called you out of darkness into his marvelous 
light: which in time past were not a people, but are 
now the people of God."— 1 Pet. 2:9,10. 

WE LOOK in vain for this "holy nation" 

amongst the various nations of the world today. 

The pathway of even the best of those denominating 

themselves Christian nations is marked with blood 

and violence and various evidences of selfish rapine. 

The very best of them would fall far short of any reasonable 

standard of holiness. They are all, as the Scriptures 

declare, parts of the kingdom of darkness under 

the prince of darkness, "the prince of this world," who 

still rules the "kingdoms of this world." 

This "holy nation" was founded by our Lord 
Jesus, and had no existence before his advent. The 
basis upon which it was founded was the "ransom for 
all" which he gave at Calvary, and the beginning of 
the construction of his kingdom was at Pentecost. 
Since then it has progressed after a manner which is 

R2128 : page 95 

adapted to his purposes, tho very contrary to the manner 
of the world and the nations of earth. It is unknown 
to the worldly, as it is written, "The world 
knoweth us not, even as it knew him not." 

This Kingdom is an ecclesiastical Kingdom— a 
Church-Kingdom; but even if we look amongst the 
numerous church-kingdoms which have sprung up in 
the world (each of which claims to be the kingdom of 
God's dear Son), we find that this "holy nation" or 



Kingdom is none of these. It is not the Roman Catholic 

church or ecclesiastical kingdom, nor the Greek 

church, nor the Armenian, nor the church of England, 

nor the Methodist church, nor the Lutheran, nor the 

Presbyterian, nor the Baptist, nor the Congregationalist. 

These all may have amongst their millions some members 

of this "little flock," this "holy nation," this true 

Kingdom class which the Lord is selecting; but none 

of these institutions is the Lord's Kingdom; none of 

them contains all who are his. There is only one record 

in the universe that enrolls all the members of this 

"holy nation" or Kingdom: it is called, "The Lamb's 

Book of Life." Hence, if we examine church history, 

we shall no more find this "holy nation," this holy ecclesiastical 

Kingdom, than amongst the temporal kingdoms. 

The historians knew not of the true "holy nation:" 

they saw and knew and recounted the incidents 

of the human organizations, called "Christ's kingdoms," 

but they knew nothing of the true one. Altho 

it has existed from the day of Pentecost to the present 

time, it has always been the kingdom of heaven suffering 

violence— despised and rejected of men, insignificant 

and ignored in the sight of the world.— Matt. 11:12. 

The reason for this is that it is a "peculiar people"— 
not peculiar in dress, nor in manners, nor in language, 
nor in foolish, senseless forms and idiosyncrasies; but 
peculiar in that it is separate from the world and the 
spirit of the world. It has the spirit of Christ— a spirit 
of full consecration to the Lord, and separateness from 
the world and its selfish aims. It is peculiar in its adherence 
to the Word of the Lord as its only law. It is 
peculiar in that it rejects worldly wisdom when it conflicts 
with the divine revelation. It is peculiar in that 
it is in the world, but not of the world. It is peculiar in 
that it has a decided faith and acts in harmony with its 
faith, and with zeal. It is peculiar in that it is self-sacrificing 
and knows no will but the will of its King. 

R2128 : page 96 

It is peculiar in that it knows the truth and is able to 
give a reason for the hope within, while others merely 
speculate and wonder and doubt. 

The King, when establishing this Kingdom, forewarned 
all who would be of it that, in proportion as 
they possessed his character and his truth, and were 
thus "children of the light," and likenesses of himself, 
who was "the Light of the world,"— in that proportion 
they would have the enmity of the world and the 
opposition of the flesh and the devil to withstand and 
overcome. In view of his forewarnings, "Marvel not if 
the world hate you, ye know that it hated me before it 
hated you;" "If ye were of the world, the world 
would love its own, but now ye are not of the world; 
because I have chosen you out of the world, therefore 
the world hateth you;" "Whosoever will live godly 



in Christ Jesus shall suffer persecution;" in view of 

these admonitions it should not surprise us that the nations 

of the world (political and ecclesiastical kingdoms) 

have always hated and persecuted the individuals composing 

this "holy nation." They seem to realize an 

antagonism, however little it may be expressed. This 

"holy nation" looks to a higher King and higher laws 

than any by which others are governed, and as Herod 

sought to destroy "him who was born king of the 

Jews," so the various worldly nations have sought (under 

the influence of the prince of this world) to hinder 

the development of this holy nation as antagonistic to 

their systems. 

Nevertheless, we note the care with which the 
apostles pointed out that all who compose this holy 
nation shall, so far as possible, "live peaceably with all 
men"— avoiding strife and contentions, except where 
principles are involved; and even when contending 
"earnestly for the faith once delivered to the saints," 
to manifest the spirit of meekness and patient forbearance, 
that "whereas they speak against you as evildoers, 
they may by your good works which they shall 
behold, glorify God in the day of visitation." He urges, 
therefore, all of the holy nation, saying, "Submit 
yourselves to every ordinance of man for the Lord's 
sake:... For so is the will of God, that with well-doing 
ye may put to silence the ignorance of foolish men: 
As free, and not using your liberty for a cloak of maliciousness, 
but as servants of God.... For this is 

thankworthy, if a man for conscience toward God endure 
grief, suffering wrongfully. ...For even hereunto 
were ye called: because Christ also suffered for us, 
leaving us an example, that ye should follow his steps; 
who did no sin, neither was guile found in his 
mouth; who, when he was reviled, reviled not again; 
when he suffered, he threatened not; but committed 
himself to him that judgeth righteously."— 
1 Pet. 2:13-23. 

Thus the King of this "holy nation" set for every 
member of it an example that they should walk in his 
footsteps. He declared that his Kingdom was not of 
this world; consequently neither does the Kingdom 
power of this "holy nation" belong to this present 
age. It awaits the return of the King himself, who 
said, "If I go away, I will come again, and receive you 
unto myself." He has promised, moreover, that when 
he comes again it will not be in a body of humiliation 
for sacrifice on behalf of the sins of the world— for this 
sacrifice he has already accomplished to the full: He 
comes to reign, and has promised that his "holy nation" 
shall be associated with him in the reign of righteousness, 
wherewith he will "bless all the families of 
the earth." 

But we notice further the Apostle's statement that 
this "holy nation" or Kingdom is also a "royal 
priesthood." We look amongst the priesthoods of 



earth, but we find that the priestly office is distinctly 
kept separate from the kingly office, everywhere. 
Indeed, they are generally antagonistic. The 
kings and royal families usually represent the highest 
developments of ambition and self-gratification: the 
priests of earth, theoretically at least, present sacrifices, 
and thus seek to make atonement for sins. Priests 
do not exercise kingly authority, nor kings condescend 
to priestly services. But in this "peculiar people" the 
priesthood and kingship are united. 

It was so with the King himself,— as a priest he 
offered up his own life, unselfishly, for the redemption 
and blessing of others. As a King he still has the same 
unselfish character and will use his kingly office to 
carry forward to all mankind, and make available to 
all, the blessings, liberties and privileges purchased 
with his own precious blood. His reign will be for this 
very purpose;— and for the establishment of righteousness 
and the extirpation of evil and those who adhere 
to it. The King himself is the great High priest of 
this "peculiar people," this "holy nation," this "royal 
priesthood;" and it is required of each individual member 
of this "holy nation" that he shall be a priest; that 
he shall be a sacrificer; that he shall partake so much 
of the loving and generous disposition of the King that 
he will desire to do good unto all men, as he may have 
opportunity, especially to "the household of faith;" 
and that he shall lay down his life for the brethren— 
in the service of the truth, in their interest. In these 
and all respects they must all be conformed to the 
image of God's dear Son.— Rom. 8:29. 

This experience as sacrificers in this present time 
as sufferers for righteousness' sake, as tempted and tried 
and able to sympathize with the weak and the erring, 
is a necessary part of the educational discipline which 
must be undergone by this priesthood before they are 

R2128 : page 97 

accounted ready to enter the honors and powers of 
their divine kingdom, as representatives and associates 
of the King of kings and Lord of lords. 

Nor does their priesthood end when their kingly 
powers begin, for it is written concerning their future 
reign,— "Thou hast made us unto our God kings and 
priests, and we shall reign on the earth." (Rev. 5:10,11.) 
This "peculiar people," this "holy kingdom" or nation 
all of whom are "royal" priests, has a great work to 
do when established in the kingdom power; for it is 
none other than the promised "Seed of Abraham," 
which, according to the divine promise, is to have entrusted 
to it the great work of blessing all the families 
of the earth, by bringing them to the knowledge of the 
Lord, and into harmony, if they will, with the New 
Covenant sealed by the precious blood of the King. As 
explained by the Apostle Paul (Gal. 3:16,29), the 



King himself is the head of this "seed," this "peculiar 
people," this "royal priesthood;" and they are reckonedly 
members of his body, and with him they complete 
this holy seed to which is committed the work of 
blessing.— Rom. 11:31. 

Israel after the flesh, the natural seed of Abraham, 
supposed that they would have inherited this great 
privilege and honor, of being the divine representatives 
in blessing and enlightening the world; but when the 
King came unto them as "his own," they received him 
not, as a nation, but to as many as received him, the 
faithful remnant, to them gave he "liberty to become 
the sons of God" and members of this "peculiar people," 
this "royal priesthood;" and he then visited the 
Gentiles to take out of them suitable ones of sufficient 
number to complete this foreordained priesthood. This 
"royal priesthood" then, be it noticed, is not the priesthood 
of Levi, even as this "holy nation" is not the 
nation of Israel. It is a new priesthood, a new people 
and a new nation, which never before had any existence, 
"which in times past was not a nation," and was 
not a priesthood, but now is become the people of God, 

R2129 : page 97 

the "royal priesthood," the "holy nation." 

The Apostle notes still another distinctive feature 
pertaining to this "peculiar people," saying that it is 
a "chosen generation" or race. How strange it would 
at first seem that the Apostle should speak of this 
peculiar people, gathered out from amongst various 
races, Jews and Gentiles, as being a special, particularly 
chosen race: as though they were a different 
family entirely from the remainder of mankind. If 
tribal relationship be understood, is not this "peculiar 
people" a mixture of all the races? And if all humanity 
be considered, are not these "peculiar people" of 
the same race as the remainder of mankind? 

Ah, no! they are a new race, a race separate and 
distinct from all others. True, they once were of the 
same race, and some belonged to one branch or family 
and some to another; but their King, in calling them to 
be this "holy nation," set aside entirely their previous 
genealogy and started them as a new race. As members 
of the Adamic race they were already slaves of 
sin and under condemnation of death; but their Master 
and King, who redeemed them from sin and death, 
opened the way for a full completion of the great divine 
purpose, and they were begotten again, not of 
blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of 
man, but of God. (John 1:13; 1 Pet. 1:3.) They 
are therefore "new creatures" in Christ Jesus. (Gal. 6:15.) 
To them old things have passed away, and all 
things have become new.— 2 Cor. 5:17. 

The apostle therefore was right in his declaration 
that these are a different generation or race from others 



of mankind. He was right also in speaking of them as 
a "chosen generation"— the race which God himself is 
selecting for the accomplishment of his great and wonderful 
plan, first declared to Abraham, but not understood, 
and expected to be fulfilled in Abraham's literal 
posterity. In reality this salvation "began to be preached 
by our Lord, and was confirmed unto us by them that 
heard him." (Heb. 2:3.) True, God has certain provisions 
and blessings in reservation for the natural seed 
of Abraham, and let us remember that to them also 
came the first opportunity, and the first place, in this 
new, select, spiritual race or "chosen generation." The 
Head or Chief of this chosen race, the twelve subordinate 
chiefs, the apostles, and many of the other members 
of this "holy nation" came from the literal seed 
of Abraham; but as a whole the natural seed was not 
worthy to become the "chosen race" or generation; 
but only to as many of them as received him (Christ), to 
them gave he liberty to become the "sons of God,"— 
by regeneration.— John 1:11,12. 

Grasping the full statement of the Apostle with 
reference to this peculiar people, this holy nation, this 
new or regenerated race, this royal priesthood, we can 
see readily that none of the human systems or organizations 
of earth, past or present, fit these demands. But 
we can see also that the conditions are well fulfilled in a 
"little flock" of which we may find scattered members 
here and there to-day, and all the way back to Pentecost. 
They are all self-sacrificing priests, who serve 
the living God through Christ Jesus acceptably, by 
serving one another, and all men as they have opportunity, 
and in general serving the gospel. Fully consecrated 
to God, and their imperfections (unintentional) 
all covered by the merit of the Redeemer, they are indeed 
a "holy nation," with higher and different aims 
from those of the world, and with a different spirit, 
they are indeed a peculiar people. And the royalty of 
their priesthood, altho unknown to the world at present, 

R2129 : page 98 

shall be revealed in due time; for it is declared by the 
inspired Word, that "the whole creation groaneth and 
travaileth in pain together until now," "waiting for 
the manifestation of the sons of God."— 
Rom. 8:19,22. 

When the glory of these sons of God, this chosen 
race, this royal priesthood, shall be revealed in the establishment 
of the Messianic Kingdom, during the 
Millennium, the entire groaning creation— the whole 
race of Adam, condemned in Eden, but ransomed at 
Calvary— shall be blessed by this great "Seed of Abraham." 
Instead of their groanings they may have joy 
and peace, through accepting the blessed arrangements 
of the New Covenant; and as a result, by the close of 
the Millennial age, all who will may have experienced 



the blessings of the divine promise, "God shall wipe 
away tears from off all faces and turn away the reproach 
for being his people." Then shall be brought 
to pass the saying which is written, He that sat upon 
the throne said, "Behold, I make all things new; and 
God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes; and 
there shall be no more death, neither sorrow nor crying, 
neither shall there be any more pain: for the former 
things are passed away."— Rev. 21:4,5. 

Is it any wonder that the Apostle declares that 
each and all of these "peculiar people" should make it 
the first, the chief, practically the only business of life, 
"to show forth the praises [the virtues of character 
and plan] of him who hath called you out of darkness 
into his marvelous light?" And the showing or the 
telling of these is the preaching of the gospel, whether 
it be done in public or in private, by word of mouth or 
by printed page. And this, the chief business of the 
peculiar people, begun now, will continue to be their 
business throughout the future, tho under more favorable 
circumstances, in the majesty of the Kingdom, 
with power to enforce the wise and just and wholesome 
laws, and with love and mercy to help and to succor 
the weak and the erring, and gradually to restore them, 
if they will, to all that was lost in Adam. 

What a wonderful gospel! What a wonderful 
privilege to be permitted to engage in its proclamation 
in any manner! Truly, all of the peculiar people can 
appreciate the testimony of the great Apostle Paul, 
"Woe is me if I preach not the gospel of the Lord 
Jesus Christ." 



R2129 : page 98 

RELATIVE VALUES OF THE HEAVENLY AND EARTHLY TREASURES. 



"A man's life consisteth not in the abundance of 
the things which he possesseth."— Luke 12:15. 

THIS statement of our Lord reminds us also of the 
exhortation of the Apostle Paul, "Let us lay 
aside every weight, and run with patience the race set 
before us, looking unto Jesus." All that the Lord's 
people have and are should be consecrated to their most 
efficient use in the divine service, according to their 
understanding of the teaching of God's Word. As we 
reflect upon it, how manifest it becomes that all earthly 
riches which are not consecrated to God are only 
weights and hindrances to the Christian. And not 
only so: it is not enough that our all be consecrated to 
God as an acceptable sacrifice; for if all be consecrated 
to sacrifice, and yet never subjected to the flames of the 



altar, of what avail is it, except as a broken vow to 
rise up against us in judgment? 

Many, indeed, are foolish enough to think that 
abundance of possessions is the only thing worth living 
for; and when they are obtained they put their 
trust in these uncertain riches and forget God. Their 
time and attention are all engrossed and their interest 
absorbed in the accumulation and care of the earthly 
treasures, which shut out all nobler aspirations toward 
spiritual things. It is for this reason that the Lord 
cautions his people not to be overcharged with the 
cares of this life. It is right to be charged to the extent 
of our necessities, and also to the extent of the 
responsibilities of our stewardship in the Lord's service, 
to be provident and thoughtful, not only for ourselves, 
but also for others whom it may be in our power to 
assist; but to be charged is one thing, to be overcharged 
is quite another. To be overcharged is to permit 
corroding care and anxious solicitude to absorb our 
thought, our time, our interest, and so crowd out 
spiritual interests and spiritual aspirations. 

In the discourse from which the above text is selected, 
our Lord was endeavoring to give to his disciples 
that amount of confidence in God which would 
enable them to cast all their care upon him, knowing 
that he careth for his children as a wise and loving 
parent, and that his tender mercies are over all his 
works. He drew illustrations from the sparrows, the 
ravens, the lilies of the field and the grass, showing 
that God had not forgotten nor failed in his care of 
even these comparatively insignificant things, then adding, 
How much more will he clothe and feed you, 
who are of more value than many sparrows. The very 
hairs of your head are all numbered, so minute is his 
knowledge of you. Do not be anxious about what 
you shall eat, or what you shall drink, or wherewithal 
you shall be clothed; for your Father knoweth that you 
have need of these things. Seek the Kingdom of God 
and his righteousness, and all these things shall be added 

R2129 : page 99 

[supplied as needed] unto you. Sell that you have, and 
do good with it, as wise and faithful stewards of your 
consecrated talents, and fear no want of any good thing 
in consequence; for "no good thing will the Lord withhold 
from them that walk uprightly." 

What a blessed promise that is! Not only will 
he make all, even the adverse things, work together 
for good to them that love God, to the called according 
to his purpose, but he will not withhold any really 
good thing from us. Can we fully appreciate this tender, 
loving solicitude and watchful care for us personally? 
Can we understand how it takes cognizance of 
every interest, temporal and spiritual, and how, with 
wise and loving forethought, it maps out our present 



course and guides our steps in view of those eternal 
interests which at present we cannot fully comprehend? 
Perhaps we cannot fully do so all at once; but let us 
take it into consideration, praying for a clearer vision of 

R2130 : page 99 

the love of God, and by and by the blessedness of these 
promises will dawn upon us more and more; and we 
will begin to realize more fully than ever before that, 
having placed our all upon the altar of sacrifice, subject 
to the consuming flames of the altar, we thenceforth 
belong to that blessed "little flock" to whom our 
Lord addresses these comforting teachings, and whom he 
exhorts to loving, patient faith, saying, "Fear not, 
little flock; for it is your Father's good pleasure to give 
you the Kingdom." 

Truly, those who follow the Lord's leading in this 
narrow way of sacrifice and of faith are only a little 
flock; for only a few thus apply their hearts unto instruction 
and wholly follow the divine direction. Consequently, 
only a few know the blessedness of the realization 
of the Lord's tender care. But to those who 
follow this leading there is a growing sense of his love 
which the daily walk with him deepens, confirms and 
sweetens as the years go by, and as experience makes 
plain the guidance of his loving hand. As one after 
another of the trials of life come, and we mark his 
overruling power, which caused even the adverse elements 
to work together for our good, faith takes 
deeper root and the character becomes more stable, 
sturdy and pleasing to God. 

It is for this very purpose that the Lord permits 
us to be subject to the various vicissitudes of the 
present life, and that those who belong to the Kingdom 
of heaven suffer violence at the hands of an unfriendly 
world. There are lessons of immense value to 
be learned in this hard school of experience— lessons 
of faith, of fortitude, of heroism, of courage, of endurance, 
of meekness, of patience, of sympathy for the 
suffering, and of loving helpfulness to others. There 
are works of grace to be wrought out in us which only 
the hard experiences of life can accomplish. For instance, 
we would be inclined to lean too much to our 
own understanding, if we were not at times brought 
face to face with problems that baffle our skill. It is 
when we are "afraid to touch things that involve so 
much," that in our perplexity we come to him who 
has kindly said, "Cast thy burden upon the Lord, and 
he will sustain thee," and ask him to undertake for us. 
Or we might be inclined to trust too much in the 
arm of flesh, if the arm of flesh had never failed us, and 
the disappointment driven us to the Lord to seek the 
shelter of his wing. Or we might learn to trust in 
uncertain riches, if moth and rust had never corrupted 
nor thieves stolen the little or much of our earthly 



possessions. Or we might have been satisfied with earthly 
friendships and earthly loves, had not their loss sometimes 
left us alone with God to prove the sweetness of 
his consolation. Or we might be weak and imbecile, 
had not the storms of life swept over us and the very 
emergencies of our case nerved us to courage, endurance 
and Christian fortitude. In view of all these 
necessities to the development of character, the Christian 
can truly feel that whatever the Lord permits to 
come upon him will be made to work together for his 
good; and in this confidence he can peacefully sing,— 

"If on a quiet sea toward home I calmly sail, 

With grateful heart, O God, to thee, I'll own the favoring gale. 

"But should the surges rise, and rest delay to come, 

Blest be the tempest, kind the storm, which drives me nearer home. 

It would be a mistake, however, to suppose in 
view of the Lord's promised care over all our interests, 
that he would in every case make things work together 
for our temporal advantage. There was at least one in 
the company to whom our Lord was speaking who 
seemed to interpret him thus, and who therefore requested 
his interposition on his behalf in the matter of 
an inheritance, saying, "Master, speak to my brother 
that he divide the inheritance with me." 

In reply to this request Jesus said, "Man, who 
made me a judge or a divider over you?" and then 
followed the instructions concerning the superior value 
of the heavenly treasure, showing that the earthly 
things are not worth the strife to obtain them. Jesus 
had not yet come to judge the world, but referring to 
that time when he would be the divinely appointed 
Judge of all the earth, he showed that the searching 
scrutiny of that judgment would extend to all the 
minutiae of human affairs. Every selfish act, every injustice, 
every unkindness, every wrong thing, will 
then,— but not now, except in very few instances,— 
receive its just recompense of reward. "For there is 
nothing covered that shall not be revealed, neither hid 
that shall not be known.... Whatsoever ye have 
spoken in darkness shall be heard in the light; and 

R2130 :page 100 

that which ye have spoken in the ear in closets shall be 
proclaimed upon the housetops." 

Men and women in their present selfish condition 
of mind and heart, and intoxicated with the spirit of 
the world, although thus forewarned, do not consider 
with what shame and confusion of face they will one 
day have to meet the record of the past, when the little 
mean acts which they supposed none they cared for 
knew of, and the unkind words to the defenseless 
which they thought no one else would ever know all rise 



up to bear testimony against them. Such often overlook 
their own folly, and consider that the penalties 
will fall only upon the criminal class. But the Lord's 
judgment will be discriminating and exact; "God 
shall bring every work into judgment, with every secret 
thing; whether it be good or whether it be evil;" and 
"The eyes of the Lord are in every place, beholding 
the evil and the good." 

In view of this judgment to come, when the Lord, 
the righteous Judge, shall be established in his Kingdom, 
Paul says to all of the Lord's people who realize 
oppression or injustice or unkindness of any kind,— 
"Dearly beloved, avenge not yourselves, but rather 
give place unto wrath: for it is written, Vengeance is 
mine, I will repay, saith the Lord. ...Be not overcome 
of evil, but overcome evil with good." 

No, Jesus is not the Judge or divider of the earthly 
things now: that will be the work of the Millennium; 
and so far as the earthly things are concerned now, 
his people may suffer many injustices and difficulties 
of various kinds; but the Lord's counsel is to dismiss 
all anxious care concerning them, and, having food and 
raiment, to be contented, and wait for the great reward 
of patient endurance. 

Meanwhile, let Christians see to it that they are 
rightly exercised by all the disciplinary experiences of 
the present time; let them learn the lessons of trust in 
God and all the other valuable lessons so necessary to 
fit them for the exalted position to which they are 
called; let them rejoice in the present favor and communion 
with God which is the privilege of all the 
saints, and, with steadfast faith, look forward to the 
rest that remaineth for his tried and disciplined people. 

Lay up for yourselves treasure in heaven, and let 
your heart be there. Then disappointments, ingratitude 
and all the vexing trials of the present life which 
go to make up the daily cross can be borne with a comparatively 
easy grace. Your life consisteth not in the 
abundance of the things you possess: you, beloved, are 
not dependent upon these earthly things; the Lord is 
the portion of your inheritance; yea, you have a 
goodly heritage. (Psa. 16:5,6.) "Fear not, little 
flock"— fear not to carry out your consecration to the 
full, keeping your little all upon the altar of sacrifice, 
and subject to the consuming fire, trusting all of your 
future, both for the present life and that which is to 
come, to the loving care of your covenant-keeping 
God; and, by and by, in the glory of the Kingdom, 
you shall prove the superior value of the heavenly 
treasures when the victory of faith shall be fully realized. 
Praise the Lord for his abundant grace and 
his precious promises! M. F. RUSSELL. 



R2126 : page 100 



"TO BE TESTIFIED IN DUE TIME." 



A correspondent sends us a published answer to 

the question,— "Since Christ gave himself 

a ransom for all, to be testified in due time (1 Tim. 2:6), 

and since the great majority of mankind has not had 

the privilege of this testimony, how and when will it 

be given?" as follows:— 

"Christ has already been 'testified' as a ransom 
for all, by his incarnation, in which he lived in our nature 
in this world; by the voice of God acknowledging 
him as his only begotten Son; and by the manifestation 
of his power in his behalf in raising him from the dead. 

"The point involved in the question, as we understand 
it, is, How far is God under obligation (if we 
may so speak) to bring these facts before every individual 

R2127 : page 100 

of mankind? In answer to this let us ask 
further, Has not God done all that is necessary on his 
part, to give the world sufficient knowledge of the 
gospel in every age? It is his plan to work through 
men; and thus every one who receives light and truth 
becomes a debtor to his fellow men, to make known 
that light and truth to them. If he does not do this, 
and those within his reach live and die in darkness, 
who is responsible? Is not God's throne so far 
clear?... 

"Again: it will doubtless be admitted that God has 
in mind just the requisite number to people this earth, 
and when this number have embraced the gospel, the 
call will cease, and the eternal state begin. But if all 
who have not heard the gospel are to have another 
chance, and have the gospel pressed upon them till they 
do receive it, there would be in the end a sufficient 
number to people several such worlds as this. Thus 
the whole course of events shows the plan of God's 
providence to be this: to gather out from each generation 
those whom the gospel reaches, till the requisite 
number of people are gathered out for his name, then 
establish the promised kingdom. And that the time 
has been so far prolonged is owing to the dilatoriness 
of men, not to any limitations of the provisions of the 
grace of God. URIAH SMITH." 

Our correspondent wishes to know what we think 
of this interpretation of the text in question. 

We think it very illogical and unsatisfactory. 

R2127 :page 101 

Really three answers are given, or three parts to the 
one answer, and we will review these in order, 



separately. 

(1) It is manifestly untrue and unreasonable to 
claim that Christ was or could be "testified as a ransom" 
BEFORE HE HAD PAID THE RANSOM PRICE, as 
this writer claims. Our Lord's own testimony is that he 
came into the world to give his life a ransom. The ransom 
was not given before Calvary, and could not be 
testified to truthfully until after that event. Indeed, 
while the laying down of our Lord's life, finished at 
Calvary, was the ransom-price, it was not presented to 
the Father or formally paid over "for us," until after 

our Lord's ascension. He ascended up on high, there 
to appear in the presence of God on our behalf. In the 
typical sin-offering for Israel, this presentation of his 
sacrifice as man's ransom-price to God was typified by 
the sprinkling of the blood upon the Mercyseat and 
before the Mercyseat.— See Tabernacle Shadows of 
Better Sacrifices. 

Besides, this wrong view excludes from testimony 
of any kind all except the Israelites; for the remainder 
of mankind were without God and had no hope. 
(Eph. 2:12.) Furthermore, the Apostle does not say 
that the ransom had been testified, but on the contrary 
he puts it future— to be testified in due time. 

The testimony referred to in verse 6 is the explanation 
of the knowledge of the truth of verse 4, just as 
Christ a ransom for all is the explanation of the statement 
that God will have all to be saved (verse 4). The 
testimony must extend to all, in order that all may 
have the promised knowledge. Verse 7 agrees, also, 
declaring that the Apostle himself was even then engaged 
in giving this testimony. How unreasonable the 
claim, therefore, that Christ gave this testimony in full. 
The Apostle declares that this testimony "began to be 
preached by our Lord"— but it has continued by the 
apostles and all the faithful Church since and must 
continue until it has reached all and brought all to a 
knowledge of the truth. 

(2) Respecting God's "obligation" to save few 

or many, or to testify the terms of salvation to few or 
many: He had no obligation originally; nor has he 
any obligations now except such as he has voluntarily 
assumed. But he has voluntarily, of his "grace," assumed 
some obligations;— toward Israel, toward the 
Church of Christ, and toward "all the families of the 
earth." As shown in our last issue, all of these obligations 
are set forth in the great Abrahamic Covenant. 
As shown, that Covenant is unconditional. It is therefore 
a first-class obligation. Moreover, it was sworn to 
by the Almighty. God wished us to know positively 
that he obligated himself; so that when the Law Covenant 
was added and still later the New Covenant was 
added (both added, as we have seen, for necessary and 
useful purposes) we might still know that neither of 
these could render void or "of none effect" the original, 
wide promise. (Gal. 3:17.) Hence God assured us 



of the blessing of all through the Seed, by two immutable 
(unchangeable) things— his word and his oath. 
-Heb. 6:18. 

All men are to be "blessed" by being brought to 
a knowledge of God's gracious arrangements in Christ. 
All must be blessed with sufficient "light" to see 
Christ as the "way," the "truth," the "life" and the 
"door" to divine favor everlasting. The testifying of 
this to all "in due time" will be the blessing of all as 
provided for in God's oath-bound Covenant. 

(3) The third answer is no less unreasonable 
than the others. In MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. I., page 
170, we give figures to prove that several times the 
entire population of the world for the past six thousand 
years could be comfortably provided for on this planet. 
Anyone can figure it out for himself; there is no need 
for anyone to be deluded by the oft repeated nonsense 
that the earth is one vast cemetery, and that if the 
dead from Adam until now were all restored to being 
they would be unable to find even standing room. 

Mr. Smith is the foremost teacher amongst "Seventh-Day 
Adventists," who hold that no one but 
Seventh-Day keepers will be saved; explaining that 
they are God's "little flock." Now put this claim 
(and the total known numbers of Seventh-day keepers, 
of the past and the present) alongside the claim above 
that— "God has in mind just the requisite number to 
people this earth; and when this number have embraced 
the gospel the call will cease and the eternal state begin." 

How do those propositions harmonize? The present 
population of the world is estimated at above fifteen 
hundred millions, and yet these do not begin to populate 
this planet— there are millions of acres without an 
inhabitant. Mr. Smith teaches that the end of all hope 
is nigh, even at the doors, yet, according to his reasoning 
above, it will require Seventh-Day Adventists 
nearly a million years to convert enough people to their 
view of matters in order to properly let the gospel call 
"cease and the eternal state begin." Nor does he leave 
himself a loophole by claiming that God will exercise 
miraculous power to increase the number of Seventh-Day 
keepers, for he says again, "God has done all that 
is necessary on his part;" "it is his plan to work 
through men." 

O! if Brother Smith and his zealous colaborers could 
only see clearly the full meaning of this one Scripture, 
—"The man Christ Jesus— gave himself a ransom for 
all— to be testified in due time,"— it would straighten 
out all their difficulties and introduce them to the antitypical 
Sabbath. 

R2127 : page 102 

How else could the oath-bound Covenant be fulfilled, 
—than by the Millennial reign of Christ and his 
"little flock," the "royal priesthood?" How else could 



the benefits of the ransom be made applicable to "all" to 
"every man" and "for the sins of the whole world?" 
How else could our Lord ever be "the true Light which 
lighteth every man that cometh into the world? (John 1:9.) 
How else will he ever "draw all men unto [or toward] 
himself" than by the presentation to all of the same 
truths which now constrain or draw us? How many 
will so make use of the blessing— the light, the drawing 
and the knowledge— as to conform to the requirements 
of the New Covenant is another question entirely. But 
there is no question that the work of the glorified Church 
in the Millennial Kingdom will be the fulfilment of 
God's oath-bound Covenant. (Gal. 3:29.) But first the 
"little flock," the Christ (head and body), must suffer 
many things and enter into glory. All the "members 
of his body" must be "lifted up" to shame, and share 
their Lord's ignominy and all must also be "lifted up" 
to glory, to share his honor. Then, the Seed complete, 
its work will be glorious. 



R2130 : page 102 

INTERESTING QUESTIONS ANSWERED. 



IS THERE NO HOPE FOR POOR JUDAS? 

Question.— I have read the TOWER article (Apr. 
15, '96) in which you give reasons for believing that 
Judas had many opportunities above others of his time 
and nation; and that hence, while the nation crucified 
our Lord "ignorantly" and may be forgiven, Judas 
sinned against light and has therefore no hope, and has 
died the Second Death— the penalty of wilful sin. 
But I find it hard to give poor Judas up. Am I wrong 
in this; or is it an evidence that I have more love than 
others? 

Answer.— By reason of the fall our entire race has 
suffered depravity both of mental and physical tastes 
—likes and dislikes; and many are by heredity disposed 
to call the good evil, and the evil good. Christianity 
does not select the least blemished amongst men, 
but oftener the more blemished; the less blemished 
often feel a self-complacency and satisfaction which 
hinders them from coming to God as repentant sinners 
and realizing that they can be justified only through 
the imputed merit of Christ. But those who do come 
to Christ, and hear him, soon learn how imperfect are 
their own depraved conceptions, and seek and obtain 
his mind to thenceforth be instead of their own judgments. 
"We have the mind of Christ," says the 
Apostle— it is our "new mind," we are "transformed 



R2131 :page 102 

by the renewing of our minds" so as to be able to 
"prove [know] what is the good, acceptable and perfect 
will of God."— Rom. 12:2. 

Your question indicates that however much you 
have submitted your judgment to God's will on some 
questions, you have not submitted on this point. The 
reason seems to be that you are deceiving yourself into 
thinking that your sympathy with Judas is the true 
love which the Scriptures everywhere enjoin as the 
essence of Christian character. But you are deceiving 
yourself. To love an evil thing is on a par with 
hating a good thing. Both are wrong; both are sinful; 
both are evidences that the depraved mind is not 
renewed, remodeled, transformed into the mind of 
Christ. As well might the drunkard or the libertine 
claim that his love of evil things indicates more true 
love. 

The mind of the Lord, inculcated by his Word, 
teaches that we are to love the beautiful, pure, true, 
noble; we are to love (in the sense of sympathizing 
with) the weak, penitent and oppressed who are seeking 
for the paths of truth and righteousness; but we 
are to "hate iniquity" and "every false way" and 
all the meanness and sin which is wilful, against light 
and of the devil. 

Cease to pride yourself upon your love for one of 
the most detestable characters known to the pages of 
history, of whom our Lord who so loved (sympathized 
with) the world that he laid down his life for it (—and 
greater love hath no man than this) said, "It had been 
better for that man if he had never been born." 
Adopt God's standpoint, as the Apostle says, "Be not 
deceived, God is not mocked, he that doeth righteousness 
is righteous [and approved of God], but he that 
practices sin [knowingly, willfully] is of the devil." 

For our part we have no thought of ever becoming 
more loving than the Lord: we accept his definitions, 
and seek to be conformed mentally thereto— the 
image of God's Son. We want to love just as he loves 
and just what he loves, and we want to hate what he 
hates. Of him it is written, "Because thou hast loved 
righteousness and hated iniquity; therefore the Lord, 
even thy God, hath anointed thee with the oil of gladness 
above thy fellows." (Heb. 1:9.) "Do not I 
hate them, O Lord, that hate thee?. ..I hate them 
with a perfect hatred."— Psa. 139:21,22. 

We are glad that neither Satan nor Judas nor any 
other creature will ever be tormented to all eternity. 
We are glad that a full, fair opportunity for coming to 
a knowledge of the Lord and of the way of righteousness 
will be granted to every member of Adam's race; 
but we are glad that, on the contrary, all who rejoice 
not in the truth but rejoice in iniquity will be utterly 



R2131 :page 103 

and everlastingly destroyed in the Second Death. We 
abominate Satan, who for over six thousand years has 
wrought unrighteousness and gloated over the evil and 
pain and sorrow which he has wrought, and who with 
clear knowledge of the redemptive work has for eighteen 
centuries opposed the Kingdom and the great 
salvation. The person who could believe in Satan's 
conversion after all this battling against the light and 
the truth has a perverse mind, very sadly blinded by 
the god of this world. 

SEEN MORE CLEARLY. 



Question (1).— In a recent number of the WATCH 
TOWER you show quite to my satisfaction that mother 
Eve was not reckoned as a separate individual, but as 
part of the body of Adam as much as before she was 
taken from his side, and that thus the one sacrifice, once 
for all, covered her in him. But now I want to ask 
two questions: Is not this presentation a little different 
from the presentation on the same subject in 
MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. I., page 123? 

Answer.— Yes; this statement is a little different 
from that in DAWN, and the next edition, now 
on the press, will show a few words of change on the 
page referred to. While the point is comparatively 
unimportant, and does not vitally affect any part of 
the plan of the ages, yet we spare no pains to present 
the truth as clearly and as fast as we see it. The trunkline 
of truth, the plan of the ages, is not only the best 
and safest route for the consecrated mind to travel in 
coming to a knowledge of the things which were, the 
things which are and the things which shall be, but, 
more than this, it is the only through route. Along this 
route, here and there, are side-tracks and switches which 
may require and must have straightening and alignment 
with the main track; but these are all "betterments," not 
impairments, of the road. But, anyway, we have never 
claimed for the DAWN verbal accuracy or infallibility. 
It is our enemies who cannot refute the general teaching 
of the divine plan, that seek to divert attention and 
arouse prejudice by crying, "Infallible!" The divine 
plan of the ages is so grand, that all the consecrated 
who see it realize that God is its author, whoever may 
be its promulgators, connected with the various steps 
of its presentation. Such rejoice with the clarifying of 
its every detail. 

Changes in the language used in expressing the 
same thoughts have been made in several instances. 
(Notably VOL. I., pages 106, 107, 140, 157, 240, 279, 
321 and foot notes of pages 124 and 288— the latter 
formerly an appendix. Also note addition of foot note 



on page 150.) These alterations of language are all, 
we trust, beneficial to the readers. They were made 
necessary by reason of two things:— 

(1) Enemies have tried to put a false light upon 
our words, and to pick out sentences or portions of a 
sentence to use against the truth and to misrepresent 
the general teachings of DAWN;— thus we have been 
misrepresented by some as being "Universalists," by 
others as teaching a second individual chance or trial for 
all of Adam's race, by others as being in agreement 
with their blasphemous doctrine that God is the author 
of all sin and wickedness. 

(2) Friends have honestly misunderstood our 
teachings. Unused to reasoning on religious subjects, 
many failed to see the two distinct parts of the one salvation; 
(a) the part between Justice and the ransom 

given by our Lord Jesus for all mankind by which he 
"bought" the whole world, and became Lord and 
Judge of all, with the right or power to grant lasting 
life to whomsoever he will; and (b) the part of salvation 
which relates to the purchased race, and the terms 
upon which they may individually avail themselves of 
the grace of their Redeemer, and obtain from him the 
life-everlasting which he (by virtue of his ransom sacrifice) 
has the right to give to all who comply with the 
terms of the New Covenant. 

Our constant aim is to have the teachings of the 
WATCH TOWER and MILLENNIAL DAWN so expressed, 
that, like legal documents, they cannot be misunderstood. 
That we have not always succeeded does not 
discourage us; for we find that the inspired words of 
Scripture are frequently wrested by false teachers, and 
misunderstood by God's honest children. The difficulty 
encountered by the legal profession in stating 
matters so that they cannot be misunderstood is witnessed 
by the frequent contest of Wills. A case in point is the 
broken Will of the noted lawyer-millionaire, Hon. S. J. 
Tilden. Yet, presumably, his Will was the most painstaking 
paper he ever prepared. 

We cannot hope that the plan is yet so stated that a 
"wayfaring man" cannot misunderstand our meaning 
and enemies cannot misrepresent us. We trust that no 
false pride, nor false ideas of infallibility, will ever 
hinder us from declaring the truth, the whole truth, 
relating to God's plan, as he shall give us to see 
the truth. 

Question (2).— Would the fact that, as pointed 
out in Tabernacle Shadows of Better Sacrifices, the 
Church, the Bride of the Second Adam, joins in his 
sacrifice, have any bearing on this question? 

Answer.— No; for it is only after we have been 
"justified" by the ransom price that we are called to be 
his bride, joint-sacrificers and joint-heirs with Christ. 

THE DATE OF JESUS' BIRTH. 



Question.— It appears that a considerable number 
of Seventh-Day-Adventists are reading MILLENNIAL 

R2131 :page 104 

DAWN [The Lord be praised!] and are finding that 
their dates and theories are faulty. They are writing 
to the editor of the Sabbath Herald for help and further 
proofs. The editor sees what many of his readers do 
not see probably; viz., that the date of Jesus' birth, as 
clearly and forcibly set forth and proved in DAWN, 
VOL. II., utterly destroys the back-bone theory of 
Seventh-Day-Adventism in re the "Cleansing of the 
Sanctuary"— by showing as VOL. III. does, that they 
have not only misunderstood the nature of the "cleansing," 
but also the time of it, which they fix in 1844 
instead of 1846 A.D. 

The article referred to throws a lot of dust for the 
eyes of its readers, but really makes only two points, 
which I will thank you to answer. 

(1) He claims that the date of Dionysius as given 

in foot note on page 54, DAWN, VOL. II., is incorrect. 

(2) He claims that "two years before Augustus' 
death" Tiberius "was allowed the celebration of a 
triumph in Rome, and was then clothed by Augustus 

with PROCONSULAR POWER, which was understood by 
all the people as CO-SOVEREIGNTY with himself." 

I see that the first point is of no consequence, as 
it no more bears on the subject than does the date of 
my birth. But the second point is of consequence; if 
it proves Tiberius to have begun his reign two years 
before the death of Augustus. 

Answer.— (1) The foot note referred to is in error, 
evidently a slip of the editorial pencil or by the compositor. 
It should read, and will be found in later 
editions, as follows:— 

R2132:page 104 

The year A.D. was fixed upon as early as the sixth 
century by Dionysius Exiguus and other scholars of 
that period, though it did not come into general use 
until two centuries later. 

However, as you suggest, this has no bearing 
whatever on the subject, and might just as well have 
been the twelfth or any other century. 

(2) The editor of Sabbath Herald finds his dates 
and reckonings all out of harmony with the testimony 
of Luke 3:1-3;— the only positive date given in connection 
with our Lord's birth and ministry, by which 
it can be connected with reliable Roman history. 
Like many others this editor has been misled by 
Josephus' unreliable dates, and having adopted them 
and fixed his theory thereon, as do many others, he 



must needs cast some discredit upon Luke's statement. 
There is not a shadow of doubt as to when Tiberius began 
his reign (A.D. 14); but this editor (and many others), 
having a false theory and date to uphold, claims that 
Tiberius began to reign and that his reign dated two 
years before he was recognized as Emperor, two years 
before the great Augustus had vacated the office by 
death. 

The so-called proofs of this, which you quote, are 
absurd, and find their only strength in the ignorance 
of his readers: the editor evidently thinks that the 
words "proconsular powers" will be misunderstood by 
his readers to mean imperial power— a totally different 
thing. That the fallacy and weakness of the argument 
may be seen we quote from the Standard Dictionary, 
the highest authority, the meaning of proconsular and 
proconsul, as follows:— 

"Proconsular.— The dignity, office, or term of office 
of a proconsul." 

"Proconsul.— A Roman official who exercised 
consular authority in one of the provinces, or as commander 
of an army— though not a Consul." 

Illustration.— "Judea was henceforth to be incorporated 
into the province of Syria, with the Proconsul 
...as supreme head under the Emperor." 

So far from "proconsular powers" signifying that 
Tiberius was made the Emperor, or that he shared imperial 
honors with the Emperor, these words signify 
an officer under the Emperor. And, indeed, there 
were several Consuls and Proconsuls in the great 
Roman empire. Nor would the vain and ambitious 
Augustus Caesar, who changed the order of the calendar 
so as to perpetuate his name in one of the months 
with the most days and at the high noon of the year, 
be the kind of man likely to grant one mite of his 
honor or office to another, until death. 

The fact is that students of chronology are quite 
at a loss for anything that will fix the date of our 
Lord's birth with positiveness, except it be this statement 
of Luke 3:1; and we accept it implicitly, as God-given, 
for our instruction. Besides, Luke was an educated 
man and shows himself to have been well acquainted 
with the general affairs of his time. He connected 
the beginning of John's preaching of the Kingdom 
of heaven at hand with the reign of Tiberius 
Caesar for the very purpose of locating or fixing the 
event chronologically; and it would be passing strange 
if he would purposely misstate the matter. There is 
no question, in secular histories, as to when "the reign 
of Tiberius Caesar" began; the only people to raise a 
question about it are those who, following the inaccurate 
records of Josephus, want to twist Luke's plain statement 
into harmony with a date two years earlier. 

The beginning of the "Seventy Weeks" (490 
years) of Israel's favor (Dan. 9:24) was so obscure and 
indefinite that the Jews could not and did not know 



positively when to expect Messiah. No doubt this was 
of divine intention. Had the fulfilment of the time of 
this prophecy been apparent to the Jews, doubtless they 
would not have crucified the Lord of glory. Only a 
few dates as far back as the beginning of those Seventy 
Weeks can be accurately fixed, and they by reason 
of notable eclipses recorded in connection with them. 

R2132:page 105 

Recognizing the fulfilment of the events of the seventieth 
week, and getting the date thereof from Luke 3:1-3, 
we are enabled to reckon back and know exactly 
when they began, regardless of the inaccuracies of records 
and the multiplied disputations of chronologists. 

The best answer to such criticism is the re-reading 
of the plain statements of MILLENNIAL DAWN. On this 
topic see VOL. II., pp. 54-72; VOL. III., Chap. 4. 

FRIDAY, THE CLOSE OF OUR LORD'S 3-1/2 YRS.' MINISTRY. 



Question. Mr. Totten writes as follows:— 

"A brother writes us under date of Nov. 18, '96, 
—'By the way, have just ended a long correspondence 
with Russell; he has had to throw up the sponge on 
both the 3-1/2 year ministry and Friday crucifixion!" 

Mr. Totten gives a few lines of comment on the 
above. Now as a personal favor I ask if your opinion 
on these matters has changed in the least from that 
presented in DAWN? 

Answer. There is not a word of truth in the 
statement. It is "out of whole cloth" like Mr. Totten's 
Astronomical and prophetical misstatements exposed 
in our issue of May 15, '96. 

We have not changed our opinion in the least from 
the presentation of these subjects in DAWN; we see not 
the slightest shadow of reason for any change on either 
subject. 



R2132:page 105 

GOD'S ACCEPTANCE OF CORNELIUS. 

-APRIL 11. -ACTS 10:30-34.- 

"Whosoever believeth in him shall receive 
remission of sins."— Acts 10:43. 

CORNELIUS, noted as the first adopted son of 
God from amongst the Gentiles, was a Roman 
soldier, the captain of a company quartered in 
Caesarea for the better preservation of order and the 



enforcement of the will of the Roman government, 
which, at that time, controlled Palestine. It may be 
that he was the very same Centurion mentioned in 
Luke (7:2-10) as a worthy, noble and generous man, 
of whom Jesus said, "I have not found so great faith, 
no, not in Israel;" and whose servant was healed as a 
reward of this faith. True, that Centurion was stationed 
at Capernaum, while Cornelius we find in Caesarea; 
it is possible, however, that these bands of Roman 
soldiers were moved about from place to place as a better 
means of awing the people with a small number of 
soldiers. It would certainly be very remarkable to find 
two such Centurions of so remarkable a character residing 
so near together. And we are to remember that 
a period of about six years must have elapsed between 
the time of our Lord's healing the servant at Capernaum 
and the events we now consider. 

The date of Cornelius' conversion cannot be positively 
determined from history, but from prophecy we 
may locate it with great positiveness in the year 36, 
A.D., because there the "seventy weeks" of Daniel's 
prophecy terminated. Our Lord was baptised at the 
beginning of the seventieth week (Oct., A.D. 29), was 
crucified "in the midst of the week" (April, A.D. 33). 
The seventy weeks ended the special favors of the Jewish 
nation (Oct., A.D. 36). That date, therefore, was 
the earliest at which it was possible for the gospel to 
be sent to the Gentiles. 

It would appear that Cornelius had been in an 
acceptable attitude of heart before the Lord for some 
time. We may reasonably infer, therefore, that God delayed 
the sending of the gospel message to him for 
some particular reason. That particular reason, we see, 
was, that the full period of the "seventy weeks" (of 
years) must be confined to Israel, as it is written, "He 
shall confirm the covenant with many for one week," 
altho he was to "cut short the work in righteousness" 
(so far as the nation was concerned) "in the midst of 
the week." The "many," to whom the covenant was confirmed 
for the remainder (3-1/2 years) of the seventieth 
week, consisted of those worthy Jews who, beginning 
at Pentecost, were specially taught, and thousands of 
them converted, during this remaining period of individual 
favor to the Jew. We may, therefore, presume 
that Cornelius, having been for some time in an acceptable 
condition of heart, the gospel went to him at 
the earliest possible moment— about Oct., A.D. 36. 

We cannot properly speak of these experiences of 
Cornelius as a conversion or turning of his heart; for 
his heart was already in the right attitude, as was that 
of Saul of Tarsus. As the latter needed to have his 
knowledge corrected, so the former needed to have his 
knowledge increased; and then both needed to be accepted 
in the Beloved,— and to receive the spirit of 
adoption as "sons of God." 

The testimony is that, at the time of receiving this 



great blessing of the truth, Cornelius was in the right 
attitude of heart to receive it: he was hungering and 
thirsting after righteousness, and was fasting and praying 
for it. What a suggestion is here! If all people 
could be gotten into a condition similar to this described 
of Cornelius, we might expect the conversion of the 
whole world speedily. The great difficulty in the presentation 
of the gospel is the unreadiness of the hearts 

R2132:page 106 

of those who need it. This is true, whether of the 
savages of Africa or the philosophers of India and China, 
or the self-satisfied ones of so-called Christian lands. 

R2133 : page 106 

They do not know the truth, and they cannot receive 
it, because their hearts are not prepared for it. And if 
the truth be received into any other than into a good 
and honest heart, it not only is not likely to bring forth 
a good harvest, but indeed may introduce a liberty 
(freedom from superstition, etc.) which may actually 
be unfavorable in its results. The constant effort of 
all, therefore, should be, not only to be in a proper attitude 
of heart themselves, but to see to it that those 
whom they approach with the truth are brought in contact 
not only with the knowledge and liberty which the 
truth carries, but also with its influence as a sanctifying 
and cleansing power. 
In the vision granted to Cornelius the Lord commends 

(1) his prayerful attitude, which implied faith 

in God and a desire for harmony with him in righteousness; 

(2) his works of righteousness— his alms-giving, 

his endeavor to overcome selfishness and to copy divine 
benevolence. So we believe it is with all; whoever is 
in the right attitude of heart will be more and more 
moved to good works. 

We have here also an illustration of divine methods; 
and we have every reason to believe that they are 
the same to-day. God did not miraculously fill the 
mind of Cornelius with a knowledge of the gospel and 
the details of the divine plan of salvation;— nor does he 
do this to-day, altho some of his children evidently so 
misunderstand his arrangement. On the contrary, the 
Lord made use of his servant Peter in communicating 
the truth, in teaching those who were ignorant of it. 
Men accordingly were sent a considerable journey to 
find Peter, and Peter journeyed with them the same 
distance in order to preach the gospel, rather than have 
any miraculous presentation of it. 

The language of Cornelius, when Peter was come 
to his house, indicates an appreciation of the fact that 
the message was from God, and that Peter was merely 
the honored instrument. Cornelius, presenting himself 
and his household in the presence of Peter for instruction, 



said, "We are all here present before God, to 
hear all things that are commanded thee of God." 
Here was a proper respect for the servant of God as a 
servant of God and his Word; but also a full recognition 
that "every good and perfect gift cometh down from 
[our Father] above," and that the gospel itself is 
"neither of man nor by man." 

It is safe to say that Peter, as well as Cornelius, 
received a great lesson from the Lord in connection 
with this visit. He was learning that, altho the divine 
favor and privilege of the gospel had been granted "to 
the Jew first," according to divine promise, nevertheless 
only true Jews could be acceptable with God, while 
"in every nation he that feareth him, and worketh 
righteousness, is [now] accepted with him"— through 
the merit of the sacrifice given "once for all" by him 
who has since been highly exalted and made "Lord 
of all." 

Peter presupposes on the part of Cornelius just 
such knowledge as we would expect of an educated 
and influential man at that time, particularly if he were 
the Centurion of Capernaum who had personal contact 
with our Lord. He says, You have heard about this 
preaching of Jesus all through your country here, the 
matter is public, no one could live in this vicinity without 
coming to a knowledge of these general facts. 
They may have heard the facts misstated to some extent 
and misrepresented, but in a general way all know 
that our preaching is concerning Jesus of Nazareth: 
that he was anointed of God, the Messiah; that he received 
the holy spirit and with it power; and that he 
used this power in doing good and healing all oppressed 
of the devil (through sickness, etc.),— all of which, 
either directly or indirectly, are traceable to sin and 
thus to the author of sin, Satan. 

Having briefly rehearsed the matters which Cornelius 
already knew, the Apostle rehearsed some matters 
which were not so generally known, but denied as 
incredible; namely, that the death of Jesus was not 
like the death of others, but was a sacrifice; that 
this sacrifice was acceptable with God as the ransom-price 
for sinners; and that God had "given assurance 
unto all men" (that the sacrifice was satisfactory and 
had been accepted on behalf of all men) by raising 
Jesus from the dead on the third day.— Acts 17:31. 

We have heretofore seen that our Lord Jesus was 
not raised from the dead a fleshly being, a human being, 
but a spirit being, and that "flesh and blood cannot 
inherit the Kingdom of God." We have seen that, 
accordingly, no one could see him as the resurrected 
spirit being, except a miracle were performed, either 
by granting special powers to see a spirit being, 
or by our Lord's appearing in a body of flesh on certain 
occasions (just as angels had done previously) for 
the purpose of the better impressing upon the disciples 
the two facts; (1) his resurrection, (2) his change of 



nature which prevented his being seen, except as he 
would specially "appear" or "manifest" himself. 
Thus, Peter here declares that the people in general 
did not see the Lord Jesus after his resurrection, but 
that God "showed him," unto "witnesses chosen before 
of God, even unto us." 

Thus by these proofs of our Lord's resurrection God 
granted us the evidences of coming divine favor— proofs 
that Christ is empowered of the Father to be the Judge 
of all who are to be judged, the living (the angels who 

R2133 : page 107 

kept not their first estate and who are "reserved unto 
the judgment of the great day," and upon whom the 
death sentence has never yet been pronounced) and 
the dead (the world of mankind, "dead in trespasses 
and sins," and dead, in the sense that all are under the 
sentence of death). 

The Apostle's discourse was orderly, and he next 
proceeded to show that all this was in harmony with 
what had been foretold respecting this long-promised 
Savior, Messiah. Then, completing his argument and 
bringing it down and making a personal application of 
it to his hearers, he showed that, the penalty of sin 
having been paid for all by the Lord Jesus, and all 
judgment of the sinners having been transferred to the 
hands of him who "bought us with his own precious 
blood," it followed that he had full power and authority 
to extend the terms and conditions of the New Covenant; 
namely, the remission of sins to all who believed 
in him as their Priest (Redeemer), their Prophet 
(Teacher) and their King (Ruler). 

We are not surprised to find from the narrative 
that this man, whose heart was so ready for the truth, 
who was hungering and thirsting for it, fasting and 
praying to be in a condition for receiving it, was so 
ready that he appropriated the words of the Apostle as 
the bread from heaven and the water of life for which 
he had been hungering and thirsting. It does not surprise 
us, therefore, that God immediately, in view of 
his full consecration, accounted him worthy of "the 
spirit of adoption;" and not only so, but also gave him 
some of the outward manifestations or miraculous 
"gifts," similar to those granted to the believers on the 
day of Pentecost. 

The Apostle Peter, as he subsequently testified to 
his fellow-disciples at Jerusalem, was astonished to see 
that God in every respect treated the converts from 
the Gentiles the same as the converts from the Jews; 
and dropping all prejudice Peter at once grasped the 
situation and did not hesitate to offer to Cornelius symbolic 
baptism as the evidence or pledge of his consecration 
to the Lord; assuredly gathering that whomsoever 
the Lord counted worthy of the holy spirit was worthy 
also of every other feature of the divine arrangement 



for the household of faith. With us also should it be 
the same: whoever we may find truly believing the 
gospel of redemption and forgiveness of sins through 
Christ, and consecrated to God's service in Him,— such, 
wherever found, are to be esteemed as brethren and 
fellowshiped to the full, whether or not they have seen 
every item of the truth now due. Further knowledge 
will come to the consecrated, and, as a fruit of it, obedience 
in every particular may reasonably be expected. 



R2133 : page 107 

THE "CHRISTIANS" OF ANTIOCH. 

-APRIL 18.-ACTS 11:19-26.- 

"Then hath God also unto the Gentiles 
granted repentance unto life."— Acts 11:18. 

ANTIOCH was one of the chief cities of the 

world at this time: it ranked with Rome 

and Corinth. It was the capital of the province of 

Syria. The gospel reached it as the result of the persecution 

which arose about the time of Stephen's martyrdom, 

in which Saul of Tarsus was one of the leaders. 

Some of those who had received the gospel at Jerusalem 

when "scattered everywhere," got as far away as 

Antioch, about 300 miles from Jerusalem. They did 

not put their lights under a bushel, but endeavored to 

"show forth the praises [virtues, glories] of him who 

had called them out of darkness into his marvelous 

light." They met with hearing ears and believing 

hearts, under the divine leading and blessing. They 

no doubt thus eventually realized that their persecutions 

were part of the "all things working together for 

good to them who love God;" and those of right mind 

surely rejoiced that by any means they were permitted 

to be co-workers together with God, and to be used of 

him in his glorious work. These laborers were not 

apostles, nor even notable ones amongst the Lord's 

disciples, so that it was not considered necessary by 

the writer even to mention their names; nevertheless 

R2134:page 107 

we can be sure that however obscure amongst men, they 
were reckoned by the Lord as his jewels whom he will 
shortly gather, and who, numbered amongst those who 
turn many to righteousness, will shine as the stars for 
ever and ever. The testimony to their efficient work is, 
—"A great number believed and turned unto the Lord." 

It is worthy of notice that believing is one thing 
and turning to the Lord is another thing. We fear 
that this distinction is too often forgotten, and that too 



many are satisfied merely to get their friends to believe 
some of the good things of the gospel of our Lord 
Jesus, and do not press the matter on to the only legitimate 
and proper conclusion— a complete turning away 
from sin and the world; a thorough turning of every 
sentiment, hope, ambition and desire "unto the Lord," 
and into harmony with his divine plan. Let us remember 
the statement, "devils also believe;" and let us not 
rest satisfied with efforts merely to convince the head 
without convicting and regenerating the heart. 
Many speak of the Church at Antioch as "the 
first Gentile Church" and of "Gentile Christians" and 
"Jewish Christians." All this is a mistake: there is 
not and never was a "Gentile Church," nor a "Gentile 
Christian." We might just as well speak of a 
"heathen Church" or a "heathen Christian," for such 
is the meaning of these expressions. There was a Jewish 
Church under Moses, but there was never a Jewish 
Christian Church, and there never will be. The way 
may have been smoother for a Jew to pass out of 
the partial light of the Law Covenant into the new light 
of the Gospel Covenant, than for the Gentile to pass 
from the outer darkness of heathenism into the full 
light of the gospel; but, nevertheless, there was a 
positive transfer in both cases. Christianity is not a 
blending of the gospel with Judaism, nor is it a blending 
of the gospel with heathenism. Our Lord declared 
that he would not put a patch upon the Jewish system and 
call it Christianity, nor put the new wine of the gospel 
into the old wine skins of Judaism; but that, on the 

R2134 : page 108 

contrary, he established a totally new thing; and that 
those who would enter his Kingdom must first be begotten 
again, and ultimately be born again before they 
could share it.— John 3:3-8. 

While we would contend earnestly for the truths 
and facts of the gospel, we do not wish to be hypercritical 
as to words and names. If, therefore, any have 
used the terms "Jewish Christians" and "Gentile Christians" 
merely through mistake of language, and have 
had the apostolic thought in mind, namely, that there 
is "neither Jew nor Gentile, bond nor free, male nor 
female, but ye are all one [a new one— a new Church] 
in Christ Jesus," we have no desire to quarrel with 
such, nor to be captious; and yet we do respectfully 
urge upon all such the unwisdom of using terms which 
of themselves, and without particular private explanation, 
are misleading. 

The gospel was preached at Antioch at first, properly, 
to the Jews only; yet, when the due time for it 
to go to the Gentiles arrived, the Lord's providence 
opened up the way and showed his servants that 
Cornelius was not an exceptional case, but that the 
gospel was to be preached in all the world for a witness, 



for the purpose of gathering his little flock 

from all kindreds, nations and tongues who should 

have an ear to hear it and to whom he would send it. 

The progress of the interested at Antioch was a refreshment 
to the central company of believers at Jerusalem, 
and forthwith appreciating the fact that they 
would need instruction in the truth, and that the Lord 
would be pleased to continue to use human instrumentalities 
to this end, they at once dispatched Barnabas on 
a missionary tour. Barnabas, as a good, faithful servant 
of the Lord, was greatly rejoiced when he found 
the condition of matters at Antioch, yet, apparently, 
he found a condition of things to meet which he himself 
lacked certain qualifications. Of a loving and kind 
disposition, his visit no doubt was very helpful to them, 
but he apparently discerned that they needed instruction 
as well as exhortation, and immediately he thought 
of Paul, the wonderful Christian logician, and of how 
ably he could present the gospel in its various features 
to those Grecians of a philosophical turn of mind. Accordingly 
he sought him and found him and brought 
him with him to Antioch. The results showed the wisdom 
of the course, and no doubt it was entirely ordered 
by the Lord. A year's stay in Antioch under 
the able teachings of Paul and under the loving ministries 
and exhortations of Barnabas resulted most 
favorably: not only was the church of believers well 
developed, but the multitudes who assembled received 
considerable instruction also, and thus the knowledge of 
the gospel was greatly spread abroad. 

Some have surmised that the name "Christian," 
first attached to the Lord's people at Antioch, was applied 
in ridicule. But it seems to us that the evidences 
all point to the contrary, and indicate that this was 
the name which the believers adopted for themselves, 
by which they would be known to outsiders. Had the 
name been a disreputable one we might have supposed 
it to be applied in ridicule; but since the basis of the 
name Christian is the word Christ, and since the word 
Christ signifies Messiah or the Anointed (of God), it 
must have been accepted as a most honorable name, 
or who would think that a divine anointing could signify 
anything dishonorable in the eyes of any man, Jew 
or Gentile. 

This adopted name "Christian" indicates the 
healthy condition of the Church, and testifies to the 
sound instruction which they had received from Paul 
and Barnabas. When later another company of Christians 
began to split up into factions, some calling themselves 
followers of Peter, some followers of Paul, some 
followers of Apollos, the Apostle reproved them for 
this, assuring them that it was an evidence that their 
views in general on the subject were fleshly, carnal, 
worldly and not spiritual. He told them that it was 
an evidence that as yet they were "babes" in spiritual 
things, and pointed out to them that neither Peter, 



nor Paul, nor Apollos, had died for them, and that 
at very most they were only servants of the Lord Jesus, 
who had redeemed them and who had sent them the 
blessing of the truth, using such instrumentalities as 
seemed to him good. (1 Cor. 3:3-23.) What evidences 
we have all around us that the carnal or worldly 
mind prevails very largely to-day,— that very many 
who have named the name of Christ are merely "babes" 
in spiritual comprehension. The evidences of these 
conditions may be found in the fact that one says, "I 
am of Wesley," another, "I am of Calvin," another, 
"I am of Peter," and that in general the believers of 
the Lord Jesus are split up into parties and factions- 
Lutherans, Presbyterians, Congregationalists, Episcopalians, 
Baptists, etc. 

Moreover, it is not true, as some claim, that these 
names are merely forms and that they signify nothing. 
They do signify much: they imply that those who 
brand themselves with these names acknowledge various 
the rules of various parties and factions, and that 
they are all more or less in bondage to human systems 
and traditions of men, and have failed to a large extent to 
realize the individual "liberty wherewith Christ makes 
free" all those who have come to him, and who are 
united to him only. Nor do we with many advocate 
the removal of these dividing fences of human creeds 
merely to construct of them a "union" fence, doubly 
strong, around the whole company of believers in 
Christ. On the contrary, we deny the propriety of 
any human fences, and hold that each individual 
Christian is to be united and bounden only to 
the Lord and to his instructions, and not to others, few 
or many. All the truly consecrated and truly united 
to the Lord will find themselves in fellowship with all 
others similarly united to him, and the bondage between 
these various members (the bonds of love and of 
common submission to the one Head and to all of his 
arrangements) will be the only bondage necessary to 
the complete operation of this body of Christ, according 
to the directions of his Word. 

Let us each make it our highest ambition and aim 
to be Christians in the fullest sense of that word. To 
truly be a Christian implies a union with Christ; it 
implies a submission to him as our Head, it implies a 
share with him in the anointing of the priesthood for 
the work of sacrifice and of self-denial in this present 
time; it implies also an association with him in the 
anointing of kings and joint-heirs in the coming Kingdom. 
Let us take and let us keep this holy name, and 
it alone; and let us make sure that we do not take this 
holy name in vain. 



page 109 



VOL. XVIII. APRIL 15, 1897. No. 8. 



CONTENTS. 



Special Items 110 

Views from the Watch Tower Ill 

The Knowledge of God— Its Value 114 

The Blessed People of God 117 

Peter Delivered from Prison 118 

Paul's First Missionary Tour 121 

Interesting Letters 123 

page 110 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
-ADDRESS TO- 
TOWER PUBLISHING CO., BIBLE HOUSE, 58 & 60 ARCH ST., 
ALLEGHENY (NORTH PITTSBURG), PA., U.S.A. 

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 

INCLUDES A SUBSCRIPTION TO "THE OLD THEOLOGY TRACTS'-QUARTERLY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, NY. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, 

OR REGISTERED. FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN 

MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS: 

Those of the interested, who by reason of old age or accident, or 
other adversity are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, 
if they will send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and 
requesting the paper. 



"LOOKING UNTO JESUS!" 



Look unto Christ, O Church of God, 
Fear not, nor be distressed; 

'Twas he who gave his precious bloody- 
In him you now are blessed. 

Look unto Christ, O sons, first-born, 

Though darkness fill the earth, 
Redemption cometh in the morn 

Of restitution's birth. 

Look unto Christ, O groaning race, 

Thy burden to remove; 
Jehovah's all-sufficient grace 

The "King of kings" shall prove.— J. M. Blose. 

MISSIONARY ENVELOPES. 



Do not forget these. They preach the glad tidings in few words 
wherever they go; to your correspondents, as well as to postmen, and 
others enroute. Price, post-paid, 25 for 10 cents, 100 for 25 cents. 



R2135 :page 111 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 



REV. Lyman Abbott, D.D., the now widely known 
"Unbeliever," was engaged by the "Hicksite 
Quakers," of Philadelphia, to deliver a lecture, and 
the Y.M.C.A. hall was secured for the purpose. 
The Secretary of the Y.M.C.A. concluded from all 
that he could learn that Dr. Abbott is an "Unbeliever," 
and that his use of the hall would not be in the interest 
of Christianity and the objects of the Y.M.C.A. and 
cancelled the engagement. We quite endorse his 
judgment, altho we well know that such a view of matters 
will be considered narrow by all "unbelievers." If 
Satan presented himself in human form, well dressed, 
as a liberal lecturer on "Higher Criticism," well fortified 
with "cunningly devised fables," he would find 
numerous defenders and plenty of willing hearers with 
"itching ears;" but if our Lord or the Apostles Paul 
or Peter presented themselves as exponents and defenders 
of the Law and the Prophets, and especially of 
the cross of Christ as the center of the Gospel and the 
power of God and the wisdom of God, they would find 
few attentive listeners. How we see fulfilling the word 
of the Lord by the mouth of the Apostle,— "The time 
will come when they will not endure sound doctrine; 
but after their own desires shall they gather to themselves 
teachers,— having itching ears; and they shall 
turn away their ears from the truth, and shall be 
turned unto fables."— 2 Tim. 4:3,4. 

The same question is causing a disturbance among 
"Christian Endeavorers." The next convention of this 
society is to be held in San Francisco, Cal., in July, and 
as it has been discovered that a prominent Evolutionist 
and higher critic otherwise known as "modern unbelievers," 
has been assigned a prominent place in connection 
with the appointments for public addresses, it 
is concluded that himself and others of like unbelief 
will endeavor to use the opportunity to make a good 
impression for their cause upon these "Young People." 
A religious press controversy has sprung up, and considerable 
heat has been developed on both sides. 

This question must yet "shake" Christendom 
thoroughly; and no doubt we will surprise many when 
we declare that, in our understanding of the Word, 
the vast majority will be sifted out as "unbelievers"— 
so much so that to many it will appear that "the old 



fogy believers in miracles, and in the divine inspiration 
of the Scriptures," have been shaken out;— because the 
masses will accept the Evolution-and-unbelief theory. 

As usual the adversary will endeavor to becloud 
the real question by sophistical statements. It will be 
claimed that the Evolutionary or "unbelievers" theory 
is the true, the moral, the logical, the enlightened 
view; and no doubt some will even claim that it is the 
Scriptural view. Those left, faithful to the Bible, will 
be the theologically "hard" and "tough" and "unreasonable," 
covered all over with barnacles of human 
error concerning election, foreordination, predestination 
and eternal torment, and their false beliefs will not 
only injure their influence, but will tend to further discredit 
the Bible, which, more than ever, will be charged 
with the inconsistencies of every misbelief. And these 
in turn, realizing the effort to overthrow their faith in 
the Bible as the Word of God, will not only hold it the 
faster but also hold the tighter all the human falsehoods 
and inconsistencies attached to their faith in the 
name of the Bible, during the "dark ages." Nor can 
we hope that many of these will get free from these 
shackles of error until the fall of Babylon (Rev. 18: 1-4) 
opens their eyes to the true situation. 

R2135 :page 112 

However various the forms which the question 
may take, it will nevertheless still be— for the cross or 
against the cross; soldiers of the cross or enemies of 
the cross of Christ,— believers in the ransom or deniers 
of the ransom. All the so-called "higher critics," or 
"unbelievers" in the Bible, are of logical necessity believers 
in Evolution; and all believers in Evolution are 
of logical necessity deniers of the fact that a ransom was 
given for sinners by our Lord, for they claim that none 
was necessary. Denying original sin by a fall, and denying 
a ransom from the condition and penalties of a 
fall, they are denying the very center of the gospel— 
the cross,— that Christ died for our sins according to 
the Scriptures, and that he rose for our justification. 
Hence also they deny justification by faith and through 
the precious blood. (Rom. 5:1,9.) Hence, by whatever 
name such "unbelievers" are known, as deniers 
of the very essence of Christianity they are not Christians, 
—not believers in Christ in the only way in which 
belief in him is genuine according to God's Word. Instead, 
they are "the enemies of the cross of Christ."— 
Phil. 3:18. 

"In the cross of Christ we glory, 

Towering o'er the wrecks of time. 
All the light of sacred story 

Gathers round its head sublime." 

The "Hicksite" branch of the Quakers, for which 



Dr. Abbott is to speak, utterly repudiates the doctrine 
of Christ's vicarious atonement— the ransom. This is 
in keeping with our observations above. 



France has begun the manufacture of a new quick-firing 
gun— the "Casnet." It is claimed that it will 
throw a shrapnel shell, loaded with 300 bullets, five 
times a minute, a distance of about four miles. Other 
"Christian nations" must similarly prepare to do murder 
wholesale, and Germany has already begun work 
on a somewhat similar weapon. The time for turning 
all this energy to useful arts of peace is not yet, but it 
is near, thank God. 



The Cretan war question is only a part of the 
Turkish question; and our remarks on the latter in our 
View of Nov. 1, '96, apply in general to all with 
which Turkey is related. We do not expect "a general 
European war which will destroy present civilization" 
—that destruction is not due yet; but we do 
expect, now or soon, such a reorganization of Turkey's 
affairs as will open Palestine and permit the return of 
the Jews as settlers— forbidden by Turkey since 1891. 



The Armeblatt, an Austrian military journal, describes 
a new murder-weapon (for use upon fellow beings 
of other "Christian (?) nations" and against savages, 
but not, we may presume, to be used against the 
Turks, so long as they can pay the interest on their 
bonds). What an amount of human ingenuity now 
employed on instruments for murder will be changed 
to new channels— to bless the already "groaning creation,' 
when the Prince of Peace shall take control 
and cause wars to cease unto the ends of the earth!— 
Psa. 46:6-10. 

Here is a description of this weapon of destruction:— 

"An engine of 16 horse power actuates a four-wheeled 
rubber-tired cycle, carrying two rapid-fire guns. 
These two guns, mounted on pivots, one in front, the 
other in the rear, can each describe a semicircle, the 
motion being effected automatically. 

"The discharge is controlled by the motor mechanism 
itself, and can take place as well when the cycle is 
in motion as when it is at rest. The number of shots 
fired per minute can be varied from 50 to 700. The 
cycle carries 500 projectiles for each gun. 

"The attendant, seated on the cycle between the 
two guns, has only to train them and then start his 
engine. He is protected in front and behind by shields, 
fixed to the guns. 



"The cycle as a whole is also protected against 
bullets, and even against small artillery projectiles. 
Besides, the mechanism of discharge, acting automatically, 
keeps on working, even after the attendant is 
disabled. 

"On a good, smooth road this cycle can go at a 
speed of forty-five miles an hour, so that it could distance 
any other kind of artillery. We can hardly imagine 
the effect that fifty or a hundred of such cycles would 
produce when all in action at once." 



The Glasgow Herald (Scotland) gives a lengthy 
and detailed account of the Meeting of the Glasgow 
Presbytery on March 2, at which the terms of union 
with the United Presbyterian Church were discussed. 
We note the growing sentiment favorable to a partial 
union with the civil government; based upon the erroneous 
assumption that the kingdoms of this world 
have become Christ's Kingdom, and that he is the 
King. Oh! how changed the world's affairs will be 
when Immanuel's reign has really been inaugurated: 
"When the Kingdom is the Lord's and he is the governor 
among the nations." "Thy kingdom come, thy 
will be done, on earth as it is done in heaven" is still 
the prayer of those who know the King's Word. 

R2136 :page 112 

The following utterance of Dr. Ross Taylor was approved 
by the Presbytery: Both churches agree that— 

"The great principle of national religion, the principle, 
namely, that as Christ was King of Nations, all 
nations were bound to own him and to have regard to 
his authority in the making of their laws and in the 
shaping of their procedure, and not only so, but that 
all were bound— nations and rulers— to recognize the 
Church of Christ and to promote its interests in every 
way consistent with its spirit and enactments. That 
was the position which they maintained with regard to 

R2136 :page 113 

national religion, and that, he was glad to say, was a 
position in which their United Presbyterian friends in 
the conference which had been held thoroughly agreed 
with them. They were at one on the points as to the 
duty of nations and rulers to recognize the Church of 
Christ and to promote its interests in every way consistent 
with ITS SPIRIT AND ENACTMENTS." 



The spirit of federation is growing rapidly in Great 
Britain, as the following from the London Daily Chronicle 



(March 6) shows:— 

"On Monday night the Lord Mayor and Lady 
Mayoress will receive at the Guildhall probably as many 
as 3,000 delegates and representatives of the National 
Council of Evangelical Free Churches which 
meets in the City Temple, and in the Memorial Hall 
on the following three days of next week. This is not 
simply the first meeting in London of the National 
Council. Practically it is its first formal meeting. 
Originating in Nov. '92 as a 'Free Church Congress,' 
with a lamentably meagre attendance, the movement 
as a whole illustrates how tremendous may be the development 
of a very simple proposal. 

"Thomas Law, organizing secretary, was able to 
report an enormous growth in the number of local Non-conformist 
councils and county federations, the influence 
of which it is the object of the National Council 
to focus upon the religious, social and perhaps even the 
political life of England. Since last year the associations 
have increased with still wilder impetuosity, not 
merely scores but hundreds of them having been surprised 
into useful existence, in almost an incredible 
way. On Tuesday morning this National Council will 
assemble with the commanding authority of delegates 
to the number of 1,200, and 'personal members' probably 
exceeding that number, representing over 10,000 
English evangelical congregations. The churches represented 
include the Congregationalists, all the Baptist 
communities, all the Methodist 'Societies,' the Presbyterian 
Church of England, the Free Episcopal 
Churches, even the Society of Friends, and a host of 
minor religious bodies— Unitarians, however, being excluded 
as not conforming to the strict interpretation of 
the constitution." 



The Pope, whose representatives have for some 
time past been specially blessing the Spanish war ships 
as they left for Cuba, found that Spain did not get 
victory as a result of his blessings, and now changes 
his course and poses before the world as the advocate 
of peace and liberty— sending a letter to the Queen of 
Spain urging peace and very liberal laws for Cuba and 
Porto Rico. 



The following extracts from a recent speech by 
Lord Salisbury, premier of Great Britain, shows a 
clearer view of general affairs than most people get. 
It shows the wisdom of the confusion of the world's 
language for the period of the reign of sin and death; 
and that present tendencies toward one language might 
work eventual ill, were it not that the Kingdom is near 
at hand. The London Spectator says:— 



"He remarked on the singularly rapid spread of 
the English race and the English language over the 
surface of our planet, and expressed the belief that 
what is said in that language will before long be intelligible, 
and not only intelligible, but actually understood, 
over almost all the world. And he insisted that 
this might turn out to be either a great blessing or a 
great curse, according to the spirit in which those who 
mold the convictions of the English-speaking races 
choose to guide the formation of those convictions. It 
is, in fact, a sort of reversal of the effect which the confusion 
of tongues,— which is said to have fallen upon 
the different families of the human race in the vain attempt 
to build a tower intended to scale the heavens,— 
was supposed to have produced. In Lord Salisbury's 
view the difficulty which different races have found in 
mastering each other's language has not been by any 
means an unmixed evil. It has served as a kind of 
non-conducting medium to limit the mischief which irresponsible 
and mischievous talk so often produces. 
St. James has told us that 'the tongue can no man 
tame.' But what no man can tame may yet to some 
extent be deprived of its poisonous influence through 
the difficulty it finds in penetrating the speech of 
another people of a quite different race. For example, 
we Englishmen have no doubt missed the point of perhaps 
nine-tenths of the French witticisms produced at 
our expense, while the French have missed the point 
of even a greater number of foolishly contemptuous 
phrases in which Englishmen have poured forth their 
ill-advised conviction of their own immense superiority 
to Frenchmen. Had this non-conducting medium 
never existed, can it be doubted that the irritation of 
France against England and of England against France 
would often have been far greater than it has been? 
...Let English become something like a universal 
language, and we shall soon find that the velocity with 
which either clever or ignorant ill-nature propagates 
its mischievous influence over the world will be indefinitely 
increased. With the electric telegraph working 
in a speech universally understood, words of hasty 
wrath will have a far more deadly effect than they have 
now, and we may find ourselves at war before we have 
had time either to define our purposes or explain our 
meaning. In short, as Lord Salisbury truly said, the 
universal currency of the English tongue will produce 
either a good or a bad effect, just in proportion to the 
wisdom or the folly, the self-control or the license, of 
the English-speaking races. ...But if Englishmen 
learn to scream, and Americans to bluster, and public 
opinion to discharge itself violently in muddy geysers 
of boiling passion in every separate Colony and State, 
then the universal spread of English may prove a great 
calamity and some day issue in a great catastrophe." 



R2136 :page 114 

THE KNOWLEDGE OF GOD--ITS VALUE. 



"Grace and peace be multiplied unto you, through the knowledge of 
God, and of Jesus Christ our Lord, according as his divine power 
hath given unto us all things that pertain unto God and life and 
godliness, through the knowledge of him that hath called us 
by his own glory and virtue."— 2 Pet. 1:2,3 
—Reading of Sinaitic manuscript. 

THE FIRST question coming to us in connection 

with these words of exhortation is, To whom 

were they addressed? Are these the instructions given 

to sinners? Is this the way by which sinners are to approach 

to God? No. These instructions are addressed 

to those who are already justified through faith in the 

precious blood of Christ, as indicated in the preceding 

verse. They are addressed— "To them who have obtained 

like precious faith with us [the apostles] through 

the righteousness of our Lord and Savior,* Jesus 

Christ." 

The suggestion clearly is that to become believers 
in Christ Jesus— even justified and fully consecrated 
believers— is not sufficient; there is to be a progress in 
the life just begun which will continue as long as we 
are "in this tabernacle," and, if faithful, be completed 
in "the first resurrection." The thought of the Apostle 
is not year by year revivals with year by year backslidings, 
but rather a continued progression in the new 
life. This thought is quite in contradiction of the experiences 
of very many who assume the name of Christ, 
which, alas! are too often expressed in the lines of 
the hymn:— 

"Where is the blessedness I knew, when first I found the Lord? 
Where is the soul-reviving view of Jesus and his Word?" 

The prevalent idea amongst this class of Christians 
might be termed alternate subtractions and additions 
of grace and peace. They first get a blessing, then 
lose it, then find it again to lose it again, and thus continue. 
There is a logical reason why this course is so 
prevalent, and why so few know anything about the 
multiplication which the Apostle here mentions— 
"Grace and peace be multiplied unto you." The reason 
is that the majority of Christians lack a knowledge 
of those things which are necessary to preserve to them 
the grace and peace found through their primary faith 
in the Lord as their Redeemer; and much more do they 
lack a sufficiency of knowledge to multiply their grace 
and peace. The vast majority occupy the position 
mentioned by the Apostle Paul (1 Cor. 3:1) "I, brethren, 



could not write unto you as unto spiritual, but as 
unto carnal— even as unto babes in Christ;" "when 
for the time ye ought to be teachers, ye have need that 
one teach you again which be the first principles of the 
oracles of God."-Heb. 5:12-14. 



*Reading of Sinaitic MS. 
R2137 :page 114 

An error on one subject often leads to many errors 
on many subjects; and so it is in this case: the 
doctrine of eternal torment as the penalty for the fall, 
from which only believers will escape, has distorted 
the judgment and misdirected the efforts of many of 
the Lord's people. With some of the most earnest the 
first thought is personal escape from eternal torment, 
and naturally the second thought is to help as many 
others as possible to escape such an awful eternity. 
With this thought as the mainspring of conduct, we 
cannot wonder that by such chief attention is paid 
to "saving sinners" and bringing them into the condition 
of "babes in Christ." But after they become 
babes comparatively little is done to develop them in 
the knowledge of God, that they may grow up into the 
full stature of manhood in Christ. As babes they are 
continually fed upon the milk, and hence are unused 
to the strong meat, so that when they do attempt its 
use, they are more likely to be choked by it than to be 
strengthened. 

The Apostle points out the proper course by which 
the believer, having made a proper start, shall continue 
onward and upward in his Christian development- 
multiplying his grace and his peace. It is all-important, 
however, that he begin right, that he be truly 
begotten "by the word of truth," "the faith once delivered 
unto the saints"— which the Apostle here terms 
"precious faith." This is not the faith promulgated 
by the higher critics. Their faith is far from precious. 
Their faith denies the fall, denies the ransom and all 
necessity for it, and consequently denies the resurrection 
based upon that ransom. Their faith consists in 
believing in their own judgments as the criterions of 
what is truth and what is error, and in doubting the 
testimony of Moses and the prophets, of the Lord and 
the apostles. Such a faith is not the "precious faith," 
is not "the faith once delivered unto the saints." And 
those who are building upon such a faith are not of 
those here addressed by the Apostle, and we need not 
expect that either their grace or their peace will be 
multiplied. We trust, however, that the majority of 
our readers are of those who can sing with the spirit 
and the understanding also,— 



"My hope is built on nothing less than Jesus' blood and righteousness; 
I dare not trust the sweetest frame, but wholly lean on Jesus' name. 
On Christ, the solid Rock, I stand: all other ground is sinking sand." 

The true foundation, upon which we should build, 
is,— faith in the righteousness of our Lord and Savior 
Jesus Christ,— faith that his sacrifice for sin was once 
for all a full and complete ransom-price for Adam and 
all his posterity, so that all of these, as in due time 
they shall be brought to a knowledge of Christ, may, 

R2137 :page 115 

if they will, obtain cleansing and eternal life under the 
gracious terms of the New Covenant. It is those who 
build upon this foundation that may hope to multiply 
their grace and peace. How? 

The Apostle answers— "Through the knowledge of 
God, and of Jesus our Lord." At first it may occur to 
some that this has but a slight meaning, and that it 
simply signifies that we come to know that there is a 
God, and that there is a Lord and Savior, Jesus Christ. 
But the knowledge of God means far more than this to 
the advancing and developing Christian: to him it 
means an intimate acquaintance with the Father and 
with the Son, a knowledge of the "mind of Christ," 
which is a full and clear representation to us of the 
mind of the Father. We are to grow in this knowledge 
by studying the Word of God, by discerning through 
that Word the principles which govern the divine conduct, 
as to how divine justice, wisdom, love and power 
operate. These are progressive studies. Something 
may be learned the first day of our Christian experience, 
but the end of the first year should show considerable 
progress in the knowledge of the divine mind; 
the second year should show us a still further increase, 
and so on. 

As our intimate knowledge of the divine plan and 
character increases, so must also our grace increase; for 
those who do not attempt to come into harmony, step 
by step, with that which they see of the divine character 
will soon lose interest in such knowledge, while 
those who have the interest which leads to further and 
further study must of necessity be growing in grace 
continually. And as they grow in grace, so also will 
they grow in peace; for peace also is a progressive 
thing. We had peace when first we found the Lord 
and realized the forgiveness of our sins; but those who 
have made progress in the knowledge of the divine plan 
and character have found their peace to be an ever-increasing 
one; and those who have advanced some distance 
in the good way can speak of it in the language 
of the apostles and realize it in their hearts as being 
"the peace of God which passeth all understanding." 

The Apostle, continuing, assures us that through 
this knowledge of God is imparted to us as by divine 



power "all things that pertain unto life and godliness." 

What an assurance! This statement of the importance 

of knowledge for our Christian development in every 

direction reminds us of the words of our Lord, "This 

is life eternal; that they might know thee, the only true 

God, and Jesus Christ, whom thou hast sent." (John 17:3.) 

To know God, as the Apostle here explains, 

signifies an intimate acquaintance with "him that 

hath called us by his own glory and virtue." It is 

only as we realize something of the greatness and perfection 

of the divine character that we are properly 

able to estimate our own littleness and imperfection; 

only as we see the beauties of his gracious character 

can we become intimately acquainted with God, familiar 

with his graces and virtues. The influence of this 

knowledge and fellowship with God, through our Lord 

Jesus Christ, reacts upon our own hearts, and has a 

cleansing and sanctifying effect. Thus the Apostle prays 

for some that they might grow in the knowledge of 

God so as to be able to "comprehend with all saints 

what is the length and the breadth, the depth and the 

height of the love of Christ which passeth [human] 

understanding." (Eph. 3:14-19.) Those beholding 

the divine character, even though but dimly, as through 

a glass, are thereby changed from glory to glory as by 

the spirit of the Lord.— 2 Cor. 3:18. 

The thought here brought to our attention is well 
illustrated in the modern art of photography. In photography 
there is necessary first of all a sensitized plate 
upon which the picture is to be reflected. Not any or 
every plate will serve such a purpose, but only one 
which has been specially prepared. This corresponds to 
the preparation of our hearts through repentance and 
justifying faith toward God through our Lord Jesus 
Christ. This first step is necessary before we can receive 
upon our hearts the impress of the divine character, 
its glory and virtue or strength. The second step 
is to bring the sensitized plate into good range with 
the features which are to be impictured upon it. This 
represents the proper attitude of heart; viz., full consecration 
to the Lord, and a desire to have his will to 
be our will and to have his character represented in 
our lives. The third step is the removal of all obscurity, 
all darkness, allowing the light to shine fully in 
upon the features to be copied. This finds its counterpart 
in the knowledge of God, which, as the light of 
truth scatters the darkness of error and sin and gives 
us clearer views of the divine character, and thus permits 
it to impress our prepared hearts and to stamp 
thereon his glorious character-likeness. Fourth, the 
sensitized plate must then be subjected to acids in order 
to the clearer development of the likeness. This also 
finds its correspondence; for our hearts, after we have 
gotten a clear view of the Lord, and been freely impressed 
with the glories of his character, require nevertheless 
the "fiery trials" of life, which, like the acid, 



only tend to develop the likeness the more perfectly. 
Fifth (for the correspondence continues), it is a well 
known fact that although photographs may be taken 
without the use of the precious metals, gold and silver, 
yet only when these are used will the photograph retain 
its color without fading. As heretofore seen, 
gold represents the divine nature, and silver represents 
the truth; and only in proportion as the likeness 
of our Lord is fixed in our hearts upon the basis 

R2137 :page 116 

of the truth and the divine nature can a lasting likeness 
be hoped for.— Rom. 8:29. 

The world in general, of course, "knows not God," 
and very evidently the great mass of professing believers 
know very little about him. The Apostle Paul explains, 
that Satan, "the god of this world," is particularly 
interested in hindering any from obtaining 
the light upon the Lord's character and plan necessary 
to impicture it upon their hearts. He declares, "The 
god of this world hath blinded the minds of them 
which believe not, lest the glorious light of the gospel 
of Christ (who is the image of God) should shine unto 
them." (2 Cor. 4:4.) Here we see the constant and 
irrepressible conflict— the battle of darkness against 
the light, as our Lord explained it in his day, saying, 
"The darkness hateth the light, neither cometh to the 
light." But all who receive and rejoice in and obey 
the light are the "children of the light;" and after the 
image of the Lord has been impressed upon their hearts, 
such become light-bearers to others and so shine forth 
upon all with whom they come in contact, reflecting 
the light which is shining upon them from the divine 
source unseen and unappreciated by the world. 

At present the influence of these lights is but 
small in comparison with what it will be hereafter. 
Now, the Lord's people are like lights set upon a hill 
which cannot be hid, and yet their influence upon the 
world is comparatively small. It is still true of the 

R2138 :page 116 

body of Christ as it was true of the Head, "The light 
shineth in darkness, and the darkness comprehendeth 
it not." But of the by and by it is written, "Then shall 
the righteous shine forth as the sun in the kingdom 
of their Father;" "The sun of righteousness shall 
arise with healing in his beams." This will be the 
great Millennial day; and as a result of the shining 
forth of the elect Church, we are assured that all darkness 
will disappear and the light of "the knowledge of 
the Lord shall fill the whole earth." 

Proceeding, the Apostle assures us that, in order 
to the attainment of this intimate knowledge of God 
which multiplies our grace and peace and gives us all 



things that pertain to life and godliness, God has "given 
unto us exceeding great and precious promises." 
Looking about us, we find that the majority of our 
fellow-Christians in the world, even of those who have 
the "precious faith" and trust in the "precious blood," 
must be "babes" in even elementary knowledge; 
for evidently they do not know much concerning these 
exceeding great and precious promises. If we would 
inquire of them with reference to these promises, the 
vast majority would answer,— Our hope is that by the 
grace of God, if faithful, we shall escape eternal torment 
and get to heaven. And many would add, If I 
can get just inside the door of heaven, it will be all I 
could ask or hope for. 

What? Do they know nothing of the "exceeding 
great and precious promises" mentioned by the Apostle? 
Alas! apparently very little. But what are these 
promises, and who have knowledge of them? 

Only those who are following in the pathway which 
the Apostle here marks out; who multiply their grace 
and peace, through an ever-increasing, intimate knowledge 
of God, and of Jesus our Lord,— those who are 
seeing more and more clearly the divine character and 
plan, and whose hearts are in a susceptible and impressionable 
attitude, and upon which is being fixed more 
and more distinctly the image of God's dear Son, who 
is the express image of the Father. (Rom. 8:29.) Before 
these, shining out as helps by the way, in letters 
of light, are the "exceeding great and precious promises" 
of God's Word, which to other hearts are unilluminated, 
dark and almost meaningless. 

Which and what are these promises? 

Oh, they are so many and so precious that 
it is difficult to know which would rank first. Perhaps 
first of all is the precious promise, "It doth 
not yet appear what we shall be, but we know that 
when he shall appear we shall be like him, for we shall 
see him as he is." Another is, "If I go away, I will 
come again, and receive you unto myself;" in harmony 
with which is the prayer, "Father, I will that these 
may be with me, where I am, that they may behold my 
glory." Another is, "To him that overcometh will I 
grant to sit with me in my throne, even as I also overcame, 
and am set down with my Father in his throne." 
Another is, "They shall be mine. ..in that day when 
I make up my jewels." Another is, "Our light affliction, 
which is but for a moment, worketh for us a far 
more exceeding and eternal weight of glory." Another 
is, that we are "Heirs of God, joint-heirs with Jesus 
Christ, our Lord, if so be that we suffer with him, that 
we may be also glorified together." Another is, that 
we are "Begotten again to an inheritance incorruptible 
and undefiled and that fadeth not away, reserved in 
heaven for you, who are kept by the power of God 
through faith unto salvation, ready to be revealed in 
the last time." Another is, "To him that overcometh 



I will give power over the nations"— authority, dominion 
as "kings and priests unto God" to "reign on the 
earth." Another is that these kings and priests will 
reign to bless, as it is written, "In thy Seed shall all 
the families of the earth be blessed." Another promise 
is that Israel according to the flesh shall yet obtain 
mercy and blessing through the mercy of these kings 
and priests of the Gospel age.— Rom. 11:32. 

Finally, all of these exceeding great and precious 
promises are summed up by the Apostle in his declaration 
that, through this knowledge of God and 

R2138 :page 117 

through the influence of these precious promises, it is 

God's will that we who by nature were children of 

wrath even as others "might become partakers of the 

divine nature." Oh, what a rich promise is here! 

How exceedingly great and precious! Who could have 

thought such a thing? Our highest thought might 

possibly have been perfection of the human nature, 

the earthly image of God, or perhaps, as some have sung, 

we might want to be angels and with the angels stand. 

But although angelic nature is higher than human nature, 

our God has not been content with offering to 

the "elect" Church angelic nature, but in the riches 

of his grace and wonderful provision he has far outdone 

the highest flight of human fancy and has promised 

that the overcoming Church, the "little flock," 

to whom it is his good pleasure to give the Kingdom, 

the bride, the Lamb's wife, shall be exalted to share 

the divine glory and divine nature of her Lord, as well 

as to share his heavenly Kingdom. 

Such knowledge is too wonderful for us: we cannot 
comprehend why our great Creator should exalt to 
his own nature such poor, helpless creatures of the dust 
as we by nature are. But this and all the other gracious 
promises exhibit to us more and more the heights and 
depths, the lengths and breadths, of the love of our God, 
which surpasses human knowledge. 

In view of what we already know of our Creator, 
especially as revealed to us in and through our Lord 
and Redeemer, Jesus, shall we not, as those who have 
come to see something of his glorious character, "press 
toward the mark" (Phil. 3:14) for the attainment of 
all that he may be pleased to reveal to us concerning 
himself, that thus we may be more and more partakers 
of his spirit, more and more conformed to his likeness, 
more and more acceptable, and by and by be actually 
and everlastingly accepted in the Beloved, to the full 
realization of all those blessings which God has in 
reservation for them who love him, and of which now 
we have the exceeding great and precious promises? 

Such promises and such knowledge properly inspire 
our hearts to love, obedience and self-sacrifice, 
that we may please him who has called us to his own 



nature and fellowship; and, as the Apostle says, "He 
who hath this hope in him purifieth himself, even as 
he [the Lord] is pure." 

It was to this intimate knowledge of or acquaintance 
with the Lord and its reward that the Apostle 
Paul referred, saying,— "That I might know him and 
[experience] the power of his resurrection [the First or 
Chief Resurrection, by] being made [fully] conformable 
unto his death [—which full surrender is possible 
to those only who know him well and have drunk in 
his spirit]. "-Phil. 3:10. 



R2138 :page 117 

THE BLESSED PEOPLE OF GOD. 



"Blessed are the poor in spirit; for theirs 
is the kingdom of heaven."— Matt. 5:3. 

IT IS only when, as faithful and obedient children 

of God, we reverently turn the sacred pages of 

his holy Word and read them as a loving epistle from 

our faithful God, full of wisdom and counsel and wholesome 

instruction, that we gather from it all the refreshment 

of divine grace contained in it. Thus, for instance, 

in the first lines of our Lord's sermon on the 

mount, heavenly love breaks forth in showers of blessing 

—"Blessed," "blessed," "blessed are ye!" Who 

are the blessed ones thus addressed? Are they the holy 

angels who do always behold the Father's face? Truly 

they are blessed; but these words were not addressed 

to them, but to the redeemed sons of men— to men rescued 

from the fall, whose feet were taken out of the 

miry clay and set upon a rock, and in whose mouth is 

put the new song of praise and thanksgiving for redeeming 

love and grace. 

"Blessed are ye!" Do the blessings belong to all 
who have ever to any extent tasted of the favor of God? 
Do they belong to the pardoned sinners who, after being 
pardoned and cleansed, like the nine lepers of whom 
the Lord spoke, return not again to give God the glory? 
Do they belong to those who do not follow on to know 
the Lord,— who decline to be led of his spirit while 
they continue to partake of the spirit of the world? 
Do they belong to the proud and lofty-spirited ones, to 
those at ease in Zion, to the self-satisfied, the selfish, 
or those who in any form regard iniquity in their 
hearts? Ah, no! Any such who read these lines must 
read therein their own condemnation; for, while they 
are benedictions to the faithful, they are also solemn 
warnings to the unfaithful. The benedictions are for 
the poor in spirit; for those who mourn because iniquity 



abounds; for the meek (the teachable and humble); 

for those who hunger and thirst after righteousness; 

for the merciful; for the pure in heart, the peacemakers, 

and the reviled and persecuted for righteousness' 

sake; for those whom the Lord calls "the salt of the 

earth" and "the light of the world." Blessed, yes, 

blessed are ye of the Lord of hosts! Yours is the Kingdom 

of heaven; you shall inherit the earth; you shall 

be comforted; you shall be filled with the spirit of God; 

you shall obtain mercy; you shall see God, and shall be 

called the children of God; your reward in heaven is 

great; you shall by and by be as a city set on a hill 

that cannot be hid. "Rejoice, and be exceeding glad;" 

R2138 :page 118 

for these heavenly benedictions are upon your heads. 

page 118 

What refreshment and joy are here for all the faithful 
sons of God who feed upon his Word, who lean in 
simple faith upon the promises and obediently walk 
after the spirit of God. Observe again the conditions 
of this blessing: they are not such as we cannot comply 
with: they are not conditions of absolute perfection 
which we cannot attain while we are in these imperfect 
bodies; but they indicate a reaching out after that 
perfection,— a hungering and thirsting after the righteousness 
of God, a mourning for all that comes 
short of that righteousness, especially in self, but also 

R2139 :page 118 

in others, and a consequent inharmony with the general 
spirit and course of this present evil world. And together 
with the heavenly desires and aspirations there 
must be a meek and contrite spirit— a pliable, teachable 
disposition. "Blessed are the poor in spirit"— the 
lowly in mind, the studious, teachable ones. Such the 
Lord can and will lead by his spirit into the paths of 
righteousness, and finally into the glory of his Kingdom: 
—"Theirs is the kingdom of heaven." 

O that our dull souls may awake more fully to all 
that is implied in this promise of the Kingdom ! Let 
us meditate upon it more and more, until the glorious 
hope inspires to faithful endurance of hardness under 
all circumstances as good soldiers of Jesus Christ. How 
large a place did the things pertaining to the Kingdom 
of God occupy in the preaching of Jesus and the apostles! 
Indeed, the whole message of divine inspiration 
contained in the New Testament was briefly comprehended 
in that expression of our Lord— "This gospel 
of the kingdom." The entire work of this Gospel age 
was to be the preaching of this Kingdom,— "This gospel 
of the kingdom shall be preached in all the world, 



for a witness unto all nations; and then shall the end 
[the harvest of the age] come." (Matt. 24:14.) This 
gospel— this good news— of the coming Kingdom of 
God, with all that pertains to it, was the constant theme 
of the Lord and the apostles:— "Jesus went about all 
the cities and villages, teaching in their synagogues 
and preaching the gospel of the Kingdom." And he 
commissioned his disciples, saying, "As ye go, preach, 
saying, The kingdom of heaven is at hand."— 
Matt. 10:7. 

We read nothing in the New Testament of any departure 
on the part of the early disciples from this 
blessed theme of the gospel of the Kingdom to the 
preaching of a mere lifeless morality, or of politics, or 
of any other theme; but the prospective Kingdom of 
God, its sure foundation in Christ the Redeemer, its 
universal dominion, its unlimited authority, its righteous 
character and requirements, the holiness that 
alone can inherit or enter into it, and the glory and 
blessedness to come in it and through it, were constantly 
held before the people to the exclusion of all side issues. 

This is the Kingdom to be inherited by the poor in 
spirit; for only the poor in spirit— the humble, teachable 
ones— can submit to the discipline and training 
necessary to fit them for it. The heady, the high-minded, 
the proud, the self-conscious and self-righteous 
have no promise of the Kingdom, and cannot inherit 
it, nor enter into it; for "there shall in no wise 
enter into it any thing that defileth." (Rev. 21:27.) 
So, altho in the present age many of these are esteemed 
of men as the aristocracy of the earth, they will not be 
the aristocracy of the new dispensation; but the poor 
in spirit will reign with Christ for the blessing of all 
the families of the earth. And even now, in God's estimation, 
these constitute the embryo Kingdom, and 
God is in the midst of them, and his law is established 
in their hearts. "The Lord is nigh unto them that are of a 
broken heart, and saveth such as be of a contrite spirit." 
"Tho the Lord be high, yet hath he respect unto the 
lowly; but the proud he knoweth afar off." "For thus 
saith the high and lofty One that inhabiteth eternity, 
whose name is Holy: I dwell in the high and holy 
place, with him also that is of a contrite and humble 
spirit, to revive the spirit of the humble, and to revive 
the heart of the contrite ones." "Thus saith the 
Lord, The heaven is my throne, and the earth is my 
footstool: where is the house [the temple] that ye build 
unto me? and where is the place of my rest?. ..but 
upon such a one will I look, upon the poor, and him 
who is of a contrite spirit, and who trembleth at my 
word."-Psa. 34:18; 138:6; Isa. 57:15; 66:1,2. 

This is the Kingdom class, the temple class, the 
beloved of the Lord with whom he is pleased to dwell. 
Like their Master, they are often lightly esteemed 
among men of the world, and perhaps despised among 
the multitudes who professedly are the Lord's people, 



but whose hearts and minds are still engrossed with 
worldly things; but they are the prospective kings and 
priests of the new dispensation, and their lowly estate 
in the present life is only their necessary discipline to 
fit them for the glory and service of the time to come. 
These are the living stones now being shaped, chiseled 
and polished for their places in the glorious temple of 
God, the house not made with hands, eternal in the 
heavens. Blessed indeed are the poor in spirit with 
such a heritage! M. F. RUSSELL. 



R2139 :page 118 

PETER DELIVERED FROM PRISON. 

--APRIL 25. --ACTS 12:5-17.- 

"The angel of the Lord encampeth round about them 
that fear him, and delivereth them."— Psa. 34:7. 

FOLLOWING the history of the early Church, 
we now come upon another period of persecution. 
The former persecution seems to have passed by the 
principal ones of the Church entirely. It manifested 
itself against ordinary believers rather than against the 
apostles and public ministers. The result, as we have 

R2139 :page 119 

seen, was the spread of the gospel by those who were 
"scattered abroad everywhere." The persecution now 
considered was directed against the apostles. Both 
persecutions were from the adversary and his faithful, 
but were such only as God saw best to permit, and such 
as would work out some good in connection with his plan. 

During the reign of the Roman Emperor Caligula 
the Jews were kept in a considerable ferment by reason 
of his repeated attempt to have his statue set up in 
the temple, with altars for the worship of himself. 
While the Jews were so busy in defending their own 
religious liberties, the infant Christian Church was left 
comparatively unmolested; but now Caligula was dead, 
and a very different personage was his successor, and 
the Jews having a respite from troubles of their own, 
had good opportunity to cultivate their animosity 
against the followers of the Nazarene. King Herod 
Agrippa, having been obliged to cooperate with the 
Emperor's plans, had made himself more or less obnoxious 
to his subjects, the Jews; and he now sought to 
conciliate them, by persecuting the Christians. This 
Herod Agrippa was a worthy successor to his uncle, 
who had murdered John the Baptist, and to his grandfather, 
Herod the Great, who murdered the infants at 
Bethlehem. His first object was personal aggrandizement 



and the perpetuation of his own family in the kingdom. 
His public acts, on the one hand, were intended 
to continue him in favor with the Emperor at Rome, 
and on the other hand, to gain as much favor as possible 
from the people whom he ruled as king,— as representative 
of the Emperor. 

The persecution began with the killing of the 
Apostle James. Seeing that thereby he gained the favor 
of the Jews, Herod thought it the cheapest method 
by which to regain popularity with his subjects and proceeded 
to take Peter also. What a sad blow this must 
have been to the early Church ! James and Peter were 
apparently the principal leaders in the affairs of the 
Church at Jerusalem, as they two with John, the brother 
of James, were the most prominent amongst the apostles 
while our Lord lived. We can imagine the consternation 
—James already dead, Peter seized and imprisoned 
and his execution held over merely because it was 
the week of Passover, and because according to Jewish 
custom no one could be put to death during that week. 
The manifest, if not declared, intention of Herod was 
that Peter should be killed in some manner immediately 
after the close of the Passover week. Here we pause 
to notice a strange commingling of religious formalism 
with the spirit of murder: the spirit of murder was in 
Herod and in the Jews, yet both for the time restrained 
themselves in order to symbolize by the Passover ceremonial 
a cleansing of the heart and life, a purification 
toward God. There is a lesson here (for all who will 
take it) to be on guard lest the outward and formal observances 
be an utter contradiction of the real condition 
of the heart. While obedience to the Lord in outward 
observances is eminently proper, it is still more important 
that the thoughts be pure and good. 

By this time the number of Christians in Jerusalem 
was evidently considerable, notwithstanding the 
number that had emigrated on account of persecution; 
and it does not at all surprise us that we are informed 
that these everywhere were praying to God on Peter's 
behalf. There were evidently no church buildings in 
use by the Christians up to this time: they gathered in 
convenient places, and quite probably there were several 
of these in Jerusalem. The earnestness of 
these prayers is evidenced by the fact that they 
were kept up all night, and evidently for the entire 
week of Peter's imprisonment; for he was not delivered 
until the very last night, and, when delivered, it was 
some time in the "fourth watch," which began at three 
o'clock in the morning, and he was knocking at the 
"gate" of Mary's home, where prayer was being made, 
before sunrise.— Verse 13. 

We cannot know just why the Lord permitted the 
death of James and spared the life of Peter; yet, doubtless, 

R2140 :page 119 



both events exercised a beneficial influence upon 
the Church. Possibly, indeed, there may have been 
growing in the Church a lack of appreciation of these 
apostles whom the Lord had so highly honored as his 
mouthpieces and channels for blessing the Church. 
The martyrdom of one would cause his loss to be 
seriously realized, the imprisonment of the other 
would and did draw forth the sympathy, love and 
appreciation of the whole company; and after they 
had prayed so earnestly for his deliverance, we may 
be sure that Peter was more than ever beloved by the 
Lord's flock. At all events, the death of one and the 
sparing of the other, we may be sure, were parts of the 
all things that worked together for good to those who 
loved the Lord. 

Meantime, Peter had been delivered to four quaternions 
of soldiers (i.e., four relief guards of four soldiers 
each): two of these watched in the outer courts of the 
prison, while two of them were chained to Peter in the 
cell. Thus, seemingly, every precaution had been taken 
against his escape. He had been delivered once before 
from the prison into which he had been thrust by the 
Sanhedrin, but now he was under military guard, probably 
in the Tower of Antonio, and chained to soldiers 
who knew that under Roman usage his escape would 
mean their death. The entire week had been spent in 
prayer on his behalf, yet the Lord had not delivered 
him, and each day seemed to add to the earnestness of 
the prayers, and to the necessity for the deliverance; 
yet knowing the circumstance it was difficult to judge 

R2140 : page 120 

in which way the Lord's providence would be interposed 

on Peter's behalf, if at all. Since the Lord had 

seen best to permit the death of James, they must have 

reasoned that they could not be at all certain that Peter 

would be delivered from death. How great and how 

far-reaching were the blessings of that week of trial 

and of prayer, of drawing near to the Lord and of realization 

of complete dependence upon him, we may surmise. 

The Lord was pleased in his providence to spare 

Peter to the Church, but he was also evidently pleased 

to be inquired of by the Church on this subject. 

However, even on the last night of his imprisonment, 
though he expected that the next morning Herod 
would call for him to deliver him up to death, notwithstanding 
all this, "Peter slept." His noble, courageous 
heart was fixed upon the Lord, he trusted in divine 
wisdom and divine power and divine love, and was 
assured that nothing would be permitted to happen 
that would not be in some manner overruled for good. 
Hence, committing his all to the Lord, he was able to 
rest sweetly in sleep. Here was the appropriate order 
of things: the one directly involved so sweetly resting 
in the Lord's grace and love that he was free from 



trouble and fear, while the Church in general, though 
not so directly and personally concerned, were so full 
of loving interest on behalf of a brother that they 
prayed without ceasing day and night on his behalf. 
What they asked we are not told, but what they should 
ask under such circumstances we may well know from 
our Lord's own prayer (Matt. 26:39-42): whatever 
they asked, in propriety must have included the thought 
and the expression— Thy will, not ours, O Lord, be done. 

When the angel awakened Peter, loosed his fetters, 
opened the strongly barred gates of the prison and 
brought him forth into the street, he left him, having 
accomplished his mission. Peter, amazed and bewildered, 
could scarcely realize at first whether it was a 
reality or a vision; but as he got his senses collected he 
comprehended that God had wrought for him another 
wonderful deliverance from the hands of his enemies- 
Herod and the Jews. But he neither went back to 
taunt the soldiers, nor was he filled with self-admiration 
and self-confidence, so as to shout his deliverance 
on the way; but considering the matter carefully he 
concluded that his proper course would be flight to 
some other city, as the Lord had directed, saying, 
"When they shall persecute you in one city flee to 
another." But as a true under-shepherd he had too deep 
an interest in the Lord's people who were so earnestly 
praying for him, to leave them without some explanation: 
so, going to the house of one of the friends of the 
cause, he communicated to them the fact of his release, 
sent word to the leaders of the cause in the city— 
"James, and the brethren"— and then fled to another 
place. This James was the brother of our Lord, while 
the James who had been killed was the Apostle, the 
brother of John. The fact that James and the prominent 
brethren were not at the house of Mary and her 
son John-Mark would seem to corroborate the thought 
that the meeting at the latter place was only one of 
many in Jerusalem. 

The narrative of Peter's knocking at the door and 
the interruption of the prayer meeting, with the announcement 
of the answer of the prayers in a most 
remarkable manner, is all told with a beautiful simplicity, 
and indicates to us the loving spirit of fellowship 
and brotherhood which existed in the early Church. 

The Golden Text carries a great lesson of its own 
in connection with Peter's deliverance. The Scriptures 
give us clearly to understand that the angels of God 
are "ministering spirits sent forth to minister for them 
who shall be heirs of salvation." (Heb. 1:14.) Very 
seldom have they been manifested to any as in this recorded 
instance; yet they are present as the representatives 
of the Lord to do any needed work for us according 
to his will. But we are to understand that the 
angel of the Lord was with James who was killed, as 
truly as with Peter who was delivered; and that the 
deliverance of God's people is not always such as can 



be appreciated by the natural senses. Sometimes the 
angel of the Lord is present with us and grants sustaining 
strength to endure a trial from which we are 
not delivered. Such was our Lord's case: we read that 
an angel appeared unto him and strengthened him. 
Such was probably the ministration of angels to James 
in his time of sore distress, when his life was yielded up 
to a murderer. Such also have been the experiences 
of many: the angel of the Lord has stood with them 
and has strengthened where he was not authorized to 
deliver. It is recorded that many Christian martyrs 
were so upheld and blessed, that even in the 
midst of persecution, torture and flames, they were 
able to sing praises to the Lord. It is related of 
Bishop Latimer that when bound to the stake he 
said to Bishop Ridley, speaking with great equanimity 
respecting his own suffering, "We shall light such 
a candle, by God's grace, in England this day, as I 
trust shall never be put out again." 

How it enlarges the confidence of a Christian to 
realize that whilst earthly powers may be in opposition, 
and whilst he may be really of himself powerless to resist 
adversaries, and whilst in addition to the flesh and 
blood adversaries he may realize that he battles also 
with spiritual wickedness in exalted places— against 
Satan and his minions of darkness— yet that, on the 
other hand, "greater is he that is on our part than all 
that be against us," and that all the heavenly hosts 
are subject to the divine will and may be employed for 
the advancement of the divine cause according to divine 
wisdom. 



R2140 :page 121 

PAUL'S FIRST MISSIONARY TOUR. 
-MAY 2.-ACTS 13:1-13.- 



WITH this lesson we leave the parent Church at 

Jerusalem, and the later Church at Antioch, 

and start with the Apostle Paul upon what is termed 

the first missionary tour. Really, however, nearly all 

of the work thus far done might be said to be of the 

nature of missionary work. Our Lord's work amongst 

the Jews was in the nature of a missionary work. The 

work which began with the day of Pentecost amongst 

the Jews was in the nature of missionary work. The 

work done by those who were scattered abroad as the 

result of persecution in Judea was in the nature of missionary 

work. The Church at Antioch was itself a 

mission Church. And so the missionary journey of the 

Apostle Paul should not be considered in the light of 



special mission work, as that term is used to-day (not 
a mission to savages and barbarians), but rather as a 
part of the whole work, which the Lord was pleased to 
specially bless and use in the establishment of the truth 
in various quarters distant from Jerusalem. 

In a previous lesson we saw the progress made by 
the Christians at Antioch under the instruction of the 
holy Spirit through Barnabas and Paul. And this is 
corroborated by the testimony of this lesson that the 
Church at Antioch was in a healthful condition, spiritual 
and full of zeal for the spread of the gospel. It had 
in it by this time several persons of ability and full 
consecration whom the Lord was pleased to use in connection 
with its ministry; and the time had come when 
Paul and Barnabas could be spared to go elsewhere, to 
start others in the good way; and the holy spirit indicated 
that this should be done. How this was indicated 
we are not informed, and we will not speculate concerning 
it. Suffice it that the Church understood the 
directions of the holy spirit and obeyed them, Barnabas 

R2141 :page 121 

and Paul being agreeable also. Barnabas is mentioned 
first in the record because up to this time he had the 
more prominent position, as being older than Paul in 
spiritual things and perhaps also older in years. While 
Paul was "a chosen vessel" unto the Lord, prepared 
for a great service, it had not yet been fully manifest 
that he was the Lord's choice to fill the place of Judas, 
the twelfth apostle. 

Apparently Barnabas and Paul were sent forth at 
the expense or charges of the Church at Antioch, and 
hence went forth as their representatives, as well as 
representatives of the Lord. The importance of the 
matter was appreciated, and the dependence of the 
mission upon divine blessing was recognized in the 
fasting and prayer and outward manifestation of appointment 
by laying on of hands. This laying on of 
hands was not by way of giving authority to preach, 
for Barnabas and Paul had already been teaching in 
various quarters for some years, and had been teaching 
the Church at Antioch for over a year: it was therefore 
merely a ceremony by which the missionaries and 
the Church undertaking their support took cognizance 
of each other as representatives and represented in this 
special work about to be begun. But while accepting 
the commission of the Antioch Church, as its representatives, 
the missionaries specially recognized that they 
were sent forth by the holy spirit.— Verse 4. 

They had not gone far before they began the work 
which lay so near to their hearts;— the preaching of 
God's message, of good tidings of great joy, of reconciliation 
effected by the precious blood of Christ. 
They did not go to heathen people, but went to 
sow the seed of the Kingdom in already prepared 



soil: they went, first of all, as in every place, to the 
Jews who for sixteen hundred years had been under 
the law as a school-master to prepare them to receive 
Christ. The pious Gentiles who were "feeling after 
God, if haply they might find him," and who had some 
knowledge of the God of Israel, frequently attended 
these Jewish synagogues, and hence in going to these 
the missionaries, Barnabas and Paul, were reaching the 
best prepared and most religious element in every place. 

The liberality of the management of the Jewish 
synagogues is attested by the fact that the gospel got 
a ready hearing in all of them up to the point where 
they realized that the message was likely to produce a 
division in their midst. If the Jewish synagogues and 
Christian churches to-day were conducted on a similarly 
liberal basis, and gave opportunity for the presentation 
of any subject that could be presented from the Scriptures 
and in harmony with the Scriptures, the present 
missionary work of disseminating the present harvest 
truth would be very much simplified. While to-day 
we are less subject to the violent persecution, on the 
other hand we are seriously handicapped by prevailing 
conditions and sectarian bondage. 

John-Mark, the nephew of Barnabas, is here introduced 
to us; not as a third laborer in the special work 
of ministry of the truth, but as an assistant or servant 
to Barnabas and Paul. In this as in every place the 
Scriptures, while teaching that all believers are "brethren" 
and "fellow-heirs," nevertheless repudiate entirely 
the thought entertained by some to-day that all 
brethren are exactly on an equality in every matter. 
Very properly Mark did not say— "If I cannot go on 
an equality with Barnabas and Paul, I will not go at 
all." Very properly he did say that if there is any 
opportunity for service, if by any means I can render 

R2141 :page 122 

any assistance in the journey and affairs of these whom 

the holy spirit has indicated as special representatives, 

I shall be most glad to serve them, and thus serve indirectly 

the Lord and his cause. And there were opportunities, 

as there are always opportunities for those 

who have a will to serve the cause; and no doubt Barnabas, 

and especially Paul, received many helps from 

their younger brother who had become their servant 

chiefly from his desire to serve the cause of Christ. No 

doubt also their opportunities for public ministry of 

the truth were enlarged and broadened by his helpful 

assistance in secular affairs. Paul especially constantly 

needed a helper, because of his thorn in the flesh, 

his weak eyes. 

Mark's faithful service continued for some time, 
but for some reason (verse 13) not stated he left the 
work, and we may judge very nearly lost his privilege 
and opportunity in connection with it. No one knows 



how much he may have lost of spiritual blessing and 
privilege by his failure to continue with Paul. The 
disagreement, whatever it may have been, apparently 
extended to his uncle Barnabas, and eventually led to 
the separation of the latter from Paul. However, years 
afterward John-Mark apparently saw things in a different 
light, and again joined Paul's company. He seems 
to have ultimately become a true yoke-fellow, very 
highly appreciated by the great Apostle. (Col. 4:10; 
2 Tim. 4:1 1.) Here is a suggestion to all of us that, 
no matter what may be the door of opportunity for engaging 
in the Lord's service, faithfulness to it is essential 
to progress; and there is a further lesson that if we 
find that we have erred and been unappreciative of our 
privilege the best thing to do is to repent therfor and 
seek a renewal of the opportunities, and to attest our 
loyalty by fresh and increased earnestness. 

The gospel heralds continued on their journey 
through the Island of Cyprus, until at Paphos they 
came in contact with a new experience. There Satan 
has a special servant, a spirit-medium, a sorcerer, and 
false teacher. This man had ingratiated himself with 
the chief government official of that place, and when 
the latter was being reached by the gospel message the 
sorcerer opposed it, realizing that there can be no harmony 
between light and darkness, between the spirit 
of Christ and the spirit of demons, and that if the deputy 
governor became a follower of Christ and imbued 
with his spirit, he would be proportionately out of harmony 
with spirit mediumship and sorcery and all the 
evil works of the flesh and the devil. It was a peculiar 
case, such as apparently had not previously been presented; 
it was a contention between truth and error and 
the servant of truth and the servant of error. It was 
just such a case as was needed to bring forward the 
Apostle Paul's grand traits of character: opposition 
only made him the stronger by arousing him fully to 
the necessity of the case. More than this, although 
he had already been made the recipient of certain 
"gifts" of the holy spirit, he was now specially imbued 
with divine power, as is here indicated by the Greek 
text; and acting under the direction of this holy power 
which possessed him, he pronounced against Elymas 
the scathing rebuke and sentence of blindness, recorded 
in this lesson. 

The deputy, who was evidently honest-hearted 
and sincere in his desire to know the truth, was thus 
convinced of the truth, and embraced the gospel. From 
this time onward Paul takes his place as the chief one 
in the work: hereafter it is Paul and Barnabas or Paul 
and his company. It is quite probable that it was a 
failure to recognize the Lord's leading in connection 
with the Apostle Paul and his leadership as an apostle 
of this branch of the work, and through family sympathy 
with his uncle Barnabas, that John-Mark here 
deserted the work. 



The spiritual lesson here, for us all, is (1) that the 
Lord himself is at the helm and directing his work, 
and that each and all of us should continually look to 
him for the guidance of his work and to note how he is 
leading the various members in the body (1 Cor. 12:25-31); 
(2) the lesson teaches us the Lord's will respecting 
the promulgation of the gospel; for altho 
unfortunately the Golden Text chosen is spurious— 
not found in old manuscripts (Mark 16:9 to end, being 
omitted by all old manuscripts— See also Revised Version), 
—nevertheless, the same thought, that it is the 
will of God that the gospel should be preached everywhere, 
is abundantly taught in other places (Matt. 28:19) 
and enforced by this very lesson under consideration. 
We see from it, too, that while certain servants 
are chosen and indicated by the Lord for certain 
special services, yet others are permitted to serve 
as did Mark, and still others may serve the Church at 
home, as did Simeon and Lucius and Manaen, and that 
still others— the entire Church— are privileged to cooperate 
in the matter of sympathy, love, prayers, hospitality 
and financial sustenance.— Rom. 12:6-13. 

Circumstances have since greatly changed, and we 
are not to be confined to exactly the same methods of 
procedure now as then; but the inherent principles are 
the same. We neither wear the same kind of clothing, 
nor travel in the same kind of vessels, nor are we supported 
in exactly the same manner. But with all of 
these variances the same service is now due to be performed; 
namely, the preaching of the gospel to all who 
have "ears to hear." With the gospel presented on 
the printed page, and with present mail and rail facilities, 
a very much larger number may become public 
missionaries, going from place to place, holding up the 

R2141 :page 123 

lamp of life, carrying the good tidings from door to door. 

The same agencies make it possible for those who must 

remain at home and who can use the mails to thus go 

about doing good, preaching Christ and his Kingdom 

and its righteousness. Others in turn can go about 

preaching orally as well as circulating the printed page 

—"every man according to his several ability." 

(Matt. 25: 15.) We who are living to-day have special 

opportunities and privileges for ministering the truth 

to others. Our responsibility is correspondingly large, 

and our faith and love and zeal should be correspondingly 

shown; for he who loves much and who has many opportunities 

will surely do much for him who has 

called us out of darkness into his marvelous light. 



R2142 : page 123 



INTERESTING LETTERS. 



District of Columbia. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I have just received a 
letter from our beloved Brother Lundy, in which he 
tells me that you are preparing a tract for the Hebrews. 
I am so delighted over the news that I cannot keep 
myself from writing a few words. May the Lord bless 
you and develop in you a true, sincere and earnest love 
to his people which he formed for himself to show forth 
his praise (Isa. 42), and who through the erroneous 
teachings of the apostate church were led to believe 
that Christianity is only another form of idolatry, and 
blasphemed and rejected the "only name given among 
men whereby we must be saved," and the great blessings 
of the gospel. 

Tell my dear brethren boldly and lovingly of the 
true Christian creed: We trust in the living God, who 
is the savior of all men, especially of those who believe 
(1 Tim. 4:10); that "By his knowledge shall my righteous 
servant justify many, for he shall bear their iniquities" 
(Isa. 53:11); that we Christians do not make the 
law of God void, but establish the law (Rom. 3:31); 
and that The letter killeth, but the spirit quickeneth. 

Yours in the love of the Lord and his people, 
CHAS. S. LABOFISH. 



Ontario. 
DEAR BROTHER AND SISTER RUSSELL:-I have 
been intending for some time to write you, but hitherto 
have had nothing new to add to the same old story 
of the amazing love of God for man. I am still holding 
on the same place of anchor— the ransom for all, 
the rock Christ Jesus. For the past six years I thought, 
like Elijah of old, that I was the only one in this place 
that cared for God, and that (typically speaking) many 
were seeking my life; but the good Lord has shown me 
that I was mistaken. During last Summer brother 
Wiltze moved to this town, and we at once met regularly 
for communion and study. Through him I learned 
that one of the members of the official board of the 
Methodist church with me when I resigned from the 
board and withdrew from the church was now reading 
DAWN and quite interested in its teaching. This brother 
had the DAWN at the time I left the church, but on 
the advice of the Minister he laid it away as a dangerous 
book. I called to see him and found both him and 
his wife much interested. After that they met with 
Bro. Wiltze and myself until they removed to near 
Boston, and I am informed that they meet regularly 
with the brethren in Boston. This greatly encouraged 
us to persevere in the work. 



Two weeks ago I stepped into the butcher shop of 
a stranger to me to purchase a piece of meat, and while 
getting it ready he asked me if my name was Anger. 
I said, yes. He said he had heard of me as a reader 
of MILLENNIAL DAWN and that he had also been reading 
it. I asked, How do you like its teachings? His 
reply was that it was the only satisfying explanation 
of the Bible and the plan of salvation. His wife came 
in, and I was introduced to her. She was very enthusiastic, 
and I learned from her that her father had 
been a reader and believer of DAWN and its teachings 
for eight years, that her brother and sister and others 
of the family were also believers. On my way home 
I called upon her father and found him strong in the 
faith, and another daughter as enthusiastic as the 
father. After exchanging views for some time I invited 
them to come to our meetings at my house, and 
the next afternoon the daughter and her husband came 
out and we had a profitable time. I should have mentioned 
that before I knew of these brothers and sisters 
a son of the brother above mentioned had also become 
a believer, and was meeting regularly with us and is 
making rapid progress in the truth. 

One week ago to-day our little company numbered 
eleven, all but three of whom I believe are true believers, 
and the others not real opposers. To-day there 
were only five present, but one of them was a new convert 
to the old gospel. And so the Lord is leading and 
we are rejoicing and beginning to understand why he 
has prevented us from closing up our affairs in this 
town in order to get out of it over a year ago. Some 
time ago we came to the conclusion that the Lord had 
a work for us to do here, but we could see no opening, 
for the ministers had effectually closed the door against 
us by warning their people to avoid us as dangerous 
persons to talk to on religious subjects, as hot-headed 
persons, religious cranks and disbelievers in God's 
Word. When these things came to us, we rejoiced 
that we were accounted worthy to suffer with Jesus, 
for in his day he was regarded very much the same by 
the religious people of that time. "Blessed are ye, 
when men shall speak all manner of evil against you 
falsely, for my sake." (Matt. 5:11.) But none of 
these things move us, for we know in whom we have 
believed, and that he is more than all they who are 
against us. 

It is a strange thing that our opposers do not try 
to show wherein we have retrograded in life and action, 
but put forth all their efforts to show what a fearful 
thing it is to leave the church. To leave the church 
is a sure passport to perdition, and a man must be bad 
when he leaves the church, altho he neither swears, 
deals falsely with his neighbors or in any way deviates 
from the best standard of correct living, but on the 
other hand has an increased love for and faith in God's 
Word, diligently studies it to find out God's perfect 



will and earnestly strives daily to bring his life and 
conduct to harmonize with that Word. Yet herein is 

R2142:page 124 

the evidence that human nature is still the same, perverted 
and unregenerated and far below the standard 
of perfect human nature. 

What a glorious reality is the religion of Jesus 
Christ!— glorious in its contemplation, glorious in its 
possession, glorious when we can get but one to espouse 
it, yet more glorious in its after-fruits, when we (the 
Church) shall have the privilege of instructing, guiding, 
controlling and leading our friends (now enemies) 
back to righteousness and to God during the space of 
a thousand years. We are content to do the Master's 
will in any way it may be required, and are rejoicing 
at the prospect of the progress of truth, and if need be 
are willing to suffer for it. May God keep us humble, 
willing and obedient. 

Your brother in Christ, an ardent follower of the 
Lamb, J. E. ANGER. 



Texas. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-It has been a long 
time since I wrote to you, tho I have often thought 
of doing so. I was indeed pleased to learn of the opportune 
and powerful support received by the Society, 
and that it will be well spent is a foregone conclusion 
with me. In the TOWER you strike the keynote; you 
are building on the Rock, "and the gates of hell shall 
not prevail against it." How easy and natural for our 
poor race to err now! Thank God, most of them know 
not what they do! In Feb. 15 issue you make so clear 
the flood that is sweeping away what little faith nominal 
Christians have. It illustrates, "Take away from 
him that hath not, and give to him that hath;" or, as 
expressed in Luke 8:18, margin, "even that he thinketh 
that he hath." 

I want to call your attention to the last chapter of Micah, 
and invite your criticism on my applications. 
[We think the suggestions are good.— EDITOR.] 
Verse 1 seems to apply to the true Church; vs. 3 is a 
picture of the present unbearable corruption in governments 
and the operation of trusts; vs. 4 refers to the 
nominal church; verses 5 and 6 are addressed to the 
"little flock," as in Luke 21:16; vs. 7 is uttered by 
them, as is vs. 8. And here is where it seems to me a 
partial darkness and confusion comes over them, so that 
she that is the enemy could bring a reproach. I would 
also like you to notice vs. 15— the going out of Egypt 
as a type of entering the Millennium. 

Your brother in the faith, E. C. LEIGH. 



Iowa. 

DEAR FRIENDS IN CHRIST: -Received the books 
with thanks, and the brother is earnestly seeking the 
truth. Please send me a few more tracts. It does me 
good to find one who will receive the truth, and I praise 
the dear Lord for allowing me that privilege of service. 

I think sometimes it is because I am so unworthy 
that the Lord don't use me more. In my early life I 
lived a devoted Christian for some years, then there 
came a time when I was measurably thrown out of 
Christian society, and I became cold, neglected duty 
and was what is called a "backslider," tho I never felt 
like denying the Lord who redeemed me. But seven 
years since, through the providence of our dear Lord, 
a brother handed me the DAWN to read, and it awakened 
me to greater love than I ever enjoyed before. 
Since that time I have tried in my weak way and through 
much affliction to do what I could. I fear I lost my 
place in the Bride company when living away from 
Christ; but, if I did, I will continue to serve him to 
the best of my knowledge. His service is all-glorious 
to me, and I will be his in some capacity. Please tell 
me briefly what you think of me. I study the Word 
all that I am able, and try to do all the good I can. 

With much love to all the saints, I remain, your 
sister in Christ, M. C. 

[REPLY:— Yours is at hand, and we are glad to 
hear from you again. Have sent the tracts requested, 
and rejoice with you that it has been your privilege to 
find at least one eager for the truth. 

You ask what we think of your case. From what 
you say of your Christian experience and the present 

R2143 : page 124 

attitude of your heart, we should say, "Cast not away 
your confidence, which hath great recompense of reward, 
for ye have need of patience that, after ye have 
done the will of God, ye might receive the promise." 
(Heb. 10:33-37.) The Apostle calls attention to some 
who were not able to go out in the midst of the battle 
as he was, but were loyal to the truth and rejoiced in 
the privilege of being the companions of some who were 
so used. And this, dear sister, has certainly been your 
case since you have come to a knowledge of the present 
truth. You have not lacked in sympathy for all the 
other members of the body, esteeming it a privilege to 
suffer with them if you could not do so for them. And 
as in David's day those who remained with the stuff 
received equal share of the spoils with those who went 
to battle, so we believe that you and all of like experience 
will receive share in the glories which await the 
overcomers. 



That during a considerable portion of your life 
you were in a backslidden condition is to be regretted; 
but the fact that the Lord sent you the truth was a 
distinct evidence of his love for you, and that you 
had not fallen away beyond recovery. We have 
no doubt that as you look back you will be able 
to recognize that much of your languor was caused by 
lack of knowledge of God and his Word, and consequently 
your mind was not sufficiently awakened to 
the necessity for active service; and even if you had 
tried to teach the truth you would have been unable to 
do so, because you did not have it yourself. Hence, 
we are sure that, if you ask it, the Lord will forgive 
all the shortcomings of the past; in fact, we have no 
doubt that you have already done so, and that he has 
granted full forgiveness. All who are truly seeking to 
do the Lord's will can doubtless look back over the 
past years of their life and realize that they omitted 
many things they might have done. If it were not so, 
it would prove either that they have failed to grow, and 
have a low standard of excellence, or that all they did 
was perfectly done (which of course is impossible, for 
there is none righteous, no, not one). Herein lies the 
value to us of the robe of Christ's righteousness, covering 
all our imperfections, so that our best endeavors 
may be acceptable in God's sight as tho perfect. 

Therefore, dear sister, we encourage you to renew 
your hope and confidence; do with your might what 
your hands find to do; let your daily life be a witness 
for the Lord and an example of holiness; and, when 
you can do nothing more, "Stand." (See Eph. 6:10-18. 
-EDITOR.l 



page 125 
VOL. XVIII. MAY 1, 1897. No. 9. 



CONTENTS. 



Can You Do More? 126 

Views from the Watch Tower 127 

Federation 127 

Enforcing the Decalogue 130 

God's Wonders 131 

Take Heed 131 

A Truthful Criticism 134 

Celebrations of the Memorial Supper 134 

Paul's Message to the Jews 137 

A Light to the Gentiles 139 

page 126 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
--ADDRESS TO- 
TOWER PUBLISHING CO., BIBLE HOUSE, 58 & 60 ARCH ST., 
ALLEGHENY (NORTH PITTSBURG), PA., U.S.A. 

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 

INCLUDES A SUBSCRIPTION TO "THE OLD THEOLOGY TRACTS"-QUARTERLY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, N.Y. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, 

OR REGISTERED. FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN 

MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS: 

Those of the interested, who by reason of old age or accident, or 
other adversity are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, 
if they will send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and 
requesting the paper. 



CAN YOU DO MORE TO SERVE THE TRUTH? 



WE hope that each TOWER reader will ask himself this question; 
and then act according to his answer. Furthermore, we want 
to assist whoever will accept our assistance. 

The past three years of financial depression have greatly hindered 
what we esteem to be the chief branch of the work— the colporteuring 
of MILLENNIAL DAWN— and the circulation, instead of increasing 
yearly, has been decreasing, because many of the colporteurs, unable 
to make expenses, have been obliged to go into other employment. 

It occurs to us that if this fact were realized by the friends of the 
truth it would lead them each and all to say, "In that event I must step 
into the breach; I must be that much more active in the service; I must 
devote that much more time in letting the light shine out upon others." 



And to such we proffer cooperation as follows:— 

(1) We cannot make any concession on tracts, for they are already 
supplied by the Tract Fund free, in any quantity, post free, to any 
TOWER reader. Avail yourself of this arrangement. No other tracts 
were ever offered so cheaply. The poorest, who desires to serve the 
Lord and his cause thus, has no excuse. 

(2) The price of the paper-bound DAWNS, when sold by Colporteurs 
will hereafter be 25 cents instead 35 cents, which will enable a 

larger number to purchase. 

(3) We will hereafter supply the paper-bound edition of MILLENNIAL 
DAWN (any language or any assortment) in packages of ten volumes 

to one address, post paid, for one dollar;— larger orders at the 

same rate. Five or more volumes, to various addresses, at 15c. per Vol. 

Let all who can avail themselves of this offer. If the new postal 
bill now pending would pass, it would make the postage alone seventy 
cents on these packs of ten, and would necessitate the cancelling of 
this offer,— except by freight. 

(4) The DAWNS bound in leatherette, embossed (English only), 35 
cents per vol., we will supply in packs of six for one dollar, post free; 
or by freight, at colporteurs' charges, for 12-1/2 cents per volume. 

(5) Where a town has been thoroughly canvassed for DAWN we 
advise a canvass for "Tabernacle Shadows" and "Reply to Robt. 
Ingersoll," leatherette, embossed, 10 cents, three for 25 cents; or for 
What Say the Scriptures About Hell? For this purpose we will supply 
these pamphlets at 50 cents per dozen, assorted as you may please. 

Those who use one hour or one afternoon a week may by these 
terms be enabled to devote two hours or two half-days per week. 
Those who loan the DAWNS may increase their work. (One sister in 
Allegheny has eighty copies constantly loaned out— changing them, 
about every three weeks.) 

Let us, dear Brothers and Sisters, by the Lord's help, take a fresh 
hold of his work. The people never needed the truth more! It is the 
only thing that will keep them from Infidelity! People never were 
more ready to receive the truth! They realize that some great changes 
are at hand, and many want to understand them. "When the judgments 
of the Lord are abroad in the land, the inhabitants of the world 
will learn righteousness [truth— justice]." If we are anxious to serve, 
the Lord will give us an opportunity. Here it is! 



Colporteurs and others will please preserve the names of Swedes 
wishing VOL. III., so we can send them notice when it is ready next year. 



R2143 :page 127 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 



FEDERATION OF PROTESTANTS. 



IN our last we called attention to the federation of 
the various Protestant denominations in Great 
Britain, aside from the Church of England. The New 
York Independent noticed the matter as follows:— 

"We gave account last week of the meeting of the 
Free Church Council in London, and we asked why 
such a confederation of the Protestant Churches in this 
country could not be inaugurated. The subject is well 
worth further and frequent consideration. That meeting 
represented the Wesleyans, Baptists, Congregationalists, 
Presbyterians, indeed all the free Churches 
of Great Britain with two million communicants. It 
was the most representative meeting of English Christians 
held for over three centuries; for the members of 
the combined Free Churches of Great Britain slightly outnumber 
the communicants of the Established Church. 
Separated hitherto, they now are confederated. They 
are one. They no longer suffer under the reproach of 
a divided Church. They have declared that they believe 
that the Church of Jesus Christ should be one, 
and they have made it not merely spiritually, but visibly 
one, so far as lies in their power. Why should 
British Christians be more progressive than we in 
America? Yet, somehow, an old and compact country 
like Great Britain does work out some problems faster 
than we do. They are in advance of us in giving popular 
postal service, postal banks and postal telegraphs; 
and here we find them far in advance of us in this great 
popular Christian movement which brings believers into 
public and confessed fellowship in Christ." 

FEDERATION OF YOUNG PEOPLE'S SOCIETIES. 



Since (1) it is a settled fact that the Young People 
of the various denominations will not be encouraged 
by their denominational "Elders" to unite as 
Christian Endeavorers, and that such a union is feared, 
especially by Methodists and Presbyterians, as tending 
to break down and remove all denominational barriers; 
and since (2) denominational federation comes 
slower than was hoped for, it is now proposed to establish 
a Young People's Christian Federation. This 
will partially satisfy those who are clamoring for Christian 
Union without denominational restrictions; it will 
also fix things where they are, and make it "irregular" 
and "a breach of etiquette" to criticize, or attempt to 
supplant, any of the allied or federated Societies; and 
it will pave the way for the desired denominational 
federation, which we know from the Scriptures is rapidly 
approaching, and will be of injury to pure, primitive 
Christianity, and lead quickly to Church and State 
alliance and to the collapse of the present social order. 

Asked, some time ago, how soon such a federation 
might be expected to take shape, we suggested that the 



opening of the twentieth century would be a likely 
date, as it is growingly the spirit of our times to start 
large undertakings on prominent and propitious days 
and years. We are therefore surprised to find the 
prime-movers in this federation naming a date so far 
in advance as the new century. This federation we 
should expect sooner, and the Church federation by 
1900, A.D. We quote the views of people prominent 
in these Young People's Societies. 

H. K. Carroll, LL.D., who suggests this federation, 
and that the congress for the purpose be called 
for the year 1900, gives as their total membership 
4,414,776. We quote from his article in the Independent 
the following expression:— 

"As immediate union of all these bodies is out of 
the question, why should there not be an Alliance or 
Federation of them? They have no creeds that stand 
in the way of closer relations. There is no question of 
polity to keep them asunder. They have the same 

R2143 : page 128 

object, similar pledges, and practice methods which do 
not vary widely. Such a Federation could in no way 
injuriously affect the denominational loyalty or usefulness 
of any society. Neither would it interfere with 
denominational control and denominational 
development." 

Bishop W. X. Ninde, of the M.E. Church, president 
of the Epworth Board of Control, endorses Dr. 
Carroll's suggestion, as follows:— 

"While organic union seems impossible, certainly 
for the time, there are no Christians in the land who 
feel a stronger yearning for a union of sympathy and 
cooperation in Christian work than do the young people 
represented in the Epworth League. We are fully 
committed to the general plan of a Federation or Alliance 
of Young People's societies. Our Board of Control, 
at its recent session in New York, emphatically 
reaffirmed its wish for the closest spiritual unity with 
all Christian young people, and its readiness to make 
or receive overtures for joining hands in all practical 
methods of Christian work." 

Mr. J. W. Baer, general Secretary of the Young 
People's Society of Christian Endeavor, says:— 

"The committee will welcome suggestions, and 
may its efforts be blessed in binding all the young people 
of evangelical churches into a closer spiritual fellowship 
that shall in no way interfere with denominational 
control. There is no reason why everything 
that is worth having in the way of denominational 
control of young people's societies should not be maintained 
without sacrificing anything that is worth having 
of interdenominational fellowship." 

J. T. Beckley, D.D., one of the trustees of the 
same society, says:— 



"Federation is the next step forward in the Young 
People's movement. It is logical and providential. 
The uprising of the young people is the most significant 
fact in the history of modern Christendom— the 
twenty-ninth chapter of the Book of the Acts. Its import 
is far-reaching. It is a splendid apologetic. When 
the enemy was claiming that Christianity was decadent 
and the Bible was a last year's almanac, this army 
of consecrated disciples, numbered by millions, came to 
the front." 

Rev. J. A. Duff, of the Young People's Christian 
Union of the United Presbyterian Church, says:— 

"There is a growing conviction in the minds of 
many that Christianity as represented by the Protestant 
churches— each one working in its own way without 
reference to the success of the whole— does not 
present a united front against either idolatry or the 
spirit of the world. While not ready for union, many 
are ready for such a movement as will combine the efforts 

R2144 : page 128 

of all and direct against the things that ought not 
to be." 

Rev. J. P. Landis, D.D., president of the Young 
People's Christian Union, United Brethren, says:— 

"As far, therefore, as I have a right to speak for 
our Young People's Christian Union, I say, by all means 
let there be a meeting called of all the young people's 
organizations; and as 1900 seems to be a specially appropriate 
time, let it be then. We shall vote for a 
Federation." 

It is worthy of note that all these gentlemen feel 
sure that the proposed federation could do no harm to 
any denominational interests. Evidently they are not 
aware that their chief concern is for the preservation 
of their several denominations. The Lord's plan is 
very unpopular, because it denounces sectarianism 
where it does not ignore it entirely. 

THE NEXT STEP PREPARING. 



Comparatively few realize the motive which lies 
back of the movements of leaders towards the federation 
of religious systems. Neglecting to observe the 
testimony of God's Word, that the mission of this age 
is the selection of the Church of overcomers to be, 
with Christ their Lord, the "Royal Priesthood," to 
bless and rule and teach the world during Christ's 
Millennial Kingdom, they have, to the contrary, concocted 
the theory that the conversion and ruling of the 
world is the Church's mission during the present age. 
After eighteen centuries they find that in this zenith 
of their efforts nearly two hundred beings are born for 



every one that is even nominally converted; and probably 
five or ten thousand for every one that becomes a 
fully consecrated "overcomer" or "saint." They reflect 
that at this rate it will be many centuries yet before 
they could hope to bring about conditions by which 
God's will would be done on earth as in heaven. 

Wishing to encourage each other, and to impress 
the world, they want union or federation or something 
which will "make a fair show in the flesh;" and they 
begin to feel just as Papacy did fifteen centuries ago, 
—that God wants them to take control of the world in 
his name and rule it, and enforce religion by civil law. 
They forget that this same erroneous view, put into 
execution by Papacy, not only led it to establish the 
great antichristian counterfeit of God's Kingdom, but 
also led to the persecution, in most terrible forms, of 
those who stood faithful to the Word of God. 

The new movement contemplates a participation 
in politics as a means of getting control of the world 
for the Lord; and Christian Citizenship Leagues are 
being formed. The following is their statement of their 
object clipped from the Christian Citizen. 

"Not until the Kingship of Jesus is established 
over our land and the world, and his teachings are made 
the rule in all public affairs, will the Christian Citizenship 
League have achieved its purpose to prepare the 
way of the Lord. And then it shall be found that not 
only has the way for his coming been prepared, but 
that he has indeed and in truth come." 

Thus they not only claim that our Lord's second 
coming cannot take place until they thus prepare his 
way, but finally they intimate that this success will 

R2144 : page 129 

make his personal coming unnecessary. They will act 
as his vice-gerent in establishing righteousness, and 
can equally be his representative after the important 
work of conquest is accomplished. 

Very true! If they can do all the hard work of 
conquering the world and the devil, they will deserve 
the glory and honor. It is clear, however, that present 
arrangements, multiplied ten-fold, could never 
bring to earth the heavenly conditions promised in our 
Lord's petition. The rightful King must take unto 
himself his great power and begin his reign, and bind 
Satan, and liberate the "groaning creation" before 
peace on earth and good will toward men and glory to 
God in the highest can be looked for. 

CHURCH AND STATE. 



Evangelist B. F. Mills is advancing along the line 
above pointed out. He is quoted as saying in a recent 



discourse:— 

"It is a mistake to consider the Church as a society 
for worship or benevolence instead of an agency for 
transforming the world. It is the business of the Church 
to see that the State conducts its affairs in a Christian 
fashion." 

The editor of the (Syracuse, N.Y.) Herald criticizes 
this utterance very wisely, as follows:— 

"Then if the majority in the State were Jews, 
would it be the business of the Jews to see that the 
State 'conducted its affairs' in Jewish fashion? Or if a 
majority were not Christians, would it be the business 
of the majority to see that the State was conducted in 
a way not Christian? This is a government by majority, 
but in order to protect as much as possible the minority 
against the intolerance and persecution which invariably 
come with majority rule Constitutions are established 
as the fundamental law of the State under 
which the rights of the minority to freedom of speech, 
freedom of printing and freedom of worship are made 
sure. The genius of our government is the complete 
separation of church and state, yet here is a minister 
of a denomination which knows the meaning of persecution 
for nonconformity to the ideas of the majority 
as to what constitutes Christianity, advocating religious 
domination— which means denominational domination 
in its logic— in the State. 

"Mr. Mills will have difficulty in finding authority 
in the New Testament for his doctrine that it is the 
business of the Church to supervise the State: It was 
the fear that the mission of Jesus Christ was to institute 
a sorely needed revolution in Judea that led chiefly 
to the persecution and death of the Founder of 
Christianity. 

"Against this charge made by the orthodox Jews 
he protested. 'Render unto Caesar the things that 
are Caesar's, means that he would not have the Church 
see to it that the State was dominated by it. The words 
and example of Paul were always in direct refutation 
of the doctrine enunciated by Mr. Mills. Both knew 
that the moment the church became political that moment 
it would begin to lose in spiritual power, and the 
history of nineteen centuries has proved the scientific 
soundness of their position. The Church cannot have 
an influence upon the State in the way suggested by 
Mr. Mills without becoming political. 

"It is the business of the church to call men to 
repentance, to preach the gospel— the 'glad tidings of 
great joy'— to work for the spiritual regeneration of 
mankind through regeneration of the individual. In this 
business it has employment for all its energies and talents, 
and thus employing itself it is a more powerful influence 
for righteousness in the State and righteousness of the 
State as a governing corporation than it can possibly 
be in attempting directly to dictate politics to the State 
and to be the State. The government of the United 



States and of the State of New York are as much the 
governments of the non-Christian as of the Christian; 
of the Jew as of the Gentile; of the Pantheist as of the 
Trinitarian; of the Agnostic and Deist as of the strictest 
of the sect of special creationists who believe in 
divine direction of the affairs of mankind. It is the 
business of the Christian church not more than of the 
Jewish church to see to it that the State is dominated 
by ethical principles, by morality, righteousness, justice 
and mercy; and it can do this best by following the 
example of Christ and Paul, not that of Constantine." 

"WHAT IS WRONG?" 



In the Christian Endeavorer Rev. C. S. Bullard 
propounds the question, "What is wrong?" and proceeds 
to answer it as follows:— 

"Every pulpit in the land guarded by law— nearly 
one hundred thousand men of learning and ability set 
for the bringing to the attention of other men the life 
and death message of God— and yet— 

"Multiply the twelve apostles by eight thousand 
and how soon they would turn the world up-side-down! 
What is wrong? 

"Think of England— the brightest part of Europe. 
Eighty thousand criminals; one hundred and sixty 
thousand drunkards; one hundred thousand prostitutes; 
nearly ten hundred thousand paupers, and a drink bill 
of one hundred and thirty-six million pounds sterling ! 
Is that the best the gospel of Jesus Christ can do for 
England? 

"Look upon our own land— over seventy-three 
million population and about twenty million enrolled 
members in all branches of the church! Seven million 
young men, of whom but five per cent, are enrolled as 
members of the church. These, as a fraction of one of 
the million, attend church somewhat regularly, another 
million attend occasionally, but five million never attend. 
Think of arresting over one and a half million 
of men and women annually— fifty millions in a generation! 
Crime increases four and a half times faster than 
the population. What is wrong? 

"Here we stand upon the threshold of the twentieth 
century with the record of forty million people habitually 
absenting themselves from the house of God! 
We have perfect machinery and a seemingly large 
amount of zeal— we are doing everything we can think 
of to reach the ungodly— we have tried spinning-wheels 
and grab-bags, theatricals and tableaux, broom 
drills and donkey socials. We have fiddled to them 

R2144 : page 130 

and fed them with ice cream and cake, and tickled them 



with funny stories, yet 'Ichabod' seems to be written 
upon everything we do. What is wrong? 

"Is there a power that can change these things? 
What is needed? Paul cries, 'The gospel is the power 
of God.' O, that is what is needed— power! POWER! 
Power in the Church and through the church IN POLITICS, 
TO REGENERATE SOCIETY. The only thing that can 

R2145 : page 130 

correct the things that need correction is the 'gospel.' 
Let us apply the gospel in liberal doses!" 

Yes, indeed, power is needed to bring order and 
righteousness to all the troublesome questions now perplexing 
the world,— Labor, Capital, Finance, Socialism, 
Trusts, True Religion, Sectarianism and Superstition, 
all need power, a mighty power, and a wise and 
good power, to take hold of them to put down the 
wrong and to lift up the right. But will the church 
by going into earthly politics be this power? Never! 
She holds no such commission. On the contrary, if 
saints could be put into office, it is very doubtful if 
they could continue to be "saints" under such unfavorable 
conditions, attempting to rule the world before 
the time appointed and without their "Head." 

Yes, men in every station of life are beginning to 
see that the world needs a "strong government" to 
hold it in check; and the more general the enlightenment 
of the masses the greater this need— to control 
the avarice and discontent and to cause the bounties of 
divine providence to minister blessings and happiness 
to every creature. No earthly power can do this: our 
Lord's promised Kingdom— the fifth universal empire 
of the earth (Dan. 2:44; 7:22,27), and it only, can 
meet the conditions. It was in full view of this necessity, 
and to meet it, that a second advent of our Lord 
was promised;— not as a man and for suffering of death, 
but as the Lord of all, in power and great glory, a 
spirit being— as invisible to men as is the present 
"prince of this world," Satan, and still more powerful. 
While the many make ready "Christian Crusades" in 
politics, and "Boy's Brigades" for future assistance, 
the true "soldiers of the cross" will fight the good 
fight of faith against their own weaknesses, while praying 
to their Lord, "Thy kingdom come: thy will be 
done on earth as it is done in heaven." 

ENFORCING THE DECALOGUE IN KANSAS. 



The following bill has been introduced in the Legislature 
of the State of Kansas by Representative Walters. 
It calls for the enforcement of the Ten Commandments 
given to Israel at Mt. Sinai:— 

"An Act to give statutory force to the Ten 



Commandments: 

"Whereas, The men of the present generation 
have become doubters and scoffers; and, 

"Whereas, They have strayed from the religion 
of their fathers; and, 

"Whereas, They no longer live in the fear of 
God; and, 

"Whereas, Having no fear of punishment beyond 
the grave, they wantonly violate the law given to the 
world from Mt. Sinai; therefore, 

"Be it enacted by the Legislature of the State of 
Kansas:— 

"Section I. Thou shalt have no other gods before 
me. 

"Section 2. Thou shalt not make unto thee any 
graven image," etc. [Each one of the commandments 
constituting a separate section of the Act] 

"Section II. Any man who shall violate any 
of the provisions of this Act shall be punished as 
follows:— 

"For violating Section I, $1,000 fine; for violating 
Section 2, $1,000 fine and one year in the penitentiary; 
for violating Section 3 or Section 4, $500 fine; 
for violating Section 5, $500 and six months in the 
penitentiary; for violating Section 6, hanged by the 
neck until dead; for violating Section 7, penitentiary 
for life; for violating Section 8, fine or imprisonment, 
in the discretion of the court; for violating Section 9, 
imprisonment, in the discretion of the court; for violating 
Section 10, fine and imprisonment, in the discretion 
of the court. 

"Section 12. This Act shall take effect and be 
in force from and after its publication in the statute 
book. 

"This proposed measure only contemplates in 
part, and on a small scale, what is proposed in the 
"Christian Amendment" to the constitution, which 
has progressed far beyond the possibilities of a joke. 
That amendment says that 'the revealed will of Jesus 
Christ' shall be 'the supreme authority in civil affairs' 
in every State in the Union. The revealed will of 
Christ includes the law of ten commandments. The 
'Christian Amendment' would do for every State 
what Mr. Walters' measure proposes to do for the 
State of Kansas. 

"It is proposed that the Kansas legislature shall 
enact, 'Thou shalt have no other gods before me.' As 
the speaking party in this enactment would be the 
legislature, the law would be that the legislature must 
be the god of everybody in the State. And the god 
who speaks the law having been determined in the 
first section of the Act, the same god would be meant 
by the phrase 'the Lord thy God' in succeeding sections. 
Thus by the third section it would become blasphemy 
to speak lightly of the Kansas legislature, and 
in the fourth section this assembly would put forth the 



stupendous claim of having created the heavens and 
the earth ! 

"Absurd as such claims would be, they are no 
more than what is really involved in every instance of 
religious legislation. For religion being the performance 
of those duties which an individual owes to his 
God, only God can rightfully command such duties; 
and when such duties are commanded by any party, 
that party by that very act assumes to be God.... 

"Another point that must not be overlooked is 
raised by the query as to what will constitute a violation 
of this Act. Jesus Christ said that hatred in the 
heart was a violation of the commandment which says, 
'Thou shalt not kill,' which is Section 6 in Mr. Walters' 

R2145 :page 131 

bill. (See Matt. 5:21,22.) No doubt it will be 
acknowledged that there is no higher authority upon 
the subject than this. The courts will therefore be 
obliged to take cognizance of hatred as a violation of 
Section 6 of this State law, of lust as a violation of 
Section 7, etc., and inflict the penalties specified in the 
Act. The enlargement of the State prisons and penitentiaries 
which the punishment of such persons, together 
with all who were covetous, would demand, it 
would be needless to try to specify. The penal institutions 
would simply have to be made large enough to 
take in the entire population of the State." 
—American Sentinel. 

We heartily concur in the Sentinel's comments, 
but must point out an inconsistency. The Sentinel is 
an able representative of "Seventh-Day-Adventism;" 
and the back-bone of that institution is the Law given 
at Mt. Sinai, referred to above. That Law is held out 
continually as the criterion for all "Seventh-Day Adventists;" 
and it is claimed that all who do not keep 
that law will fail to obtain eternal life. Why then should 
the Sentinel, above all other journals, object to the enforcement 
of that Law? 

Ah! despite its theory, that the Law is in force 
upon Christians as it was upon the Jews, the Sentinel 
cannot help seeing that no member of the fallen race 
can keep that Law. Hence its comment that, if it be 
enforced, "the entire population of the State" (including 
Seventh-Day Adventists) will be found guilty of 
violating it. The essence of the gospel is that our Lord 
Jesus, having kept the Law perfectly, gave his life a 
ransom price (not to break or destroy the Law, but) 
to justify believers, not by the Law, but by faith. 

"THY WONDERS ARE A MIGHTY DEEP!" 



As a marvel, the telegraph, by which an energy 



can be communicated at a distance, prepared the way 
for the still greater marvel, the telephone, by which 
sounds and tones can be communicated long distances. 
Next came the Roentgen or X-ray, by which rays of 
light can be passed through a plank, a tree, or a human 
being. Now, finally— no, not finally, for we know 
not what may await us in the future still more marvelous 
—the latest wonder is a method of telegraphy without 
wires or any other connections. Progress has been 
made in this direction for some time past, and some 
success was attained by W. H. Preece, head of the 
British government telegraph system. But now complete 
success has been reached by a young Italian, 
named Marconi, whose device has been patented and 
is now being put into practical operation along the 
British coast, for communicating from shore stations to 
light-ships, from half a mile to twenty miles distant. 

Experiments show that the electric influence is 
exerted through or by peculiar vibrations upon the air 
(250,000,000 per second) which affect a "receiver" 
and produce a record similar to a telegram by wire. It 
is expected that an instrument of large size would communicate 
all around the world simultaneously, wherever 
"receivers" were placed for recording the messages. 
These wave currents pass through brick, stone 
and iron walls as readily as through open air. Astounding 
as it may seem, the only fear expressed is that "in 
using the instruments on an iron clad [war vessel] the 
waves [of ether] might explode the [powder] magazine 
of the ship." 

After six thousand years of human pride and boasting, 
God is now saying to mankind, "Be still, and know 
that I am God; I will be exalted among the people, I 
will be exalted in the earth."— Psa. 46:10. 

What now will so-called Rationalists say to their 
former boast that they believe only what is tangible? 
And what about certain Christian (Second Adventists 
and others) who on rationalistic grounds claim that 
there could be no such thing as a spirit body, invisible 
to human sight, and accordingly dispute that our 
Lord, after his resurrection, came into the upper room 
while "the doors were shut" and claim, contrary to 
the inspired record, that he opened the doors and came 
in unnoticed. 

R2146 :page 131 

By and by the world will have such evidences of 
invisible things in nature, that faith in spiritual things 
which eye hath not seen nor ear heard, neither have 
entered into the heart of the natural man to conceive, 
will be an easy matter. 

Meantime the infidels of the world are rapidly becoming 
"Spiritualists"— deceived by the fallen angels 
from whom God's people are protected by the instructions 
of the Holy Scriptures. 



R2146 :page 131 

TAKE HEED. 



"Wherewithal shall a young man keep his way pure 
[keep a clean course in life]? By taking heed thereto 
according to thy Word."— Psa. 119:9. 

NEVER in all the centuries of the past was the 

exhortation to "take heed" as opportune as 

to-day, when the temperament of the age is aptly illustrated 

by its two great motive powers, steam and 

electricity. There is to-day more rush and force than 

thought and precision. The active brains of the world 

are scheming for fortunes and rushing to gain them; 

and very few in any condition of life take time to consider 

R2146 : page 132 

and to weigh and compare principles and motives 
of action, to see whether the ends for which they strive 
are worthy of their efforts. They rush and push and 
pull because the very conditions of their birth in this 
time impel them to do so, even though the end of their 
aspirations be but empty bubbles and bitter disappointments. 
And this, which is true of the world at large, 
is also true of the professed Christian Church: the active 
spirit of the age has permeated its pulpits, its 
pews and its theological schools. But this activity, 
partaking largely of the spirit of the world, has taken 
more of a business than of a pious turn, and tends 
more to the emphasizing of the forms of godliness 
than to the cultivation of its vital power, and more to 
worldly than to spiritual prosperity. It was of a similar 
class in the Jewish age that the Lord said, "The 
ox knoweth his owner, and the ass his master's crib; 
but Israel doth not know, my people doth not consider." 
(Isa. 1:3.) Let the thoughtful Christian, therefore, 
look well to his course and see that he is steering 
it in exact harmony with the divine Word and plan. 
The Psalmist, in the above text, suggests the most 
worthy ambition of life; viz., to keep our course of life 
clean and free from the contaminations of this evil 
world. The suggestion is specially apt in its application 
to the young, whose tender years and inexperience 
have as yet learned little beyond the loving discipline 
of the home circle, which the text presupposes. Parental 
love, counsel, discipline, example and prayers have 
thus far guided the youthful feet in the ways of righteousness 
and peace, and now, at the verge of manhood 
and womanhood, life's great work and its stern duties 



and responsibilities must be faced; the youth must 

come in contact, to some extent at least, with the wickedness 

of an ungodly world, where the metal of his 

character will be put to the test, and often to very 

crucial tests when it is discovered that the way of the 

ungodly prospers in the present time. 

It is true, indeed, that the tendency of "evil communications" 
is to "corrupt good manners." (1 Cor. 15:33.) 
As the ear becomes accustomed to profanity 
and to unkind and bitter words, and the eye to sights 
of misery and injustice, the tendency is to blunt the 
finer sensibilities of the pure and good, so that in time 
the heart will become more or less calloused and unsympathetic, 
unless these unholy influences are steadily 
resisted and the ways of the world shunned. 

But how, inquires the Psalmist, shall a young man 
keep his way (his course of life) clean? how, in his inexperience 
and lack of competent wisdom, shall he succeed, 
often single-handed and alone, in stemming the 
almost resistless current of evil about him? How can 
he prosper in business without resorting to the tricks 
of trade? how can he gain the desired places of social 
distinction or political preferment, if his course of life 
is continually against the current of the world's ideas 
and its means and methods? in other words, how can 
a man be in the world, and not of it? 

That such a thing is both desirable and possible to 
the Christian is plain from our Lord's prayer for his 
disciples (John 17:15-17), "Holy Father,... I pray 
not that thou shouldest take them out of the world, 
but that thou shouldest keep them from the evil. They 
are not of the world, even as I am not of the world. 
Sanctify them [separate them from the evil] through 
thy truth: thy Word is truth." 

The Psalmist raises the question for the very purpose 
of suggesting the answer, and his answer is in full 
harmony with our Lord's prayer, not that they should 
be taken out of the world, but that they should be kept 
from the evil, showing that the only way for a young 
man to keep his course of life clean is to take heed 
thereto according to the Word of the Lord. As the 
Apostle Paul also says, the "scriptures given by 
inspiration of God are profitable for doctrine, for reproof, 
for correction, for instruction in righteousness, 
...and are able to make thee wise unto salvation 
through faith in Christ Jesus."— 2 Tim. 3:15,16. 

But the Scriptures nowhere show the Christian 
how to blend the spirit and methods of Christ with the 
spirit and methods of the world, in order to make what 
men call success in life. They do not open up the 
way to either financial, political or social success, but 
they do "teach us that, denying ungodliness and worldly 
desires, we should live soberly, righteously, and 
godly in this present world; looking for that blessed 
hope [of the gospel] and the glorious appearing of the 
great God and our Savior Jesus Christ, who gave himself 



for us, that he might redeem us from all iniquity 

and purify unto himself a peculiar people [not a people 

striving after the things of this world, but] zealous of 

good works." (Titus 2:12-14.) Yes, the young man 

who would follow Christ must forego the ambitions 

and pleasures of the present life, and live for the enduring 

and satisfying riches of the life to come. 

But the Word of the Lord, full as it is of wisdom 
and counsel, cannot profit even the professed Christian 
who does not in a meek and prayerful spirit come to 
its pages for instruction. Nor does it profit the careless 
reader who fails to meditate upon its precepts, or 
who only occasionally looks into the perfect law of 
liberty and beholds himself, but straightway forgets 
what manner of man he was (Jas. 1:22-24), and therefore 
fails to apply the instruction. But he who can 
truly say,— "Thy words were found, and I did eat them 
[I appropriated them diligently to the building up of 
my character]; and thy Word was unto me the joy 
and rejoicing of my heart;" "my delight is in the law 

R2146 : page 133 

of the Lord, and in his law do I meditate day and night; 
I meditate also of all thy work, O Lord, and talk of 
thy doings; I meditate in thy precepts, and have respect 
unto thy ways; I delight myself in thy statutes, 
I do not forget thy word" (Jer. 15:16; Psa. 1:2; 77:12; 
119:15,16): these, and only these, are ordering 
their steps aright, by taking heed to the Word of the 
Lord. 

This was the course that Paul recommended to 
Timothy, that he might keep himself pure from worldly 
contamination, and be an example and faithful minister 
to others, saying, "Be thou an example of the believers, 
in word, in conversation, in charity, in spirit, 
in faith, in purity. ...Meditate upon these things, 
give thyself wholly to them, that thy profiting may 
appear to all."— 1 Tim. 4:12,15. 

The profiting certainly will not appear if the means 
are not thus used. Character cannot ripen except under 
proper conditions; and if professions abound where 
character is lacking, or is not correspondingly developed, 
how sad is the plight, and how manifest the self-deception 
to every discerning saint! 

In view of these things, therefore, let the young 
Christian mark well the counsel of wisdom, and take 
heed to his course according to the Word of the Lord. 
Let him come to it for answers to all questions of right 
and duty; and let him study how the perfect law of 
God— the law of love— applies to all the conditions and 
circumstances of his daily life and associations and obligations. 
In so doing there cannot fail to be a steady 
growth in grace, and the fruits of the spirit will not be 
lacking. 

But youth is not the only time when it is necessary 



to steer one's course by the Word of the Lord. 

While the only right way to start in life is by taking 

heed to our way according to God's Word, it is equally 

right and necessary to heed it and to meditate upon 

it to the very end of our days. A life thus spent becomes 

beautiful in old age, which should show all the 

fruits of the spirit tinged with the glow of ripeness, 

and be a loving benediction to all within the range of 

its influence. Indeed, what a pattern of godliness does 

every aged saint present when the hoary head is 

crowned with the beauty of holiness, when a long life 

of self-denial and self-discipline gives a practical demonstration 

of the power of divine grace to overcome 

the downward tendencies of our fallen nature! What 

a pattern should the aged Christian be, of patient self-forgetfulness, 

of loving sympathy and gentle forbearance, 

able to give kindly counsel and timely assistance 

in various ways to those who are still bearing the burden 

and heat of the day, cheering them onward and 

inspiring them to noble deeds and persistent fortitude, 

R2147 : page 133 

and fully appreciating all their labors of love! 

But, alas! the well-spent lives are few. How few 
have remembered their Creator in the days of their 
youth, and from youth to age have taken heed to their 
way according to God's Word! In many cases youth 
has been worse than wasted in sowing "wild oats," 
and subsequent years have reaped the bitter harvest; 
life's discipline has been endured with murmuring and 
chafing, the disposition has grown sour, and life a tiresome 
burden. Alas! too often, even among professed 
Christians, has the failure to "take heed" permitted the 
unholy passions to flourish to the great detriment of 
all spiritual progress, until at last but little remains except 
empty professions which bring only dishonor upon 
the name of Christ. Such is the result of a mere start 
in the Christian life with little or no endeavor thereafter 
to develop Christian character according to God's 
Word. Yet God is gracious, and he is slow to anger 
and plenteous in mercy, so that at whatever point in 
its downward way or its backslidden course, whether 
in youth or age, the soul halts and changes its course 
from the paths of sin to the paths of faith and righteousness, 
there the love of God is made manifest in 
pardon and peace, and the operations of divine grace 
are realized in helps and encouragements to pursue the 
upward way. But, at whatever point we start in the 
Christian life, from that starting point begins the duty 
of diligently taking heed to our way according to God's 
Word. If we grow careless of this duty, and heedlessly 
blunder along according to our own understanding, 
meditating upon our own likes and dislikes, our selfish 
preferences, or our own depraved tastes and ideas, instead 
of upon the precepts and principles of God's 



Word, and endeavoring to bring our own ideas and 
ways to that standard of righteousness day by day and 
year by year,— if such be the listless, shiftless indifference 
that marks our course, we cannot hope to retain 
the divine favor; nor can we grow in grace and approximate 
more and more the likeness of Christ. 

The spiritual life, like the physical life, develops 
according to fixed laws. As the natural life must be 
nourished and fed according to the laws of nature in 
order to sustain and develop it and keep it in health, so 
the spiritual life must be nourished by the various 
means of grace and fed continually by the Word of the 
Lord.— "Thy words were found, and I did eat them." 

If, then, we realize that, through any measure of neglect, 
we are out of the way and find in ourselves a low 
state of spiritual health, let us bestir ourselves to redoubled 
diligence. No matter how long we may have 
walked in a blundering way, the Lord stands ready 
with his grace to help and his presence to cheer as soon 
as we turn with our whole heart unto him in earnest 
desire and determination by his grace to overcome. 
"Keep thy tongue from evil, and thy lips from speaking 

R2147 : page 134 

guile. Depart from evil and do good; seek peace 
and pursue it. The eyes of the Lord are upon the 
righteous, and his ears are open unto their cry." But 
"the face of the Lord is against them that do evil, to 
cut off the remembrance of them from the earth.... 
The Lord is nigh unto them that are of a broken 
heart; and saveth such as be of a contrite spirit."— 
Psa. 34:13-16,18. M.F.RUSSELL. 



R2147 : page 134 

A TRUTHFUL CRITICISM. 



"TO see a Roman Catholic Priest stand within the 

precincts of his church, and bowing before its 

altar, while at the same time lecturing from the Bible, 

and making it his sole arbiter and final court of appeal, 

is a strange anomaly— indeed we might say a 'new 

thing under the sun.' One is inclined to ask, What 

does it all mean? Either he is coming round to Protestantism, 

which makes the Bible its only standard, 

and infallible guide, or he is only giving a seeming 

support to the Bible by keeping out of sight the baneful 

doctrines of the mass and purgatory, that thereby 

he may win back numbers to his fold. If the former 

is true, we welcome him to the green pastures and still 

waters of the Word of God. If the latter, we trust all 



those who appreciate freedom— that freedom so dearly 

bought,— will remember the policy of Rome, 'she 

changes not;' 'instruments of cruelty are in her habitation,' 

and she will become more and more the 'hold 

of every foul spirit and a cage of every unclean and 

hateful bird.' (Rev. 18:2.) Saith the Lord-'Come 

out of her, my people, that ye be not partakers of her 

sins, and that ye receive not of her plagues, for her 

sins have reached unto heaven, and God hath remembered 

her iniquities.' (Rev. 18:4,5.) Let us stand 

fast, therefore, in the liberty wherewith Christ hath 

made us free, and be not entangled again with the yoke 

of bondage.— Gal. 5:1. 

"In looking over the subject matter of the lectures 
themselves, what struck me most was the entire absence 
of the Gospel of Christ. On such a theme as the destiny 
of man we might surely expect that 'the only 
name under heaven given among men whereby we must 
be saved' (Acts 4:12) would have been proclaimed full 
and free; but no. Little wonder then, that the world 
is full of agnosticism, gloom and despair when such a 
Christless Gospel is put forward as the saving truth of 
God. How one could wish that the rev. father, instead 
of closing his lecture by quoting the Law as the 
way to life, had copied the divine wisdom given to the 
Apostle Paul, who said to the Philippian gaoler, 'Believe 
on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shalt be saved.' 
(Acts 16:31.) For if through law we have righteousness, 
then Christ died unnecessarily.— Gal. 2:21. 

"The world can draw no comfort from these worn-out 
husks of gloom and eternal torment on the one 
hand, or from the new but unscriptural and unscientific 
(unproved) notion of evolution on the other. 
Never did the groaning creation need a Deliverer— 
and a great one— more than now." 

Thus writes Brother C. N. Houston to one of the 
British journals, commenting on a public discourse on 
"The Destiny of Man." We commend the method to 
all who possess the requisite talents. Besides such occasional 
articles Bro. H. takes betimes "a week off" 
from his store to colporteur for DAWNS. He usually 
has excellent success. He is "not ashamed of the 
gospel of Christ:" his friends know this;— and so does 
the Lord. To "overcome" pride and "the fear of man 
which bringeth a snare" is a very important item in 
connection with a full consecration and a desire to be 
used up in the Lord's service. 



R2147 : page 134 

CELEBRATIONS OF THE MEMORIAL SUPPER. 



THE celebration of the death of the antitypical 

Paschal Lamb, our Lord Jesus, on its anniversary, 

this year the evening of April 15, was very general, as 

judged by the numerous reports thus far received. As 

usual, the numbers of communicants varied greatly, 

from two or three individuals to a couple of hundred, 

—and in several instances solitary believers worshiped 

and partook alone, association with others being impossible. 

All reports seem to indicate deep spiritual 

blessing and a growing appreciation of the great event 

celebrated, as the center of Christian joy and hope. 

Those who deny the ransom,— that we were bought 
with a price, even the precious blood of Christ, have 
properly neither part nor lot in memorializing that 
great transaction;— nor have those who by lives of sin 
make themselves "the enemies of the cross of Christ." 
(Phil. 3:18.) Hence the fact that the number at each 
place, as well as the number of places, seems to show 
considerable increase over previous celebrations, is a 
favorable indication. 

The occasion at Allegheny will long be remembered 
by some present. Beginning at 4.30 P.M. there 
was a baptism service. In a discourse of nearly an 
hour the true Scriptural idea of immersion was set forth 
and contrasted with popular but false ideas on the subject. 
It was shown that water immersion is not for 
the remission of sins, nor to be a door into an earthly 
church, but that it is a symbol merely, an outward confession 
of an immersion of the heart, the will, into the 
will of Christ;— a full consecration or immersion into 

R2147 : page 135 

Christ as members of his mystical body, sharers in his 
death to the self-will; and in our case also a death to 
sin. (Rom. 6:3-5.) Twenty-four adults (twelve each 
sex) were immersed in symbol in water, assenting first 
to their faith in the Lord as their personal Savior, 
whose sacrifice for sin formed the only ground-work of 
their justification and acceptance with the Heavenly 
Father; and, secondly, assenting that they had already 
consecrated, buried, immersed their wills into the 
Lord's will, laying ambition, talents, earthly possessions, 
hopes, fears,— all, even life, at the Savior's feet, 
to be henceforth, to the end of the race, used not for 
themselves, but wholly devoted to the service of him 
who loved us and gave himself for us. It was a solemn 
and impressive service, not for them alone, but for the 
hundred or more witnesses present, the majority of 
whom had made and symbolized the same covenant. 

From eight to nine-thirty o'clock the Supper was 
celebrated. The significance of the unleavened bread 
and the fruit of the vine as representatives of our 
Lord's broken body and shed blood, and of our Lord 
himself as the antitype of the Passover lamb, were considered: 
it was shown that as the institution of the 



R2148 : page 135 

type, the night previous to Israel's departure from 
Egypt, affected first the first-born of Israel and later 
all Israel, delivered from Pharaoh and Egypt, so the 
death of our Lamb (Christ Jesus— "the Lamb of God 
which taketh away the sin of the world") affects first, 
during the Gospel age, the "Church of the first-born" 
ones and subsequently, during the Millennium, will 
affect the deliverance of all who are or who will become 
God's true servants, delivering them from the slavery 
of Satan and the present evil world. 

The emblems of our Master's broken body and 
shed blood were sweet to us, and by faith through the 
emblems we partook of the merits and graces of our 
Lord and his exceeding great and precious promises 
vouchsafed for the future. We were sad at the thought 
of our Lord's sufferings for us; yet glad— so glad- 
that he paid the great price for us. We noticed, also, 
the Apostle's suggestion (1 Cor. 10:16,17) that the 
bread and wine not only symbolize our Lord's body 
and flesh broken for us, but that since we are accepted 
of him and are reckonedly his flesh and his bones while 
in the earthly tabernacle, so the bread (one loaf) represents 
our flesh consecrated to death with our Lord, 
in his service and in the service of his people. Likewise 
we have a communion (common union or fellowship) 
in the cup— our earthly lives are consecrated to 
be poured out in death, that we may partake with our 
Lord also in his new life— "partakers of the divine 
nature."— 2 Pet. 1:4. 

Having celebrated the death of the antitypical 
Passover Lamb, let us now celebrate the antitypical 
feast of Passover, not for a typical seven days, but for 
the antitypical period— all time, forever— feeding upon 
"the unleavened bread of sincerity and truth," and 
abstaining from all sin, symbolized under the Law by 
leaven. 

We give a few very brief extracts from some of 
the reports of the Memorial celebration at hand, as 
follows, requesting that all friends who reported accept 
this as our acknowledgment:— 

Cohoes, N.Y.— The Memorial service was held as 
usual, and I cannot help but feel that it was the most 
blessed season that we have yet witnessed; such a deep 
spiritual atmosphere attending it. 



Hegewisch, 111.— Just a word about our celebration 
of the Memorial Supper in this place. There were 
seven of us present— all truth seekers and believers in 
the ransom. We first sang a few appropriate hymns, 
then had a short testimony meeting,— subject "Why 
is Christ precious to me?" Then a season of prayer 



followed, after which there was a brief review of our 
reasons for celebrating the Supper at this time, and a 
short talk on 1 Cor. 1 1:23-32, especially with the 
thought of showing forth the Lord's death "till he 
come." We pictured the eventful night of his betrayal 
and his death. As we thought of the sufferings, the 
bloody sweat, the broken heart of our dear Savior, the 
tears came in all our eyes. Then, as the emblems were 
passed, we felt as never before the truth, "Is it not a 
participation of the body and blood of the Anointed 
One?" 

One thing I must not forget: We each made some 
request to be prayed for, and the answers received during 
the past few days have been truly wonderful. 
Praise God! The one thought uppermost in our service 
seemed to be, 

"We may not know, we cannot tell 
What pain he had to bear, 

But we may know it was for us 
He hung and suffered there." 



Waukesha, Wis.— Eight met to partake of the 
bread and wine of our Lord's Passover. We each renewed 
our covenant relationship for the new sacred 
year, promising to be more zealous if possible in the 
Master's work. 



Salem, Ore.— I am happy to be able to write once 
more of our meeting together to commemorate our 
Lord's death, "till he come." Altho we have not had 
many additions this year, we were all rejoiced to meet 
together without one missing, all in their places, and 
none sorry of their covenant, but all confessing to 
growth in Christian faith and fellowship. 

We earnestly desire your prayers in our behalf 
that we may grow in all the graces needed to become 
like our Master and true representatives of him, while 
spreading this glorious truth. We all received a great 
blessing, and we pray for all the little flock everywhere. 



Ballston, N.Y.— Greeting in the Lord Jesus 
Christ, our "Elder Brother!" At the Supper there 
were seven present, a goodly number, and we had a 

R2148 : page 136 

spiritual feast. It is not yet a year since the first one 
of six came into the light. I was requested to take 
charge of the Supper, and I did so, meekly but not 
doubtingly. Blessed be God that giveth us the victory! 



I am assured that we pray in union of spirit; and 

the Father's Word through Christ is being manifested 

to his saints. Glorious is our hope! 



Hayne, N.C.— Brother Draper has come and gone, 
but his influence remains. Notwithstanding the busy 
season, made more so by excessive rains which had 
just abated, the attendance at the series of meetings 
was very good, about filling the house in the day time, 
while many could not get in it in the evenings; so much 
so that on invitation of prominent Baptists who begin 
to see and love the truth services were held in their 
larger church house, which would not accommodate 
many that went. People of all creeds here and nearly 
all of the neighborhood heard and seemed to understand. 
Five symbolized baptism, and others expressed 
a desire to do so after hearing the explanation of the 
symbol, and when it should be performed. About 35 
partook of the Supper, three times as many as ever before. 
It was indeed a delightful occasion. We are 
truly grateful for the Brother's visit, as it seemed to 
be the right time for some who are beginning to see, 
and others who are willing to hear. We feel like much 
good has been accomplished here, and would like to 
have him come every year, or oftener, but want him 
to go where he can do the most good, and expect to do 
more to help send him. Pray for us that we may grow 
in grace and hold out faithful to the end. 



Indianola, la.— Five met on Thursday evening to 
celebrate the Memorial Supper. I think we all realized 
a blessing in a renewal of our consecration and 
consequent obligation. May the Lord help and keep 
all his own everywhere. 



St. Petersburg, Fla.— About fourteen rejoiced in 
commemorating the Lord's last Supper, and a very delightful 
meeting it was. We all felt the necessity of a 
closer walk with God, more love for Christ and the 
brethren, a fuller dependence on God's promises and a 
more careful watch, lest the enemy tempt us from the 
"faith once delivered to the saints." Our Norwegian 
brethren thought best to partake by themselves. 



Huron, S.D.— Last night six of us met to remember 
our Lord's death "until he come," and to renew 
our covenant with him. After prayer we read John 6:3 1-57; 
1 Cor. 10:16,17 and 11:27-30. Sweetly the 



Lord met with us. I never felt the force and beauty 
of the symbol so much before, and I believe that was 
the experience of all. Our hearts burned within us. 
May we be kept willing to be led. 



Philadelphia, Pa.— The Church here observed the 
Memorial Supper last evening. About 40 partook of 
the emblems, and 8 (4 brethren and 4 sisters) symbolized 
their consecration into Christ's death by 
immersion. 



Bethlehem, Pa.— Our little meeting here last evening 
proved a season of sweet refreshing to all present. 
There were 13, and our dear Redeemer seemed very 
near and dear to us. We were greatly strengthened 
and blessed, especially as we realized that all the Lord's 
people everywhere were meeting for the same purpose 
and praying for one another. May we be kept humble, 
and constantly watch and pray! 



Columbus, O.— Our little band met last night to 
remember the anniversary of our Lord's death on our 
behalf. We had a very interesting and profitable waiting 
on the Lord, and many expressed themselves as 
having been refreshed and edified. 27 partook of the 
emblems, 6 of our class being absent, but we had 5 
from adjoining towns. We felt that the influence of 
the Lord was present. All seemed to feel deeply the 
solemnity of the occasion, and yet every face seemed 
joyful, as if while sympathising with our Lord in his 
suffering, they could not help rejoicing over the result 
to both himself and to us and to the world. We remembered 
all the little bands of like precious faith and 
felt that we were remembered by others. 



New York City.— The Church here held the meeting 
in commemoration of the Lord's death. 

A devotional meeting preceded, beginning at 6.30 
and closing at 8 P.M., which proved a genuine feast 
of spiritual food and a fitting preparation for the principal 
service. About sixty were present, including 

R2149 : page 136 

some from neighboring localities. The Lord was there 
and blessed us wonderfully, as he is constantly with 
us, teaching, leading and sustaining us in every condition, 
according to his promise, "Lo, I am with you 



alway, even unto the end of the age." 



Dinwiddie County, Va.~ I humbly trust I may 
never count the blood of my Redeemer a worthless 
thing or cast off the covering of his name. We read 
for our Memorial lesson the 13, 14 and 15 chapters of John. 
They contain much for prayerful thought and 
study. The love of the Savior is most touchingly manifested 
in his tender solicitude for his disciples and his 
words of counsel to them, even though troubled that 
his hour was so near at hand. We partook of the emblems 
realizing that we were again renewing our covenant 
to be faithful unto death. 



Cambuslang, Scotland.— Fourteen Christians met 
here last night to commemorate the Lord's death, and 
it was a time of great blessing. I believe we all felt 
the Lord's presence with great power. 



Iowa.— I am still seeking to serve the Master to 
the best of my ability. I intended to meet with a few 

brethren and sisters at for the celebration of the 

death of our dear Lord, but circumstances did not favor; 
but the dear Lord permitted me to partake of the emblems 
alone, and I had a precious, soul-refreshing feast. 



Boston, Mass.— The work is progressing grandly 
under our great Captain. At the Memorial fifty-three 
were present, and it was a season of sweet communion 
with Christ. The Sunday previous eight (seven sisters 
and one brother) were immersed. We obtained 
the use of the Disciples' church. Every one of these 
dear people give evidence of full consecration to God. 

R2149 :page 137 

N. Indianapolis, Ind.— Brother Wise conducted 
the services here, and it was a very blessed service— 
21 present, most, if not all, of whom have made a public 
consecration of themselves, their lives, their all, to 
God, through the beautiful and appropriate symbol of 
water baptism. 



Linton, Ind.— Twenty to twenty-five, the majority 
of whom had never before seen the real import of this 
Memorial, nor the propriety of celebrating it but once 



a year, commemorated the death of "the Lamb of God.' 



Los Posas, Cal.— We had a precious season at the 
Memorial Supper. There were twelve present— the 
same number as last year. We felt drawn nearer to 
the Master and to each other in Christian fellowship. 



Scran ton, Pa.— We had a very precious season of 
spiritual communion at the recent celebration of the 
Memorial Supper. Twenty were present— eight more 
than last year. We are seeking to grow more and 
more in the grace as well as in the knowledge of our 
Lord. 



Grass Valley, Cal.— Five of us partook of the 
Memorial Supper, feeling our own unworthiness, the 
value of the covering of the precious blood and resolved 
to live nearer than ever to our blessed Lord. 
Two were immersed. 



Oakland, Md.-We enjoyed a very pleasant season 
of communion on the occasion of the Memorial Supper 
celebration. Twenty-four were present, and about one-half 
the number partook of the emblems of our Lord's 
broken body and shed blood. It was an impressive 
service— the most so far of any ever enjoyed by us here. 



R2149 :page 137 

PAUL'S MESSAGE TO THE JEWS. 

-MAY 9. -ACTS 13:26-39.- 

"Through this man is preached unto you 
the forgiveness of sins."— Acts 13:38. 

PAUL and his company did not stop at Perga, 

where they landed, but proceeded about one 

hundred miles inland to Antioch, probably because the 

inhabitants of the latter place were of a more intelligent 

class. The Apostle was not looking for the most 

degraded people, but for the most intelligent, and particularly 

those who were Jews or who had come in contact 

with the Jewish religion. This was a different 

Antioch from the place in Syria of the same name, 

whence they commenced their journey. As was their 



custom, they immediately sought prepared soil in which 
to sow the gospel seed: they went, therefore, to the 
Jewish synagogue. According to the Jewish custom a 
portion of the Hebrew Scriptures was read in the hearing 
of the audience, and the chief men of the congregation, 
discerning the intelligence of their visitors, 
asked them to make some remarks. It has been presumed 
by some that, as Paul's discourse seems to make 
reference to Deut. 1:31 and Isa. 55:3, these Scriptures 
had probably been portions of the reading lesson in the 
synagogue, and that the Apostle took the daily lesson 
as the text for his discourse. 

The Apostle Paul was the spokesman, and without 
going forward to the rostrum, he spoke from his place 
in the synagogue, addressing first those who were Israelites 
by birth, and secondly, such Gentiles as had 
become proselytes to the Jewish religion, and who, 
therefore, met with them in worship,— "Men of Israel 
and ye that fear God." Beginning with the history 
of God's dealing with Israel, the Apostle reviewed that 
history down to the time of Christ; thus, wisely, giving 
his auditors assurance of his full sympathy with 
the Jewish hopes and the divine promises, quickening 
in their hearts the desire for the long promised Messiah 
and reviving their hopes in the great promises to be 
fulfilled through him. 

Having thus gained the attention and interest of 
his hearers, he was ready to preach unto them the crucified 
Messiah, and (verse 26) he now intimated that 
the message which he bore to them was one of special 
favor. They were aware that the most pious Jews resided 
in Jerusalem and Palestine, and that they themselves 
were reckoned as being to some extent alienated 
from God and from the promises, because they had 
preferred a residence among the Gentiles, rather than 
in the land of promise. It was appropriate, therefore, 
for two reasons, that the Apostles should explain why 
his message came to them rather than to the more zealous 
Jews of Palestine. He explained (1) that their 
fellow Jews, including the leaders of the nation, at Jerusalem 
had proved themselves unworthy of the gospel 
by rejecting and crucifying Messiah; and (2) that this 
very crucifixion, so far from overthrowing the divine 
arrangement, had merely been another step in the program 
foretold by the Lord by the mouth of his holy 
prophets. He pointed out that the crucifiers of Messiah 
had merely "fulfilled all that was written of him." 
Supposing a question in their minds— How could it be 
that the chief priests and chief religionists of our race 
could make so great a mistake, and so fail to rightly 
interpret the prophets?— the Apostle answers the objection, 
telling them that it was "because they knew 
him not, nor yet the voices of the prophets which are 
read every Sabbath day [and which] they have fulfilled 
in condemning him." 

But this is not all— "God raised him from the 



R2149 :page 138 

dead," and of this we also have witness; and this message 
of the death and resurrection of Messiah constitutes 
the "glad tidings" of the fulfilment of God's 
promises made to father Abraham. This Jesus is the 
"seed" of Abraham, through the merit of whose death 
and by virtue of whose resurrection the promise to 
Abraham shall be fulfilled,— that in him "all the families 
of the earth shall be blessed" with a full opportunity 
of eternal life. 

With his usual logic the Apostle anticipated objections 
in the minds of his hearers,— Could Messiah 
die? etc., and he proceeds to prove to them from the 
words of the prophets that thus it was written beforehand. 
Although Messiah had long existed as the archangel, 
nevertheless the prophet David, speaking for 
God, said concerning him, "Thou art my son, this day 
have I begotten [literally borne or delivered] thee." 
The Apostle would have his hearers note that this 
birth mentioned referred to our Lord's resurrection, as 
it is written, he was the "first born from the dead," 
"the first born among many brethren." If Messiah 
was to be thus born from the dead, it implied that he 
must first die, and hence the Apostle gives this as a 
prophetic prediction fulfilled in our Lord's experiences. 

He quotes again the words of Jehovah through 
the prophet, addressed to Messiah,— "I will give you 
the sure mercies of David,"— i.e., I will make sure to 
thee forever the mercies of David. The Apostle quotes 
this to prove that, altho Messiah as Michael the archangel 
had been great even before David's time, yet it 
would be at a later date, and as a result of some work 
which he would perform, that the mercies promised to 
David and his seed would be made sure to Messiah. 
This transaction was the giving of "his life a ransom 
for all," and the making sure to him of the Davidic 
promises by the Almighty was evidenced "in that he 
raised him from the dead." 

In harmony with this is another statement by the 
prophet David, which evidently referred to Messiah 
and not to David himself, since it was not true of David. 
It reads, "Thou shalt not suffer thy holy one to see corruption. 
By this reference the Apostle would prove 
to them further, that God has specially promised the 

R2150 :page 138 

resurrection of Messiah, and that thus was indicated 
his death and temporary subjection almost to corruption. 
This could not apply to David who did see corruption 
to the full; but it was true of Christ who "saw no 
corruption," tho brought down almost within its grasp. 

Then comes our Golden Text, which is the center 
and pith of the Apostle's discourse. He was not merely 



talking to tickle their ears respecting their being the 

seed of Abraham, nor was he talking for the purpose 

of showing his comprehensive grasp of Israel's history; 

nor was he merely telling them the story of our Lord's 

crucifixion. More than all this, it was an individual 

message to every heart before him in condition to receive 

it,— namely, "Through this man is preached unto 

you the forgiveness of sins." The Apostle does not 

refer to something that was done by our Lord as the 

archangel before "he was made flesh" (John 1:14), 

nor does he refer to any work to be done by him in his 

new, highly exalted condition, "set down with his 

Father in his throne" and partaker of his divine nature; 

but he here refers to the work done by "the man, 

Christ Jesus, who gave himself a ransom for all" (1 Tim. 2:5,6) 

at Calvary. Thus the Apostle again emphasizes 

the fact that "as by a man came death, by a 

man also came the resurrection of the dead." (1 Cor. 15:21.) 

Yes, this is the center of the gospel proclamation 

that the failure of the first perfect man was fully 

offset by the sacrifice of "the man Christ Jesus," 

and that it was to this end that it was needful for our 

Lord to leave the glory which he had with the Father 

before the world was, to become poor (in the sense of 

taking our lower nature— but not its blemishes, for he 

was "holy, harmless, undefiled, and separate from sinners"); 

and yielding up this human nature a ransom-price 

or corresponding price for the life forfeited by 

father Adam for himself and his race. This is the 

basis upon which every offer of grace is presented by the 

Scriptures. And now, he who was the Father's agent 

in the redemptive work is to be the Father's agent also 

in the work of "blessing" all the redeemed with ample 

opportunities for return to divine favor— the first step 

of which is the forgiveness of sins. 

Whoever realizes the divine perfection and himself 
a sinner, imperfect and under condemnation of 
Justice, and desires reconciliation with God— and the 
result thereof, eternal life— such, and such only, are 
prepared to receive the gospel of redemption and forgiveness 
and help. "By him all that believe [after the 
manner described] are justified from all things [reckoned 
right, just, pure and perfect, notwithstanding all 
their inherent blemishes and uncontrollable weaknesses]." 
From none of these things could the law of 
Moses justify any. The law of Moses condemned every 
failure, but was powerless to forgive, and had no means 
of making permanent atonement or covering for those 
who were under that covenant, because its mediator, 
Moses, did not and (being himself a member of the 
fallen race) could not fulfil that covenant and satisfy 
its demands in his own person, for himself and 
the people. Hence, Moses and his covenant had not 
power to grant mercy or justification, as can be done 
under the New Covenant by its mediator, Christ Jesus, 
who sealed it with his own precious blood, "a ransom 



for all." 

Paul preached the only genuine gospel— the only 
one authorized— the everlasting gospel which ultimately 
must be preached to every creature. 



R2150 : page 139 

A LIGHT TO THE GENTILES. 

-MAY 16.-ACTS 14:11-22.- 

"I have set thee to be a light to the Gentiles."— Acts 13:47. 

"LET their table become a snare and a trap unto 

them," said the prophet respecting Israel. 

Their "table" consisted of the divine favors and truths 

which were spread before Israel. "What advantage 

then hath a Jew? Much every way; chiefly because to 

them were committed the oracles of God." Divine favor 

produced pride of heart instead of humility, and unfitted 

the majority of Israelites to inherit the chief 

blessing offered to that nation. Consequently the words 

of the Apostle (considered in our last lesson), logical 

and convincing, in that they were in harmony with the 

testimony of the Law and the prophets concerning the 

Messiah, were nevertheless coldly received, because 

they ran counter to certain Jewish prejudices: (1) Altho 

Paul preached a Jewish Messiah it was the crucified 

One. (2) If his message were true, it reflected very 

discreditably upon the heads of their nation and church, 

of whom they had been accustomed to boast as the 

greatest and holiest teachers of the world. (3) If the 

Apostle's message were true, it vitiated if it did not 

utterly destroy their long cherished national hopes that 

Israel would shortly be the great nation of earth, in 

principal power, instead of Rome. The Messiah for 

whom they hoped was not the meek and lowly crucified 

One whom the Apostle preached, but a mighty, 

earthly conqueror of men and nations. (4) If the 

Apostle's preaching were correct, Israel was no longer 

in a place of preference above the other nations, and 

those who would accept Jesus of Nazareth as Messiah, 

whether Jews or Gentiles, would become the holy and 

divinely recognized Kingdom on a common level. The 

various promises which in their selfishness they misinterpreted, 

served to blind them to the pure, true light 

of the gospel as it now shone upon them. 

But those of their number who had been proselyted 
from amongst the Gentiles had less cause for stumbling 
on these points, being less prejudiced by national 
pride and selfishness. These seem to have heard the 
message with true appreciation and inquired for further 
opportunities of meeting and hearing more of the good 
tidings, and the privilege of bringing with them Gentile 



friends who were feeling after God (verse 42). 
The result of the second meeting was a little nucleus 
of believers. By and by the news of the new Jewish 
gospel became noised abroad throughout the city, 
the result being a large concourse to the synagogue 
on the following Sabbath. 

Here was a new line of temptation to reject the 
gospel, which bore upon such Jews as were not in 
proper condition of heart to receive it; the concourse 
of the Gentiles made them "envious." They said within 
themselves: We have tried long and earnestly to make 
an impression upon these Gentiles, but they seem to 
have no ear for the Law of Moses, few of them attend 
our meetings: but now that these missionaries of a 
new gospel have come they seem both willing and anxious 
to hear them. The result will be that they will 
despise the Law of Moses, and claim that our church 
is breaking up, and that after waiting for Messiah for 
centuries our holiest people crucified him. Thus we 
shall become a reproach in the eyes of our neighbors, 
even if we reject this new gospel, and still more so if we 
receive it. Their selfishness and envy triumphed, and 
then they began to think of and use all the arguments 
they could find in opposition to the teachings of 
Paul— even "blaspheming" the Messiah whom he 
preached. Thus the greatest and grandest truths become 
the most crucial tests, stumbling the proud and 
selfish, and lifting up and blessing the humble and devout. 
There is a great lesson here for all. As our 
Lord said, "Take heed how ye hear." 

Then Paul and Barnabas told them very plainly 
that while it was necessary that the gospel should be 
preached first to Israel, as per divine promise, it was 
nevertheless now to be extended beyond them to all 
Gentiles. As usual he quoted them a text on this subject 
from the old Testament, saying, Thus the Lord 
through the prophet commanded us: "I have set thee 
[Christ] to be a light to the Gentiles, that thou shouldest 
be for salvation unto the ends of the earth." The 
rightly disposed among the Gentiles were glad of this 
message, but the Jews, who should have rejoiced at the 
broadening of the divine mercy and grace, only hardened 
their hearts the more against the message; because the 
light and favor which they had already received had 
not dissolved the selfishness of their natural hearts. 

Concerning the Gentiles it is written, "As many as 
were ordained to eternal life believed"— better translated, 
"As many as were disposed for everlasting life believed;" 
—as many as were in the right attitude of 
heart, who desired reconciliation with God and eternal 
life along the lines preached by the apostle, believed. 

But as usual the majority were in opposition to 
the truth, and amongst their number were found some 
of the most religious and most prominent. These 
raised the persecution, and "the brethren," obeying 



R2150 : page 140 

the Word of the Lord, "When they persecute you in 

one city flee unto another," shook off the dust from 

their feet and departed for Iconium, where, notwithstanding 

the prejudice which spread from Antioch, 

quite an interest was aroused; and when later an endeavor 

was made to stone them there they fled to 

Lystra, the scene of the present lesson, where the apostle 

Paul performed a very notable miracle, healing 

a cripple. The people, seeing it, came to the conclusion 

that as their heathen mythologies told of the visits 

there of gods in the form of men, in the past, this must 

be another such occasion. Barnabas, the elder and 

more venerable looking of the two, they called Jupiter; 

and Paul, the fluent speaker, they called Mercury. 

When the brethren found that they were about to do 

sacrifice to them, they went quickly into the crowd, 

explaining that they were merely men, and quite in 

opposition to such procedure were there for the purpose 

of explaining to them the true God and the true 

R2151 :page 140 

sacrifice for sin. 

What a temptation would have been here for any 
not well controlled by the Lord's spirit! How many 
arguments the world, the flesh and the devil could 
bring up to encourage them in accepting the homage 
of the people? It would have been a pleasant experience 
to be treated as gods, feasted and honored, as a 
change from their usual experiences of privation, persecution 
and tribulation. They might have reasoned, 
moreover, that by accepting a little homage they might 
gain a larger amount of influence with the people and 
thus pave the way for a gradual presentation of the 
gospel. Or they might accept the homage applied to 
themselves in a symbolic fashion as true, might speak 
of the Lord Jesus as a still greater God than themselves, 
and Jehovah as the Almighty God above all, and might 
thus put a favorable turn to the superstitions of the 
people. But all of this would have been subterfuge 
which would have done injury not only to the people 
and to the gospel, but also to the brethren themselves. 
And altho they did no more than their duty in resisting 
the homage as they did, nevertheless we note in 
the fact that they did it with alacrity, the proper spirit 
of loyalty to the one God and our Lord Jesus Christ, 
and the properly prompt resistance of every suggestion 
of the adversary towards self-aggrandizement or self-exaltation. 
Would that this noble spirit were fully 
exemplified in all of the Lord's people! Let us take 
well to heart the lesson of promptness in resisting the 
devil's baits for the weak points of our earthly natures. 
We are not ignorant of his devices. 

The apostle immediately made this mistaken reverence 



a text for a discourse in which he presented to his 
hearers, the one true God as the source of every blessing. 

But persecution followed them, and the same people 
who at one time were ready to offer them sacrifices, 
stoned Paul as they supposed to death. Miraculously 
revived, he departed with Barnabas to the next field 
of labor, Derbe, where he found some more (pupils) 
ready to enter the school of Christ as disciples. 

Notwithstanding persecution in these various cities, 
the brethren were mindful of the interests of the Lord's 
flock, and returned to them for the purpose of strengthening 
or confirming the faith of those who already believed, 
but apparently with no thought of public meetings; 
the inference being that all who were "disposed" 
to accept the offers of eternal life under the gospel call 
had already heard the message. These, however, 
needed help and development. This is a point too 
frequently lost sight of to-day by servants of the gospel; 
public preaching is very proper and necessary, but 
in addition "the flock of God" needs constant feeding. 
Quite evidently the brethren had no expectation that 
the gospel, even when preached under plenary inspiration, 
would convert all, or even a majority, of the people. 
Knowing that God designed it for the selecting 
of the "little flock" to be joint-heirs with Christ in his 
Kingdom they acted accordingly. 

We note that in these exhortations to believers an 
important place is accorded to "faith," and we have 
found in our own experience that a well-founded faith 
is essential to a well-constructed character built upon 
it. The second point of their exhortation to the believers 
was,— that "through much tribulation must we 
enter into the Kingdom of God." They did not tell 
them that all their tribulation was past and that God 
would protect them from any in the future, because 
they had believed, neither did they tell them that the 
Kingdom of God consisted of a work of grace in their 
hearts; neither did they assure them that they already 
were the Kingdom of God in the full sense; but on the 
contrary they assured them that this Kingdom of God, 
which Israel had failed to attain, because not ready of 
heart to receive their King, had been postponed of establishment 
until God should select from the Jews and 
Gentiles "a people for his name" to be joint-heirs with 
the Messiah in his kingdom. They would therefore 
have the believers wait for the Kingdom for which they 
pray, "Thy Kingdom come;" assuring them that the 
narrow path which leads to the Kingdom signifies much 
experience in tribulation as fitting and preparing them 
for a share in that Kingdom, by developing in them 
good characters as copies of God's dear Son. 

How necessary that this should be the exhortation 
to believers still! The Kingdom is a great prize, and he 
who would attain it must run faithfully and endure 
hardness, and that unto the end of his race. For such 
is laid up a crown of righteousness which the Lord of 



righteousness will give him in that day. 

page 141 
VOL. XVIII. MAY 15, 1897. No. 10. 



CONTENTS. 



Methodist Estimate of Brotherhood 142 

Views from the Watch Tower 143 

The Divine Right of Kings, etc 143 

Poem: The Secret of a Happy Day 145 

If Ye Do These Things 145 

Enoch, Elijah and the Sentence 148 

"Because Jesus Was Not Yet 

Glorified" 150 

Our Stewardship 151 

The Conference at Jerusalem 153 

The Faith That Works 154 

Keep Thy Tongue from Evil 156 

page 142 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
--ADDRESS TO- 
TOWER PUBLISHING CO., BIBLE HOUSE, 58 & 60 ARCH ST., 
ALLEGHENY (NORTH PITTSBURG), PA., U.S.A. 

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 

INCLUDES A SUBSCRIPTION TO "THE OLD THEOLOGY TRACTS"-QUARTERLY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, N.Y. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, 

OR REGISTERED. FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN 

MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS: 

Those of the interested, who by reason of old age or accident, or 
other adversity are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, 
if they will send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and 
requesting the paper. 



R2152:page 142 

METHODIST ESTIMATE OF BROTHERHOOD. 

Quite a commotion has been caused in Methodist circles lately by 
the published statement that "The Methodist Book Concern" of New 
York has a Roman Catholic foreman over its Composing Room another 
is assistant foreman in the Press Room, and another is foreman of the 
Bible publishing department. These, it seems, are gradually discharging 
Protestants and supplying their places with Roman Catholics. 



Rev. Dr. Mains, one of the managers of the Concern, explaining away 

the matter, said (as reported by the Boston Herald) that his foreman 

"was probably a Catholic. He had called him 'Brother' Cassidy many 

years without knowing or caring what his religion was." Christian 

brotherhood has become very cheap when given without knowledge or 

care as to whether the recipient even professes to follow Christ or Anti-Christ; 

—and that by a prominent exponent of Christian brotherhood. 

The Philadelphia Record says that the news from the financial 
centers of Europe is to the effect that moneylenders "are willing to lend 
Turkey five times as much money as Greece, at one-half the interest." 
Sentiment weighs in the pulpit, the platform and the press, but goes for 
naught in the financial affairs of the world— great and small. There cold 
selfishness controls. 

"I tell you," said a rabid Free-thinker, "the idea that there is a 
God never comes into my head." "Ah, precisely like my dog," was 
the reply. "But there is this difference— he does not go round howling 
about it."— Selected. 



R2151 :page 143 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 



THE DIVINE RIGHT OF KINGS GONE TO SEED. 



"A DISPATCH from Berlin relates that the 

Emperor William 'has attended the consecration 

of two new churches, and presented to each 

a Bible containing his autograph and a text of Scripture.' 

The text in one was from John (15:5), 'Without 

me ye can do nothing;' in the other, from Jeremiah (7:23), 

'Obey my voice, and I will be your God, and ye 

shall be my people.' 

"These texts written by any other sovereign, even 
the czar, would have passed without further notice 
than as showing his orthodoxy, his desire to set an example 
in faith to his people, but coming from William 
they excite a wholly different thought. Admitting 
that the dark suspicions of his insanity heard from time 
to time are the inventions of his enemies, ample reason 
remains to believe that he is not always fully responsible 
for his language or his acts. 

"Roman emperors set up statues of themselves 
and commanded the people to bow down to them in 
worship, in language not very different from that which 
this man has repeatedly used. That explains why the 
newspaper writers pitched upon those texts, which 
would have been passed unheeded if inscribed by any 
other man."— The Pittsburg Daily News. 

In the German Emperor we have the father, papa 
or pope, of Germany— its earthly god or mighty one, 



whose will must be done in Germany, as the Almighty's 
will is done in heaven. He is the civil and ecclesiastical 
head of so-called "Protestant Germany." He 
holds the reins of power and so proclaims himself; and 
his subjects, while generally repudiating such claims, 
are so bound by their necessities and by the power put 
into their emperor's hands, that they cannot help 
themselves. 

In the Czar of Russia we have another pope, the 
civil and ecclesiastical head of the millions of Russia and 
the Greek Catholic church; who similarly poses as God's 
vicegerent or representative. Less enlightened than the 
Germans, many of his subjects would worship him if 
so commanded. Indeed, they do enshrine and worship 
his representative, the minister of religion, whose portrait 
by law is exposed in all public offices with a continually 
lighted lamp before it, for the adoration of the 
people. The writer, when in Russia, seeing the portrait 
everywhere, inquired who it represented, and was 
answered, "That is Nicholas— that is our god." 

The pope at Rome is the third pope, but, divested 
of power, his influence depends upon his securing support 
to his claims by civil rulers (not so ambitious as 
those of Germany and Russia) who are willing to give 
him their allegiance. The only one willing to do this 
to-day is the emperor of Austria. 

Here we have the three Emperors of Europe representing 
autocratic powers and most opposed to everything 
like religious or political freedom of thought or 
action, and all are believers, almost to the extent of insanity, 
that the secular and religious control of the 
world is in their hands by divine appointment. It is 
not strange, therefore, that the recent visit of the German 
Emperor to the Emperor of Austria-Hungary, 
followed by a visit of the latter ruler to the Emperor 
or Czar of Russia, has given rise to the conclusion that 
an alliance of the three empires of Europe is about to 
be consummated. Not only do the autocratic and "divine 
right" sentiments of their rulers favor such an 
alliance, but their temporal interests as well. Russia 
is glad to drop fickle France with the republican sentiments, 
and Germany is glad to drop poor and weak 
Italy. On the whole, the "Imperial Alliance" is the 
strongest national combination of modern times. The 
design evidently is that at the proper time Austria and 
Russia will divide European Turkey, while Germany 

R2151 :page 144 

will be permitted quietly to absorb Holland, her navy 
and her colonies. At such a time Great Britain will 
probably improve her opportunity to take possession of 
Palestine, and thus will its doors be again thrown open 
to the Jew, and under conditions more favorable than 
ever before, facilitating the fulfilment of prophecy to 
this effect. A few years would work marvelous changes 



there under such conditions. Meantime the preparations 
for Jewish colonization progress at a wonderful 
rate among Jewish "Zion" societies. 

THE ARCHBISHOP OF YORK IN RUSSIA. 



"The Anglican Church appears to weary of her 
'splendid isolation.' Not content with collecting, as 
she will this year, all her sister and daughter Churches 

R2152 : page 144 

at Lambeth, in a gathering which will include representatives 
from every continent, and at least prove to 
the world that she is as little insular in influence as in 
aims, she is making overtures of friendship to other 
churches which she once regarded only as hostile rivals. 
It is but a few months since some of her leading spirits 
asked Rome once more to acknowledge her rank in the 
Christian Hierarchy by admitting the validity of her 
Orders, and now she is making overtures, or at least 
offering courtesies, to the Holy Orthodox Church, a 
corporation as ancient as that of Rome, almost as proud 
and independent, and destined, perhaps in the near 
future, to as large an area of sway or influence. The 
Archbishop of York is hardly visiting the great ecclesiastics 
of Russia out of mere curiosity, or with a desire 
to reveal to them that there are Protestant prelates as 
dignified and as secure in their dignity as themselves. 
He undoubtedly wishes to draw the churches closer, if 
only in the bonds of friendship."— London Spectator. 

There seems little likelihood of union between 
the Church of England and the Greek Church of Russia; 
but evidently they desire to draw closer together. 
Not long since all Protestants seemed anxious to take 
the gospel to the poor benighted ones deluded by the 
Greek and Roman Catholic churches into the worship 
of images, offering of incense before pictures, etc. But 
a desire to count numbers and make a fair show in the 
flesh is changing all this. 

On this visit the London Globe says:— 

"It turns out that one object of Archbishop Maclagan's 
visit to Russia was to carry to the ecclesiastical 
authorities there the answer of the English Primates 
to the Pope's Bull, The 'Novoe Vremya' is among 
the Russian newspapers which welcome the Archbishop. 
His visit, says that journal, 'emphasises the fact that 
in spite of all national, social, economic, political and 
religious differences between civilized countries and 
peoples, the aspiration for the unity of the churches is 
continually breaking forth.' Dr. Maclagan has been 
cordially received wherever he has gone, both by Russian 
churchmen and high State functionaries." 



FORTY-SEVEN MINISTERS PROTESTED. 



Recently Bishop Sessums of the Episcopal Church, 
New Orleans, preached a discourse which was printed 
in the Picayune. Something of its character may be 
judged by the following items of protest published in 
the Times-Democrat (New Orleans), May 6, '97, over 
the signatures of forty-seven ministers of that city, as 
follows:— 

"The undersigned ministers of the Gospel in different 
branches of the Church of Jesus Christ unite in 
this public protest against the exposition of Christianity 
given by Bishop Sessums, as put forth in the Picayune 
under the sanction of his name. It is, in our 
judgment, a complete surrender of the whole system of 
grace revealed in the holy Scriptures. So far from being 
'the old religion in the new language,' it is another 
religion in language which does not contain a single 
new suggestion. The syllabus offered to us is only a 
compend of the old heresies which have afflicted the 
Church of God in ages past. The 'old religion' is 
swept out of the Scriptures so completely that not a 
trace is left of that 'grace of God which bringeth salvation.' 
This will appear from the following specifications 
of its numerous errors:— 

" 1 . Its undisguised Pantheism, in denying the 
personality of the divine Being, reduces him to a mere 
fetich. 

"2. The explicit denial of the fall of man from a 
state of primitive holiness, with the derivation of a corrupt 
nature consequent thereupon. 

"3. In the express denial that Christ hath 'redeemed 
us by his blood,' being not a sacrificial offering 
for sin, but consisting merely in the influence of a good 
example reclaiming man from the error of his way. 

"4. In the open disavowal of belief in any judicial 
process against the sinner, and the absolute denial of 
the future punishment of the wicked in the world to 
come. 

"5. In the assertion of the final restoration of all 
men to the favor of God in a state of probation after 
death. 

"6. The sinking of religion into mere humanitarianism, 
bounded only by the second table of the law, 
and in which God has no rights, through the practical 
abolition of the first table. 

"7. The significant omission, in a scheme professing 
to define the gospel of Christ, of the necessity of 
faith in the Redeemer and of repentance for sin, of love 
to God or any of the graces of the holy spirit. 

"We purposely omit the mention of others clearly 
implied in the language of the bishop, confining ourselves 
to those which are explicitly avowed and which 
spring of necessity from the seed-plot of Pantheism. 



It is not our design to inflict upon this community a 
theological controversy which must range over the entire 
field of Christian doctrine— and that, too, before a 
tribunal which has no power to issue the case in a formal 
verdict. 

"But, set for the defense of the faith as ministers 
of the gospel, entire silence would implicate us in the 
guilt of betrayal of the truth. We cannot, therefore, 
but deliver, once for all, this testimony against another 
gospel than that delivered us in the Word of God. 
Side by side with this, our protest, we append the syllabus 
of Bishop Sessums, that the reader may compare 
the two and judge for himself upon the issue made." 

We are glad to note that the ministers of New 

R2152 : page 145 

Orleans as a whole are so loyal to the teachings of 
God's Word respecting the fall of man and his redemption 
by "the precious blood of Christ." We are sorry 
that in the Northern States there are few ministers who 
still hold to these cardinal and fundamental doctrines. 

But what is driving off, from the teaching of the 
Bible, Bishop Sessums and many (the majority of city 
ministers) in the North? 

It is the failure to recognize the logical results of the 
"ransom for all!" that he "tasted death for every man." 
Admit the value of the precious blood as "a propitiation 
[satisfaction] for our sins [the Church's sins], and 
not for ours only, but also for the sins of the whole 
world," and thinking people will not be driven by the 
wholesale from their faith in it. 

But such an admission of the true value of the 
blood proves a future opportunity for knowledge and 
trial for the millions who have gone down into the 
great prison-house of death without knowledge and 
trial. As surely as the ransom was for all, so surely 
all must be brought to a knowledge of the truth soon 
or later— else, so far as the mass of mankind is concerned, 
Christ died in vain; for, surely, hundreds of 
millions died before the ransom was given, and other 
hundreds of millions have since died without knowledge 
of the only name given under heaven or amongst 
men whereby we must be saved. 

Let God and his Word be true! The sacrifice has 
been offered and accepted, the Church has been and is 
being blessed by it, and by and by, "in due time," it 
shall be testified to all;— and that will be the world's 
trial time, as this is the Church's. No Scripture can 
be found which limits the testimony and blessing resulting 
from the shedding of the precious blood to the 
present age or the present life. Quite to the contrary; 
—unless there be a future opportunity for the majority 
of our race, many precious promises of God will fail, 
including his promise and oath to Abraham,— "In thy 
seed shall all the families of the earth be blessed;" and 



our dear Redeemer will not be the "True Light which 
lighteth every man that cometh into the world." 

We too object to such a future probation as pantheists 
teach, and therefore can agree to protest No. 5. 
But we heartily believe in, and advocate as the only 
key to the harmony of the Bible, a future probation 
for all who have not had one in the present life;— because 
a probation for all was bought by the one sacrifice, 
given once for all at Calvary. 



R2153 : page 145 

THE SECRET OF A HAPPY DAY. 



Just to let thy Father do what he will; 

Just to know that he is true, and be still. 

Just to follow, hour by hour, as he leadeth; 

Just to draw the moment's power, as it needeth. 

Just to trust him, this is all. Then the day will surely be 

Peaceful, whatso'er befall, bright and blessed, calm and free. 

Just to let him speak to thee through his Word, 

Watching, that his voice may be clearly heard. 

Just to tell him everything, as it rises, 

And at once to him to bring all surprises. 

Just to listen, and to stay where you cannot miss his voice. 

This is all! and thus to-day, you communing, shall rejoice. 

Just to ask him what to do all the day, 

And to make you quick and true to obey. 

Just to know the needed grace he bestoweth, 

Every bar of time and place overfloweth. 

Just to take thy orders straight from the Master's own command. 

Blessed day! when thus we wait always at our Sovereign's hand. 

Just to recollect his love, always true; 

Always shining from above, always new. 

Just to recognize its light, all-enfolding; 

Just to claim its present might, all-upholding. 

Just to know it as thine own, that no power can take away; 

Is not this enough alone for the gladness of the day? 

Just to trust, and yet to ask guidance still; 

Take the training or the task, as he will. 

Just to take the loss or gain, as he sends it; 

Just to take the joy or pain, as he lends it. 

He who formed thee for his praise will not miss the gracious aim; 

So, to-day, and all thy days, shall be molded for the same. 

Just to leave in his dear hand little things, 
All we cannot understand, all that stings. 
Just to let him take the care sorely pressing; 



Finding all we let him bear changed to blessing. 
This is all! and yet the way marked by him who loves thee best: 
Secret of a happy day, secret of his promised rest. 
—Frances Ridley Havergal. 



R2154 : page 145 

IF YE DO THESE THINGS. 



"For if ye do these things, ye shall never fall; for so an entrance 
shall be ministered unto you abundantly into the everlasting 
kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ."— 2 Pet. 1:10,11. 

THIS statement of the Apostle Peter is suggestive 
of several important thoughts: (1) It indicates 
the possibility to the class addressed of "an abundant 
entrance into the everlasting kingdom of our Lord 
and Saviour Jesus Christ." This is the prize of the 
high calling of the overcoming saints of the Gospel 
age. True, when we consider its exceeding glory, 
faith is prone to stagger at the promise that, poor and 
imperfect though we be, God proposes in the ages to 
come to show the exceeding riches of his grace in his 

R2154 : page 146 

kindness toward us through Christ Jesus. (Eph. 2:7.) 
Nevertheless, such is the case: "unto us are given the 
exceeding great and precious promises, that by these 
we might be partakers of the divine nature, having escaped 
the corruption that is in the world through lust" 
—through the worldly desires, "the lust of the flesh, 
the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life."— 2 Pet. 1:4; 
1 John 2:16. 

These exceeding great and precious promises contemplate 
the adoption of these called ones by the great 
Sovereign of the whole universe as his sons and heirs; 
as joint-heirs with his only begotten Son, the heir of 
all things: they shall be with him where he is and behold 
his glory; and they shall put off this mortality, 
and, like him, who is "the express image of the Father's 
person," they shall be clothed with immortality. So 
shall they be forever with the Lord, and see him as he 
is; for they shall be like him. Having overcome the 
world, they shall sit with him in his Kingdom, even as 
he overcame and sat down with the Father in his 
Kingdom.— Rev. 3:21. 

"Fear not, little flock," says the prospective Bridegroom 
of the Church, "for it is your Father's good 
pleasure to give you the Kingdom," "for the Father 
himself loveth you, because ye have loved me and have 
believed that I came out from God." Nor will he give 



the Kingdom to his beloved grudgingly; for Peter says, 
"an entrance shall be ministered unto you abundantly:" 
there will be a glorious welcome, a joyous greeting and 
a coronation jubilee among all the heavenly hosts when 
the laurels of victory are placed upon the heads of 
all the overcoming soldiers of the cross, the heroes who 
nobly fought the good fight of faith— who kept the 
faith, fought the fight against the world, the flesh and 
the devil, and finished their course in faithfulness even 
unto death. 

All this abundance of grace and glory is the possible 
inheritance of even the weakest saint who, trusting 
not to his own ability to make his calling and election 
sure, humbly looks to God for strength from day 
to day to endure hardness as a good soldier. If any 
man attempts to do this in his own strength, he must 
surely fail; for the fiery trial that is to try every one 
will prove too much for the mind of the flesh; but God 
who worketh in the consecrated to will and to do his 
good pleasure, will so fortify and equip those who depend 
upon his grace, that, with the Psalmist, they can 
say, "It is God that girdeth me with strength. ...By 
thee I have run through a troop, and by my God have 
I leaped over a wall;" and with Paul, "I can do all 
things through Christ, who strengtheneth me."— Psa. 18:32,29; 
Phil. 4:13. 

(1) Let us not fear, then, to lay hold upon the exceeding 
great and precious promises when we are so fully 
assured that he who has begun the good work in us 

will finish it, if we let him. (Phil. 1:6.) "This is 

the victory that overcometh the world, even your 

faith"— not faith in ourselves; for we can have no confidence 

in the flesh. The poor, weak and faltering 

flesh does not warrant us in reposing confidence in its 

ability for the great responsibilities of soldiers of the 

cross. We must draw our supplies of wisdom and 

strength from above: they are not within us except as 

implanted there by the spirit of God. 

(2) We next notice that while Peter's words encouragingly 
indicate the possibility of the glorious inheritance 

to all who are called, there is also the implied 
possibility of failure to enter into it. There is an "if," 
a contingency, upon which the scales of divine judgment 
as to our worthiness or unworthiness of the inheritance 
must turn. And it is in view of this contingency 
that Paul urges all the called ones to great sobriety 
of mind and carefulness of conduct, saying, 
"Let him that thinketh he standeth take heed lest he 
fall;" and again, "Let us therefore fear lest, a promise 
being left us of entering into his rest, any of you should 
seem to come short of it." It is not enough, therefore, 
that we have consecrated ourselves to God as living 
sacrifices; that we have covenanted to follow in the footsteps 
of Jesus; for the consecration, the covenant, the 
promise, will avail nothing if we prove unfaithful to it, 
except to rise up in judgment against us. "Better is 



it that thou shouldest not vow, than that thou shouldest 
vow and not pay."— Eccl. 5:4,5. See also Deut. 23:21-23; 
Prov. 20:25; Heb. 10:38,39; Psa. 15; Luke 9:62; 
John 15:6; Acts 5:4,5. 

(3) Our attention is next drawn to what is implied 
in this expressed contingency— "If ye do these things." 
What things?— The reference is to the things mentioned 
in the preceding verses; viz., that with all diligence 
we add to our faith fortitude; and to fortitude knowledge; 
and to knowledge self-control, and to self-control 
patience; and to patience godliness; and to godliness 
brotherly kindness; and to brotherly kindness love." 

It is important to observe here that while all of 
these virtues are imperative requirements of those who 
would be esteemed of God as faithful, they are only 
of value as they are added to, or built upon, a foundation 
of faith— "Giving all diligence add to your faith," 
—your "precious faith," as described in verse 1. This 
faith is our abiding confidence in the divine plan of 
salvation, which centers in the redemption accomplished 
through the precious blood of Christ, who freely gave 
himself a ransom for all. No righteousness of our 
own without this foundation of faith can avail anything 
to commend us to God. All our works of righteousness 
must be built upon this faith. 

But is not faith in Christ sufficient unto salvation 

R2154 : page 147 

without the subsequent doing of any thing? To this 
the Scriptures plainly answer that a faith that Christ 
will save us in our sins— while we still love sin and do 
the works of sin— is a misplaced faith; for Christ never 
proposed to save us in our sins, but from our sins; and 
God is faithful and just to forgive sins and to cleanse 
from all unrighteousness those who come unto him by 
Christ,— through faith in his shed blood (sacrificed 
life) as the propitiation or satisfaction for our sins, and 
in his cleansing power. "He that saith, I know him 
[Christ, as my Lord and Savior], and keepeth not his 
commandments [to do the works of righteousness, and 
to bring forth the fruits of repentance of sins], is a liar," 
says the Apostle John, "and the truth is not in him." 
(1 John 2:4.) Therefore the Apostle Paul also exhorts 
believers, saying, "Beloved, work out your own 
salvation with fear and trembling; for it is God who 
worketh in you both to will and to do of his good 
pleasure."— Phil. 2:12,13. 

It was God that provided for us the redemption 
that is in Christ Jesus, and it is God that has drawn us 
unto himself and that has promised us all needed grace 
to walk in the paths of righteousness; and more, even 
to follow in the footprints of Jesus in the way of self-sacrifice. 
While, therefore, with fear and trembling, 
—with great carefulness— we endeavor to work out our 
salvation, it is our privilege always to realize the promised 



grace to help in every time of need, and to be confident 
that our best efforts toward righteousness are acceptable 

R2155 : page 147 

to God when presented through the merit of the 
righteousness of Christ, imputed to us by faith. 

Having this foundation, then, and "having escaped 
the corruption that is in the world through lust" 
—through the desires of the flesh— and having by faith 
laid hold also on the "exceeding great and precious 
promises" of being made partakers of the divine nature 
and joint-heirs with Christ of his Kingdom and glory, 
and being anxious to make our "calling and election 
sure," let us consider these additions to our faith, 
which, if possessed and continuously cultivated, are 
the assurance that we shall never fall, and that an 
abundant entrance into the Kingdom shall be granted 
to us. 

The first addition (virtue) is fortitude or strength 
of character in righteousness. This implies the cultivation 
of the strictest integrity in our dealings, both with 
God and with our fellow men,— scrupulous honesty, 
justice and truth being the only standard. The Psalmist 
clearly defines it thus, saying, "He that walketh 
uprightly, and worketh righteousness, and speaketh the 
truth in his heart. He that backbiteth not with his 
tongue, nor doeth evil to his neighbor, nor taketh up 
a reproach against his neighbor; in whose eyes a vile 
person is condemned; but he honoreth them that fear 
the Lord. He that sweareth to his own hurt, and 
changeth not [i.e., who will not violate a contract 
found to be unfavorable to him]. He that putteth not 
out his money to usury [taking unjust advantage of 
the necessities of others], nor taketh reward against 
the innocent. He that doeth these things shall never 
be moved." (Psa. 15.) Such a one is a virtuous man, 
a man of fortified or strong character. 

The second addition is knowledge— the knowledge 
of God and of his righteous will concerning us (revealed 
through his Word, by the holy spirit). Neglect of 
this divinely appointed means of knowledge is equivalent 
to setting up our own imperfect standard of righteousness 
and ignoring the divine standard. It is therefore 
important that we give all diligence to the study 
of the divine oracles that we may be fortified in faith 
and works accordingly. 

The third addition, self-control, is one of the most 
important elements of good character. He that ruleth his 
own spirit is greater than he that taketh a city, is the counsel 
of the wise man; and many a victorious general has 
yet to learn to conquer and control himself. Self-control 
has to do with all our sentiments, thoughts, tastes, 
appetites, labors, pleasures, sorrows and hopes. Its 
cultivation, therefore, means a high order of character-development. 
Self-control, accompanied by faith, fortitude, 



knowledge from on high, implies increased zeal 

and activity in divine things and increased moderation 

in earthly things, in judgment, in conduct, in the regulation 

of temporal affairs, etc. "Let your moderation 

be known unto all men." 

The fourth addition is patience. Time is a very 
necessary element in the process of perfecting every 
good thing. The fruit hastily plucked is the unripe, 
hard, sour, bitter fruit. Time, as well as pruning and 
fertilizing and cultivating and shower and sunshine, 
is necessary to the ripe and luscious fruitage that delights 
the taste. So it is also with the fruitage of 
plans and purposes, of education and of grace. God's 
deep designs work out slowly, not only in his great 
universal government, but also in the hearts and minds 
of his intelligent creatures. God is operating all things 
according to his own will along the lines of the fixed principles 
of his wise and righteous laws— physical, moral 
and intellectual. To be impatient in any case is foolishly 
to insist upon having the unripe, hasty, sour, 
bitter fruitage, which, if the Lord grant it, will prove 
a sickening penalty for the impatience that demanded 
it. "Let patience have her perfect work," wait God's 
time: "Rest in the Lord, and wait patiently for him." 
Wait the Lord's time and way and the indications of 
his will in every case, both with regard to ourselves 
and others and "they that put their trust in him shall 
never be confounded." 

R2155 : page 148 

Faith, fortitude and knowledge prepare God's 
people to have patience with every effort toward good, 
however weak,— patience with the poor, blinded world, 
with the "babes in Christ," with the slow and stupid, 
with the excitable and blundering, with the over-confident 
Peters and the skeptical Thomases. But to have 
patience or fellowship with "the unfruitful works of 
darkness" and sin, is the perversion of this grace; for 
these, wherever found, should be promptly and sharply 
reproved and rebuked according to their evil intent; 
with patience, nevertheless, toward the repentant 
prodigals, and always with meekness. 

It is noticeable that the Lord seems to forewarn 
his people of great need of patience in the "harvest" 
or end of this age: patience toward fellow men and patience, 
in the warfare against evil, and in waiting for 
the Lord's time and method of setting right the wrongs 
of "the present evil world." The poor world, lacking 
faith, fortitude, knowledge of the divine plan and 
patience will fall a ready prey to unrest and anarchy in 
the near future. The Word of the Lord to his people 
is,— "Ye have need of patience." 

The fifth addition is godliness, godlikeness, piety, 
—that devout, controlling reverence for God which 
yields a hearty, cheerful, loving conformity to his will 



—fervency of spirit in serving the Lord. This is a 
later development and vital element in the Christian 
character. Piety, godliness, springs spontaneously 
from appreciative and grateful hearts, whose delight is 
in the law of the Lord, in meditation upon his precepts 
and promises, and in secret communion with God in 
prayer and praise. Loving, cheerful activity must result 
from such an inner life; for out of the abundance 
of the heart the mouth speaketh, and the whole being 
is quickened to new life. Only those who have a living 
faith in God, and who are fortifying their characters 
against evil and growing in knowledge and self-control 
and patience are prepared to appreciate the grandeur 
of the divine character; and only such are really energized 
by a desire for God-likeness. 

The sixth addition is brotherly kindness, which of 
necessity grows out of godliness. As God-like-ness 
presupposes the other graces mentioned, so its development 
implies an appreciation of divine justice and beneficence, 
and will broaden and deepen our sentiments 
toward all the well-disposed, however imperfect, and 
especially will it enlarge our hearts to all who are of 
the household of faith— "the brethren." 

The seventh addition is charity, love,— the bond 
of perfectness which unites all the other graces, and as 
a name stands for them all. 

Love to God alone is not the full manifestation of 
this grace; nor can there be, according to the teachings 
of God's Word, a sincere love for God, without a 
corresponding love to man: "If a man say, I love God," 
says the Apostle John, "and hateth his brother, he is a 
liar, for he that loveth not his brother whom he hath 
seen, how can he love God whom he hath not seen?" 
(1 John 4:20.) And Jesus said, "By this shall all 
men know that ye are my disciples, if ye have love one 
to another."— John 13:35. 

It is the abounding of these graces of character 
added to our faith in Christ as our Redeemer and Savior 
that insures the soul against the possibility of falling: 
"If ye do these things, ye shall never fall." The contingency 
is not in the doing of these things perfectly, and 
regardless of the righteousness of Christ to cover our 
transgressions and compensate for our daily shortcomings; 
but if, added to our faith in the imputed righteousness 
of Christ, we have cultivated all these graces 
to the extent of our ability, we shall not fall. When we 
have done all that we can do, we are still unprofitable 
servants, not daring to trust in our own righteousness, 
but in the ample robe which is ours by faith in 
Christ, while, with consistent "diligence," we work 
out our own salvation with fear and trembling, knowing 
that the righteousness of Christ is only applied to 
such as desire to forsake sin and to pursue that "holiness 
without which no man shall see the Lord."— 
Heb. 12:14. 



R2153 : page 148 

ENOCH, ELIJAH AND THE SENTENCE. 



THE ANSWER to the following query may interest 
others than the inquirer:— 

"Since 'death passed upon all men,' because of 
Adam's sin; and since all had to be redeemed before 
they could escape from that death sentence, how came 
it that Enoch and Elijah escaped from it before the redemption-price 
was paid?" 

We answer, that they did not escape, but were 
still under the sentence of death until the ransom was 
paid. The execution of the sentence was deferred in 
their cases, and their lives prolonged; but they would 
eventually have died had they not been redeemed. 
After father Adam was sentenced he lived nearly a 
thousand years, but under his particular sentence he 
could not have lived more than a thousand years; because 
the sentence read, "In the day that thou eatest 
thereof, dying thou shalt die." And since "a day 
with the Lord is as a thousand years" (2 Pet. 3:8), 
his death was fixed to take place within that "day." 
But God left the way open to make types of Enoch and 
Elijah, and hence, so far as they and the remainder of 

R2153 : page 149 

the human family were concerned, no limit of time for 
the execution of the sentence was fixed. If, therefore, 
it pleased God to have it so, they might have continued 
to live for thousands of years, under the death 
sentence, without dying. In Elijah's case, altho he 
was translated, it is not said that he did not die afterward. 
His translation made a type, as we have seen 
(MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. II., Chapter viii.), and he 
may have died and been buried afterward, unknown 
to men, as was Moses.— Deut. 34:6. 

But with Enoch the case was different, as we are 
expressly told that he did not die. In his case, therefore, 
it is evident that the execution of the sentence 
was deferred, but there is no evidence that it was annulled. 
He, therefore, remained under that sentence 
of death until he was ransomed by our Lord's death. 
As a member of the fallen race, he was an imperfect 
man, and altho redeemed, and altho a restitution to 
human perfection is provided for him in the divine plan, 
we are not certain that he is yet a perfect man. For 
the Apostle seems to teach that none of those whose 
faithfulness was attested before the Gospel call was 
made will be made perfect until after Christ and his 
bride are made perfect. He says (Heb. 11:39,40), 



after enumerating many of the ancient worthies, Enoch 

included, verse 5, "These all, having obtained witness 

through faith, received not the promise [everlasting 

life, etc.], God having provided some better thing [priority 

of time as well as of honor and position] for us 

[the Gospel Church], that they [the ancient worthies] 

without us [apart from us] should not be MADE PERFECT.' 

And since the Church, the body of Christ, 

has not yet been perfected in glory, it is but a reasonable 

inference that wherever Enoch is and however 

happy and comfortable he may be, he is not yet made 

a perfect man, and will not be until all the members of 

the body of Christ have first been made perfect in the 

divine nature. 

As to where God took Enoch, we may not know, 
since God has not revealed that. Should we speculate 
as to whether God took him to some other world, and 
for what purpose, it would be but an idle speculation. 
We may not be wise above what is written. We may 
be certain, however, that Enoch did not go to heaven 
—the spiritual state or condition— for such is the record: 
"No man hath ascended up to heaven but he that came 
down from heaven— even the Son of Man." (John 3:13.) 
Elijah is said to have ascended to heaven; but, 
from our Lord's statement above quoted, that must be 
understood to refer to the air— as, when it is said that 
"the fowl fly in the midst of heaven:" it certainly cannot 
refer to the heavenly condition, which flesh and 
blood cannot enter nor even see without a change of 
nature, which change has been promised only to the 
Gospel Church. 

Understanding, as above shown, that Enoch was 
preserved from actual dissolution in death— altho, already 
under that sentence, legally dead (Rom. 5:12; 
Matt. 8:22) until the ransom-price for all was paid by 
our Lord's death— we can see that there will now be 
no necessity for his dissolution, but that when the due 
time shall have come he may be fully and completely 
restored from even the measure of human imperfection 
he had inherited to full, perfect manhood. 

So, too, it will be with those of the world who will 
be living when the "times of restitution" are fully 
ushered in: it will not be necessary for them to go into 
the tomb. For altho they are already legally dead, in 
that condemnation (or sentence) to "death passed upon 
all men," yet their penalty has also been legally met 
by another, Christ. He now holds the judgment against 
all, but graciously offers to cancel it entirely for each 
one who will accept restitution to life and perfection on 
the conditions of the New Covenant. 

As during this Gospel age the Church, altho once, 
under sentence, they were dead in trespasses and sins, 
are reckoned as freed from condemnation, as justified, 
and as having passed from death unto life when they 
accept Christ's merit under the New Covenant, so it 
will be in the Millennial age with those of the world 



who, upon learning it, accept God's offer of life. They 
also will be reckoned as having passed from death unto 
life— as tho they had been utterly dead and then been 
awakened. So complete is the reckoning that those 
who then sin wilfully, and forfeit their reckoned life, 
die the second death, altho they all may not actually 
have died before. And indeed so too it is now with 
the Gospel Church— if after we, through faith in Christ, 
are reckoned as no longer dead, but alive toward God 
through Jesus Christ, we were to sin wilfully, intentionally, 
we would thus bring upon ourselves again (a 
second time) the full penalty of sin, death, and this 
would be the second death. 

But while there are such similarities between the 
Lord's methods now and in the next age for justification 
to life, or passing from death unto life reckonedly, 
there are very different arrangements for the two ages 
or the actual passing out of death into life, when the 
trial of each is finished. The Church of the Gospel 
age walks by faith entirely, and not by sight. Her 
trial occurs before the actual setting up of the Kingdom, 
and hence each one, as he finishes his course, 
must wait for the crown of life. They "all die like 
men," and the world recognizes no difference. But 
while they actually die the same as other men, God 
keeps up the reckoned difference between those who 
have accepted his offer of life and become his children 
and others who have not done so. Hence in Scripture 

R2153 :page 150 

believers are not said to be dead, but to be sleeping 

until the "morning," when, according to God's prearranged 

plan, such shall have actually and in full measure 

the life now reckoned as theirs under God's covenant 

in Christ. Thus our Lord spoke of Lazarus and 

others as sleeping, and the Apostle's writings refer to 

"those who sleep in Jesus." And the Scriptures, 

R2154:page 150 

throughout, preserve the same sentiment, saying,— 
"Weeping may endure for a night, but joy cometh in 
the morning;" "I shall be satisfied when I awake in 
thy likeness," etc. The only exceptions to this "sleeping" 
are particularly mentioned by the Apostle, when 
he says, "We shall not all sleep, altho we must all be 
changed." Those living in the time when our Lord 
begins to take his great power and reign, altho they all 
must die, because consecrated even unto death, yet they 
will not "sleep," their "change" to spirit-being coming 
in the moment of dying. And in this blessed time 
(according to the evidences presented in MILLENNIAL 
DAWN, VOL. II. and III.) we believe we have been living 
since April, 1878 A.D. What a blessing this is we 
find stated by our Lord,— "Blessed are the dead 



who die in the Lord from henceforth— yea, saith the 
spirit, they rest from their labors [from weariness, etc.], 
but their works [not discontinued in a sleep of death] 
follow with them."— Rev. 14:13. 

But during the Millennial age it will be somewhat 
different. Those who accept the New Covenant will 
no more get the perfect life instantly than we do now. 
They will get it at the end of the Millennial age, as 
we get it at the end of the Gospel age. Yet not just 
the same; for the Gospel Church, as we have seen, has 
waited in the sleep of death for the close of the age and 
the reward of the perfect life, while the faithful of the 
Millennial age, instead of dying, will gradually improve 
in health— mental, moral and physical— until perfection 
will be reached by all such, at the close of the 
Millennial age. Meantime, those who sin wilfully 
against full light and full ability will be accounted to 
have committed the sin unto death; and death to such, 
even if born in the Millennium, will be the second 
death. 



R2155 : page 150 

"BECAUSE JESUS WAS NOT YET GLORIFIED. 



A READER inquires for the evidence that our Lord 

Jesus has yet been glorified as we have taught 

in MILLENNIAL DAWN. He says, "From the Song of Solomon (2:10) 

and other places I gather the thought 

that he (our Beloved) is just as anxious for the marriage 

as we (the Church) are;" and quotes from Rom. 8:17 

and Col. 3:4, "glorified together," as proof that 

our Lord Jesus will not be glorified until the Church 

is completed and glorified. He refers to Heb. 1:6,— 

"When he bringeth again the first begotten into the 

world he saith— Let all the angels of God worship 

him," and holds that it will be fulfilled at the second 

advent of Christ. 

We reply, that the matter is settled beyond all 
peradventure by the text which we use as the caption of 
this article,— "The holy spirit was not yet given, because 
Jesus was not yet glorified." So says the inspired 
Apostle. (John 7:39.) Hence, when, about fifty days 
afterward (after our Lord had finished his sacrifice and 
had been raised from the dead by the Father's power, 
and had ascended up on high there to appear in the 
presence of God on our behalf), the holy spirit was 
poured out upon the Church, at Pentecost, it became a 
sure indication that at that time our Lord had been 
glorified. Notice this point distinctly. If the holy 
spirit was not given before, because Jesus was not yet 
glorified, it PROVES that when it was given, a little 



later, he had been glorified. 
R2156 : page 150 

Come now, and see the picture of his own glorification, 
given to us by our Lord, through his servant 
John. (Rev. 1:1.) It is recorded in Rev. 5. He 
that sits upon the throne is Jehovah. The scroll in 
his right hand is his plan for human redemption, sealed 
from all until the one "worthy" to carry out to completion 
its details should be found and proved "worthy." 
The inquiry, "Who is worthy to open the book [scroll] 
and to loose the seals thereof?" had long been made: 
for four thousand years, from the giving of the promise 
that the seed of the woman should bruise the serpent's 
head, it had been the query— Who shall be esteemed, 
by Jehovah God, to be worthy to perform his gracious 
purposes, and thus be honored above all others as the 
Servant (messenger) of the New Covenant of grace? 

When silence prevailed, and none was found worthy 
either in heaven or on earth (representing the condition 
of things prior to the first advent), John began 
to weep, saying to himself: Alas! tho God has some 
gracious and wise plans for the welfare of his creatures, 
we may never know them, because none is found 
worthy to know or to execute them. So it was that 
even our Lord Jesus, prior to the finishing of his sacrifice, 
as he then declared, did not know all about the 
Father's plans, and times, and seasons.— Mark 13:32. 

But John's tears were soon dried, when the angel 
declared, "Weep not, for the Lion of the tribe of Judah 
hath prevailed [hath overcome, so as to be accepted 
and declared worthy] to open the scroll and to loose 
the seals thereof." We know well who is meant; and 
the further unfolding of the panoramic vision leaves 
no doubt. Jesus our Lord is symbolized by a slain 

R2156 :page 151 

lamb restored to life, and to him was given the wonderful 
scroll which represents the divine plans, with 
authority and power to accomplish them all. Then 
(after his resurrection and ascension to the right hand of 
the Father) he was glorified and received a name above 
every name; then all the angels of God worshiped him; 
then their thousands of thousands and myriads of 
myriads sang a new song, saying, "Thou art worthy 
to take the scroll and to loose the seals; because thou 
wast slain, and didst redeem* unto God with thy blood 
out of every tribe and tongue and people and nation." 
"Worthy is the Lamb that was slain, to receive the 
power, and wealth, and wisdom, and strength, and 
honor, and glory, and blessing." And when to him was 
thus given a name above every name, all the holy ones 
bowed and offered sweet incense of prayer and homage; 
because God had honored him by delivering to him 



the scroll of wisdom, and the power and authority to 
execute all of its provisions. He is worthy; and the 
Apostle declares that it is now, therefore, God's will 
that all "should honor the Son even as they honor the 
Father. "--Acts 5:31; Phil. 2:9-11; John 5:23. 

Since his glorification the Lamb has been breaking 
the seven seals and thus opening the divine plan before 
men and angels, and we now living are privileged to 
share this knowledge more abundantly than others,— 
because, the last seal having been broken, the scroll is 
open to all who follow the Lamb in love and obedience 
and meekness; and "the mystery of God is [about] 
finished."— Rev. 10:7. 

Further evidence on this subject is unnecessary; 
the testimony that our Lord was glorified, and invested 
with honor and power and dominion at his ascension, 
is overwhelming. His promise to his followers is that, 
as he overcame and was glorified to share the Father's 
throne (glory, dignity, power), even so they, if faithful, 
will be glorified to share his throne (glory, honor). 

The sense of Heb. 1:4-6 (Diaglott) is that, when 
God had glorified Christ, mankind in general knew it 
not, but when, as God's messenger, he is again presented 
to men, at his second advent, it will be in full 
demonstration that all the angels of God (all of God's 
holy ones) worship, reverence and obey him. And in 
the expression, we shall be "glorified together" the 
word "together" does not mean simultaneously, at the 
same instant, but harmoniously, to share the same 
glory. In proof of this, note the context (see Diaglott); 
the suffering "with him" or "together" does 
not mean that we suffer at the same time, but that we 
share the same kind of suffering, for the same cause of 
faithfulness to God, and that in due time we shall be 
glorified "together;" i.e., in the sense of sharing the 
same glory wherewith our Lord has already been 
glorified. 

This glorification or instalment in honor and power 
should not, however, be confounded with the change 
which occurred at our Lord's resurrection; by which 
he was raised a spiritual being of the highest order, the 
divine nature. As the human body was termed a "body 
of humiliation," so his spirit body is termed "a glorious 
body." This, however, has nothing whatever to do 
with the glory or majesty of office to which our Lord 
was introduced fifty days later, when "he ascended up 
on high" and was received as a sharer of the Father's 
throne. The latter glory and majesty is shortly to be 
made manifest to men,— "The glory of the Lord shall 
be revealed, and all flesh shall see it together." But 
they will not see the Lord's glorious person, as our 
Lord declared before he died,— "Yet a little while, and 
the world seeth me no more." 

Likewise the Church, the "overcomers," his 
"body," his "bride," will in their resurrection change 
be granted spiritual and glorious bodies (1 Cor. 15:42-44) 



and afterward "see him [the Lord] as he is" 

and be caused to share his glory, to sit with him in his 

throne. 



*01dest MS., with evident propriety, omits us, since 
the angels were not redeemed. 



R2157 :page 151 

OUR STEWARDSHIP. 



"Let a man so account of us as of the ministers of Christ, and 
stewards of the mysteries of God. Moreover, it is required in 
stewards that a man be found faithful."— 1 Cor. 4:1,2. 

WE HAVE heretofore called attention to the 

fact that every member of the anointed body, 

the Church of Christ, is anointed to preach the gospel, 

the good tidings of the Kingdom of peace. See our 

commission as recorded by Isaiah (61:1-3) and quoted 

by our Lord in partial application to himself, the Head 

of the anointed body. (Luke 4:16-21.) Paul, in the 

above text, points to the same thing, having special 

reference to himself and Apollos and Cephas (Peter), 

and a general reference to all who are Christ's. (1 Cor. 3:21-23.) 

He would have us each remember that we 

are the divinely commissioned and ordained ministers 

(servants) of Christ, as Jesus also taught, saying to 

all who are branches in the true Vine,— "Ye have not 

chosen me, but I have chosen you, and ordained you, 

that ye should go and bring forth fruit." (John 15:16.) 

He also said, "Ye are the light of the world" 

and "the salt of the earth." 

R2157 :page 152 

The presence of this anointed body in the world is 
therefore for a purpose, a benevolent purpose toward, 
and in the interest of, the world, even in the present life, 
tho their great and most successful ministry will be in 
the age to come, when exalted to power and great 
glory as kings and priests unto God. Tho the world 
at present knows not God and is not subject to the law 
of God, nevertheless, God in his abounding grace so 
loved the world that he gave his only begotten Son to 
redeem them, and by and by, under the righteous reign 
of his Millennial Kingdom, he will restore and bless 
them, and the good news of this redemption and the 
coming Kingdom he would have testified to them even 
now, as he says,— "This gospel of the kingdom shall 



be preached in all the world for a witness unto all nations, 

and then shall the end [of this age] come" (Matt. 24: 14); 

and in the coming age the fruit of this testimony 

will appear. The same testimony also serves the 

further ordained purpose of gathering out of the world 

a people for his name (Acts 15:14), to be associated 

with Christ in the great work of the Kingdom, of restoring 

"all things" and blessing "all the families 

of the earth." Being anointed with the holy spirit, 

and ordained as ministers of Christ and stewards of the 

mysteries of God, it is not merely our mission to live 

harmless lives— simply to abstain from violence, dishonesty, 

slander, etc.— so that men can say of us that 

we never abused or cheated or ill-used them. This 

negative goodness is, of course, one side of a righteous 

character, and one without which no man is righteous; 

but more, much more, than this is required of a steward 

of God. There must be a positive, as well as a negative, 

goodness. This we find exemplified in the case 

of our Lord Jesus, who was not only "holy, harmless, 

undefiled and separate from sinners," but who also 

"went about doing good" and was abundant in good 

works. -Acts 10:38; 2:22. 

It is this positive element of character and the 
recognized obligation to activity that are specially implied 
in the term "steward," while the appointment by 
the Lord to such an office is also a recognition by him 
of those elements of a righteous character without which 
no one is eligible to the office. A steward, therefore, 
is not a person of merely harmless character, or one 
who is contented carefully to fold away in a napkin 
the talents entrusted to his care, so that the Lord, on 
his return, may find his own just as he left it, but he 
is one who makes a diligent and business-like appropriation 
of his one or many talents in the Master's 
service, so that, at the time of reckoning, the Lord 
may not only find his own, but also as large an increase 
as possible, in evidence of the zeal and faithfulness of 
his appointed steward. 

The Apostle also says, "Moreover, it is required in 
stewards that a man be found faithful. Thus we see 
that the entire body of Christ is called, not to indolent, 
self-complacent ease, but to diligent and enterprising 
activity; and not in the spirit of a hireling, with eye-service 
as men pleasers, but with the intelligent, loving 
interest and zeal of sons and heirs of God, of ministers 
of Christ, and stewards of the mysteries of God. It is 
indeed "required" of stewards to be thus active in 
the divine service, and the Lord will not count us faithful 
if we simply be good and make little or no effort to 
do good; and even he who has only one talent is not excusable 
in folding that one talent away in a napkin, or 
in hiding it in the earth. (Matt. 25:24-28; Luke 19:20-24.) 
It is, therefore, most important for every one 
to consider what are his talents, how they are employed, 
and whether his course of service is day by day 



approved of God as faithful. 

In thus endeavoring to view ourselves as God 
views us, it is important that we remember that not 
only the great talents, such as large ability, mental or 
physical, large opportunities of time and circumstance, 
or command of means, are noted by the Lord, but also 
that the small things are never overlooked by him. 
Call to mind the Lord's teaching that even a cup of 
cold water given to a disciple because he is a disciple 
shall not lose its reward; that the poor widow's two 
mites were more highly esteemed than the larger offerings 
of the rich; and when we thus perceive that the 
Lord is judging according to the thoughts and intents 
of the heart, the humblest saint can see ample opportunities 
to prove himself a faithful steward. 

This also calls to mind the statement of the Apostle 
Paul (1 Cor. 12:22,17-19), "Those members of 
the body which seem to be more feeble are necessary." 
How true! As in the illustration, by far the larger 
proportion of the members are such; and their office 
in the body is just as necessary as that of the more notable 
members, for, "If the whole body were an eye, 
where were the hearing? If the whole were hearing, 
where were the smelling? But now hath God set the 
members, every one of them, in the body, as it hath 
pleased him. And if they were all one member, where 
were the body?" 

What a blessed thought to every one who realizes 
himself a member of the body of Christ, that he has 
a place and an office in the body to which God himself 
has wisely appointed him, and that that place and office 
belong to no one else. It may now seem a humble 
place, but it is nevertheless an important, a necessary 
place; and in filling that place as a wise and faithful 
steward he is approved of God, and by and by will be 
exalted to his Kingdom and glory. 

We know of some of these dear saints in the obscure 
places of the Lord's vineyard, quietly and lovingly 
doing with their might what their hands or heads or 
hearts find to do, and doing it so bravely, so nobly and 
so well; and yet in their humility they are apparently 
all unconscious of the halo of that beauty of holiness 
they are shedding around them to the honor of him 
whose name they bear. Praise God for all these evidences 
of his grace and these fruits of his training and 
discipline! They are lights in dark places, tho generally, 
as in the case of our Lord, the darkness comprehends 
it not. Yet, nevertheless, there is produced by 
these lights an effect which men feel and which God 
will not overlook. M. F. RUSSELL. 



R2158 :page 153 

THE CONFERENCE AT JERUSALEM. 



-MAY23.-ACTS 15:1-6,22-29.- 

"Through the grace of the Lord Jesus Christ 
we shall be saved, even as they."— Acts 15:11. 

CIRCUMCISION was given to Abraham and 
his posterity as a sign or mark by which they 
attested faith in the divine promises. It was obligatory 
upon every Jew who would maintain his relationship 
to the divine promises, and it is still obligatory upon 
that nation. (Gen. 17:14.) We are not to forget, however, 
that a Jew, no less than a Gentile, is reckoned as losing 
earthly nationality in becoming a Christian. To all 
such, "old things pass away, all things become new." 
They are thenceforth "new creatures" in Christ Jesus, 
members of the "holy nation." 

Inasmuch as circumcision in the flesh as a mark 
in the flesh had been observed for over eighteen 
centuries by all recognized as God's people, it should 
not surprise us to find that some of the early Christians, 
previously Jews, concluded that it was still obligatory 
upon all who had become children of God. All 
the broad distinctions between the Law Covenant and 
the New Covenant were not clearly distinguished at 
first,— even the apostles appear for a time not to have 
distinguished clearly on all points. Nevertheless, the 
Lord had held them, as the special guides of the new 
dispensation, and had prevented their making any declaration 
on the subject, until in his due time the matter 
was brought clearly to their attention; and then they 
were guided aright. 

The Apostle Paul seems to have been the first to 
get a broadly comprehensive view of the lengths and 
breadths and heights and depths of the New Covenant 
provisions; and we are not to forget that he was probably 
helped miraculously to this clearness of perception 
by being granted "visions and revelations" more than 
all the others. Barnabas, his companion in the missionary 
tour, was naturally the first to share this 
knowledge, and was evidently in full sympathy with 
the Apostle Paul in resisting the teachings of certain 
Jews who attempted to Judaize the erstwhile Gentiles 
who chiefly constituted the Antioch Church. That 
that Church was in good spiritual health is evidenced 
by the fact that they were anxious to have the truth, 
whatever it might be. Accordingly they requested 
that Paul and Barnabas and certain of their company 
might consult with the apostles and elders at Jerusalem 
respecting the propriety of circumcision and the 
general observance of the Mosaic law on the part of 
those who were not Israelites by birth. And this plan 
was followed. 

It was now nearly twenty years since our Lord's 
resurrection; and as a result of the efforts put forth by 
believers, Christians were now to be found in little 



groups throughout Asia-Minor and Syria. The brethren 
made use of the journey to Jerusalem as an opportunity 
to refresh the hearts of God's people in the various 
cities enroute, and these fellow Christians in turn 
gladly entertained them as members of the Lord's 
body;— setting a good example of hospitality. 

Arrived at Jerusalem, they were warmly welcomed 
by the apostles and friends of the truth who had heard 
much concerning their missionary journey and its good 
results. Evidently, before they got to a statement of 
the real object of their visit, a class similar to those 
who had gone down to Antioch took exceptions to the 
method which the brethren had used amongst the Gentiles. 
They probably inquired, Were all the believing 
Gentiles whom you evangelized commanded to be circumcised, 
and instructed that they should keep the law 
of Moses? This opened up the question at once, and 
led to the announcement that the settlement of this 
question was the very object of their visit. Accordingly 
a council of the apostles and elders was called. 

Verses 7-21 give probably but a small portion of 
the discussion. It would seem that the question, What 
is the responsibility of converts amongst the Gentiles 
toward the law of Moses? had never come up for consideration 
previously, and the apostles, it would appear, 
were without very positive convictions until they 
began to discuss the subject. Peter, one of the oldest 
of the disciples, and a man of strong character, pointed 
out that God had made choice of him as the one 
who should be first to open the gospel door to the Gentiles; 
how Cornelius was the first of these converts, 
and how God poured out the holy spirit upon him and 
thus recognized him as a son and joint-heir with Christ, 
while as yet he was uncircumcised, thus proving that 
circumcision was not essential to divine reconciliation 
and sonship in the household of faith under the New 
Covenant. He doubtless also called attention to the 
fact that our Lord, who instructed them to teach all 
nations and to baptise those who believed, gave no instructions 
in reference to circumcision or any of the 
commands of the Mosaic law. He argued, therefore, 
that they had no right to put upon the Gentiles, as a 
yoke of bondage, the law of Moses, which God had 
not put upon them, but only upon the Jews, and which 
the Jews found it impossible to bear, and from which 
they (believing Jews) had to be liberated through the 
merit of Christ. 

Then Paul and Barnabas told how God had greatly 
blessed their ministry amongst the Gentiles, performing 
many miracles, etc., and in every way attesting 
his blessing upon their work; and yet that work 
had nothing in it respecting obligation to Moses' law or 

R2158 : page 154 

God's command to Abraham and his seed— circumcision. 



James, our Lord's brother, was the president or 
chairman of the meeting, and after hearing the foregoing 
coincided with Peter, Paul and Barnabas, adding 
to the argument by citing from the prophets evidences 
(1) that the Gentiles would be received into 
divine favor and (2) that the reception of the Gentiles 
was not to make of them Jews, but that, on the contrary, 
God had certain blessed provisions for the Jews 
to be fulfilled subsequently,— "After this, I will return 
and build again the tabernacle of David which is fallen 
down." Since Israel is to be recognized in the future 
by the Lord as distinct from the Gentiles, it follows 
that the particular national mark which distinguishes 
Jews from Gentiles was not to be abolished,— was 
not to be made general amongst Gentiles, even after 
they believed and became God's people. 

The results of the conference were satisfactory to 
all present, and it was decided to send a statement of 
the results to the Antioch Church, both by writing and 
orally by Judas and Silas. 

Probably only the substance of the letter is given 
in the brief recorded statement; but it is sufficient to 
show clearly that those who claim that the apostles 
were confused upon the subject so as almost to make a 
split in the Church, are greatly mistaken, for in so 
many words they positively declare that those who 
went out from them and troubled the Church at Antioch, 
almost unsettling their faith and peace with the 
statement, "Ye must be circumcised and keep the law," 
were not representatives of the apostles, and had received 
no such commandment or teaching from them. 
It is refreshing and strengthening to our faith to note 
that the Lord's promise, specially to bless and use the 
apostles and keep them from error in their teaching, 
was remarkably fulfilled, as in this case. Our Lord's 
words to them were, "Whatsoever ye shall bind on 
earth shall be bound in heaven, and whatsoever ye 
shall loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven;" in other 
words, I will so particularly direct you that you will 
make no mistakes in respect to what you will command 
and in respect to what you will forbid. 

The statement, "It seemed good to the holy spirit 
and to us," should not be lightly supposed to signify 
that the apostles "guessed at" the mind of the spirit, 
nor that they put their own judgment on a par with 
that of the holy spirit. We are to remember that they 
had special gifts of the spirit which guided them into 
the understanding of the Lord's will, and they merely 
assert here that not only was it the guidance of the 
holy spirit, but that they themselves were so in sympathy 
that they rejoiced that the holy spirit had not 
put the bondage of the law upon the Gentile converts. 

The Christians at Antioch were already well instructed 
concerning the terms of the New Covenant, 
faith and the various added virtues and graces presented 
to us in the Pauline epistles. Such matters were 



not entered into by the council at Jerusalem nor referred 

to in the letter which they wrote in reply. The 

inquiry was merely respecting the obligation of the 

converts to be circumcised and keep the other features 

of the Mosaic law. The answer ignored every feature 

of that law, except four points; and the first three of 

these were mentioned no doubt as a basis of common 

fellowship between those who had been Jews and those 

who had been Gentiles; namely, (1) abstaining from 

meats that had been offered in sacrifice to idols; (2) abstaining 

from animal food that had not been killed after 

the manner of the Jews; (3) abstaining from the 

eating of blood. It would be almost impossible for 

those who had been reared as Jews to ignore these three 

points, and if the converts from the Gentiles did not 

observe them it would be a constant barrier to their 

social intercourse. Furthermore, the observance of 

the first restriction would be a benefit to those who 

were coming out of Gentile darkness, in that it would 

break them off from old customs which might be injurious. 

It was the custom among Gentiles at that time 

that much of the meat sold in their markets should 

first be offered in sacrifice to some idol. The Apostle 

Paul shows, however (1 Cor. 8:4), that, as an idol is 

nothing, the offering of the meat in the presence of 

nothing could do no harm to those who were able to 

understand the situation aright; but to others it might 

seem like sacrilege. He therefore advised the Church 

to abstain from eating meat offered to idols, lest it 

R2159 : page 154 

should make a brother to offend. The restriction as to 
the method of killing animals was that it should not be 
by strangulation, which would leave the blood in the 
veins, but by the Jewish method of bleeding them to 
death, which extracts the blood. Abstinence from the 
eating of blood in any form has probably also a sanitary 
reason back of it, in addition to a typical significance; 
for "the life is in the blood." 

The mention of fornication was probably considered 
wise, for altho it should be understood as part of 
the law of Christ, yet nevertheless, since this evil was 
very common at that time amongst the Gentiles and in 
some cases even a part of their religious service, it was 
thought well to specify it. 



R2159 : page 154 

THE FAITH THAT WORKS. 
--MAY 30.-JAMES 2:14-23.- 
"I will show thee my faith by my works."— James 2:18. 



MANY have supposed a conflict of opinion as 

between the Apostle Paul's teachings and 

the teachings of James respecting faith and works. We 

hold, however, that, rightly understood, their teachings 

are in fullest accord. The Jewish Law Covenant 

was emphatically a covenant of works, while the basis 

R2159 : page 155 

of acceptance under the New Covenant is faith. The 
law said, Do and live; the gospel says, Believe and live. 

The Apostle Paul, writing to those who knew the 
law and who had been trained under it to expect everlasting 
life as a reward of faithful performance of the 
requirements of that law, was obliged to show that absolute 
obedience to that law is an impossibility as respects 
the fallen race of Adam; and hence that "by 
the deeds of the law shall no flesh be justified in his 
[God's] sight." If, then, justification and eternal life 
could not be obtained by any through the works of the 
law, how could they be obtained? The Apostle proceeds 
to show that our Lord Jesus had kept the entire 
law blamelessly, that he thus had secured all the rewards 
promised to "him that doeth these things;" 
namely, everlasting life and all the divine blessings. 
The Apostle further shows that, while none can hope 
for eternal life through keeping the law, they may hope 
for it and obtain it in another way— not by doing works 
that would be approved under the Law Covenant, but 
by having a faith which would approve them under 
the New Covenant, and secure to them such measure 
of the covering of Christ's righteousness as might be 
necessary to compensate for all the deficiencies and imperfections 
of their natures which hindered them from 
performing the full demands of the law. Thus he tells 
us, "The righteousness of the law is fulfilled in us, who 
walk not after the flesh but after the spirit." 

The Apostle Paul did not for a moment mean to 
say that a mere intellectual assent was sufficient. His 
teachings are in fullest accord with James' statement 
in this lesson, that a faith that produced no efforts or 
works toward righteousness would be a dead faith, a 
valueless faith— or worse, a condemning faith. 

Nor should James here be understood to ignore 
faith, and to teach that works of the law would be able 
or sufficient to justify sinners or make them heirs of 
eternal life. It is probable that some in the early 
Church, having come to realize that Christ is the end 
of the law for righteousness to every one that believeth, 
and that we are "justified by faith in his blood," 
went to the opposite extreme, as some do to-day, claiming 
that the conduct of life is immaterial, if only the 
faith be maintained. It is probable that James had this 
class of persons in mind when writing this epistle. He 
therefore guards the reader on this point— not to think 



that a mere belief or faith, that makes no impression 
upon the life, and is unaccompanied by any efforts so 
to live as would be pleasing in God's sight, would be 
a faith of any vitality, or that would do any real good. 
On the contrary, that is the kind of belief that devils 
have. 

As an illustration, he points out that, as a blessing 
unaccompanied by food would not satisfy a hungry 
person, so faith unaccompanied by works would accomplish 
nothing. If the challenge were put, "Show 
me thy faith without thy works," it would be very 
difficult to answer it. How could faith be shown, except 
by works? On the other hand, it would be taking 
a very proper position to say, "I will show thee my 
faith by my works." 

Abraham is called the father of the faithful; and 
of him it is written, "Abraham believed God, and it was 
counted unto him for righteousness." But, as the 
Apostle points out, Abraham's faith was not of the 
kind that brought forth no fruitage of good works and 
obedience. On the contrary, God tested Abraham's 
faith, and his faith was proved an acceptable one by 
works of obedience; faith and works cooperated in his 
case, and must do so in every case, else the faith will 
not be acceptable. 

The points to be kept clearly in mind in this lesson 
are (1) that no works which fallen men could do would 
be perfect works; consequently, none of them could be 
acceptable to God. (2) The Christian is acceptable to 
God through the exercise of faith under the terms of 
the New Covenant. It is this faith that counts in his 
acceptance, because he is unable to perform works that 
would be acceptable. (3) His acceptable faith must 
be proved by his efforts to do, so far as he may be able, 
the divine will. (4) Since works alone would not justify, 
and since faith must precede good works before 
they will be acceptable, and since the good works, when 
accepted, are not accepted on account of their own perfection, 
but on account of the faith which makes them 
acceptable, therefore it follows that it is the faith that 
justifies us where works could not justify us, and that 
the works do not set aside faith, but merely attest the 
genuineness of the faith. 

There is a grand lesson here for all who desire to 
please God. It is our faith that is pleasing to him— 
we at first having nothing else; but if the faith remains 
alone, without effort to produce fruits of righteousness 
in the life, it becomes a dead, a putrid thing, offensive 
to both God and man. He whose life is one of self-gratification 
and sin dishonors and injures any faith 
which he professes. Further, it is our experience that 
whoever fails to live in harmony with his faith will not 
be permitted to maintain it very long. It is to such as 
have some faith without corresponding efforts toward 
good works that the Lord sends "strong delusions that 
they may believe a lie."— 2 Thess. 2:11. 



Let us remember that the Lord's people are "living 
epistles known and read of all men;" that it is the 
works that are read rather than the faith, and hence 
the importance of the Golden Text, which should more 
and more be the sentiment of every follower of Christ, 
—"I will show thee my faith by my works." 



R2156 : page 156 

KEEP THY TONGUE FROM EVIL. 

--JUNE 6.-JAMES 3:1-13.- 

"Keep thy tongue from evil, and thy lips 
from speaking guile."— Psa. 34:13. 

"BE NOT many teachers, my brethren, knowing 

that we shall receive heavier judgment" 

(Revised Version). Thus the Apostle indicates that 

what he has to say concerning the great influence of 

the tongue is directed largely to those amongst believers 

who attempt to be teachers; who have a greater responsibility 

than if they were not teachers. It is not his wish to 

deter those who have ability, a gift in this direction, 

but rather to caution all as to the responsibility of the 

position they thus take. If they possess an eloquent 

tongue it may be a channel for a great blessing, swaying 

large numbers to the Lord, the truth and the way 

of righteousness; or, on the other hand, if contaminated 

with error, the tongue can do almost untellable harm 

—injury to faith, to morals, to good works. It is indeed 

true, that whoever exercises the gift of teaching 

lays himself open to increased responsibility in the 

sight of God and men. -See Matt. 5:19; Rom. 2:20,21; 

1 Pet. 5:3; Titus 1:11; 1 Tim. 1:7; 2 Tim. 4:3; 

2 Pet. 2:1. 

The warning in this lesson is not against the tongue 
itself, but against the power which we exercise upon 
others by the use of our tongues. Probably every person 
of experience will fully agree with the statement 
that the tongue is potent in its influence beyond any 
other member of the body, for either good or evil. Experience 
teaches also that with the vast majority it is 
easier to control any other organ than the tongue. So 
skilful a servant is it that every ambition and passion 
and inclination of the fallen nature seeks to use it as a 
servant or channel for evil. It requires, therefore, on 
the part of the Christian, increased vigilance, wisdom 
and care so to govern this member of his body and 
bring it into subjection to the new mind in Christ, that 
it shall be, not a hindrance to himself or to others, but, 
on the contrary, a help in the narrow way. As the bit 
in the horse's mouth will move and control his strength, 
and as the small rudder to a vessel will direct or change 



its course, so the tongue and the pen, its representative, 
may influence and turn about large numbers of 
people, for good or ill. How important, therefore, is 
the tongue, and how much more frequently do we find 
it employed as an agency for evil than as an agency 
for good, to pull down the faith rather than to build 
up the faith, to implant seeds of discord and discontent 
rather than those which will produce righteousness and 
peace! While this is specially true in the worldly, it 
is true to a considerable extent amongst God's people; 
and each should remember that to some extent he is a 
teacher, and day by day is either forwarding or hindering 
the cause of truth, righteousness and peace. 

In the unregenerate world the tongue is indeed a 
"fire" causing no end of burning of wrath, envy, hatred, 
strife and everything that defileth the entire body, 
stimulating all the fallen passions and desires. No wonder 
the apostle declares figuratively that the tongue 
itself seems to be set on fire of gehenna— the second 
death. Its burning not only tends to bring its master 
but others to destruction. 

In the statement, "Therewith bless we God, even 
the Father, and therewith curse we men, which are 
made in the likeness of God," we should not understand 
the writer to refer to himself and to the Church 
as using their tongues for such unholy purposes, but 
as speaking for the whole world, some use the tongue 
to praise God and some use it to blaspheme his holy 
name and to curse their fellow creatures. It is a willing 
servant in whatever direction it is guided; and 
hence the importance of having so important a servant 
and member rightly guided. Apparently, however, 
there were some in the Church who out of the same 

R2157 : page 156 

mouth rendered thanks to God and curses to fellow 
creatures— perhaps not often curses in the ordinary 
acceptation of the term, but curses in the sense of injurious 
words, which would lead to a baneful or cursed 
or evil condition; for every false teaching is a curse to 
those who receive it. In this sense of the word at 
least, many out of the same mouth send forth both good 
and evil influences. This is a wrong condition, and 
hence the importance of the warning, "My brethren, 
be not many teachers." Whoever would be a fountain 
from which would go forth the divine Word, carrying 
blessing and refreshment and strength, should see to it 
that bitter waters, false doctrines that would cause a 
curse, an injury— dishonoring God and perverting 
his Word— should not find in them a channel of 
utterance. 

In the choice of leaders for meetings the "tongue" 
qualification, as here laid down should not be overlooked. 
The fiery tongued should not be chosen, but 
the meeker, the moderate, who "bridle" their tongues 



and endeavor carefully to "speak as the oracles of God" 
only. Such tongues constrain, while others more frequently 
wound and repel. The Word of the Lord is 
quick and powerful and sharp and cuts "to the heart" 
without bitter and acrimonious and uncharitable human 
expletives to enforce it. Hence the divine instruction 
that we "speak the truth in love." 

The lesson closes with an exhortation to those who 
have the qualifications of teachers in the Church (wisdom 
and knowledge) to manifest themselves not merely 
by words and teachings, but also by godly lives and 
good works in meekness of wisdom. 

While this lesson is pointed specially toward 
"teachers," it should be regarded by all. It is an 
old and true saying that "Kind words can never die," 
and it would be equally true to say, "Unkind words 
never die." Indeed, the latter live much the longer 
in a majority of cases— in worldly hearts especially. 
Let us each and all redouble our energy in subjugating 
our tongues, that they may always bless and "minister 
grace to the hearers."— Read Eph. 4:29. 



page 157 
VOL. XVIII. JUNE 1, 1897. No. 11. 



CONTENTS. 



"Raiment White and Clean" 159 

The "Little Flock" and the "Great 

Company" 160 

The Queen and Her Virgin 

Companions 162 

Faith 163 

Post-Millennialism Makes a 

Worldly Church 166 

Surrender Self -Will— Receive God's 

Will 167 

Apostolic Advice to a Young Christian 168 

Personal Responsibility 171 

page 158 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
-ADDRESS TO- 
TOWER PUBLISHING CO., BIBLE HOUSE, 58 & 60 ARCH ST., 
ALLEGHENY (NORTH PITTSBURG), PA., U.S.A. 

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 

INCLUDES A SUBSCRIPTION TO "THE OLD THEOLOGY TRACTS'-QUARTERLY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, N.Y. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, 

OR REGISTERED. FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN 

MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS: 

Those of the interested, who by reason of old age or accident, or 
other adversity are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, 
if they will send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and 
requesting the paper. 



R2168 :page 158 

ASPIRATIONS OF THE ROYAL PRIESTHOOD 



O, let me give 
Out of the gifts Thou givest; 

O, let me live 
With life abundantly because Thou livest; 

O, make me shine 
In darkest places, for Thy light is mine; 

O, let me be 
A faithful witness for Thy truth and Thee. 



O, let me show 
The strong reality of gospel story; 

O, let me go 
From strength to strength, from glory unto glory; 

O, let me sing 
For very joy, because Thou art my King; 

O, let me praise 
Thy love and faithfulness through all my days. 
—Frances Ridley Havergal. 



R2159 :page 159 

"RAIMENT WHITE AND CLEAN." 



"They shall walk with me in white [robes]; because they are worthy. 
The overcomer shall thus be clothed in white raiment; and I will not 
blot his name out of the book of life, but I will confess his name 
in the presence of my Father, and in the presence of his angels." 
-Rev. 3:4,5.- 

UNDER the symbol of white raiment the Lord 
throughout his Word represents the righteousness 
of those whom he accepts as his people. Their 
righteousness in the future state will be a personal 
righteousness or holiness; and the guarantee of this is 
the promise that all who are accounted worthy, as 
"overcomers" of the world to be joint-heirs with Christ 
in the heavenly Kingdom, will in the resurrection be 
granted new, perfect, spiritual bodies, free from sin and 
impurity of every kind, and fully in harmony with 
their new wills or characters developed during the 
trial-time of this present life. That will be a time of 
which the Apostle speaks, saying,— "When that which 
is perfect is come, that which is in part shall be done 
away." Those who attain to that glorious condition 
are symbolically represented as being clothed in white 
linen, representing their personal purity, completeness 
and perfection at that time: as it is written, "to her 
[the bride, the victorious Church] was granted that 
she should be arrayed in fine linen, clean and white; for 
the fine linen is the righteousness of saints."— Rev. 19:8. 

Thus, seen, the Church in glory will stand arrayed 
in its own righteousness— the "righteousness of the 
saints;" but at the present time the saints have no 
righteousness of their own in which to present themselves 
at the throne of grace. As expressed by the 
prophet, "all our righteousnesses are as filthy rags." The 
very best of humanity, it must be confessed, are so imperfect 
in thoughts, words, and deeds as to be wholly 
unfit for a share in God's Kingdom or for any notice 
or favors at his hands. However, human necessities 
only made manifest the riches of divine grace and wisdom. 



R2160 : page 159 

It was for this very reason, because we were 

all defiled through sin, and unfit to approach into the 

divine presence, that God graciously provided, through 

the sacrifice of his Son, our Lord, a spotless robe of 

imputed righteousness, for all those who accept of him 

and the covenant of divine grace sealed with his precious 

blood. When by repentance and faith we desire 

to forsake sin and approach God, we are, by reason of 

obedient faith in the sacrifice, reckoned as covered before 

the divine eyes with the merit of him who "bought 

us with his own precious blood," which merit is symbolically 

represented as a linen garment, Christ's righteousness, 

instead of the filthy rags of our own righteousness. 

While covered by this robe, we may by 

faith exercise all the privileges and opportunities, 

which could be ours if the robe were actually our own 

—instead of merely a loaned or imputed robe, the property 

of our Redeemer. So long as by faith we are trusting 

in the great sacrifice for sin, and seeking to walk 

worthy of the Lord, this robe is ours, to have and to 

enjoy; but to lose this faith would be to lose all the 

advantages which come with the robe, and which continue 

only to the wearers. 

The object of the granting of these robes at the 
present time (not to the whole world, but only to the 
true believers) is that they may constitute, for those 
who accept them, "wedding garments," giving the 
wearers a right to a place at the "marriage of the King's 
Son." This "wedding garment" (justification) is a 
prerequisite to an invitation to the marriage, or rather 
the receipt of it is itself the invitation to enter in and 
become participators in the present "sufferings of 

R2160 : page 160 

Christ" and in the future "joys of our Lord." And 
as no one can enter in to the marriage without first 
having received the robe, so any one who subsequently 
rejects this robe of Christ's righteousness and attempts 
to stand before his fellows or before the King without 
it, will be "cast out" of all the privileges and blessings 
which it secures. See parable of the wedding garment. 
-Matt. 22:11-13. 

This "wedding garment" when presented to us is 
clean and white, representing the absolute purity and 
spotlessness of our Lord's holiness; and the instruction 
to each one who receives the robe is "to keep his 
garments unspotted from the world." This command 
is equivalent to our Lord's injunction, "Be ye perfect, 
as your Father in heaven is perfect"— a standard to 
which we are seeking to attain, but whose absolute attainment 
in an imperfect body, and surrounded by the 
world, the flesh and the devil, is admitted in the Scriptures 



and proved by experience to be impossible. But, 
as the robe covers all the repented-of blemishes of the 
past, so it likewise covers the unintentional and unwitting 
imperfections of the present; so that only those 
things to which we give more or less of mental consent 
are reckoned as ours— either good or evil. Thus seen, 
under this arrangement it is possible for the Lord's 
people to walk so carefully, so circumspectly (looking 
all around) at every step, as to keep his garments 
unspotted from the world. But alas, how few there 
are, if any, who have ever lived up, in all the past of 
their lives, to this high standard,— so that at no time in 
all the past, since they accepted the robe of Christ's 
righteousness, could it be said of them, that in no sense 
of the word had they ever, either outwardly or mentally, 
given any degree of mental consent to anything that 
was sinful. 

Seeing that the vast majority, if not all, have at 
some time or other given at least a partial mental assent 
to sin (however regretful and repentant of the 
thing they may afterward have been), and seeing that 
any such deflection from purity of heart would constitute 
a stain or spot upon our robe, we inquire with 
great concern, Is there any possibility of having such 
stains or spots removed and getting the robe white 
again? Thank God, yes; there is a way by which the 
spots and wrinkles may be removed from our robe and 
leave it once more as white and clean as at first. The 
stain remover is the "precious blood." As the Apostle 
says, "If we confess our sins he is just to forgive 
us our sins and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness." 

While all of our efforts (groaning of spirit, tears, 
fasting, etc.) could not remove a single stain, which 
the precious blood alone can remove; yet, nevertheless, 
it is expedient for ourselves that while realizing 
our Lord's forgiveness and the cleansing of the robe, 
we should promptly seek to discipline ourselves in 
repentance, fasting and tears: otherwise we may expect 
that while our Lord will hear our earnest prayers 
and cleanse our robe, he nevertheless would put upon 
us certain chastisements for our correction in righteousness 
and for the strengthening of our characters in respect 
to the points of weakness. The Apostle teaches 
thus, when he says, "If we would judge [correct, 
chastise] ourselves, then we should not be judged [corrected, 
chastised] of the Lord; but when we are judged 
of the Lord we are chastened, that we might not be 
condemned with the world." 

While our robe covers all our unwilling personal 
blemishes and uncleanness in our Lord's sight, and in 
the sight of brethren who see each other from the Lord's 
standpoint, yet the Lord desires and requires that we 
shall come into such close sympathy with absolute purity 
and righteousness in thought, word and deed that 
we will "cleanse ourselves from all filthiness of the 
flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness in the reverence of 



God." (2 Cor. 7:1) And to this end he grants his sanctified 
(consecrated) and white robed ones the cleansing 
power of his truth, that thus his elect bride might be 
cleansed by "the washing of water, by the Word, that 
he might present it to himself a glorious church, not 
having spot or wrinkle or any such thing."— 
Eph. 5:26,27. 

But oh, how few of the consecrated have so great 
a love for purity, so great a desire to keep the garment 
unspotted from the world, that they are thus careful to 
have every wrinkle quickly removed, and thereafter to 
guard the robe more zealously than ever. Yet, these, 
and these alone, walk with the Lord in white and are 
overcomers, who in due time shall be glorified with him 
and sit with him in his throne— and it is their names 
that shall not be blotted out of the Lamb's book of life. 

We are to understand from the Master's words 
that all who do not thus walk with him in white raiment 
are unworthy, shall not be joint-heirs in his Kingdom, 
will not be confessed as his bride and joint-heir 
in the presence of the Father and the holy angels, but 
on the contrary, will have their names blotted out of 
the Lamb's book of life— erased from amongst the 
names of the "elect" Church. 

THE "LITTLE FLOCK" AND THE "GREAT COMPANY. 



While the number of those who wear the robe of 
Christ's righteousness is, as compared with the numbers 
of the world, small indeed, yet how large a proportion 
of these are not walking in white, but have 
their robes greatly spotted by contact with the world, 
the flesh and the devil— by unfaithfulness or by carelessness, 
worldliness. We do not refer to those who 
deny the Lord and repudiate the ransom, thus taking 

R2160 :page 161 

off the wedding garment and standing with the world 
(or really in a worse condition than the world, in that 
they have rejected the grace of God): we refer to the 
true believers, who have made a full consecration of 
themselves to the Lord, and who for the sake of worldly 
advantages or earthly hopes or friendships or for the 
favors of nominal churches, are failing to live according 
to their covenant and privileges, and are thus, like 
Esau of old, selling their birthright (as new creatures 
in Christ) for a mess of pottage. Is there no hope for 
these, who fail to be overcomers, who fail to walk in 
white, who fail to gain the crown and the immortality 
to be bestowed only upon the "elect," "worthy," 
"overcomers?" 

Yes, thank God! We rejoice that there is hope 
for these, because they have not cast off their wedding 



garments, even though they have gotten them sadly 
spotted and soiled by contact with the world. The class 
referred to are neither open nor wilful sinners, but 
those who unwisely are seeking to please and serve the 
Lord and to please and serve themselves and the world 
—"foolish virgins." They make a failure in every 
direction so far as pleasing is concerned: they do not 
please the Lord, they do not please themselves and 
they are not half satisfactory to the worldly. The 
only ground upon which divine favor can continue 
with them at all and could go after them to reclaim 
them is the merit of the robe of Christ's righteousness, 
which they still love and wear, although they have not 
loved it sufficiently to keep it unspotted. But, he who 
began the good work in them will continue it and perfect 
it for all who really love and trust him— even 
though it be completed in the great tribulation at the 
inauguration of the Millennium or "the day of Jesus 
Christ." (Phil. 1:6.) Since Christ became the surety 
for all who at heart still trust him, although not overcoming 
by complete self-sacrifice in full obedience to 
his instructions, it does not surprise us that he points 
out in his last communication to his Church how he 
will deal with this numerous class of his followers and 
how it will result to them,— altho he made no such 
proposition in their "call." 

After telling of the sealing of the elect class, the 
spiritual Israel, the peculiar people zealous of good 
works, the little flock, the bride, the overcomers, a 
definite, predetermined number, "a hundred and forty 
and four thousand," gathered out of Babylon before 
the winds of the great tribulation are let loose upon 
the world, all of them bearing the seal or mark of God's 
favor in their foreheads— a noticeable intellectual evidence 
of divine favor, the impress of the spirit of 
the truth as well as the word of truth, our Lord 
shows us the "great multitude" of his followers, 

R2161 :page 161 

"whose number no man is able to tell" (that is, it is 
not a foreordained or fixed number,— none were called 
to be of this company), who will eventually stand before 
the Lord "clothed with white robes, and palms in 
their hands," crying, "salvation to our God which sitteth 
on the throne and unto the Lamb." Who are these 
who are not of the bride, the elect class, the overcomers, 
is the question? The answer is "These are they 
which came out of great tribulation, and have washed 
their robes, and made them white in the blood of the 
Lamb. Therefore are they before the throne of God, 
and serve him day and night in his temple."— 
Rev. 7:9,10,13-15. 

The marks of distinction between this "great company" 
and the "little flock" are very pronounced, both 
as respects their present course and their future blessing. 



The faithful overcomers watch and keep their 

garments unspotted from the world. And this is given 

as one of the special conditions of acceptance as "overcomers" 

to joint-heirship with the Lord— "they have 

not defiled their garments." (Rev. 3:4.) They have 

kept "their garments unspotted from the world." 

They have not been willing to permit sin to contaminate 

them and to separate them from the Lord, but 

have quickly applied for and obtained the precious blood 

to remove every stain. They are so heartily opposed 

to sin and so earnest about the keeping of this garment 

unspotted that the adversary gets no hold upon them— 

"the wicked one catcheth them not." (1 John 5:18.) 

All of this indicates a full submission of their wills to 

the will of Christ— they are "dead with him," and 

hence could not willingly practice sin. Their reward 

is the crown of life, immortality, to be seated in the 

throne, and to constitute the temple of which our Lord 

is the cap-stone, the chief corner-stone. Now contrast 

with these the "great company:" lacking the intense 

love and zeal of the overcomers, they do not keep their 

garments with sufficient care, and as a result they lose 

all the rewards promised the overcomers; and, having 

failed in the race, they would get nothing, if it were 

not for our Lord's grace. 

But God's grace cannot admit to heavenly perfection 
those who have not robes of spotless righteousness; 
and hence we are shown that these who have not cared 
for their garments and kept them white must be put 
through a severe experience before they can in any 
sense of the word be sharers of heavenly favors. These 
severe experiences are shown in the symbol as washing 
their robes in a great tribulation. But to show that not 
the penances or sufferings would cleanse the robes, 
tho these might be necessary as proper punishments 
and disciplines, it is particularly stated that the efficacy 
for the cleansing is the "blood of the Lamb." Many 
will thus be purged, purified, and their garment, now 
sullied by contact with the world, often in the garb of 

R2161 :page 162 

nominal Churchianity, will be cleansed of every guilty 
stain, when they, realizing the folly of their course, 
shall repentantly appeal to the Lord and use his help. 

But sad disappointments attach to the experiences of 
this company: it is because they fear the reproaches of 
Christ that they shirk present privileges and opportunities 
for walking with him in white in the "sufferings 
of this present time:" behold, they not only miss the 
present joy and rejoicing of those who are faithful, but 
eventually they must come through still greater sufferings, 
if they would attain even to a lower place. Although 
loving the Lord and his people they are somewhat 
ashamed of them and hide, as it were, their 
faces from them, in the presence of the worldly: and 



behold the Master at his coming for his "bride" cannot 
confess their names in the presence of the Father 
and the holy angels. The little flock is informed of the 
Bridegroom's care, and obediently watching she shall 
be "accounted worthy to escape all those things coming 
upon the world" (including the great tribulation), 
but the "great company," although the Lord's people, 
in that they have not rejected him, must be treated 
like the hypocrites and pass through the great tribulation 
in order to their purification. These, be it observed, 
are not a class who in any sense repudiate the 
Lord, they are not of those who "draw back" from 
the Lord, for in such he declares he has "no pleasure" 
(Heb. 10:38): and the Apostle declares that 
such "draw back unto perdition"— Second death. On 
the contrary, these are still "virgins," but foolish in 
that they are vainly trying to please and serve both God 
and mammon. They are wasting precious opportunities 
trying to find an easier way of following their Lord 
than "being made conformable unto his death." 

We rejoice that ultimately these will sing praises 
to the Lord, and be glad in his wondrous grace. But 
we notice that even after their robes will be washed 
white in the time of trouble by the blood of the Lamb 
and in much tribulation, they wear no crowns as 
overcomers; but, having finally overcome, they are 
granted palms as emblems of their victory through 
Christ; and although they can never be the living 
temple of which Christ is the Head, we are told they 
shall be servants in that temple; and although they 
shall never sit in the throne, they are highly privileged 
to serve "before the throne." Grand and glorious 
privileges will be theirs, but Oh, they will lose the great 
prize, having sold it for the mess of pottage of present 
seeming advantage, which proves unsatisfying and 
brings bitter after results. What exhortation to holiness, 
to complete consecration to his will, could be 
stronger than this supplied by our Lord's statement of 
the results of more and of less faithfulness? 

Probably the majority of this "great company" of 
tribulation saints are living to-day; for at no time 
in the past was there the same degree of knowledge of 
God and his Word, except in the early Church of apostolic 
times: never did so many profess to be the Lord's 
by consecration; and never were there so many subtle 
seductions from the "narrow way" of self-sacrifice. In 
centuries past the cleavage between the Lord's people 
and the world's people was much more distinct than 
to-day: persecution was more open and recognized, and 
while fewer named the name of Christ, they counted 
and appreciated the cost, as the larger number of to-day 
do not. (We of course ignore the professions and 
"great swelling words" of antichrist.) However, there 
was a great time of trouble in the end of the Jewish 
age in which many unclean may have been permitted 
to wash their robes white in the blood of the Lamb. 



And since then our Lord has not been without the 

power to bring as many as he chose through great tribulations 

for purification. Since the "overcomers" 

suffer with Christ voluntarily and the "great company" 

suffer because of Christ involuntarily, it might be difficult, 

if not impossible, for any except the Lord and 

the sufferers to know whether they suffered as self-sacrificers 

or as unwilling "tribulation" saints: but in 

the end of this age it will be different; for the overcomers 

will be taken to glory before the closing tribulation 

is fully poured out upon "Babylon." 

THE QUEEN AND HER VIRGIN COMPANIONS. 



It is appropriate that we should remind ourselves 
afresh of the beautiful suggestion laid before us through 
the prophet David respecting the wedding garment of 
the bride. (Psa. 45:9-14.) Here the Lord, through 
the prophet, tells us that the bride as the Queen shall 
be presented before the King in "raiment of fine needle 
work" as well as in "clothing of wrought gold." The 
gold clothing, as we have heretofore seen, represents 
the immortality (an element of the divine nature) with 
which the Church shall be invested in her resurrection 
glory. The raiment of fine needle work can be 
none other than the fine linen garment, clean and white, 
mentioned in Revelation. But here we have the additional 
suggestion given, that this garment will be 
finely embroidered. 

The robe that was merely loaned to us at first, 
and which constituted our invitation to the marriage, 
to joint-heirship with the King's Son, was not at first 
our own, it was merely loaned or imputed to us. But 
it became a permanent gift from the Bridegroom to as 
many as accepted the invitation to union with him; 
and examining it carefully, they found upon it in delicate 
outline a stamping in graceful lines, corresponding to 
the richly embroidered robe worn by the King's Son. 
The suggestion of copying his robe was not only thus 

R2161 :page 163 

hinted at, but it was plainly declared that all who 
would be accounted worthy to be his "elect" companions, 
should in all respects be copies of the Bridegroom. 
-Rom. 8:29. 

The careful setting of the stitches in the embroidering 
of this wedding garment has been the chief 
duty and constant occupation of the espoused virgin 
while waiting for the nuptial feast, at the return of the 
Bridegroom. True, much of the embroidering now 
done by us is very imperfect, because of first, our unskillfulness, 
secondly, our imperfections, and thirdly 
the disturbing influences about us (the world, the flesh 



and the devil). Nevertheless, we can well understand 

that it is the blessing of experience that is designed, and 

that every painstaking effort is strengthening character, 

and bringing us into fuller sympathy with our 

Lord; and that he, when he inspects his Church, will 

take pleasure in even our imperfect results, if they 

give evidence that we have bestowed effort, because 

desirous of bringing all into conformity with his will; 

and he will accept of our imperfect work as tho it were 

perfect, and in the resurrection he will grant us ideal 

bodies with ideal powers and the ideal character embroidered 

perfectly upon the new robe, which will be 

ours through his grace. 

And even here, the great company, the foolish 
virgins, not worthy to be the bride, and hence rejected 
from that place of the "elect," are nevertheless pictured, 

R2162 : page 163 

in verses 14 and 15— "The virgins her [the Queen's] 
companions that follow her shall be brought to thee, 
with gladness and rejoicing shall they be brought 
[even tho it be through great tribulation they shall 
ultimately shout Hosanna!]; they shall enter into the 
King's palace." 

Please read here the poem of page 120, POEMS AND 
HYMNS OF DAWN. 



R2162 : page 163 

FAITH. 



"Now faith is a basis of things hoped for, 
a conviction of things unseen."— Heb. 11:1. 

THE CHRISTIAN life is a life of faith. Its 
first step is a step of faith, and its last step is the 
triumph of faith. All its victories are victories of faith, 
and its joys are the joys of faith. In the above text 
the Apostle speaks of faith as a basis of hope, as something 
substantial upon which hope may build. Hope 
is not faith; but hope is that buoyant, gladsome thing 
that is born of faith. A hope that is not based upon 
faith is a mere idle fiction which has no substantial 
comfort in it. Faith is the basis or substance out of 
which the living hope springs and grows naturally. 
Faith, then, must be a reasonable thing, well founded 
in that which is fixed, immovable, sure and steadfast, 
even in the word of God which liveth and abideth forever. 
-1 Pet. 1:23. 

Such faith is not a matter of the intellect alone, 
altho the intellect has much to do with it. It is 



also a matter of the heart— "With the heart man believeth 

unto righteousness." If the heart be not right 

toward God, the intellect is easily biased toward its own 

preferences, which, in the carnal mind, are contrary to 

the righteousness of God; and so, the heart being 

wrong, the mind gropes in darkness concerning those 

things which pertain to eternal life and godliness.— 

"The carnal mind is enmity against God; for it is not 

subject to the law of God, neither indeed can be" (Rom. 8:7); 

and, therefore, to such God does not, and cannot, 

reveal the treasures of his wisdom and grace. 

We are taught that "without faith it is impossible 
to please God" (Heb. 1 1:6); and further that "faith 
without [corresponding] works [which attest its genuineness] 
is dead." (Jas. 2:17.) "What advantage," 
inquires James, "has any one, tho he say he has faith, 
but have not works? This faith is not able to save 
him." (Jas. 2:14-Diaglott.) And if faith without 
works is of no advantage, the inference is plain that 
without works it is equally impossible to please God. 
Yet, we may have both faith (or what often passes for 
faith) and works (corresponding with it) and not be 
pleasing to God. The faith not well founded, together 
with the works built upon it, is likely to be swept away 
when the storms and floods of trial beat upon it as upon 
a house built of wood, hay and stubble and resting on 
the shifting sand. It is all-important, therefore, that 
we have the right kind of faith, and that our works 
should be the outgrowth of that faith. 

What, then, is faith? We answer, True faith is 
the reasonable and accepted conclusion of a logical 
argument based upon a reasonable premise or foundation. 
And more, it is the only reasonable conclusion 
to which such a logical argument could lead. Thus, 
reasoning on the principle of cause and effect, a principle 
firmly established in all the operations of natural 
and moral law, we see in the whole realm of nature the 
evidences of an intelligent Creator. We know that 
such effects as appear in the order of nature— as for 
instance the order of the spheres, the succession of the 
seasons, and of day and night, the growth of vegetation, 
etc., etc.,— could not be produced without an intelligent 
first cause. And so undeniable is the basis of 
fact thus furnished in nature's testimony, and so logical 
the reasoning from effect to cause, that the conclusion 

R2162 : page 164 

—that there is an intelligent, wise and powerful 
Creator— is so palpable and irresistible that the Scriptures 
declare the man a fool who does not accept it.— 
Psa. 14:1. 

From these data alone we have substantial testimony 
upon which to base faith in God, even if he had 
given us no written revelation of himself. And no less 
substantial is the testimony given upon which to base 



our faith in his written revelation. For all that God 

expects us to believe beyond the realm of our senses 

and observation, he has given us an undeniable foundation 

of tangible fact, upon which he invites us to use 

our reasoning powers to arrive at conclusions of which 

we would otherwise be ignorant. Thus faith is a conviction 

of things unseen, based on the logical deductions 

from known facts— a most reasonable thing. 

It is also manifest that, since the foundation upon 
which to base faith, and the reasoning power wherewith 
to draw logical conclusions from the known foundation 
truths, and "the spirit of a sound mind," the 
holy spirit, the spirit, mind or disposition of Christ, to 
accept in simple sincerity all truth, are all given to us 
of God, so also, as Paul affirms, the faith thus derived 
may be considered, as it thus really is, "the gift of 
God" (Eph. 2:8), while it is also the free exercise of 
our own volition in obedience to the laws of conscience 
and of sound judgment. 

There is nothing more common or necessary among 
men than faith. We exercise faith in the laws of nature 
and act upon it constantly. We till the soil and 
sow the seed in full faith in a future harvest to be 
brought forth by the continued operations of natural 
law, reasoning that the sun which shines to day will 
shine again to-morrow, that the showers of yesterday 
will be repeated, and that vegetation will still be true 
to the old law of development and growth under these 
favorable conditions. Who thinks of questioning these 
things? 

Surely no one will question them who has become 
thoroughly acquainted with these methods in the past, 
and faith in them for the future is reasonable; while, 
on the other hand, doubt and unbelief would be unreasonable 
and foolish. The man who would refuse to 
plant for fear the sun would not rise again or the rain 
fall, would be rightly considered a fool. Why? Because 
faith is the only reasonable thing where the 
ground of faith is so well established. Even a child 
would laugh at another child who could not trust his 
parents for to-morrow's necessities when to-day's and 
yesterday's were abundantly provided for: his lack of 
faith would be so unreasonable. And just so when we 
have become acquainted with God, as all may who will 
study his works and ways in nature and revelation, to 
doubt is foolish; while full faith, perfect confidence in 
his wisdom, justice, love and power, is the only reasonable 
conclusion. 

Therefore it is that "without faith it is impossible 
to please God." Thus faith, being a reasonable conviction 
of things unseen, becomes a basis of hope for 
the things which God has promised. As Paul expresses 
it, "Faith is a basis of things hoped for, a conviction 
of things unseen." (Heb. 11:1.) With the same confidence, 
therefore, with which we look for an autumnal 
harvest from our spring time seed-sowing, before 



we see any sign of that harvest, we should also look 
for the fulfilment of all God's promises in due season, 
even before we see indication of their fulfilment. 

There is no difficulty in exercising faith in God 
and in any and all of his promises, if we acquaint ourselves 
with his character and in simple sincerity apply 
our hearts unto the instructions of his Word. Our 
faith in all God's promises should be as unwavering 
as our confidence that to-morrow's sun will rise. Thus 
it was in the cases of some commendable examples to 
which the Apostle Paul refers (Heb. 11)— of Abel, 
Enoch, Noah, Abraham, Jacob, Joseph, Moses, Gideon, 
Barak, Samson, Jephthah, David and Samuel, and the 
prophets, who, by faith in the promises and directions of 
God, subdued kingdoms, shut lions' mouths, quenched 
the power of fire, raised dead ones to life, and, in hope 
of a better resurrection submitted to privations, persecutions 
and ignominious deaths, having faith in the 
promise of God, in due time to reward their loyalty to 
him and to the principles of truth and righteousness. 
When God declared that a flood was coming and commanded 
the building of an ark, the reasonable course 
was to build the ark and to warn men, altho the flood, 
and every indication of it, tarried for many years. 

Similarly, when God commanded Abraham to 
sacrifice his son, it was reasonable for Abraham to obey 
the command and to leave to God the fulfilment of the 
promises which centered in that son. When he commanded 
Lot to flee out of Sodom it was the only reasonable 
thing for Lot to do, to make haste and depart, tho 
the morning was gloriously fair. 

These were commendable acts of simple, implicit 
and reasonable faith. But observe that in every instance 
of faith commended in the Bible there was good 
ground for faith; there was a clear command of God, 
a well defined principle of truth and righteousness; 
and no foolish imaginations or vague impressions were 
blindly followed. How foolish Noah would have been 
to spend energy and valuable time in building an ark 
and warning the people, if he had only imagined that 
a flood was coming. How culpable Abraham would 
have been in laying his son on the altar of sacrifice, had 
he only imagined that God desired him to do so. And 
how insane Lot would have appeared in hastening out 

R2162 : page 165 

of Sodom that bright morning declaring that the city 

R2163 : page 165 

would be destroyed, had he been given no reliable divine 
assurance of it. 

Notice that in each instance of unusual requirement 
God gave clear evidence of his will according to the 
methods of that dispensation, either by an angel, a vision, 



or some remarkable circumstance— ways, however, 
which are not now necessary, since the completed 
Scriptures of the Old and New Testaments form a perfect 
guide to faith (2 Tim. 3:15-17), and which, therefore, 
are not now resorted to. And in the instances of 
suffering and martyrdom cited, God's will was clearly 
expressed in the principles of truth and righteousness 
which he ordained, and which were properly recognized 
as more valuable even than life. These illustrations 
of faith should be specially marked by very many 
who claim to have wonderful faith in God, when the 
chief wonder in it is the ability to believe so much on 
so slight a foundation. 

In many enterprises, too, undertaken under the 
name of works of faith, and successfully carried on financially, 
faith has more foundation in the sympathies 
of philanthropic people, than in the plan, methods 
and promises of God. If Christian people make public 
statements that they are starting a benevolent enterprise 
for the amelioration of the present woes of suffering 
humanity, they may do it with a large degree of faith 
in the support of benevolent people; even the worldly 
are often fully as active in these directions as Christians. 
For instance, mark the responses to calls for help 
in great calamities and disasters. 

Successes in the direction of popular benevolences 
are not always proofs of faith in God, tho those so engaged 
are doing good works, and public appeals for assistance 
are often right and proper; but a clearer 
manifestation of faith in God is that humble confidence 
which espouses his unpopular cause, which perseveres 
in pursuing it in the face of all opposition and without 
human encouragement, and which patiently endures 
whatever of reproach, discouragement, privation and 
even persecution it may bring, assured of ultimate triumph 
according to his promise, and finding in his blessed 
truth and in his approval all the present reward and 
incentive desired. 

One expression of the Apostle Paul should not be 
forgotten. It reads, "Hast thou faith? have it to thyself 
before God." (Rom. 14:22.) If we advertise our faith and 
our needs and thus make capital out of them by eliciting 
the sympathies and assistance of men, we are in 
great danger of seeking to be pleasers of men. Almost 
imperceptibly this motive will creep into the heart and 
become a governing power in our actions, often causing 
deflections from the straight and narrow path of divine 
appointment. Beware when all men speak well of you, 
and when multitudes are ready to line up with your 
work and your methods; and look well to it that no 
element of worldly ambition or worldly policy be in it 
to ensnare your feet and to allure you from the narrow 
way.— Luke 6:26. See also Luke 4:6-8. 

There is much in the way of profession of great 
faith and in the relating of really improper proceedings 
and their results as wonderful feats of faith, which often 



does great harm to both speakers and hearers. 

While a true faith is pleasing to God, what often 
passes for faith among Christians must be correspondingly 
displeasing to him. Some, without careful observation 
and study of God's ways, jump to hasty conclusions, 
often greatly out of harmony with the spirit 
of divine truth; and, acting and teaching accordingly, 
dishonor the Lord and bring reproach upon his cause. 
Among such, too, are often found the loudest boasters 
of faith. Their faith is so strong, so rooted and grounded 
and established in what God did not say, that they 
have no inclination to hear or heed what he did say. 
In such instances God would be honored far more by 
the sealing of the lips. Rather let our faith be expressed 
to God, and let our confidence be manifest to 
him; and to our brethren let it be manifested more by 
our deeds of faith than by our words. Thus was the 
faith of the ancient worthies attested. Where is boasting 
then? It is excluded by the law of faith. (Rom. 3:27.) 
The very nature of pure, true faith is opposed 
to boastfulness. It is sincere and too humbly mindful 
of personal weakness and necessary dependence on God 
to be boastful. In fact, a humble, faithful walk with 
God excludes every mean disposition, and elevates the 
character far beyond them. 

However, the faith of which we speak is something 
which belongs only to the children of God. Their 
hearts being in harmony with God and his righteousness, 
his Word is unto them the end of all controversy; 
and their faith in that Word is the basis of 
their joyful hopes, the inspiration of their activities, 
and the anchor to their souls through all the storms of 
the present life. 

While faith depends for its earliest existence upon 
a right attitude of heart toward God and his righteousness, 
it continues to grow and thrive by a more close 
acquaintance and intimate communion with God and 
a continual striving to attain to his righteousness. 
Faith, in its beginning, is always comparatively weak; 
but God does not despise the day of small things. "A 
bruised reed shall he not break, and smoking flax shall 
he not quench, till he send forth judgment unto victory." 
(Isa. 42:3; Matt. 12:20) So also the Lord's 
people who are strong in the faith are taught to bear 
with the weaker ones.— Rom. 14:1; 15:1; 1 Thes. 5:14; 
Acts 20:35. 

R2163 :page 166 

Since faith must necessarily be at the very basis of 
Christian character and is such an important element 
in its construction, even to the grand and glorious finish; 
and since "without faith it is impossible to please 
God," the effort of every Christian should be toward 
a continual growth in faith. To do this we must maintain 
a close walk and fellowship with God in all circumstances 



and under all conditions. Does the sunshine 

of prosperity make glad our hearts? Let us see 

that we are glad in the Lord; that our hearts are lifted 

to him in grateful adoration and praise for all his benefits, 

from whom cometh every good and perfect gift. 

Or, do the clouds gather and the storms of adversity 

beat upon the soul? then call to mind the goodness of 

the Lord in times past, and take courage, assured that 

the sun will shine again when the lessons of this discipline 

have been learned.— Psa. 77:10-12. 

Nothing is more encouraging to faith than to consider 
the Lord's past faithfulness to us, and his promises 
that thus it shall be to the end. All our interests, 
temporal and spiritual, are in his hands, if we are his; 
and "no good thing will he withhold from them that 
walk uprightly." "All things shall work together for 
good to them that love God, to the called according to 
his purpose." How often, as the years go by, the children 
of God can see this ! As they realize what the discipline 
of life, patiently and lovingly submitted to, has already 
wrought in them, they see, as perhaps they could not see 
while passing through much of it, how necessary it has 
been to the developing of character in them; and so they 
are thankful for the rough and thorny places, as well as 
for the smooth, because of the peaceable fruits of righteousness, 
which they have learned to prize above all 
else. 

Christians may often encourage one another's faith 
by mingling their prayers and praises together, and by 
speaking to each other of their Christian experiences, of 
how God has led them and borne them up under trials 
which otherwise would have overcome them. Such 
indeed is the will of God, that we should so stimulate 
each other by loving communion and fellowship one 
with another in spiritual things, and by unitedly drawing 
near to God in prayer and praise. This is a means 
of grace that no Christian who has the opportunity 
to enjoy can afford to forego. Yet even this must not 
supersede that still more potent means of grace; viz., 
secret communion with God, when, alone with him, 
we can open our hearts as to none else, assured that, 
even though language be lame, he is able to read the 
very thoughts and purposes of our hearts. From such 
seasons of prayer and communion come the answers of 
peace which strengthen faith into a firm and steady 
confidence; and thus we are enabled the more fully to 
comprehend with all saints what is the breadth and 
length and depth and height of the love of Christ, and 
of the fulness of God's loving benevolence toward us. 
-Eph. 3:16-19. 

Let us endeavor to have more of that pure, true 
faith 

"Which bears unmoved the world's dark frown, 

Nor heeds its scornful smile; 
Which seas of trouble cannot drown, 



Nor Satan's arts beguile"— 

the faith which overcomes the spirit of the world in us 

and about us, and which will remove mountains of difficulty, 

and secure all that our hearts desire, since it is 

written, "Ye shall ask what ye will [our wills being in 

harmony with the will of God], and it shall be done 

unto you."— John 15:7. 

When we see, thus, how reasonable a thing faith 
is, how God through his natural and written revelation 
of himself appeals to the highest faculty of our nature 
(our reason) and bids us follow its logical deductions 
of faith in God, and to rest in and act upon its proper 
conclusions in studying his works and ways, we realize 
truly that this faith is a firm basis of hope in the things 
unseen, "which hope we have as an anchor, both sure 
and steadfast, and which entereth [by faith] into that 
within the vail"— into the glory of the spiritual condition. 
-Heb. 6:19. M. F. RUSSELL. 



R2164 : page 166 

POST-MILLENNIALISM MAKES A WORLDLY CHURCH. 

-By the late A. J. Gordon, D.D.- 

"THIS same Jesus, which is taken up from you 
into heaven, shall so come in like manner as 
ye have seen him go into heaven" is the parting promise 
of Jesus to his disciples, communicated through the 
two men in white apparel, as a cloud received him out 
of their sight. When after more than fifty years in 
glory he breaks the silence and speaks once more in 
the Revelation which he gave to his servant John, the 
post-ascension Gospel which he sends opens with "Behold, 
he cometh with clouds" and closes with "Surely 
I come quickly." Considering the solemn emphasis 
thus laid upon this doctrine, and considering the great 
prominence given to it throughout the teaching of our 
Lord and of his apostles, how was it that for the first 
five years of my pastoral life it had absolutely no place 
in my preaching? Undoubtedly the reason lay in the 
lack of early instruction. Of all the sermons heard 
from childhood on, I do not remember listening to a 
single one upon this subject. In the theological course, 
while this truth had its place indeed, it was taught as 
in most theological seminaries of this country, according 
to the post-millennial interpretation; and with the 

R2164 : page 167 

most reverent respect for the teachers holding this view 
I must express my mature conviction that, tho the 
doctrine of our Lord's coming is not ignored in this 



system, it is placed in such a setting as to render it 

quite impractical as a theme for preaching and quite inoperative 

as a motive for Christian living. For if a millennium 

must intervene before the return of our Lord 

from heaven, or if the world's conversion must be accomplished 

before he shall come in his glory, how is it 

possible for his disciples in this present time to obey 

his words: "Watch, therefore, for ye know not what 

hour your Lord shall come?" 

I well remember in my early ministry hearing two 
humble and consecrated laymen speaking of this hope 
in the meetings of the church, and urging it upon 
Christians as the ground of unworldliness and watchfulness 
of life. Discussion followed with these good 
brethren, and then a searching of the Scriptures to see 
if these things were so: and then a conviction of their 
truth; and then? The godly William Hewitson declares 
that the discovery of the Scriptural hope of our 
Lord's second coming wrought in him a change amounting 
almost to a second conversion. What if another, 
not presuming to be named in company with this consecrated 
saint, should nevertheless set his hand and 
seal to the affirmation that the strongest and most permanent 
impulse of his ministry came from his apprehension 
of the blessed hope of our Lord's second 
coming? 

But how is it that this doctrine, so plainly and 
conspicuously written in Scripture, could have remained 
so long undiscovered? In answering this question 
we see how little ground we have for glorying 
over the Jews. They did not recognize Christ in his 
first advent because they discerned in Scripture only 
those predictions which announced him as a reigning 
and conquering Messiah. This conception they wove 
into a veil of exposition and tradition so thick that 
when Jesus appeared as the lowly and humble Nazarene 
they knew him not, but "hid as it were their faces 
from him." And this strong prepossession still obscures 
their vision so that, "even unto this day, when 
Moses is read the veil is upon their heart." 

With the larger class of Gentile Christians the 
case is just the reverse. They know Christ crucified, 
and believing that the cross is to conquer the world, 
and that the preaching of the gospel in the present dispensation 
is to bring all men to God, they see no need 
of the personal coming of the Christ as King to 
subdue all things under his feet and to reign on the 
earth. This conception in turn has been woven into 
an elaborate veil of tradition for Gentile believers and 
"until this day, remaineth the same veil untaken away" 
in the reading of the New Testament. 

It was not so in the beginning. For three hundred 
years the Church occupied the position of a bride awaiting 
the return of the bridegroom from heaven— she 
meantime, holding herself free from all alliance 
with this world, content to fulfil her calling in 



witnessing for Christ, in suffering with Christ, and so 
to accomplish her appointed work of the gathering out 
of the elect body for the Lord "until he come." A 
strange and almost grotesque conception to many modern 
Christians no doubt. But it was while maintaining 
this attitude that the Church moved on most rapidly 
and irresistibly in her missionary conquests. 

Then came the foreshadowings of the great apostasy. 
The world which had been a foe to the Church 
became her friend and patron; Constantine, the Emperor 
of Rome, became her head, and thus the eyes of 
Christians began to be withdrawn from him who is 
"head over all things to the church." The great and 
good Augustine yielded to the seduction and was 
among the first to teach that in the temporal triumph 
of Christianity the Kingdom had already come, tho the 
King with whose return the primitive Church had been 
wont to identify the appearing of the Kingdom was 
still absent. Little by little, as the apostasy deepened, 
this early hope of Christians became eclipsed till, in 
the words of Auberlin, "when the Church became a 
harlot she ceased to be a bride who goes forth to meet 
her bridegroom," and thus chiliasm disappeared. What 
moreover would have been deemed an apostasy in the 
primitive Church grew into a tradition and a creed in 
the post-Nicene Church, which creed until this day 
largely rules the faith of Christians... 

The most eminent living master of ecclesiastical 
history, Harnack, photographing in a single sentence 
the Church of the earliest centuries, says: "Originally 
the Church was the heavenly bride of Christ, the abiding 
place of the holy spirit." Does the reader not see 
that here is the same two-fold conception— Christ in-resident 
in the Church by the spirit; and Christ expected 
to return in person as the Bridegroom for his 
bride?. ..With no power except "the irresistible might 
of weakness;" with no wealth except the riches of 
glory inherited through her heavenly citizenship; refusing 
all compromise with the world, declining all 
patronage of kings and emperors, she nevertheless 
went forth conquering and to conquer. 



R2164 :page 167 
SURRENDER SELF-WILL-RECEIVE GOD'S WILL. 



CHRISTIAN life is too often grievously destitute 
of real spiritual power and is essentially carnal, 
and it is the duty and privilege of every child of 
God to enter at once into the newness of life, and to 
walk henceforth in the power of Christ's resurrection. 
Hence the starting point— instant abandonment 



of sin and of every known weight which prevents or 

hinders progress. Whatever is wrong or believed to 

be wrong in God's sight cannot be indulged with impunity. 

It is held up as utterly destructive of all holy 

living and testimony, as unnecessary [improper?] because 

wrong, and as making impossible even assurance 

of salvation. 

Secondly, a deadly blow is aimed at self-life in its 
six forms: self-dependence, self-help, self-pleasing, 
self-will, self-seeking and self-glory; in other words, a 
new practical center is sought for all the life to revolve 
about, and in this way a new step is taken in advance. 
Beyond the territory of known sin there lies another 
almost as dangerous, where self-indulgence is the peculiar 

R2164 : page 168 

feature. There is a large class of pleasures, 
amusements, occupations, which do not bear the hideous 
features of secret or open sin, but which all tend to 
give supremacy to self. 

Thirdly, the surrender of will to God in obedience. 
Christ must to every believer become not only Savior 
but Lord. (Rom. 10:9, R.V.) "No man can say 
that Jesus is the Lord but by the holy Ghost." (1 Cor. 12:3.) 
Hundreds who accept him as Savior from sin 
have no real conception of him as the actual Master 
and Sovereign of the daily life. 

Fourthly, the infilling of the spirit. Here, is perhaps 
the most delicate and difficult part of this teaching. 
But it is not well to stop on phrases; whether 
we agree or not on the exact form of words, we must 
agree on facts, and conspicuous among the facts is this: 
that thousands of professed believers, like the Ephesian 
disciples in Acts 19, do not practically know whether 
there be a holy ghost or not. 

Dr. Gordon discriminated between sealing, filling 
and anointing. 

Fifthly, the Revelation of Jesus Christ in the soul 
as an indwelling Presence.— This is the climax of this 
teaching. The supreme end of the holy spirit's indwelling 
and inworking is to manifest the personal 
Christ as consciously our possession and in possession 
of us. 

Sixthly, beyond these there is always a last stage 
of teaching— the privileges and victories implied in this 
higher or deeper life, such as the rest life of faith, 
power over sin, passion for souls, conscious fellowship 
with God, growing possession of promises, and prevailing 
prayer and intercession. 

Wherein does this differ from the teaching now 
common in the majority of our churches, may be asked? 

(1) It makes more of Jesus as a Savior who will 
save us from our sins. "The very God of peace sanctify 
you wholly." "Faithful is he who calleth you, 
who also will do it." 



(2) It magnifies the necessity of surrender to the 
will of God and breaking with the world. In apostolic 
times if a man confessed Christ he knew what it meant, 
for the world would break with him; but now it is not 
so. Many professing Christians go on hand in hand 

R2165 : page 168 

with the world, and their lives are barren and unfruitful 
in consequence. 

(3) It makes much of the abiding presence of 
Jesus. The heart is opened. He is asked to come in 
and abide, and faith rests upon his promise to do so. 
His presence causes the heart to burn as did the hearts 
of the disciples going to Emmaus; brings peace, as 
when he came over the waves to the disciples on the 
sea; drives out evil as he cleansed the temple; and fills 
the soul with joy as when he appeared to the disciples 
in the upper room. 

(4) While the object sought is freedom from sin 

and effectiveness in service it makes more of receiving 
than doing. We must, with a childlike spirit, receive 
the good things God is ready to bestow before we can 
be a blessing to others. "I will bless thee and thou shalt 
be a blessing," the Lord said to Abraham. The disciples 
must first receive the bread from Christ's hand 
before they could distribute to others. 

Mark Guy Pearse says:— "Some years ago I was 
traveling in the train; seated in the carriage alone I had 
the Book open at Acts 1:8. I was thinking of the 
'Higher Life,' of which just then we had heard a good 
deal— vexed and angry at the little headway, and still 
less heartway, that I could make in the matter. There 
was a life of which I could conceive, very bright and 
very beautiful like a star. Like a star indeed,' I said, 
half scornfully, 'a long ways off, and I have neither 
wings nor ladder long enough to reach it.' Then my 
eye fell upon the word 'receive.' This was something 
very different. 'Receive' I said, with my difficulties 
silenced, and ashamed; of course I can receive. That 
is what the baby can do— receive. That needs no genius, 
no goodness, but only want. Any beggar can 
take a six-pence if it is given to him. I looked out of 
the window. The showers fell, blessing everything. 
But just outside the wayside station was a little cottage, 
and at the corner of it the old woman had set her 
broken pitcher, and it was filled to the brim. 'My 
Lord,' I sighed, humble and grateful, 'I bring thee 
my poor heart— fill it to the brim!' "Ye shall receive" 
—stay your thoughts upon the Word until it kindle 
longing expectation, the boldness that claims the promise 
as your own." — G. C. Huntington. 



R2165 :page 168 



APOSTOLIC ADVICE TO A YOUNG CHRISTIAN. 

--JUNE 13.-2 TIM. 1:1-7; 3:14-17.- 

"From a child thou hast known the holy Scriptures, which 
are able to make thee wise unto salvation."— 2 Tim. 3:15. 

THE WORDS of this lesson, addressed by the 
Apostle Paul to Timothy, are sound advice to all 
Christians, especially to such as are young in the truth, 
and particularly if they have consecrated their lives to 
the Lord and his service, and are seeking to be useful 
according to their consecration as his ministers or servants 
—whether in a public or in a private service, according 
to their talents and opportunities. 

These words were addressed to Timothy, when the 
Apostle Paul was an old man, a prisoner in Rome, because 
of his testimony for the Lord. Nor was Timothy 
a child in years at the time this epistle was addressed 
to him. Timothy's mother and himself were converts 
to the gospel of Christ presumably at the time of Paul's 
visit to their home at Lystra during his first missionary 
tour. It is presumed that at the time of his receipt 
of this letter Timothy must have been about forty years 
of age. Tradition has it that he was about sixteen 
years old at the time of his own and his mother's conversion 
to the gospel. When he was about twenty-one 
years of age, he with Silas accompanied the Apostle 
Paul on his second tour through Asia Minor, and from 
that time on for some sixteen years he was closely identified 
with the Apostle in his service of the truth, until 

R2165 : page 169 

left by the Apostle with the Church at Ephesus, 
that he might help them over some difficulties into 
which they had fallen. It was while Timothy was thus 
serving the Church at Ephesus that he received the 
two epistles which bear his name. 

Paul introduces himself not by calling attention to 
his personal qualities as a logician, nor by boasting of 
any service which he had performed as the Lord's servant 
and minister of the truth; but, properly, by reminding 
Timothy of his apostleship (one of the twelve, taking 
Judas' place) specially commissioned by the Lord 
to introduce his gospel, and specially prepared for the 
work by being made a witness of the Lord's resurrection, 
having been granted a glimpse of his glorious person 
on his way to Damascus and commissioned to declare 
the conditions for the fulfilment to men of God's promise 
of life, provided in Christ Jesus. 

Altho the Apostle had no natural children of his 
own, his tender address to Timothy as his "dearly 
beloved son," and his invocation upon him of a 
divine blessing, shows that he lacked none of 



those fine, noble and endearing sentiments, which belong 

to a true parent. Indeed, the very fact that he 

had no natural children seems to have broadened the 

Apostle's sentiments to such an extent that figuratively 

he took into his affections, as his own children, all 

who accepted the gospel. We remember that he frequently 

used this figure of speech, "Altho ye have 

many teachers, ye have not many fathers in the gospel" 

—"I have begotten you in my bonds." On 

another occasion he represents his efforts for a development 

of a fully consecrated Christian life amongst the 

believers under the figure of a mother travailing for her 

children. This being true of the Apostle's general 

sentiment toward the household of faith, it would be 

much more true in the case of Timothy who had so 

nobly and truly filled the part of a son to him. 

Incidentally the Apostle here points out the purity 
of his conscience toward God, before his eyes were 
opened to a recognition of the Lord Jesus, while making 
mention to Timothy that he prayed for him day 
and night with great desire to see him, and a remembrance 
of Timothy's tears, when they parted company 
at Ephesus in the interest of the truth. It was not according 
to the personal preferences of either that they 
had separated, but both had sunk personal convenience 
and preference in the interest of the Lord's 
cause. 

We note with appreciation the Apostle's care over 
this younger brother in the truth, in whom he sees 
such great promise of present and future service. He 
realizes, perhaps better than Timothy does, the snares 
of the adversary, by which one placed in so prominent 
a position is likely to be assailed. Would he become 
heady and high minded?— Would he lose his faith in 
the cross of Christ?— Would he fall into the snare of 
some of the philosophies, falsely so-called?— Would he 
become vainly puffed up by a fleshly mind, and get to 
feeling himself to be a "somebody?"— Or, would he, 
on the contrary, be a faithful soldier of the cross, 
meek, humble, gentle toward all, an example both in 
faith and practice to those with whom he came in contact? 
And withal, would he hold fast to the Scriptures 
and be apt to teach others to look to this divine 
source of information? He remembered that heretofore 
Timothy had been so close to himself in the work 
that he had been measurably shielded from many trials 
to which he would now be exposed; and yet, no doubt 
he realized that, if Timothy would be prepared to take 
the work of a general minister, which Paul the prisoner 
and growing old must shortly lay aside, it was time 
that he was learning how to stand, complete in the 
strength which God supplies through his Word, without 
leaning so particularly, as heretofore, upon any 
earthly prop. 

These reflections no doubt had much to do with 
the Apostle's prayers for Timothy "night and day;" 



and he now writes with a view to strengthening him 

along these lines, reminding him of the genuine faith 

and piety which he had inherited both from his mother 

and his grandmother, and assuring him that he believed 

that this had laid a deep foundation of true piety 

and faith in Timothy's own heart. We pause here to 

notice the fact everywhere kept prominent in the Scriptures 

that according to the divine arrangement not only 

are the sins of the parents visited upon the children 

for several generations, but also that the faith and godliness 

of the parents, when rightly based on the Word 

of God and the true promises of that Word, lay the foundation 

of character in their children, upon which there 

is the greater hope that a life of godliness and usefulness 

may be built. 

Not only does the Apostle strengthen Timothy's 
mind by a remembrance of the goodly heritage of faith 
and piety received from his mother and grandmother, 
but in addition he reminds him of the grace of God 
specially conferred upon him (Timothy) at that certain 
time when he made a full consecration of himself 
to the Lord, to be God's servant; when the Apostle, 
exercising his power as an Apostle, and as was common 
in those days, communicated to Timothy by supernatural 
power an outward gift or token of the holy spirit, 
through the laying on of his hands. The Apostle had 
evidently either heard or surmised that Timothy was allowing 
the fervor of his zeal for God to die out, and 
hence here he urges him to "stir up the gift of God 
which is in thee." The Greek word here rendered 
"stir up" has the significance of re-enkindle: as tho the 

R2165 : page 170 

Apostle said, Reenkindle your gift by renewed 
energy. 

The next verse enforces this view, implying that the 
Apostle thought that Timothy was in danger of being 
overcome by fear, so as to allow his zeal to abate. And 
hence he reminds him that the spirit of the Lord imparted 

R2166 : page 170 

to his people is not a spirit of fear, but on the 
contrary a spirit of power, energy, zeal awakened by 
love;— loving devotion to God, and a desire to please 
and serve him; loving devotion to the truth, and a loving 
devotion to God's people and a desire to build them 
up in holy things, and to do good unto all men as we 
have opportunity. And yet, lest Timothy should get 
the thought that the spirit of God led only to a zeal or 
energy— that might at times be unwise in its exercise 
and do more harm than good,— the Apostle adds that 
the spirit of God which he bestows upon those who 
are begotten as his sons is a spirit of a "sound mind;" 
—a mind that is fortified and strengthened by the Word 



of the Lord on every subject, and hence, while thoroughly 
fearless of man, is wise in judging of times, 
seasons and methods for using the energy of love which 
burns as a fire within the consecrated heart. O that 
all of God's children might appreciate, and more and 
more obtain, the spirit of a sound mind, by which all 
of their talents might be used, not only fearlessly but 
wisely, in the Master's service. 

Continuing his exhortation (3:14-15) the Apostle 
impresses upon Timothy two things: (1) That he had 
been taught of God, and (2) that this teaching of God 
had come to him through the Scriptures, which, he assures 
him, are sufficient to bring him all the way to 
the complete realization (in the resurrection) of that 
salvation which God has provided through faith in 
Christ Jesus. It will be well for us all to remember 
that all the graces of the spirit, all the progress in the 
knowledge of divine things to which we already have 
attained, that may have really helped us nearer 
to God and to holiness, have come to us through the 
Scriptures of the Old Testament and through the words 
of our Lord and his inspired apostles: nor will it ever 
be necessary to go to other channels for the true 
wisdom which would prepare us for the salvation 
promised. 

Proceeding the Apostle shows (Vss. 16,17) that the 
Scriptures which God inspired are profitable in every 
direction, and quite sufficient for the man of God. 
Needing no supplements of visions or dreams, either 
his own or other men's. They are profitable for doctrine, 
containing the full statement of the divine plan; 
and no human authority is competent to add thereto.— 
Who hath known the mind of the Lord?— Who hath 
been his counselor? They are useful also for reproof 
toward others: No words that we can use in correcting 
the errors of others either in word or doctrine could 
possibly be as forcible for reproof, as the inspired words 
of Scripture. They are useful also for "correction," 
literally, "to bring up and establish one in the right." 
No standard of morals or of discipline can so thoroughly 
search out the heart and correct its waywardness as 
the Lord's Word. 

Not, however, that God's Word is merely a statement 
of platitudes and moral instruction: it is far 
more than this; it searches the heart, the motives, 
the intentions, the thoughts, the ambitions, the aspirations. 
It pronounces a blessing upon the "pure in 
heart," those whose intentions are upright, honest, 
clean. The Word of the Lord as a correcter "in righteousness" 
takes hold upon all the affairs of life, and to 
those who are exercised thereby gives not only the 
spirit of a sound mind so that they are able to weigh 
and appreciate things from the true standpoint— God's 
standpoint of righteousness; but it also inculcates a 
righteousness toward God, and the propriety of seeking 
that holiness of which God is the perfect example. 



Moreover, it reaches down to the relationships between 
husbands and wives, parents and children, friends and 
neighbors. If permitted, it settles every matter for us 
on lines of justice and love. 

The Apostle assures us, accordingly, that God's 
teachings through the Scriptures are given— "That the 
man of God may be furnished completely unto every 
good work."— Revised Version. 

Here the Apostle has reference to perfection of 
character (he makes no reference to perfection in the 
flesh, elsewhere assuring us that even in his own case 
he realized "in my flesh dwelleth no perfection"). The 
perfection of character here pointed out as the proper 
and desirable aim of all Christians, and prepared for by 
the Lord through the giving of his inspired Word, 
should be the aim, the mark, toward which all the soldiers 
of the cross running in the race for the great 
prize should bend their energies. Perfection of character 
was exemplified to us in the person of our dear 
Redeemer, whom God has exalted to the right hand of 
majesty and power; and we are informed by the Apostle 
that the Father has predestinated that all of the 
"little flock" who will share the Kingdom with Christ 
must be conformed to this glorious image of his Son- 
must have perfected characters, hearts, minds, fully 
submitted to the will of the Father and to all righteousness, 
in all things;— however imperfect the earthen 
vessel may be, and however incompletely we may be 
able at our best to carry out in every thought and word 
and deed all the desires of our hearts and the endeavors 
of our transformed minds,— new characters, the 
earnest or beginning of the new natures which will be 
completed in the first resurrection. 



R2166 :page 171 

PERSONAL RESPONSIBILITY. 

-JUNE 20.-ROMANS 14:10-21.- 

"It is good neither to eat flesh, nor to drink wine, nor 
anything whereby thy brother stumbleth, or is ensnared 
or made weak."— Rom. 14:21. 

IN THIS lesson the Apostle brings forcibly to 

our attention the fact that amongst those who 

have accepted Christ as their Savior, trusting in his 

precious blood and consecrating themselves to him, 

there should be permitted the greatest liberty of conscience. 

We need, however, to discriminate between 

liberty in the matter of conscience, and liberty in the 

matter of faith. These two very different things are very 

frequently confounded; and the Apostle's words in this 

lesson are made an excuse for fellowshipping any faith 



or no faith. On the contrary, the Apostle very emphatically 

shows elsewhere, in this very same epistle, 

and in all his writings, that matters of faith and of divine 

instruction are not matters of conscience at all; 

and our consciences (otherwise our judgments) are not 

to determine in reference to what we shall believe, 

in the sense of deciding our faith: on that subject 

the entire Church of God stands upon one platform; 

and whoever does not stand upon that platform is not 

related to the Church of God in any sense or particular. 

St. Paul declared that platform emphatically when 
he said, "I delivered unto you first of all, that which I 
also received [first of all] how that Christ DIED for our 
sins, according to the Scriptures, and that he was raised 
again on the third day for our justification." Whoever 
received this testimony (that his sins have been 
atoned for) into a good and honest heart, accepting 
Jesus as his Redeemer, and seeking to live separate 
from sin and in harmony with God, and accepting from 
the risen Christ the robe of his righteousness, such a 
one was thereby "justified" from all things, from 
which the law could not justify. It is not, therefore, 
for one to say, "You may be justified through faith in 
the Redeemer, through faith in the precious blood, and 
I will be justified by works of the law;" nor for another 
to say, "I will be justified, not by faith in the blood, 
but by walking in the footsteps of Jesus." No; there 
is only the one name given under heaven, only the one 
faith, only the one door, only the one way of access 
into the justified state or condition. We are not, therefore, 
to excuse differences on this fundamental doctrine, 
by calling them matters of conscience, for 
conscience has nothing to do with the matter. These 
are faith differences. He who has the faith rightly 
based is justified, and he who has not the properly 
based faith is unjustified and is yet in his sins. 

Neither can this question of conscience excuse 
from obedience to any of the matters which are 
clearly and distinctly taught by the Lord and his apostles, 
by word and example. For instance, our Lord 
enjoined love of the brethren: it is not the province, 
therefore, of any man's conscience to judge that in his 
case love of the brethren is unnecessary. Again, Christ 
and the apostles enjoined upon the Church that we 
should not only symbolically eat his flesh (appropriate 
the merit of his sacrifice) and drink his blood (share 
his death— be dead with him), but our Lord provided 
an outward symbol of this to be commemorated annually 
and said, "Do this, in remembrance of me." And 
the apostles set us the example of doing this on its anniversary. 
It is not, therefore, a matter of conscience, 
but a matter of obedience, whether we do it or do it 
not. Similarly, our Lord declared the immersion 
(burial) of his will into the Father's will and the real 
baptism into death, saying, "I have a baptism to be 
baptized with, and how am I straitened until it be accomplished, 



"finished," at Calvary; but in addition to this, 

the real baptism, our Lord at the beginning of his consecration 

symbolized it in a water immersion at the 

hands of John, saying, "Thus it becometh us to fulfil 

all righteousness."— Matt. 3:15. 

The apostles also enjoined this, explaining that 
water baptism was "not the putting away of the filth of 

R2167 :page 171 

the flesh," but simply "the answer [outward declaration] 

of a good conscience toward God:" they instructed 

(Rom. 6:2-6) that the real baptism is a baptism or 

burial of the will into the will of Christ, whereby the 

believer becomes dead to his own will and alive to the 

will of Christ;— dead with him to the world, its aims, 

ambitions, hopes, fears, etc., and henceforth alive with 

Christ, to the hopes and promises set before us in his 

gospel. Yet, while teaching this, as the real baptism, 

the apostles, nevertheless, clearly taught by word and 

deed a baptism in water, as the outward symbol of this 

heart-consecration and burial of the will, whereby our 

good consciences would testify or answer to our faith 

and obedience in the sight of fellow-believers. It is 

not, therefore, a matter for any man's conscience to 

decide whether or not he will obey the voice of the 

Lord and of the apostles: It is merely a question of 

knowledge and of obedience, both as respects the real 

baptism of the will, and also respecting the outward, 

symbolic baptism in water. It is a fact, that quite a 

great many (mistaught) have never learned either of 

the true baptism or burial of the will by full consecration 

into the will of Christ, nor of the symbolic baptism. 

And some have learned of the symbolic baptism 

who do not understand and have never performed the 

real baptism of consecration. And others have performed 

the real baptism of consecration, but have never 

performed the symbolic baptism. We believe that disobedience 

R2167 :page 172 

on the part of this latter class in connection 
with the symbol will quite probably be excused by the 
Lord because of ignorance: but, we have no hesitation 
in saying that neither the real baptism, nor its symbol 
in water are matters that can be set aside or excused 
as a question of conscience (judgment) upon which 
each has a right to exercise his own opinion. 

In the lesson before us the Apostle points out that 
those who have become God's people by obedient faith 
and consecration (so long as they maintain that faith 
and consecration) are amenable only to God with respect 
to their views of his will on minor matters respecting 
which he has not given positive instructions. It 
is to him that each one is responsible. If really and 
truly they bow their knee to him, and if really and 



truly their tongues confess to him, no human being 
has either the right or the ability to intervene and to 
judge of their consciences, in respect to feasts or fasts, 
new moons or holy days, eating meat or abstaining 
from meat— none of which things are regulated under the 
New Covenant. Others have the right to commend or 
advise on these subjects, but have not the right to command 
or condemn. The Apostle urges that since each 
one of us must give an account of himself to God as a 
consecrated member of the body of Christ, according to 
his own conscience or judgment of the Lord's will therefore, 
each is to remember that God is the Judge of all; and 
instead of condemning one another for conscientious 
differences with reference to feasts and fasts, etc., each 
should rather make sure that from his own life he remove 
everything that would be calculated to mislead or 
to stumble his brother by a violation of his conscience. 

The important point of discussion toward which 
the Apostle's argument was directed was the eating of 
meat which had previously been offered to idols— and 
it would appear that nearly all the meat sold in the market 
places in heathen countries was so offered. Some 
of the brethren insisted that therefore they were practically 
deprived of eating meat at a neighbor's house 
or at a restaurant, and felt obliged to inquire as would 
a Jew. And these were inclined to look with discredit 
upon those who did eat such meat. The Apostle shows 
that his mind took the broad view, that since the idol 
was nothing, the meat could not have been injured in any 
manner. Nevertheless, while he would like to have seen 
all the brethren fully informed on the subject, he discouraged 
any attempt on the part of others to shame 
them into violating their consciences; and he points out 
to those who are strong, and who could see the matter 
clearly, that instead of ridiculing the weaker brethren, 
they should be glad to note their conscientiousness and 
to help them, for by ridicule and getting them to violate 
their conscience they might start them in a downward 
course which would lead to their destruction. Instead 
of forcing the weaker brother to use a liberty 
which would violate his conscience, the stronger brother, 
if he asked the weaker to eat at his table, should be 
careful to provide meat that had not been offered to 
idols, that the weaker brother might not be tempted to 
violate his conscience. Why should we be so bent on 
using our liberty and forcing it on others when we see 
that it might lead to the injury of brothers for whom 
Christ died? Christ left the glory with the Father 
and humbled himself to man's condition, and even to 
death, giving up life itself for our fallen race: can we, 
therefore, if we have our Master's spirit, do less than 
sacrifice some of our rights and liberties in the interest 
of the weaker brethren? And by so doing your good, 
your liberty, your right view of the matter, would not 
be evil spoken of. 

We are indeed the Kingdom of God in embryo, 



and as such we are not in bondage, but realize the liberty 

which the poor world, ignorant of the great Emancipator, 

Christ, and the great emancipation which he 

has wrought for those who receive him, does not comprehend. 

But, urges the Apostle, let us remember, 

dear brethren, that the advantage of being members of 

this embryo Kingdom is not merely these liberties, 

which release us from the Mosaic restrictions with reference 

to what we will eat and to what we will drink, 

but it means far more, even in the present life. The 

most valuable blessings which we have as members of 

this embryo Kingdom are— righteousness (justification 

through Christ) and its resulting blessings of peace and 

joy in the holy spirit. Let us not, therefore, think 

that in giving up some of our liberties we would be 

losing the blessings and favors of the gospel: quite the 

contrary, we have all the best things left to us, and 

may the more richly enjoy them by copying our Master's 

self denial in sacrificing these little liberties. 

And he that in these things (verse 18) surrenders 
his own rights and liberties, in his endeavor to serve 
Christ, serving some of the humble members of his 
body, is both acceptable with God and approved of 
men: not only will fellow men appreciate such little 
sacrifices, on their behalf, but God also will appreciate 
them. Therefore, instead of contending about our 
rights and privileges and battling to have these, let us 
rather follow in the way that leads to peace and the 
things whereby we may become helps one to another 
as members of the Lord's body. Do not permit a question 
respecting your food, drink or clothing to destroy 
the work of God— either the work of the development 
of his grace in your own heart, or by breaking down 
the conscience of a weaker brother, destroy the work 
which grace has begun in him. Being free from the 
Mosaic law we understand that all kinds of food are 
permissible, and none to be regarded as unclean, but if 
any one thinks that certain food is unclean (forbidden 
by God's command) it would be a sin for him to eat 
it, because he thus would violate his conscience. 

Finally, brethren, the Apostle urges, it would be 
a good rule to follow, to refrain from either the eating 
of meat or the drinking of wine, or any other liberty 
whose exercise would likely do injury to another, 
either temporarily or permanently. 



JUNE 27TH-REVIEW. 



page 173 
VOL. XVII. JUNE 15, 1897. No. 12. 



CONTENTS. 



Views from the Watch Tower 175 

Papacy Seeking National 

Prominence 175 

High-Church Opinion of 

Sectarianism 176 

"Overproduction of Ministers" 176 

What Say the Scriptures about Spiritism? 

—Proofs That it is Demonism 177 

Spirits Personating the Dead 180 

Obsession at the First Advent 184 

The Gospel Sent to Europe 187 

page 174 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
-ADDRESS TO- 
TOWER PUBLISHING CO., BIBLE HOUSE, 58 & 60 ARCH ST., 
ALLEGHENY (NORTH PITTSBURG), PA., U.S.A. 

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 

INCLUDES A SUBSCRIPTION TO "THE OLD THEOLOGY TRACTS'-QUARTERLY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, N.Y. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, 

OR REGISTERED. FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN 

MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS: 

Those of the interested, who by reason of old age or accident, or 
other adversity are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, 
if they will send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and 
requesting the paper. 



FREE TO THE LORD'S POOR. 



We are not only willing but anxious to have on the WATCH 
TOWER lists the names of all who are interested in its teachings;— 
whether able to pay for it or not. It is for this reason that we offer it 
free as stated above. But those who get it free are expected to apply 
by postal card each year: for otherwise we might continue sending it 
to people who have removed or died or lost interest. And then, too, 
the office must be run on general rules. Please cooperate by complying 
with such moderate requirements: but do not forget that we are 
anxious that all who love the present truth should have the WATCH 
TOWER always. Let us know at once by postal card if your copy ever 
miscarries. 

THE WATCH TOWER IN GERMAN. 



Extra editions of the first three numbers of our German paper 
were printed, and all readers who have German friends are invited to 
send their addresses for free sample copies. Their contents are very 
suitable for beginners. 

R2176 : page 174 

IMPROVED SPELLING. 



The National Educational Association has given its formal approval 
to the reformed spelling of the following words as here given: 
program, tho, altho, thoro, thorofare, thru, thruout, catalog, prolog, decalog 
demagog, pedagog. 



R2168 : page 175 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 



MANY were surprised that after the widely 
published announcement that Archbishop 
Corrigan (Roman Catholic) would take a prominent 
part in the recent dedication of the Grant Monument, 
and that he would pronounce the closing benediction, 
—he was afterward dropped from the arrangement 
and took no part. The explanation is now at 
hand. It appears that two of General Grant's 
sisters caused the change of program. The Primitive 
Catholic says:— 

"Mrs. Virginia Grant Corbin of Newark, and Mrs. 
J. Cramer of Orange, N.J., both sisters of General 
Grant, refused most emphatically to attend the ceremonies, 
if any Roman Catholic prelate should be called 
upon to bless the sarcophagus and utter any of his 
benedictions. 

"Then the great men in Washington and New 
York, the generals and patriots composing the committee 
on ceremonies, exercised much diplomacy and 
cunning, animated into activity on account of their 
cringing fear of offending the popish politicians and 
their master, but it was all of no avail. Those two American 
women held out; no compromise was possible with 
the resolute stand they had taken. The committee 
was obliged to concede the palm of victory to them 
and avert a national scandal, consisting of a most flagrant 
breach of trust, against the memory of the dead 
soldier, against his family and the nation at large." 

PAPACY SEEKING NATIONAL PROMINENCE. 



During President Cleveland's administration the 
Roman Catholic Church requested a grant of space on 
government ground at the United States Military Academy 
at West Point for the erection of a chapel. The 
permission was given, and forthwith foundations for a 
large church building were begun. But the press protested 
so vehemently against the providing of church 
sites by the general government that the permission 
was recalled and the work stopped. 

The matter has come before the new administration, 
and it has decided that the church may be built; 
and that any other denomination desiring to build there 
shall also be granted a site; but the assumption is that 
not many Protestant denominations will accept the offer, 
since few of them would care to spend the money to 
build a structure that would compare favorably with 
the one now being started. 

Romanism has for years been laboring to stamp 
its character and influence upon this government. To 
this end it has spent money liberally at our national 
Capitol— for the great Catholic College and other 
church institutions. This move on West Point is in 
the same line; for, altho comparatively few of the Cadets 
are Romanists, they recognize that influence upon 
them will be influence upon a class that some day will 
wield a pronounced influence in governmental affairs. 
They are zealous, too, in forwarding the interests of 
Catholic young men for admission to West Point. Protestants 
seem to think that Romanism has changed 
within the last century. She has changed her tactics, 
but not her principles; and that because she was losing 
her hold: she changed so as to take a fresh hold on the 
people's liberties. She will be a prominent figure in 
the time of trouble and will have the cooperation of 
many "Protestants" in efforts to maintain "the present 
social order." Both Protestants and Romanists have 
for some time been moving to have the United States 
declared to be a "Christian nation;" and having at last 
unitedly succeeded, as represented in the decision of 
the United States Supreme Court, Romanism will be 
crafty enough to grasp her full share of the power. 

R2168 : page 176 

HIGH-CHURCH OPINION OF SECTARIANISM. 



The rector of St. Ignatius' Protestant Episcopal 
Church, New York City, Rev. Arthur Ritchie, edits a 
monthly church journal. In a recent issue of this 
paper appears an editorial of which the following is 
an extract:— 

"As a matter of fact, could anything be more utterly 



contemptible than the great American sects? We 
do not refer to respectable religions, like the Presbyterian 
and the Lutheran, the fruit of the travail of the 
sixteenth century, but such low, time-serving, ignorant 
superstitions as the Baptist Church, the Methodist 
Episcopal Church, and the like. In the East these 
parvenu folk do not dare to raise their heads, or, if 
they do, they are laughed at for their pains. But no 
doubt in the West it is different, and quite possibly 
there a Baptist Minister or a Methodist minister may 
consider himself as on an equality with the Church 
clergyman! Should this be the case, a little 'arrogance' 
and 'superciliousness' would be very useful and highly 
commendable. Those who boast that they derive their 
office from the people should be made to know, if not 
to feel, that they are removed by an infinite chasm 
from those who derive their mysterious powers from 
above and are the vicegerents of heaven. 

"Of course, in matters non-ecclesiastical there 
should be Christian politeness shown to every one according 
to his position in life; but even in such matters 
dissenting ministers should be made to feel their 
inferiority. 

This minister and editor is not well posted. We 
can assure him that some Methodist and Baptist congregations 
have in recent years come nearer to his conceptions 
of true Christianity,— i.e., become more arrogant 
and supercilious, and nearer to the Scriptural description 
of the Laodicean stage of the Church— rich, 
increased in goods and having need of nothing; and 
knowing not that they are poor, blind, miserable and 
naked-Rev. 3:16-19. 

We much regret that all of the arrogance, etc., is 
not confined to Episcopalians, Presbyterians and Lutherans: 
and we trust that the truly meek and humble in 
every quarter of Babylon will give earnest heed to the 
Lord's words, "Come out of her my people; that ye be 
not partakers of her sins and that ye receive not of her 
[chastisements] plagues."— Rev. 18:4. 

THE "OVERPRODUCTION OF MINISTERS." 



Not long since The Evening Post (N.Y.) published 
an article advocating "A Society for the Decrease 
of the Ministry." Some of the arguments for 
fewer ministers were: "the all-pervasive restlessness 
and discontent" of the ministry, so great that "a prominent 
officer of a missionary society is reported to have 
said that in all his visitations of the clergy of a certain 
State he had failed to discover a single incumbent who 
did not wish to make a change;" "the underlying anxiety 
for prospective bread and butter;" the disgraceful 
"scramble for place," so that "a certain Congregational 
church in Connecticut, with by no means an inviting 



future, received not less than two hundred and 
fifty applications, scattered all the way from Maine to 
California;" the existence of a "dead line" beyond fifty 
years of age; and the growing "commercial basis of 
modern church life." 

This question, started in England, is being much 
discussed here also. The World (N.Y.) has interviewed 
some of the leading ministers and college professors 
on the subject, and we subjoin extracts from 
some of their replies:— 

The President of Andover Seminary, Rev. George 
Harris, D.D., said,— "It is undoubtedly true that the 
ranks of the ministry are at present overcrowded. The 
number of unemployed clergymen is increased somewhat 
by reason of the protracted depression of business. 
Some of the small churches are not able to pay 
a living salary, and the missionary societies are obliged 
to reduce their working forces." 

Rev. Dr. George Hodges of Episcopal Theological 
School, Harvard University, says,— "It is true that 
every desirable vacant parish is pursued by an eager 
crowd of parsons, some of them being out of employment, 
others being discontented with their cures. It 
is true also that after middle life many ministers find 
the door of opportunity shut in their faces." 

"Rev. Lewis W. Mudge, D.D., Princeton, N.J., 
says,— "The spirit of unrest so manifest in churches 
and among ministers is seen also in other professions 
and in business circles, and is the outcome of financial 
and social conditions." 

Prof. Edward L. Curtis, Yale Theological Seminary, 
says,— "The complaint that there is an over-supply 
of ministers might be made of any of the learned 

R2169 : page 176 

professions as much as of the ministry. 

"I do believe, however, that such schools as the 
Moody School and others of that kind, where only the 
English branches are taught, have had a tendency to 
send men into the ministry only partially equipped for 
the work, and that it has had a tendency to bring 
about a competition not desirable." 

Dr. James O. Murray, Dean of Princeton University, 
says,— "What the Church wants is a higher intellectual 
standard. There are too many men in the ministry 
that could not prosper at anything else and do 
not succeed here." 

Rev. Dr. John Hall said,— "Regarding an over-supply 
of ministers much may be said that is true, but 
no more true than of other professions.. ..What we 
need in the nation is not a reduction in the number of 
ministers, but an increase of spiritual power, of fidelity 
to the Master, of the teaching and preaching of the 
glorious gospel, and of reliance on the guidance of the 
holy spirit in the hearts of people and pastors." 



We agree with Dr. Hall, that there are not too 
many ministers of the right kind: there are merely too 
many professional ministers. Every fully consecrated, 

R2169 : page 177 

humble Christian is a member of the "royal priesthood,' 
commissioned to minister (serve) the truth to 
all who have ears to hear; to be ambassadors for God; 
to show forth the praises of him who has called them 
out of darkness into his marvelous light. Such were 
the ministers of the primitive Church, and there cannot 
be too many of these God-ordained ministers of the 
Sanctuary, who labor not for filthy lucre's sake, but 
gather fruit unto eternal life and await the Master's— 
"Well done, good and faithful servant [minister], enter 
into the joys of thy Lord." 

The harvest is great and such laborers are far too 
few. Pray ye the Lord of the harvest that he will 
send forth more laborers into his vineyard; and seek 
and pray that you yourself may be one of them. Of 
such ministers it is written: "They shall be all taught 
of God." 

"SELF-DENIAL WEEK." 



The Salvation Army in Great Britain has recently 
had a "self-denial week," the results of which are announced 
to be $124,000. This is the second week of 
the kind within a year. When returns are received 
from other parts of the world it is expected that the 
total will be a quarter of a million dollars. 

We greatly admire the zeal of the "Army," and 
recommend that special efforts be made to put "present 
truth" before them favorably. We wonder whether 
clearer knowledge of the Lord and his goodness and 
gracious plan would lead them as it ought to redoubled 
energy in the service of so gracious a Master, or 
whether it would cool their ardor and self-denial. The 
truth is a crucial test of our consecration, true love 
and devotion to our Lord. He seeketh such as worship 
and serve him in spirit and in truth— from love, not 
from fear. Let each reader ask himself, How is it 
with me? 



R2169 : page 177 
WHAT SAY THE SCRIPTURES ABOUT SPIRITISM? 



-PROOFS THAT IT IS DEMONISM. 



THAT which we believe to be the truth respecting 
Spiritism is antagonized from two standpoints. 
(1) The majority of people have no confidence 
in Spiritism, but believe its claimed manifestations and 
proofs are fraudulent. (2) An increasingly large number 
are disposed to deny the existence of the evil spirit 
beings called demons, and of the prince of demons, 
called in the Scriptures the Devil and Satan. 

Rev. Adam Clark, D.D., has well said,— 

"Satan knows well that those who deny his being 
will not be afraid of his power and influence; will not 
watch against his wiles and devices; will not pray to 
God for deliverance from the Evil One; will not expect 
him to be trampled down under their feet, if he has no 
existence; and, consequently, they will become an easy 
and unopposing prey to the enemy of their souls. By 
leading men to disbelieve and deny his existence, he 
throws them off their guard. He is then their complete 
master, and they are led captive by him at his 
will. It is well known that among all those who make 
any profession of religion, those who deny the existence 
of the Devil, are those who pray little or none at 
all; and are, apparently, as careless about the existence 
of God as they are about the being of the Devil. 
Duty to God is with them out of the question; for those 
who do not pray, especially in private,— and I never 
saw a devil-denier who did,— have no religion of any 
kind, except the form, whatever pretensions they may 
choose to make." 

If it be asked how Spiritism could do injury to 
those who consider its claims to be deceptions and 
frauds and its votaries to be dupes, we answer that a 
large majority of its votaries are those who at one time 
thoroughly and heartily denied its claims and considered 
them impositions. Those who most thoroughly 
disbelieve in Spiritism are often the most ready to test 
its professed claims; and when convinced that many of 
its claims are genuine and many of its manifestations 
supernatural, these former disbelievers are more liable 
to become its devotees: whereas, if they had known 
just what Spiritism is, and how and by what power it 
operates, they would be on guard, and their judgment 
would have a support and guidance which it otherwise 
lacks. It is the lack of the true knowledge of Spiritism 
(imparted through the Scriptures and confirmed 
by indisputable evidences from outside the Scriptures) 
which causes so many to fall a prey to this delusion. 

True, there are frauds committed in the name of Spiritism; 
but these are chiefly in connection with attempted 
"materializations." That Spiritists have done and 
can do, through some power or agency, many wonderful 
works beyond the power of man, has been abundantly 
proved in a variety of cases— some of them before 



scientific men, total unbelievers. Tambourines 

have been played while in the air beyond the reach of 

human hand and suspended by some invisible power; 

chairs have been lifted into the air while people were 

sitting upon them, and without any connection with 

any visible power or agency; mediums have been floated 

through the air, etc. The rapping tests, the table-tipping 

tests, the autograph tests and the slate-writing 

tests have been proved over and over again, to the satisfaction 

of hundreds of intelligent people in various 

parts of the world. And Spiritism reckons amongst 

its adherents judges, lawyers, business-men and numbers 

of women of ability. These people have tested the 

claims of Spiritism and have candidly avowed their 

R2169 : page 178 

faith in it. And it is unwise, to say the least, to sneer 
at such as fools or knaves— fools if simply deluded by 
tricks and slight of hand; knaves if they are willingly 
and knowingly lending their time and influence to the 
perpetration of frauds. 

The writer was inclined to be skeptical with reference 
to all the various claims of Spiritism until convinced 
to the contrary by a Christian man, in whose 
testimony he was justified in having full confidence. 
This friend was not a believer in Spiritism but, being 
thrown into the company of some Spiritists for an evening, 
the suggestion was made, "Let us have a seance." 
The company present assented; our friend remaining 
from curiosity. They sat down to a table, placed their 
hands upon it in the usual manner, and one of the 
number present being a medium inquired, "Are there 
any spirits present?" The answer indicated by raps 
upon the table— one for A, two for B, three for C, etc., 
spelled out the information that spirits were present, 
but that they would hold no communication that evening. 
The medium asked "Why?" The answer rapped 
out was, "Because new mediums are being appointed 
all over the United States." The company was disappointed 
and through the medium asked that as a test 
the name of some prominent person dying that night 
should be communicated. The request was complied 
with and the name of a Russian dignitary, which we 
cannot now recall, was spelled out. This was before 
the Atlantic cable was laid, and my friend, anxious to 
test the matter, kept watch of the newspapers and finally, 
nearly a month after (the time requisite for 
Russian mails in those days) he saw the announcement 
of the death of the Russian notable bearing that very 
name. 

Our friend was convinced that Spiritism was not 
all a "hoax," and was anxious for another meeting. 
When it took place, in view of the answer at the previous 
meeting, the medium inquired, "Are there any 
mediums present? and, if so, how many?" The answer 



was, "Four." The medium asked the spirit to please 

indicate which four of those present were mediums, 

and as each one called his name the mediums were indicated 

by a rap upon the table, by some invisible 

agent. Our friend was one of those indicated and right 

proud he felt of the honor. This occurred in Wheeling, 

W.Va. Shortly after he came to Allegheny, Pa., 

and visited an aunt, a widow, who with her family resided 

here. Anxious to display his newly conferred 

powers as a medium, he asked his aunt and her daughter 

to join him in a "seance." They were surprised, and 

the daughter said, "Why, are you a medium? I am 

a rapping medium also, brother Harry is a tipping 

medium and mother is a writing and trance medium." 

Our friend had never witnessed the powers of any but 

rapping mediums, and was very anxious that his aunt 

R2170 : page 178 

should display the powers of her mediumship, and was 
shown writing done by her which was an exact facsimile 
of his dead uncle's autograph upon checks. And 
strange, too, his uncle wrote a fine hand, while his 
aunt could not write at all, except under this influence. 

Wishing to test her powers as a talking medium, 
the three surrounded a small table, and the aunt called 
for a spirit to communicate through her. The answer 
given was that there would be no communication, because 
there were no unbelievers present to convince. 
They persisted, however, and got the aunt to call again 
for the spirit. The answer this time was that her hands 
were forcibly lifted from the table and brought down 
upon it with a bang. This was something surprising 
to them all. The spirits evidently were provoked at 
the pertinacity of a second call after their refusal. 
But after discussing the matter for some ten minutes 
our friend prevailed upon his aunt to call again for the 
spirits and see what else would happen. She complied, 
and in response her hands were lifted from the table and 
brought down with fearful concussion, three times in 
rapid succession, sounding as tho every bone would be 
broken; and with her eyes staring out wildly and shrieking 
Oh! Oh! Oh! she jumped from the table in a semi-delirious 
condition. 

That spirit, whoever it may have been, was evidently 
angry and wanted it understood that it could not be 
trifled with. Our friend informs us that never after 
that would his aunt have anything to do with Spiritism 
as a medium— she had caution enough to let it alone. 
But our friend was anxious to witness the powers of a 
"tipping medium," and in the evening when his cousin 
Harry came home he insisted on having an exhibition 
of his mediumship. Harry complied and amongst other 
tests was the following:— He placed a small, light table 
in the center of the floor and said, "I call for the spirit 
of our old dog Dash to come into this table." Then 



addressing the table he said, "Come Dash!" The table 
balanced itself on two feet and hobbled after him around 
the room. 

I should here remark that our friend who vouches 
for these matters will no longer exercise any of his 
powers as a medium. He is a prominent Christian man 
now living in this city: his views with reference to 
Spiritism are now the same that we are here endeavoring 
to present. 

The claim of Spiritists is, that these manifestations 
and communications from unseen intelligences are from 
human beings, who once lived in this world, but who, 
when seeming to die really became more alive, more intelligent, 
freer, and every way more capable and competent 
than they had ever been before. It is claimed 
that the purpose of these manifestations is to prove 

R2170 : page 179 

that the dead are not dead, but alive;— that there is no 
need of a resurrection of the dead, because there are 
no dead;— the dead being more alive than ever, after 
passing into what is termed death. We shall not stop 
here to show how inharmonious all this is to the testimony 
of Scripture upon this subject, but merely cite 
the reader to the Word of the Lord; reminding him that, 
"If there be no resurrection of the dead,. ..then they 
also which are fallen asleep in Christ are perished."— 
1 Cor. 15:13,18; Job 14:21; Psa. 146:4; Eccl. 9:5,6. 

Here is the point of infatuation. As soon as the 
unbeliever in Spiritism has been convinced that an unseen 
intelligence communicates through the medium 
he is all interest. Nothing else offers such proofs from 
invisible sources as does Spiritism; and many seem not 
only willing but anxious to walk by sight rather than 
by faith. Every one has friends who have died, and 
thousands are anxious to communicate with them if 
possible, and to receive from them some message or 
some advice. It is not surprising, therefore, to find 
people greatly absorbed in these matters, and very willing 
to be directed by those whom they esteem their 
truest friends and most competent advisers. 

They visit a medium for the purpose of holding 
communication with the dead. The medium describes 
the hair, the eyes, etc., and certain little peculiarities, 
such as a mole or an injured or deformed finger 
or foot (which the father or son or sister or wife identifies 
as the description of the loved one deceased) 
and delivers a message which, however vague or indefinite, 
is construed to be very important. The novices 
are filled with a sort of reverent joy mixed with 
a humble feeling of the inferiority of their own condition, 
and with a pride that they have been counted 
worthy to receive communications from "the spirit 
world," while so many good and great people are not 
so favored, but are "blind to the wonderful facts of 



Spiritism." The feelings thus started are somewhat 
akin to some kinds of religious feelings, and straightway 
the "converts" are ready to believe and obey the 
advice and instructions of those whom they believe to 
be so much wiser and holier than themselves, and so 
deeply interested in their welfare, present and eternal, 
as to leave the joys and ministries of heaven to commune 
with them and instruct them. 

The majority of people have no true Christian 
faith built upon the foundation of the Word of God: 
they have a wish for a future life, and a hope with reference 
to their dead, rather than a faith with reference 
to either. As a consequence, their minds being convinced 
that they have had communication with those 
beyond the grave, everything relating to the future life 
becomes more real and more interesting to them than 
ever before. And many such, wholly ignorant of religious 
feelings, say to themselves, Now I know what 
it is to have faith, and a religious feeling with reference 
to the future, and they congratulate themselves 
that they have received a great spiritual blessing. 

But this is only the first lesson, and these comparatively 
uplifting experiences belong chiefly to it. Later 
experiences will demonstrate, as all Spiritists will freely 
acknowledge, that there are "evil spirits," "lying 
spirits," which time and again deceive them; and the 
messages and revelations, often foolish and nonsensical, 
gradually lead the investigator to a disbelief of the 
Bible and the Creator, while it teaches and exalts "the 
spirits" as the only sources of knowledge aside from 
nature; and thus the way is paved toward advanced 
lessons on "spirit-affinities," "free love," etc. But 
after the first deception and shaking of confidence the 
explanation that there are "both good and bad spirits" 
is generally satisfactory; and the poor victim follows 
blindly on, because assured that he communes with 
some supernatural power. 

As an illustration of this we mention the case of 
an old gentleman, a Pittsburger, an avowed Spiritist 
and an earnest defender of Spiritism. We knew something 
of his history through a mutual friend; how that, 
while holding a communication through a medium, 
supposedly his "evoluted" wife, the latter said to him: 
"John, I am perfectly happy only for one thing; and 
that is on your account." He answered, "O Mary, 
do not allow my affairs to mar your bliss! I am comparatively 
happy for an old man and comparatively 
comfortable." But the answer came, "O no, John, 
I know better. I know that you are lonely, very lonely, 
that you miss me very much, and are suffering from 
lack of many little attentions; and that your home is 
comparatively dreary." Mr. N. had full confidence in 
Mary's judgment, and the message carried great weight; 
and his home and its affairs gradually grew less happifying, 
and he gradually grew dissatisfied; and so at a 
subsequent "seance" he inquired of Mary what he 



could do that would relieve her burden and make her 
bliss complete. She replied that he should find a suitable 
companion and re-marry. But the old gentleman 
(seventy years old) objected that even if he could find 
a suitable companion, such a one would not have him. 
But at frequent interviews the supposed spirit of his 
wife insisted, and as he thought further over the matter 
he grew more lonely, and finally asked Mary to choose 
for him, as she had so much better judgment than any 
earthly being could have on the subject. The medium 
affected great indignation at the answer, and would 
not communicate it at first. The more she objected to 
giving the answer, the more anxious Mr. N. became 
to have it, and finally the medium explained that the 
spirit of his wife had said that Mr. N. should marry 

R2170 : page 180 

her (the medium); but that she was indignant that the 
spirit should think that she would marry an old man 
like him. 

But the more Mr. N. thought the matter over the 
more he was inclined to be, as he supposed, led by the 
good spirit of his wife into ways of pleasantness and 
into paths of peace; and he urged upon the medium 
that it was the duty of humanity to obey the behests 
of their best friends in the "spirit world." Finally the 
medium consented that if he would deed over to her what 
property he possessed she would agree to follow the 
directions of the spirit and marry him. The matter was 
consummated in legal form, and Mr. N. with his medium 
wife and her daughter proposed to make the formerly 
cold and cheerless home of Mr. N. all that his spirit-wife 
had wished for him. It was a very short time, 
however, before the poor old gentleman was very glad 
to abandon home and all, to get free from the two 
"she-devils," as he afterward knew them. 

But did not this shake the confidence of Mr. N. 
in Spiritism? By no means. He merely communicated 
with his wife again through another medium and 
was informed that a lying spirit had misrepresented 
her entirely and that she had given no such bad advice. 
Knowing these facts concerning his history when we 
met him shortly after, and he tried to urge upon the 
writer the claims of Spiritism, we said to him, "Mr. 
N., we will admit that Spiritism is backed by some 

R2171 :page 180 

super-human phenomena, but we deny that the powers 
which communicate represent themselves truthfully. 
They claim to be friends and relatives who once 
lived in this world, but the Scriptures assure us to the 
contrary of this that there is no work or knowledge or 
device in the grave, and that the dead know not anything. 
(Eccl. 9:5,10.) They declare that the only 



hope of a future life is by a resurrection from the dead. 
You know, Mr. N., that whatever these powers may 
be which claim to be the spirits of your friends, their 
testimony is entirely unreliable. You cannot believe 
their most solemn declarations. They are what the 
Scriptures term "lying spirits." We proceeded to give 
him, as we are about to give in this article, the identity 
of these spirits as set forth in the Scriptures. He 
heartily assented that some of the spirits were unreliable, 
"thoroughly bad," but claimed that others were 
very good, very truthful, and had frequently given 
good advice which had been very helpful to him. 

It is claimed by many Spiritists, especially by novices, 
that the influence of Spiritism is elevating; but 
those who have passed through the various stages of 
experience in this so called religious system have found, 
and have publicly declared, that its influence is quite 
the reverse of elevating— it is demoralizing. 

The method of operation is explained by The Banner 
of Light, a leading Spiritist paper, in answer to 
the query, thus:— 

"Q. Where a spirit controls the hand of a medium 
to write, is the impression always made through the 
brain? 

"A. Sometimes the control is what is termed mechanical 
control; then the connection between arm and 
brain is entirely severed, and yet the manifestation is 
made through what is called the nervous fluids, a certain 
portion of which is retained in the arm for the purpose 
of action. But when the manifestation is what is 
called an impressional manifestation, then the brain 
and entire nervous system is used." 

Explaining the difference between Mesmerism and 
spirit control, another journal, the Spiritual Age, says: 

"Suppose I magnetize you to day; and that I, the 
mesmerizer, speak, write, act through you, you being 
unconscious;— this is Mesmerism. Suppose, further, 
that I die tonight; and that, to-morrow, I, a spirit, 
come and magnetize you, and then speak, write, 
act through you; this is Spiritualism [Spiritism]." 

The value of Spiritism to the world is thus summed 
up by the well known Horace L. Hastings:— 

"According to the theory of Spiritualists there are 
a hundred times as many disembodied spirits about us 
as there are men in the flesh. Among them are all the 
poets, authors, orators, musicians and inventors of past 
ages. They know all they ever knew when they were 
in the flesh, and have been learning a great deal more 
since; and with their added powers and extended experience 
they should be able to do what mortals have 
never done before. They have had free access to the 
public mind and public press, with no end of mediums 
ready to receive their communications, and thousands 
and thousands of inquirers who have anxiously questioned 
them, and earnestly desired to obtain information 
from them. They have had tables and slates and pens 



and pencils and banjos and pianos and cabinets and 

bells and violins and guitars; and what have we to show 

for it all? Their business in this world has been to 

instruct men, to help them, to make them wiser and 

better. They have talked and rapped, they have tipped 

and rattled, they have fiddled and scribbled, they have 

materialized and dematerialized, they have entranced 

and exhibited; they have told us many things which 

we knew before; many things which we do not know 

yet; and many other things which it was no matter 

whether we knew or not; but when we come to real instruction, 

reliable information, or profitable and valuable 

knowledge. Spiritualism is as barren as Sahara, 

as empty as a hollow gourd." 

WHO ARE THESE SPIRITS WHICH PERSONATE 
THE DEAD? 

We have in the Scriptures most abundant and 
most positive testimony that no communication could 
come from the dead until after the resurrection. Furthermore, 
we have positive Scripture testimony (1) 
that not only some, but all, of these spirits are "evil 
spirits," "lying spirits," "seducing spirits." The 
Scriptures forbid that humanity should seek to these 

R2171 :page 181 

for information, and clearly inform us that these demons 

or "devils" are "those angels which kept not 

their first estate,"— some of the angels to whom was 

committed the supervision of mankind in the period 

before the flood, for the purpose of permitting them to 

endeavor to lift mankind out of sin; that by their failure 

all might learn that there is but one effectual remedy 

for sin; viz., that provided in Christ. These angels, 

instead of uplifting humanity, were themselves enticed 

into sin, and misused the power granted them, of materializing 

in human form, to start another race. (Gen. 6:1-6.) 

Their illicit progeny, was blotted out with 

the flood, and themselves were thereafter restrained 

from the liberty of assuming physical bodies, as well as 

isolated from the holy angels who had kept their angelic 

estate inviolate. 

The Apostle Peter (2 Pet. 2:4) mentions these, 
saying, "God spared not the angels that sinned, but 
cast them down to hell [Tartarus] and delivered them 
into chains of darkness, to be reserved unto judgment." 
Jude (6) also mentions this class, saying, "The angels 
which kept not their first estate, but left their own 
habitation [proper condition] he hath reserved in everlasting 
chains— under darkness unto the judgment of 
the great day." Notice three points with reference to 
these evil angels. 

(1) They are imprisoned in Tartarus, restrained, 
but not destroyed. Tartarus is nowhere else rendered 



"hell," but in this one passage. It does not signify 
the grave, neither does it signify the Second Death, 
symbolized by the "lake of fire and brimstone;" but 
it does signify the air or atmosphere of earth. 

(2) They have some liberties in this imprisoned 
condition, yet they are chained, or restrained, in one 
respect— they are not permitted to exercise their powers 
in the light being "under chains of darkness." 

(3) This restriction was to continue until "the 
judgment of the great day," the great Millennial 
Day— in all a period of over 4000 years. As we are 
now in the dawning of the Millennial Day— "the great 
day"— it is possible that this should be understood to 
mean that some of these limitations as to "darkness" 
may ere long be removed, gradually. If so, if the 
"chains of darkness" should be released, it would permit 
these evil spirits to work deceptions or "lying 
wonders" in the daylight (as they are now attempting 

to do) to the delusion of mankind more than ever has 
been known since the flood. 

These fallen angels, or demons, are not to be confounded 
with Satan the prince of demons, or devils, 
whose evil career began long before— who was the 
first, and for a long time the only, enemy of the divine 
government; who, having been created an angel of a 
superior order, sought to establish himself as a rival 
to the Almighty, and to deceive and ensnare Adam 
and his race to be his servants; and to a large extent, 
for a time at least, he has succeeded, as all know. As 
"the prince of this world," who "now worketh in the 
hearts of the children of disobedience," he has indeed 
a very multitudinous host of deceived and enslaved 
followers. Naturally he would appreciate the deflection 
of the "angels who kept not their first estate," 
and who were restrained at the time of the flood; and 
hence he is spoken of as their chief, "the prince of 
devils;" and no doubt as a superior order of being he 
exercises some degree of control over the others. 

These fallen angels, "demons," have probably 
very little to interest them amongst themselves;— evil 
beings apparently always prefer to make game of the 
purer, and apparently take pleasure in corrupting and 
degrading them. The history of these demons, as given 
in the Scriptures, would seem to show that the evil 
concupiscence which led to their fall, before the flood, 
still continues with them. They still have their principal 
pleasure in that which is lascivious and degrading; 
and the general tendency of their influence upon 
mankind is toward working mischief against the well-disposed, 
and the debauchery of those over whom they 
gain absolute control. 

We are well aware that many Christian people 
have reached the conclusion that the Lord and the 
apostles were deceived, when they attributed to the 
works of demons conduct that is now considered human 
propensity and mental unbalance and fits. But all 



should admit that if our Lord was in error on this subject, 
his teachings would be an unsafe guide upon any 
subject. 

Notice the personality and intelligence attributed 
to these demons in the following Scriptures— "Thou 
believest that there is one God; thou doest well; devils 
also believe and tremble." (Jas. 2:19.) Do human propensities 
"believe and tremble?" The demons said to 
our Lord, "Thou art Christ, the Son of God! And he, 
rebuking them, suffered them not to speak [further], 
for they knew that he was Christ." (Luke 4:41.) 
Another said, "Jesus I know and Paul I know, but who 
are ye?" (Acts 19:15.) The young woman from 
whom Paul cast out the spirit of soothsaying and divination 
(Acts 16:16-19) is a good illustration. Can it 
be claimed by any that the Apostle deprived the woman 
of any proper talent or power? Must it not be confessed 
to have been a spirit which possessed and used 
her body?— an evil spirit unfit to be tolerated there? 

Many of those who claim that the demons of the 
Scriptures were the spirits of wicked men and women 
who died, and that these are the "lying spirits" acknowledged 
by Spiritists, have still another difficulty;— 
for generally they claim that the spirits of wicked dead 

R2171 :page 182 

go to hell-torments, as they wrongly interpret sheol 

R2172:page 182 

and hades to mean.* If so, how could they be so much 
at liberty? 

"Witchcraft," "Necromancy," the "Black art," 
"Sorcery," etc., are supposed by many to be wholly 
delusions. But when we find that they had a firm hold 
upon the Egyptians, and that God made special provision 
against them with Israel, we are satisfied that 
he made no such restrictions either against that which 
is good, or against that which had no existence whatever. 
The instruction to Israel was very explicit: they 
should not have any communion nor make any inquiries 
through necromancers (those who claimed to speak 
for the dead; i.e., spirit-mediums); nor with any wizard 
or witch; nor with any who had occult powers, 
charms; nor with those who work miracles by means 
of sorcery and incantation.— Read carefully all of the 
following Scriptures,— Exod. 22:18; Deut. 18:9-12; 
Lev. 19:31; 20:6,27; 2 Kings 21:2,6,9,11; 1 Chron. 10:13,14; 
Acts 16:16-18; Gal. 5:19-21; Rev. 21:8; 
Isa. 8:19,20; 19:3. 

The Bible story of King Saul's "seance" with 
the witch of Endor, a necromancer or spirit-medium, 
as related in 1 Sam. 28:7-20, is an illustration of what 
is claimed to be performed to-day. Altho the law with 
reference to these mediums was very strict and the punishment 



death, there were some who were willing to 

risk their lives because of the gains which could thus 

be obtained from people who believed that they were 

obtaining supernatural information from their dead 

friends— just as with spirit-mediums to-day. King 

Saul was well aware that there were numerous of these 

mediums residing in Israel contrary to the divine injunction 

and his own law, and his servants apparently 

had no difficulty in finding the one at Endor. Saul 

disguised himself for the interview, but no doubt the 

crafty woman knew well the stately form of Saul— head 

and shoulders taller than any other man in Israel. (1 Sam. 9:2.) 

Hence her particularity to secure a promise 

and oath from his own lips that no harm should befall 

her for the service. 

The methods used by the evil spirits through the 
medium at Endor were similar to those in use to-day. 
They caused to pass before the medium's mental vision 
the familiar likeness of the aged prophet, Samuel, 
wearing as was his custom, a long mantle. When she 
described the mental (or "astral?") picture, Saul recognized 
it at once as a description of Samuel; but Saul 
himself saw nothing— he "perceived," from the description, 
that it was Samuel. Easily convinced, as 
people under such circumstances usually are, Saul did 
not stop to question how it could be that Samuel looked 
as old and as stooped as he looked in the present life, 
if he was now a spirit being and far better off; nor did 
he inquire why he wore the same old mantle in the 
spirit world that he had worn when he knew him as an 
earthly being. Saul had been forsaken by the Lord 
and was now easily deceived by these "lying spirits," 
who personated the prophet and spoke to Saul in his 
name, through their "medium," the witch, necromancer, 
Spiritist. 

The fallen spirits are not only well-informed in respect 
to all the affairs of earth, but they are adepts in 
deceit. In answering Saul, the manner and style, and 
as nearly as could be judged the sentiments of the 
dead prophet were assumed— the better to deceive. 
(Thus these "lying spirits" always seek to counterfeit 
the face manner and disposition of the dead.) The 
response was, "Why hast thou disquieted me to bring 
me up?" This answer corresponds to the Jewish belief 
—that when a person died he became unconscious 
in "sheol," the grave, waiting for a resurrection. (Job 14:12-15,21; 
Psa. 90:3; Eccl. 9:5,6.) Hence the representation 
is that Samuel was brought up from the 
grave, and not down from heaven; and that his rest or 
peaceful "sleep" was disturbed or "disquieted."— Psa. 13:3; 
Job 14:12; Psa. 90:5; John 11:11,14. 

Saul was easily deceived into thinking that the 
Prophet Samuel who had refused to visit him to have 
any further converse with him while alive, had been 
forced to commune with him, by the wonderful 
powers of the witch. (See 1 Sam. 15:26,35.) Saul's 



own testimony was, "God is departed from me and 
answereth me no more, neither by prophets, nor by 
dreams."— 1 Sam. 28:6,15. 

Any rightly informed person will readily see the 
absurdity of supposing that Samuel would hold any 
conference whatever with Saul under the circumstance. 
(1) Samuel (when living) was aware that God had forsaken 
Saul, and hence Samuel had no right to speak 
to him and no right to give him any information which 
the Lord was unwilling to give him. And Samuel 
would not do so. (2) It is thoroughly absurd to suppose 
that a spirit-medium under condemnation of the 
Lord and prohibited of the right of residence in the 
land of Israel could have the power at the instance of a 
wicked king, whom God had deserted, to "disquiet" 
Samuel and to bring him "up" out of sheol. Was 
Samuel down in the earth, or was he afar off in heaven? 
and had the witch the power in either case to command 
him to present himself before King Saul to 
answer his question? Or is it reasonable to suppose 
that any spirit-mediums have the power to "disquiet" 
and "bring up" or in any other manner cause the dead 



*See "What Say the Scriptures About Hell?" a pamphlet in 
which every text of Scripture containing the word hell is cited and examined 
in the light of Scripture and reason, together with other Scriptures 
and parables supposed to teach eternal torment. Price 10 cents. 
For sale by WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, Allegheny, Pa. 

R2172 : page 183 

to appear to answer the speculative questions of the 
living? 

The "familiar spirit" of the witch, personating 
Samuel, foretold nothing which Saul himself did not 
anticipate. Saul knew that God's word had been passed 
that the kingdom should be taken from him and his 
family, and he had sought the witch because of his 
fear of the Philistine hosts in battle array for the morrow. 
He expected no mercy for himself and his family, 
God having told him that David would be his successor. 
He even anticipated, therefore, the statement 
which was the only feature connected with this story 
that indicates in any degree a supernatural knowledge; 
viz., "To-morrow shalt thou and thy sons be with me: 
the Lord also shall deliver the host of Israel into the 
hands of the Philistines." The well-informed demons 
knew full better than did Saul the strength of the 
Philistines' position and army, and the weakness of 
Saul's position and army, and that he himself was already 
panic stricken and making this inquiry of the 
witch-medium because he was distracted at the situation. 
Any one familiar with the warfare of that time 
would know (1) that one day's battle would probably 



settle the question; and (2) that the death of the king 
and his household would be the only logical result. 
Nevertheless, the "familiar spirit" erred, for two of 
Saul's sons escaped and lived for years. It is even denied 
by scholars that the battle and the death of Saul occurred 
for several days after the visit to the witch. 

It is not surprising that Satan and the fallen angels, 
his consorts in evil, should know considerably 
more than do men, concerning many of life's affairs. 
We must remember that by nature they are a higher, 
more intelligent order than men; for man was made "a 
little lower than the angels" (Psa. 8:5): besides, let 
us remember their thousands of years of experience, 
unimpaired by decay and death, as compared with 
man's "few years and full of trouble," soon cut off in 
death. Can we wonder that mankind cannot cope with 
the cunning of these "wicked spirits," and that our 
only safety lies in the divine provision that each one 
who so wills may refuse to have any communication 
with these demons? The Word of the Lord is, "Resist 
the devil, and he will flee from you." (Jas. 4:7.) 
"Be sober, be vigilant; because your adversary the 
devil, as a roaring [angry] lion, walketh about, seeking 
whom he may devour: whom resist, steadfast in the 
faith." -1 Pet. 5:8,9. 

But while able to tell things past and present, these 
evil intelligences are quite unable to do more than guess 
at the future. Yet these guesses are often so skillfully 
stated as to satisfy the inquirer and yet appear true, if 
the result should be the opposite of his expectation. 
Thus the oracle of Delphi having been consulted by 
Croesus demonstrated to him a super-human knowledge 
of present things, and when he, having thus gained 
confidence in it, inquired through its mediums, 
"whether he should lead an army against the Persians," 
the answer as recorded by Herodotus the historian 
was, "By crossing the Halys, Croesus will destroy 
a mighty power!" Relying upon this, Croesus attacked 
the Persians and was defeated. His own mighty power 
was destroyed! History is full of such evidences that 
the demons know not the future; and God's Word 
challenges all such, saying,— 

"Produce your cause, saith the Lord; bring forth 
your strong reasons, saith the King of Jacob. Let them 
bring them forth and show us what shall happen. Let 
them show the former things [things before or to come 
what they be, that we may consider them, and know 
the latter end of them; or declare us things for to come. 
Show the things that are to come hereafter, that we may 
know that ye are gods."— Isa. 41:21,23. 

But where was Samuel the prophet, if Saul would 
be with him the day following? Clearly the meeting 
place would not be heaven, for wicked Saul was surely 
unfit to enter there (John 3:5); nor could the meeting 
be in a place of flames and torment, for surely Samuel 
was not in such a place. No; the "familiar spirit" 



spoke to Saul from the standpoint of the general faith 
of that time, taught by Samuel and all the patriarchs 
and prophets,— namely, that all who die, good and bad 

R2173 : page 183 

alike, go to sheol, the grave, the state of death, the 
sleep from which naught can awaken except the resurrection 
power of Michael, the arch-angel (Dan. 12:1,2); 
—except it were claimed that the witch's "familiar 
spirit" could awaken the dead in advance,— but this, 
as we are showing, was a deception, a fraud, the "lying 
spirit" personating the dead and answering for Samuel. 
Of this passage Charles Wesley wrote— 

"What do these solemn words portend? 
A gleam of hope when life shall end?— 
Thou and thy sons shall surely be 
To-morrow in repose with me:— 

Not in a state of hellish pain, 
If Saul with Samuel remain; 
Not in a state of damned despair, 
If loving Jonathan be there. 

One remarkable thing in connection with the manifestations 
of these fallen angels, or "demons," is that 
people of ordinary common sense are so easily deceived 
by them and accept such flimsy proofs respecting the 
dead, which they would not accept respecting the living. 
The inquirer will accept through the medium a 
description which fits to the individual and his manner, 
clothing and appearance years before, and will hold sacred 
a message purporting to come from him, whereas the 
same individual would be more on guard against deception 
by a living impostor, and his message through 
a servant. 

R2173 :page 184 

The mention in the Scriptures of these necromancers, 
witches and mediums, leads us to infer that 
through mediums they were for centuries seeking fellowship 
with the Israelites. But it is apparently the 
custom to change the manner of manifestation from 
time to time: just as witchcraft flourished for a time in 
New England and Ohio, and throughout Europe, and 
then died out and has been succeeded by Spiritism, 
whose tipping and rapping manifestations are gradually 
giving way to others, clairaudience and materialization 
being now the chief endeavors, the latter, being 
very difficult and the conditions often unfavorable, are 
often accompanied by mediumistic assistance and fraud. 

OBSESSION AT THE FIRST ADVENT. 



In the days of our Lord and the early Church the 
method of operations on the part of these demons had 
changed somewhat from the practices in the days of 
Saul, and we read nothing in the New Testament about 
witches, wizards and necromancy, but a great deal 
about persons possessed by devils— obsession. Apparently 
there were great numbers thus possessed throughout 
the land of Israel: many cases are mentioned in 
which our Lord cast out devils; and the power to cast 
them out was one of those conferred upon the twelve 
apostles, and afterward upon the seventy that were 
sent out. The same power was possessed and exercised 
by the Apostle Paul.-See Luke 9:1; 10:11; Acts 13:8-11; 
16:18. 

Mary Magdelene, we remember, had been possessed 
of seven devils (Luke 8:2), and being set free 
from their control, she became a very loyal servant of 
the Lord. Another instance is mentioned in which a 
legion of spirits had taken possession of one man. (Luke 8:30; 
4:35,36,41.) No wonder that his poor brain, 
assaulted and operated upon by a legion of different 
minds, would be demented. This tendency of these 
fallen spirits to congregate in one person indicates the 
desire they have still to exercise the power originally 
given them; namely, the power to materialize as men. 
Deprived of this power they apparently have comparatively 
rare opportunities of getting possession of human 
beings. Apparently the human will must consent before 
these evil spirits have power to take possession. But 
when they do take possession apparently the will power 
is so broken down, that the individual is almost helpless 
to resist their presence and further encroachment, 
even tho he so desires. Our Lord intimates such a 
condition (Matt. 12:43-45), suggesting that, even after 
an evil spirit had been cast out and the heart swept 
and garnished, if it were still empty, there would 
be danger of the return of the evil spirit with others 
to re-possess themselves of the man;— hence the necessity 
for having Christ enthroned within, if we would 
be kept for the Master's use, and be used in his service. 

Apparently these evil spirits have not the power 
to impose themselves, even upon dumb animals, until 
granted some sort of permission; for, when the "legion" 
was commanded to come out of the man whom they 
possessed, they requested as a privilege that they might 
have possession of the bodies of a herd of swine; and 
the swine being according to the law unclean to the 
Jew, and unlawful to eat, the Lord permitted them to 
have possession of them, doubtless foreseeing the results, 
and with a view to giving us this very lesson. 

The same Apostle who speaks of these evil spirits 
as "lying wonders" and "seducing spirits" (1 Tim. 4:1; 
2 Thes. 2:9; compare Ezek. 13:6; 1 Kings 22:22,23) 
tells us that the heathen sacrificed to these demons. 



(1 Cor. 10:20.) And so, indeed, we find that in various 
parts of the world there are demon manifestations. 
Amongst the Chinese these demon powers are frequently 
recognized, and sacrifices are offered to them; 
so also in India and in Africa. Amongst the North 
American Indians in their savage state these evil spirits 
operated after much the same manner as elsewhere. 
An illustration is given by Missionary Brainard in a 
"Report to the Honorable Society for Propagating Christian 
Knowledge," explanatory of the difficulties and 
obstacles to the spread of Christianity among the Indians 
with whom he had been laboring, as follows:— 

"What further contributes to their aversion to 
Christianity is the influence which their powaws (conjurers 
or diviners) have upon them. These are a sort of 
persons who are supposed to have a power of foretelling 
future events, or recovering the sick, at least oftentimes, 
and of charming, enchanting, or poisoning persons to 
death by their magic divinations. Their spirit, in its 
various operations, seems to be a Satanic imitation of 
the spirit of prophecy with which the Church in early 
ages was favored. Some of these diviners are endowed 
with the spirit in infancy;— others in adult age. It 
seems not to depend upon their own will, nor to be acquired 
by any endeavors of the person who is the subject 
of it.... They are not under the influence of 
this spirit always alike,— but it comes upon them at 
times. Those who are endowed with it are accounted 
singularly favored. 

"I have labored to gain some acquaintance with 
this affair of their conjuration, and have for that end 
consulted and queried with the man mentioned in my 
Diary, May 9, who, since his conversion to Christianity, 
has endeavored to give me the best intelligence he 
could of this matter. But it seems to be such a mystery 
of iniquity, that I cannot well understand it, and do 
not know oftentimes what ideas to affix to the terms he 
makes use of. So far as I can learn, he himself has 
not any clear notions of the thing, now his spirit of divination 
is gone from him. 

"There were some times when this spirit came 
upon him in a special manner. Then, he says, he was 
all light, and not only light himself, but it was light 
all around him, so that he could see through men, and 

R2173 :page 185 

knew the thoughts of their hearts. These "depths of 
Satan" I leave to others to fathom or to dive into as 
they please, and do not pretend, for my own part, to 
know what ideas to affix to such terms, and cannot well 
guess what conception of things these creatures have 
at these times when they call themselves all light. But 
my interpreter tells me that he heard one of them tell 
a certain Indian the secret thoughts of his heart, which 
he had never divulged.... 



"When I have apprehended them afraid of embracing 
Christianity, lest they should be enchanted and 
poisoned, I have endeavored to relieve their minds of 
this fear, by asking them, Why their powaws did not 
enchant and poison me, seeing they had as much reason 
to hate me for preaching to them, and desiring them 
to become Christians, as they could have to hate them 
in case they should actually become such? That they 
might have an evidence of the power and goodness of 
God engaged for the protection of Christians, I ventured 
to bid a challenge to all their powaws and great 
powers to do their worst on me first of all; and thus I 
labored to tread down their influence."— Memoirs of 
Brainard, pages 348-351. 

Three months since the New York Sun published 
the following account of the experiences of Capt. C. E. 
Denny, Indian agent for the Canadian Government 
among the Blackfeet Indians. Capt. Denny says:— 

"On my arrival in the northwest territories with 
the northwest mounted police, in 1874, 1 was curious 
to find out how far these "medicine men" carried their 
arts, and also what these arts consisted of. I heard 
from Indians many tales of wonders done by them, but 
it was a long time before I got a chance to be present 
at one of these ceremonies. The Indians were reluctant 
to allow a white man to view any of their "medicine" 
ceremonies. As I got better acquainted with 
several tribes, particularly the Blackfeet, I had many 
chances to find out the truth regarding what I had 
heard of them, and I was truly astonished at what I 
saw at different times. Many of the medicine feats did 
not allow of any jugglery, the man being naked, with 
the exception of a cloth around his loins, and I sitting 
within a few feet of him. 

"All Indians believe in their familiar spirit, which 
assumed all kinds of shapes, sometimes that of an owl, 
a buffalo, a beaver, a fox, or any other animal. This 
spirit it was that gave them the power to perform the 

R2174:page 185 

wonders done by them, and was firmly believed in by 
them all. 

"On one occasion I was sitting in an Indian tent 
alone with one of the "medicine" men of the Blackfeet 
Indians. It was night and all was quiet in the camp. 
The night was calm, with a bright moon shining. On 
a sudden the Indian commenced to sing, and presently 
the lodge, which was a large one, commenced to tremble; 
and the trembling increased to such a degree that it 
rocked violently, even lifting off the ground, first on 
one side and then on the other, as if a dozen pair of 
hands were heaving it on the outside. This lasted for 
about two minutes, when I ran out, expecting to find 
some Indians on the outside who had played me a trick, 
but, to my astonishment, not a soul was in sight, and 



what still more bewildered me was to find on examination 
that the lodge was firmly pegged down to the 
ground, it being impossible for any number of men to 
have moved and replaced the pegs in so short a time. 
I did not enter the lodge again that night, as the matter 
looked, to say the least, uncanny. 

"On another occasion I visited a lodge where a 
"medicine smoke" was in progress. There were about a 
dozen Indians in the lodge. After the smoke was over, 
a large copper kettle, about two feet deep, and the 
same or a little more in diameter, was placed empty on 
the roaring fire in the middle of the lodge. The medicine 
man who was stripped, with the exception of a 
cloth around his loins, was all this time singing a "medicine" 
in a low voice. 

"The pot after a short while became red-hot, and 
a pole being passed through the handle, it was lifted 
in this state off the fire and placed on the ground, so 
close to me that the heat was almost unbearable. On 
the pole being withdrawn the medicine man sprang to 
his feet and, still singing his song, stepped with both 
naked feet into the red-hot kettle and danced for at 
least three minutes in it, still singing to the accompaniment 
of the Indian drums. I was so close, as I have 
before said, that the heat of the kettle was almost unbearable, 
and I closely watched the performance, and 
saw this Indian dance for some minutes with his bare 
feet in it. On stepping out he seemed none the worse; 
but how he performed the act was and is still a mystery 
to me." 

Similar feats are performed by the fetish men of 
India "under control;" and tests given by "spirit mediums" 
"under control" sometimes include the handling 
of fire, red hot glass, etc., with bare hands without 
injury. God has protected his faithful in the flames 
(Dan. 3:19-27), and it seems that he does not always 
hinder Satan's use of such power. 

Dr. Ashmore, of long experience as a missionary 
in China, says,— 

"I have no doubt that the Chinese hold direct 
communications with the spirits of another world. They 
never pretend that they are the spirits of their departed 
friends. They get themselves in a certain state and 
seek to be possessed by these spirits. I have seen them 
in certain conditions invite the spirits to come and to 
inhabit them. Their eyes become frenzied, their features 
distorted, and they pour out speeches which are 
supposed to be the utterances of the spirits." 

An old issue of Youth's Day Spring contains a 
letter from a missionary describing the condition of the 
Africans on the Gaboon river at the approach of death. 
He says,— 

"The room was filled with women who were 
weeping in the most piteous manner, and calling on 
the spirits of their fathers and others who were dead, 
and upon all spirits in whom they believed, Ologo, 



Njembi, Abambo, and Miwii, to save the man from 

death." 
A Wesleyan missionary, Mr. White, says,— 
"There is a class of people in New Zealand called 

Eruku, or priests; these men pretend to have intercourse 

with departed spirits." 

R2174 : page 186 

No part of humanity has been exempted from the 
attacks of these demons, and their influence is always 
baneful. India is full of it. So generally accepted at 
one time was the belief in demon-possession, that the 
Roman Catholic Church, through her priests, regularly 
practiced "exorcism," or casting out of demons. 

The very earliest recorded spirit manifestation was 
in Eden, when Satan, desiring to tempt mother Eve, 
used or "obsessed" the serpent. Mother Eve claimed 
that she was deceived by the serpent's misrepresentations. 
God allowed the claim as true, and sentenced 
the serpent, which there became the symbolic representative 
of Satan. As the father of lies he there took 
possession of a serpent to deceive Eve and lead her to 
disbelieve God's command by the false assurance, "Ye 
shall not surely die!" so ever since, tho he has varied 
his methods and mediums, all of them are to deceive 
—to blind the minds of mankind, lest the glorious 
light of the goodness of God, as it shines in the face of 
Jesus Christ our Lord, should shine unto them. 

Thanks be to God for the promise that, in due 
time, the Kingdom of God shall be established in the 
earth, in the hands of our Lord Jesus and his then completed 
and glorified Church, and that one of the first 
works of that Kingdom, preparatory to its blessing 
"all the families of the earth," will be the binding of 
that Old Serpent, the Devil and Satan, that he may 
deceive the nations no more for the thousand years of 
Christ's reign; until all men shall be brought to a clear 
knowledge of the truth, and to a full opportunity to 
avail themselves of the gracious provisions of the New 
Covenant, sealed at Calvary with the precious blood 
of Christ. 

While the name Old Serpent includes Satan, "the 
prince of devils," it is here evidently used as a synonym 
for all the sinful agencies and powers which had 
their rise in him. It therefore includes the legions of 
"evil spirits," "familiar spirits," "seducing spirits." 

Spiritism, as a deceiving influence under the control 
of Satan, is foretold by the Apostle Paul. After 
telling of the work of Satan in the great Apostacy of 
which Papacy is the head-center, the Man of Sin, the 
Mystery of Iniquity,* the Apostle draws his subject to 
a close by pointing out that Satan, toward the end of 
this age, will be granted special licence to deceive by 
peculiar arts, all who, having been highly favored with 
the Word of God, have failed to appreciate and use it. 



He says,— "For this cause God will send them strong 
delusion [a working deception], that they may believe 
a lie: that they may all be condemned, who believed 
not the truth, but had pleasure in unrighteousness 
[doctrinal or practical]."— 2 Thes. 2:11,12. 

We shall not be at all surprised if some later manifestations 
of the powers of darkness, transformed to 
appear as the angels of light and progress, shall be 
much more specious and delusive than anything yet 
attempted. We do well to remember the Apostle's 
words,— "We wrestle not with flesh and blood, but 
with princely powers of darkness, with the spiritual 
things of the evil one."— Eph. 6:12. 

In 1842, six years before "modern Spiritism" began 
to operate, Edward Bickersteth, a servant of God 
and student of his Word, wrote,— 

"Looking at the signs of the times, and the long 
neglect and unnatural denial of all angelic ministration 
or spiritual influence, and at the express predictions of 
false Christs, and false prophets, who shall show signs 
and wonders, insomuch that if it were possible they should 
deceive the very elect, and that when men receive not the 
love of the truth that they might be saved, for this cause 
God shall send them strong delusion, that they shall believe 
a lie; I cannot but think there is a painful prospect 
of a SUDDEN RECOIL and religious revulsion from 
the present unbelief and misbelief, to an unnatural and 
undistinguishing CREDULITY." 

Satan is the inspirer and supporter of every Anti-Christ; 
and as he led those who had pleasure in error 
rather than the truth to the organization of the great 
Anti-Christ, Papacy, symbolically the "beast" of Rev. 13, 
and as he is now operating to produce a Protestant 
"image of the beast" with life, which will cooperate 
with the chief Anti-Christ, so in combination with 
these will be the powers of darkness, the powers of the 
air, the lying and seducing spirits, operating in some 
manner or in a variety of ways,— Spiritism, Christian 
Science, Theosophy, Hypnotism, etc. 

"Rev. Father Coppens, M.D. [Roman Catholic], 
Professor in Creighton University," recently delivered 
a discourse on "Borderland of Science," from which we 
extract the following on the phenomena of Spiritism:— 

"What must we think of the nature of Spiritism, 
with its spirit rappings, table-turning, spirit apparitions 
and so on? Can the facts, which are not imposture, 
but realities, be explained by the laws of nature, 
the powers of material agents and of men? All that 
could possibly be done by the most skilled scientists, 
by the most determined materialists who believe neither 
in God nor in demon, as well as by the most conscientious 
Christians, has only served to demonstrate to perfect 
evidence that effects are produced which can no 
more be attributed to natural agency than speech and 
design can be attributed to a piece of wood. One principle 
of science throws much light on the nature of all 



those performances, namely, that every effect must 
have a proportionate cause. When the effect shows 
knowledge and design, the cause must be intelligent. 
Now many of these marvels evidently show knowledge 
and design, therefore the cause is certainly 
intelligent. 

"A table cannot understand and answer questions; 
it cannot move at a person's bidding. A medium cannot 
speak in a language he has never learned, nor know 
the secret ailment of a patient far away, nor prescribe 



*See MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. II., chapter 9, pages 267-366. 

R2175 : page 187 

the proper remedies without knowledge of medicine. 
Therefore these effects when they really exist, are due 
to intelligent agents, agents distinct from the persons 
visibly present, invisible agents therefore, spirits of 
another world. 

"Who are these agents? God and his good angels 
cannot work upon these wretched marvels, the food of 
a morbid curiosity, nor could they put themselves at 
the disposal of pious men to be trotted out as monkeys 
on the stage. The spirits which are made to appear at 
the seances are degraded spirits. Spiritualists themselves 
tell us they are lying spirits. Those lying spirits 
say they are the souls of the departed, but who can 
believe their testimony, if they are lying spirits as they 
are acknowledged to be? This whole combination of 
imposture and superstition is simply the revival in a 
modern dress of a very ancient deception of mankind 
by playing on men's craving for the marvelous. Many 
imagine these are recent discoveries, peculiar to this age 
of progress. Why this spirit-writing is and has been 
for centuries extensively practiced in benighted pagan 
China, while even Africans and Hindoos are great 
adepts at table turning. It is simply the revival of 
ancient witchcraft, which Simon Magus practiced in St. 
Peter's time; which flourished in Ephesus while St. 
Paul was preaching the gospel there. It is more ancient 
still. These were the abominations for which God 
commissioned the Jews in Moses' time to exterminate 
the Canaanites and the other inhabitants of the promised 
land." 

-(TO BE CONTINUED.)- 



R2175 : page 187 

THE GOSPEL SENT TO EUROPE. 



--JULY 4.-ACTS 16:6-16.- 

"The entrance of thy words giveth light."— Psa. 119:130. 

AFTER the conference at Jerusalem respecting 

the obligations of the Law upon Christians, 

we noticed that Jude and Silas returned with Paul and 

Barnabas to Antioch, to deliver the decision of the 

Council. After remaining with the Antioch Church 

for several months the Apostle Paul proposed to Barnabas 

that they revisit the Churches of Asia Minor, 

which they had established during the first preaching 

tour. The Apostle was thoughtful of the interests of 

the general work, and remembered the necessity of 

watering as well as sowing the truth. Experience is 

convincing that this thought is correct, and that it is 

just as true to day as then that beginners in the Christian 

way need the careful oversight of those who are 

more advanced, that they may become rooted, grounded, 

established and built up in the truth. 

The necessity for doing something to center and 
develop the interest of beginners is very generally recognized 
to-day, but with many the thought seems to 
be that the beginner needs to get into the current of 
what is termed "Christian work," but what in reality 
is very largely animal excitement. We may be very 
certain that the Apostle's thought was not with reference 
to getting up some little excitement and entertainment 
for the "babes" in Christ, such as strawberry 
festivals, apron sociables, gossip societies and other 
entertainments to attract the world, at ten cents a head, 
for the Lord's cause. These were not the considerations 
which moved the Apostle to suggest the new tour. 
He had a more important work than this; he thought 
of the newly interested believers, the opposition with 
which they would have to contend among their former 
friends, the false arguments and sophistries which 
would be raised by the adversary to combat the truth; 
the inexperience and perplexities of the Lord's flock, 
and he needed to go amongst them to encourage, 
strengthen and establish them in the truth and make 
of them strong soldiers of the cross. 

Barnabas readily assented to the proposed tour; 
but before they had proceeded far in the arrangement, 
a difference of opinion arose between the two which, 
however, has been very greatly exaggerated, we think, 
by many Commentators. We hold that they did not 
have a "quarrel, bitter and angry;" that they did not 
"part in anger;" that it is not true that "neither would 
yield to the other, and therefore both were wrong." 
Quite to the contrary, we think that each had a right 
to act according to his own judgment of the Lord's will 
in the matter under discussion; and that a sharp discussion, 
in which each would be positive, should not 
with Christians signify any bitterness or acrimonious 
feeling. 



The point of the discussion was, whether or not 
John Mark (cousin of Barnabas and writer of the Gospel 
of Mark) should go with them on this journey. 
We saw in our lesson of May 2 that Mark forsook the 
service of the ministering brethren (Paul and Barnabas) 
in their first tour, and Paul evidently thought 
that up to this time Mark had not properly recognized 
his misconduct on that occasion, and hence was determined 
that the assistant on this occasion should be 
some one upon whom they could place greater dependence. 
Barnabas, on the contrary, stood up for Mark, 
and as a result they determined that it would be best 
to make two parties instead of one. The evidence 
seems to be that Barnabas was rather the loser by not 
acquiescing with the Apostle Paul's view of the matter; 
for altho Barnabas and Mark started on a preaching 
tour, its importance and success were comparatively 
much less than attended the ministries of Paul: so 

R2175 : page 188 

much so that no particular report of it is given, and 
Barnabas thereafter is almost lost from sight. 

That Paul's conduct was not the result of any unkind 
feeling toward either Barnabas or Mark is evident 
from the fact that in one of his subsequent epistles he 
mentions Barnabas most kindly; and a little farther on 
we find Mark one of Paul's associates in the work. 
Presumably he had learned the lesson which the Apostle 
thought he needed to learn. However, as a result 
of their candid differences of view, as Dr. Stalker puts 
it, Paul had to part "from the man to whom he owed 
more than to any other human being; and Barnabas 
was separated from the grandest spirit of the age." 
"They never met again." 

Paul chose Silas, whose full name was Silvanus, 
one of the brethren sent from Jerusalem after the conference, 
to be his companion and helper; and they started 
northward from Antioch, then turned westward to 
Derbe, then to Lystra, where the company was joined 
by young Timothy. Altho Timothy's mother was a 
Jewess, his father being a Greek he had never been 
circumcised. Paul, foreseeing that he would be a valuable 
assistant in the work, recommended that, according 
to the Jewish custom, Timothy be circumcised, 
and thus become in the fullest sense a Jew according 
to the custom divinely enjoined upon that nation. 

Paul has been sharply criticised for his course in 
this matter by some who consider that his action here 
directly contradicted his testimony to the Galatians— 
"If ye be circumcised Christ shall profit you nothing." 
(Gal. 5:2-6.) But these critics fail to notice an important 
feature; namely, (1) that circumcision was 
established before the Mosaic Law was given at Sinai; 
(2) that it was made a national mark, and that any 
Jew who was not circumcised, forfeited by that neglect 



his rights in the Abrahamic promise. (3) The Galatian 
Christians, who were told that they must not be 
circumcised, were not Jews, and had nothing to do 
with Israel's national sign; and for them to perform 
circumcision would indicate that they were seeking for 
divine favor by becoming Jews and coming under the 
Jewish laws and regulations, and that they were not 
trusting fully to Christ. (Gal. 2:14-16.) (4) A Jew, 
on the contrary, while trusting in Christ, could properly 
enough conform to the national usage of circumcision 
established before the Law. 

Having passed from the province of Galatia in 
which were located the cities of Antioch, Lystra and 
Derbe, the Apostle evidently here intended going into 
the province called Asia, a part of what is known as 
Asia Minor, but the holy spirit hindered them and forbade 
that course. How this instruction of the spirit 
was communicated we are not informed; and no matter, 
since we have confidence that the Apostle was not following 
mere impressions, but made sure that he was 
under the divine guidance. They next thought to go 
into the province of Bithynia, but again they were 
hindered, and so passed by Mysia; that is, they passed 
through the province of Asia without preaching therein, 
and came to the seaport of Troas, thinking there to 
take shipping, but apparently uncertain as to which 
direction the Lord would have them go. 

Here the Lord's leading was very distinct: in 
a dream the Apostle Paul saw a man of Macedonia 
beckoning to him and saying, "Come over and help 
us." This settled the Apostle respecting the course 
he should take. The Lord was leading him, but evidently 
chose to delay the full and clear information 
respecting his route, that the Apostle (and the Church 
in general through this account) might realize the more 
fully how directly God was leading and providentially 
guiding in the presentation of his truth. The Apostle 
and his company immediately prepared to go to Macedonia 
in obedience to the Lord's indication. 

Thus the Lord specially directed the word of his 
grace to Europe. Instead of sending it northward and 
eastward through Asia— to the millions in Asiatic 
Russia and India and China, and instead of sending it 

R2176 :page 188 

southward to the other millions in Egypt and all Africa, 
the Lord specially guided his truth northwestward 
into Europe. Who cannot see that a great question 
was in the balances, and was here divinely decided? 

Let it be remembered, too, that, in sending the 
gospel into Europe, the Lord chose first of all the most 
enlightened parts of Europe. Macedonia lies just north 
of Greece, and their peoples were practically one; their 
intelligence and civilization were practically on a par. 
Only a short time before, Greece, under Alexander the 



Great, had conquered the world, and Greek civilization 
and the Greek language and Greek philosophies had 
thus been spread among all civilized people. And altho 
subsequently the Caesars of Rome had conquered 
Greece, they had not destroyed the influence of the 
Greek literature and philosophy, which still dominated 
at the time of our lesson. In sending the gospel into 
Macedonia, therefore, the Lord was sending it to the 
people most advanced in civilization and the arts. After 
starting the work in Macedonia and in Greece, the 
good tidings were later sent to Rome, and from these, 
then the centers of civilization, the gospel of the Lord 
Jesus Christ has spread northward through Europe and 
westward through America, and has been the instrumentality 
for producing the highest types of civilization 
that the world has ever known; and this in proportion 
as the Word of God has been free, and has 
been received into good and honest hearts. 

In Macedonia, by the spirit's leading, they went 
first to one of the principal cities, Philippi, and there 
on the Jewish Sabbath they found by the river side a 
prayer meeting. The women who attended it were 
probably all Jewesses, and the Apostle concluded that 
those who were seeking the Lord in worship and prayer 
would be in the best condition of heart to be approached 
with the gospel: a judgment which experience since, 
in every land, endorses as correct. Paul's discourse 
concerning the hopes of Israel and the fulfilment of 
these in Jesus the Messiah, and the story of his crucifixion 
for our sins, found a lodgment in the hearts of 
some who heard it. This was the start of the Church at 
that city, to which later Paul wrote— the Epistle to the 
Philippians. 

The brief reference to Lydia, one of the believers, 
is worthy of notice. Her heart being touched with 
the message of the gospel, she esteemed it a privilege 
to serve and entertain those whom the Lord had been 
pleased to honor as servants in carrying to her his 
message. We have here a good lesson of thankful appreciation 
and hospitality. 



page 189 
VOL. XVIII. JULY 1, 1897 No. 13. 



CONTENTS. 



Views from the Watch Tower 

The "Jewish Question" 191 

The Diamond Jubilee, etc 193 

What Say the Scriptures about Spiritism? 
—Proofs That it is Demonism 
Modern Spiritism and Its 

Tendencies 194 

Paul a Prisoner at Philippi 200 

Poem: Cumbered with Much Serving 203 

The Gospel to the Noble and to the 

More Noble 203 

page 190 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
-ADDRESS TO- 
TOWER PUBLISHING CO., BIBLE HOUSE, 58 & 60 ARCH ST., 
ALLEGHENY (NORTH PITTSBURG), PA., U.S.A. 

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 

INCLUDES A SUBSCRIPTION TO "THE OLD THEOLOGY TRACTS'-QUARTERLY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, N.Y. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, 

OR REGISTERED. FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN 

MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS: 

Those of the interested, who by reason of old age or accident, or 
other adversity are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, 
if they will send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and 
requesting the paper. 



MOTTO CARDS-ENAMEL TEXTS. 



We frequently have calls for text cards, for home embellishment, 
and have heretofore found it difficult to describe them satisfactorily. 
Now we are arranging for an illustrated catalogue describing thirty-eight 
different styles and over two hundred mottoes and texts. Prices from 
5 cents to 50 cents each. We are not permitted to cut these prices, 
but we can and will send all orders postage free; and with each dollar's 
worth of these motto cards we will send free either one leatherette 
bound volume of MILLENNIAL DAWN or three copies of "Tabernacle 
Shadows" (leatherette), or of "Thy Word is Truth" (leatherette), or of 
"What Say the Scriptures about Hell?" 

Orders for these catalogues will be filled in rotation as received. 



WALL CHARTS ON ROLLERS. 



The artist who paints these for us can do them at the low price of 
$1.50 only during the dull seasons— Summer and Winter. In the busy 
seasons they would be worth about $5.00 each. Orders that have been 
waiting for three months will soon be filled. Order now if you wish 
one for use the coming Fall. Price $1.50 delivered. Cannot be mailed 
outside the United States and Canada. 

ALLEGHENY CHURCH MEETINGS. 



Preaching and divine worship every Sunday afternoon in Bible 
House chapel, No. 56 Arch Street, at 3 P.M. 

Cottage Meetings— for prayer and testimony on Wednesday evenings; 
and Dawn Circles for Bible Study on Thursday, Friday and Saturday 
evenings— various localities— inquire at WATCH TOWER office. 



R2176 :page 191 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 



AS THE hour draws near, indicated by the 

prophetic hands of the great clock of the 

ages, when "Gentile Times" shall end and God's Kingdom 

shall take control of earth's affairs, with the natural 

seed of Abraham as its earthly representatives, in 

the Land promised to Abraham (Acts 7:5), every 

intelligent student of prophecy naturally watches the 

events bearing upon the promised land and the covenant 

people. 

It is just about a year since Dr. T. Herzl, a learned 
Hebrew of Vienna, published his book advocating 
the foundation of a "Jewish State," in Palestine, the 
old homestead, as the only practical solution of the 
"Jewish question." His views, now known as "Zionism," 
have been taken up by leading Jews and Jewish 
journals the world over, and while some opposition has 
been aroused it is wonderful how general is the Jewish 
sentiment in favor of the project. 

Rabbi Stephen Wise, of New York, says of the 
movement:— 

"The Zionists here and everywhere, however, are 
thinking of the homeless in Israel. Ours it is to plan 
and toil, not for ourselves alone, but even for those 
whose existence is threatened by the passions and prejudices 



of the different peoples among whom their lots 

are cast. Have we not witnessed the oft-repeated triumphs 

of 'scientific' anti-Semitism at the German 

polls? Few are the nations which are wholly friendly 

to the Children of the stock from which sprang Jesus 

of Nazareth. 

"Enlightened and God-fearing Christendom will 
marvel at the spectacle of a comparatively small band 
of heroes venturing upon a task of appalling magnitude. 
Were all Christendom truly Christians, there 
were little or no need of this movement. But Zion 
must be rebuilt, because the law that went forth therefrom 
hath not prevailed among all of its professors. In 
the meanwhile I doubt not that the American people 
will, with characteristic admiration for personal and 
national heroism, applaud and God-speed the hardy 
and hopeful upbuilders of a new Zion." 

Dr. Moses Gaster of London, Chief Rabbi of the 
"Sephardim" Jews of all Southern Europe, said recently, 
respecting Dr. Herzl's Zionist proposition:— 

"I feel a very keen interest in the scheme, dating 
back from the time when I was living in Roumania, 
and was instrumental in founding the first Jewish colony 
in Palestine. I have always cherished the conviction 
that the future of the Jewish race lies there, and 
nowhere else. I regard Dr. Herzl's scheme not as a 
politico-economical idea, but rather as a religious one. 
It is impossible to divorce such a plan from the religious 
ideals which underlie it. On the practical details he 
has developed I refrain from pronouncing an opinion, 
because it is impossible to say what form the movement 
will assume when once the masses are stirred with enthusiasm. 
I presided some months ago at a mass meeting 
of fifteen hundred East End London Jews, and 
nothing could have exceeded the enthusiasm at Dr. 
Herzl's appearance. It is the masses that decide such 
questions." 

Delegates representing Jewish societies in all 
parts of the world have already been chosen, to meet 
August 25th in the city of Munich, Germany, to consider 
the most practical steps to be taken for the attainment 
of the aims of Zionism. The following prominent 
Jews are in charge of the convention,— Dr. T. 
Herzl, Max Nordau, C. Montefiore, Dr. DeHaas. 

How remarkable that such a movement should 
take place at the present time! When in 1878 we pointed 
out that according to prophecy the set time for the 
return of divine favor to Israel was then due to begin, 
and that the beginning was in the putting of Egypt 

R2176 : page 192 

and Palestine measurably under British protection by 
the Berlin Conference, the idea was scouted by many. 
When we declared that the return of Israelites to Palestine 
was the next step, the Jews themselves scoffed, 



declaring that to be an absurdity: that the Jew in Germany 
was a German, in England an Englishman and 
in the United States an American, and so elsewhere 
the world over. 

When the Russian persecution drove thousands to 
seek other homes, Palestine was spurned as a barren 
land. Baron Hirsch, the German millionaire, started 
with lavish expenditure a new land of promise in Argentina, 
South America; and wealthy American Hebrews 
helped their brethren by thousands to the United 
States. But some of the poorest Russian Jews looked 
longingly to Palestine and went thither— to find the 
land dry and barren enough. However, for these God 
raised up friends in Sir Moses Montefiore and Baron 
Rothschild who, seeing their destitution, pitied them 
and started Industrial Schools and Experimental Gardens 
for their instruction, hospitals for the sick, etc. 

Then came the decree of the Sultan that no more 
Jews be permitted to settle in Palestine; and shortly 
the Russian persecution abated, and a few years of quiet 
followed in which affairs have been developing and the 
Jews have learned certain lessons. (1) The Argentine 
colony, backed by millions and under seemingly most 
favorable conditions, has not been a success but a great 
failure, financially and every way. The Jews colonized 
there are dissatisfied. (2) The Jews brought to the 
United States have succeeded only fairly well. (3) The 
Jews who went to "barren" Palestine have prospered 
phenomenally. As if by magic the land became more 
fruitful and happy, and gives evidence of a permanent 
revival. As a result the eyes of all Israel are turned 
Zionward, and their watchword is Zion! Zion! Verily, 
O Lord— "Thy people shall be willing in the day 
of thy power." Surely, in this we have another distinct 
evidence that we are in "the Day of Jehovah."— 
See MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. I., Chap. 15. 

Seeing this trend of events with Israel, we look 
in another direction to see in what way the Lord will 
open the gates to permit their return. And as we can 
now see a providence and blessing in the retarding of 
their emigration for a time, until the divine favor upon 
the land should center upon it the interest of all Jews, 
we shall expect ere long to see the doors opened wide, 

R2177 :page 192 

and that many not only of the poor, but also of the rich 
of Israel will seek Palestine as a home. We do not 
expect, however, as the Zionists do, that they will succeed 
speedily in organizing an independent Jewish 
state. This cannot be until the full end of Gentile 
Times-in the end of A.D. 1914. See MILLENNIAL 
DAWN, VOL. II., Chap. 4. 

Turkey still rules over Palestine, and her success 
in the war with Greece has emboldened her to feel 
a greater independence than she has felt for nearly a 



century. She is concentrating troops in Europe from 
her Asiatic provinces, and the great powers fear a war, 
while all are striving for peace. The Grand Vizier of 
the Empire, the Sultan's Prime Minister, has recently 
expressed himself as follows, as reported by the London 
Standard:— 

"My great age, and the confidence shown in me 
by appointing me the Grand Vizier of so glorious a 
Caliph, emboldens me to submit to your Majesty my 
views on the question of the day. The successes of our 
soldiers over their enemies have so revived the ardor 
of the nation that an important portion of it, which 
was previously alienated from you, has now been won 
back. The whole of Islam is, therefore, one soul and 
one body, and stands around your throne in an invincible 
phalanx. Sire, look upon the Powers of Europe 
as enemies, who are plotting the destruction of Turkey. 
If, in the present circumstances, we yield to European 
pressure, not only shall we have done nothing to ensure 
our existence, but we shall alienate our Mussulmans. 
Therefore I implore your Majesty, for the sake of your 
victorious ancestors, to retain Thessaly. If you seize 
this opportunity, you are destined to revive the ancient 
prowess of the great Sultans of the past. During your 
glorious reign there have been several questions which 
Europe laid stress upon, and on which you refused to 
be dictated to, such as the Armenian question and 
others. What was the result? You gained the victory. 
Let these examples guide you in the matter of 
Thessaly, but if my views are unpalatable to your Majesty, 
I beg you to accept my resignation." 

Various jealousies and differences of interest hinder 
the great powers of Europe from uniting determinedly 
on any policy respecting Turkey. Austria 
would take the side of Turkey rather than permit 
Russia to gain too much by absorbing it. Russia would 
take sides with Turkey rather than let Austria absorb 
it, etc., etc. 

There are not lacking other sources of European 
complication which some consider much more dangerous 
to peace. For instance, the German Emperor is 
credited with desiring to form a European combination 
against Great Britain, to hinder further extension of 
her empire, if not to reduce it. English journals have 
for some months been urging for a larger and more efficient 
British army, to repel feared foes. The balance 
of power is held by France, and British statesmen are 
alarmed at the growing intimacy between France and 
Germany. It is even claimed by some writers that the 
volatile French admire in Emperor William II. the very 
qualities of show and bombast and autocracy which 
Englishmen and Americans consider to be his 
weaknesses. 

The London Spectator says:— 

"The German Emperor is credited with a project 



R2177 : page 193 

for uniting the whole Continent in a war with England, 
which— says one scribe supposed to be inspired— 'could 
afford to each power engaged a magnificent compensation.' 
The league is to be for plunder. ...Emperor 
William II. is almost as formidable an enemy as Napoleon, 
and we do not feel sure that he will not ultimately 
succeed in organizing a coalition of some kind the 
motto of which will be Delenda est Carthago.... We 
shall not have a long warning if a crisis comes." 

Another influential journal says:— 

"The Emperor of Germany will have to be reckoned 
with whether in Africa or Europe, and in the 
stirring developments that are pending it is not to St. 
Petersburg, Paris, or London that one must look for a 
clew, but to Berlin. 

An Amsterdam journal, Handelsblatt, voices the 
sentiments of many of the intelligent of America. It 
says:— 

"It seems to us that a coalition against England 
is in formation not unlike that created by Napoleon I., 
and that England assists in the work by estranging her 
friends [by her colonial and financial policies] and leaving 
her army in its present condition. We hope we 
are mistaken. Nothing more horrible could be imagined 
than a victory of the autocrats over free England and 
her noble people. For, after all, that people remains 
one of the wonders of the world, be its Government 
ever so blind." 

But Great Britain has able statesmen who doubtless 
will guard her interests and conciliate France and Russia. 
However, we see various national complications possible, 
any one of which would be tolerably certain to 
affect the future of Palestine and open its gates to the 
natural seed of Abraham,— preparatory to its becoming 
the Capital of the world. 

But whether it comes peaceably or by war, we expect 
Palestine to be open to Israel in less than five 
years. Nor do we expect that any war that might occur 
(for we do not anticipate a great war) would be 
the predicted great turmoil that will wreck the present 
social order. 

THE DIAMOND JUBILEE. 



The whole world has echoed and reechoed joyous 
congratulations to England's Queen, jubilating the sixtieth 
year of her reign. Literary men have striven 
with each other to see how much could be said in praise 
of the lady and of her reign. The period of reign has 
even been styled "The Victorian Age"— after the olden 
style; as for instance "The Augustan Age" was a term 
applied to the reign of Augustus Caesar. 



We have great respect for the royal lady and great 
appreciation of the blessings of the past sixty years; 
but we are far from supposing that the latter were dependent 
upon the former. In the days of the Caesars 
one man could and did do much to impress his imperial 
character for good or for bad upon the art, the literature, 
the finances, the morals and everything pertaining 
to his reign. Hence there was a propriety in 
associating the ruler and the epoch as in the term,— 
"Augustan Age." But this is not true to-day— especially 
not in Victoria. Indeed, the lady and the nation 
are to be congratulated that she did not attempt to 
stamp her personality and will upon the affairs of the 
great nation of which she is the nominal head and ruler, 
as William II. is evidently attempting to stamp 
his personality upon Germany. 

Great credit is due Queen Victoria for not attempting 
to rule the British Empire in any particular. Contenting 
herself with being a figure-head of royalty, 
she has done the very best thing for these times, in 
leaving the rule, the government, wholly in the hands 
of Parliament, the representatives of the people;— so 
far as we recall not even once exercising royal prerogatives, 
of veto, etc. Any king on the same throne, who 
would have stamped no personality upon his epoch, 
would have been despised by his subjects as lacking 
character; but sex-chivalry permits that in the Queen 
non-intervention in the government and non-personality 
of reign shall be esteemed graces. Had a man been 
on the throne, all of his subjects would have insisted 
that he have some policy of his own, and among people 
like the English and Americans, as soon as it would be 
declared it would arouse those of different views as 
enemies and opponents. This would have led long 
ago either to imperialism and less liberty as in Germany, 
or else to a republican form of government, as 
in France and the United States. 

No; the blessings of the past sixty years are not to 
be credited to kings and queens, nor to republics, but 
to God. As already pointed out in MILLENNIAL DAWN, 
the great prophetic period termed "The Day of His 
Preparation," began in 1799 and will end with 1914: 
and it is the advancement of this "day" and the light 
which God provides, necessary for its work, that has 
brought the wonders of the present, and is rapidly now 
bringing on the conditions for the great time of trouble, 
for the overthrow of present imperfect conditions 
and the establishment of the Kingdom of God's dear 
Son. 

THE WEST POINT CHURCH. 



The permit to proceed with the construction of the 
Roman Catholic church on Government property contiguous 



to the West Point Military School has been 

cancelled. The question of the authority of the Secretary 

of War, under the constitution, was referred to 

Attorney General McKenna (a Roman Catholic) who, 

much to the disappointment of Roman Catholics, decided 

that the Secretary of War has no right to permit 

the erection of any building for sectarian purposes, at 

R2177 : page 194 

West Point. The Constitution certainly guards carefully 
against union of Church and State. 

Many great Americans seem to have foreseen danger 
along this line. President Grant said,— "Keep 
Church and State forever separate." President Jackson 
said,— "It is wicked and tyrannical to compel any 
man to support a religion in which he does not believe." 
President Garfield said,— "The divorce between Church 
and State should be absolute." Benjamin Franklin 
said,— "A religion that depends on the State for support 
is, for that reason, a bad religion." 

Nevertheless, we believe a practical union, or at 
least a cooperation, is approaching, the result of which 
will be injurious to religious sentiments not prominent, 
popular and influential. 

R2178 : page 194 

CHURCH UNION PROGRESSING. 



The English Church, having been rebuffed by the 
pope, is making progress with the Greek Church of 
Russia. We noted the attendance of the Bishop of 
London at the Czar's coronation in full mediaeval regalia 
of gaudy robes, cap, mitre, pastoral staff, episcopal 
ring, etc., and later the visit of the Archbishop 
of York to Russia, presumably in the interest of union 
between the Greek and English churches. Now we 
notice that the Greek Church has sent the Archbishop 
of Finland to attend, as its representative, the ceremonies 
of the Queen's Jubilee, and in addition to attend 
the Lambeth Conference, which meets shortly in the 
interest of Church Union. 

As an olive-twig to the "Nonconformists," as Protestants 
in general are designated in Great Britain, Rev. 
Dr. Barret was invited to and did "read the Scripture 
lesson" at the Jubilee Service. This, however, as some 
Churchmen point out, does not signify a recognition of 
nonconformist ministers as being duly ordained; for 
any "layman" might be called upon for that service 
under English Church rules. 

Alas! how little the real ordination, the real ministry, 
the real union, and the real Church are understood; 
—how sadly and blindly all these questions are 



confused by the "Babylonians." 



R2178 : page 194 
WHAT SAY THE SCRIPTURES ABOUT SPIRITISM? 



-PROOFS THAT IT IS DEMONISM--CONTINUED. 



MODERN SPIRITISM AND ITS TENDENCIES. 



The claim of Spiritists is that Spiritism is the new 
gospel which is shortly to revolutionize the world— socially, 
religiously, politically. But, as we have just 
seen, Spiritism, under various garbs, has long held 
possession of the world and borne bad fruit in every 
clime. It is nearly fifty years since the rapping and 
tipping manifestations first occurred, in Rochester, N.Y. 
(1848), and gave start to what is at present known 
in the United States as "Spiritualism." It began with 
strange noises in a "haunted house" and first answered 
a little girl who addressed the unseen author of the 
noises as "Old Splithoof." It had a rapid run of popularity, 
and judges, doctors, lawyers and ministers and 
hundreds of thousands of others speedily became its 
votaries, until its friends and its enemies claimed that 
its adherents numbered over ten millions. Believing 
in the consciousness of the dead, ignorant of the Scripture 
teachings on the subject of death and of their prohibition 
from holding communion with "mediums;" and 
very generally disbelieving in evil spirits, it is not surprising 
that intelligent men and women, having proved 
to their own satisfaction that supernatural powers were 
in their midst, as manifested by the rappings, tippings, 
slate-writings, answers to questions through mediums, 
clairvoyances, etc., should believe these invisible powers, 
which desire to converse with them, to be what 
they profess,— their deceased friends. Even allowing 
that there are certain tricks of legerdemain, and certain 
frauds along similar lines, we cannot wonder that 
intelligent people would believe their own senses in 
respect to instances which they had personally 
investigated. 

As a result, for a time many of God's people were 
in great danger, because of their failure to take heed 
to the sure Word of God's testimony (the Bible) on 
this subject. Indeed, the personating spirits seem at 
first to have been very careful in all their references to 
the Bible, sometimes advising the religious ones who 



attended seances to do more reading of the Bible, more 
praying, etc. But this was only to allay their suspicions 
and fears and to get them more fully under their 
influence. Gradually the teachings became more and 
more lax, and the student was given to understand 
that the Bible was better than nothing to the uninitiated 
world, but to those who had come to have intercourse 
with the spirits direct, the Bible was useless,— 
and worse, a hindrance. 

Well has an able writer upon the subject said of 
Spiritism,— 

"A system which commences with light, innocent, 
trifling and frivolous performances and communications, 
but which ends in leading its followers to deny 
"the Lord that bought them," and to reject the 
Word of God which liveth and abideth forever, gives 

R2178 :page 195 

evidence that there may be a deep purpose under all 
its fantastic tricks; and that the craft of the Old Serpent, 
who is a liar from the beginning, may underlie 
those trifling and unimportant communications which, 
by stimulating curiosity and inspiring confidence, lull 
to slumber the suspicious of honest but undiscerning 
souls, until they are in the fatal coils of the Enemy of 
all righteousness." 

These demons who personate the dead, seeing that 
a new dispensation is opening, were prompt to apply 
their knowledge as far as possible to the advancement 
of their own cause, and freely declared a new dispensation 
at hand, and Spiritism the guiding angel which 
was to lead mankind safely into it; and they have not 
hesitated to declare that the new dispensation means 
the utter wreck of the present social order, and the establishment 
of Spiritism as the new order. In some 
instances, where they thought it would serve their purpose, 
they have not hesitated to declare the second 
coming of Christ, and on one occasion at least it was 
distinctly stated that Christ had come a second time: 
and it was intimated that they were ready if any one 
chose to grant communication with Christ through the 
medium. 

Many of God's people have been saved from being 
ensnared into this great evil, by what we might term 
their own spiritual sense, by which they discerned that 
there was something in connection with Spiritism quite 
at variance with the spirit of our Lord and the sentiments 
of his Word. We may safely conclude, however, 
on the strength of the Lord's promise, that none 
of the fully consecrated— the "elect" are suffered to 
be fully ensnared.-Matt. 24:24. 

The strongly marked tendency of Spiritism toward 
free-loveism served to bring it into general disrepute 
amongst the pure minded, who concluded that, if the 
influence of the dead was properly represented in some 



living advocates of Spiritism,— then the social conditions 
beyond the vale of death must be much worse, 
much more impure, than they are in the present life, 
instead of much better, as these demon spirits claim. 

We could make voluminous quotations from Spiritist 
writings, proving that it totally denies the Bible, 
and that it is in direct opposition to its teachings; 
that it has denied the very existence of God, teaching 
instead merely a good principle, and that every man is 
a god. It denies the atonement and the Lordship of 
Christ, while it claims that he was a spirit-medium 
of low degree; and furthermore, abundant testimony 
could be quoted from prominent Spiritists proving 
that the tendencies of Spiritism are extremely demoralizing. 
We will content ourselves with one. 

Here is the testimony of J. F. Whitney, editor of 
the Pathfinder (N.Y.). Having been a warm and 
evidently an honest defender and advocate of Spiritism 
for a long time and well acquainted with its devotees, 
his is a testimony hard to impeach. He says:— 

"Now, after a long and constant watchfulness, seeing 
for months and years its progress and its practical workings 
upon its devotees, its believers, and its mediums, 
we are compelled to speak our honest conviction, which 
is, that the manifestations coming through the acknowledged 
mediums, who are designated as rapping, tipping, 
writing and entrance mediums, have a baneful 
influence upon believers, and create discord and confusion; 
that the generality of these teachings inculcate 
false ideas, approve of selfish individual acts, and endorse 
theories and principles which, when carried out, 
debase and make man little better than the brute. These 
are among the fruits of modern Spiritualism.... 

"Seeing, as we have, the gradual progress it makes 
with its believers, particularly its mediums, from lives 
of morality to those of sensuality and immortality, gradually 
and cautiously undermining the foundation of 
good principles, we look back with amazement to the 
radical change which a few months will bring about 
in individuals; for its tendency is to approve and endorse 
each individual act and character, however good 
or bad these acts may be." 

He concludes by saying— "We desire to send forth 
our warning voice, and if our humble position, as the 
head of a public journal, our known [former] advocacy 
of Spiritualism, our experience, and the conspicuous 
part we have played among its believers, the honesty 
and fearlessness with which we have defended the 
subject, will weigh anything in our favor, we desire 
that our opinions may be received, and those who are 
moving passively down the rushing rapids to destruction, 
should pause, ere it be too late, and save themselves 
from the blasting influence which those manifestations 
are causing." 

So bold and outspokenly immoral did some of the 
prominent representatives of Spiritism become, especially 



the female mediums (and most of its mediums 

are females) that the moral sense of civilization was 

shocked; and for a time demonism under the name of 

"Spiritualism" languished. Now that its past is measurably 

forgotten or denied, it is reviving, but along 

somewhat different lines. The new method seems to 

be to have less tipping and rapping and fewer special 

R2179 : page 195 

mediums, or rather to make of each believer a medium, 

by the use of mechanical appliances. Indeed, almost 

all who become investigators are assured that they 

would make excellent mediums: this flattery is no 

doubt intended to lure them on; the ability to do "wonders" 

having a great fascination, especially for people 

of naturally mediocre talents. Nor is the statement 

untrue: none but idiots are so stupid or so ignorant 

that they cannot be used as mediums; and they may become 

powerful mediums in proportion as they yield 

themselves obediently to the "control" of these "seducing 

spirits" and their "doctrines of devils (See 1 Tim. 4:1) 

and are "led captive" by Satan at his will. 

—2 Tim. 2:26. 

R2179 : page 196 

The term "seducing spirits" exactly fits the case. 
From amusement of curiosity and answering of questions, 
sometimes quite truthfully, they proceed to gain 
the confidence of their victims, and in a plausible manner 
to break down the will power and make slaves of 
them. Then they tyrannize in a most diabolical manner, 
leading into excesses of various kinds. Should 
conscience rebel or an attempt be made to get free from 
this slavery, all reserve is cast aside and the victim is 
taunted with his fall, persuaded that there is no hope 
for him, and that his only future pleasure must be in 
diabolism— Scriptures being skillfully quoted and cited 
to apparently prove this. 

A case of this kind came under the writer's observation 
in 1895. A gentleman who had occasionally 
attended on preaching asked that an interview be granted 
his sister whom he would bring from Cleveland for 
the purpose. She was, he said, laboring under the delusion 
that she had committed the unpardonable sin, 
and he hoped we could disabuse her mind of the 
thought which sometimes made her "wild." We consented, 
and she came. She conversed rationally enough 
but assured us that her case was hopeless. We explained 
the Scriptures relating to the "Sin unto death" and 
endeavored to show her that she had never had sufficient 
light to come under its conditions, but we could 
make no headway. She declared that she had been in 
a salvable condition once, but was so no longer. 

She told us how she had met in California a man 



who had a familiar spirit and occult powers: at first 
disbelieving, she afterward became his co-worker in 
"mysteries" resembling witchcraft, and had finally 
inveigled and injured a dear female friend. Since then 
remorse had seized her, and she had been tortured and 
at times frenzied and hope had forever fled. Before 
she left us she seemed comforted a little by what we 
told her of divine compassion and the abundant provision 
made in the great ransom for all given at Calvary. 
But we have heard since that she lost hope again and 
has been placed in an asylum to hinder her from taking 
her own life. She could not be trusted alone: she 
would attempt to throw herself headlong from a window, 
or while quietly walking the street would attempt 
to throw herself under passing vehicles;— reminding us 
of the case mentioned in Mark 9:22. We have regretted, 
since, that instead of merely reasoning with 
the poor woman we did not, also, in the name of the 
Lord, exorcise the evil spirit which evidently possessed 
her; or, failing to cast it out, at least have instructed 
and helped her to exercise her will power to resist the 
demon. 

There are good spirits, as the Scriptures freely 
declare; and these holy angels are charged with the 
care of all who are fully consecrated to the Lord. 
These, however, do not operate in darkness, nor through 
"mediums," and have better employment than tipping 
tables, rapping out answers to foolish questions and 
entertaining humanity. "Are they not all ministering 
spirits, sent forth to minister for them who shall be 
heirs of salvation?" (Heb. 1:14.) There is no warrant, 
however, for seeking or expecting communications 
from these holy guardian angels: God's will being 
that his "elect" shall walk by faith and not by 
unusual manifestations or sights or sounds. To this 
end he has prepared his Word as a storehouse of knowledge 
from which his faithful shall be supplied with 
"meat in due season:" and he declares it to be sufficient 
that the man of God may be thoroughly furnished 
unto every good work.— 2 Tim. 3:17. 

Furthermore, it may be set down as a sure sign of 
evil (either germinating or developed), for any one to 
attempt to get control of the will and mind of another 
—as in mesmerism, spirit-mediumship, hypnotism and 
the like. The Lord respects our individuality and appeals 
to it, and urges our self-control in harmony with 
the principles of righteousness laid down in his Word. 
But Spiritism asks an abandonment of self-control 
in favor of spirit control. No one of ordinary prudence 
would dare to give up the use and control of his mind 
and will to fellow men, much less to unseen powers 
which merely profess to be good and great and wise. 
No Christian who has the slightest confidence in the 
Bible as the inspired Word of God should submit himself 
to these influences as a "medium," or even become 
an "investigator" of that concerning which God's Word 



has given us so explicit warnings— that it is a way 
that leads from God and righteousness to sin, and ruin, 
mental, moral and physical. 

One of the simple modern devices for awakening 
interest and leading on to fuller "mediumship," "possession" 
and "control," is described in a letter just received, 
dated March 1 1, '97, from a Christian lady, a 
school teacher in Georgia, and a deeply interested student 
of God's plan of the ages. The writer says:— 

"I have been having a rather strange and perhaps 
unwise experience lately. My husband's brother is a 
Spiritualist, takes the Progressive (?) Thinker and is 
thoroughly imbued with its teachings, and, when I visit 
there, he reads articles from it and asks my opinion 
concerning them; especially those from persons claiming 
to have received messages from 'departed friends' 
through the aid of the mediums. Now I never have 
thought it 'all humbug' as many do, tho there is much 
fraud connected with it— for it seems to me that the 
Bible plainly teaches that spirits have had, and will 
have, the power to communicate with men. I have 
told him that I believed those communications came 
from fallen angels who personated the dead for the 
purpose of deceiving men into believing Satan's old 
lie, "Thou shalt not surely die." But as my brother-in-law 

R2179 : page 197 

does not accept the Bible as the Word of God, 
my opinion had little weight with him. His wife (who 
is a firm believer in DAWN) is much troubled over his 
belief; and both have found their difference of opinion 
any thing but pleasant, tho his wife avoids the subject 
as much as possible with fidelity to the truth. Some 
time ago he bought a Psychograph, an instrument used 
by mediums for communing with spirits, but he could 
not use it. 

"A few days ago it was placed in my hands, and, as 
I found I was a medium, I resolved to "try the spirits." 
[This is a misapplication of Scripture, as shown later. 
EDITOR.] About the first thing it said to me was that 
there is a valuable gold mine on our place: that did 
not surprise me, as we had been told that a "vein" had 
been traced across the place. It described the exact 
location to dig for it; said it is only 7-1/2 feet below the 
surface. So that will not be difficult to prove. Then 
it gave me some Scripture messages, Col. 1:4,5 and 
2:4. I asked what was meant by "enticing words" 
and was answered, Bellamy, Christian Science, Spiritualism, 
Ingersolism, etc. I asked who was talking, 
and was told Epaphras. That did not seem to please 
my brother-in-law very much, and he said he would 
like to hear from some one we had known in the flesh, 
so I asked if such an one were present, and was told, 
"Yes, Eastman" (a stranger to me, but my brother-in-law 
and his wife, who alone were present, were both 



acquainted with him). When asked what he wished 

to say he cited us to Titus 3:5, said MILLENNIAL DAWN 

doctrine is true, and that his wealth had hindered him 

from gaining the prize of the high calling. I, said 

Eastman, was not thought a very good Christian, tho 

a member of the church. 

"The next day I tried the wheel or Psychograph 
again, and was told that a dear good friend of mine 
who had lived in speaking distance of me for several 
years was talking to me. She asked me to write to her 
husband and tell him, that she said, a certain boy (giving 
name) was having a bad influence over their boy. 
She told me that my husband (who is in Florida) was 
hurt and was very lame, and I got a letter from him 
day before yesterday confirming it. She said she regretted 
that she had not given DAWN the attention 
that I had wished her to, that she had life on the angelic 
plane; she also told me of the "mine." I asked 
did she know the one claiming to be Eastman, and she 
said yes, that it was a deceiving spirit personating him, 
and that I would best not make use of the means through 
which I could receive such communications. One 
claiming to be Cephas cited me to the first chapter of 
Daniel. Another, claiming to be my father, said in 
substance the same. All said the same about the gold 
"mine," and all professed to believe in Christ and that 
DAWN is a correct exponent of God's Word, and told 
me that I was failing to make the best use of one of 
my "gifts"— teaching; that I should teach publicly as 
well as individuals, but was cautioned with 1 Cor. 3:7 
and Eph. 4:2. 

"During the little time I experimented with the instrument 
I was told many things (a few of which were 
not true) that would take too much of your time to 
tell you; and several of the "spirits claimed that they 
would heal the sick through me, if I would only trust 
them. A great deal of Scripture was given, and all 
very appropriate to those for whom it was given; but 
the Devil quoted Scripture to Christ; and I still think 
the same as I did before "trying the spirits,"— only I 
was not sure that fallen angels would admit, even for 

R2180 :page 197 

the purpose of deceiving, that Christ had "come in the 
flesh;" but it seems now they will. Probably 1 John 4:1-3 
refers to doctrines of men wholly. Of course, it would 
be possible for those who shall have "part in the first 
resurrection" to speak through such a device, but is it 
probable that they will? I will be glad to hear from 
you on this subject. 

[That passage has reference to men,— doctrines 
among men. It may be remarked here that the evil 
spirits not only have knowledge of present events, but, 
by some power can frequently closely approximate the 
future. In one instance under our notice two deaths 



within a year were foretold: one of the parties died, the 
other became seriously ill, but recovered. Some power 
is in Satan's hand, but with limitations. Compare 
Heb. 2:14; Psa. 97:10; 116:15 and Job 2:3-6.--EDITOR.] 

"What experience I have had tends to confirm 
your teaching— that the communications are from the 
fallen angels. They are very unreliable. One can but 
feel how impossible it will be in these closing days of 
the Gospel age for any one to "stand" who has not a 
firm foundation for faith." . 

Here is an illustration of the insidious methods of 
these demons. Like Satan and the evil spirits of our 
Lord's day, they will confess Christ and the truth. 
Similarly, the woman "possessed" followed Paul and 
Silas several days saying truly (Acts 16:16-18), 
"These men are the servants of the most high God, 
which show unto us the way of salvation." But for 
that matter, abundant evidence could be adduced that 
they would confirm and approve almost any doctrine 
or theory held precious by the inquirer in order to gain 
his confidence, and thus a fuller power over him. 

Respecting the "mine,"— that is a bait to draw 
and hold the interest. It is questionable whether the 
fallen angels can see deeper into the earth than can 
mankind. Of course, it might happen that the gold in 
paying quantities might be found on any of the gold-bearing 
veins of Georgia, but the experiences of miners 
in general and of drillers for petroleum who have 
been "directed by spirits," or who have used "divining 
rods," has been that, in the end, they lost money 
by following such directions. The presumption must 
therefore be that, if the "lying spirits" are not deceiving 
by misrepresenting themselves as possessing knowledge 
when they have none, then the same malevolence 
which leads them as "seducing spirits" to lure mankind 
to moral and mental wreck, leads them to take 
pleasure in misleading them to financial wreck. Lying 
spirits, like lying men, are not to be believed or 
trusted under any circumstances. 

R2180 : page 198 

Concerning the advice to "teach": coming from 
such a quarter, it should rather incline us to fear that 
the demons saw in the Sister a weakness in that direction 
from which she would be most easily assailable. 
It is safe to conclude in advance that their advice is 
either directly or indirectly intended to do us harm. 
And notice the cunning which sought to guard against 
suspicion by quoting texts cautioning to humility! 

True, the people need instruction, and all instructors 
are "teachers;" but it is very unsafe for 
anyone to think of himself or herself as a teacher. 
The preferable plan, by far, is for each to be a pupil 
in the school of Christ the great Teacher; and to be 
ready to learn of him through any channel, or to be used 



by him in helping to make plain to others his teachings. 
Each one who learns anything of the Lord 
should tell it to others, not as his own wisdom and 
teaching, but the Lord's, and himself merely the channel 
which gladly passes the water of life on to others. 
No wonder the holy spirit cautions us, "Be not many 
of you teachers, my brethren, knowing that we [teachers] 
shall have the greater judgment [or severer 
trial]."— James 3:1. 

With the thought of teaching others is closely associated 
the thought of superior wisdom; and from the 
first this has been Satan's bait. To mother Eve his 
promise as the reward of disobedience was, "Ye shall 
be [wise] as gods." And the temptation to her was 
that she perceived from his arguments that the forbidden 
fruit was desirable "to make one wise." Alas, the 
wisdom which Satan gives is very undesirable. It is 
"[1] earthly, [2] sensual, [3] devilish;" as many, too 
late, have discovered. But on the contrary, "the wisdom 
which cometh down from above is first pure, then 
[2] peaceable, [3] gentle, [4] easy to be entreated, 
[5] full of mercy and good fruits, [6] without partiality 
and without hypocrisy." (Jas. 3:15-17.) No wonder 
the inspired Apostle said, "I fear lest by any means 
as the serpent beguiled Eve, by subtilty [cunning], so 
your minds should be corrupted from the simplicity 
[purity] that is in Christ." (2 Cor. 1 1:3.) Let us 
therefore lose no opportunity for telling the "good tidings 
of great joy;"— but let us lose sight of ourselves as 
teachers and point all, as brethren and fellow-pilgrims, 
to the words and example of the great Teacher and of 
the twelve inspired apostles whom he appointed as our 
instructors, our teachers. 

We advised the Sister further, that it was very 
unwise to disobey the divine instructions (Isa. 8:19,20) 
by having anything whatever to do with these "seducing 
spirits." These are not the spirits which we 
are to "try" "whether they be of God," for God has 
already forewarned us that they are not of him, but that 
they are "wicked spirits." As well might we use the 
Apostle's words as an excuse for trying all the various 
brands of intoxicating spirits to see if one could be 
found which would not make drunk. These "familiar," 
wicked spirits claim, that they are numerous, a 
"legion" possessing one man: they would ask no more 
than that humanity should "try" them all. A fair trial or 
"test" is just what they request and they succeed sooner 
or later in enslaving most of those who test them. 

In the passage which says, "Beloved, believe not 
every spirit, but try the spirits whether they be of God" 
(1 John 4:1-6), the word spirits is used in the sense 
of teaching or doctrine and has no reference to spirit 
beings. This is shown by the verses following, which 
declare that we are to "try" or discern between "the 
spirit of truth and the spirit of error." And this may 
be quickly done, for all false doctrines either directly 



or indirectly deny that "Christ died for our sins;" that 
"the man Christ Jesus gave himself a ransom for all." 

Assuredly we should not expect that the Lord, 
nor any in harmony with him, will ever make use of 
methods which the "lying spirits" use and which God 
in his Word has condemned and forbidden. To do so 
would expose God's people to all the "wiles of the 
devil." 

The Sister sent us an advertisement of the Psychograph 
which says,— 

"Do you wish to investigate Spiritualism? Do 
you wish to develop Mediumship? Do you desire to 
receive communications? The psychograph is an invaluable 
assistant. Many, who were not aware of their 
mediumistic gift, have, after a few sittings, been able 
to receive delightful messages. Many, who began 
with it as an amusing toy, found that the intelligence 
controlling it knew more than themselves, and became 
converts to Spiritualism." 

Thus does Satan now make use of the belief common 
to all denominations of Christians as well as heathendom, 
that the dead are not dead but are angels hovering 
round us; and what is more calculated to "seduce" 
them than just such a toy? 

By the same mail came the samples of The Progressive 
Thinker,— a Spiritualist organ of the most pronounced 
type. We examined it, having in view matter 
for this article, and to our surprise found that several 
of its leading articles freely conceded that the vast 
majority of the communicating spirits are evil spirits 
which seek influence over human beings in order to 
work their ruin: and if possible to get possession of 
them to make them crazy. It told of written communications 
dropped into a room signed "Beelzebub" and 
"Devil." In one column under the caption "A Critical 
Study of Obsession," was an account of a poor 
woman who had been so beset by evil spirits that she 
was sent to an Insane Asylum and who finally got rid 
of their torments; and it gives her statement, "I prayed 

R2180 : page 199 

them away." Asked, "To whom did you pray?" her 
recorded answer is, "To the Ever-living God. He only 
can answer prayer." And yet in another column 
God's name is blasphemed, under the caption, "Peter 
and Paul," from which we quote these words— "Moses, 
who tho said to be learned in all the Egyptian skill, 
was the very meanest of men, and for his God erroneously 
took Jehovah, a departed spirit of an Egyptian 
disappointed aspirant to some lucrative or ecclesiastical 
office." 

In the same issue (April 3, '97), under the heading 
—"Thoughts Illustrating the Status of Spiritualism, 
and the Dangers that Beset the Honest Investigator," 
by Charles Dawbran, we have a notice of a book by an 



English Clergyman, entitled "The Great Secret or the 
Modern Mystery of Spiritualism." Introducing the 
author the article says:— 

"His experiences commenced with the development 
of his wife as a writing medium, through whom, 
from time to time, he received such tests as delight the 
heart of the worshiper of phenomena. He also seems 
to have made the acquaintance of almost every public 
medium who has at any time been high priest or priestess 
of the Occult, to the worthy citizens of London. 
And he has apparently been a welcomed visitor to the 
homes and seances of every distinguished investigator 
or full fledged believer in that city during the forty 
years of which he writes. He has included hypnotism 
in his investigations, and has been successful both as 
operator and subject. He has even dabbled a little in 
'Black Magic,' at least sufficient to prove it a dread 
reality. So we have in this author a man most unusually 
qualified to deal intelligently with the subject. 

R2181 :page 199 

That he is now, and has for almost all these years been 
a believer is evident, for he narrates incidents and 
proofs which would carry conviction to every intelligent 
and unprejudiced mind. But his trouble has been 
that of every experienced investigator. He has not 
only witnessed much phenomena that could be explained 
as due to the normal or abnormal powers of the 
mortal, but where there has been an evident 'ghost' 
at work, mistakes, and at times evident fraud, have 
troubled his ecclesiastical soul. 

"So we have little but the usual mixed experiences 
of the average intelligent investigator. A grain of 
wheat to a bushel of chaff is claimed by the Spiritualist 
as abundant compensation for the toil and trouble of 
long years of waiting upon the 'dear spirits.' And to 
some minds perhaps it is. But to others there have ever 
been fierce attempts to increase the crop of truth. And 
it is herein that the experiences of this clergyman become 
interesting to every truth-lover the world over. 
He, as we have said, has had abundant experience in 
both public and private seances, but his pathway to 
progress seemed blocked. He was just as liable to the 
usual imperfections of spirit intercourse after many years 
of such investigation, as in the very first sittings with his 
own wife and a few chosen friends. 

"So the question became: 'Is progress possible?' 
And to solve this he tried an experiment which inspires 
the present writer to call this attention to his 
book. For as we have seen, the rest was what almost 
everybody can endorse, and say 'me too.' He determined 
to seek spirit intercourse from the highest plane 
possible to the mortal, so that if there be truth to the 
maxim 'like to like' he might attract the very highest, 
and repel those who come from the unseen to trouble 



and perplex weary mortals. He devoted a house to 

that purpose. Not merely were there rooms for use 

by mediums and circles of investigators or believers, 

but a chapel was prepared where he himself conducted 

a religious service twice a week, and it was at the conclusion 

of this service that a special seance was held by 

the believers present. The surroundings were most 

solemn. Frivolity was conspicuous only by its absence. 

The spirits had promised great results. For 

over a year at one time, and for months at others, these 

meetings were continued. But no promise was fulfilled. 

Prayers to God for light and truth proved no more efficacious 

than the eternal 'Nearer my God to thee' of 

the usual public seance, with its miscellaneous crowd. 

"So our poor clergyman has his one grain of wheat 
after forty years of honest attempt to make at least a 
pint of it. He clings to that atom of truth with his 
whole soul, but his earnest attempt at progress has 
proved a life-long failure, altho, apparently, every condition 
was favorable to success. Since such is the experience 
of the thousands, once zealous, who have become 
'silent' believers from the same cause, we may 
well ask: Is modern Spiritualism fixed and bounded 
like the theological systems of the past and present? 
Is there no hope of solving its problems, overcoming 
its barriers, and reaching a higher manhood on this 
side of the life line? Is the honest and convinced investigator 
presently to become discouraged, almost as 
a matter of course?" 

The claim made by Spiritists is that good spirits 
commune with good people, and evil spirits with evil 
people is thus disproved. Could stronger testimony 
than this be produced in evidence that all spirit communications 
are from evil spirits and are wholly unreliable? 
The writer, further on in the same Spiritist 
journal, gives the following account of the experiences 
of another "believer," for which he vouches:— 

"For a score of years he had been true to his convictions, 
endeavoring to reduce all belief to a basis of 
provable facts. His own sensitiveness permitted spirit 
approach, and sometimes the heavens had seemed to 
open to shower blessings on his soul. But foes came 
as readily as friends whenever the gate was ajar, so 
that, for the most part, safety compelled him to avoid 
personal experience of spirit return. The active mind 
offers poor foothold to any spirit, so he accepted public 
office and labored zealously for the public weal. But 
at intervals the experiences reappeared, and it seemed 
as if the battle had to be fought all over again. He 
failed to find a direct cause which might account for 
the presence of his foes. But they seemed to have 
certain gathering points. For instance, he could rarely 
visit a public library to select a book but that he would 
be followed and annoyed for hours by some "invisible," 
seeking to control him. It is true, each battle, when 
fought to victory, was usually followed by a brief and 



happy re-union with angel friends, but the sense of 

R2181 : page 200 

danger made him only the more earnest to close the 
door to all spirit return. His method of fighting off 
the influence was to resolutely fix his mind on some 
matter of interest in his daily affairs. And this would, 
sooner or later, prove successful every time. Any attempt 
to gain help from the spirit side of life only 
seemed to give added power to the foe." 

This man had evidently progressed in Spiritism so 
that he had become a "clairaudient medium." The 
supposed good spirits or "angel friends" which sometimes 
visited him were merely the same evil spirits 
called by the writer "foes;" but they transformed themselves 
to his mind by assuming an opposite attitude 
when they found him getting away from their influence; 
—to keep him from abandoning them altogether, 
and in hope that by and by they would get such an influence 
over him that escape would be impossible. 

From the same journal, under the heading, "Incidents 
With Good Advice," after giving two cases 
of pronounced insanity, the direct result of "spirit 
control," we find the following advice:— 

"The lesson I would draw is this: Never sit alone, 
if there is the least probability of the controls overcoming 
one's judgment. Even though their intentions 
may be good, as in Mr. B.'s case; yet their experience 
has been insufficient with regard to the management 
of mediums, and their operations may become very injudicious. 
Never permit a control to cause you to do 
that which your judgment cannot sanction, no matter 
under what promise it is given. Only evil designing 
controls are liable to resort to such measures. 

"These cases call to mind the thought that undoubtedly 
there are many others in the asylums, who 
are simply the victims of control. I could cite another 
case, where during her first confinement, a young 
woman was given chloroform and other treatment which 
weakened her system to such an extent that a degraded 
spirit took hold of her organism, and the language he 
made that previously moral girl use, was deplorable. 
Under these conditions she was committed to the asylum, 
where she is at present and at last reports was, at 
times, able to control her body, and, of course, at those 
times she was considered 'rational' by the 
authorities. 

"Let all Spiritualists be sure to caution persons 
who are beginning their investigation by sitting alone 
to be very careful— and to make a regular practice of 
reporting, so that those of experience may know what 
is taking place and advise accordingly. And further, 
let us make a practice of looking into all cases of so-called 
'insanity' before they are sent to the asylums; 
perchance it may be a case like those I have cited." 



A "strong delusion," an "energy of Satan" truly 
Spiritism is, when people with all these evidences before 
them still return to it time and again, even after 
being injured,— as do the once singed summer moths 
to the deadly glare that fascinates them. There is a 
dense darkness in the world to-day upon divine truth; 
and thinking people, when awakened from the stupor 
which has so long benumbed their reasoning faculties, 
as respects religion, cry out for "Light, more Light;" 
and if they do not get the true Light of the knowledge 
of God (which shines only for the honest and consecrated 
believer in the ransom), they are ready for the 
false lights with which "the god of this world," Satan, 
seeks to ensnare all— Higher Criticism otherwise called 
Agnosticism, or Spiritism, or Christian Science, or 
Theosophy. These, if it were possible, would deceive 
the very elect; and are well represented as being Satan's 
ministers transformed as angels of light. 

-(TO BE CONTINUED.)- 



R2181 : page 200 

PAUL A PRISONER AT PHILIPPI. 

-JULY 11. -ACTS 16:22-34.- 

"Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou 
shalt be saved, and thy house."— Acts 16:31. 

ALTHO, as we have seen, Paul and his company 
were divinely directed into Europe, his early 
experiences there would have led many others to think 
that there was some mistake respecting the matters- 
some misdirection; for he had not been long in the new 
field of labor until he was imprisoned. The Apostle, 
however, knew to expect just such experiences, and 
realized himself in the hands of one who was both able 
and willing to make all things work together for good 
to his servants. The imprisonment was of the Evil 
One and his deluded servants, and was permitted of 
God as a means for contrasting the spirit of the truth 
with the spirit of error, and of bringing the gospel 
particularly to the attention of the jailor. 

The circumstances which led to the imprisonment 
are interesting and instructive. Satan then, as previously 
and since, used spirit manifestations to delude the 
people. A young woman was the spirit medium 
through which the demons (fallen angels) operated, 
personating the dead, and delivering messages purporting 

R2182 : page 200 

to be from them, to those who paid liberally 



for the service. Apparently, the revenues from this 

R2182: page 201 

source were very large, for the woman was owned and 
controlled by a company or syndicate, and "brought 
her masters much gain." 

It is perhaps difficult for us to determine the motives 
which prompted the evil spirits to move the medium 
to cry after Paul and Silas, "These men are the 
servants of the most high God, which show unto us 
the way of salvation." These evil spirits, however, 
were similarly moved on several occasions to confess 
our Lord Jesus Christ. (Mark 1:24,34.) The Apostle 
endured this testimony for several days, but finally expelled 
the evil spirits; probably through sympathy for 
the woman, as well as from a realization that if thus 
permitted the evil spirits might claim some collusion as 
between themselves and the Apostle, and so after his 
departure might have an improper influence upon those 
who would receive the gospel of Christ. 

Wealth always has been a power. It is not surprising, 
therefore, that the syndicate of worldly men 
who were making much gain through this spirit medium, 
angered by the wanton destruction of the value 
of their property, as they would regard the matter, 
and realizing the loss of all their future profits from 
this source, would feel disposed to inflict some kind of 
retribution upon those who had been the cause of their 
misfortune. And their wealth had power with the magistrate 
who, similarly blinded, did not recognize that 
a good work had been done in liberating a fellow-creature 
from the power of the devil, and thus stopping one 
avenue of evil influence and deception. The Apostle, 
as a shrewd man, probably knew to expect some such 
results; otherwise we may suppose that he would have 
rebuked the evil spirit on the first day. He probably 
took the time to think and pray over the matter, 
and to ascertain the Lord's will before putting himself 
and the interests of the cause in jeopardy. We may 
be sure that he was guided in this matter for good, the 
Lord probably wishing to bring the gospel message to 
the jailor. 

The charges brought against Paul and Silas are 
worthy of note as indicating the cunning of the syndicate 
owning the medium. When Paul and Silas were 
dragged to the public square, where trials were conducted, 
the charge brought against them was not that 
they had wrecked the financial interests of the syndicate 
by the exercise of a spirit more powerful than that 
which possessed their medium, for such a charge would 
have had no weight under the laws of the Romans; 
but taking advantage of the fact that the Roman law, 
while tolerant of all religions, made it a criminal offense 
to attempt to proselyte a Roman, they made their 
charges along this line, claiming that Paul and Silas 



were Jews, who were endeavoring to proselyte Romans. 

This charge had some foundation in fact, for of course 

the brethren were there for the very purpose of converting 

Jews, Greeks and Romans to Christ. On this 

charge they were adjudged guilty, and the masses taking 

sides against them, the magistrates made the penalties 

the more severe. They were beaten in public, 

and then put into the inner prison and their feet made 

fast in the stocks. 

With many, such treatment, and the fact that God 
permitted it, would have brought discouragement, and 
they would consequently have chosen some less hazardous 
calling in life; but these servants of God were 
true soldiers of the cross, who had enlisted for life, 
realizing that they were called upon "to endure hardness 
as good soldiers of the Lord Jesus Christ." Instead 
of bemoaning their lot and wishing they had 
never enlisted in the Lord's service, or thinking of how 
they could withdraw from it, these noble men, on the 
contrary, rejoiced and thanked God that they were accounted 
worthy to suffer in his name and for his cause. 
While not disposed to be obtrusive with their prayers 
and praises, they evidently felt that it would be proper 
that their fellow prisoners who would know something 
of their treatment, should know something also of how 
they received it, and of the grace of God which sustained 
them. No such prisoners had ever been there 
before, and never before had that prison been a Bethel, 
a house of God, a gate of Heaven. As the Apostles 
prayed their strength of heart and fervency of spirit 
increased until they broke forth in songs of thankfulness, 
gratitude and praise to the King of kings and 
Lord of lords. 

Heathen religions have holy books, and prayers, 
and occasional mournful chants by their priests or 
priestesses, but they have no singing of hymns in worship. 
These seem to have been confined first, to the 
Jews, and secondly, to their successors in grace, Christians; 
but now, alas! they are taken up by all classes, 
and some times prostituted to the uses of Mormonism, 
Christian Science, Spiritism, Theosophy, etc. 

How greatly this conduct of Paul and Silas differs 
from the recorded conduct and sentiments of some of 
the greatest and most notable and most stoical on the 
pages of history. Of Ovid, the famed poet and philosopher, 
it is declared— "There is scarcely one of his 
many letters which he wrote during his short exile, 
which is not full of unmanly lamentations." Of Seneca, 
a noted writer of Paul's day, it is written that his books 
were "full of most sounding professions of stoic superiority 
to passion and pain, yet, when exiled, he broke 
into abject complaint." Similar things are said concerning 
Cicero, and Napoleon Bonaparte is another example. 
Yet all these men, even in their exile, were 
surrounded by wealth and luxury: but here we have 
before us two men who had forsaken all for the privilege 



R2182 : page 202 

of being God's ambassadors, representatives of 
Christ, suffering to bear the message of divine grace to 
the sin-blinded and unthankful;— yet under most distressing 
circumstances, with their backs lacerated from 
the beating, with their feet in the stocks, and their 
whole bodies therefore pained and uncomfortable, with 
seemingly no cause for thankfulness that the worldly 
could discern, they were filled with love and gratitude 
to God, and their hearts overflowed in songs of praise. 
Surely they were actuated by super-human hopes and 
joys! 

Nor were they the only ones upon whom the 
truth and the holy spirit of the truth has had such an 
influence. We remember many martyrs who likewise 
"endured as seeing him who is invisible." We think 
of Daniel praying in the lion's den and answering the 
king in a cheerful voice, "The God whom I serve hath 
sent his angel and shut the lion's mouth." We remember 
the three Hebrew captives, who, because of faithfulness 
to God, were cast into the fiery furnace; and who 
there had the presence with them of one in appearance 
like the Son of Man. We remember Bunyan, who, 
while in Bedford jail, England, for faithfulness to the 
truth, not only prayed to God, but figuratively sang 
his praises, as represented in his remarkable work- 
Pilgrim's Progress. We remember also King David of 
old, some of whose most expressive and impressive 
Psalms were written in hours of distress, when the 
Lord upheld him. Madam Guyon, while imprisoned 
in the Castle Vincennes (1695), wrote songs and sang 
them in praise to God. Writing of it subsequently she 
said, "It sometimes seems to me as if I were a little 
bird, whom the Lord had placed in a cage, and that I 
had nothing now to do but to sing. The joy of my 
heart gave brightness to the objects around me. The 
stones of my prison looked to my eyes like rubies." 
In prison she wrote:— 

"A little bird I am, shut from the fields of air; 

And in my songs I sit and sing to him who placed me there: 

Well pleased a prisoner thus to be, because, my God, it pleaseth thee. 

My cage confines me round,— abroad I cannot flee; 

But though my wing is closely bound, my heart's at liberty. 

My prison walls cannot control the flight, the freedom of my soul." 

Thank God, the days of beating and imprisonment 
for Christ's sake are no more; but there are still opportunities 
for the development and exercise of the spirit 
of sacrifice by all who are faithful followers in the footsteps 
of the Lord Jesus; there are social smitings and 
ostracisms for the truth's sake, which can be borne 
with rejoicing to such an extent that the smart is scarcely 
felt. There are times when the Lord permits our 



financial conditions to become almost a gloomy prison 
as viewed from the natural standpoint,— times when 
responsibilities or sicknesses may shut us in as prisoners; 
but under such circumstances the faithful are 
able to realize the Lord's favor and mercy; they find 
many blessings to recount and their hearts overflow 
with thankful gratitude and praise, so that all who 
come in contact with them take knowledge of them, as 
they did of the Apostles, "that they have been with 
Jesus and learned of him." 

The Lord's response to the faith, prayers and praise 
of his servants, by an earthquake, is of course out of 
the ordinary course of his providences; but the case 
was an extraordinary one. These were extraordinary 
servants, the work given them to do in establishing 
the Church was an extraordinary work. And evidently 
something extraordinary was needed in the case of the 
jailor, who, though an honest and well disposed man, 
was not expecting any blessing of religious instruction 
from the prisoner under his care: yet, as soon as he 
grasped the situation he became as teachable as a child 
at the feet of his prisoners, inquiring the way to eternal 
life. It is worthy of note that the gospel of the 
Lord Jesus Christ has little effect upon any who receive 
it otherwise than in meekness: those who oppose themselves 
and fight the truth at every step are not of the 
kind, nor in the condition to be blessed by it: hence 
the Lord's instruction to "preach the gospel to the 
meek. 

The gist of the apostle's instructions is summed 
up in our golden text,— "Believe on the Lord Jesus 
Christ"— the significance of which is very comprehensive. 

R2183 : page 202 

It implies not only mental assent to the fact 

that Christ died for our sins and arose for our justification, 

but also a reception of these truths into the 

heart and into the life of the believers; so that thenceforth 

he may realize that he is not his own, but bought 

with a price, even the precious blood of Christ; that 

he belongs to him and should willingly submit in every 

matter to his guidance and direction. 

The Apostle did not tell the jailor and his family 
that they must seek the Lord's favor and forgiveness 
for several weeks, in prayer at a mourner's bench, or 
otherwise; but, on the contrary, that they should 
simply and at once believe the facts as preached to them, 
and at once start a consecrated life in harmony therewith. 
And all this faith and consecration was at once 
confessed and professed by the jailor and his family 
when they were immersed. 

Meantime, we can imagine with what tenderness 
and gratitude to God the jailor washed the wounds of 
his remarkable prisoners; and recognizing them as the 
servants and representatives of the Lord he entertained 



them with the best his house afforded. A proper appreciation 
of God and his goodness always leads to an 
appreciation of the servants and instruments which God 
is pleased to use in bringing blessings to us. 

R2184 : page 203 

CUMBERED WITH MUCH SERVING. 



"So busy, O so busy," is the cry on every side, 

"There's much to do, and workers few, while on the moments glide;" 

And weary hearts are fainting oft' beneath their load of care; 

And willing hands have grown too weak the burden's weight to bear. 

"No time to rest, no time to wait for strength to be renewed, 
No time to tarry till the soul with power is endued; 
The tasks increasing every day, this life so near its close; 
We cannot rest," the toilers cry, "until death brings repose!" 

O burdened hearts, can it be true this is the Master's will? 
Are you to labor every hour and never to be still? 
These vessels are so very small, our cups will not run o'er 
Unless we seek the fountain's brink for filling more and more. 

Take time to sit at Jesus' feet and hear his blessed Word; 

Wait there, like Mary, till your soul to love's best deed is stirred; 

Then break the alabaster box, and let its perfume sweet 

Spread with the gospel's joyful sound, and make the earth replete! 

O be not cumbered with much care,— they serve who only wait; 
The Lord's command, "Go thou and work," will never come too late. 
His truth must burn within your soul e'er you a task begin: 
For we must know our captain's will if faith's good fight we win. 

Then come apart each weary one into a place of rest,— 
The flesh so weak must often seek the Rock and Shadow blest; 
There tarry in that silence sweet till freed from every care, 
And you arise, with strength renewed, for him to do and dare. 

— F. G. Burroughs. 



R2183 : page 203 

THE GOSPEL TO THE NOBLE AND TO THE MORE NOBLE. 

-JULY 18.-ACTS 17:1-12.- 

"They received the Word with all readiness of mind 
and searched the Scriptures daily."— Acts 17:11. 

LEAVING Philippi at the request of the magistrates, 
and for the sake of peace, not insisting 
upon his rights as a Roman citizen, Paul with 



Silas and Timothy proceeded westward, leaving Luke 

with the believers at Philippi for the further establishment 

of the believers in the truth. Their next stop 

was at the city of Thessalonica, the capital of Macedonia. 

They were seeking cities where there were considerable 

numbers of Jews, knowing that they would 

be the best prepared to understand the gospel and to 

accept it. One of the attractions at Thessalonica was 

a large synagogue: and it was to the Jews, as usual, 

that the Apostle first addressed himself. 

It is worthy of note that the Apostle's manner was 
not that of a "ranter," but of a logical and connected 
reasoner: his proofs were brought from the Old Testament 
Scriptures; and the correspondence between these 
testimonies concerning Messiah, given of God through 
the prophets, with the facts and circumstances of our 
Lord's ministry and death were logically set forth. 
And no doubt all his hearers had some knowledge of 
the matters which had transpired in Jerusalem; for 
representatives undoubtedly went every year to Jerusalem, 
to the Passover. The reports which reached 
them had no doubt all been from the prejudiced Jewish 
side of the matter, leading them to believe that, while 
Jesus was a good man who performed many wonderful 
works, he was nevertheless an impostor, possessed of a 
devil, a false Messiah, etc. The Apostle's work, then, 
was largely to correct these misapprehensions, and to 
show that the very things which they had heard respecting 
the ignominious death of Jesus were all parts 
of the divine plan, that fitted perfectly to the previous 
testimony of the prophets. He proved to them that 
Messiah must of necessity have died as the Redeemer, 
before he could justly dispense divine mercy and forgiveness 
to any. And then, he showed that all these 
things had been accurately and properly fulfilled in the 
experiences of Jesus. 

As usual, wherever the true gospel went, the result 
was a division; and the same is true to-day. 

So our Lord foretold, saying, "Think not that I 
am come to send peace on earth: I came not to send 
peace, but a sword." The sword of the spirit is the 
Word of God, and it not only separates in congregations, 
but also in homes— the Ishmael class opposes the 
Isaac class— the Esau class opposes the Jacob class. 
Many not appreciating the divine plan are surprised 
that the truth causes division. Such divisions along 
right lines are to be expected and esteemed: but the 
Apostle speaks of another kind of divisions which are 
disapproved and are to be avoided; namely, divisions 
on technicalities, methods, forms, genealogies, etc. 
The Apostle assures us that such divisions are of the 
adversary. But divisions as between those who accept 
Christ as their Redeemer and the only hope of salvation, 
and those who do not so accept him, are most important 
and to be desired. Upon all other points the 
Lord's people are to be peace-lovers and "peace makers." 



"So far as lieth in you, live peaceably with all 
men." Waive all unimportant tests and shibboleths, 
but in no sense or degree either ignore or deny the 
only basis of Christian fellowship— the "ransom for 
all." 

The believing Jews consorted or associated with 
the brethren, and quite a good many Greeks, including 
a number of honorable women, were counted among 
the believers; and the cause seemed to be gaining a 
good foothold: but again God permitted a disturbance 
which brought the truth and its servants more prominently 
before the attention of the whole people and 
served to make the cleavage between the believers and 

R2183 : page 204 

the unbelievers the more distinct. Thus not only a 
trial of faith and of character was brought unto the 
believers, but a blessing came, also, to those who were 
faithful; for all who took a decided stand for the truth 
were undoubtedly helped and strengthened thereby. 
The spirit of compromise with error is the most subtle 
and dangerous spirit encountered by those who are 
called to forsake all and follow Christ. 

The unbelieving Jews were those who were not in 
proper condition of heart to receive the truth;— of the 
Ishmael class, they were full of envy and jealousy 
against the true seed of Abraham— the true heirs of 
the promise. They did not hesitate to employ hoodlums 
as their servants in creating an uproar and making 
a mob-assault upon the house in which they supposed 
Paul and Silas and Timothy were lodged. Not 
finding these, they took Jason and others of the new 
converts before their tribunal, accusing them of consorting 
with the disturbers of the peace. As usual, 
sagacity was shown in the nature of the charges; the 
same charge was brought forward that was brought 
against our Lord himself, namely, treason to Caesar- 
teaching of another king. Under autocratic governments, 
such as that of the Caesars, rulers everywhere 
were expected to be specially severe against any and 
every form of treason, and to have ignored such charges 
would have made them appear to be co-conspirators 
against Caesar. How shrewdly the adversary makes 
his attacks! 

Since the Lord had been pleased to frustrate the 
plans of the enemies of the truth for the arrest of his 
ministers, the latter concluded that it would be the 
proper thing not to arouse further antagonism, nor to 
challenge their enemies by bringing charges of riot, 
etc., but rather peaceably departed for another city. 
In this they followed the instructions of our Lord, 
"When they shall persecute you in one city flee unto 
another." They followed the example of our Lord 
also, of whom we read that he left Judea and Galilee, 
for he "could not walk in Judea because the Jews 



sought to kill him." 

The words of the enemies— "These that have 
turned the world up-side-down are come hither also," 
indicate how wide-spread was the knowledge of the 
truth at this time, and how zealous the efforts of the 
apostles were conceded by their enemies to be. Nor 
was this turning up-side-down wholly the work of the 
apostles: rather it was the work of the spirit of the 
truth, wherever the truth was preached; the apostles 
were merely zealous in introducing the truth which did 
the work. When they were gone, the true believers, 
inspired by the same spirit, continued the work of 
turning matters up-side-down, not only in the synagogue, 
but also, we may be sure, in their own hearts 
and in their own lives; turning out the evil and impure, 
and turning in more and more of the fruits and 
graces of the spirit of the truth. The reason that so 
many who receive some knowledge of the truth, know 
little of the turning up-side-down of the perversities of 
their old natures is, because they fail to receive the 
spirit of the truth, fail to come into full sympathy of 
heart with the principles of divine righteousness which 
inspired the word of truth and formulated the divine 
plan. Alas! many seem to receive the truth not in 
the love of it; but rather in the love of controversy or 
in curiosity. To such it will be of no real value. To 
profit us it must be received as the sword of the spirit 
to kill the old nature, that the new nature may develop; 
—it must become "a discerner of the thoughts 
and intents of the heart" to us, that we may by divine 
grace conquer self and bring every thought into captivity 
to the will of God. 

The next stop was at Berea, sixty miles west of 
Thessalonica. Of the people of this city wonderful 
words of commendation are written, "These were more 
noble than those of Thessalonica, in that they received 
the Word in all readiness of mind, examining the 
Scriptures daily, whether those things were so." This 
commendation is frequently misunderstood as applicable 
to the Christians at Berea; but not so, it applies 
specially to the Jews at that place: they seemed to be 
just ready for the truth, and yet received it, not in a 
spirit of credulity, simply because it was told to them, 
but properly they were ready and of a proper spirit to 

R2184 : page 204 

investigate, and to see whether the things spoken fitted 
to the prophetic statements respecting Messiah and 
his work, etc. This is always a mark of true nobility, 
and such noble persons are worthy of the truth and are 
enabled to receive it. Nevertheless, we are to remember 
that readiness to investigate and to receive the 
truth are not the only qualities which go to make up 
a Christian. In one of his parables our Lord illustrates 
a class which was ready to receive the Word, but 



had no root in themselves, and who consequently, when 
the sun of persecution arose, withered and drooped and 
lost their Christian vitality. --Matt. 13:6,20,21. 

Apparently, the larger proportion of the Jews at 
Berea became believers, and the unbelievers were so 
comparatively few that they did not attempt persecution. 
But whether it was from lack of persecution, or 
whether it was that the seed at Berea fell into hearts 
that had less depth, it is nevertheless a fact that the 
Church at Thessalonica seems to have flourished far 
better than the Church established at Berea. This is 
evidenced by the fact that the Apostle wrote two of 
his epistles to the Church at Thessalonica, and we 
have no record of any written to the Church at Berea. 
We may draw a lesson from this to the effect that it is 
not always the places in which the truth is most favorably 
received that it will hold out the longest and bring 
forth the most fruitage. Persecution and opposition 
are often agencies of great blessings;— in part perhaps 
because they draw the line of demarkation sharply between 
those who are the Lord's and those who are not 
the Lord's. A certain amount of persecution is very 
helpful in the establishment of character. Hence the 
encouragement of the Apostle to "rejoice in tribulation;" 
and again his declaration, "Tribulation worketh 
patience." Again the Apostle Peter stated that present 
afflictions may be considered light, because we 
recognize that "they work out for us a far more exceeding 
and eternal weight of glory." 



page 205 
VOL. XVIII. JULY 15, 1897. No. 14. 



CONTENTS. 



Special Items 206 

Views from the Watch Tower 207 

Spiritism— Demonism 

Warnings from a Spiritist 209 

Many Possessed of Devils To-day 210 

Spirits Organizing "Churches" 214 

"In the Secret Chamber" 214 

Satanic Powers Malific 215 

Preaching to Athenian Philosophers 216 

God's People in Corinth 219 

page 206 
SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 



--ADDRESS TO- 
TOWER PUBLISHING CO., BIBLE HOUSE, 58 & 60 ARCH ST., 
ALLEGHENY (NORTH PITTSBURG), PA., U.S.A. 

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 

INCLUDES A SUBSCRIPTION TO "THE OLD THEOLOGY TRACTS"-QUARTERLY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, NY. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, 

OR REGISTERED. FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN 

MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS: 

Those of the interested, who by reason of old age or accident, or 
other adversity are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, 
if they will send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and 
requesting the paper. 



HOW TO ADDRESS LETTERS AND ORDERS TO US 



Please assist us by observing the following rules in your correspondence 
with us:— 

(1) Address orders for Bibles, Tracts, Dawns, WATCH TOWER 
subscriptions and Tract Fund donations to— 

WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY, 
58 ARCH STREET, ALLEGHENY, PA. 

(2) If you write to the Editor on doctrinal or other subjects, and 
choose to enclose "Good Hopes," for orders for books, tracts, etc., 
please write orders on one sheet of paper, questions on another and 
your general letter on another. Address— 

C. T. RUSSELL, 58 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA. 

(3) Please do not trust to our remembering previous correspondence, 
but make each letter complete in itself, including your full address. 

MOTTO CARDS-ENAMEL TEXTS. 



We frequently have calls for text cards, for home embellishment, 
and have heretofore found it difficult to describe them satisfactorily. 
Now we have arranged for an illustrated catalogue describing thirty-eight 
different styles and over two hundred mottoes and texts. Prices from 
5 cents to 50 cents each. We are not permitted to cut these prices, 
but we can and will send all orders postage free; and with each dollar's 
worth of these motto cards we will send free either one leatherette 
bound volume of MILLENNIAL DAWN or three copies of "Tabernacle 
Shadows" (leatherette), or of "Thy Word is Truth" (leatherette), or of 
"What Say the Scriptures about Hell?" 

Orders for these catalogues will be filled in rotation as received. 



R2184 : page 207 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 



THE "American Railway Union" under the lead 

of Eugene V. Debbs at its June convention 

merged itself into a new organization, known as "The 

Social Democracy of America." The scheme proposed 

is that members and friends of the Society shall contribute 

funds to start a system of colonies, one after 

another, as rapidly as possible, in some state of the 

Union at present sparsely settled and otherwise considered 

favorable to the scheme. When the colonists 

are of sufficient number they hope to control the State 

legislature and government— to enact socialistic laws, 

and to enforce them; and thus to give to the world a 

practical example of their claim, that Socialism is to 

be the world's savior. 

Practical tests of the various social remedies proposed 
are just what is needed to prove them all at best 
palliatives, never remedies, and often breeders of woes 
worse than those they seek to cure. It would be an 
excellent plan to set apart one half say, of Oregon, and 
divide it into about twenty little states for experimental 
purposes, in which the advocates of various "social-redemption" 
theories could rule themselves and "try" 
their theories, and prove them failures. Give one to 
"The Social Democracy," another to the "Nationalists," 
another to the "Single Taxers," another to "The 
New Woman," another to "Anarchists," etc. In fact 
there is no need for legislation on the subject, for there 
is plenty of good vacant land to be had by settlers, 
free, in several states. 

But what these "reformers" want is not free land, 
free water, free air, and plenty of hard work in "subduing 
the forests," etc. The Pilgrim fathers got those 
things with "sweat of face;" and it developed in them 
strong characters for integrity, and a reverence for the 
Creator and his Word. 

Judging from their declaration of intentions, "The 
Social Democracy of America" purposes to steal a State. 
Under cover of liberal laws they design to enter some 
favored State and to so change its laws that the invested 
wealth, improvements and conveniences accumulated 
by others through years of toil shall, nolens volens, 
be largely appropriated to the use and convenience of 
the less prudent or less fortunate invaders. 

And all this is proposed on the plea that the "reformers" 
wish to demonstrate the blessings that would 
flow from the operation of the Law of Love, as opposed 
to the miseries of the present Law of Selfishness. Alas! 
how easily men can deceive themselves. Surely, anyone 
can see that at very most this is the self-love of one 
class fighting the self-love of another class. 

We rejoice to note any evidence of the growth of 
the spirit of generosity in mankind; and would be glad 
if all men were willing to surrender private interests to 
the public welfare; but we are not so blind to facts and 



reason as to suppose that Mr. Debbs and his associates 
are acting the part of philanthropists in scheming to acquire 
the property of others: tho, of course it may be 
claimed that such a readjustment should come sometime. 

But all such schemes are now in order, and many 
of them will undoubtedly be tried that the world may 
have demonstrations of that which God's people already 
know from his Word;— that all human schemes must 
fail to bring forth perfect results because conceived 
and carried forward by men and women whose thoughts 
and deeds are warped by the sin and selfishness of six 
thousand years' development. 

Mr. Debbs and his principal associates express 
great confidence in the success of their scheme, and 
point to the success of the Mormons in Utah. They 
forget that the secret of the Mormon success is a religious 

R2184 : page 208 

unity that practically enslaves the people to the 
control of their Elders whom they accept as divinely 
appointed and inspired. No other slavery can hold 
its victims so firmly as religious slavery— good or bad. 
And Mr. Debbs could expect no such influence over 
those who would follow him as standard-bearer. There 
would be nothing but selfishness common to all who 
would join his colonies: and selfishness is the very 
basis of anger, envy, hatred and strife, and constantly 
tends to disintegration. His scheme might prosper so 
long as donations in its aid would continue, or so long 
as special hopes of improvement at the expense of others 
held out; but it would go to pieces at once when these 
selfish inducements would cease. 

Mr. Debbs and some of his associates no doubt 
have some benevolent sentiments blended with their 
selfish ones, and with us would probably rejoice to see 
all the "groaning creation" (Rom. 8:22,23) relieved 
from the present pressure of evil. What they lack is the 
knowledge which comes from the Lord's Word— a 
quarter from which they expect no light. 

It teaches— (1) That no man can either appreciate 
or exercise pure love unmixed with selfishness, 
except he be "born again," for which he must first be 

R2185 : page 208 

"begotten again" by the holy spirit of the Lord's Word 
of truth. 

(2) That only such are qualified to rule either 
themselves or others, or to enjoy full liberty. 

(3) That God has been testing and selecting just 
such a class of rulers during this gospel age; and that 
soon he will bless the world by establishing his "elect" 
under Christ, their "Head," as his autocratic Kingdom, 
to take away human liberty and rule with a rod 

of iron, until all who will obey shall be blessed and 



lifted to perfection of being and of character; and all 
who will not obey shall be destroyed. (Acts 3:19-23; 
1 Cor. 15:12-25.) Then, at the close of the Millennial 
age, full liberty can be granted to all; for none but the 
worthy will remain. 

"Our Father which art in heaven. ..Thy Kingdom 
come, Thy will be done on earth as it is done in 
heaven." 



R2185 : page 208 
WHAT SAY THE SCRIPTURES ABOUT SPIRITISM? 



-PROOFS THAT IT IS DEMONISM-CONCLUDED. 



Another popular Spiritualist paper is The Philosophical 
Journal. It continually urges that its gospel of 
Spiritism be tested, and declares it to be the one thing 
the world needs; and yet it also admits the frauds practiced 
by the "spirits" upon mediums. It will admit 
that when detected as "evil spirits," "lying spirits," 
by misrepresentation, fraud, wicked suggestions or 
works, arousing the victim to resistance or relief through 
prayer, evidently the same spirits return as moralists, 
with reproofs, professions of sympathy and promises 
of aid in resisting the evil spirits, etc., only to improve 
the first opportunity of weakness or temptation to break 
down all resistance of the will and obtain complete possession 
—obsession. We clip a statement in support of 
this from its issue of April 22, '97, signed by A. N. 
Waterman, one of the leading Spiritualist lights. Under 
the caption, "Real Authorship of Spirit Communications," 
he says:— 

"It appears to me impossible that in this life we 
can know from whom a spiritual communication from 
the other world is made. We can have evidence, something 
like that which we possess in reference to the 
authorship of a telegram, but no more." 

Would people of "sound mind" stake their all, 
risk an insanity which according to their own accounts 
is manifold worse in torture than ordinary dementia, 
and spend their lives trying to get other people to risk 
their all similarly, when for it all they have no more 
evidence than goes with a telegram? Would they do so 
when the bitter experiences of forty years testing had 
told them that the genuine are at most only as "one 
grain to a bushel," as one of them has just told us? 

No, no; only desperately deluded people would 
pursue such a course. Evidently as the holy spirit in 
men produces "the spirit of a sound mind" (2 Tim. 1:7; 



Prov. 2:6,7), so, on the other hand, the spirit of 
devils produces the spirit of an unsound mind. 

Another letter received recently from Florida, 
from a brother in Christ, a WATCH TOWER reader, well 
educated in several languages, informs us concerning 
some peculiar experiences recently had with these "seducing 
spirits." He became aware of the presence of 
invisible spirit beings, and they seemed to manifest a 
curious interest in his work: he was translating MILLENNIAL 
DAWN into a foreign language. 

Well informed along the Scriptural lines presented 
foregoing, as to who these "seducing spirits" are, he 
nevertheless forgot, or failed to heed the divine instruction, 
—that mankind should hold no communication 
whatever with these "lying spirits" and "have no fellowship 
with the unfruitful works of darkness." The 
neglect of this instruction caused him serious trouble; 
and but for the interposition of divine mercy, in response 
to his and our prayers, it might have made 
shipwreck of him— soul and body. 

R2185 : page 209 

He was allured to the conference by a mixture of 
curiosity with a benevolent desire to do them good by 
preaching to them the glorious gospel of divine love and 
mercy operating through Christ toward all mankind; 
and the eventual hope of a judgment (probationary 
trial) for the fallen angels, declared in the Scriptures. 
(1 Cor. 6:3.) At first they gave close attention and 
appeared to take a deep and reverent interest in the 
message; but before long they became very "familiar" 
spirits, intruding themselves and their questions and 
remarks at all times and places, disputing with him 
and with each other in a manner and upon topics far 
from edifying, so that he remonstrated: finally he demanded 
that they depart, but having gained his "inner 
ear" (having made of him what Spiritists would term 
a "clairaudient medium") they were not disposed to go, 
and only through earnest prayer was he finally delivered. 
He should have been on his guard against their 
seductive influences; he should have remembered that 
whatever message of grace the Lord may yet have for 
these fallen angels he has not yet sent it to them, and 
that none are authorized to speak for the Lord without 
authority. "How shall they preach except they be 
sent?" The message of salvation thus far is to mankind 
only; and even here it is limited, for altho all 
are to be counseled to repent of sin and to reform, yet 
the gospel of salvation is restricted to repentant "believers" 
only,— "the meek of the earth." 

WARNINGS FROM A SPIRITIST AND SWEDENBORGIAN. 



Joseph Hartman has published a book of 378 pages 
in which he recounts his experiences as a Spirit medium 
(led into it by Swedenborg's teachings), his debasement 
almost to the loss of reason by spirit obsession, 
and his final recovery from its ensnarement of 
his will; but strange to say, he is still a firm believer 
in Swedenborgianism and Spiritism, altho, like others, 
he cautions every one to be on guard against their 
wicked devices. Poor deluded man, he still believes 
that there are good spirits. 

Mr. H. had come in contact with the "Planchette," 
a wooden device which holds a pencil and moves readily 
under the hands of certain mediums or "sensitives," 
even children, writing answers to questions propounded 
to it; and he had attended several tipping and rapping 
seances, and was convinced that they were not frauds, 
but the operations of invisible, intelligent spirits. He 
became actively interested while endeavoring to convince 
doubting friends of the genuineness of the manifestations. 
Next he tried it in his own family and developed 
the fact that his little son was a drawing and 
writing medium. Next he was curious to investigate 
the phenomena of spirit materialization. About this 
time his daughter "Dolly" died, and he was deeply 
interested in the apparitions or materializations which 
professed to be "Dolly." He, however, was incredulous, 
and, in his own words, "gave it up under a cloud, 
and a suspicion of fraud." But after five years of experience 
he says,— "Whatever doubts I may have entertained 
respecting the phenomena, I am clearly of 
the opinion that honest materializations are now of frequent 
occurrence. Who the forms are, or whence derived, 
is a mooted question." We have just seen 
that if the manifestations are "honest" so far as the 
mediumship is concerned, they are frauds so far as 
the persons represented are concerned— simulations of 
the dead, by the fallen angels. 

Later the table-tipping and rapping and drawing 
and writing tests were revived at Mr. H.'s home, two 
of his children becoming adept mediums, and finally, 
he himself became a writing medium, to his own surprise 
and without expectation or solicitation. Now he 
could and did hold frequent converse supposedly with 
his daughter "Dolly," but really with demons who personated 
her, and others, he was caused to smell pleasant 
odors, etc. As a later development he became a speaking 
medium, and "under control" would speak and act 
without his own intention or volition; but with full 
power to refuse to be a medium to such "spirits" as he 
chose to refuse, because of their former rudeness or obscenity. 
Next he was granted the "inner ear," "Clairaudience," 
or ability to hear sounds not audible to 
others, and thus to hold converse with the "spirits" 
without any outward agency, such as writing, rapping, 
etc. 

Of his "spirit friends" he says,— "They described 



to me that their controlling circle consisted of 'twelve 
spiritual gifts or virtues' which composed a 'band' of 
very great strength; and under their guidance, they 
declared, I would become one of the greatest mediums 
ever known. I revolted— had not the least ambition for 
fame of that sort.— They were the more determined." 

Thus gradually was Mr. Hartman brought, against 
his wish, more and more under the "control" of the 
wicked spirits which finally obsessed him. The next 
experience was with a peculiar clairaudient "Voice" 
which represented itself to be the Lord and took full 
control of him, directing his every act. It pictured all 
his errors and weaknesses in darkest shades; and endeavored 
to destroy all hope. He was told to pray, 
and when he attempted to pray he was given such conflicting 
suggestions as to words as made it impossible. 
He was fast in the snare of the "wicked spirits;" 
"possessed," and controlled by "spirit-mesmerism," 
as he calls it. 

But finally he escaped their bondage;— a once 
strong will reasserted itself, and he wrote the account 
to hinder others from being similarly entrapped. But 

R2185 : page 210 

he does not understand the matter, notwithstanding his 
remarkable experiences. His experiences had proved 

R2186 : page 210 

that all the "spirits" which he had come in contact 

with were "wicked," lying, profane, and a majority 

of them vulgarly and disgustingly obscene: Yet, believing 

these to be the spirits of dead men and women, 

he surmised that he had met a band of evil ones only, 

and that there were other bands of good, truthful and 

pure spirits of good people. If he had but known the 

Lord's testimony on this subject, it would have put the 

entire matter in another light. 

After gaining will-control of himself he was still 
attended by these evil spirits whose character he now 
fully knew; and they tried repeatedly to bring his will 
power again under "control," but had no power that 
he would not grant. He did, however, grant them 
liberty to use his hand in writing communications, and 
in reply to his questions respecting how and why they 
had abused his confidence, lied to him, were obscene 
and sought to bind and injure him, they answered that 
they were constitutionally and thoroughly bad and that 
they were "devils;"— again contradicting this and declaring 
that they were spirits of dead human beings. 
But to confirm him in Swedenborgianism they told him 
that there were no Swedenborgians among them. And 
Hartman evidently believed these self-confessed "lying 
spirits," for he concludes his book by quoting proofs 
that Swedenborg had passed through experiences of obsession 



somewhat like his own. He quotes from Swedenborg's 
Diary 2957-2996 as follows:- 

"Very often when any one spoke with me, spirits 
spoke through me. ...This occurred many times; for 
instance twice to-day. I cannot enumerate the times, 
they are so many. ...Moreover, they have laughed 
through me, and done many things. ...These are those 
who introduce these things into my thoughts, and 
while I am unconscious of it, lead my hand to write 
thus." 

Hartman says of Swedenborg further:— 

"It is a matter of history that Swedenborg's maligners, 
not understanding interior temptations or spirit 
control, published that he was crazy, and that he did 
several foolish and insane things while living in London. 
...He was under control of spirits who acted through 
his body, speaking through him and moving his body 
as if it were their own. ...During a part of this 
transitional period he was unquestionably controlled by 
evil spirits. He says he had 'tremors and was shaken 
from head to foot, and thrown out of bed on his face' 
...'I was in the temptation,' he says, thoughts invaded 
me that I could not control,... and full liberty 
was given them.... While I had the most damnable 
thoughts, the worst that could possibly be, Jesus 
Christ was presented visibly before my internal sight.'" 

Mr. Hartman comments:— "This we believe was 
an evil spirit pretending to be Christ, as in our own 
case the spirit pretended to be God." 

To us it seems evident that Swedenborg was a 
Spirit-medium and was an advance agent for promulgating 
and establishing the "doctrines of devils" respecting 
"seven heavens and seven hells," etc., etc., 
ad nauseam. Yet Mr. Hartman closes his book with 
a eulogy of Swedenborg; who, altho admittedly possessed 
of devils at times, he thinks was sometimes possessed 
and controlled by good spirits: while Hartman's 
own experience corroborated the Scriptures, that they 
are all "wicked," "seducing," "lying" spirits. 

MANY POSSESSED OF DEVILS TO-DAY. 



In a pamphlet entitled— "The Nature of Insanity; 
its Cause and Cure",— by J. D. Rhymus, the author 
shows that in many cases insanity is merely demoniacal 
possession or "obsession." He says,— 

"In my own case I know that the brain was not 
diseased at all; my whole nature seemed to be intensified 
by conflicting emotions raging within my breast. 
I was completely enveloped and pervaded by thought, 
or in other words thought came as something impinged 
upon me, seeking expression through me, without being 
coined or generated by the action of my own brain, 
altho fully conscious at the time, as I am now, that I 



possessed a strength within me not my own will and 
brain power so-called;— yet it was so blended with, and 
manifested through my own powers of action, that I felt 
great exhaustion of nerve force and mental prostration 
when the conditions subsided." 

After detailing his own case and his release from 
the thraldom of evil spirits, whom he supposed to be 
the spirits of wicked dead men (apparently he also was 
a follower of Swedenborg), he quotes a letter from a 
Philadelphia physician, dated Nov. 12, 1884, as 
follows:— 

"The young lady to whom you refer in your letter 

is a Miss S , who was once my patient and quite 

intimate in my family. Her father was a sea captain, 
and was lost at sea, no one knowing when or where. 
Her anxiety to learn something of his fate, led her to 
apply to a spirit medium. She was found to be very 
'susceptible' and a remarkable medium. She did nothing 
to encourage the approach of spirits; but they came 
all the same. They almost tormented the life out of 
her for a long time— how long I do not remember. 
They often made her get out of bed at night and perform 
all sorts of grotesque antics. She finally drove 
them off by repeating the Lord's Prayer on their every 
approach. Your sincere friend, ." 

The same writer says:— 

"Judge Edmonds of New York [a noted Spiritist 
and both a Clairvoyant and Clairaudient medium— now 
deceased], has recently expressed the opinion that 
many so-called lunatics in asylums are only under the 
influence of spirits." The Judge himself said,— 'Some 
fifteen cases of insanity, or rather obsession, I have 
been instrumental in curing. This I said to the Academy 
of Science, in New York.' 

"The Judge has had Catholic priests, after a thorough 
trial of their 'holy water and prayers,' send [to him] 
their mediumistic members when wickedly disordered, 

R2186 : page 211 

to be demagnetized and released from the grasp of obsessional 
spirits." 

SPIRITISM REVIVING. 



Few are aware to what extent Spiritism is now 
active; how it is gradually reviving. Here is an account 
of Dr. Peebles' visit to Melbourne, Australia, 
this year, 1897. He writes to The Philadelphia Journal 
as follows:— 

"Altho I had come for a rest, I was immediately 
pressed into active service, and have been lecturing 
every Sunday evening either in the Masonic hall (which 
seats 1300) or the Lyceum (700), both of them being 



filled at times to overflowing. I have also spoken in 
the Unitarian and Swedenborgian churches, and the 
Australian (Presbyterian) church, on vegetarianism 
and other reform subjects. 

"Several mediums speak about coming to Australia. 
Before leaving, let me tell you that the Melbourne 
press says there are already 500 mediums in the 
city and suburbs, while others say 200, but I see none 
who compare with Mrs. Freitag, and others. I cannot, 
conscientiously, encourage mediums to come to Australia, 
unless they are absolutely first-class test mediums. 
That's what the people clamor for— tests, tests, tests. 
Old, bald headed Spiritualists, who had tests years 
ago, want them renewed, and so seek for tests instead 
of going on to a higher plane of harmony, beauty and 
spiritual truth, becoming their own mediums." 

Yes; the tests, rapping, writing, table tipping, 
and even materialization tests are only the beginnings 
of Spiritism, and not the desired ends sought by the 
spirits. The end sought is possession "obsession;" and 
those who by strong self-control constantly resist absolute 
spirit-control are used as "test mediums," to 
catch others, and to exhort others, as above, to go "on 
to a higher plane of harmony" with lying, seducing, 
enslaving and demonizing spirits. 

An English journal called Black and White gives 
a detailed and illustrated account of recent apparitions 
at the town of Tilly-sur-Seulles, Normandy, France. 
It says that the apparitions are of the Virgin Mary 
and have continued for several months, and are thoroughly 
vouched for. It adds:— 

"The appearances, which seldom or never resemble 
each other even to the same voyants, always either ascend 
from the earth, as in the case of those of the Witch 
of Endor, or appear gradually bit by bit, first a leg, 
then an arm, and so on, at a slight elevation. All this 
is very queer reading. 

"The trampled field of oats, the elm tree stripped 
of its branches by relic-hunters, the torn hedge protected 
by barbed wire and decorated with statues pictures, 
rosaries, pots of flowers and votive tapers, remain 
to testify to a belief in the supernatural not less 
strong than it was in mediaeval times." 

Black and White, after quoting from the Croix du 
Calvados (the official organ of the Roman Catholic 
Bishop of the diocese), that, " Altho it cannot doubt 
the fact of the appearances, it is inclined more and more 
to attribute them to diabolic intervention," adds:— 

"If anything, this is calculated to lend them 
still greater interest in the eyes of the world which, 
at the end of the nineteenth century, shows itself 
especially ready to dabble in Satanism, crystal-gazing, 
astrology, theosophy, spiritualism and magic, 
both black and white. The chief points in favor of this 
clerical decision seem to be that one Vintras, who lived 
in an old mill, still standing on the banks of the Seulles, 



below the older village of Tilly, prophesied these apparitions 
about the year '30. Vintras was condemned 
as a sorcerer and incarcerated at Caen by request of 
Pope Gregory XVI. He claimed to have been 'inspired' 
by the Archangel Michael. Curiously enough, another 
'prophet,' claiming to be inspired by another Archangel, 
Gabriel to wit,— namely Mile. Cuedon, who has 
made a stir in Paris lately, and whom a certain Abbe 

R2187 : page 211 

declares to be 'possessed' rather than 'inspired,' prophesied 
these same apparitions at Tilly a fortnight before 
they began." 

Satan's motto seems to be, Anything to deceive 
and bewilder humanity and to hinder the truth now 
due to them from reaching them. From an English 
Spiritist journal Light, we quote a recent statement 
of a seance, as follows:— 

"At a sitting which was being held one evening 
at the invitation of a mother who had just lost a dearly 
loved son, amongst other phenomena a remarkable 
light was seen. It was in the form of a beautiful radiant 
globe, the center of which was a bright blue of 
great brilliancy. It was apparently an immeasurable 
distance away, the wall of the room offering no obstruction 
to those who watched it, and it remained for 
about half an hour, when it gradually faded from their 
sight. 

"All present were filled with a sense of deep reverence 
and veneration. The control [i.e., the spirit 
controlling the medium] explained that this was indeed 
the Light of Christ, who, in verification of the belief 
which is now very generally held by Christians of every 
denomination, is gradually approaching this earth; 
and in fulfilment of His words, spoken nearly two 
thousand years ago, is coming to establish his Kingdom, 
the reign of universal love and brotherhood, 
amongst us. 

"The control further said: 'Write thus to the editor 
of Light, Tell him that light is coming to all men. 
It grows brighter day by day. This light is the Light 
that should lighten all men that come into the world. 
Love is embodied in it. Truth is bringing it. Wisdom 
teaches it. Faith reveals it. Hope nourishes it. 
Justice craves for it. Glory attends it. Peace claims 
it. Power waits for it. This remarkable light is attended 
by hosts of angels; by dwellers in the spheres 
of the Blest; by mighty conquerors; by those whose 
sins, being scarlet, now shine radiant in this Light. 
Perfected good, perfected man, perfected light. 

"Beautiful angels surrounded the medium. The 
Light appeared behind her; but she was pleased to know 
that the greatest glory shone when she spoke of Christ's 
power. Altho not herself viewing the greatest glory 
of the Light she saw it, far, far away, having a star-like 



radiance." 
R2187 : page 212 

Just as at his first advent the evil spirits acknowledged 
Jesus, saying, "We know thee, who thou art." 
"What have we to do with thee, Jesus, thou Son of 
God?" and as they testified of the apostles,— "These 
be the servants of the most high God which show unto 
us the way of eternal life; so to-day, as we have seen, 
some of them will testify occasionally to the truth, 
commend MILLENNIAL DAWN, etc.; but it is safe to 
assume that it is all for a purpose; as a "bait" for 
those who are interested or seeking light along these 
lines, to eventually lead them off into some gross darkness. 
Let us constantly remember that these deceptions 
will become so bold, and be apparently so backed 
by advanced truth that they will, "if it were possible, 
deceive the very elect."— Matt. 24:24-26. 

Under such circumstances there is but one safe 
course. It is not to stand still with closed eyes, panic 
stricken: that will be impossible, very soon. It is to 
fully accept of Christ Jesus the redeemer, the ransomer 
of the race as your Savior and your Teacher, and to 
be controlled only by his spirit of truth expressed to 
man through his Word— the Bible. So doing you will be 
kept by the power of God from all the snares of the 
wicked one; for the gospel is the power of God unto 
salvation to every one that [obediently] believeth." 

To what great dangers the people of Christendom 
are exposed we may judge when we remember that 
nearly all are laboring under the delusion of Satan, 
first enunciated to Mother Eve in Eden,— to her deception 
and fall. He then said, "Ye shall not surely 
die." He has kept up his side of the controversy 
since then, and the majority of God's people believe 
Satan's statement and disbelieve the Lord's word;— 
holding that no one really dies, but that when death 
apparently takes place the person is thereby made "more 
alive than ever." Believing that none are really dead, 
we cannot wonder that Christendom totally rejects the 
Bible doctrine that the only hope for a future life rests 
in God's promise of a "resurrection of the DEAD," and 
makes nonsense of it by claiming that it is merely a 
resurrection of the body that died— which the Apostle 
declares will never be resurrected— but a new body be 
substituted when the soul, the being is resurrected.— 
ICor. 15:12-18 and 36-38. 

In evidence of the dangers along this line we note 
the fact that in a very recent issue of "The Ram's 
Horn," a radical orthodox journal of Chicago published 
on its outside cover a colored engraving representing 
a Christian mother with clasped hands, praying beside 
a little grave decorated with flowers, while just before 
her is shown the shadowy outline of her child approaching 
her. The editor of The Ram's Horn and 



his readers are like all other nominal Christians who 
neglect the teachings of God's Word on this subject; 
—just ready for Satan's delusions to ensnare them. 

Note also the following, clipped from the Jan. 2, 
'97, issue of The Philosophical Journal (Spiritualist). 
Under the caption "Progressive Thought, the editor 
quotes from Rev. T. De Witt Talmage's discourse of 
Dec. 6, '96, as follows:— 

"Even Talmage has progressed from the old faith, 
and now believes in the return of the spirit to this 
world of ours after death. On December 6 he preached 
a Sermon at Washington on the 'Celestial World,' 
showing the employment of 'the departed' in that state 
of existence. In answer to the question: 'What are 
the departed doing now?' he said: 'That question is 
more easily answered than you might suppose,' and 
adds:— 

"Their hand has forgotten its cunning, but the 
spirit has faculties as far superior to four fingers and a 
thumb as the supernatural is superior to the human. 
The reason that God took away their eye and their 
hand and their brain, was that he might give them 
something more limber, more wieldy, more skillful, 
more multipliant.' 

"Dr. Talmage says that the spirits, freed from 
the material body, are 'more limber, more skillful,' 
and 'are at their old business yet,' but with vastly improved 
faculties. He argues it thus:— 

'"Have you any idea that that affluence of faculty 
at death, collapsed and perished? Why so, when there 
is more for them to look at, and they have keener appreciation 
of the beautiful, and they stand amid the 
very looms where the sunsets and the rainbows and the 
spring mornings are woven. 

'"Are you so obtuse as to suppose that because 
the painter drops his easel and the sculptor his chisel, 
and the engraver his knife, that therefore that taste, 
which he was enlarging or intensifying for forty or 
fifty years, is entirely obliterated? 

"These artists, or friends of art, on earth worked 
in coarse material and with imperfect brain and with 
frail hand. Now they have carried their art into larger 
liberties and into wider circumferences. 

'"They are at their old business yet, but without 
the fatigues, without the limitations, without the 
hindrances of the terrestrial studio.' 

"In answer to the question as to what the physicians 
are doing, since they passed to 'the beyond,' 
he says they 'are busy at their old business,' and adds: 

'"No sickness in heaven, but plenty of sickness 
on earth, plenty of wounds in the different parts of 
God's dominion to be healed and to be medicated. 
Those glorious souls are coming down, not in lazy doctor's 
gig, but with lightning locomotion. 

'"You cannot understand why that patient got 
well after all the skillful doctors had said he must die. 



Perhaps Abercrombie touched him. I should not wonder 
if he had been back again to see some of his old patients. 
Those who had their joy in healing the sickness and 
the woes of earth, gone up to heaven are come forth 
again for benignant medicament' 

R2187 : page 213 

"Then he propounds another question, as to what 
all the departed are doing now— who in earth life were 
'busy, and found their chief joy in doing good.' He 
replies: They are 'going right on with the work.' 

"John Howard visiting dungeons; the dead women 
of Northern and Southern battlefields still abroad looking 
for the wounded; George Peabody still watching 
the poor; Thomas Clarkson still looking after the enslaved 
—all of those who did good on earth, busier since 
death than before. The tombstone is not the terminus, 
but the starting-post' 

"He then concludes with this very emphatic 
language:— 

'"To show you that your departed friends are 
more alive than they ever were; to make you homesick 
for heaven; to give you an enlarged view of the 
glories to be revealed, I have preached this sermon.' 

"Without the slightest doubt then, Dr. DeWitt 
Talmage is a Spiritualist. He does not claim that cognomen, 
but he teaches the grand tenets of our philosophy 
and admits the consequent phenomena of the 
return of the spirit to visit mortals— spirit physicians 
to touch those given up to die by mortal physicians, 
and to heal them— to visit those in dungeons in order 
to relieve their distress— to watch the poor— to look 
after the enslaved— and in this work to be 'busier 
since death than before!' 

"If 'the departed are more alive than they ever 
were'— as Dr. Talmage affirms in his closing remarks 
—then it is evident that he was correct in saying that 
'the tombstone is not the terminus, but the starting 

R2188 : page 213 

post"— the 'door' to the higher life, the entrance to 

the state of endless labor, grand possibilities, and eternal 

progression. 

"If Dr. Talmage thought more of these grand 
truths than of his clerical standing, he would frankly 
avow himself a Spiritualist. 

"All the churches are rapidly becoming permeated 
with Spiritual philosophy, and soon must either add 
to their structural confession these grand and inspiring 
verities, or sink into oblivion in the twentieth century, 
when the cycle of evolution shall be completely rounded 
out." 

Who can deny the logic of the Spiritualist editor 
in claiming Dr. Talmage as a Spiritualist, who refrains 



from fully acknowledging his identity? Who can doubt 
that the hundreds of thousands who read that discourse 
in the many journals which publish Dr. Talmage's 
discourses regularly, accepted every item of its poisonous, 
unscriptural suggestion as gospel; because in full 
accord with what they had been taught from other 
pulpits, and especially at funeral services? Alas! the 
millions of Christendom are ready, ripe, for the evil 
work of these seducing spirits. 

Note the following hand-bill announcement of 
Spiritist performances and tests, given at Muskegon, 
Michigan, recently: it is in display type and illustrated 
etchings showing shadowy forms, etc.— and was sent 
to us through the Lord's providence just in time for a 
notice here. It reads thus:— 

"Opera House, under the auspices of the Religio-Philosophical 
Society of Boston, Mass., Sunday night, 
April 11, 1897. 

"Spirit materializations, marvelous superhuman 
visions, Spiritualistic rappings, slate writing, floating 
tables and chairs, remarkable tests of the human mind, 
a human being isolated from surrounding objects floating 
in mid air. Behold the marvels of to-day! Reflect 
on the one great question of the hour: Is there a spirit 
land? and what is the destiny of man? Do you want 
to be convinced that there is a hereafter? Do you believe 
in immortality? Do you believe in a soul world? 
or do you believe that death ends all? 

"Dr. Loyd Cooke, preeminently peer of spirit 
mediums, assisted by a number of mediums of note, on 
the open stage, will produce some of the most wonderful 
materializations ever witnessed in this country. 

"The following are some of the tests that usually 
take place in the presence of these mediums: A table 
rises 4 to 5 feet and floats in mid-air. Spirit hands and 
faces are plainly seen and recognized by their friends. 
A guitar is played and passed around the room by the 
invisible power. Flowers are brought and passed to 
the audience by hands plainly seen. Bells are rung, 
harps are played, and other tests of a startling nature 
take place in the presence of these wonderful mediums, 
if the conditions are strictly complied with. 

"A night of wonderful manifestations! The veil 
drawn so that all may have an insight into the spirit 
world and behold many things that are strange and 
startling. 

"The clergy, the press, learned synods and councils, 
sage philosophers and scientists, in fact, the whole 
world has proclaimed these philosophical idealisms to 
be an astounding fact. You are brought face to face 
with the spirits. A large piano is played upon without 
a living soul touching it. And many spirit forms 
upon the stage— sometimes eight or ten at a time— are 
proof positive of the genuineness of these mediums. 
They have been three years developing for the special 
purpose of demonstrating the facts of spirit power in 



full gas light! 

"The invisible powers are constantly producing 
new and startling manifestations to convert the skeptical 
and strengthen the believer. Come and see for 
yourself. Take no one's word. Investigate and believe 
your own eyes. Be guided by your own reason. 
Believe nothing you hear! Every man and woman has 
a right to see and think. 

"Many ask: 'Is there any truth in Spiritualism?' If 
you should attend this seance with these new mediums, 
you would never doubt again that the spirits do re-visit 
the earth, and can be seen and recognized by their 
friends. They will stand beside you and shake hands 
with any one who will ask them. Remember, this 
seance is not like others you have attended. The forms 
seen here are not afraid of you, but will come so close 
to you that you cannot doubt their identity, and will 
satisfy you that they are not flesh of this earth. No 

R2188 : page 214 

one who has ever attended these seances can doubt 
the genuineness of these mediums. Remember, these 
are newly developed mediums, just arrived at this 
place, and are recognized by all that have seen them 
to have the most powerful circle that has ever been 
brought to this country. Not in darkness, but in open 
light. You feel their touch. You see their disembodied 
forms. In plain, open light! Every possible means 
will be used to enlighten the auditors as to whether 
these so called wonders are enacted through the aid of 
spirits or are the result of natural agencies. 

"Committees will be selected by the audience to 
assist, and to report their views as to the why and 
wherefore of the many very strange things that will be 
shown during the evening. This is done so that every 
person attending may learn the truth regarding the 
tests, whether they are genuine or caused by expert 
trickery. Doors open at 7:15. Commences at 8. A 
small admission will be charged. 

SPIRITS NOW ORGANIZE "CHURCHES." 



Finding that Churchianity is popular, and a certain 
amount of formalism demanded by the people they 
seek to ensnare, Spiritists are organizing "churches" 
for the "worship" and "praise" of the "All Good," 
—the name they use instead of God. But since advanced 
Spiritists do not believe in a personal God this 
name merely represents to them— all good spirits, among 
whom they reckon Thomas Paine, Shakespeare, Judas 
and Nero, as well as Christ, Confucius and Buddha. 
In these "churches"— "Spiritualist," "Theosophical" 
and "Christian Scientist," all of the same cult, and all 



guided (unknown to many of their votaries) by the 
same master spirit— Satan— the preachers and evangelists 
are generally women: in marked contrast (whatever 
the explanation) with the course pursued by the 
true Head of the one and only true Church, our Lord 
Jesus,— who appointed twelve apostles and seventy 
evangelists, all of them men. 

The newspapers gave an account of a Spiritist 
baptism service, at the "First Church of Spiritualists," 
Pittsburg, on Sunday, Dec. 13, '96, by Mrs. Ida Whitlock, 
of Boston, as follows:— 

"When the babies' parents and godmothers had 
been assembled, deacons of the church brought out a 
long flower decked rope, which they tied about the 
participants in the ceremony. Mrs. Whitlock gave 
each baby a small bunch of carnations, handing them 
from a silver bowl. Having completed this ceremony, 
Mrs. Whitlock took another silver bowl, and, advancing 
to each baby, she dipped into the bowl a rose and 
sprinkled the faces of those to be baptized, saying as she 
did so, 'I, Ida Whitlock, by a power commissioned to me, 
do baptize thee, Anna Marie Klotz, in the name of the 
All Good' Alderman Klotz, of Allegheny, is the 
father of this child." 

The power commissioned to Mrs. Whitlock was 
certainly not from the Father, nor from the Son, nor 
by the holy spirit; and we feel confident it was from 
the one who backs all the tests and tricks and lies and 
obsessions:— "Your Adversary the Devil."— 1 Pet. 5:8. 

"IN THE SECRET CHAMBER." 



Brother Thori of St. Paul, Minn., sends us the 
card of a Dr. Snyder of that city, who styles himself 
a Christian Spiritualist and claims that he and others 
there hold regular seances in which the Lord as a spirit 
being shows himself to their mortal eyes. He says 
that about forty persons there have seen these manifestations. 
Three of them received "the communion" 
direct from the Lord's hand. The card received bears 
sixteen texts from the Bible, among which are the 
following:— 

"God is a spirit." 

"I am the light of the world." 

"He that keepeth my commandments, he it is 
that loveth me; and he that loveth me shall be loved 
of my Father; and I will love him, and will manifest 
myself to him."— John 14:21. 

In large type at the head of the card are these 
words:— 
"HAVE YOU SEEN THE LORD? IF NOT, WHY NOT?" 

Brother Thori remarks that the Doctor appears to 
be very pious, and professes faith in the ransom and 
in restitution. The incident at once reminded Brother 



T. of the statement of MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. II., 
page 158, which reads as follows:— 

"Among other such things some of them even 
teach that Christ is present, and we doubt not ere long 
they will give seances at which they will claim to show 
him 'in the secret chamber.'" (Matt. 24:26.) Brother 
T. called the Doctor's attention to this Scripture and 
this application of it; but he was so enamored by the 
seducing spirits that he could make no application of 
it to his own experiences. He declared that it referred 
to such preposterous frauds as Schweinfurth. 

Here we see more of Satan's policy: he works one 
fraud against another. A few weak-minded people are 
deluded into thinking and claiming that they are "some 
great one"— Christs, etc.,— and by hypnotic powers 
deluding a few into their "heavens," thus disgust 
more sensible people, who, believing that these frauds 

R2189 : page 214 

fulfil the scope of our Lord's warning, are off guard 
against the much more subtle deceptions of Spiritism 
which draw nearer and nearer daily. 

Then again, true to his character as a deceiver, 
Satan begins all such performances with the outwardly 
devout. He puts a bait on his hook when he fishes 
for men. It will be found that self-willed Christians, 
no matter what their morals or faith, will be subject to 
snares of the great enemy. The full submission of the 
will to the will of God as expressed in his Word is absolutely 
necessary to overcome the world, the flesh and 
the devil. 

R2189 : page 215 

"WE ARE NOT IGNORANT OF HIS DEVICES." 



We will no doubt surprise some when we state that 
to our understanding "Christian Science," "Theosophy," 
"Mesmerism," "Clairvoyance" and "Hypnotism," 
as well as "Swedenborgianism," are all related 
to Spiritism, and designed by the "seducing spirits" 
to enthral and "pass along" the various classes of mankind 
who are now awakening out of mental lethargy; 
and to blind their eyes to the truth respecting the Lord 
and his Word.-2 Cor. 4:4. 

"Christian Science" by its attractive but deceptive 
name, no less than by its lying proposition that 
there is no pain, no sickness, no death, no sin, no devil, 
no Savior— nor need of any— by the very absurdity of 
its claims attracts the curious; and by its seeming 
harmlessness and "good works" ensnares the unguarded 
and uninstructed, who do not know "the depths of 
Satan." (Rev. 2:24.) Their processes for treatment 



of "imagined" diseases seem harmless, but are their 

cures therefore less of the demons and more of God 

than those of Spiritualists? While a pure faith in the 

first principles of the doctrines of Christ is not to be 

accepted as instead of good morals, the latter are nevertheless 

to be considered as concomitants to every manifestation 

of divine favor and power. All, therefore, 

who deny our Lord Jesus as the Redeemer of mankind 

"who gave his life a ransom price for many," are not 

of God, and their "wonderful works," whether good 

or bad, are not to be credited to divine power.* 

It may be questioned by some whether Satan and 
his associates can be charged on the one hand with 
causing sickness and death (Heb. 2:14), and on the 
other hand with healing the sick and casting out devils. 
Would not this seem to be an opposition to his own 
kingdom not supposable of any intelligent being. "If 
Satan cast out Satan he is divided against himself; 
how shall then his kingdom stand?"— Matt. 12:25,26; 
Mark 3:24-26. 

Very true; and this shows to what straits "the 
prince of this world" is reduced by the great increase 
of intelligence shining in upon the world during the past 
century. The demons must sham to be "angels of 
light," teachers of advanced truths and good physicians, 
both of souls and bodies, in order to reensnare those 
who are feeling after God, if haply they might find 
him. (Acts 17:27.) The words of inspiration give us 
to understand that Satan's struggles to retain control 
of mankind will be specially desperate at its close- 
before he is "bound" for the thousand years that he 
may deceive the nations no more.— Rev. 20:2. 

Here will be one of the "strong delusions" mentioned 
by the Apostle Paul, to cope with which God's 
people will have need of "the whole armor of God" that 
they "may be able to stand in this evil day." (2 Thes. 2:9-12; 
Eph. 6:11-13.) We are now in the period of 
which he cautions us to be specially on guard against 
"seducing spirits and doctrines of devils." (1 Tim. 4:1.) 
Here the Apostle Peter tells us to "beware lest ye 
also being led away [seduced] by the error of the 
wicked [one] fall from your own steadfastness." (2 Pet. 3:17.) 
Hence the Lord tells us to watch and pray to 
escape the delusions which will be so strong as to "deceive 
if it were possible the very elect." (Matt. 24:24.) 
Shall we, in view of these warnings, expect no "strong 
delusions," deceptions from the wicked spirits? Nay; 
we expect far more during the next few years than 
even Spiritists have dreamed of hitherto. 

SATANIC POWERS MALIFIC. 



But if Satan and his faithful have a knowledge of 
curative agencies and skill in their application let us 



not forget that he has great malific power also. This 

has already been demonstrated. Take the case of 

Jannes and Jambres, the celebrated mediums and magicians 

of Egypt, who in the presence of Pharaoh 

duplicated many of the miracles performed by divine 

power through Moses and Aaron. They could transform 

their rods into serpents; they also turned water 

into blood; they also produced frogs, altho they could 

not duplicate the plagues of lice, etc.— Exod. 7:1 1,22; 

8:7. 

We have every reason to believe that the fallen 
spirits have learned considerable during the past four 
thousand years and that they have a much wider range 
of power to-day. We are inclined to believe that the 
grasshopper plagues and the multitudinous farmer-pests 
and the spores and microbes of disease that are 
afflicting human and animal life in recent times, may 
be manifestations of the same power for evil. Similarly 
Satan is "the prince of the power of the air," and 
is malevolent enough to exercise his powers to the 
extent of divine permission. This might account in 
part for the great floods, cyclones and tornados of recent 
years. 

But surely such forces of nature are not left in 
the charge of demons? some one inquires. 

Not entirely;— most assuredly not; otherwise we 
may doubt if the world would be at all habitable. Take 
the case of Job: as soon as divine restraints upon Satan 
were released, he moved the Sabeans to steal Job's 
cattle and to kill his servants; he caused fire to come 
down from heaven, which not only killed but burned 
up Job's flocks of sheep; he sent the Chaldeans who 
stole Job's camels, and finally produced a cyclone which 



*For an examination of "Christian Science" see ZION'S WATCH 
TOWER of May, 1891. 

R2189 : page 216 

smote the house in which Job's children were feasting 
together, and destroyed the house and killed its occupants; 
and he attacked Job's person with disease as 
soon as granted permission.— Job 1:9-2:7. 

There is no question that Satan and his legions 
are as able and as willing as ever to do all the mischief 
that divine wisdom may see fit to permit them to do. 
It only remains, therefore, to notice that God has not 
only foretold that he will permit them to have great 
power in the end of this age, but also why he does so. 
He tells us that he is about to "pour out his indignation, 
even all his fierce anger," upon the world of 
mankind, as a chastisement for sin and for a correction 
toward righteousness; to humble mankind and to prepare 
them for the blessings of the Millennial Kingdom. 



All are familiar with the plagues foretold in the book 

of Revelation about to be poured upon the world in 

the end and judgment of this age. Of these the plagues 

upon Egypt were illustrations,— even tho the coming 

plagues be described in symbols. But let us always remember 

God's care over his people to preserve them 

from every calamity which would not under divine supervision 

work out for them some valuable lesson or experience; 

and let us remember that he is able and willing 

to overrule the wrath of men and of devils and to 

restrain the remainder that would hinder his grand 

purposes. 

The following words of Rev. A. B. Simpson are 
quite to the point:— 

"The healing of diseases is also said to follow the 
practices of Spiritualism, and Animal Magnetism, 
Clairvoyance, etc. We will not deny that while some 
of the manifestations of Spiritualism are undoubted 
frauds, there are many that are unquestionably supernatural, 
and are produced by forces for which Physical 
Science has no explanation. It is no use to try to 
meet this terrific monster of Spiritualism, in which, as 
Joseph Cook says, is, perhaps, the great IF of our immediate 
future in England and America, with the hasty 
and shallow denial of the facts, or their explanation as 
tricks of legerdemain. They are often undoubtedly 
real and superhuman. They are the spirits of devils 
working miracles,' gathering men for Armageddon. 
They are the revived forces of the Egyptian magicians, 
the Grecian oracles, the Roman haruspices, the Indian 
medicine-men. They are not divine, they are less than 
omnipotent, but they are more than human. Our Lord 
has expressly warned us of them, and told us to test 
them, not by their power, but by their fruits, their 
holiness, humility and homage to the name of Jesus 
and the Word of God; and their very existence renders 
it the more imperative that we should be able to 
present against them— like the rod of Moses which 
swallowed the magicians', and at last silenced their 
limited power,— the living forces of a holy 
Christianity." 

In conclusion let spiritual Israel hear the Word of 
the Lord to fleshly Israel:— 

"When thou art come into the land which the 
Lord thy God giveth thee, thou shall not learn to do 
after THE ABOMINATIONS OF THOSE NATIONS. There 
shall not be found among you any one that... 
USETH DIVINATION, or an observer of times, or an enchanter, 
or a witch, or a charmer, or a consulter with 
familiar spirits, or a wizard, or a necromancer. For 
all that do these things are an abomination unto the Lord; 
and because of these abominations the Lord thy God doth 
drive them out from before thee."— Deut. 18:9-12. 

"When they shall say unto you, Seek unto them 
that have familiar spirits, and unto wizards that peep 
and mutter: Should not a people SEEK UNTO THEIR 



GOD? on behalf of the LIVING should they seek unto 
the DEAD? To the law and the testimony: if they 
speak not according to this word, it is because there is 
no light in them."— Isa. 8:19-20. 



R2190 : page 216 

PREACHING TO ATHENIAN PHILOSOPHERS. 

-JULY 25. -ACTS 17:22-34.- 

"God is a spirit: and they that worship him must 
worship him in spirit and in truth."— Jno. 4:24. 

ALTHO the Jews of Berea received the message 

of Christ in a proper spirit and searched 

the Scriptures daily for the proofs of the gospel, a measure 

of persecution was at least threatened there. The 

Jews of Thessalonica, hearing of the progress of the 

gospel amongst their brethren at Berea, went thither 

for the express purpose of fomenting strife and hindering 

the gospel. Satan seems always to have plenty 

of agents ready and willing to oppose the truth— frequently 

blindly, as in Paul's own case. 

We do not know that there was much persecution 
at Berea: the brethren merely saw that it would follow, 
and judged it to be the wiser plan that the Apostle 
Paul, who was always the chief object of attack, 
should at once withdraw. The absence of his powerful 
testimony left nothing for the opposers to contend 
against, and they probably speedily withdrew, satisfied 
with having, as they supposed, put a stop to the influence 
of the gospel, by chasing Paul away. But Silas 
remained with the Bereans, to strengthen and establish 
them, as Timothy had remained at Thessalonica, and 
Luke at Philippi, for similar reasons. Thus Paul was 
alone when he came to Athens, the center of the world's 
civilization, religious philosophy and art, at that time, 
as indeed it had been for several centuries. It was a 
college city, where resided the most eminent philosophers 

R2190 : page 217 

of the world as instructors in its great colleges 
to which came the brightest and ablest thinkers of the 
world. Some one has said of Athens: "In its prime it 
sent forth more great men in one hundred years than 
all the rest of the world could show in five hundred." 
Socrates, Plato, Aristotle, Demosthenes, Sophocles, 
Aristides, Phidias, Zeno, Epicurus, Xenophon and 
Themistocles, still of world-wide renown, were sons of 
this famous city. 

It would appear that there were no Jews in Athens, 
and this was doubtless for two reasons: (1) The Jews 



had a religious philosophy of their own which would 

have been in continual conflict with these heathen 

philosophies. (2) Not interested in heathen philosophies, 

nothing would draw them to Athens, except 

commerce, and Athens was not a commercial or manufacturing 

city. Finding no synagogue, the Apostle 

wandered through the streets of Athens, noting the 

endeavor of its people to reach, by mental philosophy, 

a knowledge of God, while ignorant of the holy Scriptures, 

the revelation of the only true God. In a city so 

given over to philosophical speculations, it is not surprising 

that such questions were discussed in the streets, 

in the market places and wherever its intelligent, cultured 

citizens came in contact with each other or with 

strangers. As an educated man the Apostle was well 

versed in the various speculations of the day, and had 

besides the philosophy of the divine plan which others 

had not. 

Where the Jews were the auditors one-half of the 
preaching would do, for they already knew the one 
living and true God and acknowledged him; they already 
knew of Moses and the law, and of how Moses 
had foretold Messiah; and they were already waiting 
for this long promised Messiah. To such the Apostle 
merely needed to present the evidences that Christ fulfilled 
in every particular the predictions of the prophets. 
But with these Athenians even the true God was not 
known. Hence, the first point in preaching to them 
was to establish faith in Jehovah; the second, to establish 
faith in the prophets as his mouth pieces, and 
then third, to prove that Christ fulfilled the predictions 
of the prophets. This was the Apostle's first contact 
with undiluted heathenism, and he began by talking 
as the others did, in the market places, on the subject 
of the true God. 

Noting that the Apostle was consistent and logical 
in his remarks, some of the leading men made an 
appointment for him to give a public address before 
the Council of the Areopagus, which occupied chief 
seats in the auditorium on Mars Hill, and was surrounded 
at its sitting with the intelligent population 
of this metropolis of philosophy. 

For the first time the gospel is preached to the 
most learned and most scientific, according to the estimate 
of this world,— by its most able exponent on 
earth. We note with intense interest the method of 
presentation employed, and the results obtained. It 
was necessary first of all that these philosophers should 
learn of their error in supposing that there are many 
gods, and come to understand that there is but one living 
and true God, the Father, and one Lord, Jesus 
Christ, his Son: then they would be prepared to see 
how the Father's law was infracted through sin; how 
a ransom was necessary, and that Christ came into the 
world and died and rose again for the justification of 
sinners, and their release from sin's penalty,— death. 



We are impressed with the wisdom of the Apostle's 
method of procedure in addressing a congregation so 
cultured in error. Our Common Version (v. 22) does 
the Apostle great injustice, by representing him as beginning 
his discourse by insulting his hearers;— telling 
them that they were "too superstitious." What 
he did say to them signified, "You are reverential to 
an extreme; for as I passed by, and beheld your devotions, 
I found an altar with this inscription— 'To 
the unknown God.' Whom, therefore, you worship 
[admittedly] without knowledge [of his name and 
character], him declare I unto you." What a lesson 
we have here of presenting the truth with wisdom, in 
meekness and in love. 

Our respect for the Apostle's method is increased 
when we know that the Athenians considered themselves 
so well supplied with gods that they had passed 
a law inflicting the death penalty upon any one who 
would set forth in their midst any foreign god not previously 
recognized in their city. (Possibly this helps 
to account for the absence of Jews.) Thus the Apostle 
seized upon the only opportunity for presenting 
to his hearers the true God without risking his own 
life, by calling attention to the fact that they already 
recognized and offered worship to the true God, altho ignorant 
of his name. Such masterly wisdom must have 
had weight with so intelligent an audience: and apparently 
the Apostle received a careful hearing as he 
described some of the characteristics of Jehovah— far 
above and beyond anything which his hearers had ever 
claimed for their divinities. 

The secret of the Apostle Paul's success, and the 
reason why God used him so graciously as a servant, 
is a lesson which all who attempt to serve the truth to 
others would do well to note and to apply to themselves. 
Was it not because he preached not himself 
but the Lord and his gospel? Do not many would-be 
teachers fail to attain results and to be more used of 
the Lord because their ambition really preaches self, 
and the gospel as a means for calling attention to self; 
—and do not others combine self-glorification with the 

R2190 : page 218 

gospel, and thus obtain only partial results for the Lord? 
The Apostle's course was self-abandonment, as he 
explained, "I determined to know nothing among you 
save Christ, and him crucified." (1 Cor. 2:2.) His 
knowledge on other subjects was all sunk out of sight. 
It is for this reason that many comparatively ignorant 
men have been greatly used of the Lord in the gospel 
service— great learning in the philosophies often proving 
a snare, a temptation to preach these and to make 
a show among men rather than to preach the divine 
philosophy— redemption through the blood of the cross. 
Let us all copy the Lord and his greatly used and thus 



approved servant, Paul, until the expression of our 
every word and act will be 

"None of self and all of Thee." 

Athens was full of idols and temples representing 
the homage to deities of various degrees of distinction. 
Pliny, the historian, informs us that in Nero's day 
Athens contained more than 3,000 public statues— of 
gods of various grades and of notable human heroes. 
In one street there stood before every house a square 
pillar supporting a bust of the god Hermes, and every 
gate-way and porch had its protecting god. Paul 
preached (1) a God so great that he not only could 
not be made by human hands, but that all things, both 
in heaven and in earth, were his creation; (2) a God 
who needed no temple or house; (3) a God so great 
that nothing could be done for him, seeing that he himself 
is the Creator of the world and the author of every 
good gift, including life itself; (4) that all the human 
family evidenced his handiwork, and all from one 
source or parent; and (5) that God had in general one 
great plan with reference to the entire human family. 
All this was very different from the confused ideas presented 
by the philosophers respecting various gods and 
the competition and strife between them as between 
human heroes. 

Having set forth the character of God, the next 
point was to show that all God's creation should seek 
him, that he is nigh unto all that call upon him; for 
his power and intelligence are everywhere present. 
Seizing upon a truthful statement by one of their poets 
to the effect that all mankind are God's offspring, the 
Apostle endorses this, and then points out that this, 
being true, it logically follows that images of gold, silver 
and stone could not properly represent this great God. 

Anticipating the question in their minds— If there 
is so great a God why has he not previously manifested 
himself to us? and why has he permitted us to look to 
and to worship other gods? and would he not be very 
angry with us, because of this false worship? the Apostle 

R2191 : page 218 

answers, No; the past period of ignorance God entirely 
overlooks: You are not charged with responsibility 
for rejecting that of which you did not know. 
But, now this great God has sent forth his gracious 
message, that all men everywhere should come to a 
knowledge of him, and should repent of sins and seek 
to do his will. 

Here is a definite statement from an inspired source 
informing us that the millions who lived and died in 
heathen darkness prior to the coming of Christ are not 
held responsible and will not be punished for that ignorance. 
And the same principle can logically be applied 
to all since who have not known of Christ and of 
the redemption through his blood. All of these must 



yet come to a knowledge of the truth. 

But note the Apostle's reasoning: God has appointed 
a day of trial ("judgment") for the whole human 
family, in which Christ will be the righteous Judge, 
and in which every man— the whole world— will have 
a righteous trial, a fair opportunity for accepting divine 
favor and eternal life, or of rejecting these and 
receiving the wages of sin, the second death. Here, 
the Apostle was able to bring Christ to the attention 
of his hearers. The little portion of the discourse set 
before us omits all mention of a redemption by the 
second Adam, before any blessing of life or even a trial 
for life eternal could be offered to any: doubtless, however, 
this was part of the discourse, set forth along the 
same lines as the Apostle's argument in Romans 5 and 
in 1 Cor. 15. 

In logical order, it was necessary that the Apostle 
would present the doctrine of the resurrection. (1) He 
must show that Christ, having died for our sins, did 
not remain dead, but was raised up and clothed with 
authority and power to be the Deliverer in due time of 
those whom he had purchased with his own blood. 
(2) He must show that the ignorant ones of preceding 
centuries, as they had shared the Adamic penalty, 
would have an opportunity also of sharing the benefits 
of the atonement, and he must therefore show that, altho 
the penalty, death, was justly enforced against all, 
yet God purposed an awakening from death for all 
mankind; and a complete resurrection to the condition 
enjoyed by Adam before the fall, to all who would render 
obedience to the Redeemer when he would be the 
Judge. (The mention of the high calling and the way 
of full consecration leading to it, he reserved for such 
as would accept justification.) 

The Apostle held the attention of his hearers and 
evidently made considerable impression until it came 
to this last part of his discourse. But the doctrine of 
the resurrection ran counter to all their latest philosophical 
deductions which were to the effect that death 
is merely a change to a higher form of life. According 
to their philosophy there could be no resurrection of 
the dead; for they believed that there were no dead. 
These philosophers had become so thoroughly imbued 

R2191 : page 219 

with the sentiments wherewith Satan deceived mother 
Eve ("Ye shall not surely die") that they were ready 
and willing to reject what they must have conceded 
was the grandest philosophy respecting the Deity that 
they had ever heard. This same error has been a 
stumbling block to many, hindering them from seeing 
the beauty and consistency of the divine plan. 

The Apostle's efforts were not wholly without 
fruitage, for one of the Professors of the university, 
Dionysius, and a lady of note, Damaris, and some others 



believed, but evidently not satisfied with the prospect 
for future service, the Apostle departed for Corinth. 
Aside from the general lesson of this narrative other 
valuable lessons may be drawn. 

(1) As Athens, the seat of learning, was full of 

idols, so the heart, even tho enriched with earthly wisdom, 

may be full of idols and wholly lacking of any 

proper conception of the great Creator and his plan. 

Many cultured minds have nevertheless idols of selfishness, 

passions, earthly ambitions and love of falsehoods, 

to such an extent as to reject the sublime testimony 

of the gospel, even when brought to their 

attention. 

(2) Culture and refinement are not always accompaniments 
and indications of the Lord's presence and 

the light of his grace, but quite frequently are hindrances, 

in that they give a measure of satisfaction 

which serves as a substitute for Christ and his gospel. 

(3) Forms of worship are not acceptable with God: 
the Athenians were worshipful and reverential to an 
extreme. God not only seeks worshipers who have 
the true spirit of worship, but he arranged also that 
these shall have a knowledge of the truth, so that they 
may worship in truth, according to the truth. Hence, 
the declaration, "Ye shall know the truth, and the 
truth shall make you free." A knowledge of the truth 

is essential before we can worship in spirit and in truth. 
As a spirit of worship without the truth is not sufficient 
or accepted, much more a knowledge of truth is not 
sufficient nor acceptable without a spirit of worship. 



R2191 : page 219 

GOD'S PEOPLE IN CORINTH. 

-AUGUST l.-ACTS 18:1-11.- 

"Other foundation can no man lay than that 
is laid, which is Jesus Christ."— 1 Cor. 3:11. 

CORINTH as a city was almost the opposite of 
Athens. Corinth was as completely given 
over to commerce and sinful pleasures as Athens was 
given over to religious philosophy and idol worship. 
We have seen what poor success attended the gospel 
amongst the superstition-blinded philosophers of the 
religious metropolis; and we feel curious to know 
whether its effect will be more or less amongst the non-religious 
of Corinth. The Lord's testimony settles the 
matter. In a vision he encouraged the Apostle not to 
be afraid but to speak boldly, assuring him that he 
would be with him and protect him; adding,— "I have 
much people in this city." 
Here we see the principle of the divine policy in 



respect to the sending forth of the gospel. The Lord 

knew the honest-hearted ones beforehand; and even 

tho they did not know him, and had not yet accepted 

of Christ, "the only name," God nevertheless spoke 

of things to come as tho they already were accomplished, 

and called the earnest ones who hungered and 

thirsted after righteousness his people. When we remember 

that the Lord specially directed the Apostle 

into Macedonia and suffered him to remain but a short 

time in the cities of Philippi, Thessalonica and Athens, 

and that his stay in Corinth was for a year and a half, 

and then note these words,— "I have much people in 

this city," it gives us the thought that the objective 

point of this missionary tour in the divine program was 

Corinth. And indeed, at the close of his ministry in 

Corinth the Apostle was sent nowhere else, but took 

his journey homeward, visiting enroute the Churches 

he had previously established in Asia-Minor. What 

a lesson we have here of the divine superintendence of 

his own Word and plan! what an illustration of the 

statement, "The Lord knoweth them that are his;" 

and that our God is "the same yesterday, to-day and 

forever!" He still knows his own; he still superintends 

his work; he still sends through appropriate agents and 

at the proper season just such helps as are needful to 

his people. 

Every laborer (every public and every private laborer 
in the vineyard) should mark the lesson which 
the Lord has here set before us. And each should the 
more carefully watch for the leadings of divine providence 
and realize that only as he is a co-worker together 
with God can he accomplish anything. As the 
Master said, "Without me ye can do nothing." 

Every minister of the gospel (and this includes all 
who serve the Lord in any degree or capacity) can find 
in the Apostle Paul a most wonderful lesson of practical 
humility. Upon entering Corinth he did not look 
up some philosopher and endeavor to ingratiate himself 
with him as a fellow-philosopher and teacher, who 
could not dig and was ashamed to beg. He did nothing 
which would compromise the truth, and his influence 
or liberty as a servant of the truth. Like all Jews 
of that time he had learned a trade and he at once set 
to work to earn an honest living, while seeking the 
door of opportunity for his great life-work, the preaching 
of the gospel. His trade, tent-making, was a good 
one in the sense that it afforded employment in every 

R2191 : page 220 

seaport town; but a poor one in that not being difficult, 

it had much competition, and was poorly paid. Nevertheless, 

there is not the slightest intimation that the 

Apostle repined or in any degree rebelled against the 

leadings of divine providence, altho he probably queried 

why it was that the Lord, who had specially called 



and commissioned him to the work of the gospel, had 
so circumstanced him that it was impossible to give 
any but the fag-ends of his time to this service to which 
he had devoted himself, and to which he had been accepted. 
Under the leadings of divine providence he 
became acquainted with Aquilla and Priscilla, poor 
Jews, outcasts for their religion, who were earning 
their living by the same trade. Their troubles had no 
doubt mellowed their hearts and made them ready for 
the gospel of Christ, and the Lord brought it first to 
their humble dwelling, and they became devoted servants 
of the Lord's cause. 

The Apostle was fervent in spirit and not slothful 
in the great business to which his life was devoted; 
and hence he lost no opportunity of looking up the 
Jews of Corinth and attending the Sabbath services in 

R2192 : page 220 

their synagogue. Apparently, however, the difficulties 
and persecutions endured tended to make the Apostle 
cautious, if by any means he might improve upon the 
methods of the past, by the use of greater wisdom. 
We see how he left Thessalonica and then Berea as 
the persecution manifested itself; and we see that he 
studiously sought to avoid persecution at Athens; and 
now at Corinth apparently he did not start out to 
preach Christ boldly to the Jews, but rather reasoned 
with them, and with certain Gentiles who were feeling 
after God, for a number of Sabbath days, along general 
lines; as a preparation for the great message he had to 
deliver. He persuaded both Jews and Greeks with 
reference to the Law, its types and ceremonies and 
sacrifices; and with reference to the significance of the 
prophecies; but he avoided that which would awaken 
prejudice until he would first arouse faith and fervor 
in his hearers, and their confidence in his sincerity, 
and in his fidelity to the Lord's Word. 

But when Silas and Timothy joined him, the opportune 
moment came: and the Apostle felt such a 
pressure of earnest desire to make known the Lord 
Jesus, as the grand hope of Israel and the world, that 
he could keep it back no longer and spoke it forth. 

Then came the opposition and blasphemy which 
previous experiences had warned him to expect: but 
by this time he had made some impression, not only 
upon some of the Jews, but upon the religiously disposed 
Greeks, who had been interested in Judaism. 
Foreseeing that thereafter the Jews would consider him 
an intruder in their synagogue, he withdrew, accepting 
as a place for meetings the home of Justus, who 
apparently was a Greek convert first to Judaism, and 
now to Christianity. This change would make it more 
favorable to all Greeks to come and hear, and at the 
time being near the synagogue would keep the gospel 
of Christ before the attention of the Jews. The result 



was that "much people," the Lord's people, were 
found by the truth, including the ruler of the synagogue 
and many citizens of Corinth. 

Had the Apostle been either a cold or a lukewarm 
Christian and servant of the Lord, or one of the "fearful 
and unbelieving" kind, he might have attended the 
synagogue and for years kept his "light under a bushel;" 
and in such an event it probably would shortly 
have become extinguished, according to the divine rule; 
and he would have lost his place as a servant of the 
gospel and some one else who had a sufficiency of 
faith, love and zeal would have been permitted to do 
the work. But the Apostle never kept his light under 
a bushel, but lifted it high that all might see the glorious 
light of the goodness of God as it shines in the 
face of Jesus Christ our Lord, which had shone into 
his heart. He continually showed forth "the praises 
of him who had called him out of darkness into his 
marvelous light." 

Judging from his past experiences, the Apostle 
might have expected persecution which would have 
permitted him to stay but a short time in Corinth. It 
was probably for his instruction in this particular that 
he was granted the vision, instructing him that God 
would protect him from persecution here, because he 
had much people to be reached by the truth. Nevertheless, 
it was necessary and the Lord's instruction, 
that he should speak the truth boldly and not hold his 
peace, nor expect that the Lord would work a miracle 
to reach his people in Corinth without a public 
testimony. 

It was during this stay in Corinth that the Apostle 
received a loving contribution for his support from the 
converts at Philippi, which gave evidence that Luke, 
who remained with them, was performing a faithful 
ministry and stirring up their hearts with zeal for the 
Lord and his service. It was during this period, also, 
that he received through Silas and Timothy a good 
message from the Churches at Thessalonica and Berea; 
and it was during this stay in Corinth also that the 
two letters were written to the Church at Thessalonica. 
Nevertheless, it is respecting this very period of his 
stay in Corinth that the Apostle subsequently wrote 
to the Corinthians (1:4; 2:3); in which he mentions 
his weakness (bodily sickness) and "fear and trembling;" 
probably the result partly of his weak physical 
condition and of the remembrance of the trying experiences 
already passed through. 

Subsequently he writes apparently referring back 
to experiences at Corinth,— "Even unto this present 
hour we both hunger, and thirst, and are naked, and 
are buffeted, and have no certain dwelling place; and 
labor, working with our own hands. Being reviled, 
we bless; being persecuted, we suffer it; being defamed, 
we entreat. We are made the filth of the world, and 
are the offscouring of all things unto this day."— 



1 Cor. 4:11-13. 

Every servant of the truth to-day can find rich 
lessons in the experiences and faithfulness and perseverance 
of the great Apostle. In infinite wisdom the 
Lord permitted this his chiefest servant amongst men, 
next to the Lord Jesus, to preach the truth under unfavorable 
circumstances and with many drawbacks. 
Paul learned that the servant is not above his Master; 
and so must every other faithful follower learn the 
same lesson of faithfulness and endurance— overcoming 
self and difficulties in the name and strength of the 
Lord and his Word: upheld by loving zeal and by the 
exceeding great and precious promises of the Father's 
Word. In due time we shall reap the reward, if we 
faint not by the way. 



page 221 
VOL. XVIII. AUGUST 1, 1897. No. 15. 



CONTENTS. 



Special Items 222 

Views from the Watch Tower 223 

"Young People's" Societies 223 

Mohammedans Insolent and 

Bloodthirsty 225 

Poem: The Pilgrim 226 

Covered Sins to Be Blotted Out 226 

"I Will Come Again and Receive You" 229 

Self-denial in the Interest of Others 233 

Interesting Letters 235 

page 222 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
--ADDRESS TO- 
TOWER PUBLISHING CO., BIBLE HOUSE, 58 & 60 ARCH ST., 
ALLEGHENY (NORTH PITTSBURG), PA., U.S.A. 

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 

INCLUDES A SUBSCRIPTION TO "THE OLD THEOLOGY TRACTS"-QUARTERLY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, N.Y. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, 

OR REGISTERED. FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN 

MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS: 

Those of the interested, who by reason of old age or accident, or 
other adversity are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, 
if they will send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and 
requesting the paper. 



R2192: page 222 

OUR "PILGRIMS." 



THE extreme heat and other considerations have necessitated slight 

changes of program for several of the traveling brethren; but in 

all cases where positive appointments had been made we were enabled 

to give timely notice: we hope that no serious inconvenience was experienced. 

Brother Ransom took unwell; Brother Cone is aged and 

needs a little rest; Brother McPhail's son took sick and has since died; 

and others had various hindrances. Remember these all with us at the 

throne of grace. 

On the whole we have reason to rejoice that the Lord's blessing 
seems to go with this branch of the service in so wonderful a manner. 



Many of the scattered ones are reached, in parts we never expected to 
reach; and the meetings seem to do much good, judged by the letters 
and reports we receive from all along the various routes. 

Whenever there are five or more WATCH TOWER subscribers we 
make an effort to reach them;— especially if a desire for public or parlor 
meetings has been expressed. 

Wherever a positive appointment is made, you may expect it to be 
kept to the very hour. The routes are mostly arranged at the WATCH 
TOWER office. One to three days are all that can be spared generally, 
as the field is large and the laborers are few: so make the best use possible 
of the "pilgrims," while they are with you. 



R2192 : page 223 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 



THE Christian Endeavor and other societies of 
"Young People" are keeping well to the front, 
influentially and otherwise, in religious matters. When 
we remember that these young people's societies represent 
about five millions of members, and that the 
majority of these are no longer very young, we can 
readily see that within ten years these people will include 
the most active representatives of normal Christendom. 
They are likely to have considerable influence 
in forming the coming Protestant Federation. 
In view of this, we have been on the lookout for reports 
of what was accomplished by the recent C.E. 
Convention at San Francisco, California. 

We have seen the report of the President of the 
Society, congratulating it upon its growth and size, 
and giving a brief account of his recent trip around 
the world, in the interest of the Society. But we have 
as yet seen no report of any important action taken, or 
even proposed. Indeed, it seems to be an immense combination 
of well-intentioned young people, anxious to 
do something great— and good, rather than bad. But it 
scarcely knows what to adopt as its mission. Hitherto 
this subject has not been so important; for all energies 
were employed in growing. Now it has corporeal 
size, and weight of influence, and feels strong, and realizes 
that it must have a policy and a mission, or else 
it will look foolish; and it, no doubt, will decide this 
question shortly. 

It is fearful to adopt any very spiritual work or 
mission; because doctrine is more or less necessary 
to every such movement, and doctrines must be sedulously 
avoided, lest they split the organization, and 
thus wreck all that has so far been attained— size and 
union. For instance: suppose it were resolved that 
the Society of Christian Endeavor shall hereafter devote 
its main energies to Foreign Mission work, among 



the barbarous and heathen. Questions would at once 
arise, such as, Shall we determine and expect to convert 
the world? Shall we understand this to be God's 
purpose, and that he has raised us up to do it, and that 

R2193 : page 223 

he will give us success in its full accomplishment? 

And how quickly can we do this, if it has required 

eighteen centuries to reach the present degree of development? 

Or, shall we undertake it merely as a 

witnessing to all nations, to gather out an elect "little 

flock"— through whom, at the second advent of Christ 

God will "bless all the families of the earth"? 

Here would be a split at once. Would the Y.P.S. 
of C.E., as a whole, declare its belief in a pre-millennial 
advent of Christ, or in a post-millennial advent? 
It would do neither; but would refuse to discuss the 
matter, lest it cause division; because some of its most 
earnest members are on each side of that question. 
But to avoid the question as to object of work, is to 
avoid those lines of work which necessitate decision 
as to object. And so it is with all spiritual questions 
and activities; they are inseparably connected with 
faith; and all faith is built upon doctrines— true or false, 
divine or human. 

If, then, these societies are built upon wrong principles 
for spiritual work (in that they ignore doctrine, 
the basis of faith, as faith is the basis of spiritual activities), 
what will they do with their immense organizations, 
restless as they are for some great activity- 
some mission? 

The next plane of labor, lower than spiritual work, 
is moral or social or political reform work. For activities 
in these directions, doctrines are unnecessary, 

R2193 : page 224 

or at least easily avoidable. The faith of a Buddhist, 
or a Brahmin, or a Christian, need not interfere if the 
holder thereof will sink every other ambition and work, 
and devote himself solely to the reform work. But 
which of these phases of reform work will it probably 
decide on— the moral, the social, or the political? 

These three reforms, all good, are more or less near 
to religion and spiritual things. Moral reform probably 
comes nearest— lifting up the depraved and fallen, is 
next, we may say, to preaching the gospel, because it 
helps often to prepare the way for the gospel. In fact, 
moral reformers often rank their work far above the 
commission given by our Lord— "Preach the gospel to 
the meek." But the Young People's Societies are not 
likely to take up that field as their mission; because it 
is already fairly well occupied. They will want a new 
work, which will show as distinctly theirs. 

The second reform in nearness to religion would 



naturally be social reform. This is a large field, in 

which great good to a great number would be possible, 

if five million Christian men and women were to take 

hold of it. The world's social conditions sadly need 

an uplift— the poor need a protecting arm, to help 

ward off the pinch and grind coming as a result of invention, 

over-production and monopolies. But this 

field is apt to be left to Socialists, Populists and Anarchists; 

for the "Young People" generally feel that they 

and their benefactors belong to the other side of the 

question. 

This still leaves the door of political reform open; 
and we incline to believe that these societies will decide 
that in that direction lies their mission. In some 
places they are already beginning this work; and of 
course there are politicians who will be glad of their 
co-operation, and who will teach them how to make 
this movement somewhat of a success. But where will 
this leave the more spiritual work and doctrine and 
faith within ten years? They will evidently be obsolete 
—abandoned. The reform movements will come 
gradually to be considered the real gospel to the 
world. And the world will, of course, approve the 
change; for it never has comprehended spiritual things; 
these and the cross of Christ have always been foolishness 
untoit-1 Cor. 2:12-14. 



Many of the C.E. Societies have adopted yells, 
similar to those used by college students, and these 
were freely poured forth as the delegations gathered 
at their Convention and en route. A published report 
of the Convention, for instance, says: 

"The Colorado delegation came in with a ringing 
yell: 

"Pike's Peak, or Bust! 
Pike's Peak, or Bust! 
Colorado, Colorado! 
Yell we must!" 

The editor of one of the Pacific coast journals 
writes of the Convention delegates under the caption, 
"Christians Who Yell," as follows: 

"There is no other body in the country like that 
of the Young People's Society of Christian Endeavor. 
It is strictly a religious organization, but it is the best 
exemplification of muscular Christianity that ever appealed 
to robust piety. There is nothing sanctimonious 
about its members or sniveling about its methods. 
It unites good fellowship with Christian brotherhood, 
with no affectation of manner, speech or 
action. 

"There is no other religious fraternity which goes 
to a convention with a college yell and a whoop. The 
war cry of the Spokane Club: 'Who can? We can, 
Spokane, Wash., Wash., Wash.,' is not only funny, but 



it is vastly superior to the ordinary run of baseball 
club and college yells, which are, indeed, frequently 
idiotic. The Colorado delegation also has a yell which 
must be very effective when uttered by a large body. 

"The Christian Endeavorers have done more than 
any other organization to bring into the ranks of a 
Christian society young men and young women, and 
especially young men, who are ordinarily disinclined 
to be regarded as 'good' in the sense of being pious. 
There are some things which no amount of argument 
will change, and one of them is the suspicion and even 
dislike which attaches to too many young men who 
assume to be leaders in church work. Pastors know 
this, if they know anything in the world, and young 
men who are not professing Christians, although they 
may be good enough as the world goes, also know it. 
Although the Christian Endeavorers have been the 
most successful in the new departure, other organizations 
are awakening to the difficulty which they 
really have to overcome. The establishment of athletic 
clubs by the Y.M.C.A., for instance, has done 
much to impart a manlier tone to the members of that 
body. 

"When, in order to be an acceptable member of 
a church organization, it is no longer necessary to 
wear a sanctimonious look and speak with a nasal 
twang, when a young man feels that he is no longer 
derided because he is an active church worker or a 
Sunday school teacher, it will be a great deal better 
for the churches, and we shall not hear that wail about 
the worldliness of the present generation. Men with 
fifty years of experience in English-speaking countries, 
at least, are aware that there has been a great improvement 
in the morals of the average young man. 
The number of those who are addicted to intoxicating 
drinks in an excessive degree is much smaller, and 
the experience of physicians is that there is much less 
unhealthiness due to preventable causes than there 
used to be, and the number of stalwart Christians who 
do not belong to churches is greater. 

"The chief cause of this change is the realization 
by many pastors of the fact that all that is worldly is 
not vicious; there are songs which are harmless, although 
they are not hymns; amusements which are 
not sinful, although they are not strictly in the line of 

R2193 : page 225 

church work. Dancing is no longer condemned as 
it used to be, nor is whist regarded as an occupation 
invented by the devil. There never was a time when 
flirting could be entirely prevented, even by the most 
rigid disciplinarian and in the most Puritan communities, 
but it was regarded as a sin by the mistaken 
judgment of ministers." 



The writer of the foregoing likes the change which 
he notices, and as much as says that he himself never 
was one of the over-pious, and is glad to find those 
of his mind greatly on the increase in numbers and 
influence. But Christians who have learned the way 
to God and the "narrow way" of discipleship in following 
the footsteps of Christ, will take a wholly different 
view of the change. 

If these were claiming to be merely moral or social 
clubs, there would be no grounds for objection. The 
objection is to the desecration of the name Christian, 
to the erroneous thought that every man and woman 
who does not steal, nor get drunk, nor use vile and 
profane language, and who is moral and honorable, is 
therefore a Christian. 

Here the ignoring of doctrines has a bad effect. If 
the doctrines of Free Grace and Election must be avoided, 
and if it is right to avoid and ignore them, then may 
not the entire subject of grace be ignored? and may 
not all faith be ignored as a standard by those who 
bear the name of Christ? This certainly is the tendency, 
not only of the young people, but also amongst 
the older Christians of all denominations. But all 
who see the Scriptural definition of a Christian falling 
into disuse and contempt, should be the more careful 
to hold firmly to "the faith once delivered to the saints," 
viz., that the steps into "the body of Christ, which is 
the [true] Church" are (1) Faith in the efficacy of the 
precious blood of Christ, shed for the remission of sins; 
(2) acceptance thereof with repentance and reformation: 
and (3) an unreserved consecration of every talent 
to the Lord's service. 

The reason for such a falling away from doctrine 
is not difficult to find. It is because the doctrines of 
God's Word were so terribly mixed with God-dishonoring 
human traditions. For instance, the doctrine 
that an eternity of torment awaits all who are 
not of the elect, has brought the Scriptural doctrines 
of "an election according to favor" and the perseverance 
of the saints into disrepute. Intelligent people 
say to themselves, the saintly are few, the decent, moral 
and semi-moral are many. These are too decent and 

R2194: page 225 

too good to be everlastingly tormented after death, 

and we must therefore suppose that they will go to 

heaven. And the next argument is, If they will go to 

heaven, can they go there without being Christians? 

The third step is to claim that they are Christians, and 

a letting down of all the terms and conditions of Christianity 

—on the score that if a moralist is a Christian, 

and will gain the reward of heaven, no one need be 

required to be more. Thus, the blasphemous doctrine 



of everlasting torment, foreign to God's Word, and 
invented during the dark ages, is rapidly destroying 
the Scriptural doctrine of the necessity of making our 
calling and election sure by faithfulness and holiness 
unto the Lord. 



The "Cincinnati Post" gives the figures of a statistician, 
who has estimated the cost of four conventions 
of Young People's Societies this year, as follows: 
Christian Endeavor Convention, fares etc. .$2, 875, 000 
Baptist Young People's Convention, fares, 

etc 1,400,000 

Epworth League Convention, fares, etc 1,700,000 

Brotherhood of St. Andrew Convention, 
fares, etc 200,000 

Total $6,175,000 

The Post's article concludes by saying: 

"The aggregate sum equals the contributions of 
all Protestant denominations for Foreign Missions." 

The following statement by Mr. W. N. Coler, just 
returned from Japan, is significant, and fully in line 
with the foregoing— only "broader." He said: 

"In Japan there is much talk of getting up a new 
religion. Japanese students and thinkers are studying 
religion as a practical problem, which they believe will 
throw much light on the question they are now asking, 
'Why has the West gone so far ahead of the East in 
civilization?' 

"They are reaching the conclusion that strict morality 
has much to do with it, and a large body of advanced 
thinkers are seriously considering the proposition 
of getting up a new religion. 

"It is proposed to do this by dissecting the Christian 
and Buddhist religions and Confucianism and 
uniting the best doctrines and principles of each into 
the new system. 

"In Tokyo and other Japanese cities all the religions 
are being liberally discussed. I think they are 
getting to the point of believing that the Christian religion 
is the most civil of them all, though believing 
in the principle of evolution and improvement." 

Mr. Coler believes that the result of missionary 
work in India, China and Japan has been to detach 
many orientals among thinking classes from Buddhism, 
and has made them free thinkers, who will readily 
attach themselves to a new religion embracing the 
best points of the religions named. 

MOHAMMEDANS INSOLENT AND BLOODTHIRSTY. 



The success of Turkey in the recent war with 
Greece, has a tendency to encourage the followers of 
Mahomet to hope that they may yet conquer Christendom 

R2194 : page 226 

and the world, "for Allah and his prophet." 

We quote from a New York "World" a cablegram as 

follows: 

"Sayid Rayhan Allah (the Mollah) has planned 
the extermination of all the Hebrews in Persia. He 
has summoned the chief rabbi, and informed him that 
the Hebrews must accept the Mahometan faith, or he 
will do all that he can to oppress and exterminate 
them. 

"Sayid Rayhan has formulated the following 
restrictions: 

"Every Hebrew must have all of his hair cut off, 
must never ride an animal throughout the city, must 
wear European dress, and must wear a mark to distinguish 
him from the Mahometan. 

'"Hebrew women must veil. They must not wear 
the chador, or chaghchoor, the outdoor dress which 
Persian etiquette expects of every woman. 

"A Hebrew must not build a house higher than 
that of his Mahometan neighbor. The entrance to the 
house must be distinguished from the Moslem's. He 
is not to come out of his house on a rainy day, and is 
not to touch articles of food. 

'"When a Hebrew dies, any relative who is a convert 
to Mahometanism may possess all his property. 

'"A Hebrew who, having once accepted Islam, renounced 
it, will be put to death.'" 

Poor Jews! Much of Jacob's trouble lies yet 
ahead, before the faithful are gathered back to Palestine, 
there to have the eyes of their understanding 
opened to recognize him whom they pierced, and to 
mourn for him and to be accepted. 

The Zionist movement, noted in our last issue, 
although strong and very popular with some Jews, 
is opposed by others, as likely to bring greater 
persecution. 

For fear of persecution, it has been decided that 
the convention will be held in Switzerland, instead of 
in Germany, as first proposed. 



R2199 : page 226 

THE PILGRIM. 



Wild shrieks the wind, how rough's the way! 
But, see, one star's alight! 



Up! let us follow, where its ray 

Strikes through the shuddering night 
O'er yonder roof, serene and clear. 
And hark! what music is't we hear? 

My heart scarce beats, my steps are slow, 

Almost I faint and die: 
Sick, worn, benumbed amidst the snow, 

Ah! what a pilgrim I! 
Yet will I follow stagg'ring on, 
Ere light and music both be gone. 

For One waits there, the only one, 
Who knows my heart and me; 

All that I am, all I have done, 
All I may chance to be: 

Who will not spurn the piteous thing, 

The sole, best offering I can bring: 

Who will not chide me, poor and late, 

Nor scorn my sorry wit; 
Who will not fling me to my fate— 

O God, the thought of it! 
Once that I look in those dear eyes, 
What virtues shall my soul surprise! 

Then up, my heart, gather thy strength 

A little longer! see, 
Almost our journeying ends; at length 

Almost at home are we: 
Sheltered, my heart, from storm and night 
In that Friend's house of sure delight! 

— Selwyn Image. 



R2194 : page 226 

COVERED SINS TO BE BLOTTED OUT. 



MANY make the mistake of confounding the 

"blotting out" of sins with the covering of 

sins; but the two thoughts are distinctly 

separate. The covering of sins takes place instantaneously, 

as soon as the believer has repentantly accepted 

of the redemption which is in Christ Jesus. 

This covering of sin, and of all the blemishes of the 

believer is symbolically represented as accomplished 

by his putting on the "wedding garment," the pure 

robe of Christ's righteousness imputed to true believers. 

This constitutes the justification by faith of which 

the Apostle speaks, saying, "David describeth the 

blessedness of the man unto whom God imputeth 

righteousness without works [righteousness which he 



had not worked out] saying, 'Blessed are they whose 
iniquities are forgiven, and whose sins are covered. 
Blessed is the man to whom the Lord will not impute 
sin.'"— Rom. 4:6-8. 

While it brings to the believer joy and peace to 
realize that his imperfections are covered, and not permitted 
to hinder his approach to the Heavenly Father, 
he nevertheless properly battles against those imperfections, 
a continual warfare— the newly-begotten and 
renewed or transformed mind being resisted by the 
natural, depraved will of the flesh. But, nevertheless, 
every true child of God, rightly instructed from the 
Father's Word, is distinctly looking forward to the 
end of his warfare-probation, when his "covered" sins 
and weaknesses shall all be "blotted out." 

This blotting out of sins, so far as the overcoming 

R2194 : page 227 

Church is concerned, will not be completed until the 

first resurrection has been completed; for, as the work 

of grace began by the covering of the imperfections of 

the flesh for believers, it will end with the complete 

destruction of the flesh in death, and the raising of the 

elect Church spiritual bodies, free from all the blemishes 

and imperfections which belong to these present, 

mortal bodies. Now the consecrated "have this treasure 

[the new nature] in earthen vessels:" and all know 

how seriously marred is every one of these vessels, 

so that our very best intentions and desires are liable 

to have more or less of blemish or imperfection, when 

viewed from the Divine standpoint. But by-and-by 

this treasure, the new will, the new creature in Christ 

Jesus, will be delivered into the perfect condition, the 

new spiritual bodies, described by the Apostle (1 Cor. 15:42-44,48-50), 

saying: "Thus also is the resurrection 

of the dead [the first or chief resurrection of the overcoming 

class amongst the dead]. ..It is sown in corruption, 

it is raised in incorruption"— all the marks 

and blemishes of sin which belong to the earthen vessel 

will be destroyed, "blotted out." When buried in 

death, the Church is actually imperfect, dishonorable 

and weak, except as her Lord's robe of righteousness 

is her covering, and his strength is made perfect in 

her weakness. But all these dishonorable, weak and 

imperfect conditions now covered are to be completely 

and everlastingly blotted out with the passing of the 

present life; for the promise to the overcomers is, "It 

is sown in dishonor, it is raised in glory; it is sown 

in weakness, it is raised in power; it is sown an animal 

body, it is raised a spiritual body"— the image of the 

heavenly one, our Lord. 

It was in harmony with this view of matters that 
the Apostle wrote "We [the newly begotten spirit beings, 
the Church] while in this tabernacle [earthly 
body] do groan; not that we desire to be unclothed 



[that we should lose our imperfect human bodies in 
death, and be obliged to wait or 'sleep in Jesus' until 
his second coming]; but that we might be clothed 
upon with our heavenly house [or spiritual bodies]"— 
experience the blessings of a participation in Christ's 
resurrection— the first resurrection.— Phil. 3:10-12; 
Rev. 20:6. 

The Apostle had in mind the same earnest desire of 
the spirit-begotten ones for the completion of the work 
of grace in them at the resurrection, when he said: 
"Ourselves, also, which have the first fruits of the spirit, 
even we groan within ourselves, waiting for the adoption 
—to wit, the deliverance of our body— [the Church 
—from the bondage of corruption into the glorious 
liberty of full sonship]." Rom. 8:23. The "wedding 
garment" of Christ's imputed righteousness, under 
which are granted to us all the privileges of sons without 
removing our weaknesses and frailties, leaves us 
to wage a warfare with these, thus to prove our love 
of righteousness and our faithfulness to the commands 
of "him who called us out of darkness into his marvelous 
light," and to become sharers of his sufferings, 
and of the glories to follow. Through the merit of 

R2195 : page 227 

our robe we were begotten to the new mind, the new 

nature; and it will serve every purpose until such times 

as we shall have proved ourselves faithful as new creatures, 

and shall be permitted to pass from the probationary 

sonship to the enjoyment of the full measure 

of the Father's blessing and complete adoption into 

his family and nature. But there, at the moment of 

transition, when being received from the begotten and 

probationary stage of sonship into the everlasting state, 

it is eminently proper, and all that we would ask or 

desire, that every trace of the hitherto covered and forgiven 

sins and blemishes should be blotted out, and 

no longer need covering. And all this is a part of the 

Divine provision for those who love God, "the [faithful] 

called ones according to his purpose." Then, it 

will be that that which is perfect having come, "that 

which is in part [our present standing graciously covered 

with Christ's imputed righteousness, covering 

our defects] will be done away." 

"Oh, hail happy day! 

That ends our tears and sorrows, 

That brings us joy without alloy; 

Oh, hail happy day! 

No more by doubts and fears distressed, 

We now shall gain our promised rest, 

And be forever blest, 

Oh, hail happy day!" 

The tears and sorrows and battlings in strife 
against the world, the flesh and the devil are all very 
necessary in the present time; and we should neither 



hope nor expect to be crowned as victors, without 
passing through such experiences. In this battle, we 
learn not to think of ourselves more highly than we 
ought to think; we learn of our own weaknesses and 
imperfections and our need to walk closely with the 
Lord, if we would keep our garments unspotted from 
the world. We learn also to trust his grace, and that 
"our sufficiency is of God." We learn that "greater is 
he who is on our part than all they that be against 
us." We learn that the victory that overcometh the 
world is neither the strength and perfection of our 
flesh, nor merely the strong resolution of our minds, 
but the latter helped and strengthened by him who 
assures us that his strength can be perfected in our 
weakness. It is here that we learn that all things are 
working together for good to them that love God. 
In this battle with the world, the flesh and the devil 

R2195 : page 228 

we learn also to appreciate the whole armor of God: 

the value of the "helmet of salvation," the intellectual 

appreciation of the Divine plan and promises; the 

value of the "breastplate of righteousness," Christ's 

righteousness covering our most vital parts; the value 

of "the shield of faith," which is able to quench all 

the fiery darts of the Adversary; and the invincible 

quality and sharpness of "the sword of the spirit, which 

is the Word of God"; and to put on the preparation 

of the gospel in a meek, patient and quiet spirit, which, 

as sandals, permits us to pass over the sharpest difficulties 

of life successfully. In this conflict we learn 

to cultivate the graces of the spirit, through many trials 

and temptations; which though for the time being are 

not pleasant but grievous, nevertheless work out for 

all who are rightly exercised thereby, "a far more exceeding 

and eternal weight of glory." 

The Apostle in our text declares that the blotting 
out of the Church's sin shall be in connection with 
"times of refreshing" or spirit outpouring, at the second 
advent of our Lord. How consistent this is with 
reason, and with all the facts of the case: it was after 
our Lord Jesus had bought us with his precious blood 
that the Heavenly Father granted to his Church a 
great blessing, a season of refreshing from the presence 
of the Lord, at Pentecost, as marking his approval of all 
covered by the "wedding garment," and as a foretaste 
of his greater blessing, to be bestowed when her trial 
would be complete, and the sins actually blotted out. 
That season of Pentecostal refreshing from the Divine 
presence, under the blessed influence of which Peter 
was preaching when he used the words of our text, 
was only an earnest or hand-payment of the great 
perfect refreshment and spirit-energizing that will come 
to the Lord's people at the farther end of the narrow 
way, when the Bridegroom shall come to receive to 



his nature and his throne and to confess her before 
his Father and the holy angels. As the Apostle intimates 
in our text, the very first work then will be the 
complete blotting out of the Church's sins, in the first 
resurrection. 

And immediately following this perfecting of the 
Church will come a work for the world— "times of 
restitution of all things which God hath spoken by 
the mouth of all the holy prophets since the world 
began." This signifies a similar blessing (blotting out 
of sins) upon all the world of mankind, who shall then, 
after being brought to a knowledge of the truth, obediently 
accept the Divine mercy under the terms of the 
New Covenant. Since man as originally created was 
in the moral likeness of his Creator, but has lost that 
likeness by the blemishes of sin, restitution to the likeness 
lost, would signify the blotting out of those blemishes 
wrought by sin. But there will be a great difference 
between the blotting out of the sins of the obedient, 
overcoming Church and the blotting out of the 
sins of the obedient ones of the world. The Church's 
sins will be instantly blotted out in the moment of the 
resurrection; the world's sins will be gradually blotted 
out during the period of Christ's reign— during the 
Millennium. The terms and conditions will be different 
also. While the Church has her sins and imperfections 
covered during the period of her trial, and 
does not have her efforts to overcome the weaknesses 
of the flesh rewarded by physical restitution, but is 
rewarded instantaneously at the end of her race, according 
to her faith and her endeavors to conquer, the obedient 
of the world, in the next age, will, on the contrary, 
have their sins blotted out, not as the reward of 
faith and effort merely; but as the reward of successful 
and continuous effort, which will then be possible, 
and be rewarded step by step with restitution blessings 
or the gradual blotting out of sins. 

Describing the judgment (trial) of the world during 
the Millennial Age, our Lord shows that all will 
then be "judged according to their works"— not according 
to their faith, as the Church is now being judged. 
(Rev. 20:12,13; 1 Jno. 5:4.) Faith, which is now 
difficult and therefore highly rewarded, will by and by, 
when the mists have rolled away, be the most easy and 
only reasonable thing; and while it will be required, being 
easy it will not be specially rewarded as now. And 
perfect works, which under present conditions are impossible 
with all our efforts, because of our blemished 
bodies, will then be the standard for which and toward 
which all who attain to everlasting life will be required 
to labor, building up character in breaking off evil 
propensities and in bringing themselves into full accord 
with righteousness in thought, word and deed. 
And under the favorable conditions of that time, a 
restitutionary blessing will be present to reward every 
effort, not only with an upbuilding of moral character 



and will-power, but also with proportionate strength 
and upbuilding of the mental and physical powers. 
Thus, item by item and step by step, throughout 
the Millennial Age, the worthy ones of the world will 
be helped out of their weakness and imperfections, 
back to the perfection originally lost by the disobedience 
of father Adam, the right to return to which 
(by the cancellation of Adam's sentence) was secured 
by the ransom-price given by our Redeemer. And 
since every victory over self and sin and imperfection 
will be promptly rewarded, it will be rightly seen 
that the blotting out of the world's sins will gradually 
progress little by little, until at the close of the Millennial 
Age, all who have been willing to hear and obey 
the voice of the Great Prophet (Head and Body), will 
have attained to an unblemished perfection, mental, 

R2195 : page 229 

physical and moral, with none of the blemishes of sin 
remaining. 

Mankind, as originally created, as represented in 
father Adam before his transgression, was in the image 
of God: the mind, the will, the judgment were true 
copies of the Lord's; and thus it might properly be 
said that Adam had the law of God written in his 
heart, in his head, in his very organization. But, this 
Divine likeness has been marred, ruined by the fall. 
Man's organization, mental and moral, can no longer be 
said to be in the image of God. The selfish qualities have 
grown at the expense of the moral and intellectual 
qualities, so that he is very unlike his Creator, and 
his own original, as represented in Adam. But God's 
promise is that when he begins to deal with the world 
under the New Covenant in the hands of the Great 
Mediator, a great work will be accomplished for all 
the families of the earth who will obey him through 
the then exalted seed of Abraham; until all shall be 
blessed and be permitted to become God's people— 
"Israelites indeed," children of Abraham through faith 
—multitudinous as the sands of the sea. 

Then will be fulfilled the promise of the Lord 
(Jer. 31:29-34), that they who die will die for their own 
iniquity, and not as now, for Adam's iniquity. And 
under the conditions of the new covenant, the Great 
Mediator of that covenant will re-write the law of God 
in the hearts of the repentant ones, as it originally was 
in the heart and very organism of Adam before his 
transgression: as it is written, "I will put my law in 
their inward parts, and write it in their hearts; I will 
be their God, and they shall be my people." This 
promise does not apply to the present time, but indicates 
the completed results of the Millennial work, 
when the willing and obedient of mankind shall have 
been brought to perfection; all their iniquities and sins 
being blotted out. This is shown by the context, 



which says, "They shall teach no more every man his 

R2196 : page 229 

neighbor and every man his brother, saying, 'Know 
the Lord'; for they shall all know him, from the least 
of them unto the greatest of them, saith the Lord: 
for I will forgive their iniquity, and I will remember 
their sins no more." 

This blotting out of sins for the world during the 
Millennial Age will begin with Israel according to the 
flesh; "to the Jew, first." So the Apostle informs us 
in so many words. Read Romans 11:25-29. As spiritual 
Israel is the first-fruits of all God's creatures, the 
first to enter into the fullness of his blessing and be 
recovered from death, so natural Israel is to constitute 
the first-fruits of the nations to be saved from the blinding 
influences of the Adversary, and to be granted a 
blessing under the New Covenant. 

But, the blessing which begins with the return of 
fleshly Israel to Divine favor, will not end with them; 
for as the casting away of Israel under Divine providence 
resulted in the bringing in of some from amongst 
the Gentiles to be joint-heirs in the Abrahamic promise 
and covenant, so the blessing of Israel under the New 
Covenant means, not only an opportunity of life from 
the dead to them, but also a similar blessing of opportunity 
for all the families of the earth; because it is 
through the seed of Abraham (first the spiritual, secondly, 
the natural) that all the families of the earth 
are to be blessed with an opportunity of becoming children 
of Abraham, who is the "father" of all who are 
faithful to God. Thus, eventually, there shall none 
remain except the seed of Abraham, first the spiritual 
seed as the stars of heaven, and secondly, the earthly 
seed, as the sands of the seashore, all partakers of father 
Abraham's faith and obedience. See 
Romans 11:12,15. 

The original perfection of mankind (father Adam) 
and the fall were symbolically represented in the first 
tables of the Law which God himself prepared and 
wrote, but which were broken, because of sin; they 
also represented the Law Covenant, and how it was a 
failure, broken so far as the people of Israel were concerned. 
The hewing out of the new tables of stone, 
whereon to rewrite the Law of God, symbolized the 
preparation of mankind, through the justification accomplished 
by the sacrifice of Christ. And not only 
was the preparation of the second tablets the work of 
Moses (type of Christ, Head and Body), but also the 
second writing of the law on those tables was the work 
of Moses and typified the work of Christ (Head and 
Body) during the Millennial Age— the engraving of 
the Law of God in the very hearts and constitutions 
of all of mankind, willing to submit to his gracious 
hands. 



R2196 : page 229 

"I WILL COME AGAIN AND RECEIVE YOU." 

--AUGUST 8.-1 THESS. 4:9-5:2.- 

WHILE our lesson deals chiefly with the second 
coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, it is introduced 
with a description of the class who will rejoice 
in his second coming, and with good reason. The 
Apostle (vs. 9-12) points out some of the true characteristics 
of those to whom he elsewhere says, "Ye, 
brethren, are not in darkness that that day should overtake 
you as a thief; ye are all children of the light, and 
children of the day." 
An essential of Christian character is "the love of 

R2196 : page 230 

God," "the love of Christ," extending to all the household 
of faith possessed of his spirit; and a spirit of 
sympathy toward the entire "groaning creation." 

Although the Church at Thessalonica was composed 
of those who in respect to length of Christian 
experience were but "babes in Christ," yet very evidently 
the persecution which had come upon them 
had caused them to grow very rapidly. It was but a 
year since they had received the gospel, and yet the 
Apostle witnesses to their rapid development, as evidenced 
by their love one for the other; and not only 
love for the company at Thessalonica, but the 
breadth of their love extending to and manifesting an 
interest in all of the household of faith throughout the 
Province of Macedonia. The Apostle declares 
that this love of the brethren was a manifestation of 
the fact that they had been "taught of God." This 
reminds us of the statement of another apostle, "He 
that loveth not his brother, whom he hath seen, how 
can he love God, whom he hath not seen." 

One of the first effects of a knowledge of the grace 
of God in Christ, and of a full, thorough consecration 
to the Lord, is this love for all fellow-servants— "brethren." 
Would that the fervency and zeal of first love, 
both toward the Lord and toward the entire household 
of faith, might not only continue, but increase with 
all. But alas! many who start warmly and earnestly 
grow lukewarm— become captious, cynical, hypercritical, 
high-minded and self-assertive— and lose much of 
the simplicity, zeal and humility of their first faith and 
first love. This is the first attack of the great adversary 
through the weaknesses of the flesh, to re-ensnare 
those who have escaped his chains of darkness, and 
gotten to see some of the glory of God shining through 



Christ. If they do not resist these temptations, the 
effect is sure to be not only lukewarmness toward the 
Lord and his cause and the members of his body, but 
eventually the cultivation of the fruits of darkness, 
envy, malice, hatred, strife, instead of the fruits of the 
spirit of Christ, meekness, gentleness, patience, brotherly 
love and kindness. Hence, the Apostle urges the 
Church, "We beseech you, brethren, that ye increase 
more and more," in love and service one for the other, 
which imply a growth in all the graces of the Spirit. 

The expression "that ye study to be quiet" might 
be rendered literally "that ye be ambitious to be quiet," 
or that ye have a quiet ambition— not a restless bustling 
for notoriety and great exploits, but a quiet earnest 
perseverance in well-doing; in which condition the 
fruits and graces of the Spirit thrive best. They were 
to be ambitious also to attend to their own affairs, and 
to work with their own hands: home and family duties 
were not to be neglected. The religion of Christ is 
designed to enter into and blend with all the proper 
duties, perplexities, trials and pleasures of the home 
and family; and thus the majority can best let shine the 
light which they have received from the Lord. 

True, the light received will make a great change 
in many of the affairs of the home. It sets before us 
new ideals to be esteemed and to be copied. It introduces 
us to a new relationship, a new kindred— the 
family of God— and thus brings some new responsibilities 
and privileges. And if filled with the spirit of the 
truth, with love toward God and all who have any of 
his likeness, it will make us very zealous in the dispensing 
of the grace of God, which has brought so 
much blessing to our own hearts. But, we should not 
consider it necessarily the Lord's will that we all should 
go forth as public teachers, abandoning entirely our 
homes, trades, duties, responsibilities, etc. 

The Lord's call will never conflict with proper duties 
and responsibilities previously upon us. The man 
or the woman who has a family to provide for should 
not think of leaving such obligations, nor consider himself 
called to public preaching, if it would imply the 
neglect of duties and obligations already resting upon 
him. He or she, however, should quietly and thankfully 
be ambitious to do all in the Divine service that 
a proper regard for others dependent upon them would 
permit. On the other hand, those who are free to 
give time and energy to the Lord's service, and who 
have talents, should when they receive the truth, humbly 
present their all to the Lord and seek to use their 
every opportunity in his service as he shall open the 
way; and such consecrated ones should be very careful 
that they do not encumber themselves so as to hinder 
usefulness in such service. 

Not only have we duties and a ministry toward 
every member of the body of Christ, but (v. 12) we 
have certain responsibilities toward those who are without 



—in darkness, out of Christ. The Christian is to 
be a burning and shining light toward the world. The 
world sees not from the inside, as does the household 
of faith, but merely from the outside; hence the necessity 
that Christians should so live before the world as 
to be "living epistles, known and read of all men," 
honoring to the Lord and to the teachings of his Word. 
The Apostle's statement really is "walk honorably 
toward them that are without." The Christian life 
should be seen by the world, not merely as just and 
honest, but also as noble and honorable. There are 
honest people who are mean, truthful people who tell 
the truth in a combative and repellant manner; in the 
true Christian, love should produce so generous a 
sentiment as would ennoble every virtue. In other 
words, as the same Apostle expressed it, "He that giveth, 
let him do it with simplicity (without ostentation)"; 
"he thatruleth, with diligence"; "he that showeth 

R2196 : page 231 

mercy, with cheerfulness," etc., Rom. 12:7-20. 

To this end, also, the Christian should strive "to 
have need of nothing"— So far as possible not to be 
dependent upon charity— but, rather, as the Apostle 
elsewhere states it, in harmony with the foregoing, 
he should "labor, working with his hands at useful 
employment [not to accumulate great wealth, but] that 
he may have to give to him that needeth." (Eph. 4:28.) 
The Lord's instruction to fleshly Israel that they should 
lend, but should not borrow, may well be applied in 
principle by spiritual Israel. And this principle applies 
to buying on credit; which should be avoided by 
the Lord's people, and as a rule would be found advantageous 

R2197 : page 231 

to mankind in general. 

"THEM THAT SLEEP IN JESUS." 



Having given us some general idea respecting the 
brethren, their general character, etc., the Apostle proceeds 
to speak of their hopes. Under the Apostle's 
instruction, supplemented by Timothy's, the Church at 
Thessalonica had in a very short time attained a considerable 
knowledge of the Divine plan; much more 
apparently than is enjoyed by a majority of Christian 
congregations to-day. For instance, (1) They knew 
what many to-day are ignorant of, that their hope centered 
in the second coming of the Lord Jesus Christ, 
and their being gathered to him then. (2) They knew 
that their friends who had died were "asleep," and their 
hope was that they would be awakened from the sleep 



of death by the Lord at his second coming. Realizing 
that all hopes of eternal life depended upon the second 
coming of the Lord as the great Life-giver, there was 
no danger that the early Church should ever lose sight 
of this inspiring hope set before us in the gospel. And 
it is because this fact (that the dead "sleep" and cannot 
be awakened until the second advent) has been lost 
sight of for several centuries past, that faith in and 
hope for the Lord's second coming has so generally 
languished. It has come to be generally believed by 
Christian people that the dead do not "sleep," but are 
more awake than they ever were— that they go to 
heaven or to hell in the moment of dissolution; and 
that these conditions are permanent, unalterable. With 
such unscriptural thoughts before their minds, who 
can wonder that to them the second coming of the 
Lord is an event without special interest; and hence 
regarded lightly, and by many wholly disbelieved, and 
declared to be a useless, uninteresting and pernicious 
faith. 

However, "the brethren," who have been instructed 
by the Word of the Lord, and who do not follow 
"cunningly devised fables" originated by the deceiver, 
find that the Scriptures as a whole from Genesis to 
Revelation are illuminated with the grand hope of the 
coming of Messiah in glory and power, to establish his 
kingdom of righteousness in the earth, and to awaken 
and lift up those who have fallen under the hand of 
death; to give beauty for ashes, and the oil of joy for 
the spirit of heaviness— to as many as will accept his 
blessing, under the terms of the New Covenant sealed 
at Calvary with his own precious blood. 

The penalty against our race, as originally pronounced, 
was not a sleep of death, for a few days or for 
a few centuries; on the contrary, it was absolute death 
—destruction. But God had purposed a redemption 
from the curse of death, and for this purpose Christ 
Jesus came into the world and died, the just one for 
the unjust, that he might bring us to God— back to 
Divine favor, where the gift of God, eternal life, will 
be a possibility to the obedient. Ever since the ransom-price 
was paid at Calvary, and its acceptance 
manifested at Pentecost, it has been proper to regard 
the whole world as being no longer dead— wholly cut 
off from life— but as merely sleeping— waiting for the 
return of the Redeemer as the Awakener, Vivifier, 
Life-giver. 

In this sense of the word, all mankind, redeemed by 
the precious blood, may be said to "sleep in Jesus"; because, 
by his death Jesus bought the world, and secured 
for all another trial for life (instead of the one lost by 
father Adam through disobedience). And Jesus himself 
declared that as a consequence of his being lifted up as 
the great sin-offering upon the cross, he will yet 
"draw" all men unto him— thus showing that the world 
is not to be considered as dead, extinct, but as merely 



"asleep," waiting for the drawing time foreordained of 
the Father, and provided for by the ransom for all. 
This drawing, like the drawing exerted for the selection 
of the Church, will be through a knowledge of the 
truth, and signifies that all mankind will ultimately be 
made aware of God's gracious provision, under which 
if they will (when brought to a knowledge of the truth), 
they may obtain life everlasting. Since the majority 
of mankind went into death before the ransom was 
paid, this implies an awakening from death in order 
that they may be drawn or come to a knowledge of the 
truth. In harmony with this are the words of our 
Lord, that the hour is coming when all that are in the 
graves shall hear his voice and come forth; and then 
they that hear (obey) shall live (everlastingly). 

All have been redeemed by Jesus, who "gave his life 
a ransom for all"; and the fact that their death-sentence 
has been met, paid by the Redeemer, makes it proper 
that they may now be spoken of as "asleep in Jesus," 
instead of as being dead in Adam. The fact that many 
of them did not know of their redemption would work 
no greater hindrance than the fact that many of the 
same ones had no knowledge in particular of the original 

R2197 : page 232 

sentence through Adam— they came under Adamic 
sentence without choice or knowledge, and latterly 
came under the benefits of the redemption similarly 
without choice or knowledge— Rom. 5:18. 

That the Apostle in this connection in the use of 
the words "them also which sleep in Jesus," does not 
refer merely to the saints is very evident, when we 
remember that the gospel had only been preached at 
Thessalonica for one year, and that in that year not 
very many of the saints could have died. When we 
remember further that the saints are not very generally 
related, according to the flesh, we can readily see that 
in appealing to their hopes that they should sorrow 
not as others, the Apostle must have meant not only 
hopes for the saints, but also hopes for all of their 
friends who died— including those who had previously 
died. If their hopes were merely for the saints, and 
if they believed that all others were hopelessly and 
everlastingly lost, it would be in vain that the Apostle 
would appeal to them not to sorrow as others who have 
no hope; for, such bad hopes respecting the great majority 
of their dying and dead friends and relatives 
would be a cause for more sorrow than they or any 
other heathens could have had when they had no 
knowledge, and no definite hopes. 

This is set forth by the Apostle (v. 14): he points 
out that our faith is built upon the fact, (1) that Christ 
died; and (2) that he rose again. He died for our sins, 
"and not for ours only, but also for the sins of the 
whole world" (1 John 2:2). His resurrection is an 



evidence that his sacrifice was acceptable on behalf 
not only of his Church, but also on behalf of all for 
whom he died; and it becomes a guarantee or pledge, 
not only of God's gracious proposition, that he will in 
his own due time establish Christ and his Church as his 
kingdom, but a guarantee, also, of the further promise 
that Christ's kingdom when established shall "bless all 
the families of the earth," with "the knowledge of the 
truth." Believing this, we are bound to believe also 
that all who were redeemed by his precious blood shall, 
according to his promise, yet come forth from the sleep 
of death to hear his Word as the great Law-giver of 
the new dispensation; and by obedience to it, under 
the New Covenant, sealed by the precious blood, to 
have if they will the gift of God, eternal life, through 
Jesus Christ our Lord. (See Acts 3:22,23.) As God 
accepted the sacrifice of Christ and raised him from the 
dead, even so, them also which sleep in Jesus will God 
bring [from the sleep of death] with him— through his 
instrumentality. 

But let us not confound this thought of the future 
of the whole world being changed from "death" to 
"sleep" by the ransom which Jesus gave for all, with 
the very different expression "new creatures in Christ," 
and "the dead in Christ," expressions which are applicable 
to the elect Church only. 

IN JESUS, VS. IN CHRIST. 



Many will notice at a glance that the name Jesus, 
which signifies Saviour, has special applicability to the 
ransom and restitution features of our Lord's work, 
while the name Christ is the title of his kingly office. 
The call to "be baptized into Jesus Christ" (the anointed) 
is an offer which is restricted to the "called and chosen 
and faithful," "elect" Church of this Gospel age; but 
the redemptive benefits covered by the name Jesus are 
"for all," for "every man," for "whosoever will" accept 
those mercies on New Covenant conditions. 

So, then, in the language of the Apostle, we exhort 
Christians that in respect to all their dead, in 
Christ and out of Christ— new creatures and old creatures, 
those enlightened and blessed by the marvelous 
light of the gospel, and those who have died while yet 
blinded to the truth by "the god of this world," that 
they sorrow not as others who have no hope. We believe 
that Jesus died for all, and that he has risen, and 
that all the dead on this account are to be reckoned as 
sleeping, waiting for his return and his exaltation with 
his elect bride in glory; and that then all whom God 
counts as asleep in or on account of or through him 
and his work, shall be also brought from the dead. 

And few have noticed the frequency with which 
the Scriptures use this word "sleep." Notice that it is 



used three times in three successive verses in this lesson. 
Notice also the following instances: Jno. 11:11,12; 
Acts 7:60; 13:13,36; 2 Peter 3:4; 1 Cor. 15:6,13-18,20,51; 
Matt. 9:24; 13:25; 25:5; Mark 5:39; Luke 8:52; 
1 Thess. 5:10; Matt. 27:52; 1 Cor. 11:30. 

These instances of the use of the word sleep, instead 
of the word death, are all from the New Testament, 
and used in full view of the ransom by which 
all were redeemed from the Adamic sentence, and a 
majority of them after the sacrifice had been given. 
What was the custom previously? Looking back we 
find Daniel (12:1-3) prophetically speaking of those 
who "sleep in the dust of the earth," and describing 

R2198 : page 232 

the sleepers as of two classes— some who will awake 

to everlasting life, and some to shame— the latter representing 

those whose trial will take place during the 

Millennium. And similarly of the kings and prophets 

one after another, good and bad, it is declared he "slept 

with his fathers." 

The basis for this expression and of the faith in 
a future life which it implied is explained by our Lord 
saying, "That the dead are [to be] raised, even Moses 
showed at the bush" (Luke 20:37). "Have ye not read in 
the book of Moses, how in the bush God spake unto him 

R2198 : page 233 

saying, I am the God of Abraham, and the God of 

Isaac, and the God of Jacob" (Mark 12:26). "He is 

not a God of the dead [the extinct, for whom no future 

is designed] but [he is the God] of the living, because 

all live unto him" (Luke 20:38). It was as a result of 

this lesson the Jews thereafter spoke of their dead as 

"asleep," and "waiting for the morning" to be "awakened." 

And, be it noticed, God's grounds for speaking 

of humanity as yet having a hope of life beyond the 

grave, rests not upon any change of the sentence from 

death (extinction) to a profound "sleep" for a period, 

but upon his predetermined plan to provide a Savior 

who would redeem or purchase back for Adam and all 

his race "that which was lost" of privilege of life everlasting 

in harmony with God. 

If, then, sentence of death which came upon all 
men by Adam's transgression is changed to a sleep, 
through whom came the change? We answer, It is in 
or through Jesus that they may now be said to sleep; 
because his sacrifice is the ground for the expression 
"sleep." 

Having spoken of the general hopes of the entire 
"groaning creation" which all centre in the second 
coming of our Lord, the Apostle delivers, not an opinion 
or a guess, but a special message, to the effect that 
the sleeping saints will suffer no less by reason of having 



fallen asleep, but that, on the contrary, they will be 
granted a priority over the living saints, in that they 
will be "changed," "glorified," be like and see the 
Lord, and share his glory, before those of the same 
class who are alive at that time. Elsewhere we have 
given at considerable length our reasons for believing 
that the shout, the voice and the trumpet here mentioned 
by the Apostle are symbols, as in other parts of 
the Scriptures— for instance, the shouts, voices and 
trumpets of Revelation, connected with the same topic. 
See Millennial Dawn, Vol. II., chapter V., particularly 
pages 143-150. 

It would appear that the Church at Thessalonica 
had been studying this subject of the Lord's second 
coming, and were fearful lest some of them might "fall 
asleep" before his coming, and were doubtful as to how 
much of the blessing might thus be lost by them, as 
well as solicitous for their friends, hence the Apostle 
says, "Comfort one another" with these words. 

We here notice that the word coming in verse fifteen 
is in the Greek parousia, which really does not 
have the significance of our English word "coming," 
but instead signifies presence— after arrival— giving 
the thought that the Lord will be present before the 
dead in Christ are "raised," although that will be prior 
to the "change" of the living. This, as well as many 
other Scriptures, indicate distinctly that the Lord's 
presence will not be manifest, visible, to the world 
during this time; as our Lord said before he went 
away, "Yet a little while and the world seeth me no 
more." This thought is emphasized by the Apostle's 
subsequent remarks respecting the day of the Lord, 
and the fact that the world would not know of it, but 
only the "brethren" who were "not in darkness." 

It speaks well for the rapid growth in knowledge 
on the part of the Church at Thessalonica that the 
Apostle could say to them, "Of the times and seasons, 
brethren, you have no need that I write unto you: for 
yourselves know perfectly, that the day of the Lord so 
cometh as a thief in the night; and when they [the 
world, unbelievers] shall say, Peace and safety! then 
sudden destruction cometh upon them, as travail upon 
a woman with child, and they shall not escape; but, 
"ye brethren, are not in darkness that that day shall 
overtake you as a thief." How definitely the Apostle 
here separates the body of Christ, the Church, from 
the world; and how particularly he shows that the one 
class may, will, must have knowledge on this subject, 
while the other class must be in ignorance on the same 
subject. And that subject is a knowledge of the day 
of the Lord— the day of the Lord's presence— "the 
harvest" or end of this age, in which the great Chief 
Reaper will not only gather the sleeping ones first, but 
proceed also to seal and to gather all the living ones 
of the elect class, who shall be accounted worthy to 
escape the great things that are about to come upon 



the world, in the great time of trouble which will dissolve 
present institutions and make ready for the establishment 
of Christ and his little flock of joint-heirs, as 
the heavenly kingdom. 



R2198 : page 233 

SELF-DENIAL IN THE INTEREST OF OTHERS 

-AUGUST 15.-1 COR. 8:1-13.- 

GOD'S Word, both of the Old and New Testaments, 

has been, and yet is, the very cornerstone 

of human liberty and independence. Every other 

system of religion has tended more or less to fetter the 

mind and the conscience with priestcraft and superstition. 

And the various so-called Christian religions, 

from Roman and Greek Catholicisms down, have likewise 

tended toward priestcraft, superstition and conscience-bondage, 

in proportion as they have ignored 

the teachings of God's Word, substituting therefor the 

"traditions of the elders," Decrees of Councils, theological 

dogmas, etc. As we look over the world to-day, 

R2198 : page 234 

it is an unquestionable fact that the largest liberty, 
social, political and mental is possessed by the peoples 
who have the Bible, and who read it freely. And the 
largest Christian liberty amongst these is enjoyed by 
those who study it with the greatest candor and 
simplicity. 

But if this knowledge and liberty be not accompanied 
by a full self-surrender to God, a complete consecration 
of one's self to him who is the Author of our 
liberties and privileges, we stand in great danger; for, 
as the apostle here declares, knowledge alone without 
self-submission to God would incline to puff us up, 
to make us heady, arrogant, self-sufficient. But if 
the knowledge be accompanied by a love to God, which 
leads to self-consecration in his service, in harmony 
with his instructions, the knowledge will work good 
for us, by thus introducing the spirit of love as the 
controling factor in our lives, because the effect of love 
is to "build up" instead of to "puff up." Love is constructive, 
and tends not only to build up our own characters 
after the Divine pattern, but by so doing it makes 
us co-workers together with God, in our sympathies 
for and interest in others— in their upbuilding and general 
welfare. 

After making this point clear, the apostle proceeds 
to apply it to the Christians at Corinth. As in all other 
cities of the Gentiles at that time, there were plenty of 
idols, plenty of gods, and plenty of temples; and it was 



the custom to eat consecrated food— meat that had 

been offered before an idol. The Apostle assures his 

readers that he fully agrees with their knowledge and 

logic upon this subject; to the effect that since the idol 

is not a god, therefore the offering of meat to it could 

not in any manner injure the meat to those who really 

understood the matter. Their increase of knowledge 

had given them a liberty which they could not have appreciated 

at first; but he urges that as Christians it is 

our duty to consider not merely our own liberties, but 

in such cases to waive our liberties in the interest of 

others, upon whom the influence might be injurious. 

We should, therefore, be very careful in the use of our 

knowledge and liberties, to see that it worked no injury 

to others— or otherwise to abstain from such liberties 

as might be injurious to others. 

Every one knows how easy it is to meddle with 
the delicate machinery of a watch, and thus to render 
it absolutely useless. So the conscience is a delicate 
mechanism, and we should be on guard against any 
and every influence which might injure either our own 
conscience or the consciences of others. The Corinthian 
brethren who fully understood that an idol was nothing, 
and that an idol temple was therefore nothing, might 
be fully at ease in their own consciences, if as guests 
they attended a municipal feast or banquet in such an 
idol temple; they might be able even there to recognize 
the true God and to eat and drink with thankfulness 
to him; but there might be onlookers, or amongst 
them, other brethren with knowledge less clear upon 
these subjects, who, nevertheless, would want to follow 
their example, and who in so doing would be violating 
and injuring their consciences. And no one could 
know what serious results might come from such a 
violation of conscience; the conscience which submitted 
to violation reluctantly at first, would incline 
to become hardened, and finally would cease to speak 
at all. And the owner of that conscience would be 
likely to drift according to the inclinations of his fallen 
nature into the very worst extremes of depravity. For 
this reason those who have knowledge of the Divine 
Word and the liberties wherewith Christ makes free, 
need more than ever an increase of the Divine spirit- 
charity, love— which would make them careful that 
their every act would not only be in harmony with 
their own consciences, but such, also, as would not 
prove stumbling blocks to the consciences of others, 

R2199 : page 234 

whose knowledge or logic could grasp the situation 
less clearly. 

To fail to have this love and this active, self-sacrificing 
consideration for the welfare and conscience of a 
weaker brother, the Apostle declares would not only be 
a sin against the brethren and wound their consciences, 



but a sin also against Christ— against the very spirit of 
his law of love one for the other. How nobly the Apostle 
sums this matter up when he declares that as for himself, 
if he found it necessary, in order that he 
might be a help to the brethren, and not a stumbling 
block to any, he would take pleasure in denying himself, 
not only the meat offered to idols, but all meat of 
every kind, as long as he lived. Paul thus manifested 
the true spirit of brotherly love; and every follower 
of the Lord Jesus Christ should seek to have this same 
spirit and sentiment active in all their intercourse with 
each other. 

While there is nothing in this lesson directly bearing 
upon intoxicating liquors, the principle inculcated 
can be very properly applied to the great evil of intemperance 
which is doing so much injury to the whole 
world, and in some cases even to those who have named 
the name of Christ. We do not dispute the principle 
of liberty, that each Christian has a right to decide the 
right and wrong of such matters according to his own 
conscience, but we do offset this knowledge and liberty 
with the doctrine of love, as the Apostle does in this 
lesson. Whoever is a child of the King, not only has 
liberty, but must also have the spirit of love; and he 
who boasts the liberty and manifests nothing of the 
spirit of love and consideration for others, raises the 
question whether he is a bastard or a son; for if any 

R2199 : page 235 

man have not the spirit of Christ (love), he is none of 
his. 

The Christian whose heart is full of the Lord's 
spirit of love will not only be careful that he may set 
a good example before the brethren, lest they should 
be stumbled, but he will also be careful of the example 
which he sets to his own sons and household, and to 
all "them who are without"— those who have not yet 
accepted the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, but who 
are reading the lives and characters of his disciples, as 
living epistles of his doctrines. 



Incidentally our lesson brings before us a very 
clear and positive statement respecting God. While 
the world has many that it calls gods and lords and 
masters, to the Christian, as the Apostle expresses it, 
"There is but one God, the Father." The Apostle 
evidently knew nothing of the doctrine, started in the 
second century, and patterned after the heathen ideas, 
to the effect that there are three gods, of whom the 
catechisms declare that they are "equal in power and 
in glory." The Apostle knew of only one God who was 
supreme, "the Father." And he declares that of him 
(proceeding from him, directly or indirectly) are all 



things, including ourselves, who are his children. 

But, the Apostle by no means ignored our Lord 
Jesus Christ, who claimed to be not "the Father," but 
"the Son of God." Of him the Apostle has elsewhere 
said after telling us how he humbled himself for our 
sakes, leaving the glory of the Father's presence in 
obedience to the Father's will and plan, and how he 
suffered for us, the just for the unjust, death itself, even 
the death of the cross," then adds, "Him hath God highly 
exalted, and given him a name that is above every name, 
that at the name of Jesus every knee should bow, both 
of things in heaven and things on earth, to the glory of 
God, the Father"— and that all men "should honor the 
Son, even as they honor the Father." Nor does the 
Apostle here omit to mention Jesus, but says, that to 
us there is "one Lord, Jesus Christ, by whom are all 
things, and we by him." 

How clearly and how simply the Apostle states the 
relationship existing between the glorified Father, the 
glorified Son, and all the creation of God, which is or 
will be blessed through the Son. Although, all things 
are of the Father, in the sense that the original power, 
life, etc., proceeded from the Father, nevertheless all 
things are by the Son, in the sense that he from the 
very beginning has been the Father's active and honored 
agent in every feature of the Divine plan. Himself 
declared to be "the beginning of the creation of 
God," it is also declared that "all things were made by 
him, and without him was not anything made that was 
made" (though of the Father, by the Father's power, 
etc.). See Rev. 3:14; Jno. 1:2,3; also our issue for 
June '92 and April 15, '93. 



page 235 

INTERESTING LETTERS. 



Ontario. 

DEAR BROTHER IN CHRIST:-I must say that I 
have been surprised, delighted and astonished beyond 
measure at the truth revealed in your tract on hell. 
Oh, how I have been deluded by the traditions of men! 
How I have misrepresented and traduced God in preaching 
such a doctrine. 

I have been outside of all sects and systems of men 
for years, yet bound by the traditions of men, when I 
thought myself free. May he, the spirit of truth, 
guide me quickly into his perfect light. 

I would be pleased to circulate any literature on 
these subjects that you have for free distribution in 
this dark town in which I live, and will send you my 
subscription for ZION'S WATCH TOWER as soon as I 



am able. Yours in Christ, I. W. HAMMOND. 



Kansas. 

TOWER PUBLISHING CO.:-Through the Christian 
kindness of my brother I have been furnished VOLS. 
L, II. and III. of MILLENNIAL DAWN. How blind 
and stiff-necked I have been, I can hardly tell. After 
reading the first volume I was not at all convinced, 
but through courtesy to my brother I re-read it, the 
second time comparing references carefully. Then I 
commenced at Isaiah's prophecy, and read all the prophets 
and the New Testament through. And altho I 
had read the same many times, I was surprised at what 
I found there, that I had never seen before. Five years 
ago I felt my ignorance of the Word of God, not being 
able to "rightly divide the word of truth," so I sought 
the Lord, pleading that promise, "If any lack wisdom, 
let him ask of God, who giveth to all men liberally, 
and upbraideth not." And how wonderfully he has 
answered my prayers! I am now feasting on the hidden 
manna. 

Yesterday I stepped out of the ship [the nominal 
church— ED.], alone on the troubled sea. For a little 
while I felt as if I was sinking, when I heard, by faith, 
"Oh thou of little faith, wherefore didst thou doubt." 
MRS. S. C. SMITH. 



California. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-We rejoice in the 
truth. Our pet doctrines, immortality of the soul, everlasting 
torment, triune God, have been exchanged for 
the pure gold. Now we can do nothing against the 
truth, but feel it our reasonable service to do all we 
can for the truth. 

Silver and gold we have not; but such as we have, 
our time, testimony and influence to serve the truth to 
others, we give. We appreciate your offer very much, 
in sending us tracts for free distribution, as it opens the 
way to have a little talk and then leave the silent messenger 
with them (the people). They will read the 
tract, but cannot argue with it. The tract entitled 
"The Wages of Sin" proved a great blessing to me. I 

page 236 

marked it well, and accompanied with a long letter sent 
the same to a friend. 

I have learned to appreciate this kind of reading 
matter so much, because of the glorious light it has 
brought me— "glad tidings of great joy." Blessed be 
God, I have learned to love him better, because I know 
him better and his wonderful plan; in fact it has brought 



me into harmony as a co-worker with him, and I am 
able to understand and willingly do the work he has 
for me to do in this harvest time. 

A strong sectarian spirit prevails in this place. 
Something that will strike at the root of this evil with 
the many false doctrines and teachings of the popular 
denominations seems to be one thing needful. You 
may judge as to what tracts would suit, and I will 
faithfully distribute the same. 

We shall be glad to take up the colporteur work 
and do what we can along that line. Will let you know 
when we are ready to take up that work. We know 
much good is accomplished in that way. 

Yours in the love of God and the fellowship of the 
one spirit, P. J. SHOQUIST. 



Michigan. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-Allow me to address 
you a few lines concerning the effect of your work, the 
I., II. and III. volumes of MILLENNIAL DAWN, upon 
me. It found me through a friend in a creed bed. And 
reading and examining it I found the bed too short. 
I was acting as superintendent of a Sunday School at 
the time, and I resigned and withdrew from the Evangelical 
Association; not without a church meeting, 
however. 

I was able to get a great deal of truth before them, 
and the minister, having more knowledge of the Scriptures 
than the rest, and I having given him my reason 
for withdrawing before the meeting, confessed to the 
truth privately, but simply said he would have to defend 
the discipline or he could not preach. He lacked 
a love and appreciation of the truth. He could not 
condemn and did not do so, but by his silence allowed 
the members to condemn the truth. 

This step cost me the friendship of all my neighbors 
for a time, but they have shown every respect 
since, tho the minister keeps them so guarded that I 
cannot get them to read MILLENNIAL DAWN and examine 
the truth for themselves. 

I am so thankful to God for his great mercy to me 
in revealing this truth to me. Oh! I desire strength to 
fight the good fight of faith to the end. I pray God 
to be with you in his might in strengthening you in 
spreading the truth, and may the Lord reward you for 
your good work, as no one else is able to bless. Pray 
for me. Yours in Christ, L. L. PARNEY. 



Ontario. 
DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I take the liberty of 
writing to thank you for your very clear, forcible, logical, 
convincing and satisfactory presentation of the 



truth in your three volumes of MILLENNIAL DAWN. 
Altho I have been acquainted with the Word of God 
from childhood, I never knew so much of my heavenly 
Father's glorious provision for our fallen race as I 
have learned since reading your valuable works. While 
I am surprised and ashamed that for so many years I 
knew nothing of what is so clearly pointed out in God's 
Word, I feel very thankful that at eventide it is light. 
Praise the Lord for clearly revealing his glorious purposes, 
which till lately were hidden from me. I long 
to tell others the blessed tidings that gladden my heart. 
Glory to God, my Savior is here; Christ, the divine 
Bridegroom is present. 

Since I have seen something of the Millennial 
Dawn, I have been trying to point others to its glorious 
light. I have conversed about it whenever I had an 
opportunity, and lent DAWNS to any who were willing 
to read them. Last May I publicly left the Methodist 
church of which I had been a member from my youth. 
All our family were members of that church, but two 
of them have left because they are believers in the great 
truths you teach. Our youngest son, who lives at M., 
left before I did. He is very diligent and earnest in 
his efforts to spread the light. 

The people here are strongly prejudiced against 
what they think are new doctrines. One of them told 
me he wanted to die in the same faith as his fathers. 
I told him that if all his forefathers had been of his 
opinion they would have been Roman Catholics, and 
farther back they were heathen. One man to whom I 
lent the DAWNS acknowledged that no one could disprove 
them, but said that it was hard to give up opinions 
that had been instilled into the mind in childhood. 
Some are so prejudiced that they will not read the books 
at all. We never tire of reading them and the TOWERS 
over and over again. 

My husband joins with me in kind regards to yourself 
and Sister Russell. May the Lord bless you abundantly 
in your great work. Your Sister in Christ, 
MRS. ELIZABETH HALL. 



Ohio. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I bless God for the 
MILLENNIAL DAWN, for it has removed all doubts 
and fears and revealed to me the perfect plan of God 
for the redemption of man, and I have since reading it 
made a personal acquaintance with my Savior, our Lord 
Jesus Christ, and he is now ruling supreme in my heart, 
and I am looking for his coming [the full establishment 
of his Kingdom?] when I shall see him as he is 
and be like him. O, bless the Lord all my soul! 

I was groping in darkness, but I was seeking after 
truth, and hungering and thirsting after righteousness, 
and bless God he has filled me and given me the Comforter, 



who he has promised shall abide with me forever. 

I will tell you how the DAWN happened to fall into 
my hands. One day in looking over the books in 
the Public Library, under the head of Religion, I saw 
this book, and in scanning its pages I thought it was 
just what I wanted, so I took it home and read it on 
three different occasions, and it has been a great blessing 
to me; and not only to me, but I showed it to a 
friend of mine who had almost fallen into infidelity, 
and was attending meetings of a club which is composed 
of Anarchists, Communists and Socialists, and 
proffered to believe in their teachings; but praise God, 
he is now interested in the truth, and my prayer is that 
the Lord will manifest himself to him that he may 
make a personal acquaintance with Him and accept the 
ransom provided for all who will accept its benefits. 

Yours in Christ, CHARLES PETERSON. 



page 237 
VOL. XVIII. AUGUST 15, 1897. No. 16. 



CONTENTS. 



Special Items 238 

Views from the Watch Tower 239 

Zeal the Measure of Love 240 

"Wash One Another's Feet" 242 

The Sum of All Graces is Love 244 

Gifts in the Early Church 245 

Fruits of the Spirit More Desirable 245 

Faith, Hope and Love Abide 

Forever 248 

The Gospel Preached at Ephesus 250 

page 238 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
--ADDRESS TO- 
TOWER PUBLISHING CO., BIBLE HOUSE, 58 & 60 ARCH ST., 
ALLEGHENY (NORTH PITTSBURG), PA., U.S.A. 

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 

INCLUDES A SUBSCRIPTION TO "THE OLD THEOLOGY TRACTS "-QUARTERLY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, N.Y. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, 

OR REGISTERED. FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN 

MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS: 

Those of the interested, who by reason of old age or accident, or 
other adversity are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, 
if they will send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and 



requesting the paper. 



R2208 : page 238 

A SYNAGOGUE AND JEWS AT ATHENS. 



By an oversight (which however involved no principle or doctrine) 
we recently made the statement that there was no synagogue at Athens, 
and that no Jews resided there at the time of Paul's visit, whereas Acts 17:17 
plainly states to the contrary. This furnishes first class evidence 
of the truthfulness of our claim that the WATCH TOWER is not infallible, 
but liable to Editorial as well as typographical errors. Our readers 
will therefore do well to keep a sharp look-out: and while we are 
always very careful as respects doctrinal statements, it is our desire to 
be correct also in respect to even the comparatively unimportant features 
of the divine Word; and this slip will make us the more careful. 



page 238 

"What Say the Scriptures About Hell?" is the title of a pamphlet in 
which every text of Scripture containing the word hell is cited and examined 
in the light of Scripture and reason, together with other Scriptures 
and parables supposed to teach eternal torment. Price 10 cents; 
50 cents per doz.; $4.00 per hundred. 



R2199 : page 239 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 



TWO thousand carrier-pigeons collected from various 
parts of Germany by the German government, 
sent to Dover, England, and there set free to see 
how many of them could be relied on to return quickly 
to their homes, is but a trifling incident of itself; 
but it has created a great commotion in England. It 
is interpreted to indicate that the German Emperor is 
considering the possibilities of a war with Great Britain; 
and desires to know how he could keep in communication 
with his army after it had landed on British soil, 
supposing that the telegraph cables would be destroyed 
or under British control. The matter was taken up in 
Parliament, but it was decided that the affront was of 
so peculiar a character that no notice could be taken 
officially by the Government. 

In our opinion it is one of Emperor William's strategic 
bluffs, by which he is pleased frequently to startle 



the world, and keep himself in notice as a central figure 
—the arbiter of peace or war. It is an offset to the 
"Jubilee" show by Britain of a war fleet greater than 
that of all other European nations combined. It perhaps 
merely suggests,— "Britishers, when thinking of 
your naval strength, remember that others have greater 
army-strength." 

But it nevertheless indicates the love of the grandson 
Emperor for his grandmother Queen; and indicates 
that the present-day inclination to peace on the part of 
the so-called Christian nations and rulers, springs not 
generally from any change of hearts or renewal of right 
spirits within the rulers or the masses, but from changed 
conditions which make results extra hazardous, as 
well as very expensive. 

Theoretically both grandson and grandmother 
reign "by the grace of God;" i.e., they claim to hold 
power not from the peoples whom they govern, but as 
rulers divinely commissioned and set over the people, 
as representatives of the Kingdom of Heaven: and similarly 
all the kings and emperors of Europe claim. 
Yet, in the light of these false claims, how absurd are 
propositions of war like the above, and all the unholy 
wars the accounts of which cover the pages of "Christendom's" 
history. 



An English journal, The Morning Star, is responsible 
for the report that Queen Victoria recently said 
to a minister of the Church of England,— "I am looking 
for the coming of our Lord, and I do not think it 
impossible that I may not have to surrender my crown 

R2200 : page 239 

till I shall lay it down at his feet." 

It is pleasant to be assured that one of the potentates 
of earth is looking for the Heavenly King and 
his Kingdom of righteousness, even tho her words imply 
that she sees the subject comparatively obscurely. 
Only his special "friends" know that the Great King 
is already present, is assuming his great power and is 
about to use it as a rod of iron in dashing to pieces the 
human systems of church and state which falsely, and 
often ignorantly, call themselves by his name,— Christian 
governments and churches. Only these realize 
that the judgment of these man-made systems is now 
in progress. Only these have been served by the Master 
through his instrumentalities with the "meat in due 
season" for the household of faith. (Luke 12:37.) Only 
these know how to interpret the growing confusion 
and darkness coming upon the nominal churches, and 
the forboding "clouds" of trouble causing distress of 
nations with perplexity, and making men's hearts to 
fail them for fear in looking forward to the things coming 



R2200 : page 240 

upon the earth. Only these are able to see through 
these events to the blessings they presage, to the 
Church first, and to all the families of the earth later 
on. Only these therefore are able to lift up their heads 
and rejoice, knowing that their redemption draweth 
nigh. 



Many odes and poems were written in commemoration 
of the Queen's Jubilee; but one of the last, and 
less boastful than many, seems to meet with general 
appreciation. It is styled "Recessional," as indicating 
thoughts on the conclusion of the Jubilee, and has 
just been published. It is as follows:— 

JUBILEE RECESSIONAL. 



"God of our fathers, known of old- 
Lord of our far-flung battle-line— 
Beneath whose awful hand we hold 
Dominion over palm and pine- 
Lord God of Hosts be with us yet, 
Lest we forget— lest we forget! 

"The tumult and the shouting dies— 

The captains and the kings depart- 
Still stands thine ancient Sacrifice, 
An humble and a contrite heart. 
Lord God of Hosts be with us yet, 
Lest we forget— lest we forget! 

"Far-called our navies melt away— 

On dune and headland sinks the fire— 

Lo, all our pomp of yesterday 
Is one with Nineveh and Tyre! 

Judge of the nations, spare us yet, 

Lest we forget— lest we forget! 

"If, drunk with sight of power, we loose 

Wild tongues that have not Thee in awe- 
Such boasting as the Gentiles use 

Or lesser breeds without the Law- 
Lord God of Hosts be with us yet, 
Lest we forget— lest we forget! 

"For heathen heart that puts her trust 

In reeking tube and iron shard- 
All valiant dust that builds on dust, 

And guarding calls not Thee to guard— 
For frantic boast and foolish word. 



Thy mercy on Thy people, Lord! Amen. 
— Rudyard Kipling." 

JEWISH INVESTIGATION. 



"A curious movement is on foot among the Jews 
in one or two of the provinces of South Russia, which may 
result in an important religious revival. A number of 
pious Israelites are establishing associations for the 
reading and study of the Scriptures, both in the homes 
of the people and in their public assemblies. Much 
attention will be devoted to the prophetical books of 
the Old Testament, and to investigating the claims of 
Christians that Jesus of Nazareth has in his life and 
work and death been the fulfiller of many utterances 
of the prophets which have for so long been stumbling 
blocks to the Jews. It is further reported from Russia 
that a deeper religious feeling than has hitherto characterized 
them is noticed among the Karaim Jews of 
the Crimea. This sect of Israelites reject the Talmud 
as in any sense binding on them, their only sacred 
scriptures being the Old Testament. They are only 
found in the Crimea and in one or two isolated districts 
in Western Russia."— The Independent. 

This is a favorable indication. The Talmud stands 
between the Jew and God's Word just as the creeds 
and decrees of Synods and Councils stand between 
Christians and the Word. Nothing must be allowed to 
separate between us and the inspired Word if we would 
walk in the Light. Whatever "helps" really point 
us to the Bible as the only authority, and assist us in 
rightly dividing it, are profitable to us as servants and 
guides: but that which attempts to be to us instead of 
God's Word is a dangerous foe. 



R2200 : page 240 

ZEAL THE MEASURE OF LOVE. 



"There was a certain creditor which had two debtors: the one owed five 

hundred pence, and the other fifty. And when they had nothing 

to pay, he frankly forgave them both. Tell me therefore, which of them will 

love him most? Simon answered and said, I suppose 

that he to whom he forgave most. And Jesus said 

unto him, Thou hast rightly judged."— Luke 7:41-43. 

THE peculiar circumstances which drew forth the 
above colloquy will be very generally remembered. 
It was toward the close of our Lord's ministry, 
and a prominent Pharisee had invited him to dine 



with him and a company of friends; and while they reclined 

at dinner, after the custom of those times,— the 

table being spread in the centre and couches surrounding 

it on which the guests rested upon one elbow, while 

their feet extended out behind the couches— there came 

behind the Lord a woman, Mary Magdalene, widely 

known as a disreputable character; she was in deep 

contrition and was weeping, her tears falling copiously 

upon the Master's feet. She had with her an alabaster 

box of very expensive ointment, and as she prepared 

to anoint our Lord's feet with it she first wiped 

them with her hair. Such a scene probably never occurred 

before or since, and was well calculated to move 

even the hardest hearts. But, so far from entering 

into the real spirit of the situation, the Pharisees were 

of cynical mind and merely interpreted this as a proof 

that our Lord was not a prophet: arguing that, if he 

were, he would have known the character of the woman, 

R2200 : page 241 

for she "was a sinner." Our Lord, discerning their 
hearts, gave them a better explanation of the case in 
the language of our text. 

We are not to understand from our Lord's illustration 
that Mary was ten times as guilty before the 
divine law as was Simon, the Pharisee, but rather that 
in this illustration our Lord pictured the sentiments of 
the two sinners. Really "there is none righteous, no, 
not one;" "all have sinned and come short of the glory 
of God;" both Simon and Mary were under the Law 
of Moses, according to which he who was guilty of violating 
one feature of the Law had broken the Law as 
a whole; and had therefore failed of the reward promised 
to the one who would keep the whole, and had 
incurred the penalty pronounced for the violation of 
the whole,— death. Strictly speaking, then, both Simon 
and Mary owed the same amount— the lives of 
both were forfeited because of sin: and if either one of 
them were ever to obtain eternal life it could be only 
by the mercy of God, in the forgiveness of their sins. 
Strictly speaking, then, they each owed five hundred 
pence (were under sentence of death), and were alike 
unable to meet their indebtednesses. 

Our Lord put the illustration of ten to one, not 
as representing his view of the situation, but as illustrating 
the sentiments of Mary and Simon. Mary realized 
her unworthiness, and in this respect was like the 
publican mentioned in one of our Lord's previous illustrations, 
who smote upon his breast, saying, "God 
be merciful to me a sinner;"— she realized her sinful 
load and how much need she had of the Lord's mercy 
in its removal. But Simon was like the other character 
of our Lord's discourse, who thanked God that he 
was not like other men, but that if not entirely perfect 
in every particular he was at least very nearly perfect. 



Alas! those who are in this condition of mind are farther 
from the Lord than the truly humble and penitent who 
realize their need of a Savior, even tho as respects many 
moralities they may be humanly on a higher plane. 
So in this case, while the Savior was present and Simon 
might have had a great blessing, it was penitent Mary 
who really received it. She heard the Master's words, 
"Thy sins are forgiven," while Simon who appreciated 
his unworthiness but slightly got no forgiveness. 
Here we have an illustration of our Lord's statement 
at another time,— "The whole need not a physician, but 
the sick." In reality there are none whole, all are 
sick; but only those who realize their sickness apply to 
the physician for his remedies. 

Not only did our Lord justify his course in receiving 
the kind offices of penitent Mary, but, turning the 
argument, he administered a gentle but sharp reproof 
to Simon; he pointed out that he had neglected the 
common courtesies of that country and time. It was 
customary then to receive guests with a kiss, as it is 
now our custom to shake hands; it was customary then 
to provide water for the washing of the guest's feet, 
uncomfortable by reason of travel along the dusty roads 

R2201 : page 241 

of that time; in the case of an honored guest a servant 
would be sent to wash the feet. Furthermore, with 
special guests sometimes perfumed ointments for the 
hair and toilet were provided. Our Lord calls Simon's 
attention to the fact that these little courtesies had 
been ignored by him, but had been more than made up 
for by Mary; and that the secret of the difference of 
sentiment lay in the fact that Simon loved him little, 
and that Mary loved him much. 

It could not be that Simon had accidentally omitted 
these courtesies, for all Pharisees were punctilious on 
the subject of washings; nor need we suppose that it 
was an intentional slight put on our Lord. On the 
contrary, we may reasonably suppose that Simon, like 
Nicodemus, had a genuine interest in the Lord, and a 
surmise that he was a more than ordinary prophet. 
But both Simon and Nicodemus belonged to the respectable 
class, or higher caste, and came under the 
description of John (12:42,43), "Nevertheless, among 
the chief rulers also many believed on him; but because 
of the Pharisees they did not confess him, lest they 
should be put out of the synagogue: for they loved 
the praise of men more than the praise of God." 

Nicodemus came to the Lord by night to interview 
him, but Simon more shrewdly thought to get the opportunity 
of a conversation directly with the Lord by 
inviting him to dinner; but to prevent the thought that 
he had anything more than a general interest and curiosity 
respecting Christ, and thus to maintain the good 
opinion of his co-religionists, he treated the Lord and 



the disciples, who evidently were also guests, as persons 

of a lower caste; and as tho he thought that it was 

a sufficient honor to them to be his guests at all, he entertained 

them as inferiors; altho, probably, could he 

have done so without endangering his standing as a 

Pharisee, he would have enjoyed extending to the Lord 

every courtesy. 

How many who like Mary have realized their sins 
and have appreciated the divine mercy in the forgiveness 
of their sins have almost envied Mary her privilege 
of touching the feet of the blessed Master and, as 
he declared, "anointing them for his burial." With 
us, such opportunity might properly be appreciated 
still more highly, because of greater knowledge; for we 
have learned what Mary probably very imperfectly 
understood, that our Lord Jesus for our sakes left 
the glory which he had with the Father and humbled 
himself to human conditions in order that we through 
his poverty might be made rich. And not only so: 
Mary at this time had no knowledge of the extent to 

R2201 : page 242 

which the Master would go on her behalf and ours, to 
redeem us from sin and its sentence of death;— Calvary 
was then still in the future. 

What a comforting thought it should be to all who 
are of Mary's attitude of mind that it is still possible 
to wash and to anoint the Lord's feet. His own lips 
have declared that, whatever is done for the least one 
of his consecrated followers, is accepted by him as done 
unto himself. Ah! blessed thought; the Lord is still 
in the flesh, representatively; his faithful are to be esteemed 
"members of his body," as new creatures. And 
while these are still in the flesh, the sufferings of Christ 
in the flesh are still in progress, and will not be finished 
until the last member has been glorified.— Col. 1:24. 

Moreover, the Scriptural figure holds good: Christ 
is the Head of this body which is his Church, and 
which for eighteen hundred years has been in process 
of development; and now the last members of the body 
are here,— "The feet of him." As members of the 
feet class many are weary, discouraged, needing rest, 
refreshment and comfort, such as was bestowed upon 
the literal feet of the Master. 

Here comes in a test with respect to the symbolic 
feet of Christ, similar to that with respect to the natural 
feet which proved the great love of Mary and the 
slight of love of Simon. The members of the feet class 
are unpopular to-day as was the Master himself in his 
day, with a class corresponding to the scribes and Pharisees 
and doctors of the Law. Only those who love 
the Master much and appreciate greatly their own forgiveness 
will love his "feet members" in the present 
time to the extent that they would be willing to serve 
them and to fellowship them; while others like Nicodemus 



and Simon, altho well-meaning and considerably 

interested, will be ashamed of the gospel of the 

Nazarene in the present time, and ashamed of his feet, 

which published to Zion glad tidings, saying, "Thy 

God reigneth"— the Millennial age is dawning and 

the reign of Christ has already begun. (Isa. 52:7.) 

But those who are ashamed either of the gospel 

or of its servants are ashamed of the Master and of the 

Father; and such cannot be recognized as "overcomers" 

of the world, because instead they are overcome 

by the world and its spirit. Such shall not be accounted 

worthy to progress into the full knowledge and privileges 

of discipleship. 

How few there are who seem to have a large measure 
of the spirit of Mary Magdalene! How few are 
really very helpful to one another. How few pour 
upon one another the spikenard ointment of comforting 
words, helpful suggestions and encouragements. 
Those who are thus helpful will be found filled with a 
genuine love for the "head," for the "body" in general 
and even for the "feet." And the secret of their 
love as in Mary's case will be found to be a large appreciation 
of their own imperfections and of the Lord's 
mercy and grace toward them, in the forgiveness of 
their sins. The Apostle expresses the sentiments of 
these helpful and loving members of the body, who are 
the only ones who are making their calling and election 
sure, saying,— "For we thus judge, that if one 
died for all then were all dead; and that we who live 
should not henceforth live unto ourselves, but unto 
him who died for us and rose again." 



R2201 : page 242 

"WASH ONE ANOTHER'S FEET. 



IT WAS shortly after the incident related foregoing 
that our Lord, alone with the twelve disciples, 
took a basin of water and a towel and began to 
wash the disciples' feet. Strange indeed, this conduct 
seemed to them: not only their Master's words but also 
his actions were inexplicable riddles to them. He had 
acknowledged himself as the Son of God, the Messiah, 
their Lord and Master; and yet here he was, kneeling 
before them in the attitude of the humblest servant, 
washing their feet. Wondering and dumbfounded, but 
accustomed to obey the Master, no remark or protest 
was made until in turn he came to Peter. But Peter, 
as humble as he was bold, refused to allow the Master 
to perform the menial service, until assured that the 
explanation of it would be given after the service had 
been performed, and that unless he was washed he 



could have no part with the Master, whereupon he desired 
that his head and his hands as well as his feet 
might be washed. 

Since literal feet-washing was frequent, the custom 
of that day, and almost indispensable to comfort, we 
may suppose that our Lord's example would be frequently 
followed in the early Church. But, we do not 
see in it any command that feet-washing should be performed 
simply as a ceremony— regardless of its usefulness 
and its convenience. 

Our Lord's words to Peter, "If I wash thee not 
thou hast no part with me," certainly imply that the 
washing was more than a mere ceremony— more also 
than a mere expression of humility, as we shall endeavor 
to show. Nevertheless, the principle should 
hold good in every time and in every clime: that whatever 
useful service can be rendered to a fellow-member 
of the body of Christ, however humble or menial, it 
should be performed, as unto the Lord. 

Having finished the service the Master explained 
its significance. He had set them an example (1) of 
humility, in being willing to perform the most menial 

R2201 : page 243 

service to those who were truly his; (2) the washing 
was an illustration of a great truth, namely, that altho 
already cleansed by the Lord— justified freely from all 
things, through faith in him— yet that there were certain 
defilements which would attach to each of them 
so long as they would be in the world, from contact 
with its evils and besetments. While the general washing 
(justification) would stand good for all time, yet 
they would need continually (figuratively) to wash one 
another's feet— with the "washing of water by the 
word." (Eph. 5:26.) This would signify that they 
should have a mutual watch-care over one another's 
welfare; to keep each other clean, holy, pure, and to 
assist one another in overcoming the trials and temptations 
and besetments of this present evil world;— arising 
from the three sources of temptation, "the world, 
the flesh and the devil." 

This cleansing work which is to be done for one 
another is in harmony with the injunction, "Keep yourselves 
in the love of God." They could not get each 
other into the love of God: that could be attained only 
in the one way; through the original cleansing of the 
precious blood, through faith; and no one can thus 
cleanse us or help us into divine favor, except the Redeemer 
himself. But he having cleansed us and brought 
us into divine favor, has commissioned us that we 
should help one another to "abide in his love" and to 
keep ourselves unspotted from the world. The merit, 
the way and the privilege are all of God through Christ. 
The agencies used in applying these to one another are 
ourselves. "Ye ought also to wash one another's feet;" 



to help keep each other separate from the world, and 
clean through the Word he has spoken unto us,— by 
"the washing of water by the Word;" "building one 
another up in the most holy faith." 

This again reminds us of the Scriptural statement, 
in reference to the Church perfected and glorified,— 
"His wife hath made herself ready." (Rev. 19:7.) 
While the entire arrangement for her wedding robes, 
the washing of regeneration (justification) and the 
water for her feet-washing, are all provided for the 

R2202 : page 243 

bride through the agency of the Bridegroom, and she 
is thus made ready, yet the use of these means, the 
putting on of her adornment, the embroidering of her 
robes and the arrangement of the jewels presented to 
her through the spirit, is left for herself to do; each 
member of the body co-operating unto the edification 
of the whole body in love.— 1 Thes. 5:11; Rom. 14:19. 

It would doubtless be pleasing in the sight of the 
Master, our Head, that we should have a disposition 
to help and to reform the world in general, and to wash 
the vilest of the vile from all their sin; but however 
praiseworthy such a disposition might be, we are to 
remember that this is not the command which he has 
placed before us in our text. His injunction here is 
not to do general washing of all the unclean, but to do 
special washing for those whom he already has cleansed, 
justified, through faith. It is in respect to the fellow-members 
of his body that he has given this charge; 
and we emphasize it here, because this fact seems to be 
very generally overlooked by Christian people, who give 
their time rather to the outward cleansing, the moral 
and social uplifting, of those whose hearts have never 
been washed by the Master, and correspondingly neglect 
one another, his "feet." Yet, as already seen, preceding, 
tho it is a great honor to render such a service to one 
another, the privilege will be properly appreciated and 
much used only by the truly humble who have much 
love for the Master. 

But, it requires peculiar qualifications to enable us 
to help each other in this respect; before we can help 
others to remove the motes out of their eyes, and to 
cleanse their way of life, in all its little particulars, so 
that every thought as well as every word and act shall 
be brought into subjection to the divine will, it is necessary 
that we have experiences along the same lines 
ourselves. We must endeavor to get rid of the motes 
and beams that would obstruct our own vision. We 
must cultivate purity in our own lives,— in our deeds, 
words and thoughts. Only as we cultivate the various 
graces of the spirit,— meekness, patience, gentleness, 
brotherly-kindness, love, can we hope to be specially 
helpful to others in putting on these adornments of 
character and purities of life, and to get rid of defilements 



of the world, and the flesh. 

To this end it will be found helpful to remember 
the lesson of Mary in her service to the Lord's literal 
feet. Many who would reject well-meaning criticisms 
of conduct, resent well-meant efforts to wash their 
feet, as interferences with their private business, would 
be very amenable to the influences of the same person 
if he approached them with such evidences of true devotion 
and loving interest as would be symbolized by 
tears. It is the sympathetic ones who are most successful 
in helping the various members of the body of 
Christ out of the difficulties, besetments and defilements 
incident to the following of the Lord in this 
present time. Oh, let us study and strive and pray 
that we may be very successful in obeying the Master's 
words, "Ye also ought to wash one another's feet." 

It will also be a great help and comfort to the fellow 
members of the body, if in connection with these 
efforts to help one another in the cleansing of our ways, 
by taking heed unto the Word of the Lord, we will 
have with us also some of the precious ointment of 
sympathetic and, as far as possible, commendatory and 
encouraging words, and helpful assistance: for all the 
members of the feet class who are seeking to walk 
worthy of the Lord need the ointment of sympathy and 
encouragement, as offsets to the trials, difficulties and 
persecutions incident to the "narrow way," coming to 
them from the great Adversary and his blinded servants. 



R2202 : page 244 

THE SUM OF ALL GRACES IS LOVE. 

-AUG. 22.-1 COR. 15:1-13.- 

"And now abideth Faith, Hope, Love, these three; 
but the greatest of these is Love."— 1 Cor. 13:13. 

NEXT TO the Great Teacher's sermon on the 

mount, stands this discourse upon Love by 

the great Apostle Paul. Both discourses teach the 

same lesson; but they approach it from different standpoints. 

As pupils in the school of Christ, all the instructions 

of the divine Word and providences are intended 

to develop our hearts and influence our conduct 

in harmony with the lines of Love. This was the testimony 

of the Master when he said, "A new commandment 

I give unto you, that ye love one another." 

Similarly he declared that the entire law of God to men 

is fulfilled in Love— toward God and toward men: Thou 

shalt love the Lord thy God, with all thy heart, with 

all thy mind, with all thy being, and with all thy 

strength; and thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself. 

Since, then, "Love is the fulfiling of the law," and "the 



bond of perfectness," without which no other grace of 
character would be truly beautiful, we do not wonder 
to find the statement in Scripture that "God is Love;" 
and again, that "He that loveth not, knoweth not God." 

Our Lord declares, "This is life eternal, that they 
might know thee, the only true God"— the God who 
is Love. To know God in the sense here indicated 
means more than merely to know that there is a God; 
it means more than merely to know something of God's 
loving plan and character; it means to know God in the 
sense of personal acquaintance, and an appreciation of 
his character; and no one can have this knowledge except 
as he receives, partakes of, the spirit of God, the 
spirit of holiness, the spirit of Love. And this spirit 
of holiness and Love cannot be acquired instantly; it is 
a growth, and its development is the chief business and 
should be the chief concern of all who hope to know 
God in the complete sense which will be rewarded with 
life eternal. 

Hence, after Love's great provision of the Lamb 
of God, and the ransom of all mankind accomplished 
by him, all of its various steps for our deliverance from 
sin and death have been along the line of developing 
in us this character of Love, the character of God, 
which, according to the divine standard, alone will 
make us acceptable before the Father and bring to us 
his grace of everlasting life. Oh how important then, 
that we should be "taught of God" and develop this 
his character. "Learn of me," said our dear Redeemer; 
and well we may, for he is the express image of the 
Father's glorious character of Love. And "if any man 
have not the spirit of Christ [the Father's holy spirit, 
Love] he is none of his." 

To begin with, we are very poor material out of 
which to form likenesses of God's dear Son. (Rom. 8:29.) 
We were "children of wrath even as others"— 
the original likeness of God possessed by father Adam 
before he transgressed has been sadly lost in the six 
thousand years intervening: hence, instead of finding 
ourselves in the divine likeness of Love, we find that 
we were "born in sin, and shapen in iniquity" to such 
a degree that, instead of Love being the natural ruling 
principle in our characters, it is in many instances almost 
entirely obliterated; and what remains is largely 
contaminated with evil, self-love and sin-love and carnal-love; 
—perversions which are in direct antagonism 
with the wholly unselfish Love which is the essence of 
the divine character. 

The work of grace for the world, during the Millennial 
age, will be to make known to all mankind the 
gracious character of God, and his provision for the 
salvation of all; and to transform all who are willing 
from the depravity of sin to the perfection of character 
—Love: making mankind once more images of God. It 
will not only transform their wills, but it will also be 
accompanied by a physical transformation which will 



remove from them all the blemishes of sin, and all hereditary 
inclinations thereto, and leave them in the 
likeness of God, with a recollection of the undesirableness 
of sin and its evil consequences. 

The work of grace for the Church during this 
Gospel age is to transform our perverted characters and 
reestablish them in the divine character, Love. Whoever 
fails of attaining this fails of attaining the will of 
God concerning him; and must necessarily fail of winning 
the prize set before us in the gospel. 

But since our transformation of mind or will is not 
accompanied by a physical transformation or restitution, 
it follows that so long as we are in the flesh, we shall 
be obliged to contend against its inherited weaknesses 
and dispositions to selfishness and sin. But this sharp 
and continual conflict not only selects a special overcoming 
class, but serves to develop the desired character 
more quickly than will the more easy processes of 
the Millennial age. In consequence, while it will require 
nearly a thousand years for the world's perfecting, 
the perfecting of the saints in character may be 
accomplished in a few years, under the special, sharp 
discipline and the special course of instruction designed 
for the "little flock." But whether in few years or 
many years, and whether with little or much friction 
of adversity, the transformation and polishing of character 
must be accomplished. This love-likeness of our 
wills to the will of God is the end to be sought, if we 

R2202 : page 245 

would finish our course with joy, and with good hopes 
for the eternal glory. 

GIFTS IN THE EARLY CHURCH. 



In the early Church God indicated in a miraculous 
manner his acceptance of those who consecrated themselves 
as followers of Christ, by the bestowal of what 
were termed "gifts of the spirit." A particular account 

R2203 : page 245 

of these is given in the chapter preceding our lesson. 
(1 Cor. 12.) The Apostle indicates that some enjoyed 
several of these gifts, remarking concerning himself 
that he had more than any of them. Not unnaturally 
the recipients of these gifts, while feeling thankful for 
such a recognition from heaven, realized that some gifts 
were more valuable than others: and the Apostle confirms 
this view and urges that they seek to use the 
highest and noblest gifts where several were possessed. 
And perceiving that the Church was likely to consider 
that the possession of these gifts indicated such a measure 



of divine favor as would imply that they were overcomers 
and would ultimately gain the prize of their 
high calling, the Apostle took this opportunity, while 
discussing the gifts, to point out that their possession 
implied far less of divine favor than the recipients had 
supposed. To this end he points out in our lesson 
that these outward gifts of tongues, miracles, healings, 
etc., were necessarily and properly divided between 
the various members of the Church for their mutual 
welfare, and to draw them and hold them together, 
making them mutually dependent upon one another. 
This being the case, all could not have the same gifts; 
but as he points out, God has divided these and set or 
established the various members and gifts in the body 
as it hath pleased him. Yet, it is proper that all should 
recognize the difference in the gifts, and each covet or 
desire earnestly to have and to use in the divine service 
the best gifts that God has been pleased to entrust to 
his stewardship. And then, the Apostle adds, "Yet 
show I unto you a more excellent way." 

FRUITS OF THE SPIRIT MORE DESIRABLE. 



This more excellent way is that, instead of seeking 
and striving for the "gifts," which were solely at 
God's disposal, they should seek for another kind of 
"gifts," otherwise called "fruits" of the same spirit; 
namely, Faith, Hope and Love. These gifts are termed 
"fruits of the spirit," because, unlike the others, they 
grow gradually, and are not given miraculously. However 
humble a miraculous gift any member of the 
Church might have, there would be nothing to hinder 
him from growing the largest "fruits of the spirit" by 
careful attention to the cultivation of his heart. If the 
chief "gifts" were not open to all, the greater and 
more precious "fruits" were open to all; and to desire 
and cultivate these is much more excellent than to strive 
after miraculous gifts or talents which God has not 
been pleased of his own volition to bestow. 

Proceeding along this line, the Apostle calls attention 
to the fact that any one, or even all, of the miraculous 
"gifts" might be possessed, and yet the recipient 
be far from the condition of heart which would be fit 
for the Kingdom. The quality which is necessary, as 
a basis of character, which would make any service acceptable 
to God or cause it to be appreciated or esteemed 
by him, is Love. If Love be not the motive 
power, the greatest zeal and richest rhetoric and eloquence 
on behalf of God or on behalf of righteousness, 
would pass for nothing in God's estimation, and bring 
us no reward from him. If Love be lacking, great 
ability as an expounder of mysteries, and much study 
and knowledge would pass for nothing in God's esteem. 
Even a faith that could cure all manner of diseases, or, 



to use our Lord's illustration of the largest degree of 
faith of this kind, a mountain-moving faith (Matt. 21:21) 
would count for nothing, if, deep in our hearts as 
the basis therefor, God could not see Love,— for himself 
and for our fellow-creatures. Even the giving of 
all of one's possessions to feed the poor, as charity, 
would count for naught except the moving cause were 
Love. And even to be a martyr, and to be burned at 
the stake in the name of Christ, would pass for naught 
except in the recesses of the heart God could see that 
the moving consideration to the suffering was Love. 
Because, all of these things, the acquisition of knowledge, 
the dispensing of it with eloquence, the exercise 
of mountain moving faith, and the giving of all of one's 
goods to the poor, and his own martyrdom, might be 
done from selfish motives— to be seen of men, to be 
highly esteemed by men, for ostentation, for pride, or 
because of a combative disposition. For this cause the 
Apostle exhorted the Church to seek for this inestimable 
fruitage of the spirit,— Love; so that whatever 
gifts they might possess, either natural or miraculous, 
might be exercised in a manner that would be a blessing 
to their fellows and acceptable to God, and bring 
the users the great reward,— eternal life. 

What then is Love, this wonderful quality without 
which nothing is acceptable in the sight of God? The 
Apostle does not attempt to define Love, but contents 
himself in giving us a description of some of its manifestations. 
The fact is that Love, like life and light, 
is difficult to define; and our best endeavors to comprehend 
it are along the lines of its effects. Where 
Love is lacking results are more or less evil; where 
Love is present the results differ according to the degree 
of Love, and are proportionately good. A college 
professor, commenting upon the word Love, said,— 

"As you have seen a man of science take a beam 

R2203 : page 246 

of light and pass it through a crystal prism, as you have 
seen it come out on the other side of the prism broken 
up into its component colors— red, and blue, and yellow, 
and violet, and orange, and all the colors of the 
rainbow— so Paul passes this thing, Love, through the 
magnificent prism of his inspired intellect, and it comes 
out on the other side broken up into its elements. And 
in these few words we have what one might call the 
spectrum of Love, the analysis of Love. Will you observe 
what its elements are? Will you notice that they 
have common names; that they are features which we 
hear about every day, that they are things which can 
be practiced by every man in every place in life; and 
how by a multitude of small things and ordinary virtues, 
the supreme thing, the summum bonum, is made up? 

"The spectrum of Love has nine ingredients:— 

Patience— Love suffereth long.' 



Kindness— 'and is kind.' 

Generosity— 'Love envieth not.' 

Humility— 'Love vaunteth not itself, is not puffed 
up.' 

Courtesy— 'does not behave itself unseemly.' 

Unselfishness— 'seeketh not her own.' 

Good temper— 'is not easily provoked.' 

Guilelessness— 'thinketh no evil.' 

Sincerity— 'Rejoiceth not in iniquity, but rejoiceth 
in the truth.'" 

We cannot agree with the professor that these 
graces can be practiced by every man, in every place, 
every day. We must contend that these graces as a 
whole cannot belong to "the natural man." He may 
indeed put on some of the gentleness, some of the humility, 
some of the courtesy, some of the patience, 
some of the kindness; as men may attach grapes to 
thorn-bushes and figs to thistles; but with the natural 
man these graces are wholly put on, and not the outgrowth 
of the inward grace, the holy spirit, Love;— 
not an evidence of relationship to God. Where the 
imitator has not been begotten again, by the word and 
spirit of truth, his imitation of certain outward features 
of Love will not constitute him a son of God nor bring 
to him the rewards and blessings of sonship to which 
there is but one door,— Christ Jesus. 

In the Christian, an outward manifestation of patience, 
meekness, etc., is not sufficient either in God's 
sight or in his own sight. These graces of the spirit must 
be produced by the spirit of Love, filling and expanding 
within his own heart. But in civilized countries 
many of the graces of the spirit are recognized by the 
unregenerate, and are imitated as marks of good breeding: 
and in many cases they are successfully worn as 
a cloak or mask, covering hearts and sentiments quite 
antagonistic to the holy spirit of Love. 

The putting on of the outward forms of Love does 
however mitigate the evils and distress and friction incident 
to the fall, even in "the natural man," even 
when these graces are merely simulated with more or 
less of hypocrisy and deception as to the real selfishness 
of the uncircumcised heart. But trying times occasionally 
show how thin is the polished veneer of politeness 
and gentleness which covers selfish and stony 
hearts: for instance, the last reports from the recent 
holocaust at the Charity Bazaar in Paris, shows that the 
most polished and aristocratic young "gentle-men" of 
the most polite city and nation of earth displayed the 
ferocity of brute beasts when face to face with death, 
and that in their mad rush to escape the flames they 
knocked down and injured each other and even the first 
ladies of rank in France, to whom erstwhile they were 
overly polite. We cannot expect more of a love-veneered 
selfish heart— even the strong glue of chivalry 
will not hold the veneer under some such cases. And 
the time is not far distant when a still greater, more 



general and more terrible crisis will make manifest to 

the whole world that much of the politeness and gentleness 

of our day is only skin deep, and is not from 

the heart, the fruitage of the holy spirit of Love. In 

that great crisis, as the Scriptures show, every man's 

hand will be against his neighbor. In that Day of 

Vengeance the masks of formal politeness will be discarded, 

and the world for a short time will get such a 

glimpse of its own hideous selfishness as will help prepare 

it for Millennial lessons in Love and its graces, to 

be given them by the great Immanuel. 

The Scriptures inform us that in our fallen state 
Love is foreign to our natures, and must be introduced 
into them by the power of God; saying,— "Not that 
we first loved God but that he loved us and sent his 
Son to be a propitiation for our sins." And, learning 
of this, God's Love, and truly believing and appreciating 

R2204 : page 246 

it, "the Love of Christ constraineth us [to Love]." 
We are "begotten by the Word of truth,"— the message 
of God's Love toward us in the forgiveness of 
our sins, and his call to us to return to his favor 
and likeness, and his provision of the helps by the way 
that we might become copies of his dear Son. 

The measure of our appreciation of divine Love will 
be the measure of our zeal in conforming our characters 
to the divine pattern. A naturally rough, uncouth, depraved 
disposition may require a long time, after the 
grace of divine Love enters the heart, before that grace 
is manifest in all the words and thoughts and acts of 
the outward man. Others, on the contrary, of more 
gentle birth and cultured training, may without the 
grace of God within have many of the outward refinements. 
None but he that readeth the heart is competent 
therefore to judge as to who have and who have 
not received this grace, and of the degree of its development 
in their hearts: but each one may judge for 
himself, and each one begotten by this holy spirit, 
Love, should seek to let its light so shine out, through 
all the avenues of communication with his fellow-creatures, 

R2204 : page 247 

as to glorify our Father in heaven and "show 

forth the glories of him who called us out of darkness 

into his marvelous light." 

Perfect Love is patient with the weaknesses and 
imperfections of those who give any evidence of good 
intentions. More than this, it is patient even with 
those who are out of the way, and that oppose themselves 
to righteousness, realizing that the whole world 
is more or less under the influence of the great adversary 
who, as the Apostle declares, blinds the minds of 
the masses. This manifestation of Love was very 



prominent in our Lord Jesus: how patient was he with 
his opponents. Let us heed the Apostle's words:— 
"Consider him that endured such contradiction of sinners 
against himself, lest ye be wearied [in well-doing 
and patience] and faint in your minds."— Heb. 12:3. 

Perfect Love is kind in its methods. It not only 
seeks to do good to others, but seeks to do it in the 
kindest possible manner. And who has not discovered 
that the manner and tone have much to do with every 
affair of life. In proportion as perfect Love is attained 
the effort of the heart will be to have every word and 
act, like the thought which prompts them, full of kindness. 
It is well to remember the motto of the old 
Quaker,— "I shall pass through this world but once. 
Any good thing, therefore, that I can do, or any kindness 
that I can show to any human being, let me do it 
now. Let me not defer it, nor neglect it, for I shall 
not pass this way again." 

Perfect Love is generous and has no place for envy, 
which, on the contrary, springs from a perverted nature 
—from selfishness. Love on the contrary rejoices 
with them that rejoice, in the prosperity of every good 
work and word, and in the advancement in Christian 
grace and in the divine service of all who are actuated 
by the divine spirit. 

Perfect Love is humble— "vaunteth not itself." It 
does not sound a trumpet before it. Its good deeds 
are not done to be seen of men, but would be done just 
the same if no one saw or knew but God only. It is 
neither boastful of its knowledge, nor of its graces, but 
in humility acknowledges that every good and perfect 
gift cometh from the Father; and it makes return for 
every mercy to him. Some one has truly said that— 
"Love saves a man from making a fool of himself by 
consequential conduct, and by thrusting himself into 
positions which betray his incompetence." 

Perfect Love is courteous— "doth not behave itself 
unseemly." Pride is the root out of which grows most 
of the unseemly conduct and boorishness so common 
to those who think themselves somebody, either intellectually 
or financially. Perfect Love on the contrary 
develops courteousness along with humility. A thoughtful 
man has said,— "Politeness has been defined as 
love in trifles. Courtesy is said to be love in little 
things. The one secret of politeness is to love. A 
gentleman is one who does things gently, with love." 

Perfect Love is unselfish— "seeketh not her own" 
interests, exclusively. Nothing in this signifies that 
one should neglect the duty of caring for and providing 
for those dependent upon him by ties of nature, 
that he may do good to others. In every sense, "Love 
begins at home." The proper thought, as we gather 
it, is that the men and women possessed of the spirit of 
perfect love, would not think exclusively of their own 
interests in any of the affairs of life. In bargaining 
they would have an interest also in the welfare of the 



one from whom they bought or to whom they sold. 
They would not wish to take advantage of a neighbor, 
but sympathetically and generously would wish to 
"live and let live." Put into exercise, this element of 
Love would have a great influence upon all the affairs 
of life, inside as well as outside the home and family. 

Perfect Love is good tempered— "not easily provoked" 
to anger. Among the evils abounding and 
very common to-day, is this one of ill-temper, fretfulness, 
bad humor, touchiness, quickness to take offence. 
Yet, to whatever extent this disposition is fostered, or 
willingly harbored, or not fought against, it becomes 
an evidence of a deficiency and imperfection of our development 
in the holy spirit of our Father, and of the 
deficiency of our likeness to our Lord Jesus, our 
Pattern. Very few of the evidences of a wrong spirit 
receive as much kindness and as many excuses for their 
continuance as does this one. But however natural 
depravity, and heredity, and nervous disorders, may 
tend toward this spirit of fretfulness, taciturnity, and 
touchiness, every heart filled with the Lord's spirit 
must oppose this disposition to evil in his flesh, and 
must wage a good warfare against it. It will not do 
to say, "It is my way;" for all the ways of the fallen 
nature are bad: it is the business of the new nature to 
overcome the old nature in this as well as other works 
of the flesh and the devil: and few show to our friends 
and households more than this the power of the grace 
of Love. This grace as it grows should make every 
child of God sweet tempered. 

Perfect Love is guileless— "thinketh no evil." It 
seeks to interpret the conduct of others charitably. If 
pure and good intentioned itself, it prefers, and so far 
as possible endeavors, to view the words and conduct 
of others from the same standpoint. It does not treasure 
up animosities and suspicions, nor manufacture a 
chain of circumstantial proofs of evil intentions out of 
trivial affairs. Some one has wisely remarked that 
"faults are thick where love is thin." Love makes all 
possible allowance for errors of judgment, rather than 
to impugn the motives of the heart. 

R2204 : page 248 

Perfect Love is sincere— "rejoiceth not in iniquity." 
It is grieved by evils wherever encountered, sympathizes 
with all who fall into evil, or who are beset by 
temptations. In this respect Love prompts to an opposite 
course of action from that of Balaam, who "loved 
the reward of iniquity." Balaam, it will be remembered, 
feared the Lord, and as his prophet could not 
think of doing otherwise than according to the strict 
letter of the Lord's injunction; but he did not have 
the spirit of the Lord, the spirit of Love; and hence, 
when a reward was offered him if he would curse Israel, 
he was willing (in order to secure the reward) to 



conform to the evil proposition in spirit, in intention, 
while outwardly refraining from saying aught except 
as the Lord indicated. So, there are some amongst 
Christians who have a respect for the letter of the divine 
word through fear, but who lack the holy spirit 
of Love, and who by reason of a perverted love for 
wealth, etc., are willing to engage in various practices 
which come as near to the injury of the Lord's cause 
as is possible, without openly opposing him. Some of 
these Balaams are in the ministry and for the sake of 
salary, and the maintenance of their positions, and the 
friendship of wealthy Balaks, are willing to preach doctrines 
which they do not believe (respecting eternal 
torment, etc.), and in various ways to cast stumbling 
blocks before spiritual Israel. (Num. 22:7; 31:16; 
Rev. 2: 14.) The Apostle mentions these Balaams as 
being specially represented by false teachers in the nominal 
Church.-See 2 Pet. 2:15; Jude 11; Rev. 2:14. 

Every one who is seeking to develop in his heart 
the holy spirit, perfect love, should guard carefully 
this point of sincerity of motive as well as uprightness 
of conduct. The least suggestion of rejoicing at the 
fall of any person or thing that in any degree represents 
righteousness and goodness, is to be deplored and 
overcome. Perfect Love rejoiceth not in iniquity under 
any circumstances or conditions, and would have 
no sympathy but only sorrow in the fall of another, 
even if it should mean his own advancement. 

Perfect Love "rejoiceth in the truth." However 
profitable error might be, Love could take no part in it, 
and could not desire the reward of evil. But it does 
take pleasure in the truth— truth upon every subject, 
and especially in the truth of divine revelation; however 
unpopular the truth may be; however much persecution 
its advocacy may involve; however much it 
may cause the loss of the friendship of this world and 
of those who are blinded by the god of this world. The 
spirit of Love has such an affinity for the truth that it 
rejoices to share loss, persecution, distress or whatever 
may come against the truth and its servants. In the 
Lord's estimate it is all the same whether we are 
ashamed of him or ashamed of his Word, and of all 
such he declares that he will be ashamed when he comes 
to be glorified in his saints. 

R2205 : page 248 

Perfect Love "beareth all things." It is both willing 
and able to endure for the cause of God— reproaches, 
reproofs, insults, losses, misrepresentations 
and even death. "This is the victory that overcometh 
the world, even your faith"— the very center and life 
of which faith is the holy spirit of Love to the Lord 
and to them that are his, and sympathetically for the 
world. Perfect Love can bear up under all circumstances 
and by God's grace bring us off "conquerors 



and more than conquerors" through him who loved us. 

Perfect Love "believeth all things." It is not suspicious, 
but on the contrary disposed to be trustful. It 
acts on the principle that it is better if necessary to be 
deceived a hundred times, than to go through life 
soured by a distrustful suspicious mind— far better than 
to wrongly accuse or suspicion even one person unjustly. 
This is the merciful disposition as applied to 
thoughts, and of it the Master said, "Blessed are the 
merciful, they shall obtain mercy." The unmerciful, 
evil-thinking mind is father to unmerciful conduct toward 
others. 

Perfect Love "hopeth all things." It is not easily 
discouraged. This is the secret of Love's perseverance; 
having learned of God, and having become a partaker 
of his spirit of holiness, it trusts in him and hopes undismayed 
for the fulfilment of his gracious Covenant, 
however dark the immediate surroundings. This hopeful 
element of Love is one of the striking features in 
the perseverance of the saints, enabling them to endure 
hardness as good soldiers. Its hopeful quality hinders 
it from being easily offended, or easily stopped in the 
work of the Lord. Where others would be discouraged 
and put to flight, the spirit of Love gives endurance, 
that we may war a good warfare, and please the Captain 
of our salvation. Love's hopefulness knows no 
despair, for its anchorage enters into that which is beyond 
the vail, and is firmly fastened to the Rock of 
Ages. 

FAITH, HOPE AND LOVE ABIDE FOREVER. 



Not only is Love the greatest of all the graces, 
and really, as we have seen, the sum of them all in 
combination and unification, but it is the most lasting 
grace: Love never faileth— will never cease; and he 
who has this character of Love will never fail, will 
never cease: It is for such that eternal life has been 
provided in the divine plan. 

Now bear in mind the Apostle's argument to the 
Corinthian friends: (1) that the gifts of miracles, 
tongues, etc., bestowed upon them by the spirit, were 
divided amongst them according to talent or divine 
wisdom, and were not the results of their own efforts; 

R2205 : page 249 

(2) that he is pointing out to them a grace much more 

excellent than those "gifts," something that God will 

be pleased to give to each one of them; a grace of more 

value than any of the "gifts"— of much more value 

than all of them together; a grace that might properly 

be termed a fruitage of the spirit,— Love. And the 

fact is that some possessed of few talents have proportionately 



less to contend against while seeking to cultivate 
the all-important Love. 

Having described this wonderful and necessary 
element of character in its perfection, the Apostle comes 
back and contrasts it with those "gifts" which they so 
highly appreciated and coveted, and shows that the 
chiefest of those "gifts" are inferior to Love. The 
gift of prophecy he declares will fail, will cease; because 
the necessity for prophecy would cease: the miraculous 
power of speaking with unknown tongues 
would cease for the same reason: the knowledge of 
mysteries and the ability to expound the deep things 
of God will gradually vanish away, as the perfect light 
gradually comes to all men; for when the full, clear 
light shall have come there will be nothing hidden, all 
shall be revealed, and all will be able to see; hence the 
gifts of ability to understand mysteries of the divine 
plan and to expound them to others, altho two of the 
greatest of the gifts, will ultimately vanish in the perfect 
light: but Love will never fail. It is the greatest 
thing in this world, and it will continue the greatest 
thing in the world to come; for God is Love; and all 
who would enjoy his favor and its reward, eternal life, 
must possess this, his holy character. 

Pausing, the Apostle remarks how little we all 
know in the present time; even those who have the 
largest amount of knowledge and who can expound the 
divine Word and its hidden mysteries, know only in 
part; they see only obscurely: and while the obscurity 
will gradually vanish into the perfect light as the Sun 
of Righteousness arises, yet we will only know in part 
until that time, when we shall be "changed;" when 
imperfection shall give place to perfection. 

Looking back to childhood we can see that as we 
have developed physically and grown in knowledge in 
earthly matters, and have changed our processes of 
thought and conduct and language correspondingly; 
so in spiritual matters we should realize that in the beginning 
of our Christian way we were but "babes;" 
and we should not be satisfied to remain such, but desire 
individually to grow up into Christ in all things. 
And what is true of each individually is true of the 
Church collectively. The period of the gifts of tongues 
and miracles was the period of infancy, childhood; as 
progress was made, under the leading of the holy 
spirit, certain of those features very necessary and well 
adapted to the childhood stage passed away, and instead 
came other experiences, methods and leadings in the 
truth. Hence, to-day the "tongues" are gone, the 
"prophesying" in the sense of foretelling future events 
is gone, the "miracles" are gone, etc., after having 
served their purposes well. But the Lord still continues 
to provide in the Church "knowledge," even tho it be 
but imperfect knowledge; he still continues to provide 
methods for evangelizing or spreading the news of the 
truth to the unbelieving; he still provides teachers and 



helps in the Church. But these are not usually provided 
miraculously, as at first, but naturally and by the 
addition of the Lord's blessing to natural qualifications. 
But all these will cease so far as the Church is concerned 
when her course is finished;— "when that which 
is perfect is come," she will have no further need of 
these imperfect helps. 

Three gifts of the spirit, of the kind developed as 
fruits, will survive; and these three are to be earnestly 
sought and diligently cultivated; they are Faith, Hope 
and Love: but the greatest, the chiefest, of these is 
Love. Faith and Hope, altho they are two of the most 
necessary qualities for the present time, in aiding us in 
making our calling and election sure, and two which 
will never cease to all eternity, will measurably lose 
their active operations, "when that which is perfect is 
come;" because in a large degree and in reference to 
many subjects, sight and knowledge will take the place 
of Faith and Hope. But Love will never fail, never 
fade, never grow dim. It will be as active and glorious 
and useful in the life to come as it is now. Indeed, 
the sum of the future perfect life will be Love. 



Let us, dear readers, with all our getting, get Love 
—not merely in word, but in deed and in truth; the 
Love whose roots are in the "new heart," begotten in 
us by our Heavenly Father's Love, exemplified in the 
words and deeds of our dear Redeemer. All else sought 
and gained will be but loss and dross unless with all we 
secure Love. 

The Editor has a proposal to make to every reader, 
which he believes will be helpful to all who cooperate. 
It is this:— 

(1) That during the remainder of this year each 

of us pray every morning, that the Lord will bless us 
in the cultivation of Love in thoughts and words and 
deeds throughout the day; and that every evening, 
when reviewing the events of the day at the throne of 
the heavenly grace, we remember to report to the Lord 
respecting our measure of success or failure. 

(2) That during the remainder of this year we 

read carefully and thoughtfully every Sunday morning, 

alternately, 1 Corinthians 13 and Matthew 5:1-16. 

That those who would like to read in unison may do so, 

we mention that the Editor will read Matt. 5:1-16 on 

August 22, 1 Cor. 13 on Aug. 29, and thus onward alternately. 

Note the results of your watching and 

praying; keep on the lookout for all encouraging evidences 

of growth in this fruitage of the holy spirit: 

and, when you write to us, if you please, mention your 

progress in willing to Love and in practicing it; we are 

specially glad to know of your growth both in grace 

and in knowledge. 



R2206 : page 250 

THE GOSPEL PREACHED AT EPHESUS. 

-AUGUST 29.-ACTS 19:21-34.- 

"Take heed, and beware of covetousness."— Luke 12:15. 

THIS lesson stands related to the history of Paul's 
evangelistic service amongst the Gentiles, connecting 
with our lesson dated August 1 ; and the intervening verses 
should be considered. Leaving Corinth, 
the Apostle made a short stop at the important city of 
Ephesus, parting there with Aquila and Priscilla who 
accompanied him that far. He proceeded to Jerusalem 
that he might be in time for the feast of the Passover, 
purposing no doubt a visit with the Church there, 
amongst whom were several of the apostles and James 
our Lord's brother. The account of the visit to Jerusalem 
is briefly summed up by Luke in the statement 
that Paul "saluted the Church." (Acts 18:22.) Apparently, 
the reception accorded the great Apostle was 
a rather cool one, the believers there having not yet 
learned so thoroughly as had Paul that but a "remnant" 
would be gathered from the Jews, and the remainder 
of the elect Church be selected from the Gentiles. 
Cannon Farrar makes a remark on this visit by 
Paul to Jerusalem which is well worth repeating; he 
says,— 

"Had James and the circle of which he was the 
centre, only understood how vast for the future Christianity 
would be the issues of these perilous and toilsome 
journeys,. ..with what affection and admiration 
would they have welcomed him? So far from this, 
St. Luke hurries over the brief visit in three words 
that he 'saluted the Church;'. ..there is too much 
reason to fear that his reception was cold and ungracious; 
that even if James received him with courtesy, 
the Judaic Christians who surrounded 'the Lord's 
brother' would not; and even that a jealous dislike of 
that free position towards the Law, which he established 
amongst his Gentile converts, led to that determination 
upon the part of some of them to follow in 
his track and to undermine his influence, which, to the 
intense embitterment of his later days, was so fatefully 
successful. It must have been with a sad heart, with 
something even of indignation at this unsympathetic 
coldness, that St. Paul hurriedly terminated his visit. 
But none of these things moved him." 

Oh, how much some of the "brethren" missed it, 
when they failed to recognize the leading of the Lord's 
providence in connection with the work of the Apostle 
Paul. John-Mark, as we have already seen, and 
afterward his uncle Barnabas failed to see their great 



privilege in being co-workers together with that servant 
whom the Lord was pleased specially to use in the 
presentation of the gospel message at that time. And 
afterward we note how some "false apostles," not sent 
on any such errand, followed the Apostle into various 
cities where he by the Lord's grace had planted the 
truth and there sought, and to some extent succeeded, 
in overturning his work— "teaching the people that 
they should keep the Law of Moses," etc. But we are 
not to understand that they really did injury to the 
Lord's work; for the Lord himself is behind his own 
work. Their teachings served as sittings to draw off 
those who were not Israelites indeed, and who had not 
received the perfect Law of liberty through Christ. 
And they gave occasion for the writing of certain parts 
of Paul's epistles to counteract these errors, which have 
proven a blessing and a great help to the Lord's people 
for the eighteen centuries since. Thus does the Lord 
overrule the work of evil for good to those who love 
him and who are in the proper attitude of heart to be 
"taughtofGod."-See2Cor. 11:13; Gal. 2:4; 5:4. 

Returning to Ephesus the Apostle remained there 
for three years, finding it an excellent field from which 
the influence of the gospel would radiate through all 
Asia-Minor. Ephesus was one of the most important 
cities of that time, its population being chiefly Greeks. 
It was called "one of the eyes of Asia." It had a colosseum 
or place for public gatherings, capable of accommodating 
fifty thousand people, and one of its chief 
attractions was an immense and grand temple erected 
to the honor of the goddess Diana, and it was the centre 
of her cult, whose influence and numbers extended 
throughout all Asia-Minor. The temple was built of 
the purest marble: the historian says of it:— 

"It was 425 feet long and 220 broad; its columns of 
Parian marble were 60 feet high, and 36 of them were 
magnificently carved. The porticoes in front and rear 
consisted each of 32 columns; the entire number of columns, 
127, being given each one by a king. The hall 
was adorned with the most wonderful statuary and 
paintings." 

From this description we readily see that the character 
of the idolatry with which the Apostle had to contend 
was very widely different from that of the South 
Sea Islanders. Its majestic temples were not out of 
harmony with its priesthood and general features, all 
of which were evidently on an impressive scale, quite 
in harmony with its devotees,— intelligent and cultured 
people, as the Ephesians were. 

The account shows that in the interim of Paul's 
visit to Jerusalem the Lord prepared the way at Ephesus 
for the greater work of the three years' ministry 
which followed; for Apollos had in the meantime visited 
Ephesus,— mighty in the Scriptures as far as he understood 
them, but "knowing only the baptism of John" 
unto repentance, and faith in Christ as the Messiah. 



Apollos, apparently had not learned particularly respecting 
the new dispensation, and the gifts of the 
spirit by which it was being introduced. But Aquila 
and Priscilla, altho not themselves gifted so as to be 
able to speak in public, hearing of Apollos and his good 
work, sought him out, invited him to their home and 
there found quiet opportunity for imparting to him a 
clearer knowledge of the new dispensation: thus they 

R2206 : page 251 

became sharers in the fruits of his subsequent efficiency. 

When Paul arrived at Ephesus Apollos was gone, 
but some whom he had interested were soon found and 
instructed respecting the gifts of the holy spirit; then 
being baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus they received 
some of the gifts. The real baptism of consecration 
to the Lord Jesus as his servants, was no doubt 
part of the Apostle's explanation; but this was followed 
by instruction with reference to baptism in water, and 
these brethren, twelve in number, being of proper and 
teachable spirit, were not only willing but anxious to 
render obedience to every feature of the divine will; 
and having by their immersion in water publicly confessed 
Christ and themselves as his servants "dead with 
him," they were blessed with a share of the gifts, some 
of which were granted to every believer in that time; 
—as we have already seen in the lesson preceding. 

As usual, wherever the truth is preached there is 
a division; not merely a division as between those who 
respect God and his Word and those who deny the true 
God, but further than this, amongst those who acknowledge 
the true God and the Scriptures;— a division 
respecting Christ, and especially respecting the work 
of Christ, the value of the cross and the blessings which 
now and hereafter shall flow therefrom, to the blessing 
ultimately of all the families of the earth. The Apostle 
was not surprised at the division; he expected it. 
He doubtless remembered the Lord's words, "I am 
not come to send peace but a sword" and to cause division: 
it was better that the sincere followers of Christ 
should meet by themselves than that they should meet 
with others whose opposition to the truth would make 
continual disturbance, or else hinder their advancement 
into further knowledge and grace. It was for this reason 
that the Apostle secured, probably by hire, for use 
on certain occasions for meetings, the school-room of 
Tyrannus. 

Ephesus was a great city for magic, incantations, 
divinations, etc. The worship of Diana and the delusions 
connected therewith, "black art," etc., were 
(like all the heathen religious practices) devices of Satan 
and the fallen angels, whereby the people were 
made to believe in the power of Diana for good and 
evil, for health and sickness, for safety or accident. A 
vessel going to sea in order to have a prosperous journey 



it was thought must have on board a miniature 
"shrine of Diana." The individual who wished for 
luck repeated certain words or prayers to Diana and 
wore upon his breast a charm or amulet marked with 
her likeness or with a prayer to Diana (much after the 
manner that Roman Catholics wear upon their bosoms 
what are termed "scalpel," blessed with prayers to the 
Virgin Mary, with holy water, masses, etc.). As we 
have already seen,* the powers of darkness (Satan and 
the fallen angels) have liberty and ability to perform 
wonders of certain kinds under certain circumstances, 
just as Jannes and Jambres had power from the same 
source as recorded in Exodus 7:1 1. In consequence 
we are not surprised that the Lord greatly blessed the 
Apostle Paul in Ephesus with powers of the holy spirit 
which enabled him to more than meet the powers of 
darkness. The record is, "God wrought special miracles 
by the hand of Paul: so that from his body were 
brought handkerchiefs and aprons, and the diseases departed 
from them, and the evil spirits went out of 
them." This naturally attracted the attention of all 
classes to the gospel which Paul preached, and to the 
power of God which was with him— whose manifestation 
was so different from the power which was with 
the workers of magic and incantations. The attempt 
of certain vagabond Jews to do the same miracle of 
casting out demons, using the name of Paul, their failure 
and the fact that they were worsted, the demons 



*See "Spiritism— Demonism" in our issues June 15 to July 15. 

R2207 : page 251 

having no respect for them, helped to convince some 
respecting the gospel,— the very object intended by 
the Lord in the giving of "gifts." 

"Many that believed came, and confessed, and 
showed their evil deeds [acknowledging that their 
works of magic were evil and from an evil source]. 
Many of them also which used curious arts [magic] 
brought their books together, and burned them before 
all." And when we are informed that the value of 
those books was 50,000 pieces of silver, estimated to be 
$9,300 in our money— but if calculated in proportion to 
the rate of wages then and now, equivalent to a very 
much larger sum— it will be manifest that the work of 
grace was moving mightily in Ephesus. When the 
gospel so takes hold upon the lives of believers that 
they are willing not only to abandon evil ways, but to 
destroy the instruments of evil which previously had 
brought them gain, it proves that it is a genuine work 
and not a mere emotion. It is worthy of note also that 
these believers did not sell their books and merely go 
out of business of evil, but destroyed them, lest the 



work of evil should propagate itself further through 
this agency. "So mightily grew the Word of God and 
prevailed."— Acts 19:20. 

With this connection we are the better enabled to 
understand the opposition which now arose; and why 
those who were engaged in making small images of 
Diana, and miniature copies of the temple, and charms, 
and amulets, and "Ephesian spells" should become so 
excited and realize that their craft was endangered, not 
only in Ephesus but throughout all Asia-Minor. 

Having spent about three years in Ephesus, Paul's 
purpose of mind was to return again to Jerusalem after 
visiting the Churches of Berea, Thessalonica, Philippi 
and Corinth; and his courageous heart was meditating 
a visit to the City of Rome, the seat of empire, 
where the gospel would have an opportunity of reaching 
another intelligent class and be brought more particularly 
in contact with the governmental and military 
influences and perhaps be even more liable to provoke 
persecution than in his previous experiences; for Aquila 
and Priscilla had been expelled from Rome for being 
Jews: in harmony with this plan he sent two of his co-laborers 
before him into Macedonia. 

But the Lord saw best to permit the adversary to 
raise up a persecution about this time, and, of course, 
Paul would in a large measure be the centre of it. This 
persecution was on strictly business lines. The manufacturers 
and workmen engaged in the producing of 
the images, amulets, charms, etc., of Diana, were gotten 
together by one of their craft, Demetrius, who pointed 
out to them that the progress of Christianity meant the 
destruction of their various trades and that now was the 
time to put a stop to it and to reenkindle amongst the 
people a fervor of sentiment for Diana. The scheme 
worked well, and soon a furor was created: the less intelligent 

R2207 : page 252 

masses being easily aroused by the cry, "Great 
is Diana." 

It has been surmised that this riot occurred in 
May, the month of Diana's Festival, when usually 
there was the largest demand for the charms, amulets, 
etc., and that on this occasion business being less brisk 
than usual, the depression was laid to the charge of 
Christianity, whose influence was by this time considerable, 
and certainly every item of it in opposition to 
Diana. Ephesus was not only the shrine of Diana, 
but it was a great mercantile centre for Asia, as Corinth 
was for Greece, and the May Festival of Diana was 
accompanied by not only sacrifices in her temple and 
processions in her honor and prayers for her protection, 
but with these were associated wonderful displays 
in their theater or Colosseum,— gladiatorial combats, 
athletic feats, hippodrome races, etc. These drew people 
from far and near, and for a time, commercially, 



the city was a fair, and a large amount of business 
was done with the strangers. It was doubtless in order 
to have an opportunity of presenting the gospel to 
these multitudes from round about, that the Apostle 
delayed taking his journey into Macedonia until after 
the Feast of Diana. 

Paul being the prominent leader in the promulgation 
of Christianity was of course the central figure 
against whom the rioters moved. It is supposed that 
he still made his home with Aquila and Priscilla and 
that the mob made directly for their lodgings: apparently, 
however they missed getting Paul, and as the 
next best thing took Gaius and Aristarchus, two of his 
co-laborers. It is probable that it was at this time that 
Aquila and Priscilla, as Paul's faithful friends, risked 
their lives in his protection, as intimated by the Apostle's 
statement in his epistle to the Romans (16:4) 
where he says of them that they "laid down their 
necks" for his life. When the mob got Gaius and 
Aristarchus they took them to the Colosseum (theater), 
the general place of rendezvous for large gatherings. 
Here Paul, full of courage, purposed to attempt to 
speak to the mob in defense of the Christian cause, but 
the Ephesian converts would not permit him, knowing 
better than he the vicious and unreasoning spirit of the 
superstitious lower classes of Ephesus. 

When the mob got to the theater it was much confused, 
and of different opinions respecting the object 
of the gathering. Many of them evidently supposed 
that it was a tumult against the Jews,— a very likely 
mistake, since the Apostle and some of his co-laborers 
were Jews, and since the common people would probably 
only distinguish Christians as being a Jewish sect. 
Realizing this the Jews put forward Alexander. (Probably 
Alexander the copper-smith, mentioned by the 
Apostle in 2 Tim. 4:14, possibly a convert to Christianity 
who subsequently apostatized.— 1 Tim. 1:20.) 
Alexander was put forward by the Jews evidently for 
the purpose of explaining to the mob that the Christians 
were renegade Jews, and that the Jews proper 
would thoroughly approve of and support their persecution 
as disturbers of the general peace; that the 
Jews in general were a commercial people, interested, 
therefore, in the festivities of Diana, and the associated 
business prosperity. However, the Lord did not 
permit so insidious an attack, Alexander not being 
permitted to speak. 

The account here given is very brief, but is supplemented 
by the Apostle's own statement of the matter. 
(2 Cor. 1:8-10.) "Concerning our affliction which 
befell us in Asia, that we were weighed down exceedingly 
beyond our power, insomuch that we despaired 
even of life: Yea, we ourselves have had the answer of 
death within ourselves, that we should not trust in ourselves, 
but in God which raised the dead: who delivered 
us out of so great a death, and will deliver." 



It was probably the intention of the ringleaders 
of the mob to have a "spectacle" in the Colosseum, 
—to have the Apostle cast into the arena to be devoured 
by the wild beasts in the presence of the multitude. 
The Apostle refers seemingly to this persecution saying, 
"If I have fought with beasts at Ephesus" (1 Cor. 15:32) 
which would imply that if he did not have a 
combat of the kind intended for him, it came so near 
being such a conflict that it amounted to practically 
the same thing so far as his trials were concerned;— 
or it is barely possible that he referred to the Ephesian 
mob itself, as "beasts" seeking his life. 

Two important lessons to be drawn from this narrative 
are (1) that thorough conversion to the Lord 
means a thorough abandonment of evil, whatever the 
cost, the self-denial, financial or social. (2) That the 
love of money is the root of all evil and a frequent 
cause of opposition to the Lord's Word and plan. 

These principles, at work eighteen centuries ago, 
are still the same, and exercise similar influences to-day. 
And this is the very object of the truth during 
this Gospel age,— to be a test of our love for truth, for 
righteousness, for God. Sufficient evil is still permitted 
to test the Lord's people, to prove who are "overcomers." 
Those who are fully the Lord's are ready to lay 
down everything in his service— the service of righteousness. 
Just as the converts in Ephesus were willing 
to burn their once highly esteemed and commercially 
valuable books on magic, so to-day those who 
become the Lord's are ready to change their business 
if they find it inconsistent with righteousness and truth; 
and to lay down even life itself in the service of him 
who has called us out of darkness into his marvelous 
light. 

And there is a class to-day, like Demetrius and 
his fellow craftsman, who, as the Scriptures express 
it, "look every one to his own quarter for gain." It 
will be noticed that the business of Demetrius and his 
associates might be considered a religious business, inasmuch 
as they were forwarders of the worship of 
Diana: and so it is with a certain class to-day who are 
financially identified with the worship of "the image 
of the beast." (Rev. 13:14-17.) These support various 
religious systems from which also they draw 
goodly compensation of honor, praise, titles, money 
and respect. These likewise often oppose the truth, 
and go as far as public sentiment and civil government 
will permit in opposing the truth and those who serve 
it, and in inciting opposition among the masses. Their 
reasons therefor are similar to those which influenced 
Demetrius and his companions; they realize that their 
"craft is in danger." It is for each individually to be 
on guard lest he be "led astray with the error of the 
wicked," and fall from his own steadfastness, and be 
found to fight against God either for financial interests 
or earthly ambition. 



page 253 

VOL. XVIII. SEPTEMBER 1, 1897. No. 17. 



CONTENTS. 



Special Items 254 

Divine Secrets Revealed 255 

"He Will Show Them His 
Covenant" 257 

"He is Faithful Who Hath 
Promised" 258 

The Book of the Covenant 259 

Lending to the Lord 260 

Poem: Scatter Seeds of Kindness 263 

Living the New Life 263 

Interesting Letters 268 

page 254 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
--ADDRESS TO- 
TOWER PUBLISHING CO., BIBLE HOUSE, 58 & 60 ARCH ST., 
ALLEGHENY (NORTH PITTSBURG), PA., U.S.A. 

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 

INCLUDES A SUBSCRIPTION TO "THE OLD THEOLOGY TRACTS"-QUARTERLY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, N.Y. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, 

OR REGISTERED. FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN 

MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS: 

Those of the interested, who by reason of old age or accident, or 
other adversity are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, 
if they will send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and 
requesting the paper. 



ALL ABOUT HELL. 



"What Say the Scriptures About Hell?" is the title of a pamphlet in 
which every text of Scripture containing the word hell is cited and examined 
in the light of Scripture and reason, together with other Scriptures 
and parables supposed to teach eternal torment. Price 10 cents; 
50 cents per doz.; $4.00 per hundred. 



R2208 : page 255 

DIVINE SECRETS REVEALED. 



"The Secret of the Lord is with them that fear him; 
and he will show them his Covenant."— Psa. 25:14. 

IS THERE any secret in connection with the 

divine plan? Are not all of God's arrangements 

so plain that "a wayfaring man, tho unlearned, need not 

err therein?" Are not all of the steps of the plan of 

salvation so simple that even a child may understand 

them? 

Oh no! very evidently not; for everywhere we find 
the utmost diversity of opinion respecting the divine 
plan. Not only is there a great variety of heathen 
theories utterly false, but the various theories which 
obtain amongst Christian people are in violent antagonism 
the one to the other. Even amongst the worldly-wise 
of Christendom how various are the conceptions 
of God's intention and method respecting his 
creatures? These differences are represented in the 
various theologies of all the various sects. His plan is 
claimed to be one of "Free Grace" in which he gives 
an equal opportunity to all his creatures to share; yet, 
looking about us we see most evidently that all are not 
alike privileged, not alike informed and not alike circumstanced. 
On the other hand, there is the claim of 
an "Election" which denies that grace is free to all, 
and holds that it is restricted to the favored few. Besides 
these, we have various other conflicting theories 
in Christendom, and the most obtuse thinker must admit 
that where so many theologians, college professors 
and doctors of divinity are in dispute, the unlearned 
"wayfaring man" has many chances to err in his endeavor 
to grasp the divine plan. 

Observation therefore sustains, as most literally 
true, the statement of our text that the Lord's plan is 
a secret: and it is in agreement with the statement of 
other Scriptures respecting the "mystery of God," 
"hidden from past ages and dispensations." In harmony 
with this is the fact that all the prophets have 
spoken more or less obscurely and in parables, not excepting 
the Great Prophet, our Lord Jesus, of whom 
it is written, that "he taught the people in parables 
and dark sayings"— "and without a parable spake he 
not unto the people." He promised, nevertheless, 
that in due time the holy spirit would be granted as a 
guide and instructor to his true disciples: "He will guide 
you into all truth" and "show you things to come." 
(Jno. 16:13.) Some of the mysteries of God were due 
to be understood at once, and some more gradually 
down through the age, but the great unfolding of the 
divine mystery we are expressly told was reserved until 
the close of the Gospel age, when "the mystery of God 
should be finished," which he hath kept secret from 
the foundation of the world.— Rev. 10:7. 



Even so much of the divine plan as was due to be 
revealed by the spirit and to be understood step by 
step during this Gospel age, was intended only for a 
special class, and not for the world in general. The 
Apostle Paul emphasized this when he declared, "The 
natural man receiveth not the things of the spirit of 
God, neither can he know them, because they are spiritually 
discerned." "But God hath revealed them 
unto us by his spirit; for the spirit searcheth all things, 
yea, the deep [hidden, obscure] things of God." 
-1 Cor. 2:14,10. 

This same thought is before us in our text, "The 
Secret of the Lord is with them that fear him." As 
this has been true all the way down throughout this 
age, it is still true, and the finishing of "the mystery 
of God" in the close of this Gospel age must therefore 

R2208 : page 256 

be expected to be understood and appreciated only by 
this special class of the Lord's people,— those who fear 
or reverence him. We are to make a distinction between 
those who fear or reverence the Lord and those 
who fear or reverence man and the work of man, sectarian 
systems, creeds, etc. "The fear of man [and of 
man's churches] bringeth a snare," and hinders growth 
both in grace and in knowledge;— hinders an appreciation 
of the "Secret of the Lord." "But the fear [reverence] 
of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom," and 
this wisdom, if continued, leads to fuller knowledge of 
God, to greater confidence in him, and to that degree 
of intimate friendship and sonship which is the key to 
the understanding of the "Secret of the Lord." 

Abraham was called the "friend of God;" because 
he had the divine confidence, so that God made known 
to him certain things that he did not make known to 
others: "The Secret of the Lord" was with Abraham, 
so far as that Secret could be communicated to any one 
at that time. For instance, in the matter of the destruction 
of Sodom, the Lord said, "Shall I hide from 
Abraham [my friend] that thing which I do?" And 
it was because Abraham was the friend of God that he 
also made known to him something of the divine plan 
for human salvation: as the Apostle declares, God 
"preached beforehand the gospel to Abraham, saying: 
In thee shall all the nations be blessed.'"— Gal. 3:8. 

While it was not possible for Abraham or any one 
else than God to fully comprehend this statement, or to 
understand therefrom the lengths and the breadths of 
the divine plan of salvation, yet it contained the whole 
gospel, in the same sense that an acorn contains a great 
oak tree. So likewise our Lord at the first advent 
spoke in parables to the nominal house of Israel, 
that "Seeing they might see and not believe, and hearing 
they might hear and not understand;" yet, a certain 
few, full of faith and obedience and consecration 



to the Lord, were not thus treated; but, on the contrary, 

were treated as "friends" and had much explained 

to them. Thus our Lord said to the disciples 

when they inquired concerning the significance of a 

parable, "To you it is given to know the mysteries of 

the Kingdom of God; but to them that are without, 

these things are spoken in parables." And again he 

said to the same devoted disciples, I have not called 

you servants, for the servant knoweth not what his 

Lord doeth; but I have called you friends, because whatsoever 

I hear of the Father I have made known unto 

you.— John 15:15. 

This "mystery" of the divine plan, hidden in 
parables, in figures, and in symbols from the world, 
and from the nominal Christian,— hidden from all except 
the fully consecrated children of God— is most 
beautifully symbolized in the Book of Revelation. As 
therein recounted, John was shown in a vision a symbolic 
panorama, illustrative of the subject. The heavenly 
glories were symbolized and the Father shown seated 
upon the throne of his glory, holding in his right 
hand a scroll sealed with seven seals. This was the 
Mystery, the Secret of the Lord, unknown to any one 
but himself— his plan for the salvation of the world. 
John in the symbol hears the proclamation, "Who is 
worthy to open the Book and to loose the seals?"— 
who is worthy to have committed to his care, the execution 
of the great divine plan, wonderful for its wisdom 
and love, and its lengths and breadths and depths 
and heights past human comprehension— that he may 
open it and execute it? A silence followed; and John 
fearing that this signified that none would be found 
worthy, and that hence the divine plan would never be 
fully revealed, and therefore could not be fully executed, 
wept much. But in the symbol the angel again 
touched him and said, "Weep not! for the Lion of the 
tribe of Judah,' the 'Root of David,' hath prevailed to 
open the Book, and to loose the seven seals thereon." 

Ah yes! this was one significance of the severe trials 
and sufferings of our dear Redeemer;— in humbling 
himself, leaving the glory with the Father, becoming 
a man and ultimately giving his life a ransom for all, 
he was doing two works: not only (1) redeeming us 
with his own precious blood, but (2) additionally by 
this obedience he was commending himself to the 
Father, and proving himself worthy to be the Father's 
agent and representative in carrying out all the great 
"mystery of God" hidden from previous ages and dispensations. 
-Eph. 3:3-5. 

The interim of thirty odd years, in which our Lord's 
humiliation and subsequent exaltation took place, is all 
passed over in the vision, and the symbol merely shows 
in the midst of the throne "a lamb, as it had been 
slain:" how forceful the illustration to those whose 
eyes are anointed that they may discern its meaning. 
And now the symbolical panorama proceeds, and shows 



us the Lamb approaching Jehovah and receiving from 
him "the mystery of his will," the great plan of the 
ages, as mapped out in the divine purpose from before 
the foundation of the world. As soon as the "mystery 
of God" was committed to "the Lamb of God;" who 
had already fulfilled an important part of that plan by 
redeeming the world with his own precious blood, he 

R2209 : page 256 

receives homage, as it is written: "Him hath God highly 
exalted, and given him a name that is above every 
name, that at the name of Jesus every knee should bow 
of things in heaven and things on earth," and "that 
all men should honor the Son even as they honor the 
Father." 

Then came the opening of the seals: the disclosing 
of one after another of the various features connected 

R2209 : page 257 

with the divine purpose. Each seal as it was loosed 
permitted the scroll as a whole to open a little wider, 
and a little wider, thus permitting "the mystery of 
God" to be a little more clearly discerned. And so 
God's people down through this Gospel age have been 
privileged to know something of the "Secret of the 
Lord;"— the divine plan. But not until the last seal 
was broken, did the scroll fly wide open, permitting the 
"Mystery of God" to be fully disclosed; as it is written: 
"In the days of the voice of the seventh angel, 
when he shall begin to sound, the Mystery of God 
should be finished, as he hath declared to his servants 
the prophets."— Rev. 5:1; 10:7. 

This same thought, that God's consecrated people 
will have intelligence respecting his plans far different 
from any the world will have, is everywhere kept prominently 
before us in the Scriptures, and must therefore 
be considered a very important indication with all who 
profess to be God's people;— distinguishing whether 
they are merely his "servants," or whether they are 
still more intimately connected and have received the 
spirit of adoption as serving "sons," and are being 
treated as sons;— made acquainted with the Heavenly 
Father's plan. 

Our text speaks merely of the fear (reverence) of 
the Lord, but, as we have seen, this reverence continued 
leads into the very deepest work of grace obtainable; 
—to a fullness of consecration to the Father's will 
and service. It is of this class who fear (reverence) 
the Lord that we read,— "They that feared the Lord 
spake often one to another, and the Lord hearkened 
and heard it, and a book of remembrance was written 
before him for them that feared [reverenced] the Lord, 
and that thought upon his word [esteeming his Name, 
his Honor, his Will above any earthly, sectarian name 



or work]. And they shall be mine, saith the Lord of 
hosts, in that day when I make up my jewels; and I 
will spare them [they "shall be accounted worthy to 
escape" the severity of the great time of trouble with 
which this age shall end], as a man spareth his own 
son that serveth him." These who reverence the Lord, 
in this full and Scriptural sense, are surely the Lord's 
"elect," "the body of Christ," the "overcomers," the 
"little flock," the "royal priesthood," who shall reign 
with Christ, and with him bless all the families of the 
earth in due time. 

The privilege of this "royal priesthood" to know 
"the Secret of the Lord," to comprehend "the deep 
things of God" hidden from others, was beautifully 
symbolized and typified in the privileges of the Jewish 
priesthood. When the Tabernacle was set up, with 
its beautiful golden furniture, lamp stand, table of shew 
bread, golden altar, etc., all symbolizing spiritual 
things, they were covered over, hidden, not only from 
the ordinary Israelite, but even from the Levitical 
"servants" of the Tabernacle, who were not even permitted 
to look therein. The privilege of seeing those 
typical secret things, reserved exclusively for the priests, 
thus typified "the royal priesthood" and their exclusive 
privilege of understanding the mysteries of God, his 
Secret. 

"HE WILL SHOW THEM HIS COVENANT." 



But our text adds, "He will show them his covenant." 
This is stated as tho it were a very important 
matter to see or clearly understand God's Covenant: 
and it is an important matter, for God's Covenant is 
really the key to the entire divine plan. What God 
promised to Abraham in the Covenant, "In thee and in 
thy seed shall all the families of the earth be blessed," 
included directly and indirectly all the riches of divine 
grace. Yet, how few see this. We do not say how 
few of the world see this, for we should not expect any 
appreciation of the divine Covenant on the part of 
"them that are without." But we say, How few of 
those who have named the name of Christ, and nominally 
stand related to spiritual Israel— how few of these 
know or care anything whatever about the divine 
Covenant. 

Alas, that Satan should so grossly blind the eyes 
of so many, that they should have no interest in the 
divine Covenant and not even know that there is a divine 
Secret or Mystery! Satan has gotten them thoroughly 
imbued with the delusion that God's plan is, 
—that every poor human creature born in sin, shapen 
in iniquity and schooled more or less in vice and superstition, 
shall have a few years of very imperfect opportunity 
to hear one or the other of the many conflicting 



creeds and theories of Christendom (or a jargon of them 
all), to thoroughly reform his life and become a copy 
of God's dear Son; and that if he does not succeed in 
doing these things, with the thousand chances to one 
against him, he shall be relegated to an eternity of torture. 
Alas ! we say, that Christians should ever conclude 
that this is the plan of God. Truly, it was an 
enemy of God (Satan) who put before the people so 
monstrous, so God-dishonoring a doctrine as this: and 
persuaded them that this is the length and the breadth, 
the height and the depth of divine wisdom, and love, 
and provision for poor fallen humanity. 

But with our eyes anointed, and our hearts fully 
consecrated to the Lord and fully desirous to know just 
what is his will and his way, we look at the Great Covenant, 
and behold, it opens gloriously before us into 
three parts: (1) All the families of the earth— every 
member of the human family is to receive a blessing. 
(2) The Seed of Abraham is to be the channel of these 
divine blessing to every creature. (3) This Seed in 

R2209 : page 258 

its primary sense we find meant our Lord Jesus Christ; 
but in its secondary sense it includes the "bride the 
lamb's wife," his jointheir in this Covenant and in all 
of the divine mercies. This is clearly set before us by 
the Apostle in his letter to the Galatians.— 3:16,29. 

With this thought in view we realize at once that 
none of the spiritual blessings of this Covenant were 
possible until Christ Jesus, the Head of the Seed had 
finished his course and been glorified; and we see that 
the Lord's work since that time has been the gathering 
of the "elect" Church to be the "bride," the 
"body of Christ." We see also that the work of blessing 
cannot begin in its proper sense until this entire 
"Seed" is complete and glorified: and that with this glorification 
of the Church with her Lord, in the end or 
"harvest" of this Gospel age, will come the time 
mentioned by the Apostle Paul in his letter to the 
Romans (8:18,23), when the "groaning creation" 
shall be blessed by the "manifestation of the sons of 
God," in the glory of the Kingdom. This spiritual 
Seed of Abraham (Christ and the elect Church) has 
indeed been the salt of the earth, throughout the Gospel 
age, and has helped to preserve the world from utter 
deterioration; but this is but a small part of the great 
blessing which God designs to send through the Church 
to the world. The "light" of truth as it has been dimly 
shining during this night, is properly compared to a 
candle or lamp, but the "light" of the Church glorified 
in the Kingdom during the Millennium is properly 
represented as "the Sun of righteousness, which shall 
arise with healing in its beams." 

The Covenant then shows us our privilege of the 
present time, of becoming "heirs of God and jointheirs 



with Jesus Christ our Lord, if so be that we suffer with 
him, that we may be also glorified together." And it 
shows us the object of this trial, the object of this election, 
the object of the glorification of the Church, to 
be a work of mercy, blessing, helpfulness, toward the 
remainder of mankind. The Covenant is broad: it does 
not promise, merely, that all the families of the earth 
who will be so fortunate as to be living at the time 
when the Seed is complete will receive a blessing; 
neither does it merely say that all the families proceeding 
from Abraham, dead and living, will receive a 
blessing; but comprehensively it promises a blessing to 
"all the families of the earth,"— those who have fallen 
asleep in death as well as those who will be alive 
at the time of the establishment of Christ's Kingdom. 

To this end our Lord Jesus became Master or 
"Lord of the dead:" he bought all with his own precious 
blood: "He is the propitiation for our sins [the 
Church's sins] and not for ours only, but also for the 
sins of the whole world." And as we have received a 
blessing as the result of his ransom, so in God's due 
time "all the families of the earth" will also receive a 
blessing because of the ransom. It is from this standpoint 
that the Church is called the "first fruits unto 
God of his creatures,"— not the entire harvest. The 
first-fruits are to be used of the Lord as his instruments 
for blessing the remainder. 

And in the coming blessing, to the families of the 
earth, the natural seed of Abraham are to be given a 
place or preference, a priority over others;— "To the 
Jew first." As the spiritual blessings were offered to 
them first, so the earthly favors are to be offered to 
them first. They shall obtain mercy "through your 
[the Church's] mercy." (Rom. 11:31.) And after 
Israel shall have obtained mercy, a blessing through 
the glorified Spiritual Israel, then in turn natural Israel 
shall let the light shine upon others— "all the families 
of the earth;" until in due time the promise shall be 
fulfilled that Christ as the true light shall enlighten 
"every man that cometh into the world." (Jno. 1:9.) 
Oh glorious covenant! luminous with divine Love and 
Wisdom. -Rom. 11:33. 

R2210 : page 258 

THE COVENANT SURE AND EVERLASTING. 



And is this Covenant sure? It is sure; as the great 
Apostle points out, God took special care to so state 
this Covenant repeatedly to Abraham, Isaac and Jacob 
and to repeat it through the prophets; thus giving us 
most absolutely his word on this subject. But lest this 
should not be thought conclusive enough on a subject 
of so great importance, lest some should fear that there 



might be a contingency involved, by which that covenant 
might be vitiated, the Apostle points out that 
God not only gave his word but also his oath, that its 
engagements should be strictly fulfilled and in no wise 
miscarry. He says,— 

"God, willing more abundantly to show unto the 
heirs of promise the immutability of his counsel, confirmed 
it by an oath: that by two immutable things, in 
which it was impossible for God to lie, we might have a 
strong consolation, who have fled for refuge to lay hold 
upon the hope set before us: which hope we have as an 
anchor to the soul."— Heb. 6:13-19. 

"HE IS FAITHFUL WHO HATH PROMISED." 



Those who have the "Secret of the Lord," and to 
whom he has not shown the significance of his Covenant 
should forthwith examine themselves, to see 
whether or not the fault be unfaithfulness on God's 
part or failure on their part to come up to God's conditions. 
They should strictly inquire within whether 
or not they have been sufficiently and properly reverencing 
God, or whether their reverence and worship 
has to any degree been to man and to human institutions, 
churches, etc.— whether they ever became "servants" 

R2210 : page 259 

of God and, if so, whether they progressed and 
became servant sons. 

And those to whom the Lord has disclosed his 
Secret, and the significance of his Covenant, should see 
to it that these divine favors lead their hearts to still 
greater reverence for the Lord. For we may be assured 
that if the reverence is lost the Secret will slip from us, 
and the Covenant become more and more dim. And 
here we perceive God has placed a great test: He has 
permitted the great adversary to malign his character, 
and to traduce his plan, and to misrepresent the teachings 
of his Word to such an extent that the majority 
of those who name the name of Christ are at first influenced 
to turn to the Lord chiefly from fear of eternal 
torment. Their activities in mission work and in their 
general Christian course are actuated chiefly by fear and 
sympathy— sympathy for those whom they esteem to be 
in danger of eternal torture at the hands of a loveless 
and unjust God, and fear for themselves, lest they 
should not be spared a similar fate. Love to God finds 
no room under such conditions. In fact, it would be 
impossible for any one to truly love a God of such merciless 
character. But, amongst those who outgrow 
their creeds and fears are some who, in opposition to 
their false instructions, learn to think better of their 
Creator, and by faith grasp sufficient from his Word to 



beget a love for him which produces a fullness of consecration 

to his service; and thus they become sons of 

God: and then, by entering into divine fellowship 

through Christ, these have committed to them the 

"Secret of the Lord" and are shown something of his 

Covenant. 

This fullness, however, does not come all at once; 
it is a gradual development, step by step. If the truth 
is rightly received it leads onward into more of the 
truth, and into more of its grace; but if wrongly received, 
it may lead outward, away from the Lord 
and his Word, away from his Secret, away from his 
grace, into utter darkness with the world. Nor is it 
infrequently the case that those who lose their abnormal 
fears lose practically all their reverence for the 
Lord, and become careless with reference to his Word, 
and with reference to their conduct. Such "receive 
the grace of God in vain;" in some respects, indeed, 
it does them injury, instead of bringing them blessings. 

In our fallen condition we need some strong impellent 
motive, to enable us to live righteously, soberly, 
godly in this present evil world. And if the abnormal 
fear and superstitious dread be removed before a 
love for God, for righteousness and for truth has 
been implanted, the probabilities are that the knowledge 
of God's grace in such will fall upon stony ground. 
But where the spirit of the Lord has been implanted, 
where the spirit of the truth, the holy spirit of Love, 
has begotten to newness of life, where love to the Lord 
and appreciation of his goodness is the ruling and controlling 
element of life, there the increase of knowledge 
of the divine Secret and Covenant will bring increasing 
blessings of heart, of mind and of daily life. (Compare 
Isa. 29:13; 1 John 4:18.) It was for this that the 
Apostle prayed for the early Church, saying,— "That 
ye might be able to comprehend with all saints [the Secret 
of the Lord] the lengths and the breadths, the 
heights and depths of the love of Christ which passeth 
knowledge, that ye might be filled with all the fulness 
of God."-Eph. 3:17-19. 

THE BOOK OF THE COVENANT. 



As we have just seen, the divine blessings are all 
hidden in the Abrahamic Covenant,— to which were 
added because of sin the Mosaic (typical) Covenant 
and its antitype the Covenant in Christ, the New Covenant 
sealed with his blood. 

The Bible is the great Book of these Covenants. 
And it like every other feature is considerably hidden, 
obscured, to the natural man; and its deeper and grander 
presentations can be seen only through the vail of types 
and shadows, parables and symbols. And the privilege 
to look beyond this vail, and to grasp the spirit of 



the truth, is reserved in large degree for the class mentioned 
in our text foregoing:— "The Secret of the Lord 
is with them that reverence him, and he will show them 
his Covenant." 

To this class— them that fear the Lord and have 
his Secret and know his Covenant— the Bible becomes 
a Chart of the Ages, which shows not only the coast 
lines and rocks and sand bars of the six thousand years 
of evil, but also the blessed port then to be reached, 
and the glorious land of blessing and righteousness and 
divine favor— the thousand years of Christ's Millennial 
reign. 

To this same class the Bible is a Compass also, 
which, in connection with the Chart, indicates to them 
the divinely directed route, by which they are to escape 
certain troubles coming upon the world, and by which 
they are to obtain certain trials and experiences which 
will be valuable to them in fitting and preparing them 
to be jointheirs with Christ in the Kingdom. Without 
this Compass they might indeed be able to judge in 
clear weather of some portions of the route, but never 
satisfactorily: and in times of storm and darkness, sun, 
moon and stars obscured, these, like the world, would 
be left to the mercy of their own imperfect judgments 
as to which way to steer, and would feel all the trepidation 
and uncertainty which so many others feel, were 
it not for their Compass. But the Compass can be 
seen, and its directions followed, however dark or obscure 
the natural light; and following its directions the 

R2210 : page 260 

Lord's people are to attain unto their high calling- 
make their calling and election sure. 

The Lord's Word, in the hands of this same class, 
may be compared to a Telescope, whose properly adjusted 
lenses represent the bringing into harmony of 
the human will with the divine will, in Christ. Careful 
adjustment is required that we may get a proper 
focus; but when this condition is obtained, wonderful 
things through the Bible we see. The far off and indistinct 
promises are brought nigh, made clear and 
plain. Hitherto unseen features of the divine character 
and plan are made manifest; and by the aid of this 
Telescope the lengths and breadths, the heights and 
the depths of divine Wisdom and Love and Power may 
be much more closely approximated by our finite 
minds. 

To this same class the Bible is also a Microscope. 
The proper adjustment of its lenses— the complete consecration 
of the human will to the divine— brings to 
bear upon all the little affairs of life a power which 
magnifies them, and shows us their importance as never 
seen by us before, and as cannot be seen by the world 
in general. Through the Bible as a Microscope, we 
can see that all the trifling affairs of the present life 



are potentialities, which, under divine direction, are 

working together for good to "the called ones according 

to his purpose." It magnifies the Law of God, 

shows us how grand, how sublimely perfect and altogether 

reasonable, is every requirement of God. It 

shows us that the weaknesses and imperfections which 

hinder us from measuring up to the standard of that 

perfect Law are inherited from father Adam. It shows us 

that the blemish of sin has affected not only our physical 

systems, but also our mental and moral faculties; and 

thus it points out to us that our own reasoning on every 

subject requires to be re-adjusted and harmonized with 

the spirit of the divine Law; and thus it enables us by 

such mental and moral adjustment to obtain what the 

Apostle calls "the spirit of a sound mind." It not only 

shows us what we could not see before of our own 

shortcomings, but graciously it indicates also how after 

coming into Christ and being covered with his robe 

of righteousness by faith, we may to some extent make 

up for these deficiencies by adding to our faith fortitude, 

and to fortitude knowledge, and to knowledge 

self-control, and to self-control patience, and to patience 

piety, and to piety brotherly-kindness, and to brotherly-kindness 

Love, which things, as they more and more 

abound, will incite us to cultivate fruitfulness, in the 

use of the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ. 

-2 Pet. 1:5-8. 

In view of the blessings attached let us strive more 
and more to retain and to cultivate that true reverence 
for the Lord, which is not only the beginning of wisdom 
but also its end; that through it we may have the 

R2211 : page 260 

benefit and helpful assistance of all the gracious provisions 
which God has made for the progress of those 
who love him, in knowledge and in character; that in 
due time, if we faint not, we may inherit the promises 
and share the glories of our Father and our Lord. 



R2211 : page 260 

LENDING TO THE LORD. 

-SEPTEMBER 5.-2 COR. 9:1-11.— 

"For ye know the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, that, tho he 
was rich, yet for your sakes he became poor, that we through his 
poverty might be rich."— 2 Cor. 8:9. 

OUR lesson inculcates Christian benevolence- 
alms giving. It is addressed to the Corinthian 
Christians and is on behalf of Christians in 
and about Jerusalem. A question arises why collections 



should be made for the Christians at Jerusalem 
more than for the Christians at Corinth. There were 
three reasons: (1) A severe famine had prevailed in 
the vicinity of Jerusalem. (2) Jerusalem was not a 
commercial city, and therefore money was less plentiful. 
(3) It would appear that the classes who received 
the gospel in and about Jerusalem were chiefly the 
poor, and we can readily judge from the open persecutions 
of the truth there that there was also a great deal of 
quiet opposition to all who sympathized with the gospel 
of Christ. As small shop people they were probably 
boycotted; and as laborers they probably were as far 
as possible rejected except as necessity might demand 
their services. On the contrary, the cities of Greece, 
Macedonia and Asia-Minor were prosperous; and as far 
as we may judge the class of society which accepted 
the gospel was in many cases the better element. 

This was indicated in our last lesson by the statement 
that the "chiefs of Asia" dissuaded Paul from 
going before the people at the colosseum. These chiefs 
of Asia were generally quite wealthy and prominent 
men. We remember also in the same lesson the fact 
that the books of magic, which were burned after the 
owners had accepted Christ, represented a very large 
amount of money. Probably, therefore, their owners 
were correspondingly wealthy. We remember also the 
favorable decision of the town clerk at Ephesus; and 
the fact that Tyranus was so in sympathy with the 
Apostle's teaching as to permit the use of his schoolroom. 
We recall the conversion of Serges Paulus, the 
deputy governor, at Paphos; also Dionysius, one of the 
professors in Mars Hill college at Athens; and Damaris 

R2211 : page 261 

of the same city; and Justus of Corinth; and Crispus, 
chief ruler of the synagogue in the same city. 

The question naturally arises, Why should the 
same gospel attract the well-to-do and middle classes in 
Greece and Asia-Minor and Thessalonica, and attract 
few outside the poorer class at Jerusalem? The answer 
would seem to be (1) that among the Jews who had 
long been acquainted with the true God, the true religion 
and the gracious promises of the Messiah, a religious 
pride had developed, especially amongst the 
wealthy and the learned. And because their religious 
system was in advance of every other religious system 
in the world, the learned attributed a like superiority 
to themselves individually— they "trusted in themselves 
that they were righteous, and despised others." 

This was the secret of Israel's being "blinded" to 
the gospel. The leaders and theologians were so self-conscious, 
and relied so implicitly upon their interpretations 
of the divine promises as centering in themselves, 
that they could not regard the humble Nazarene 
and his unlearned followers except as impostors. And 



when, later, the gospel began to be preached to the 
Gentiles their opposition was increased; for it was utterly 
contrary to every thought of their religious pride 
that God would accept either the humble Jews or the 
Gentiles to his favor, and reject themselves, the leading 
representatives of his cause and work. 

But amongst the Gentiles the case was very different: 
while the illiterate masses were firmly bound in 
the superstition of their various religions, those who 
were of an honest mind among the better educated 
were quick to discern that many of the features of their 
own religions were superstitions merely. They had 
probably, previously, been somewhat attracted to the 
Jewish religion as being much more reasonable than 
their own, as we find that the Gentiles readily resorted 
to the Jewish synagogues; but the Jewish religion 
would necessarily be unsatisfactory to them since it 
would appear to be very narrow, limiting the divine 
blessings in a special manner to Israelites— a people 
whom they considered rather inferiors in the arts at 
that time. But, the gospel, throwing wide open the 
door to those who desired righteousness, truth and 
goodness, of every nation, people, kindred and tongue, 
would naturally commend itself to the class we describe 
as being the most reasonable explanation of the Jewish 
doctrines and their grand eventual outcome, and long 
hidden meaning. 

At all events, the saints at Jerusalem were poorer 
than were the saints in Corinth. It was therefore appropriate 
that the Apostle should suggest to the latter 
the propriety of sending a gift to the former. Living 
at a time when the conveniences for transferring money 
were very inferior to the very poorest known to-day, 
the only possible method seemed to be that the various 
congregations should send their gifts at the hand of the 
Apostle when he would go to Jerusalem the following 
year. And Paul's words intimate that the suggestion 
made by him nearly a year before, to the Corinthian 
brethren, had been well received, and the collections 
zealously entered upon. For this reason it was "superfluous" 
for him to write in this connection particulars 
respecting the necessity for and propriety of this 
collection; but he hints to them that there was a bare 
possibility that the work zealously begun a year before 
might not have been patiently carried out, and that 
after he had boasted somewhat to others of their love 
and zeal for the Lord, he would regret if coming to 
them, enroute to Jerusalem, it should be found that 
after all they had failed to have their donation ready. 

In his previous epistle to the Corinthians he had 
suggested methodical charity, saying, "Now concerning 
the collection for the saints, as I have given instructions 
to the Churches at Galatia, even so do ye. 
On the first day of the week let every one of you lay 
by him in store, as God has prospered him, that there 
be no gathering when I come." 



It was the Apostle's experience, as it is the experience 
of all thoughtful people, that systematic charity 
is better than spasmodic charity: not only is the result 
generally larger, but the influence upon the giver is 
more beneficial: it keeps an object before the mind, a 
service to be rendered as unto the Lord. And with 
many the opportunity for serving the Lord's cause with 
money is almost the only opportunity for service. Of 
course, where a consecrated child of God can do so it 
is far better that he should give to the saints after the 
manner of Paul and his traveling associates— giving 
spiritual gifts and blessings, either by public preaching, 
or by house to house visiting: presenting the truth 
either by the printed page or by tongue or both. 

But there are others so circumstanced in life 
through lack of talent, or strength, or opportunity 
(hindered by prior mortgages upon their time— family 
obligations) that practically their only chance for serving 
the Lord and manifesting their love for him is 
through their gifts to his cause and to his people. For 
such to be deprived of the opportunity of exercising 
themselves in the Lord's service in this manner either 
through a lack of a cause needing their assistance, or 
through lack of instruction respecting this method of 
divine service, would be to deprive them of an important 
opportunity of service, and correspondingly to deprive 
them of the blessings which always follow every 
service to the Lord, whatever its character. 

We notice, therefore, that the Apostle felt very 
free to recommend to the Church the grace of giving 
and to even press upon them the fact that their liberality 

R2211 : page 262 

in proportion to their ability, would in a large degree 
be an index of their love for the Lord and the 
gospel. But, here we note in contrast, that the same 
Apostle did not ask alms of these believers when first 
they received the Lord's grace; lest they should in any 
manner get the impression that the gospel was being 
preached from mercenary motives— for lucre's sake. 
Accordingly, we find that rather than mention money 
the Apostle preached to these very same Corinthian 
brethren for more than a year without a suggestion as 
to remuneration; laboring with his own hands at his 
trade of tent-making, rather than be chargeable to any. 
He reminds them of this later on in this same epistle. 
-2 Cor. 11:7-9. 

Let us note also the change which the full appreciation 
of the gospel wrought upon the believers at 
Corinth. At first they were so negligent of their privilege 
that seemingly they never thought of volunteering 
financial assistance to the Apostle while he was 
serving them by the labor of his own hands, and receiving 
some assistance from believers in other places. 
But, after the grace of God entered more fully into 



their hearts and they began to appreciate the value of 
the truth which they had received,— that it had brought 
them priceless blessings of hope and joy and faith and 

R2212 : page 262 

character— they had a zeal, a "forwardness" to do 
something financially in the Lord's service. And now 
that the Apostle was absent from them, and after his 
course had proved to them that he sought not their 
money but themselves, to do them good; he felt free to 
draw their attention to the great blessing that would 
come from liberality in the Lord's cause in proportion 
to their ability and love. 

Urging this matter he gave them a parable, saying, 
"He that soweth sparingly shall reap also sparingly; 
and he that soweth bountifully shall reap also bountifully." 
And this reminds us of the proverb, "There 
is that scattereth, and yet increaseth; and there is that 
withholdeth more than is proper, but it tendeth to poverty. 
The liberal soul shall be made fat: and he that 
watereth shall be watered also himself." (Prov. 1 1:24,25.) 
The evident lesson is that the Lord is pleased 
to see his people cultivate breadth of heart as well as 
breadth of mind;— generosity in proportion to their 
knowledge of him and his generosity. 

The Scriptures nowhere declare that cases of absolute 
privation amongst the Lord's people are proofs 
that at some time in their past lives when possessed of 
means they failed to use a portion of it in charity, in 
the Lord's service; but the inspired words above quoted 
come very close to giving this lesson. At all events, 
it is profitable that we lay this testimony to heart and 
that each child of God henceforth shall be earnestly 
careful that out of the blessings of the Lord coming to 
us all from day to day some measure be carefully, 
prayerfully and lovingly laid aside as seed to be sown 
in the Lord's service according to the best wisdom and 
judgment which he will give us. How many have that 
carefulness for themselves either in using every penny 
as fast as it comes, or in being so interested in laying 
by for the outworking of future plans, that they feel 
they can spare nothing for charity. How many such 
can afterward see that they made a great mistake, when 
their accumulations suddenly vanished, either by reason 
of sickness or accident or bank failure or what not; 
and how then they have good reason to regret that 
they sowed no "seed" after the manner described by 
the Apostle in the sixth verse of our lesson. 

Our Lord showed us how he measures our gifts; 
that he esteems them not according to the amount given, 
but chiefly according to the spirit which prompts 
the gift, when he drew attention to the poor widow 
who cast in two mites into the Lord's treasury. Our 
Lord declared that from the standpoint of his estimation 
the poor widow had cast in a larger sum than any 



of the wealthy who had given merely out of their 
abundance, and not to such an extent that they felt it. 
How many of the Lord's people would be more "fat" 
spiritually to-day, if they would give attention to the 
exercise of this talent, this opportunity for service, we 
cannot say; the Lord only knows. But this lesson 
makes it incumbent upon us to point out a privilege in 
this direction which is within the reach of the very 
poorest. 

Very seldom is it necessary to caution people 
against over-much giving; yet in some instances such 
caution is proper, and in some instances in Scripture 
giving has been restrained. No one should give to the 
extent of causing privation to those dependent upon 
him. Nor should any one give to such an extent as to 
bring upon him financial bankruptcy and cause losses 
to others. The apostolic rule for giving we have quoted 
above. The laying by should be in general, "according 
as the Lord hath prospered him." The degree 
of our prosperity should be the measure of our charities. 
"The spirit of a sound mind" is inculcated by 
the Scriptures, upon this as upon every subject. 

"The Lord loveth a cheerful giver." And gifts 
in any other spirit than a cheerful one might just as 
well not be given: they will bring no blessing. The 
Lord does not appreciate such giving: it has no "sweet 
odor" in his estimation. The gift, to be appreciated 
of the Lord, must be a thank-offering, prompted by a 
realization of a debt of everlasting gratitude, to him 
from whom cometh every good and every perfect gift. 
And to such, the Apostle assures us, "God is able to 
make all things abound." All who give anything in 
the divine service, time, talent, strength, money or influence 

R2212: page 263 

—any or all of these— will find themselves proportionately 

abounding in the different graces; because 

such are in the right attitude of heart to grow in grace. 

But, the Apostle seems to imply further that such 
will have "sufficiency in all things" as well as be able 
to "abound in every good work." In thinking of sufficiency 
in any direction the condition of the mind must 
be taken into account. Sufficiency may not mean luxury 
and every comfort, but "all sufficiency" is gained 
always where there is "godliness with contentment." 
In proof that he is inculcating no new theory respecting 
the divine care over those who are seeking to scatter 
to others a portion of the blessings that come to 
them, temporal or spiritual, the Apostle quotes from 
the Psalms. -112:9. 

When in the last verse the Apostle speaks of 
"being enriched in everything," we are not to understand 
him to mean that the Lord's people will all be 
enriched financially. The Apostle himself was an example 
of how the Lord's people do not become wealthy. 



He is speaking rather of the enrichment of the heart, 

as he says in another place, speaking of himself and co-laborers 

in the gospel work: We are "as poor, but 

making many rich;"— rich in hope, rich in faith, rich 

in love and all the various concomitant graces which 

these imply. 

Our Golden Text reminds us of the grandest example 
of self-denial in the interest of others on record 
—the gift by our Lord Jesus of himself for the world. 
He was rich in the possession of the spiritual nature 
and its honors and glory, yet for our sakes he became 
poor, taking the human nature that he might redeem 
us; and to this end he surrendered even life itself at 
Calvary, that through his sacrifice we might become 
rich:— become possessed of divine favor, and the riches 
of divine grace in Christ; even jointheirship with him 
who is now our exalted Lord at the right hand of divine 
Majesty. But to attain this jointheirship with 
him, we must study to be like him, to have his spirit; 
and like him desirous of sharing whatever he may give 
us of either temporal or spiritual favors with others, 
particularly the "household of faith;"— either to feed 
or clothe it, spiritually or temporally, as circumstances 
may dictate. "The liberal soul shall be made fat." 

R2215 : page 263 

SCATTER SEEDS OF KINDNESS. 



"Loving words will cost but little, 

Journeying up the hill of life; 
But they make the weak and weary 

Stronger, braver for the strife. 
Do you count them only trifles? 

What to earth are sun and rain? 
Never was a kind word wasted; 

Never one was said in vain. 

"When the cares of life are many, 

And its burdens heavy grow 
For the ones who walk beside you, 

If you love them, tell them so. 
What you count of little value 

Has an almost magic power, 
And beneath that cheering sunshine 

Hearts will blossom like a flower. 

"So as up life's hill we journey, 
Let us scatter all the way 

Kindly words, to be as sunshine 
In the dark and cloudy day. 

Grudge no loving word, my brother, 
As along through life you go, 

To the ones who journey with you; 



If you love them, tell them so." 



R2212 : page 263 

LIVING THE NEW LIFE. 

--SEPT. 12.-ROM. 12:9-21.- 

"Be not overcome of evil, but overcome evil with good."— Rom. 12:21. 

WHILE the Apostle Paul was a wonderful logician, 

and in his writings has set forth the 

elements of Christian faith along doctrinal lines more 

than any other apostle, yet we notice that he is in pursuit 

of a certain object: he is not beating the air, not 

discussing theological points for the sake of making an 

argument or showing his own ability. His arguments 

along doctrinal lines lead the reader in every instance 

onward and upward, as a stairway, to a grand upper 

room of perfected Christian character: and nowhere is 

this more manifest than in his epistle to the Romans. 

Beginning with the distinctions between the Jew, informed 

respecting God, and to some extent respecting 

his will and his plan, and contrasting these with the 

general ignorance prevailing amongst all classes of Gentiles, 

"without God and having no hope in the world," 

he carries the mind forward, pointing out how the degradation 

had come, and how the knowledge of God had 

reached Israel first, not because Israelites were better, 

but because of the divine favor, "grace," "election." 

He points out nevertheless that "the Law made 
nothing perfect," but was merely a pedagogue (a servant 
whose business it was to take children to school); 
thus the Law was to bring Israel to Christ, the great 

R2212 : page 264 

Teacher, that they might learn of him. He points out 
further that, while Israel was seeking divine favor, 
they failed to get the chief blessing because they were 
not thoroughly candid with themselves, and hence mistook 
the mission of Moses' Law. They hypocritically 
claimed that they kept that Law inviolate and were entitled 
to its blessings,— eternal life, etc.,— whereas they 
should have admitted that the Law was so grand and 
so perfect, and themselves so fallen from perfection, 
that they were unable to keep it; and they should have 
looked to the Lord for help. In this attitude of mind 
they would have been ready to receive eternal life as a 
gift, through Jesus Christ our Lord; and would have 
given up seeking it by the perfection of their own works. 
So the Apostle points out that Israel failed because 
they sought the blessing not by faith but by works. Thus 
"Israel hath not obtained that which he seeketh for; 



but the election hath obtained it, and the rest were 
blinded." (Rom. 1 1:7.) He then points out that this 
fall of Israel into blindness and the calling of a peculiar 
people from among the Gentiles to complete the "elect" 
company was foreknown of God and declared by him 
through the prophets. (Rom. 9 and 10.) But he shows 
that Israel is not cast off forever, and that when the 
elect class is complete all Israel shall be saved from the 

R2213 : page 264 

blindness into which they stumbled in the rejection of 
Christ; and that their recovery then will be the signal 
for blessings upon the whole world. 
-Rom. 11:15,25,32. 

It is after eleven chapters of argumentative, logical, 
beautiful, instructive, blessed reasoning that the Apostle 
reaches the crown of his argument, saying (12:1), 
"I beseech you therefore, brethren, by the mercies of 
God [presented in the previous eleven chapters] that 
ye present your bodies a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable 
to God, which is your reasonable service." He is 
addressing the "elect" body of Christ, of which a part 
was being gathered from among the Jews and the remainder 
being made up from those called from among 
the Gentiles. These should know what are the terms 
and conditions upon which God hath "called" them; 
viz., (1) to suffer with Christ in this present time, and 
(2) to be glorified and reign with him in the coming 
age, to bless the world. These should know the reason 
for their sufferings and the character which God would 
develop in them, and without which they would not be 
"fit for the Kingdom." It is concerning some of these 
characteristics, necessary to those who would make 
their "calling and election sure," that our present 
lesson treats. 

"Let love be without dissimulation." He had already 
explained the necessity for love; but he now puts 
us on guard against a merely feigned love, which would 
only outwardly appear kind and polite. The true spirit 
of love, a holy spirit, will not be a dissimulating one, 
a hypocritical one: the love will be genuine, heartfelt 
as well as mouth expressed. This love is to be toward 
God, and toward all in proportion as they are God-like, 
or striving to be so. It is to be a love of that which is 
good, right, pure, true. 

"Abhor that which is evil." We are not merely to 
avoid doing that which is evil, not merely to have no love 
or affinity for evil; but more than these we are to hate, 
to abhor evil. And as the love for God and for all 
things true and pure and making for righteousness is 
to be cultivated, so the abhorrence of sin and impurity 
of every kind is to be cultivated, so that the stronger 
we become in Christian character the more intense will 
be our love for the good and pure and true, and the 
more intense will be our opposition to the untrue, the 



impure, the sinful. The more we learn of the beautiful 
harmonies of this heavenly grace of love, and the 
more they become the melodies of our own hearts, the 
more distressing and repugnant and abhorrent will sin 
and selfishness, "the spirit of the world," be to us: just 
as discords in music grate upon our ears in proportion 
as our knowledge and appreciation of musical harmonies 
grows. As holiness and sin are opposites, so our 
feelings toward these must be represented by the sentiments 
of love and hatred. To grow cool in love for 
righteousness, is to lose some of the abhorrence for sin. 
Let us therefore cultivate in ourselves hatred for sin, 
selfishness impurity and every evil way, that we may 
find it the easier to cultivate in our hearts the beautiful 
graces of the holy spirit. 

"Cleave to that which is good." The thought is, 
adhere to, be cemented to, that which is good. There 
is a constant tendency not only from our own fallen 
natures, but also from the world and the devil, to separate 
from that which is good and pure and noble. 
And we must resolutely determine, that at all hazards 
and for all time, by the Lord's grace, we will adhere 
to him,— the truth, the way, the life. 

"Be kindly affectioned." The thought here seems 
to be: Cultivate among yourselves that kind of affection 
which properly belongs in a family, where the 
blessing or honor of one member signifies the blessing, 
honor and advancement of all. Perhaps the Apostle 
thus delicately suggests the impropriety of any manifestation 
of affection except such as would be proper 
between brethren: as we read in another place, "Love 
as brethren."— 1 Pet. 3:8. 

"In honor preferring one another." That is, rejoicing 
more if honor come to another than if it had 
come to self. Our hearts should be so unselfish 
that we would take pleasure in seeing honor and prosperity 
come to another, and rejoice in it: and so sympathetic 
that a brother's failure would cause us as much 

R2213 : page 265 

chagrin as if it were our own failure. This is the holy 
spirit which unfeignedly rejoices with those who rejoice, 
and weeps with those who weep. 

"Not slothful in your affairs." The word here 
does not refer specially to mercantile business, but to 
affairs in general. The class addressed, who are seeking 
to make their calling and election sure, are to "do 
all things as unto the Lord;" and nothing done for the 
Lord should be done in a slovenly manner. We are in 
a world full of opportunities for good or evil: there are 
few on our side, the side of God and of righteousness; 
and whoever realizes this, and is fully consecrated to 
the Lord, will certainly be aroused from slothfulness 
which is natural to many in the fallen condition. If 
the battle of truth against error, of light against darkness, 



does not awaken us to energy in the Lord's service, 
it marks an unfavorable condition of heart. And 
to the consecrated child of God, every affair of life- 
eating, drinking and all other business in this 
present life— is to help us to serve the interests of our 
Master's cause. 

"Fervent in spirit." This is placed in contrast 
with sloth: if as stewards of divine mercy and truth we 
are slothful, it is because we are cool in our love to the 
Lord; hence the Apostle's instruction that we should 
be hot, fervent in spirit. The Greek word here translated 
"fervent" signifies to be hot, to boil. We are 
reminded of our Lord's words to the Church of Laodicea, 
boastful of its works but luke-warm in the spirit 
of its love. "I know thy works, that thou art neither 
cold nor hot: I would that thou wert cold or hot. So 
then, because thou art lukewarm, and neither cold nor 
hot, I will spew thee out of my mouth." Let all who 
have received the Lord's spirit take heed lest they get 
into a lukewarm condition and lose the Lord's favor: let 
them cultivate rather a growing appreciation of the mercies 
of God, which growing appreciation as fuel will 
add fervency to our love and zeal for his truth, and 
for purity in our own hearts, and for service to others. 

"Rejoice in hope." We are not to expect to have 
much in the present life to rejoice in, if we are faithful 
to our "calling;" because, "through much tribulation 
shall ye enter the Kingdom." Our rejoicing is to 
be in hope— looking into the future. The eye of faith 
is to see what the natural eye cannot see, the crown of 
life and all the glorious things "which God hath in 
reservation for them that love him [fervently]." And 
here is the advantage of doctrinal knowledge: it inspires 
hope; it gives a foundation for hope. Knowledge 
cannot bring us to the Kingdom; but it may be a great 
help in building us up and preparing us for it, by constantly 
holding before us the hopes which God designs 
should stimulate and encourage us while running the 
race for the great prize. 

"Patient in tribulation." Our word tribulation is 
derived from the Latin tribulum, the name of a roller 
or threshing machine used in olden times for cleaning 
wheat, removing from it the outer husk or chaff. How 
appropriate the thought when applied to the Lord's 
consecrated people, who in the Scriptures are symbolized 
by wheat. Our new natures are the kernel, 
the real grain: yet this treasure or valuable part is covered 
with the husk of earthly conditions. And in order 
that the wheat may be made properly ready for the 
"garner" and for usefulness, it is necessary that each 
grain shall pass through the tribulation necessary to 
separate those qualities which, until separated, render 
us unfit for the future service to which we are called 
of the Lord. In proportion as we are able to realize 
our own imperfections, and the perfect will of God 
concerning us, we will be enabled to bear patiently, 



and even with a certain kind of rejoicing, all the tribulations 
which the Master shall see best to let come upon 
us. "We glory in tribulations also."— Rom. 5:3. 

"Instant in prayer." No advice that the Apostle 
could give to the class addressed could be more vitally 
important than this. 

"Ah, whither could we flee for aid when tempted, desolate, dismayed? 
Or how the host of sin defeat had suffering saints no mercy-seat. 

Prayer, communion with God, is indispensably 
necessary to our spiritual welfare; and the appreciation 
of the privilege of communion with the Most High and 
with our Redeemer, or the lack of such appreciation, 
as the case may be, indicates tolerably clearly our fervency 
or our coldness with reference to the things of 
the Lord. People may be fervent in serving schemes 
or plans of their own, or human systems and theories, 
and have little desire for prayer; but those who serve 
the Lord and his truth from a hot, fervent heart, will 
so realize their imperfection and their own inability in 
the divine service, that they will desire and will continually 
seek the Master's guidance and direction with 
reference to the service they are rendering to him. 

If, therefore, we ever feel a growing indifference, 
either to private prayer or to public worship or to social 
prayer-meetings, we may be assured that it is a very 
dangerous sign of one of two things. (1) Either that 
our love is growing cold, or (2) that our love is misplaced, 
misdirected, placed upon some earthly scheme 
or ambition, and is not fervent toward the Lord. And 
whichever is found to be the difficulty should be corrected 
at once. The appreciation of prayer, like the 
growth of love, and like the increase of fervency of 
spirit, is a matter for development; and the best fuel, 
as above suggested, is the consideration of the divine 

R2214 : page 265 

mercies already enjoyed. 

"Distributing to the distresses of saints." The 
Greek word here rendered "distributing" signifies to 

R2214 : page 266 

make common. The thought evidently is, that altho 
Communism is not encouraged in Scripture, nor is it the 
best method in this present time, while it is better that 
each should have the responsibility largely for his own 
affairs and be the steward of his own talents, nevertheless 
that feeling of brotherhood is to prevail amongst 
the saints, which would "make common" to others of 
the spiritual family, such things as are necessities to 
them. Love, not Selfishness, is to control. 

"Given to hospitality." The Apostle's language 
here does not signify if requested we should not be inhospitable; 
but it means much more: literally, it signifies 
following after hospitality— going out after, or 



seeking for opportunities for the exercise of hospitality. 
This principle is as applicable to the poor as to the 
rich. If what we have is plain or common, the hospitable 
use of it will just as truly show our heart-intentions 
as tho it were the best. Some, we fear, fail to 
cultivate this grace; and if they exercise hospitality are 
inclined to give better than they have, and perhaps 
would go into debt in order to entertain more lavishly 
than their circumstances would justify. This is wrong. 
It is not cultivating the grace which the Apostle here 
inculcates, but is cultivating a very evil weed,— pride. 
Let us learn not only to love without dissimulation, 
but also to follow after hospitality without dissimulation, 
without seeking to show off better conditions than 
are really ours. 

"Bless them which persecute you." This is a quotation 
from the sermon on the mount. It addresses a 
mind enlightened by the divine Word, that has thus 
drawn against it the opposition of Satan, and of those 
whose understandings he has darkened. It means an 
opposition of persecution not for wrong-doing, or as 
busy-bodies in other men's matters, or for nonsensical 
peculiarities, but persecution for the truth's sake. It 
implies a heart full of love and sympathy and pity; for 
no other heart could really and truly bless its persecutors 
and wish them no evil, but good. This is the kind 
of a heart, overflowing with the holy spirit of the Lord, 
that is able to rejoice with those in prosperity, to weep 
with those who sorrow and even able to forget its own 
tribulations or adversities. 

"Be of the same disposition toward each one." Be 
sympathetic toward the very humblest brother or sister 
as well as toward the most refined. "Mind not high 
things." Do not allow your affections and sentiments 
merely to go out along ecstatic lines, but bring your 
mind down so as to enter into sympathy with those of 
God's people who financially and intellectually are in 
a low estate. 

"Be not wise in your own conceits." This is a further 
injunction to humility. Those who are always 
minding high things and overlooking the humbler ones 
of the Lord's people usually do so because of too high 
an opinion of their own wisdom and intelligence. Few 
things more blemish an otherwise developed Christian 
character than a conceit which separates him or her 
from the humblest of the Lord's flock. Moreover, 
there is no more dangerous thing than such an opinion 
of one's own wisdom. This condition is described 
as being "heady," "high minded." It naturally leads 
into error, and to a fall from both the letter and spirit 
of the truth. "Pride goeth before destruction, and a 
haughty spirit before a fall." Let all beware of this 
terrible disease. Nothing is a greater hindrance and 
stumbling-block to the ministers of the nominal churches 
to-day (hindering them from receiving the truth) 
than this kind of pride in their own wisdom, which 



leads to and is distinguished by the unscriptural division 
of believers into "clergy" and "laity." And there 
is equal and even greater danger along this line 
for those who have received present truth, and who are 
seeking to minister it to others. Let all of the Lord's 
people, especially those who have a little more knowledge, 
and who attempt to make known the riches of 
divine grace, be specially on guard against attacks of 
the enemy from this quarter. 

"Recompense no man evil for evil." Much of the 
previous instruction of this lesson relates to our dealings 
with the brotherhood; but here the Apostle points 
out a general line of conduct toward all men. There 
is a general tendency on the part of well-intentioned 
people to recognize a line of justice and a desire to vindicate 
justice and to punish evil doers. The Apostle 
points out that this is not the rule governing the Lord's 
family. It is not improper for the world to have laws 
and regulations for criminals, in the interest of society; 
and the Apostle is not discussing those, nor finding 
fault with them. He is treating rather of the minor 
affairs of life in which various evils may be inflicted 
and resented without coming directly under the control 
of civil laws. The policy of the Christian is to be not 
along the lines of slothfulness, animosities, revenges 
and perpetual conflicts, but to the contrary of all this; 
because of his greater knowledge of how sin came into 
the world, and how all mankind are fallen mentally, 
morally and physically, and how God has sympathy with 
the poor groaning creation and has provided a ransom 
for all, and that in due time a restitution for all shall 
be possible. And he is to have a heart so full of sympathy 
with this plan, that he will be generous, and 
God-like, toward the sin-blinded ones— anxious chiefly 
for the opening of the eyes of their understandings, 
and for an opportunity of blessing and helping them, 
rather than entertaining feelings of revenge. 

"Provide things honest in the sight of all men." 
Realizing that part of the service which the Lord requires 

R2214 : page 267 

of him is an honest provision for the necessities 
of himself and family, the true Christian will seek to 
live up to this reasonable requirement. If he cannot 
obtain employment at that which he prefers, he will 
be bound in honesty to take some other employment, 
in order to meet his obligations. Few things are more 
likely to bring dishonor upon God's people in the sight 
of the world than dishonesty. Of course, none of the 
saints would steal; but there is another way of being 
dishonest, which seems to slip by many consciences 
under certain circumstances. This is the dishonesty 
of purchasing on credit by actually or impliedly promising 
a payment at no distant date when there are no 
assurances of ability to pay at that date, as the merchant 



is led to presume. Some indeed seem to encourage 
themselves in such dishonest methods, persuading 
themselves that they are exercising "faith" in God, that 
he will provide means for the payment of their debts. 
This is a great mistake. God has never authorized any 
one to go into debt for him, and such a faith has no 
backing in God's Word. On the contrary, he instructs 
his people not to go into debt; but he says, "Owe no man 
anything." A good plan is to always live within our 
income and, if possible, to "lay by in store that we 
may have to give to him that needeth." 

"Live as peaceably with all men as lieth within the 
range of your possibilities." With the various crooked 
natures of the world, and with our own imperfect dispositions 
(more and more coming under control of grace 
however) it will be a difficult matter to avoid all friction. 
But while in the interest of peace we are to submit 
to trifling wrongs and injustices with good grace, 
yet there is a place where we must draw the line; a 
place where our desire for peace must not control; that 
is, whenever a principle is involved. Here is a great 
difficulty: those who are naturally peaceable, will be 
tempted to pursue peace even at the expense of principle, 
and in conflict with the divine commands; on the 
other hand many of those who are firmest in defense of 
righteous principles are inclined to be combative, and 
have great need to guard themselves and to cultivate 
this disposition for peace, which is a part of the divine 
character which we are to copy. The rule should be, 
"First pure [truthful and loyal to righteousness] then 
peaceable."— James 3:17. 

"Dearly beloved, avenge not yourselves"; but preferably 
get out of the way of your opponents and their 
wrath, remembering that it is written, "Vengeance is 
mine; I will repay, saith the Lord." Hence we do not 
need to feel that justice needs to be vindicated at our 
hands. God will take care of the vindication of his 
own justice. If it were left in our hands to mete out 
justice to those who mistreat us and say all manner of 
evil against us falsely for Christ's sake, we would 
doubtless make many mistakes. We should therefore 
be glad that the matter is not in our hands at present, 
and that divine wisdom and justice will repay to evil 
doers with greater mercy than we would probably be 
able to exercise. Our feelings, therefore, should be 
largely those of sympathy and pity for wrong doers, 
remembering that surely either in the present life or 
in that which is to come a man shall reap according 
to his present sowing. 

For these reasons and in order to cultivate in us 
more of the divine mind, we are instructed to be kind 
to our enemies and not to see them want for necessities 
of life. Such treatment will be more likely than any 
other to do them good, and to win them as friends. We 
are not, however, to treat them kindly in order to see 
how badly we can make them feel under it. We are 



to treat them kindly because love is the principle of 
our nature, the "new commandment" of our Lord and 
Master, the holy spirit which is more and more actuating 
us. We are to treat them thus, regardless of 
whether we ever melt them by our kindness in the 
present life or not. 

R2215 : page 267 

"Be not overcome of evil." We are to remember 
that there is a constant conflict between good and evil, 
that each has its servants, or soldiers, and that we have 
enlisted on the side of good, under the Captain of our 
salvation, with the engagement that we will "fight a 
good fight." We are never, therefore, to take up or 
to use evil words or methods or manners. To do so 
is temporarily to join the enemy, or to admit that his 
implements and methods are better than those of the 
Captain to whom we belong. To answer anger with 
anger, evil report with evil report, bitter words with 
bitter words, slander with slander, persecution with 
persecution, blow with blow, or any of these, would be 
to endeavor to overcome evil with evil. This which 
is natural to our fallen natures is what we are commanded 
to avoid, that we may the more thoroughly 
cultivate the new nature. To be misled by the adversary 
to use his methods in any of these ways is to 
be overcome of evil. 

"Overcome evil with good." The fact that the Lord 
so directs us is proof (1) that it is practicable and (2) 
that it is preferable. Faith accepts these declarations 
of divine wisdom on the subject; and experience endorses 
or ratifies them. Whoever has tried, has found 
that evil can be overcome with good, in many instances. 
Not infrequently, however, all the good that you 
can do in return for evil will work no change in the 
evil-doer; he goes on in his evil way, is more insistent, 
and more intolerant. Nevertheless, the course of the 
Lord's people cannot vary; they are authorized to do 
only good, and to keep on doing good whether it shall 
melt the opposition or not. In this, we are but following 

R2215 : page 268 

the divine example. God causes the rain to fall 
upon the crops of the good and of the evil; he causes 
the sunshine to come indiscriminately, upon the just 
and the unjust. "His tender mercies are over all his 
works." And even by and by, when his vengeance 
shall be exercised, it will still be in love and kindness; 
(1) that those who will may be benefited by the 
discipline of trouble, and (2) that those who will 
not benefit may be destroyed from among the people; 
to the end that their baneful influence may be removed 
forever. Let us all more and more seek to live the 
new life. 



R2215 : page 268 

INTERESTING LETTERS. 



MR. M. L. MCPHAIL, Illinois. 

DEAR FRIEND AND BROTHER:-It was through a 
recent letter received from Mr. C. T. Russell that I 
obtained your name and address. And I now take pleasure 
in penning you a few lines. 

You do not know— O yes! I think you do,— but 
certainly only a few can know, what exceeding blessedness 
has come to me through my brief acquaintance 
with Mr. Russell and his works. And how I long for more! 

I am a middle-aged man of 40. I was brought up 
a Christian from my mother's knee. 

Eleven years ago (about), I lost my sweet wife, 
after a marriage of 2-1/2 years. She was a devoted 
Christian, so good, so beautiful, so true; for her sweet 
sake I could willingly have died. But God took her 
from me, leaving me with no children, no cares, but 
a crushed spirit, a broken heart and almost a rebellious 
inclination. But these extremities set me to thinking 
as I had never thought before. 

I have long felt that Christian religion ought to 
be a great deal more or a great deal less than that 
usually presented either by pen or pulpit. I accordingly 
went into the ministry in the Methodist Church. 
And while I enjoyed working for my Master according 
to my limited knowledge and ability, I learned to 
feel more and more that the Methodist Church did not 
mean business: did not believe what it presented nor 
try to present what it did believe. 

After working hard for 2-1/2 years I was obliged to 
stop from nervous prostration. And really, the teaching 
of this church is enough to prostrate the nerves of 
anybody who is honest enough to work consistently in 
harmony with such views. Thus I left the pulpit: but 
I could not leave off thinking. Last winter I advertised 
in the Chicago Record for truth, thus,— 
PERSONAL NOTICE. 

Correspondence wanted from any one who is a candidate for absolute 
and abstract truth. Address: Box 142, , 111. 

This ad was echoed and enlarged by the Tribune, 
and I received many answers: among them VOL. I. of 
MILLENNIAL DAWN, a copy of the WATCH TOWER and 
"What Say the Scriptures about Hell?" These were 
sent me by a brother Dixon, of Iowa, and this was the 
first that I ever heard of the good people at Allegheny. 
But I have feasted on it since that time. 

Then it was, upon inquiry concerning who and how 
many accepted this interpretation of the Word, that I 



learned of the little band so near as Chicago. Now it 
so happens that I expect to spend two or three days in 
Chicago some time in September (perhaps before the 
middle). I have a number of friends in and near the 
city, and I think I would like to meet some of you 
people and have a nice long talk with you personally, 
if it be agreeable to you. 
I am Yours in Christ, R. W. LOVERING. 



California. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-Quite accidentally, 
the other day, I became acquainted with a miner, returned 
to these parts from Alaska. He has done fairly 
well there. 

I found that he did not believe in "One word of 
the Bible, not one word from beginning to end of the 
book!" I told him there was a surprise in store 
for him, and gave him two TOWERS and lent him VOL. 
I. of MILLENNIAL DAWN. A few days after I saw him 
again before he had finished VOL. I., and he said: "I 
am going back to Alaska early in March, and want to 
take all those books with me!" I am sure he is now 
well on the road to grasp the truth. 

Will these be the first of the DAWNS to go to the 
Arctic Circle? If so please let the TOWER readers 
know that Mr. Walker has the honor of God to bear 
the Light manifested at the close of the Gospel age into 
the Arctic regions. 

Yours very truly, ALFRED R. PEARSON. 



Tennessee. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I write you that you 
may know how the Lord's few are getting along at this 
place. We have had six meetings from place to place 
since I wrote you last, and had a soul refreshing time 
at each gathering. But as our homes are so scattered 
over the neighborhood that house to house meetings 
are very inconvenient, I have fitted up a good house on 
my place, at the edge of our little town, to be used as 
a meeting house for God's people. To-morrow will be 
our first gathering at our new meeting place. I pray 
the Lord may bless us in our effort. 

Last Saturday the Baptist church, which is three 
miles from here, held a meeting in which they proposed 
to discuss among themselves what they call the Russell 
doctrine. The questions were asked through a 
question box. Three important questions,— "To what 
extent does the atonement reach?" "How far does the 
Redemption extend?" "Is there to be a restitution 
of all things?"— were assigned to one Burl. Henry, said 
to be the ablest minister in the Baptist Northern Association. 
Mr. Henry answered those three questions 



in broad terms as taught in the MILLENNIAL DAWN. 
Then they all rose up and told Mr. Henry that he would 
have to stop advocating such doctrine, or they would 
turn him out of the church; but Mr. Henry frankly 
told them that he did not care if they did turn him out 
of their church, that they could not stop him from 
preaching this Gospel of the Kingdom, except they 
stopped his breath. Thus it is, one by one, they keep 
coming as the Lord's sheep to his bountiful provisions. 

May the Lord bless you in your every effort to 
spread the truth. Yours in Love and Christian 
fellowship, G. E. TOLIVER. 



page 269 

VOL. XVIII. SEPTEMBER 15, 1897. No. 18. 



CONTENTS. 



Millennial Dawn, Vol. IV 270 

Views from the Watch Tower 271 

The Coal-Miner's Strike 271 

"Zionism" Advocated 273 

The Lambeth Conference 274 

Poem: Hear Thou My Prayer 275 

Falling Away from Steadfastness 275 

Is Faith in Christ Necessary? 278 

Paul's Heart Revealed 279 

Paul's Last Journey to Jerusalem 281 

Interesting Letters 283 

page 270 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
--ADDRESS TO- 
TOWER PUBLISHING CO., BIBLE HOUSE, 58 & 60 ARCH ST., 
ALLEGHENY (NORTH PITTSBURG), PA., U.S.A. 

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 

INCLUDES A SUBSCRIPTION TO "THE OLD THEOLOGY TRACTS"-QUARTERLY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, N.Y. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, 

OR REGISTERED. FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN 

MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS: 

Those of the interested, who by reason of old age or accident, or 
other adversity are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, 
if they will send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and 
requesting the paper. 



R2223 : page 270 

MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. IV., 



SPECIAL ISSUE, 
WILL REPRESENT FOUR ISSUES OF THIS JOURNAL: 
OCT. 1 AND 15, AND NOV. 1 AND 15. 

WE EXPECT 
TO BEGIN MAILING IT OCTOBER 1, 1897. 
IT WILL BE SENT TO 
ALL WATCH TOWER SUBSCRIBERS NOT THEN IN ARREARS 
AS AND FOR THOSE NUMBERS, 
WITHOUT EXTRA CHARGE. 
REGULAR PRICE IN CLOTH BINDING $1.25, 
IN LEATHERETTE 50 CENTS, IN PAPER COVERS 35 CENTS 
PER VOLUME--656 PAGES. 



R2216 : page 271 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 



WELL has the Prophet described our times, 

saying, "The great day of the Lord is near, 

it is near, and hasteth greatly, even the voice [sound] 

of the day of the Lord." (Zeph. 1:14.) He who cannot 

hear the "voice" to-day is deaf indeed: "He that hath 

an ear let him hear," saith the Lord. The "voice" of 

complaint for some time back has been from the farmers, 

"the reapers," who just now are temporarily pacified 

by large crops and good prices,— brought to them 

through the adversity of their fellow creatures in famine-stricken 

India, and a shortage elsewhere— a pacification 

which will probably not last more than another 

year or two, except as war or famine or other calamities 

may be permitted of the Lord to grant temporary 

respite. 

But now the "voice" of woe comes from another 
quarter: from the miners of bituminous coal, who claim 
that they cannot possibly endure longer the strain of 
competition, which, through idleness and in other ways, 
reduces their wages sometimes as low as $3.00 per 
week. They have "struck," demanding reform measures 
and better pay. To make their "strike" successful, 
they claim it is necessary to induce all, or nearly 
all, miners to join them; and to this end they have 
formed "marching bands" to endeavor peaceably to 
induce miners still at work to join in the strike. 

The coal-mine owners have ordered the marchers 
off their property, as they of course have a right to do; 
but in addition, by going before the courts and swearing 



that they believe these "marching bands" intend 
injury to their property and to the persons of their 
miners now employed they have induced the courts to 
issue Injunctions, commanding the "marching bands" 
to disperse and not to march on the roads within a 
certain radius of the mines. The strikers obeyed as respects 
"bands," but in groups of two or three and singly 
they walked along the highways and shouted to the 
miners at work to come out and join in the strike for 
living wages. But the law of injunction seems to have 
deprived the strikers from using even that liberty. It 
is not to be wondered at, that this feature of Injunction 
is criticized as contrary to the spirit of liberty and the 
Constitutional rights of the American people. 

Nevertheless the majority of the well-to-do and 
wealthy seem to view the matter in the same light as do 
the courts, and to be willing to infringe the Constitutional 
rights of the laborer for the preservation of peace. 
But it will be found that such a peace is purchased at 
too high a cost. That the strikers have just cause for 
striking is generally admitted and even by some of the 
operators; and that generally they have conducted 
themselves with great moderation and patience is also 
conceded. 

The groundwork for this moderation lay in the 
fact that they hoped to succeed by virtue of the justice 
of their cause: but now when they find that the Courts 
of Justice are prejudiced against them so as to deprive 
them, as criminals, of the liberty of their own highways, 
in anticipation that they may become criminals, can we 
wonder that their faith and hope for peaceable methods 
of redressing their grievances are blighted? No indeed. 
Do they not claim with justice that they have the right 
as freemen to assemble unarmed for the discussion of 
their welfare, as truly as the mine-owners may meet at 
hotels or other rendezvous for the discussion of their 
interests and to persuade each other pro or con? 

Of course there are occasions when Court injunctions 
are both proper and necessary, and it may be difficult 
at times to decide where the line should be drawn; 
but surely the wealthy and the Courts, if not blind to 

R2216 : page 272 

the true situation and deaf to "the voice of the day of 
the Lord," would avoid utterly discouraging the lower 
classes by destroying their confidence in the administration 
of justice: nothing else so quickly breeds the 
spirit of anarchy. 

Hearken to the "Voice of the Day of the Lord" 
from St. Louis, sounding into the ears of the civilized 
world through the daily Press:— 

"St. Louis, Aug. 31.— The conference of labor 
leaders of the country, which has been in session here 
two days, finished its work this evening. The meeting 
was productive of several sensational speeches and 



many resolutions. The platform as presented by the 
committee reads in part as follows:— 

"The fear of the more watchful fathers of the republic 
has been justified. The judiciary has become 
supreme. We witness a political phenomenon absolutely 
new in the history of the world; a republic prostrate 
at the feet of judges appointed to administer its 
laws. They acknowledge no superior on earth, and 
their despotic deeds recall Milton's warning to his 
countrymen: 'Who bids a man rule over him above 
law, may bid as well a savage beast.' 

"Under the cunning form of injunctions, courts 
have assumed to enact criminal laws, and, after thus 
drawing to themselves the power of legislation, have 
repealed the bill of rights, and for violation of those 
court made laws have denied the accused the right of 
trial by jury. 

"The exercise of the commonest rights of freemen 
—the right of assembly, the right of free speech, the 
right of traveling the public highway— have by legislation, 
under the form of injunctions, been made a 
crime, and armed forces disperse as mobs people daring 
in company to exercise these rights. 

Having drawn to themselves all the powers of the 
Federal Government until Congress and Presidents 
may act only by judicial permission, the Federal Judges 
have begun the subjugation of sovereign states, so that, 
unless a check is soon put upon the progress of usurpation, 
in a short time no government but the absolute 
despotism of federal judges will exist anywhere over 
any portion of American soil. 

"Whereas, appeals to Congress and to the courts 
for relief are fruitless, since the legislative, as well as 
the executive and judicial powers are under the control 
of the capitalistic class, so that it has come to pass in 
this 'free country,' that while cattle and swine have 
a right to the public highways, Americans, so called 
freemen, have not. 

"Whereas, our capitalistic class, as is again shown 
in the present strike, is armed, and has not only policemen, 
marshals, sheriffs and deputies, but also a regular 
army and militia, in order to enforce government 
by injunction, suppressing lawful assemblage, free 
speech and the right to the public highway; while, on 
the other hand, the laboring men of the country are 
unarmed and defenceless, contrary to the words and 
spirit of the Constitution of the United States; therefore, 
be it 

"Resolved, That we hereby set apart Friday, the 
third day of September, 1897, as a 'Good Friday' for 
the cause of suffering labor in America and contribute 
the earnings of that day to the support of our struggling 
brothers, the miners, and appeal to every union 
man and every friend of labor throughout the country;" 
etc., etc., etc. 

"Mr. Debs was then called for and said: 



"I believe the gravity of the industrial situation 
in this country is well understood. It is quite evident 
the delegates to this convention are cognizant of the 
fact that civil liberty is dead in America. I have said 
and say again,— For the last time, I have appealed to 
the courts for justice, and shall appeal to them no more. 
The American Railway Union expended $45,000 to 
have the question of civil rights tested in the supreme 
courts of the United States, only to be told that we 
have no rights that capital is bound to respect. Shall 
we appeal to the supreme courts again? No. We appeal 
to this convention and to the country for an uprising 
of all the common people in every walk of life 
to beat back the courts and reenthrone the rights of 
the American people. 

"From justice of the peace to justice of the supreme 
court of the United States, all the judicial powers 
of the United States are directed against labor. All 
the organized forces of society are against labor, and if 
labor expects to emancipate itself, labor itself must do it. 

"The time has not quite come to incite the populace,' 
said Mr. Debs, shaking his fist vehemently." 



But will "the voice of the day of the Lord," as it 
comes from various quarters and swells into a mighty 
roar of the sea class (Luke 21:25) be heard, and will it 
be heeded, and will relief be granted, and will the 
threatened crash and the wreck of present institutions 
be avoided? No; God's Word shows us that it will 
not be averted;— so strong is the power of selfishness 
in the world that it blinds those who should see, if 
only in self-interest. But we leave this subject for 
MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. IV.-"THE DAY OF VENGEANCE," 
which we expect to commence mailing Oct. 1, next,— 
as and for the October and November issues of this 
journal. 

INTERDENOMINATIONALISM VS. UNDENOMINATIONALISM. 



We have pointed out from time to time that the 
Christian Endeavor movement is too liberal to be tolerated 
by sectarians; and that having no common basis 
of faith, and proposing to ignore doctrines, the Society 
would be at a loss as to any definite object and be apt 
to drift into Moralism, Christian-politics, etc. The 
following quotations show that three Presbyterian journals 
are waking up to the fact that Christian Endeavorers 
will soon reach the place where they cannot be 

R2217 : page 272 

depended upon as sectarians, whatever they may gain 



or lose as Christians. 

The Editor of the Michigan Presbyterian says:— 

"For two weeks we have been hesitating to say 
just what we felt, because of love for the Christian 
Endeavor work and for our brethren: but we are ready 
now to confess what has been for years slowly taking 
shape in our mind, that we honestly believe that it 
would have been far better for the Presbyterian Church, 

R2217 : page 273 

and especially for our young people, if twelve years 

ago we had put the same amount of energy into organizing 

Westminster Leagues as we did into organizing 

the Young People's Society of Christian Endeavor. In 

short, we believe that our Westminster League brethren 

have been right during all these years of controversy. 

The reasons for this opinion are so many and 

so fundamental that it would take half a dozen articles 

even to state them, and half a dozen more to meet the 

arguments on the other side, many of them being arguments 

which we have honestly made ourselves, in 

synods and presbyteries. Nor is there any practical 

use in dwelling upon them, for it is now too late to 

make the radical change that could have been made 

successfully ten years ago." 

The Editor of The Presbyterian, commenting on 
the foregoing, adds:— 

"But whatever opinion one has upon the points 
raised, there is a fact brought out by our Michigan 
contemporary which is worthy of special consideration, 
and which shows the existence of elements of conflict 
and disintegration, which will sooner or later assert 
themselves. Dr. Clark has insisted upon its being 
interdenominational, and he has done his best to make 
it so. But look at the facts: What denominations come 
next in numbers to our own in Christian Endeavor 
work? The Congregationalist and the Campbellist. 
Congregationalism is more and more standing for union 
work, making its plea on that basis, and making its 
doors wide to all kinds of religious ideas, in a loosely 
confederated sort of way. Campbellism, through its 
leading organ, the Christian Standard, declares that as 
far as that body of believers is concerned, they reject 
utterly Dr. Clark's interdenominational ideas, and they 
are in the Christian Endeavor work to abolish denominationalism 
altogether. They make no secret of their 
mission to substitute for interdenominationalism 
undenominationalism . " 

The Presbyterian Banner prints a comment on the 
matter, saying:— 

"We do not forget that Dr. Clark and Mr. Baer, 
editors of the Golden Rule, who hold the reins of control 
[over Christian Endeavorers], have made much 
show of denominational loyalty on the part of church 
societies, subordinate, however, to supreme loyalty to 



the organization. This strategic movement was made 
by them after charges had been brought, that the whole 
tendency of Christian Endeavor was in the direction of 
church union, or more properly, independent churches." 
The Editor of the Banner assents, saying:— 
"That there has been a marked change in the 
views of many ministers and elders and a large number 
of members of the Presbyterian denomination since 
the last meeting of the General Assembly at Saratoga 
cannot be doubted by any one familiar with the trend 
of opinion in the church. What ought to be done, or 
what can be done in the circumstances, we do not pretend 
to know at present.... We agree with the 
Michigan Presbyterian that 'there is a great deal that 
we can do. We can make continually more of our own 
history, doctrines and plan of work, and continually 
less of the undenominational character of this work.'" 

THE DIVINE RIGHT OF KINGS. 



At the unveiling of the equestrian statue of Emperor 
William I. at Coblentz, the present Emperor of 
Germany, in proposing a toast, made the following 
pointed statement of his conception of his office:— 

"My grandfather went forth from Coblentz to 
mount the throne as the chosen instrument of the Lord, 
and as such he regarded himself. For all of us, more 
especially for us princes, he raised the throne once 
more on high, crowning it with the bright rays of the 
treasure which may we ever preserve in its sublimity 
and holiness. I mean the kingdom, by the grace of 
God, the kingdom with its heavy duties, its never ending, 
ever enduring toils and labors, with its awful responsibility 
to the Creator alone, from which no man, 
no minister, no house of parliament, no people can release 
the prince. For me it will be a sacred duty, following 
in the ways which the great ruler has shown us 
and in solicitude for my country to hold my protecting 
hand over this splendid jewel." 

It is well that all persons in and out of public office 
should recognize every influence and opportunity as a 
stewardship from God; but it is very peculiar that the 
king of Prussia having acquired imperial authority 
over the other German states with and by their consent 
to be so governed, should now recognize his accountability 
as to the Creator alone. He, like all other men, 
owes fealty to God in all his acts: but his office came 
from the people and should be esteemed amenable to 
the people who gave it. His views are part of the 
leaven dispensed by Papacy, at the bottom of much of 
the world's superstition; which in this particular has done 
good as well as harm. By and by we shall have the true 
King and the reign of righteousness, whose only object 
will not be to fight for the maintenance of a throne,— 



but to "bless all the families of the earth." 

"ZIONISM" ADVOCATED AND DEFENDED. 



The Jewish Conference respecting Zionism met at 
Basel, Switzerland, on August 30th as proposed;— to 
discuss the feasibility and advisability of Dr. Herzl's 
scheme for securing Palestine as a national home for 
the Jewish race, and assisting the poor and persecuted 
to return to the land of their fathers and to prosperity. 
The cable announces merely the fact that the Conference 
enthusiastically endorsed Dr. Herzl's suggestions, 
and sent to the Sultan of Turkey a telegram congratulating 
him upon the peace and prosperity of their 
race throughout his dominions. Hebrew was the language 
of the Convention: a very noteworthy indication. 

Thus gradually, but surely, prophecy is fulfilling 
along this line also; keeping pace exactly with the developments 
along other lines— civil and religious— all 
rapidly approaching their foretold climaxes. Praise God! 

R2217 : page 274 

Mr. Max Nordau, a Hebrew and a noted writer, 
expressed himself recently with great freedom in favor 
of the Zionist program and in opposition to those Jews 
who are opposing it. He suggests that "rabbis and 
idiots" who now raise against the movement a "senseless 
outcry" may some day rejoice at the success of 
Zionism, because of the refuge it will afford "from the 
Antisemitic storm gathering over their heads." (Antisemitism 
signifies opposition to the descendents of 
Shem; it includes all the races of Southwestern Asia- 
Assyrians, Arabs, Abyssinians, Hebrews, etc., but it is 
here and most frequently used to signify opposition to 
Hebrews, the Jews.) Proceeding, Dr. Nordau said:— 

"Zionism has been called into existence by the 
steady growth and encroachments of Antisemitism in 
its various forms— official Antisemitism in Russia, popular 
Antisemitism in Germany and Austria. Being a 
German myself I can only speak for my own country. 
There, I have no hesitation in saying, the Jew is not 
only not beloved, but he is positively hated and feared; 
and this aversion extends to all people having the faintest 
trace of Jewish blood in their veins. 

"The Antisemitic propaganda has turned people 
mad in Germany and Austria, and there seems to be 
no prospect of a change for the better. Altho no one 
can accuse me certainly of being a parasite or a money-grabber 
—every penny I have earned has been the result 
of hard and conscientious labor— my mail is often 
weighed down with insulting anonymous letters from 
the other side of the Rhine.... Seeing that this anti-Jewish 
feeling is pretty well universal, or rapidly becoming 



so, why should the Jew himself, we ask, be 
satisfied to continue living in a hostile camp? Why 
should he be reduced to effacing his nationality?... 

"The Jew, figuratively speaking, is constantly 
holding his hand in front of his nose to hide its peculiar 
aquilinity, which peculiarity, by the way, he shares 
with the all-conquering Romans of old. Why be 
ashamed of our natural and, above all, national characteristics? 
No, let us develop them on the contrary, 
form them in the right molds. Let us be true to ourselves, 
to our traditions, to the genius of our race. 
Then, indeed, will great things come out of this disordered 
mass. Israel will be herself again. This is 
the true essence of Zionism!. ..The gentle rabbis 
in Germany and the United States who have been pooh-poohing 
our efforts may not be aware that at this moment 
hundreds of thousands of their coreligionists are 
living in the most awful squalor and misery conceivable 
within the confines of the Jewish pale of Russia or 
among the wild Kurdish tribes of Asia Minor." 



Thus, the Jews themselves being the witnesses, 
God is forcing them back to the Promised Land for 
which many of them had lost all hope and all love. 

Whether Palestine will be opened to the Jew by 
money, as they now propose, or whether it will be 
opened by war, we cannot say; but far more than the 
Zionists hope for will be attained by A.D. 1915. To 
permit all that God has promised that is due before 
that time, would demand that they be admitted to Palestine 
under the domination of some other Power or 
Powers very shortly. 

R2218 : page 274 

Brother Kirkham tells us that when in Europe recently 
he was brought in contact with certain Jewish 
bankers to explain some inventions in tile making; and 
that incidentally he found an opportunity to explain 
God's plan of the ages, mentioning also that the due time 
had come for the restoration of divine favor to Israel. 
To his surprise his hearers manifested deep interest 
and said that what he had said was in many respects 
closely in harmony with their own views. They then 
voluntarily sent with him an escort and showed him at 
a private marble yard, kept secret from the general 
public, columns of very fine marble in preparation, they 
said, to form parts of a grand temple to be built at 
Jerusalem. The parts are being gotten ready according 
to draughted plans, and each stone is lettered and 
numbered to indicate the place for which it is intended. 

THE DIVISION OF TURKEY ARRANGED. 



It is now pretty generally agreed that Austria and 
Russia have reached an agreement respecting the division 
of Turkey when it shall be judged that the opportune 
moment has arrived. Austria is to have Salonica 
and all the territory west of it, while Russia is to have 
Constantinople and a good share of the territory surrounding 
it and northward. But it is not intended to 
force a war; merely the arrangement is made so that in 
the event of another war with Turkey each nation will 
know the portions to seize. It is said that Germany 
is very anxious to secure Syria, including Palestine, 
on the same terms; but that the other Powers would 
permit this is very doubtful, as they all covet Palestine. 

Our chief interest in the Turkish question is the 
opening of Palestine to the returning Israelites: if it, 
or even liberty of settlement therein, be conveyed to 
the Jews for money, we shall feel comparatively little 
further interest in Turkey. 

THE LAMBETH CONFERENCE. 



The third Conference at Lambeth, near to London, 
has just been held, bishops of the Church of England 
being present "from divers parts of the earth." These 
Conferences have done much to instil and foster the 
idea of Protestant Federation, and meantime are endeavoring 
to hold together the Episcopal Church, doctrinally. 
To this end previous Conferences have advocated 
the appointment of a Primate, or Head Bishop, 
still higher than the Archbishop of Canterbury,— practically 
a pope, without claims for his infallibility. 

A large conservative element has thus far hindered 
this proposal; and the friends of the measure, abandoning 
hope along that line, have at this Conference secured 

R2218 : page 275 

the appointment of a "Central Consultative Committee" 

to assist and give advice on all theological 

points in controversy, with a view to holding in some 

kind of harmony the various branches of the Episcopal 

Church in various climes, on doctrinal subjects, which 

the present day awakening of thought makes very 

difficult. 

The Committee was agreed to, and is to be appointed 
by the chief minister of that church— the Lord 
Archbishop of Canterbury, of whose installation in office 
we not long since gave an account, pointing out 
also that he is a Higher Criticism unbeliever and an 
avowed Evolutionist, which signifies that he denies the 
ransom, and is not in any sense a real Christian according 
to the New Testament standard. That he will appoint 



upon this committee such as are disbelievers in 
the Scriptures and in the ransom, like himself, goes 
without saying; and we may accordingly judge of the 
lines of error along which they will seek to harmonize 
the theological differences in the Church of England. 



HEAR THOU MY PRAYER. 



Lord that pitiest all, hear thou my prayer:— 

For gold I ask not, nor for transient wealth, 
Nor e'en for richer gifts, nor power, nor health, 
But only this— to nestle in thy care, 

To rest supreme in thee, and feel that there 

No harm can come that thou hast not foreseen. 
To trust alway, and on thy strength to lean, 

To feel thy guiding hand mid every snare. 

1 ask that strength that comes alone from thee, 

To falter not, nor any trials shun; 
And eyes of faith mid deepening gloom to see 
My duty's path, and thus my course to run. 

Beyond these years I look to that bright home. 
Help thou my wavering step, O Lord, I come. 

-Paul R. Wright. 



R2218 : page 275 

FALLING AWAY FROM STEADFASTNESS. 



"Ye therefore, beloved, seeing that ye know these things before, 
beware lest ye also, being led away with the error of the 
wicked, fall from your own steadfastness."— 2 Pet. 3:17. 

THIS exhortation applies to the Lord's consecrated 
people living at the present time. The proof 
of this is found in the context: the Apostle has just 
been portraying some of the events connected with the 
day of the Lord in which we are living— the "Day of 
Vengeance." In verse ten he has pointed out that the 
present age will end with the dissolution of the symbolic 
"heavens" and the symbolic "earth," which, as 
we have elsewhere shown, signifies the utter disruption 
of the present social and ecclesiastical order. In 
verse thirteen he points out that we are looking for a 
new order of things, and not hoping either to patch up 



the old order ourselves, or that others will succeed in 
patching what the Lord has declared "shall pass away." 
And now in our text he refers to "these things." In 
the eleventh verse he points out that those who have 
such expectations should be separate and distinct from 
all other people in the world, saying, "What manner 
of persons ought ye to be in all holy conversation and 
godliness?" And then in our text and in the verse 
preceding it, he points out that at this particular time 
the Adversary will get advantage of certain ones, will 
beguile them, get them to wrest the Scriptures, and 
thus to deceive themselves to their own destruction;— 
to their loss of present light at least. 

Finding thus that the Apostle is particularly addressing 
ourselves, let us indeed give earnest heed to 
his counsel; for we well know that we live in what the 
Apostle Paul calls that "evil day."— Eph. 6:13. 

We notice further that the Apostle is not addressing 
the worldly, nor even the average nominal Christian; 
but he specifies that his warning is to the "beloved," 
who already had attained to "steadfastness." 
This implies that they had become rooted and grounded 
and built up, both in the knowledge and in the love 
of God; for only such ever become steadfast. Does it 
surprise us that the Apostle should address such a developed 
class of Christians and warn them of their own 
personal danger of falling into the "error of the wicked?" 
It does strike us as peculiar, and we are inclined 
to think that there must be some hidden meaning 
in the expression— "error of the wicked." 

It would be past comprehension that such a class 
as the Apostle has just described should be in great danger 
of falling into such errors of the wicked as blasphemy, 
or murder, or arson, or theft. We must look 
the matter up more carefully, and see whether or not 
the translators have given us a faithful rendering of 
the Apostle's words. We find that they have not, and 
that the word wicked is too strong: the Greek word is 
athemos; according to Prof. Young's Analytical Concordance 
(undisputed authority) it signifies "unsettled," 

R2218 : page 276 

or "lawless." Now, the passage seems more reasonable. 
There is danger, we can readily see, that those 
once established in the truth might be so led away as 
to become unsettled, and to wrest the Scriptures, 
"handle the word of God deceitfully," and thus become 
lawless in the sense that they would set aside the 
Word or Law of God, and take instead thereof a twisted 
interpretation which would the better suit some theory 
of their own. Such a wrong course the Apostle 
points out would surely unsettle them, and eventually 
mean the destruction of their spiritual interests; and 
that they would go into "outer darkness" in respect 
to "present truth." "Beware, lest ye also, being led 



away with the error of the unsettled, fall from your own 
steadfastness." 

The Apostle's language not only points to the 
present time, but seems to imply that there would be 
previous fallings away or sittings, which he calls "the 
error of the wicked"— literally, "the delusions of the 
unsettled or lawless." The implication seems to be, 
that the not settled ones would first be shaken out, and 
that subsequently there would come a still more insidious 
trial which would test even the "steadfast." We 
inquire therefore, have there been, during this "harvest" 
time (whilst we are waiting for the dissolution 
of the present order of things and for the establishment 
of the new order of things)— have there been such 
sittings or fallings away by delusions which have affected 
those not settled? 

R2219 : page 276 

We answer: Yes, there have been several: we 
might recount some of these. First of all came a shaking 
directly upon the subject of the ransom: Certain 
lawless ones, "heady," rejected the testimony of the 
Lord's Word, denying the Lord having "bought us" 
with his own precious blood. They would accept Christ 
as an example only, and claimed to be able to follow 
that example, and that they needed no sin-offering to 
compensate for their imperfections, inherited or personal. 
This the Adversary's first move was remarkably 
bold, yet it found adherents who were not rooted 
and grounded upon the testimony of the Lord's Word. 
Then came the "flat earth" theory, whose advocates 
strangely concluded that the shape of the earth is a 
part of the gospel; the result was that certain others of 
the unstable were "led away" in that delusion, by not 
settled leaders who wrested certain Scriptures to their 
own confusion and to the extinguishment of what light 
they had enjoyed. 

Then came another delusion in effect teaching the 
old doctrine of Universalism,— that God would finally 
force eternal salvation upon all men and even upon 
Satan himself. This theory of course also denied the 
ransom; because to have admitted that the condemnation 
to death pronounced in Eden could not be set 
aside without a ransom, a corresponding price, would 
logically have implied that disobedience under the second 
trial, secured by the ransom, would similarly bring 
an everlasting punishment— everlasting death— from 
which there could be no resurrection. Hence, this 
theory boldly denied the ransom, wrested or twisted 
the Scriptures which speak of the Second death as "everlasting 
destruction from the presence of the Lord," 
handling this and other Scriptures so deceitfully as to 
declare that the Second death would be a great blessing 
to all upon whom it would come. Of course none 
but unstable souls could be beguiled by such open and 



arrogant perversions of the Word of God. 

But, still another sifting came for the "unlearned" 
and unsettled, not thoroughly furnished with the 
whole armor of God; this was the teaching that God is the 
author and instigator of all the sin, crime and wickedness 
there is in the world; and that after he shall become 
weary of evil doing he will reform, change his 
course and incite all mankind to righteousness and holiness, 
as he now (this theory claims) incites the majority 
to sin, etc. Of all the theories which the Adversary 
has brought out in this "evil day," this one 
seems to be the most blasphemous. So-called "orthodoxy" 
is certainly quite blasphemous enough, in claiming 
that God, after permitting his creatures to be "born 
in sin and shapen in iniquity" (which he had nothing 
to do with bringing upon them), claims that, as a punishment 
for sins which they could not avoid, the vast 
majority of the human family will be imprisoned in a 
flaming hell of unspeakable torture, and divinely provided 
with everlasting life, so that they shall never be 
able to escape those sufferings by death, and that the 
devil will be similarly supplied with eternal life (but 
free from pain) for the purpose of torturing them; and 
that fuel for the torture will to all eternity be provided 
by divine power. We say that this is extremely blasphemous 
of the divine character, yet it is as nothing at 
all in comparison to the teaching which claims that 
God is the instigator, the first cause, of all the sin and 
crime and wickedness in the world. This theory also 
wrested some Scriptures to its support, just as Spiritism 
and Christian Science do. Of course, only those 
who had never become thoroughly rooted and grounded 
in the truth could ever be "led away" by such a blasphemous 
delusion as this. 

The Anglo-Israel question, and communistic and 
social questions, "led away" from the truth, and into 
more or less darkness and confusion, some others who 
were not well rooted and grounded in the knowledge 
of the fact that all present institutions will go down, 
and that the new order of things to be introduced will 
not be of human institution, but the work of God 
through the glorified Christ. 

R2219 : page 277 

But the Apostle comes in our text to a time 
after such delusions had "led away" those not established 
or settled; and his warning is given to the steadfast. 
The implication seems to be that the Adversary 
has more subtle delusions before us than any of those 
in the past; and that the fully consecrated of the Lord's 
people may need to be more than ever on guard against 
"the wiles of the devil."— "Ye therefore, beloved, 
seeing ye know these things [that all of the affairs, reforms, 
etc., of the present time will avail nothing, and 
that all the present institutions will pass away, and 



that God is about to establish his own Kingdom in his 
own way;— and knowing further, that just at this particular 
time there will be a special sifting and testing 
of those who are in the light], beware lest ye ALSO, being 
led away with the error of the wicked [the unsettled or 
lawless who do not bow implicitly to the Lord's Word, 
but wrest it to establish theories of their own], fall from 
your own steadfastness." 

(While the "sittings" specially affect those who 
have been brought by the Lord into the light of present 
truth, yet in a more general way and along different 
lines slightly different sittings are in progress with the 
nominal church as a whole. Each denomination is being 
shaken, and the theories of Evolution, Spiritism, 
Christian Science, Theosophy and Moralism are making 
great inroads upon all who have named the name 
of Christ, even if they have not come into the light of 
the "harvest" truth. Unsettled, lacking the knowledge 
of the divine Word and plan, necessary in this evil day, 
the whole nominal church is gradually losing its faith 
in the Bible, under the lead of its most able ministers, 
who, blinded to present truth, and unable to rightly 
divide the Word of truth, are generally coming to hold 
the opinion, that their own ideas respecting truth 
("higher criticism") are superior to the Scripture 
presentations.) 

The Apostle in our text cautions that we beware 
against being "led away." The word here rendered "led 
away" occurs in only one other place in the Scriptures 
(Gal. 2:13), where the Apostle Paul says, "Barnabas 
also was carried away with their dissimulation." The 
words "carried away" give the same thought as "led 
away" but a little more strongly: they imply that the 
danger to the steadfast will be along some line which 
would sweep away or carry away their judgments from 
the fixed statements of the divine Word, through personal 
preference, or sympathy, or through the influence 
of some one held in respect or esteem. Let us all 
therefore be on guard, that whoever may, consciously 
or unconsciously, become the instrument of the Adversary, 
and seek to lead us away from the sure testimonies 
of the Lord's Word (whether congenial to our natural 
tastes or uncongenial), we may not be "carried 
away" but that we may be more determined than ever 
that- 

"To our Lord we will be true 
Who bought us with his blood. 
Only Jesus will we know, 
And Jesus crucified." 

While we see that the danger to the majority of 
God's people will be through being "carried away" by 
sympathy, influence, etc., we must remember that this 
implies that their will be certain leaders of thought 
whose conduct will tend to carry away the others. It 
is not necessary for us to suppose that these leaders 



into error will knowingly and intentionally get wrong 

themselves, and carry away numbers with them into 

their delusions and lawless disregard for the testimony 

of the Lord's Word, wresting its statements. We may 

rather assume that in a majority of instances these 

leaders will be themselves deceived; as the Apostle expresses 

it— "deceiving and being [themselves] deceived." 

-2 Tim. 3:13. 

All who seek to teach the divine plan to others 
are exposed to peculiar temptations, so that the honor 
of serving the Lord and his people demands a correspondingly 
larger measure of the graces of the holy 
spirit, as well as of knowledge. The tendency of 
knowledge, as the Apostle points out, is merely to puff 
up, make vain and conceited, and to become a temptation 
of the Adversary, to draw away followers after 
them. (Acts 20:30.) Whoever therefore would be an 
instructor of others, a mouth-piece of the Lord, should 
cultivate all the various graces of the holy spirit, including 
meekness; that these combined (Love) with 
knowledge, may build up himself as well as build up 
those to whom he ministers. "Knowledge [alone] 
puffeth up, but Love buildeth up."— 1 Cor. 8:1. 

Let us not forget that there is a way, and one way 
only, whereby we may insure ourselves against falling 
into any of these traps of the Adversary. This insurance 
is not secured wholly by knowledge, altho knowledge 
is a very important element in it: it is secured 
chiefly by obedience to the principles laid down in the 
Lord's Word, and illustrated in the life and character 
of our Lord and his apostles. The same Apostle who 
addresses us this caution against falling from our own 
steadfastness, tells us in the same epistle (1:5-12), 
"If ye do these things, ye shall never fall: for so an 
entrance shall be ministered unto you abundantly, into 
the everlasting Kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus 
Christ." 

What things? Does he give us the particulars of 
this work of grace that will so insure us against falling 
that we shall receive the great prize? Yes. 
He tells us that it is by continually adding to our stock 
of the heavenly graces,— "Add to your faith fortitude, 

R2219 : page 278 

and to fortitude knowledge, and to knowledge self-control, 
and to self-control patience, and to patience 

R2220 : page 278 

piety, and to piety brotherly-kindness, and to brotherly-kindness 

Love; for these things being in you and 

abounding, they will not permit you to be inactive or 

unfruitful in the knowledge [personal intimacy, acquaintance] 

of our Lord Jesus Christ.... Therefore, 

brethren, give the more earnest heed that you may 



make your calling and election sure, for if ye do these 
things ye shall never fall." 



R2220 : page 278 

IS FAITH IN CHRIST NECESSARY? 



REV. John H. Barrows, D.D., President of "The 
World's Parliament of Religions," held in 
Chicago in 1893, has returned from his visit to India. 
He recently wrote an account of his experiences there, 
in which he tells that he was asked by the Hindoos, 
whether or not he believed that "all men will finally be 
saved." He states the answer he made them, as follows, 
—"I replied, My Master does not encourage me to 
cherish such a hope. I do entertain a hope, however, for 
some who have never heard of the historic Christ. There 
are minds, like that of Socrates, naturally Christian. If 
I do not meet Socrates in heaven, I think it may be because 
I have not kept the right road myself." 

Dr. Barrows' views are a fair sample of the views 
of a rapidly growing class of Christian people— all except 
those recognized as "old foggies;"— all the "learned" 
and "intelligent," both in pulpit and pew. What does 
it mean? It means that these people have repudiated 
the only gospel taught by our Lord and his inspired 
apostles and have made for themselves another gospel 
which omits all the prominent features of the New Testament 
good tidings. 

(1) The center of the New Testament gospel is 

that, whereas Adam sinned and fell from the divine likeness, 
Christ Jesus died for man's sins, redeeming Adam 
and his posterity by the sacrifice of his own life as "a 
ransom [a corresponding price] for all." The new, false 
gospel denies this, declares that Adam never was in the 
divine image and could not fall from it; but that he was 
more nearly a monkey's image and has been constantly 
rising out of it for the past six thousand years: and from 
this basis it is forced to deny that our Lord's death was 
in any sense a ransom for man; for if man has been 
evolving grandly out of monkey conditions, the progress 
would not be a sin and would require no atonement. 
If original sin is denied, a sacrifice for that sin must be 
denied and is denied, logically, by all Evolutionists. 

(2) The essence of the New Testament gospel is 

the offer of pardon and reconciliation to God, to all who 

will accept the blessings secured by the ransom. The 

new, false gospel, denying the ransom and all need of 

one, necessarily denies the offer of forgiveness and reconciliation, 

claiming that the race never was alienated from 

God, denying that we were born in sin, denying that 

father Adam ate the sour grape of sin, and that in 



consequence the teeth of all his children are set on edge. 
-Ezek. 18:2. 

(3) The first requirement of the New Testament of 
all who would share its blessings is faith. God's grace 
provided the atonement, and Christ's death was the 
means or channel through which he provided it; but he 
most specifically declares that sinners may avail themselves 
of this grace only by the exercise of faith. As the 
Apostle declares, we are justified by faith, and by it also we 
enter into all other favors of the divine provision. (Rom. 5:1,2.) 
Nor is this required faith a general faith— a 
faith in anything we may please, or in nothing in particular: 
quite to the contrary, it is a faith in God and in 
Christ Jesus. It goes still farther and demands that the 
faith shall be in Jesus' death as the sin-offering and in 
his resurrection as the Savior from sin, and from death 
the wages of sin, through the Kingdom of God which he 
will establish at his second advent. 

The new, false gospel plainly declares a union with 
Christ by living faith, or any other kind of faith, unnecessary. 
Mark the words of Dr. Barrows italicised 
above. Alas! we fear that, as the Doctor suggests, there 
is great danger that he has lost "the way, the truth and 
the life" now set before the overcoming Church. He 
certainly, and many in his company, "have not kept 
the right road" to the Kingdom, as marked out in the 
Scriptures. 

But we are glad to hope that Dr. Barrows and some 
others, equally well intentioned and deluded, will by 
and by, after the Kingdom is set up, get the eyes of 
their understandings opened, and see and truly believe 
and be blessed. There, too, they will meet Socrates, 
for "all that are in the graves shall hear the voice of 
the Son of Man and come forth;" and there, under the 
blessings of the Millennial Kingdom, "all the blind 
eyes shall be opened," and then "the god of this world 
[Satan]" who now blinds "the minds of them which believe 
not." shall be bound for a thousand years "that he 
should deceive the nations no more." (2 Cor. 4:4; Rev. 20:2,3.) 
But the favor then opened to believers will 
be the earthly paradise restored, not the heavenly Kingdom 
and the divine nature now held before the Gospel 
Church as the prize of her high calling, to which, by faith 
and obedience, she is to make her calling and election 
sure. (2 Pet. 1:10.) Hear the word of the Lord:— 

R2220 : page 279 

"The Scripture hath concluded all under sin, that 
the promise by faith of Jesus Christ might be given to 
them that believe. But before faith came we were kept under 
the Law, shut up unto [waiting for] the faith which 
should afterwards be revealed."— Gal. 3:22,23. 

"It pleased God by the foolishness of preaching to 
save them that believe.. ..We preach Christ crucified, 
...the power of God and the wisdom of God."— 



1 Cor. 1:21,23,24. 

"We believe that Jesus died and rose again."— 
1 Thess. 4:14. 

"These [testimonies of John's gospel] are written, 
that ye might believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of 
God: that believing ye might have life through his name." 
-John 20:31. 

"Neither pray I [Jesus] for these [apostles] alone, 
but for them also which shall believe on me through their 
word."— John 17:20. 

"He whom God raised again saw no corruption. 
Be it known unto you therefore, men and brethren, that 
through this man [Christ Jesus] is preached unto you the 
forgiveness of sins, and by him all that believe are justified 
from all things. "-Acts 13:37-39. 

"When they believed Philip preaching the things 
concerning the Kingdom of God and the name of Jesus 
Christ, they were baptized."— Acts 8:12. 

"Ye were not redeemed with corruptible things,... 
but with the precious blood of Christ... manifest for 
you who by him do believe in God, that raised him from 
the dead and gave him glory."— 1 Pet. 1:18-23. 

"I have not shunned to declare unto you the whole 
counsel of God." "So we preach and so ye believe."— 
Acts 20:27; 1 Cor. 15:11. 

"That is the word of faith which we preach; that 
if thou shalt confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, 
and shalt believe in thine heart that God hath raised 
him from the dead, thou shalt be saved. ...The 
Scripture saith, Whosoever believeth on him shall not 
be ashamed.... For whosoever shall call upon the 
name of the Lord shall be saved." 

"How then shall they call on him in whom they 
have not believed? and how shall they believe in him of 
whom they have not heard?"— Rom. 10:8-14. 



R2220 : page 279 

PAUL'S HEART REVEALED. 

-SEPT. 19.-ACTS 20:22-35.- 

"Remember the words of the Lord Jesus, how he said, 
It is more blessed to give than to receive."— Acts 20:35. 

PERHAPS no other words give us a clearer 

insight into the heart of the Apostle Paul than 

his address to the elders of the Church at Ephesus. 

They show us what were the moving impulses of his 

active life. He sought not for ease or fame or worldly 

pleasure. He was thoroughly imbued with his Master's 

holy spirit which delighted in honoring God and 

doing good to all, regardless of earthly reward, persecutions, 

insults, slander and misrepresentations. 



In our lesson for August 29th we saw how the 
Apostle "endured a great fight of affliction" at Ephesus, 
just as he was about to start for Macedonia. It is 
supposed that he spent about ten months in Macedonia 
and Greece, visiting the Churches of Philippi, Thessalonica, 
Berea and Corinth, besides extending his 
labors into other cities further north, not previously 
reached, but where some interest had been awakened 
by others. Having gone the rounds, he was now on 
his way to Jerusalem with the collections of the 
Churches of Macedonia and Corinth. His time was 
limited, if he would reach Jerusalem in season for the 
Passover, and hence instead of going overland and visiting 
the Churches of Asia-Minor, he continued his 
course by sea and sent word from Miletus, the seaport, 
to Ephesus, inviting the Elders of the Church there to 

R2221 : page 279 

come to him: and this lesson is Luke's report of his 
discourse to them. 

God made known to the Apostle the fact that 
something extraordinary was to befall him at Jerusalem, 
as a consequence of which he would never again 
have the privilege of meeting these dear brethren 
in the flesh. This made the present meeting with the 
elders or representatives of the Church a specially impressive 
one, and at the end of his talk his auditors 
were in tears. 

Wishing to stimulate these dear brethren who, inasmuch 
as they were chosen as elders or special servants 
of the Church, may be regarded as amongst the 
most earnest and zealous of the Lord's people in Ephesus, 
the Apostle very briefly refreshes their minds on 
a subject already well known to them;— his own methods 
and course as a minister of Christ. He would impart 
to them some of his own spirit of consecration— 
the Master's spirit— that they might be the more faithful 
as servants of the Lord and of his people. He reminds 
them, but not boastfully, of his own humility of 
mind in serving the Church; how he kept back nothing 
that was profitable to them, but on the contrary sought 
to impart to all the same knowledge of the divine 
character and plan which he himself enjoyed, and 
how he had not affected a superior wisdom that made 
peculiar statements without submitting the proofs. 
The inference is left for his hearers that they would 
thenceforth have an increased responsibility and should 
seek to follow the same heaven directed course. 

While telling them that his trials were not over, 
but that evidently worse things awaited him, he courageously 
declares, "But none of these things move me, 

R2221 : page 280 

neither do I count my life dear unto myself, so that I 



may finish my course with joy and [fulfil] the ministry 
that I received of the Lord Jesus, to testify the 
gospel by the grace of God." 

After calling their attention to his own faithfulness 
in keeping back nothing that would be profitable, 
and thus making sure that he was free from responsibility 
in respect to any that might fall away, he exhorts 
his hearers to take heed, to be careful (1) of 
themselves: that they might make their own calling 
and election sure; that they might so walk in the footsteps 
of the Master that they would be acceptable to 
him. And (2) they should remember that, having 
accepted special appointment as ministers, they had an 
added responsibility on behalf of the Lord's flock. 
Oh, that all the servants of the Lord's cause might 
take this exhortation to heart, and feel the responsibility 
that rests upon all who minister in holy things. 
(And this will apply in a still wider sense, for every 
brother and every sister is to some extent his brother's 
and sister's keeper, and is commissioned to help in 
watching over the Lord's flock.) The Apostle points 
out that their commission is not merely that of the 
Church which selected them to be its servants in holy 
things, but that they became representatives of the 
holy spirit, and are therefore not to think lightly of the 
responsibility which they have accepted. The whole 
Church of the consecrated are begotten of the spirit, 
and hence their conscientious action in selecting their 
Elders, according to divine direction, is to be considered 
the work and selection of the holy spirit. 

The object of the appointment of these elders, as 
the Apostle points out, was to feed the Church of 
Christ; to bring to the attention of the flock the green 
pastures and still waters of divine truth. They are not 
commissioned to pen them up in human sects and thus 
hinder the sheep from pasturing upon the Lord's provision. 
Neither are they to consider the sheep as so 
much mutton whereoff they may feed themselves, and 
from whom they may shear the golden fleece for their 
own benefit: they are to remember that the Church is 
not theirs, but God's, which he purchased with the 
precious blood. They are therefore to conduct themselves 
as servants or ministers of the Lord's flock, and 
not as its lords and masters. 

Speaking prophetically, the Apostle declares his 
knowledge of the fact that greedy wolves would get in 
amongst the flock, and full of selfishness would be reckless 
of the interests of the sheep, and careful only of 
their own interests. These are some of the "wolves" 
which deceptively present themselves "in sheep's clothing," 
for otherwise the sheep would be on guard against 
them. And still worse than this the Apostle prophesies, 
—there would arise amongst themselves certain 
"heady" ones who, desirous of name and fame, would 
preach errors in order to "draw away disciples after 
them." Alas, how true this prophecy has proved, applicable 



not only to the Church at Ephesus but to the 

Church all the way down, from then until now! How 

few like the Apostle seem willing to preach not themselves, 

but Christ, and not human philosophies (their 

own or those of other men) but the cross of Christ, the 

power of God and the wisdom of God to every one that 

believeth. And the Apostle points out that he had 

been guarding them and the whole Church along these 

lines for three years. 

These, he says, will speak perverse things;— that 
is, they will distort the truth, to make it harmonize with 
some theory which they have accepted and which they 
wish to impress upon others, thereby exalting themselves 
as the discoverers of new light. No less than 
five of these false teachers who arose in the Church of 
Ephesus, some before and some after, are mentioned 
in the Apostle's epistles to Timothy,— Hymeneus, 
Alexander, Phygellus, Hermogenes and Philetus.— 
1 Tim. 1:20; 2 Tim. 1:15; 2:17. 

Under the circumstances, realizing the trials that 
were coming upon them, and that he would be unable 
to share these with them, what commendation would 
the Apostle give to these representatives of the Church? 
He gave them grand advice in these words, "I commend 
you to God, and to the word of his grace which 
is able to build you up, and to give you an inheritance 
among all them which are sanctified." Ah yes, there 
can be no better recommendation to any than this— to 
keep close to the divine Word, and to take heed lest 
they twist or wrest the Scriptures, and thus blind themselves 
and make ready for the Adversary to lead them 
further into darkness. The Apostle thus points out to 
them that they are not yet ready for the heavenly inheritance; 
that they must first be built up in sanctification; 
and that the spirit of the Lord's Word permeating 
them will more and more produce this sanctification 
of heart and life. 

What a noble testimony by the grace of God Paul 
was enabled to give: "I have coveted no man's silver 
or gold or apparel." He not only had used his trade 
as a tent-maker for his own support, but also to help 
financially those who were associated with him in the 
gospel work. Praise God for so noble an example of 
devotion! For altho the Apostle could not and did not 
endure more, nor as much, as his Redeemer, and is not 
to be considered as a superior example, nevertheless 
the illustration of a full devotion which his life affords 
does us great good; for we remember that our Lord 
was perfect,— holy, harmless, separate from sinners; 
but the Apostle declares that he had "like passions" 
with ourselves;— he was imperfect, and obliged to keep 

R2221 : page 281 

his "body under," in subjection to his new mind, the 
will of God in Christ. 



And now we come to the grandest expression of 
the whole discourse: "I have showed you [illustrated 
to you, in] all things, how that so laboring ye ought 
to support the weak, and to remember the words of the 
Lord Jesus, how he said, 'It is more blessed to give 
than to receive.'" Would that these words might be 
deeply graven upon all our memories. The world's 
rule, the general disposition of the fallen nature, is to 
give adherence or support to the strong, and expect 
weaker ones to rally around and support or uphold us. 
This is self-pleasing— the way of the fallen nature: 
but the method of the "new creatures" is to be the reverse 
of this— they are to be on the lookout for the welfare, 
interests and comforts of others, especially in their own 
families; and applying the Apostle's words to the Church 
they inculcate carefulness for the weaker members of the 
"household of faith." Each of the stronger should 
take pleasure in helping the weaker and the less 
learned, and so far as possible in bringing all up to the 
stature of manhood in Christ. 

And the Apostle here shows that the secret of his 
success as a servant of the Lord, and the reason why 
his life could be pointed to as a pattern, was that he 
was remembering and putting into practice the words 
of the Great Teacher. The art of giving himself is 
one of the secrets of a happy Christian life. He first 
gives his will to the Lord, then his time, his energy, 
his talents, to the service of the Lord and for the Lord's 
people. He has pleasure in the giving and a blessing, 
whether others know and appreciate it or not; and by 
and by his time for receiving will come,— the Lord's 
time for giving. The Lord will give unto such eternal 
life, eternal glory and association with himself in his 
Kingdom. 



SEPTEMBER 26. -REVIEW. 



R2222: page 281 

PAUL'S LAST JOURNEY TO JERUSALEM. 

-OCTOBER 3.-ACTS 21:1-15.- 

"I am ready not to be bound only, but also to die at 
Jerusalem for the name of the Lord Jesus."— Acts 21:13. 

THE date on which the Apostle Paul, after his interview 
with the elders of the Church at Ephesus 
at Miletus, resumed his journey toward Jerusalem, 
is calculated by those who have made a special study 



of the subject, to have been Monday, April 24, A.D. 58. 
He wished to reach Jerusalem about the time of the 
Passover, but apparently was somewhat delayed enroute, 
and it is supposed he did not reach there until 
May 17— Pentecost day, that year. 

The expression "after we had gotten from them," 
would seem to refer to the affectionate parting between 
Paul and those who accompanied him, and the Elders 
of Ephesus with whom evidently Timothy remained. 
As noticed in the previous lesson, "they all wept sore, 
and fell on Paul's neck and kissed him, sorrowing:" 
so that they were finally obliged to break away from 
them, to get aboard their vessel. There is nothing 
very special in the account of the journey: it was in a 
sailing vessel, slow and tedious and rather uninteresting. 
Probably the master and crew of that small vessel 
had little idea how much the value of their ship's 
burden was enhanced by the addition of Paul and his 
company. Little did they know how honorable a servant 
and ambassador of the Most High was their guest 
and passenger, and how he and his associates carried 
with them the gospel of Divine grace, a pearl of great 
price. "The world knoweth us not, even as it knew 
him not." Paul's company seems to have consisted 
(1) of Luke, the writer of this account, who uses the 
pronoun we; (2) Trophimus (verse 29); (3) Aristarchus 
(Acts 27:2). 

Paul's experience in the city of Tyre serves to 
show us the bond of sympathy and Christian love which 
prevailed in the early Church. Apparently Paul and 
his companions were unaware that there were believers 
at Tyre, but, no doubt providentially, they found some; 
and so close was the bond of Christian sympathy that 
the finding of them insured the finding of fast and loving 
friends. We may imagine the blessed experiences 
of the little group of believers during the seven days 
of the Apostle's stay with them. We are not told what 
was done, but from the character of the Apostle we may 
judge with considerable accuracy, for "a good fountain 
sends forth sweet waters" only. He surely did not waste 
time in telling them of his many travels and the various 
scenes in foreign lands. We may be sure also that, having 
the spirit of love shed abroad in his heart he did not 
indulge in "gossip" in respect to the Lord's people in 
the various places he had visited: he had come under 
"the royal law" of Love, which neither thinketh nor 
speaketh ill of his neighbor; and we may be sure he 
would be doubly careful of what he would say to or 
about the Lord's "brethren." Paul had a grander mission 
than this, and a mind too noble to permit him to 
be either a "busybody in other men's matters" or a 
gossiper. He had more important business: As he 
elsewhere expressed himself, "This one thing I do," 
—the Father's business. Forgetting the things which 

R2222 : page 282 



were behind, and pressing forward to those things 
which were before, he ran with patience the race set 
before him in the gospel, for the prize of the high calling; 
looking unto Jesus as both the Author and Finisher 
of his faith. 

We may therefore know assuredly that those seven 
days were profitably employed by the Apostle in talking 
over with the Church at Tyre the gracious plan of 
God, his precepts and his promises to those who love 
and obey him. The impression made indicates that 
the Apostle had become a lifelong friend of the Tyre 
believers, so much so that they were all loth to part, 
and husbands, wives and children accompanied Paul 
and his associates clear outside the city limits, and they 
parted with prayer. Where such holiness of heart, 
singleness of purpose and devotion to the Lord are 
found, there cannot be found in the same individual a 
contrary spirit; and all who are in close company with 
such a Christian will be profitted and helped and kept 
thereby. 

A briefer visit was made at Ptolemais, the next 
stop being with Philip, the evangelist, at Cesarea. We 
are not surprised to find a Church at Cesarea, for it 
was here that the gospel to the Gentiles first was 
preached; this being the residence of Cornelius the 
first Gentile convert. (Acts 10:1.) We may reasonably 
suppose that a man like Cornelius who, before receiving 
the gospel, "feared God with all his house" 
and "gave much alms to the people, and prayed to 
God alway," on receiving the good tidings of great 
joy would become ten fold more zealous than he had 
ever before been. That the Church at Cesarea was of 
considerable size is evident from the fact that Philip 
made it his head quarters, and that this was the third 
visit which Paul had made to this city during his travels. 
-See Acts 9:30; 18:22. 

The statement of verse nine to the effect that Philip 
had four virgin daughters "which did prophesy" is 
worthy of notice. The word "prophesy" is used in 
many instances in the New Testament to describe public 
or semi public speaking and not always a foretelling 
of future events. It is somewhat difficult to know 
which view should be taken in the present case, because 
in the next verse Agabus is mentioned as a 
prophet— a foreteller of future events— possessing the 
gift of prophesying. But whichever view of the word 
prophesying we apply to the daughters of Philip, the 
intimation would be that women were recognized of 
the Lord in connection with the ministry of the gospel 
in the early Church. In attempting to reach safe and 
sound Scriptural conclusions on this subject, it is proper 
that we take into consideration all the statements and 
all the facts bearing upon it. While the Apostle writes 
most positively "I suffer not a woman to teach or to 
usurp authority over a man," he also says that if women 



in the Church pray or prophesy, it should be with 
their heads covered; and thus we see that his other 
statement that "I suffer not a woman to teach" must 
be understood in a qualified sense and in connection 
with the latter part of that statement— not to usurp 
teaching functions over and above the men. We find, 
nevertheless, that the Apostle greatly appreciated the 
co-operation of female believers, and that he speaks of 
them in the highest terms of appreciation. 

In all this Paul followed closely in the footsteps of 
the Master who, tho he appreciated very highly and 
specially "loved" Martha and the Marys and the several 
honorable women among his disciples, and altho 
he privileged one of them to be the first to know of his 
resurrection, and tho he sent the message of his resurrection 
by one of them to Peter and the other disciples, 
nevertheless he did not make use of women in connection 
with the public ministry of the gospel. He not 
only chose males for the twelve apostles, but also subsequently 
for the seventy evangelists sent forth to declare 
him and the Kingdom of God at hand. It behooves 
us to note the divine leadings on this and on 
all other subjects and to follow as closely as circumstances 
will permit in the same footsteps,— whether we 
see or do not see, positively, the philosophy of the inspired 
methods. It may be argued that women were 
more ignorant then and are more intelligent now, but 
this would not account for the matter satisfactorily, 
because we know that the masses of the men were correspondingly 
ignorant of literature and philosophy at 
that time: as for instance in our Lord's case, the people 
in general marveled that he could read, and very few 
men except amongst the Scribes had the necessary 
education to read, or any use for such an education, 
since books were very rare and costly. 

Without offering any reason why this should be 
so, without attempting to give any explanation of the 
Divine course, we can very safely afford to wait for the 
few remaining years, until "that which is perfect is 
come," without attempting to change in any particular 
degree or even to greatly modify the methods instituted 
by our Lord, and generally practiced by the early 
Church. Especially so when we notice that Satan's 
method seems to be along diametrically opposite lines: 
he uses females chiefly— for Spiritualistic mediums, 
for Christian Science instructors and healers, and as 
apostles of Theosophy. 

On the contrary, we have no sympathy with the 
sentiment apparently held by some brethren, that the 
sisters of the Church are to be entirely ignored, and 
that any suggestions which they may offer respecting 
the Word of the Lord should be despised. But, while 
recognizing certain facts and principles on this subject 

R2222 : page 283 



laid down in the Scriptures, all should remember that 
it is a part of the Christian duty to be kind and courteous 
to all, overbearing and dogmatic toward none, 
male or female. And furthermore, let us remember 
that, while the outward proprieties acceptable to the 
Lord, may distinguish the more public ministers as for 
men, and the more private ministries for women, yet 
amongst those who are faithful to their appointed ministries, 
as the Lord has been pleased to arrange for 
them, there is no personal discrimination as between 
the sex in our Lord's love and estimation; "there is 
neither Jew nor Greek, bond nor free, male or female," 
but all are one in Christ Jesus.— Gal. 3:28. 

Distinctions as to nationality, freedom or sex, 
while they may be properly enough recognized in their 
relationship with the affairs of this present time, have 
no bearing whatever upon our Lord's love for us, nor 
upon our love for each other, nor upon the conditions 
of the future, when all these distinctions will be removed; 
that which is perfect having then come, national 
distinctions and different degrees of freedom, as well 
as sexual differences will all be obliterated. So then, 
while under divine providence a bondman may not be 
granted the opportunity to render as great a service in 

R2223 : page 283 

the Lord's cause as if he were a free man, while a very 
poor man might not have the same opportunities for 
service as if he were made a steward of wealth, and 
while the sisters may not under divine commission take 
quite so prominent a place in the public ministry of the 
truth as the brethren, nevertheless each one who is 
faithful in the use of the opportunities which the Lord 
has given him will be blessed according to his faithfulness 
to the Lord's arrangement;— as greatly, we may 
suppose, as tho equally faithful in the use of larger 
opportunities. And each one should be zealous to 
render all the service possible to the Master, in harmony 
with the station and conditions under which he has 
been placed through divine providence. The bondman 
is not to feel that the only way in which he can serve 
the Lord acceptably would be by becoming a master 
instead of a servant: nor are the sisters to suppose that 
the only way in which to be acceptable and to show 
their zeal would be by usurping authority over the man, 
contrary to the Divine order in nature, and as set forth 
in the Scriptures. On the contrary, thankfulness and 
gratitude to God is to be the ruling sentiment of our 
lives; and our zeal is to be, to use every opportunity 
which the Lord shall bring to our hands, rather than 
to endeavor to alter his arrangements in the mistaken 
thought we might thus render him a greater or more 
acceptable service. 

The Agabus mentioned in the tenth verse had already 
been manifested before the Church, as specially 



used of the Lord in foretelling the famine which came 
upon not only Palestine, but a large part of the civilized 
world at that time. (Acts 1 1:27.) His prophecy 
therefore of bonds and imprisonment awaiting Paul at 
Jerusalem would have great weight with all the Church. 
He accompanied it with signs, as was common with the 
prophets of olden time. (Jer. 13:5; 19:10,11; Ezek. 4:1-3; 
5:1-4, etc.) Believing implicitly that Agabus 
(as he declared) spoke as a mouthpiece of the holy 
spirit, the friends began to importune the Apostle to 
discontinue his journey to Jerusalem; even his companions 
joining in the request. But Paul was fully convinced 
that it was the Lord's will that he should go to 
Jerusalem and could not be hindered from so doing. As 
he had told the Elders of Ephesus that the holy spirit 
witnessed to him that bonds and imprisonments awaited 
him at Jerusalem, so now he was not surprised when 
through Agabus came another intimation to the same 
effect. His noble answer to the fears and entreaties 
of the brethren was in the sublimely courageous and 
yet beautifully sympathetic language of our Golden 
Text. O how important it is that we should all learn 
the lesson, not to be moved from faithfulness to the 
Lord and his commands; neither by the tears and entreaties 
of friends nor by the frowns and threats of our 
foes. 

"Where duty calls or danger, be never lacking there." 
Paul's firmness would no doubt be misunderstood 
by some, to be obstinacy and self-will: in reality however 
it was the very reverse of these. Self-will in him 
was completely subordinated to the divine will; and 
instead, therefore, of its being obstinacy it was faithfulness 
that he exhibited. His determination carried 
the day, and the others acquiesced, saying not, Paul's 
will be done; but, recognizing that Paul was faithfully 
carrying out the Divine plan they said, "The will of 
the Lord be done." 



R2223 : page 283 

INTERESTING LETTERS. 



page 283 

Virginia. 
MY DEAR BROTHER:-I wish to thank you for 
your kind letter. Before receiving it and knowing 
what you thought, I had concluded that Satan was the 
instigator of that Mormon report; and since you think 
so, too, I am all the more sure of it. The way I look 
at it is this:— You know I feel I ought to be baptized 
right here at home, and you know why I feel so. 



Satan doubtless, in some way I do not understand, 
knew it also, and he determined to prevent it, if he 
could, from having the desired and desirable effect; 
and to make it work against the truth; but he has not 

page 284 

succeeded. He may have thought also that he would 
turn me aside from my purpose, but He who is with 
me is mightier far than Satan. The rite was performed 
at the appointed time, by Dr. Staley, in the presence 
of a large congregation, many of whom went for a 
frolic, but they, together with Satan, were disappointed. 
It was a solemn and impressive service, and the 
feeling pervading the congregation was such that those 
who went in a spirit of levity found no sympathy, and 
were constrained to behave themselves properly. I attach 
no undue importance to any ceremony, anything 
merely external, but I will say that God has been 
pleased to give me sweet rest since, more than ever 
before. Last night in my room, alone in the dead 
hours of the night, I had sweet, delightful communion 
with him. Nothing ecstatic, nothing emotional, but I 
was able to put myself wholly in his hands and rest 
there. 

I am misrepresented, I am losing work; but none 
of these things move me, and I am fully persuaded 
that He is able and willing to keep that which I have 
committed unto him. Praise the Lord, O my soul! 

It will be only a little while longer, and then, then, 
the eternal weight of glory! Who, that can see, understand 
and appreciate God's gracious plan would not 
give up all for Christ? I shall praise Him as long as 
eternity endures, because He has called me into this 
wonderful grace, and condescended to reveal His plan 
to me, who am indeed the least of all saints. My soul 
magnifies the Lord, and rejoices in the God of my salvation. 
The thought that so far as I know, I am the 
only one in this whole town who accepts fully his 
gracious plan, makes me wonder with astonishment at 
his kindness to me, and at the same time humbles me. 

His richest benedictions be upon you and yours 
and all his faithful ones. Your brother in the faith, 



R2223 : page 284 

Connecticut. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-How hard are the 
barnacles over the understanding of the people. Indeed, 
"gross darkness has covered the people," but to us has 
been given a great light. Praise God! 

We here in S. find no seeming interest in the 
truth. At one of the church prayer meetings a woman 



rose and said it was her duty to warn people against us, 
that any one who believed as we did would surely go 
to hell, and in fire and torment repent when it was too 
late. One of our bitterest opponents, a man who stood 
and looked at us in a church prayer meeting, said, 
"There are some folks who are believing and preaching 
another chance after death, but I warn all against such 
doctrine, for the Bible says death ends all, and I have 
the Scriptures to prove it, and to back up what I say." 

This was another public assault, and I, knowing 
the people had heard me say many times that I 
stood upon the Word, felt as if it was my duty to reply 
and define my position; so I said, "No doubt this 
brother has made his assertion after a careful study 
and comparison of the Scriptures, but as I have been 
studying too, and have reached an opposite conclusion, 
and as the brother has said he has the Scriptures 
for proof, I would call on the brother for some of his 
proofs, being able to give him many, many passages in 
support of mine. But he never peeped, and last week 
at a church prayer meeting I spoke on the 1st chapter 
of Ephesians and said, that predestination was of a class 
not to individual salvation; spoke of the dispensation of 
the fullness of times as I see it; of what our inheritance 
is to be; what the earnest of our inheritance is; what 
Christ really did redeem; what it means to emerge 
from blindness, superstition and ignorance of God's 
plan in the nominal church; and of the hope of my calling, 
giving my Scriptures for my belief. I had liberty. 

He rose to his feet and said, "I thank God that 
Brother M. ever came to this meeting. I have never 
seen, before his explanation of this chapter, how many 
good things God had provided, and I have never understood 
the Bible so well as to-night. His explanation 
has opened many other things that were dark to me 
and I cannot tell how glad I am to know something of 
these, which to me have always been mysteries;" and 
he went home and told his wife how I had opened for 
his benefit the Scriptures, and that I had been much 
misrepresented to him. 

We are as ever, Yours in him 

F. U. and N. C. MELLEN. 



West Virginia. 
DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-Greetings from this 
house— Mrs. Gillis and myself. Your presentation of 
1 Cor. 13 exceeds expectation and will certainly prove 
an answer to the prayers of the faithful asking assistance 
to put on the character of our Lord. I am glad 
of the proposals you therein make; with the Lord's 
presence among us there is no doubt of the helpfulness. 
I have been assisted the past week since adopting your 
suggestions. Will endeavor to gratefully read and 
worship in unison with you and all to-morrow, reading 



1 Cor. 13. May we all grow in grace and knowledge. 
[We have many hearty responses to the suggestion, 
and blessings are already reported.— EDITOR.] 

I was led to search how it came that charity got 
into Paul's letter to the Corinthians from the word 
agape, and find the word Charity is coined from the 
pure Latin word caritas. The h being inserted to 
make it appear as if the Apostle had used the Greek 
charis. The translators having the disadvantage of 
"corrected" (?) MSS, it seems accepted charitas as 
Latin for Greek charis— charity. Caritas is from caras, 
dear, costly; and careo, to want (dear-th, scarce). The 
only sense in which there is even a remote equivalent 
in caritas for agape is the love we have for things dear, 
scarce, costly. 

Two or three times out of four issues, the County 
paper, Journal, gives me privilege of a column or more 
on first page. It does not publish Talmage's sermons. 
Our town paper here does publish Mr. T.'s eloquence, 
but its Editor is in sympathy with the truth as far as 
he has learned. It was to him you sent a set of DAWNS 
in cloth some time ago,— he was then on the Journal. 

May you be encouraged in every trial and come 
off more than conqueror through his grace who loved 
us and gave himself for us. Remember me at the 
times of prayer that I may develop the new nature- 
Love. Yours in Christ, H. L. GILLIS. 

P. S.~ Love to Sister Russell. I connect you both 
in my mind. 



R2223 : page 270 

MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. IV., 



SPECIAL ISSUE, 
WILL REPRESENT FOUR ISSUES OF THIS JOURNAL: 
OCT. 1 AND 15, AND NOV. 1 AND 15. 

WE EXPECT 
TO BEGIN MAILING IT OCTOBER 1, 1897. 
IT WILL BE SENT TO 
ALL WATCH TOWER SUBSCRIBERS NOT THEN IN ARREARS 
AS AND FOR THOSE NUMBERS, 
WITHOUT EXTRA CHARGE. 
REGULAR PRICE IN CLOTH BINDING $1.25, 
IN LEATHERETTE 50 CENTS, IN PAPER COVERS 35 CENTS 
PER VOLUME--656 PAGES. 



R2223 : page 270 

MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. IV., 



SPECIAL ISSUE, 
WILL REPRESENT FOUR ISSUES OF THIS JOURNAL: 
OCT. 1 AND 15, AND NOV. 1 AND 15. 

WE EXPECT 
TO BEGIN MAILING IT OCTOBER 1, 1897. 
IT WILL BE SENT TO 
ALL WATCH TOWER SUBSCRIBERS NOT THEN IN ARREARS 
AS AND FOR THOSE NUMBERS, 
WITHOUT EXTRA CHARGE. 
REGULAR PRICE IN CLOTH BINDING $1.25, 
IN LEATHERETTE 50 CENTS, IN PAPER COVERS 35 CENTS 
PER VOLUME--656 PAGES. 



page 285 

VOL. XVIII. DECEMBER 1, 1897. No. 23. 

CONTENTS. 



Special Terms on Dawns 286 

"The Anointing Which You Have 

Received" 287 

Teachers' Bibles 292 

Poem: Some Day 295 

"He That Humbleth Himself 

Shall Be Exalted" 295 

Paul's Dying Words 298 

Interesting Letters 300 

page 286 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
--ADDRESS TO- 
TOWER PUBLISHING CO., BIBLE HOUSE, 58 ARCH ST., 
ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 



SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, N.Y. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS: 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age or accident, or other 
adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, if they 
send a Postal Card each December, stating their cases and requesting the paper. 



R2224 : page 286 
"THE DAY OF VENGEANCE. "-DAWN, VOL. IV. 

As announced in our issue of Sept. 15, the fourth volume of 
MILLENNIAL DAWN was sent to all paid up subscribers as representing 
the October and November issues of ZION'S WATCH 
TOWER. All who failed to receive a copy should notice the date 
beside their names on the address tag. If the date is past it indicates 
that the subscription expired at that date. If the tag differs 
from your record of the matter, you should drop a card to the 
Tower Pub. Co., explaining and inquiring. Those regularly 
on the list as "the Lord's poor," who applied for the TOWER for 
and during 1897, received a copy of DAWN, volume IV., the same 
as cash subscribers. 

The second edition of ten thousand of this volume will soon 
be ready. This volume bids fair to be quite in demand by the 



public. Many can grasp the subject from this standpoint who 
are not disposed to heed direct appeals to the Bible: to many we 
hope it will prove to be an entering wedge for the truths of the 
other volumes. 

The first half of the volume is not as new to WATCH TOWER 
readers as to others; but it seemed necessary to a complete treatment 
of the topic and, as many letters already received indicate, 
even the review portion is fresh and interesting and strengthening 
to those who know it best. 



R2224 : page 287 

"THE ANOINTING WHICH YOU HAVE RECEIVED." 

-1 JOHN 2:21,27.- 

EVERY BLESSING which God has given to 

us as his people, our adversary, Satan, would 

if possible take from us; and to this end he seeks to 

deceive us in respect to the real gifts and provisions of 

God;— to mislead us respecting the truth, and to substitute 

for it something which will prove an injury to 

us. This general truth is forcibly exemplified in connection 

with the Scriptural teaching respecting the holy 

spirit and Satan's misrepresentation of the same, by 

which multitudes of Christians are deceived, blinded 

and hindered from spiritual development. A few poor 

translations in our Common Version English Bible, indicate 

clearly that the translators were as much confused 

upon the subject of the holy spirit as are the 

majority of Christian people to-day. 

In the passage above cited (1 John 2:27), the 
Apostle says, "The anointing which ye have received 
of him abideth in you, and ye need not that any man 
teach you: but as the same anointing teacheth you all 
things, and is truth and is no lie, and even as it has 
taught you, ye shall abide in him." How Satan has 
used this mistranslation to befog the minds of the 
Lord's people and to make them believe contrary to the 
testimony of their own senses! To illustrate the subject, 
we mention an incident in our own experience. 

A lady who had been attending our preaching for 
about a year ceased to be in attendance for about a 
year, when the following conversation, in substance, 
took place. 

We said, "It is some time, Sister, since we had 
the pleasure of meeting you." 

She replied, "Yes; I have not attended your meetings 
for about a year. I have now taken the holy spirit 
to be my teacher;"— referring to the above Scripture. 

We replied: "Well, Sister, you certainly have 
found an excellent teacher; and we trust that you are 
an attentive pupil, and that you are growing greatly in 
grace, in knowledge and in love." 



She answered that she thought she had made considerable 
development. 

We replied, "May we be excused for putting to 
you a very leading question along the line of your 
spiritual progress?" 

Answer: "Yes, with pleasure." 

We replied, "Our question then would be, How 
much and along what lines have you learned during 
the past year, in which you feel confident that the holy 
spirit has been your teacher? Will you please mention 
something that you have learned during this year's 
instruction that you did not know before?" 

The Sister tried in vain to think of one solitary 
item of truth or grace acquired during the year, and 
we then said, "Dear Sister, if you are correct in supposing 
that you had the holy spirit as a special and 
personal teacher in the very way that you think, then 
evidently from your own testimony you have been a 
very poor pupil and have learned nothing. Now, may 
we inquire how it was the year previous when you met 
with us for the study of the Lord's counsel?" 

Her answer was that during the year previous she 
certainly had learned a great deal respecting the divine 
Word and plan along many lines. Nevertheless, she 
was so pleased with the thought that she needed no 
human assistance in the study of the Lord's Word, and 
that God operated upon her mind and treated her as a 
private pupil, and not as one of the general class of 
scholars, that she was seemingly puffed up with the 
thought and preferred to continue it rather than to 

R2224 : page 288 

have the truth in the Lord's way,— Not forgetting the 
assembling together for the building up of one another 
and the use of all the means which God would grant 
for the understanding of his Word. How many others 
claim thus to be private pupils of the holy spirit without 
having anything creditable to show either in grace 
or knowledge, year after year. 

This illustration is a representative of thousands 
of similar instances in which the Adversary misleads 
those not sufficiently meek to accept the Lord's counsel 
in the Lord's way. No fact could be more plainly 
taught in the Lord's Word than that it was his intention 
to make use of human instrumentality, teachers, 
in the development of his Church. Mark the Apostle's 
statement. (1 Cor. 12:28,29.) "God hath set [placed in 
position] some in the Church, first apostles, secondarily 
prophets, thirdly teachers, after that miracles, then gifts 
of healing, helps, governments, diversities of tongues. 
Are all apostles? Are all prophets? Are all teachers? Are 
all workers of miracles? Have all the gifts of healing? 
Do all speak with tongues? Do all interpret?" We 
admit that many of these early gifts to the Church 
passed away, but we hold that some of these were not 



intended to pass away until the Church should be completed. 
In proof of this we refer to Eph. 4:8,11-16, 
in which he says, speaking of our Lord Jesus and the 
giving of the holy spirit to the Church, "He gave some 
apostles; and some prophets; and some evangelists; and 
some pastors and teachers; for the perfecting of the 
saints for the work of the ministry, for the edifying of 
the body of Christ, until we all come in the unity of the 
faith and the knowledge of the Son of God unto a perfect 
man,— unto the measure of the stature of the fulness of 
Christ." 

What then is the significance of this statement 
about there being "no need that any man teach you" 
but that "the same anointing teacheth you all things?" 
We answer, the Apostle has reference here to a particular 
matter described in a preceding verse. (1 John 2:18,19.) 
Some who had been believers in Christ 
had rejected him and had left the company of those 
who still believed. The Apostle is merely pointing 
out that those who had received the holy spirit 
of the Lord should in this fact have sufficient 
proof to offset any arguments of the Adversary to 
the effect that Christ was an impostor. Since they had 
received the holy spirit as a seal to their hearts and to 
their faith, it should be quite unnecessary for John or 
any one else to write to them an epistle, proving to 
them, or teaching them, that Jesus is the Son of God; 
for the anointing which they had received was proof 
positive of this fact, superior to any arguments that 
could be framed by any man. And to this all Christians 
will agree. But the passage has no reference whatever 
to general instruction in righteousness and in the Word 
of God and in the plan of salvation. 

Another statement in the same connection (1 John 2:20) 
is similarly misread. It says, "Ye have an 
unction [an anointing or lubrication] from the Holy 
One and ye know all things." The passage thus rendered 
is very certain to be a stumbling block to many. 
If they do not "know all things," they are in doubt 
whether or not they have ever received the holy spirit. 
If they claim that they should know all things and that 
they do know all things, they are very apt to convince 
their friends by such claims that they are somewhat 
unbalanced mentally. The passage however becomes 
very simple and very reasonable when properly translated 
thus: "Ye have the anointing of the Holy One 
and ye all know it." The one receiving the anointing 
should know it, whether others know it or not. And 
yet the character of this anointing has been presented 

R2225 : page 288 

to the Christian mind in so confused a manner that the 
vast majority to day do not know whether they have 
the anointing from the Holy One or not. Nor have 
they any idea what such an anointing would imply in 



their own personal experience. We may therefore 
profitably examine this subject together, "that we may 
know the things that are freely given unto us of God." 

The word "anointing" and the word "unction" 
carry with them the thought of oiling, making smooth, 
lubricating. From earliest times God has used oil as 
a type of the holy spirit: for instance, the kings of 
Israel, before being installed in office, were anointed; 
likewise the priesthood. (Exod. 30:22-32.) Christ is 
the antitype not only of Israel's kings, but also of Israel's 
High priests— the two offices unite in him. And 
as we have already seen, "the Christ" according to 
divine arrangement is to be a composite body, the elect 
overcoming Church, under Christ its glorious head. 
Hence, the oil which was poured upon the head of the 
king and the priest in type, and which ran down over 
the entire person, represented the holy spirit of God, 
poured out upon our Head, Christ Jesus, which subsequently 
reached the Church which is his body, at Pentecost, 
and which has been flowing down ever since, 
anointing the various members of his "body" from that 
day to the present time. 

And the antitype, the holy spirit upon God's elect, 
should be expected, in some respects at least, to resemble 
the type. As the effect in the type was to cause a 
shining of the face, so the antitype, the holy spirit, is 
indeed the "oil of joy" which counteracts the spirit of 
heaviness in all those who receive it, causing their faces 
to shine and their hearts to rejoice with joy unspeakable. 
Oil was used in olden times for anointing the 
skin to give smoothness and softness and suppleness to 
the joints and muscles: so the holy spirit brings to all 

R2225 : page 289 

who are anointed with it a smoothness and softness of 

character and manner not previously theirs. The 

Apostle in explaining this holy spirit, this spirit of 

Christ, the spirit of the Truth, the spirit of God, calls 

it Love; and properly so, for God is Love, and hence 

the spirit of God must be a spirit of love. Explaining 

the spirit of love, the Apostle declares that it is the 

sum of all its graces. He enumerates some of these, 

calling them gentleness, meekness, patience, brotherly-kindness, 

affection, long-suffering; all these graces 

together, love. He likewise points out what characteristics 

are opposed to love and denominates them the 

carnal mind or disposition, whose characteristics are 

anger, malice, hatred, strife, vain-glory, emulations 

and all such works of the flesh and of the devil, which 

are contrary to the spirit of God but are elements of 

the spirit of the world. 

As the Apostle John says, whoever has received 
the spirit of Love, the holy spirit or disposition, the 
spirit of the Truth, has an unction, anointing, lubrication 
from the Holy One: for it has no other author: 



it is the spirit of God, which proceedeth and came forth 
from him, bestowed upon his faithful. As the Apostle 
further declares, "Ye [who have received it] all know it." 

The possession of this spirit of Love, the spirit of 
the Truth, is an evidence that the possessor has been 
begotten of God and is a child of God; and that if faithful 
to his Lord and Head, even unto the end, he will 
by and by be made a joint-heir in his Kingdom. The 
possession of this spirit on the part of those who believe 
in the Lord Jesus as their Redeemer constitutes 
therefore, as the Apostle says, the seal of their adoption 
into God's family— "whereby ye are sealed unto 
the day of redemption [deliverance]." (Eph. 4:30) 
The absence of this unction or anointing, even tho accompanied 
with some knowledge of the truth, is an 
evidence that the heart has not been fully consecrated 
to the Lord; the will not fully resigned to his will and 
Word. 

In the beginning of the Gospel age it was proper 
that the manifestation of divine favor should be not 
only through the fruits of the spirit, faith, hope and 
love, but also that it should be manifested by outward 
signs, or "gifts" of the spirit,— tongues, miracles, 
prophesyings, etc. And hence the Pentecostal blessing 
not only sealed the Lord's people with his spirit of 
love, but also gave miraculous physical "gifts" to the 
Church: they however soon passed away— the power 
to communicate those gifts being limited to the Apostles. 

The spirit of the Law age was the spirit of Justice. 
During that epoch God manifested the element of his 
character which we term Justice, and his Law, "an eye 
for an eye and a tooth for a tooth," was the one according 
to which the Jewish ideas formulated. But when 
in the fulness of time God manifested another element 
of his character, namely Love, then that became the 
pattern,— the next lesson for all who would be taught 
of him to learn. "Herein was manifested the love of 
God, in that he gave his only begotten Son;" "in this 
was manifested the love of God toward us, because 
that God sent his only begotten Son into the world 
that we might live through him. Herein is love, 
not that we loved God, but that he loved us, and sent 
his Son to be the propitiation [satisfaction] for our 
sins."-l John 4:9,10. 

Accordingly, we find our Redeemer, who was filled 
with the holy spirit of love himself, speaking as the 
mouthpiece of the Father and declaring, "A new commandment 
I give unto you, that ye love one another." 
We find him also explaining the Law, and showing that 
while it signified justice, yet it could be fulfilled only by 
love. "Love is the fulfilling of the Law." We hear 
him summing up the entire significance of all that had 
been taught to Israel, saying, (1) "Thou shalt love 
the Lord thy God with all thy heart, mind, soul [being] 
and strength;" and (2) "Thou shalt love thy 
neighbor as thyself. On these two commandments 



hang all the Law and the prophets." The Apostle 

John and others of the Lord's disciples heard his wonderful 

teachings and witnessed his exemplification of 

this holy spirit of love and marveled; but it was not 

their privilege to possess the same spirit until Pentecost. 

Before that they received him and became his 

followers, disciples, and received some instruction respecting 

the way of life; but it was expedient for them 

that he should go away— that he should pay the ransom-price, 

be raised from the dead by the Father's 

power and ascend up on high to appear as their high 

priest and make an atonement for their sins— else the 

Comforter could not come, they could not receive and 

be begotten by the spirit of the truth, the spirit of love, 

the holy spirit. (John 14:16,17; 15:26; 16:7.) And 

this is the declaration of the Apostle John, "As many 

as received him [Jesus], to them gave he power [privilege] 

to become the sons of God [beginning at Pentecost]; 

even to them that believe on his name: which 

were begotten [beginning at Pentecost] not of blood, 

nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but 

ofGod."-John 1:12,13. 

It was only natural and to be expected that the 
believers in the early Church would overlook the most 
important blessing, the sealing, the anointing of the 
holy spirit of Love; and that they should think chiefly 
of the "gifts"— of tongues, healings, miracles, etc. It 
was therefore necessary that the Lord through the 
Apostle should call their attention to the fact that the 
fruits of the spirit, faith, hope, love were the essentials, 
and not the tongues, miracles and other gifts. He 

R2225 : page 290 

says, "Yet show I unto you a more excellent way"— 
following after love, whose development and ripeness 
will be a gradual and progressive work. And the Apostle 
points out clearly that one might have all the various 
"gifts," healing-power, miraculous power, ability 
to speak with tongues, etc., yet if they did not possess 
in addition to these the spirit of God, the spirit of 
Christ, the spirit of the Truth, the spirit of Love, they 
would be simply tinkling cymbals, sounding brasses- 
drums without spiritual life or vitality in any degree, 
and consequently without any proper hope respecting 
a future life or the Kingdom. 

If we have this holy spirit, this anointing, this 
unction, we surely know it as a fact, whether or not 
we have always discerned it as being the spirit of our 
adoption to the divine nature. However true it is that 
this holy spirit is to be a gradual development in the 
Lord's people, a growth in grace, it is nevertheless 
equally true that it had a definite time of beginning. 
It did not begin when first we came to know the grace 
of God in Christ, in the precious blood shed for the 
forgiveness of our sins. With repentance and faith 



came justification, and its "joy and peace through believing;" 

but it was not until later that we had, by the 

same faith, "access into this grace wherein we stand, 

and rejoice in hope of [sharing] the glory of God."— 

Rom. 5:1,2. 

This latter grace we attained only by learning 
to admire to some extent God's character of love. He 
invites us to consecrate ourselves fully to him, to lay 
aside and to sacrifice our own wills and to follow in the 
footsteps of the Lord Jesus Christ, who did not his own 
will but the will of his Father who sent him: and it is 
when we reach this point of full surrender of our own 
wills to the will of God that we may be purged of 
selfishness, the spirit of the world and of earthly ambitions, 
and be filled with the spirit of the Lord, the 
spirit of holiness, the spirit of the truth, the spirit of 
love. Then we are accepted of the Lord as "new creatures 
in Christ Jesus" and receive an impartation of his 
spirit of holiness, love, as the seal or mark of our acceptance 
—"being transformed by the renewing of our 
minds." Thenceforth, all holy things, the things of 
God and the people of God, as well as God himself, 
draw forth our hearts; no matter who they are nor 
under what circumstances, we love the Lord's people 
and everything which is in harmony with the Lord's 
Word and character. And correspondingly from the 
same moment of full consecration we are the enemies 

R2226 : page 290 

and opponents of sin, we "hate every evil way" and 
everything sinful, mean, selfish, contemptible, and 
contrary to love, whether we find its stain upon our 
own flesh or upon others of the fallen race. Thenceforth 
it is our mission as new creatures to be representatives 
of God and his truth and his spirit of love, and 
all other considerations are secondary; and the language 
of the heart is:— 

"Henceforth my chief concern shall be, 
To live and speak and toil for Thee." 
This is the new life, and from the time it begins 
we are reckoned as "new creatures in Christ Jesus; 
old things have passed away, all things have become 
new." But the new creature has various difficulties to 
contend with, all of which are permitted of divine providence 
for his development and perfecting, which will 
not be accomplished until he has proved faithful unto 
death, and in the first resurrection has been clothed 
with the spiritual body and its new conditions against 
which there will be no necessity for warfare. "But 
we [new creatures] that are in this tabernacle [present 
earthly conditions unfavorable to the new creature] do 
groan, being burdened [by the constant conflict with 
the powers of darkness as well as with the motions of 
sin in our own flesh and the contact with sin abounding 
on every hand]." The new creature finds in the 



present existence necessity for a continual battle between 

his flesh and himself as a new creature, an 

adopted and begotten son of God, whose disposition or 

spirit is one of holiness and love toward God and men; 

for he is opposed by inherited imperfections and depraved 

tendencies in his own physical system. Hence, 

he is obliged continually to recognize the two personalities, 

as the Apostle expresses it— the new "I," which 

loves God and men, especially the household of faith, 

and which desires holiness, seeks peace and endeavors 

daily to become more and more an exact copy of the 

Lord Jesus Christ; and the other "I," the natural man, 

which is reckoned dead, but which will not be actually 

gotten rid of until literal death; which continually 

seeks to obtrude its will and preference, and requires 

to be continually kept under by the new "I," in complete 

subjection to the will of God in Christ, to the holy 

spirit of love.— 1 Cor. 9:27. 

The beginning of this experience as a "new creature" 
varies somewhat with different individuals. The 
spirit of the Lord, the spirit of Love, has to a certain 
extent won favor with very many of the worldly, and 
many of these to some extent, conform their lives to it 
slightly, even tho they have never been begotten by it 
to a complete transformation of disposition. As a consequence, 
we find that the so-called "Christian world" 
which has not received the holy spirit as a comforting 
and guiding influence, nor as a seal or mark of adoption 
into the Divine family, has nevertheless adopted 
some of the outward features of the holy spirit of love 
as its standard, and outwardly at least has been blessed 
thereby. For instance, gentleness is one element of 
the holy spirit, and some people who are thoroughly 

R2226 : page 291 

worldly have cultivated this grace of gentleness to a 
very large extent and are pleased to be known as gentlemen 
and ladies (gentlewomen). Indeed, amongst a 
certain class of thoroughly worldly people for one to say 
to the other, You are not a gentleman, sir! or You are 
not a lady, madam! would be a sure method of arousing 
anger, malice, hatred, strife and various other 
qualities which would prove beyond question that the 
persons so jealous of their reputation for gentleness are 
really devoid of the spirit of Love, and hence, that 
their gentleness is not a fruitage of the holy spirit 
within, but is merely an outward adornment, fastened 
on externally. 

Similarly, we have noticed business men exercise 
wonderful patience in dealing with unreasonable customers, 
and may have marveled how they attained so 
good a degree of proficiency in patience, and self-control; 
but perhaps after the customer had been served, 
cordially shaken hands with and bidden good-bye, those 
who were near have heard the burst of passion and indignation, 



accompanied perhaps with profanity, which 
indicated that the patience and self-control manifested 
were merely from a love of money, and not the fruitage 
of love, the holy spirit. In society, the lady who 
is very gentle in manner and in word, and very patient, 
and who perhaps manifests her love with much gusto 
and a kiss and with many gentle and affable manners, 
will sometimes in private reveal the fact that such conduct 
was not the fruitage or result of having her heart 
filled with the holy spirit of Love, but was merely a 
display on the surface of carefully cultivated gracious 
manners; the heart perhaps revealed its true condition 
privately in speaking evil of the one on whom kisses 
and demonstrations of affectionate love had been showered 
but a few moments before. 

With the "new creature," begotten of the spirit of 
Love, matters are wholly different: the demonstrations 
of love for God in worship are not outward formalities 
or mere habits of worship, but the homage of the heart, 
which delights to not only outwardly worship, but to 
bow before the Lord in secret and to serve him with 
its very best of time, influence, voice or other means. 
Its love for humanity is genuine, sincere, also: it loves 
chiefly amongst men those who have the most of the 
Lord's likeness in their characters; and whether rich 
or poor, learned or unlearned, the mark of divine acceptance, 
the seal of the spirit of the Lord upon any, 
is quite sufficient to draw out for such love and interest 
and service according to the necessities and the opportunities 
—as unto the Lord. Even toward the worldly 
and the wicked (who are not knowingly and wilfully 
wicked) there is a sympathy, an appreciation of the 
blindness of their minds which has come from the god 
of this world, and which hinders them from appreciating 
the goodness of God and the beauties of his character. 
Feeling a sympathy for these and for all who 
are under the distresses of the "curse," the new spirit, 
the loving or holy spirit, prompts them not only to 
"love unfeigned" for the "brethren," but to sympathy 
unfeigned for the entire "groaning creation." From 
this condition springs their gentleness to all, their patience 
with all, their kindness and moderation and 
long-suffering, Love. But these who have the true 
spirit of love and who in this have an evidence that 
they "have passed from death unto life,"— that they 
have the spirit of Christ, without which they would 
be none of his, that they have been "sealed with 
the holy spirit of promise" as the earnest or beginning 
of the new nature,— these are the few exceptions even 
amongst those who have named the name of Christ. 

It need not be surprising to us that all Christians 
have not exactly the same experience in reaching the 
beginning of this spirit-begotten condition, with its renewed 
mind. Let us remember that some are born 
into Christian families where the spirit of the Lord, 
the spirit of love, has been to a considerable extent 



recognized: either the outward graces of gentleness, 

patience, brotherly-kindness, etc., have been set up as 

home rules and standards, and have helped to bring 

blessing and peace, or the true spirit of love itself, has 

control of one or more influential in the family, in 

whom these various graces are a natural fruitage or 

outgrowth, which makes some impression on each member 

of the family. Those who are born and reared 

under such favorable conditions, and who thus have 

learned to appreciate love and to practice it to some 

slight extent, are indeed highly favored. Yet nevertheless, 

when they shall have reached years of discretion and 

personal judgment, and after they have confirmed with 

their maturer thoughts the faith of childhood respecting 

the redemption which God has accomplished 

through Christ, each should come to the point of making 

a definite, positive and everlasting covenant with 

the Lord,— presenting himself a living sacrifice to 

him, to his truth and to his service. Understanding 

that this means the dethronement of self, and the enthronement 

in their heart of the will of the Lord, as 

instead of their own will, not only as respects evil 

things, but in respect to every matter, such thereby 

become new creatures in Christ Jesus; consecrated and 

accepted as members of "the Church which is his body," 

and as heirs of God, joint-heirs with Jesus Christ, their 

Lord, if so be that they will "suffer with him that they 

may also be glorified together" with him. When such 

a young person, brought up in the nurture and admonition 

of the Lord shall have thus completed his 

covenant by laying himself upon the altar of the Lord, 

he will be sealed with the holy spirit of love: he will 

(CONTINUED ON PAGE 294.) 

R2226 : page 294 

feel a broader and a deeper love both for God and for 

his fellows, than he ever before experienced. Nevertheless, 

in his case the change will be less sharply defined 

than in the case of one differently born and reared 

—one reared under the influence of undiluted sin 

and selfishness; who, believing in Christ as his Redeemer 

and repenting of sin, subsequently presents 

himself a living-sacrifice to the Lord. With the latter, 

the change from feelings of hatred, envy, strife and 

selfishness, suddenly giving place to warm, loving devotion 

to the Lord and sympathy and love for fellow-creatures, 

would be a great and much more startling 

experience. Hence some of these latter, if of a demonstrative 

turn, may sing or weep for joy and feel 

like embracing everybody near them, when first they 

receive of the spirit of love and holiness. 

But while the Apostle's statement of the matter 
must always be true, that those who have received the 
anointing from the Holy One "all know it" themselves 



—can readily discern the change of their own sentiments 
—it is also true that it should not be very long 
after they received it and know it, before others should 
know it also. The Lord has indicated one particular 
way in which he desires every new creature, whose will 

R2227 : page 294 

has been baptized into the will of Christ and who has 

received of the holy spirit of love and who has become 

a new creature in Christ, pledged to walk in newness 

of life, to indicate this change to others; namely, by an 

immersion in water, as a symbol of the consecration 

and immersion of the will; and while this should be 

promptly attended to as a confession before fellow-creatures, 

yet such a confession would not be a sure 

sign of the new life: for many have thus confessed 

"newness of life" whose living epistles seem to contradict 

this. 

When however the holy spirit is received into the 
heart as the actuating principle of a life guided and 
instructed by the counsel of the Lord, it will not only 
obey the Lord in the matter of symbolic immersion, 
but it will also soon manifest itself in the various affairs 
of life, to those with whom the "new creature" comes 
in contact. The anointing which comes upon the Lord's 
people must soon or later affect their outward conduct 
by manifestations of greater meekness, patience, 
gentleness, brotherly-kindness, affection and generosity 
of word and deed. All of this is in the illustration 
of the anointing oil which typifies the spirit from which 
we have an unction or anointing or lubrication. But 
this lubricating and mollifying of character will come 
slowly, gradually, and we must not expect a miracle 
or as sudden a change in our earthen vessels as we had 
in the spirit of our minds: nevertheless, the "new 
creature," the renewed will, is to control the earthly 
body and impart its spirit and disposition to it, so far 
as possible, and should begin the work at once. If the 
new mind or spirit or disposition of love for God and 
man dwells in us richly, as new creatures, it will speedily 
begin to lubricate, make smooth and unctuous the 
earthen vessel. 

In this day of machinery all have some knowledge 
of it and of why machinists put oil upon all its joints 
and bearings: it is in order that it may operate with 
the greater ease and perform its duties the more perfectly. 
Without the oil the tendency would be for the 
various parts to bind and produce friction, heat, wear: 
with the oil, the mechanism will perform its duties much 
better than without it. Nevertheless, as we all know, 
machines are of various degrees of perfection and imperfection, 
hence while the oil will be of advantage to 
every machine, it will not produce the same evenness 
and smoothness of motion in every part of each. And 
so it is amongst Christians: while every Christian will 



be blessed by the holy spirit, the unction, anointing 

and lubrication from the Holy One, through the spirit 

of love received, nevertheless all Christians will not be 

alike smooth, regular, moderate, gentle, long-suffering, 

tenderly affectionate one toward another in love. 

The anointed heart or will can be, will be, must be 

striving for perfecting in love and actuated by it as a 

motive power, but the outward working of this upon 

the natural body, the outward man, will vary according 

to its natural makeup and its rooting in selfishness 

—sin. The man or woman who was naturally bad 

tempered, cross, selfish, hateful, mean will be helped 

from the time the anointing of the holy spirit of love 

is received; yet it may be weeks or months or years 

before the friction in certain parts of the disposition is 

worn smooth; and it should be the constant effort of 

every "new creature in Christ," first of all to be sure 

that he has received the unction, the spirit of love, and 

secondly to grow in that spirit and grace, to be filled 

with the spirit of love, letting the spirit of Christ dwell 

in him richly and abound, and thirdly he should constantly 

and earnestly strive to let the light he has received 

so shine before men that they may see his good 

works, that they may see that the spirit of Christ has 

produced in him a great change and an increasing 

change toward meekness, gentleness, patience, brotherly-kindness, 

benevolence, in all the workings and operations 

of life, that thus he may glorify God in his body 

and in his spirit (new mind) which, with all he has, 

are given to the Lord by consecration as well as being 

his by redemption. 

Whatever friction may be unavoidable between the 
new creature and the world, which has a different 
spirit and which therefore operates along different lines 
and on different principles, there should be no friction 
amongst those who are the Lord's people, and who 

R2227 : page 295 

have all received of the same spirit. We recall the 
Apostle's words respecting the body of Christ in which 
he urges that even the speaking of the truth should be 
done in love one for another; that we "may grow up 
into him in all things, which is the head, even Christ: 
from whom the whole body fitly joined together and 
compacted, by that which every joint supplieth [lubrication] 
according to the effectual working of every part 
in its own place, maketh increase of the body unto the 
edifying of itself in love." (Eph. 4:15,16.) The 
Apostle's thought seems to be that while each new 
creature may be considered as a complete member of 
Christ, and have all the parts of his own character thoroughly 
lubricated with the spirit of love, yet in addition 
to this all the new creatures are to recognize themselves 
as members one of another, and of the body of 
Christ, the Church; and are to exercise toward each 



other in their various efforts toward cooperation in 
obedience to the will of the Lord, such love, such unction, 
such anointing, such lubrication, as will prevent 
friction and enable the whole body of Christ to cooperate 
for its own upbuilding in the graces as well as for 
its own completion in numbers. 

This same thought is brought to our attention 
through the prophet David who, after saying, "How 
good and pleasant it is for brethren to dwell together 
in unity," adds, "It is like the precious ointment upon 
the head"— the anointing oil upon the typical priest, 
Aaron, representing the holy spirit upon the royal 
priesthood, head and body.— Psa. 133. 



R2350 : page 295 

SOME DAY. 



"Some day all doubt and mystery 

Will be made clear: 
The threatening clouds that now we see 

Will disappear. 

"Some day what seems a punishment, 

Or loss or pain, 
Will prove to be God's blessing, sent 

For very gain. 

"Some day our weary feet will rest 

In sweet content; 
And we will know that we were blest 

By what was sent; 

"And, looking back with clearer eyes 

O'er life's short span, 
We'll see with wondering, glad surprise, 

God's perfect plan; 

"And, knowing that the way we went 

Was God's own way, 
We'll recognize his wise intent, 

Some day, some day." 



R2227 : page 295 
"HE THAT HUMBLETH HIMSELF SHALL BE EXALTED. 

-DEC. 5. -PHIL. 2:1-11.- 
"Let this mind be in you, which was 



also in Christ Jesus."— Phil. 2:5. 

THE exhortations of this lesson are taken from the 
Apostle's letter to the Church at Philippi. It 
will be remembered that this Church was the first one 
founded in Europe: the particulars connected with its 
small beginning were noted in our lessons for July 4th 
and 1 1th. Referring to the smallness of its beginning 
Dr. McLaren, commenting upon the account of how 
the Apostle and his companions found outside the city 
by the river bank a place of resort for prayer and 
"spake unto the women which resorted thither," 
says:— 

"Not blowing of trumpets, not beating of drums 
of any sort. A few women and some worn out travelers 
talking together by the banks of the rushing river. 
How scornfully the great folk of Philippi would have 
smiled, if they had been told that the chief title of their 
city to be remembered at all would be the presence in 
it of that one insignificant Jew, and his letter to the 
Church founded on that morning ! " 

The Apostle indirectly reveals something respecting 
the general character of the Philippian Church in 
the Epistle written to it: we find in it nothing like reproof 
or correction, as we find in most of the epistles 
written to other Churches by the same Apostle. It is 
a particularly beautiful and loving letter and indicates 
a very close sympathetic bond between the Apostle and 
this Church in particular. Moreover, this Church on 
four different occasions that we know of rendered the 
Apostle practical sympathy by financial assistance, as 
well as by words of comfort and cheer. While at Thessalonica 
he twice received their gifts in his support; 
again while he was at Corinth they ministered to him, and 
again when he was a prisoner in Rome they did not 
forget him. It was their messenger, Epaphroditus, who 
brought this last memorial of their love, who was 
"sick unto death"— probably prostrated by the malarial 
fever. On his recovery, the Apostle Paul sent back 
with him this beautiful letter known to us as The Epistle 
to the Philippians. (Phil. 2:25-28; 4:14-19; 2 Cor. 11:9.) 
The other Churches may possibly have ministered 

R2227 : page 296 

to the Apostle also, but if so the fact is not recorded; 

apparently they missed a great opportunity, 

and we may be sure that while the Apostle did urge 

them to contribute to the relief of the brethren at Jerusalem, 

during a period of famine, he would not 

make a request for personal assistance, however much 

he may have been in need, or however much he might 

have appreciated even small manifestations of their 

love for him and the cause he served. 



The lesson before us respecting Christian humility 
does not intimate that this grace was lacking among 
the Philippians, but that the Apostle recognized it as 
being one of the most important of all the graces, and 
one which required continual cultivation, in order to a 
continual growth in the likeness of Christ. The opening 
words of this lesson are an exhortation to brotherly-love 
and affection amongst themselves. He says, 
If there be any consolation in Christ, if there be any 
comfort of love to those who are in him, if they have 
any heart, if they have any mercies,— as tho he would 
put them to the test whether or not any would deny 
that these graces appertain to all who have come into 
Christ as new creatures. Then, as tho they had assented 
to his proposition, conceding that there is comfort, 
love, fellowship, sympathy and consolation in 

R2228 : page 296 

Christ for one another, he adds: You can fill my joy 
full by being thus minded toward each other— having 
love for each other, being in sympathy and accord with 
each other, and having one mind or purpose or will as 
a Church, the Lord's will. How grand an expression 
this is, his joy would be filled merely by knowing of 
their sympathy and love for him, not by knowing of 
their professions of love for the Lord, but by knowing 
that they loved, sympathized with and consoled one 
another, in the proper fellowship of the members of the 
body of Christ! This would fill his joy more full than 
anything else that he could know respecting them. 
Likewise, we may be sure the same conditions would 
be most pleasing and most acceptable in the sight of 
our Lord and Savior. The Apostle John had the same 
thought respecting brotherly-love in the Church as an 
indication of its godliness, when he says: "He that 
loveth not his brother whom he hath seen, how can he 
love God whom he hath not seen?"— 1 John 4:20. 

To this end— that such a spirit of perfect unity 
and fellowship might obtain amongst the believers at 
Philippi, Paul exhorts that all shall cultivate the grace 
of humility, and that in every affair each shall take 
heed that "nothing be done through strife or vain 
glory," that self-laudation and strivings for preeminence 
be thoroughly put away as the greatest enemies 
to the spirit of the Lord and the blessing of the Church. 
On the contrary, each should have that lowliness of 
mind which can see the good qualities of fellow-members 
and appreciate some of these qualities at least 
as superior to his own. Lowliness of mind does not necessarily 
signify an ignorance of any talents or graces 
which we ourselves may possess; but so long as the 
Church is in the present imperfect or tabernacle condition, 
the perfection of all the graces, and all the 
talents, and all the abilities, need never be expected in 



any one person in any congregation. So, then, each 
one may, if he be of lowly mind, see in others certain 
good qualities or graces superior to his own and should 
delight to recognize these and to esteem their possessor 
accordingly. 

For each one to look merely upon his own things, 
interests, welfare or talents and to ignore these in others 
would manifest a general selfishness, and consequently 
a dearth of the spirit of Christ, which is a 
spirit of love and generosity. In proportion as we are 
filled more and more with the holy spirit, love, we will 
find ourselves interested in the welfare of others. This 
was the mind, disposition or spirit which was in our 
dear Redeemer,— which he so wonderfully manifested, 
which we must copy and develop in our characters if 
we would ultimately be of the "little flock" who shall 
be joint-heirs with Christ in his glory: concerning whom 
God has predestinated that to be accepted with him to 
this position they must be "copies of his Son."— 
Rom. 8:29. 

That we may partially discern how our Lord Jesus 
exemplified this spirit of humility, the Apostle briefly 
sums up in few words the story of his humiliation and 
how it led to his present exaltation. He points out to 
us that when our Lord Jesus was a spirit being, before 
he stooped to take our nature and to bear the penalty 
of our sin, he was in "a form of God"— a spirit form, 
a high and glorious condition. But instead of being 
moved selfishly to ambitiously grasp for higher things 
than those which God had conferred upon him— instead 
of seeking to set up a rival empire as did Satan- 
he did not meditate a robbery of God to make himself 
his equal (Satan's course), saying, "I will ascend above 
the stars [the bright ones, the angelic hosts], I will be 
as the Most High [his peer, his equal]." Quite to the 
contrary of this, our Lord Jesus, "the beginning of the 
creation of God," was willing in harmony with the 
Father's plan to humble himself, to take a lower nature 
and to do a work which would imply not only a great 
deal of humiliation but also a great deal of pain and 
suffering. The Apostle points out how the "Only Begotten" 
proved his willingness and humility by complying 
with this arrangement; and that after he became 
a man he continued of the same humble spirit, willing 
to carry out the Divine plan to the very letter, by dying 
as man's ransom-price; and not only so, when it 

R2228 : page 297 

pleased the Father to require that the death should be 
a most ignominious one in every respect, perhaps beyond 
the requirements of the ransom merely, he did 
not draw back, but said, "Thy will not mine be done," 
and stooped even to the ignominious "death of the 
cross." 
Here, as the Apostle points out, we have the most 



wonderful demonstration of humility, meekness and 
obedience to God that ever was manifested or that 
could be conceived of. And this is the pattern the 
Apostle points out that we should seek to copy. "Let 
this same [humble] mind be in you, which was also in 
Christ Jesus." 

It was on account of this humility, which enabled 
him to render perfect obedience, that the Heavenly 
Father has so highly honored our dear Redeemer as to 
raise him from the dead to the Divine nature, to a station 
far above angels, principalities and powers, and 
every name that is named. That this is his argument 
is shown (verse 9) by the word "wherefore;" i.e., on 
this account, on account of this humility just described, 
God hath highly exalted him. 

Not only did our Lord's beautiful and perfect humility 
and obedience demonstrate that he was loyal to 
the core to the Heavenly Father, but it also demonstrated 
that in him the Father's spirit, Love, dwelt 
richly, for he shared the Father's love for the race he 
redeemed. On this account also he is found worthy to 
be the divine agent in the blessing of all the families 
of the earth, as per the terms of the divine covenant 
made with father Abraham. Thus he has become the 
head of the "Seed of Abraham" which is to bless the 
race redeemed; and hence it will be to him that every 
knee shall bow and every tongue confess, when Jehovah's 
"due time" shall come for the pouring out of 
divine blessings upon the redeemed world— that all 
may come to a knowledge of the truth and, if they 
will, into full harmony with God, and to eternal 
life. 

The Apostle not only holds up the Lord Jesus as 
the great example of a proper humility, self-abnegation 
and obedience to God in the interest of others, but he 
would also hold up before us the reward, the high exaltation 
of our Lord by the Father, the result or reward 
of his obedience, that we also might be encouraged, 
and realize that, if faithful in following the footsteps 
of our Redeemer and sacrificing the advantages of the 
present to serve the Lord and his cause, then, in due 
time, we also may expect to be glorified with him and 
to share his name and throne and work, as members of 
his anointed body, his Church, his joint-heir. 

In the succeeding verses (12-16) the Apostle gives 
a most beautiful tribute to the Church at Philippi, 
while urging them to continue on and to make more 
and more progress in the race-course in which they had 
already started, working out in themselves through 
humility and obedience the character, the disposition 
of Christ, with fear and trembling, and thus working 
out each his own share in the great salvation to glory, 
honor and immortality which God hath promised. 

We cannot work out our own justification; but being 
justified by the blood of Christ, and being called 
with the heavenly calling, we can make our calling and 



election sure, we can work out our own share in the 

great salvation to which we have been called in Christ, 

by giving heed to the instructions of the Lord; by following 

the pattern which he has set for us. Not that 

we will attain perfection in the flesh, but merely perfection 

of will, of intention, of heart; and keeping the 

body under to the extent of our ability, its weaknesses 

and imperfections will be reckoned as covered by the 

merit of our Lord, the Holy One. 

It is encouraging also for us to know that this 
warfare is not merely one of our own, against weakness 
and sin; but that God is for us, has called us, and 
is helping us. He already works in us, by his Word 
of promise, and has led us thus far in the willing and 
the doing of his will, his good pleasure: and he will 
continue thus to lead and to help us and to work in us 
by his Word of truth, if we will continue to give heed 
to his counsel. "Sanctify them through thy truth 
—thy Word is truth." The gospel is "the power of 
God unto salvation" to every one that so accepts it; 
and no greater stimulus to true godliness can be found 
than the "exceeding great and precious promises given 
unto us; that by these ye might be partakers of the 
divine nature."— 2 Pet. 1:4. 

Moreover, in following in the footsteps of our Lord 
Jesus, running the race for the great prize set before 
us in the Gospel, we are not to murmur by the way, 
finding fault with its difficulties and narrowness; nor 
are we to dispute respecting it, nor to seek to have any 
other way than that which divine providence marks out 
before us, realizing that the Lord knows exactly what 
experiences are necessary to our development in the 
school of Christ, and realizing also that, if obedience 
were possible while our mouths are full of complaints 
and dissatisfaction with the Lord and our lot which he 
has permitted, it would indicate that we were at least 
out of sympathy with the spirit of his arrangement; 
and such an obedience, if it were possible (but it would 
not be possible), would not meet the divine approval, 
nor gain us the prize. Hence, as the Apostle exhorts, 
we should "Do all things without murmurings and disputings; 
that ye may be blameless and harmless, the 
sons of God without rebuke,. ..holding forth the 
Word of life in the midst of a crooked and perverse 
nation, among whom ye shine as lights in the World." 



R2229 : page 298 

PAUL'S DYING WORDS. 

-DEC. 12.-2 TIM. 4:8,16-18.- 

"I have fought a good fight, I have finished my 
course: I have kept the faith."— 2 Tim. 4:7. 



PAUL wrote these his dying words to Timothy 
whom he dearly loved, and frequently refers 
to as his son. He was in prison in the city of Rome, 
and is supposed to have been sixty-three years of age 
at this time. His imprisonment in Rome referred to 
in a previous lesson, when he was permitted to live in 
"his own hired house," had terminated by his being 
released from custody; and it is supposed that during 
the period of his release, about three years, he revisited 
some of the Churches previously established and 
also carried the gospel into Spain. 

It was during this interim of his freedom that the 
great persecution arose in Rome under Nero. That 
brutal Emperor is supposed to have caused the city of 
Rome to be set on fire that he might witness a great 
conflagration from the tower of his palace, or possibly 
with a view to having it rebuilt in a more modern style 
a monument to himself. But the losses occasioned by 
this fire, which could not be gotten under control for 
six days, and which laid a large portion of the city in 
ashes, stirred up so great a commotion amongst the 
people, so aroused their anger, that he thought it discreet 
to let the blame be laid at the door of Christianity; 
—the charge being that the Christians were the incendiaries 
and responsible for the great destruction 
wrought. Following out this line of policy, Nero began 
a terrible persecution of Christians, thus directing 
the suspicion of the people away from himself and 
against those who had taken the name of Christ: who 
were unpopular anyway with the wicked and the idolatrous. 
Multitudes were slain with the sword, exposed 
in the amphitheaters to be torn by wild beasts, or covered 
with the skins of wild beasts to be torn to pieces 
by dogs, while some were wrapped in sheets covered 
with pitch and tied to stakes and set on fire as torches, 
to illuminate Nero's garden. 

This persecution commenced shortly after Paul's 
release from his first imprisonment in Rome; and the 
spirit of bitter persecution thus aroused was still hot, 
when, three years later, he was again arrested. This 
time, as he explains in the words of this lesson (verses 16-18), 
it would appear that he had a public examination, 
possibly before Nero himself; but the fear of the 
people was so great, and quite probably the Apostle's 
language so bold, that he was forsaken of all, as was 
his Master when before Pilate. He tells us nevertheless, 
that he had with him the Lord's presence, which 
strengthened him to such an extent that he spoke the 
Word with a boldness which permitted the gospel to be 
fully known to the Gentiles thereabouts. He evidently 
was more anxious to make known the "good tidings" 
than to preserve himself from pain and death. He 
was a true and noble soldier of the cross— a close follower 
in the footsteps of our great Chief Captain, Christ 
Jesus. Paul's prison was a very uncomfortable place we 



may be sure. We visited the place which tradition 

points out in the city of Rome as being the place of his incarceration. 

It is a dungeon below the surface, dark, 

damp and extremely forbidding. But notwithstanding 

all this the reader must be struck with the tone of triumph 

which pervades the Apostle's writings from there. 

What else than the power of God could so sustain an 

able and cultured man under the various trials and vicissitudes 

through which he passed, including this his 

last imprisonment and his final execution, which followed 

shortly after the writing of this epistle to Timothy? 

He was spared from crucifixion by reason of being 

a Roman citizen, and instead he was beheaded, 

says tradition. 



In the light of the foregoing circumstances, Paul's 
charge to Timothy is, so to speak, his dying message; 
and so regarded, its solemnity and impressiveness are 
increased before our minds. What was this dying 
charge? It was that Timothy should be diligent, zealous 
in preaching the Word of God; that considerations 
of his own convenience should be entirely set aside and 
every opportunity for declaring the message of God's 
love in Christ availed. 

As considerations moving to this end the Apostle 
mentions first the Father, God,— his approval; and 
second, the Lord Jesus Christ, the appointed Judge of 
all, living and dead, at his appearing and Kingdom. 
Only when moved by all of these considerations, can 
the preaching of the gospel be most effectual. He who 
does not believe in God the Father and in his Son, our 
Lord Jesus, could not preach the gospel at all; and even 
tho believing in the Father and the Son, no man can 
really preach the good tidings intelligently who does 
not believe also that the Son has been appointed by 
the Father to judge the world in the appointed Millennial 
day (Acts 17:3 1), and that this judgment of the 
world will be at (during) his manifestation and Kingdom, 
at his second advent. 

The Apostle explains that, as a minister of the 
grace of God, this declaration of the gospel may include 
three features; (1) reproof, (2) rebuke, (3) exhortation. 
But it is safe to caution all of the Lord's 
people against a too liberal use of the first two features. 
In order to reprove properly, the heart should be very 

R2229 : page 299 

full of love and sympathy; else the reproofs and rebukes 
may be sharp, and possibly do more harm than good. 
Even with the heart full of love, it requires a head 
that is exceedingly well-balanced to be able to make use 
of reproofs and rebukes to good advantage to those who 
really need them. And herein God's people are to be 



wise as serpents, harmless as doves. Exhortation is 
the form of faithfulness which quite evidently can best 
be used by the majority of the Lord's people. And 
even it, as well as the other efforts, should be characterized 
by patience, longsuffering, brotherly -kindness. 

Another point to be noticed is, that it is the Word 
of God that is to be preached, and not the word of 
man. However God may use human instrumentalities 
in expounding his Word, the distinction between 
the Word of the Lord and the word of the expounder 
is to be continually recognized. Moreover, all this is 
to be done with "doctrine," better translated as in the 
Revised Version, "teaching." The Apostle links 
"teaching" with "long-suffering and patience," and 
gives us the thought that he who would be a successful 
servant of the Lord, really helpful to the Lord's 
flock, will be willing to dispense the message "line 
upon line, precept upon precept, here a little and there 
a little," as a teacher; backing up the Word of the 
Lord with reason, and exemplification in his own life 
in connection with the exhortations, etc. 

This message to Timothy, who was a public minister, 
would of course have special force and application 
to all who are endeavoring to feed "the flock over 
which the holy spirit hath made them overseers" 
(Acts 20:28); but it applies to all who are truly the 
Lord's, every one of whom is to be a preacher of righteousness, 
a servant of the truth, "holding forth the 
Word of life" to those who hunger and thirst after 
righteousness. 

In this connection the Apostle prophesies, as in 
some other instances, and foretells a future day when 
sound teaching would not be endured by those avowing 
themselves to be followers of Christ. Prophetically, 
he points out the great falling away which culminated 
in the organization of Papacy. This reached a fulfilment 
very quickly after the death of the apostles. 
Teachers assumed to be a separate class and designated 
themselves "clergy," branding all others "laity." 
And this seemed to be more generally pleasing to the 
carnal mind than the divine arrangement. The people 
preferred that some one else should do their thinking 
and studying for them, rather than be merely 
their helpers or teachers, respecting the Word of the 
Lord. Thus darkness more and more dense came on 
the Church, resulting in the establishment of the great 
"abomination" noted in the Scriptures.* The minds 
of the people were turned away from the truth to fables, 
from the study of God's Word to the doing of 
penances and vain repetitions of prayer; from faith in 
the precious blood of Christ, as the continual and only 
and ever acceptable sacrifice for sins, they turned to 
"the mass" and its fresh and oft repeated sacrifices for 
sins. Instead of walking by faith, the minds of the 
people were turned to fables respecting sacred relics 
and wonderful cures wrought by these;— nails from the 



cross, pieces of the cross, bones of saints, etc., etc. So 
completely were they turned to fables that for centuries 
the Word of God was wholly neglected; and that 
period is known in civil history as "the dark ages." 

Altho a Great Reformation set in and the Word 
of God reappeared amongst the people, and altho the 
preaching of it has brought great blessing and liberty 
to the people since, nevertheless the adversary still perverts 
the truth, and induces God's people to separate 
themselves, the one from the other, and thus to destroy 
the force and value of the Reformation and the influence 
of God's Word. Satan's present methods are 
suited to the occasion: he cannot prevent the circulation 
of the Scriptures, but he can blind with prejudice 
and superstition the minds of those who read, and see 
that what they read will profit them little: this is his 
present method of procedure. Under sectarianism he 
endeavors to offset the testimony of God's Word with 
the declarations of faith in the various creeds of 
Christendom. 

The Apostle's words are as forceful as ever for all 
who would be ministers of the Word of God and not 
of the traditions of men; with all who would have their 
works stand in this day of fiery trial into which we are 
coming. To all such the Apostle's words to Timothy 



*See MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. II., Chap. 9; VOL. III., Chap. 4. 

R2230 : page 299 

have a special appropriateness— "Watch thou in all 
things, endure afflictions, do the work of an evangelist 
[a teacher and expounder of the gospel and not of human 
tradition]." 

How humble and yet how confident are the closing 
words of the great Apostle's testimony (verses 6-8), 
"I have fought a good fight," etc. He did not 
boast of perfection in his flesh, but on the contrary disclaimed 
it, saying, that he had constant need to keep 
his body "under," in subjection to the new mind. He 
did not boast of how many Churches he had established, 
nor how many converts he had made and baptized. He 
did not boast of his knowledge of the Lord's Word, nor 
of his ability as a speaker, nor of how many epistles he 
had written, nor of his imprisonments and sufferings 
for the sake of the gospel. His boast, on the contrary, 
was simply that he had fought well, fought faithfully, 
fought the best he was able, against sin abounding on 
every hand and weaknesses in himself. His boast was 
not that he had made a faith, nor that he had expressed 

R2230 : page 300 

the gospel in the most clear and positive manner which 



would descend generations after him to glorify God and 
to bless his people; but his boast merely was that he 
had "kept the faith," the faith which God through his 
Word had inspired, the faith which he had received, 
and was given to all of the Lord's people; he had kept 
it, he had been faithful to it, he had not bartered it for 
a mess of pottage, earthly advantages. 

On the strength of these two points,— his having 
kept the Word of the Lord's testimony obediently, and 
his having fought in defence of it to the end of his 
course, to the best of his ability— on the strength of 
these two things he builds his hope for the crown of 
rejoicing in the Kingdom with the Redeemer and his 
faithful, at his appearing. 

What an encouragement is here for the very humblest 
of God's people; not by intellectual or physical 
strength, not by wonderful works, not by anything 
that we can do or have done for the Lord, his cause, 
and his people, are we to hope for eternal glory; but 
simply with the Apostle we are to seek to use what 
talents we do possess and what opportunities the Lord 
provides for us, faithfully. We are to keep the faith, 
not denying the faith under any consideration— not to 
secure the favor of any, nor to avoid the frowns of any, 
may we be unfaithful to the Word of God's testimony. 
We too, are to fight the good fight against selfishness 
in its every phase, especially in ourselves, and to develop 
in ourselves more and more under the Lord's instruction, 
his spirit, the spirit of love, the holy spirit. 



R2230 : page 300 

INTERESTING LETTERS. 



page 300 

Minnesota. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELLr-Volume IV. has been 
duly received and once read. To say that I am pleased 
with it, will hardly express my sentiments. You are 
certainly to be congratulated, as it bears not only the 
marks of laborious compilation but especially of deep 
study. To those already interested in present Truth 
it will be of inestimable personal value, and I think 
may awaken the interest of many who have carelessly 
neglected to study the other volumes. 

Yours in Christian love, C. H. DICKINSON. 



R2230 : page 300 



For the encouragement of our readers, and as showing 
that there are still opportunities for service in the 
colporteur work, we publish a letter from a dear Brother 
who is employed all day in business, but spends what 
time he can in the evenings in spreading the knowledge 
of the truth among the people in his city. 
Minnesota. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-Enclosed please find 
our report for DAWNS delivered the past 30 days. It 
is simply wonderful how the dear Lord is blessing every 
effort here put forth to spread the good news. Considering 
the few hours employed in this service, he seems 
to be leading me in many of the smallest details of his 
work so as to get the best possible result in the least 
possible time. Blessed be his name forever! 

The last month has far overtopped my highest expectations 
in DAWN work, 272 VOLS, being delivered. 
May we pray God always to keep us humble, so he 
may condescend to accept our sacrifices, not because 
of their own, but because of Christ's merit. May the 
Lord's richest blessings rest upon you and yours is my 
prayer. Yours in the Redeemer, M. P. THORI. 



page 300 

Virginia. 

MY DEAR BROTHER: -Just a word to thank you 
for DAWN VOL. IV. I have read it with some degree 
of care (shall study it), and regard it as a masterly portrayal 
of the present condition of things in the social, 
political and ecclesiastical world. He is blind indeed 
who, after reading it (even if he could not before), 
cannot see that all things are rapidly approaching the 
final catastrophe. Many do see it who yet do not know 
what it means, and who do not see and will not believe 
that it means the end of the present order of affairs, 
and the establishment of a glorious, better order under 
the rule of the Christ. What insight into the deep 
things of God has been bestowed upon you! I thank 
God from the depth of my heart that he has been 
pleased not only to bring these wonderful things to my 
attention, but also that he has given me the receptive 
mind and heart to take hold of and rest on them. 

I pray God's richest blessing upon the work in 
which you are engaged, as well as upon yourself personally 
and the whole household. I feel very lonely 
in my isolation here, but God knows what is best. I 
find frequent occasions to present the truth, but none 
seem able to accept it fully. 

Yours in the love of the truth, 

WM. W. MURRAY. M.D. 



R2230 : page 300 

Wisconsin. 
TO THE AUTHOR OF MILLENNIAL DAWN. 

DEAR BROTHER:— Having been very much interested 
in the reading of the DAWN, and particularly of 
VOL. IV., which I am now reading, and feeling that it 
contains an amount of information from every source 
which, if true or trustworthy, is of the greatest value, 
and finding that many feel disposed to question the 
reliability of the figures you give, I take the liberty to 
ask you for some direct word of assurance along this 
line. I am a class leader in the M.E. Church of this 
place and have charge of other work in the county, and 
feel anxious about these things. Please kindly give 
me such words of assurance as you can. 

Yours in Christ, H. D. WHITE. 

[Reply.— All the quotations and statistics given 
in VOL. IV. of DAWN are properly credited to their respective 
authors, and stand or fall on the merits of those 
authors and on their veracity. We did not put into 
the book anything which we thought could reasonably 
be questioned, and you will notice by going over the 
names of the various journals and persons quoted that 
they are nearly all well known and of international reputation. 
-EDITOR.! 



page 301 

VOL. XVIII. DECEMBER 15, 1897. No. 24. 



CONTENTS. 



Do You Desire Z.W.T. for 1898? 302 

Songs in the House of Our Pilgrimage 303 

Poem: "My Peace I Give unto You" 307 

Tract Society's Report for 1897 307 

Confession and Forgiveness 310 

Baptism of Jesus and Announcement 

of His Work 313 

Interesting Letters 315 

Index for Zion's Watch Tower of 1897 316 

page 302 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
-ADDRESS TO- 
TOWER PUBLISHING CO., BIBLE HOUSE, 58 ARCH ST., 
ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 



SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, N.Y. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS: 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age or accident, or other 
adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, if they 
send a Postal Card each December, stating their cases and requesting the paper. 



R2238 : page 302 

DO YOU DESIRE ZION'S WATCH TOWER DURING 1898? 



Please notice the address tag on your paper. It indicates 
the date to which your subscription is paid. If it does not agree 
with your record, please drop a card at once, explaining. 

If you desire the TOWER, but cannot pay just now, drop a 
card so stating, so that your name be not dropped. 

If you are unable to pay at all, you will see above that the 
Lord has made full provision for you as one of "THE LORD'S 
POOR." All such are requested to apply each December. Like all of 
God's gifts, a desire and a request are necessary to obtain them. 
A Postal Card request will do. 

If we do not thus hear from you, your name will be dropped 
at once, as we cannot know that you desire its visits further. 
Then, if you should write later, it would cause us extra trouble 
to reset your name for the list. 

MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. IV. 

The friends of the truth will be pleased to know that the 
paper-bound edition of VOL. IV. is already exhausted. The next 
lot will not be ready for filling orders before February, as our 
printers are extremely busy just now. We still have some in 
leatherette and in cloth covers. 

The public demand for VOL. IV. promises to exceed that for 
any other of the series, altho we have not yet sent many copies 
to newspapers for review. 



R2230 : page 303 

SONGS IN THE HOUSE OF OUR PILGRIMAGE. 



"Thy statutes have been my songs in the 
house of my pilgrimage."— Psa. 1 19:54. 

GOD'S PEOPLE during the Jewish dispensation 



as well as during the Gospel dispensation 

are spoken of as "pilgrims and strangers" in the 

"present evil world." They are such, because they 

have heard of "a better country," whose ruler is God, 

and whose law is love— "the perfect law of liberty." 

To such pilgrims the strife for wealth and vain glory, 

the pride, haughtiness and tinsel that everywhere prevail 

now, are distasteful; while the battle for wealth 

or position, especially when it leads to unrighteousness, 

oppression, slander, envy, strife and every evil 

work, is repulsive. Having obtained a glimpse of the 

perfection of divine character with its absoluteness of 

justice and love, it has become their ideal: and they 

have heard "the voice of him that speaketh from 

heaven," instructing them that sin and evil shall not 

always prevail, but that the God of heaven by and by 

shall set up his Kingdom which will renovate and bless 

the world of mankind, and bring in everlasting righteousness. 

Since they have heard this, and the more 

they learn to appreciate it, the more, necessarily, they 

are out of harmony with the contrary conditions of the 

present time. Hence it is that they feel themselves, 

and are portrayed in the Scriptures as being, pilgrims 

and strangers who seek the fairer clime of the coming 

age. 

It was in this view of matters that the Apostle declared 
that Abraham, Isaac and Jacob were "pilgrims 
and strangers on the earth," who sought a better country, 
a home under more righteous conditions. They 
sojourned in the very land promised to them, but it 
was not their "home;" because it was still in the hands 
and under the government of those who were aliens 
and strangers from God. They waited for the fulfilment 
of God's promise to give them that country under 
his divine blessing and laws, when it would become to 
them a heavenly country, a country under heavenly 
direction and blessing. They were obliged to wait for 
two reasons: first, as a test and development of their 
own faith and trust in the Great Promiser; and secondly, 
because "the wickedness of the Amorites was not 
yet come to the full."— Gen. 15:16. 

Commenting on this, the Apostle declares that if 
they had been mindful, i.e., wishful, to have returned 
to Charran, their own country prior to the promise of 
Canaan, they might have returned to it,— when they 
found the land of promise still occupied by other peoples, 
and that God was not yet ready to fulfil to them 
his promises. (Heb. 11:15.) But they preferred to 
hold on to God's promises, and chose accordingly, for 
the time, to be pilgrims and strangers in the land of 
promise. Stephen in his discourse (Acts 7:2,5) points 
out this pilgrimage and sojourn, as strangers, of 
Abraham and his seed— waiting for possession of the 
promised land. Stephen says, "God gave him none 
inheritance in it: no, not so much as to set his foot on: 
yet he promised that he would give it to him for a possession, 



and to his seed after him." 

We are to understand, accordingly, that the heavenly 
country for which Abraham, Isaac and Jacob and 
all the faithful of the fleshly house of Israel waited as 
"pilgrims and strangers" is after all to be earthly, in 
the sense of being on the earth; but it will be heavenly 
in the sense that its government, regulations, laws, 
etc., will be heavenly laws, etc., and not "earthly, 
sensual, devilish." Consequently, when the Apostle 

R2230 : page 304 

says that they "looked for a city which has foundations, 
whose builder and maker is God;" and that God 

R2231 : page 304 

"hath prepared for them a city," we must understand 

this promise, so far as they are concerned, to be in harmony 

with the other promises made to fleshly Israel. 

The "city" referred to is not a literal city, but the 
symbolical one mentioned in Rev. 21:2,9-27. In 
symbol a city signifies a government, and this city which 
comes down from God out of heaven symbolizes the 
Kingdom of God, his rule or government, which will 
be established in all the earth. This "city" or government 
will consist of The Christ— the "Bridegroom" 
and "the bride the Lamb's wife." "Then shall the 
righteous shine forth"— the city will have the glory of 
God. When this Kingdom is established, the nations* 
shall walk in the light of it.-Rev. 21:24. 

Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, and all the faithful 
pilgrims and strangers prior to the atonement, while 
they will not be members of the bride company nor of 
the new Jerusalem, the Kingdom, will nevertheless be 
very closely identified with it in the work of blessing 
the world of mankind in general. And hence it is that 
they are represented as waiting for this "city," this 
government which God will establish in the world; 
preferring to have their inheritance at that time, 
and under the blessing and bright illumination of that 
heavenly city or government, rather than enjoy the 
pleasures of sin for a season. It is in harmony with 
this thought that we are taught to pray, "Thy Kingdom 
[the Heavenly Jerusalem, the city which hath for 
foundations the twelve Apostles— Christ Jesus himself 
being the chief cornerstone] come! Thy will be done 
on earth as it is done in heaven." This city will shine 
and bless the world until all the willing shall be helped 
and reconciled to God. Its reign will be for a thousand 
years, after which a new dispensation will open, 
under new conditions, in which mankind (perfected) 
will be granted the privilege of ruling themselves in 
harmony with the divine law. 

In a certain sense then we might designate the 
present era, "the present evil world," to be the general 



house of our pilgrimage for all who love and long for 
righteousness; and the better condition of the future, 
the "new heavens and the new earth" promised as the 
heavenly home or condition which will be found abundantly 
satisfactory to all who shall attain thereto. 

"OUR EARTHLY HOUSE" AND "OUR HOUSE FROM 
HEAVEN." 

Nevertheless, the Apostle Paul (2 Cor. 5:1-10) 
writing concerning this pilgrimage and addressing 
specially the consecrated Church of the Gospel age, 
uses language which, while not out of harmony with 
what we have just seen, foregoing, may be nevertheless 
properly understood to refer to the present mortal 
bodies of the saints, as their houses of pilgrimage— 
their temporary houses, while on the way to their permanent 
homes, the spiritual bodies which God hath 
promised to them that love him, and which the same 
apostle described to the same readers in a previous 
epistle.-l Cor. 15:38,42-45. 

Moreover, since we well know that very much in 
the Psalms was written prophetically, respecting the 
Christ, head and body, the overcoming Church of the 
Gospel age, we may well infer that the language of our 
text had special reference to these pilgrims of the Gospel 
age. The Apostle says, "We know that if our 
earthly house of this temporary dwelling place were 
dissolved, we have a permanent structure of God, a 
house not made with hands [not produced by human 
powers] everlasting in the heavens." Since the renewed 
earth, altho it will be a permanent house for the 
world of mankind, will not be "in the heavens;" and 
since the Church when granted their new spiritual 
bodies in the resurrection will be thereafter everlastingly 
in the higher or heavenly condition, it seems but 
proper to construe the Apostle's language as relating 
to the earthly bodies and the heavenly bodies of the 
Church. And such an application seems to fit his discourse 
throughout thoroughly. It is true that in this 
present body or temporary house of pilgrimage we 
groan— oppressed not only by the evil influence of the 
world and the devil on every hand but also and especially 
by the weaknesses of our own flesh. For when 
we would do good, evil is present with us, so that the 
good which we would do we are often hindered from 
doing, while the evil which we do not approve often 
obtrudes itself on us and requires to be continually resisted 
and overcome. As the Apostle elsewhere declares, 
we "which have the first fruits of the spirit, 
even we ourselves groan within ourselves, waiting for 
the adoption, to wit, the deliverance of our body,"— 
the Church, into the glorious likeness of our Lord. 

But our groaning is not with a desire to be unclothed; 
we do not wish to be without a body, for that 
at very best all down through the Gospel age would 



mean to be "asleep in Jesus," waiting for the resurrection 
morning that then we might be "clothed upon 
with our house from heaven," our new, perfect and 
permanent body, our "home." What we prefer is not 
to have the little spark of present life extinguished, 
but to have it swallowed up, absorbed into the perfect 
conditions of the perfect life to which we are begotten, 
with its perfect body. 
"Now he that hath wrought us for the self-same 



*The words "of them that are saved" in this text are not 
found in the older MSS. Very evidently they are an interpolation; 
because after the nations are saved, brought into harmony 
with God, they will no longer be "nations" (Gentiles, heathen), 
but parts of the one holy nation, the Kingdom of God. 

R223 1 : page 305 

thing is God, who also hath given us the earnest of the 
spirit." This perfect condition which we are to obtain 
in the resurrection will be the grand consummation of 
our salvation which God has promised; and the new 
mind, the new will begotten by the Word of truth, is 
reckoned as the beginning of that new creature, which 
will be perfected in the divine nature when the first 
resurrection shall have completed it. The holy spirit 
granted us in the present time is a hand payment so to 
speak, an "earnest" or assurance of the grand and 
gracious results for which we are hoping and striving, 
groaning and praying. 

"Therefore we are always confident knowing that, 
whilst we are at home in the body [so long as we feel 
entirely contented with present conditions— ourselves 
and our surroundings], we are absent from the Lord." 
If we were living near to him, "walking with God, we 
would not feel perfectly satisfied with present attainments, 
conditions, etc.; but would feel like pilgrims 
and strangers, seeking a better rest, a better home, 
"which God hath in reservation for them that love 
him." But this, as the Apostle explains, is true only 
of those who walk by faith and not by sight. 

"But we are confident [full of faith toward God, 
we rejoice to walk by faith], and are well pleased rather 
to be from home [homeless, pilgrims and strangers on 
the earth] and to be at home with the Lord" in the 
spirit of our fellowship. 

For this cause we are striving, that whether it be 
by and by when we reach our home, or whether it be 
in the present time when we are actually away from 
home, pilgrims and strangers, we strive that we may 
be acceptable with the Lord; that we may have his 
favor and blessing and realize his fellowship and presence 
and know that we shall ultimately be accepted by 
him. "For we must all appear before the judgment seat 



of Christ that every one may receive the things done 

in the body, according to the things he hath done 

whether it be good or bad." All through this pilgrimage 

we are standing at the bar of our Lord's judgment: 

he is testing us, proving us, to see whether or not we 

love him and the things which make for righteousness 

and peace; and if so, how much we are willing to sacrifice 

for righteousness' sake. He marks the degree of 

our love by the measure of our self-denials and self-sacrifices 

for his sake, the truth's sake. 

But to thus speak of our bodies as houses can be 
true only of the "saints," the "new creatures" in 
Christ. Others of mankind have not duality of nature, 
and could not properly apply to themselves such expressions 
as that of Romans 8:10,11, "If Christ be in 
you the body is [reckoned] dead because of sin; but the 
spirit alive because of [the imputed] righteousness" 
of Christ. The new nature of the saints, begotten by 
the word of truth, is really only the new will, which 
however is thenceforth addressed as the real person, 
and it alone is recognized of God who knows us not 
after the flesh but after the spirit of our new minds— 
Christ-minds. Notice also Romans 6:3,4. These 
"new creatures" have an old man or outward man that 
is perishing, and a new man, inward man, or hidden 
man of the heart who is being renewed day by day.— 
2 Cor. 4:16; Col. 3:9,10; Eph. 4:23,24; 1 Pet. 3:4. 

It is written, he "giveth songs in the night," and 
"He hath put a new song into my mouth." It causes 
us no surprise to know that the saints will "be joyful 
in glory" and sing aloud with the high praises of God 
in their mouths, when it shall be given to them to execute 
the judgments written (Psa. 149:4-9); but it may 
strike some as peculiar that the present conditions of 
God's people, the condition of imperfection and physical 
frailty, in which we groan and are burdened, should 
be a condition in which songs and thanksgiving and 
joy should prevail with us. Nevertheless, this is the 
divine will, as it is the divine statement, respecting all 
who are truly overcomers: they are all to be joyful in 
the house of their pilgrimage. Respecting this joy our 
Lord declares "Your joy no man taketh from you." 
"Peace I leave with you, my peace I give unto you: 
not as the world giveth give I unto you. Let not your 
heart be troubled, neither let it be afraid."— John 14:27; 
16:22. 

So then, while there is a measure of groaning 
because of some burdens on the part of those who have 

R2232 : page 305 

attained to the new life, there are also blessed joys 
which the world cannot give, neither take away: and 
these are the source and cause of the unceasing joy and 
"songs in the night," before the glorious dawn of the 
new Millennial day: these songs are inspired by the 



joys granted us in the house of our pilgrimage— while 
we are actually absent from our "home." 

What are our joys which no man taketh from us? 
and which persecution and affliction and trouble can 
only deepen and widen and make more sweet? What 
joy is this? This joy is a foretaste of the blessings to 
come, an earnest of our inheritance. It is inspired by 
confidence in him on whom we have believed: confidence 
that he is both able and willing to perfect the 
work which he has begun and which we desire shall be 
perfected in his own best way: confidence that so long 
as we are firmly holding to his gracious promises with 
the arms of our faith, he will not permit us to be separated 
from him. Who shall separate us from the love 
of God in Christ? Shall tribulation and persecution? 
Our confidence is that "no one is able to pluck us out 
of the Father's hand," and that "the Father himself 
loveth" us, and will not turn us away so long as we 
desire to abide obediently in his love. Yea, we are 

R2232 : page 306 

confident that all things are working together for good 
to those who love God; confident that he who is for us 
is more powerful than all who can be against us. Such 
confidence is sure to bring joy beyond the world's 
comprehension, and a peace of God that passeth all understanding 
which keeps the heart. 

And such joy, produced by the true gospel of our 
Lord Jesus Christ received into an honest heart, naturally 
and properly awakens the "songs in the house of 
our pilgrimage." 

'"Mid all the tumult and the strife I hear the music ringing, 

It finds an echo in my soul, how can I keep from singing." 
The word "song" has a wider meaning than simply 
a musical cadence: it is used in the Scriptures and elsewhere 
to indicate a joyful message of any kind. For 
instance, we say, referring to the gospel, the knowledge 
of the divine plan, "Thou hast put a new song into my 
mouth, even the loving-kindness of our God." And 
it is a fact that those who have tasted that the Lord is 
gracious, those who have received the joy which no 
man can take from them, those who have tasted of the 
grace of God in Christ, will not only rejoice and literally 
sing musical songs with their lips, but they will 
also rejoice to have their entire lives a song of praise 
and thanksgiving unto God. The song will bubble 
over on every proper occasion, wherever hearing ears 
are found: so fully will the cleansed, justified and consecrated 
heart appreciate God's goodness and so greatly 
will it desire to— 

"Tell the whole world these blessed tidings, 

And speak of the time of rest that nears." 
Wherever Christians find themselves without this 
joy of the Lord, and where they have no song in the 
house of their pilgrimage, they have reason to fear that 



there is something wrong,— that the connections between 
their own hearts and the Lord are not full and 
complete. If they are unacquainted with this joy and 
these songs, it is because they have either never fully 
accepted the Lord as their portion, and consecrated 
themselves to his service, or else because certain false 
doctrines have so terrorized their minds and so completely 
enslaved them to fear that trustful joys are impossible 
to them. Such should at once take the proper 
steps either to make their consecration to the Lord 
complete, so that he can put his spirit into them as 
members of his body, and give them the "seal of adoption," 
and cause them to know the joys of his salvation; 
or, if fully consecrated and hindered from joy and 
songs through false doctrine, they should diligently 
search the Scriptures and find the Lord's message,— 
"Their fear toward me is taught by the precept of 
men."— Isa. 29:13. 

IN THE CLOUDY DAY. 

It is true, nevertheless, that our Christian experience 
is not always of a kind calculated to produce an 
exuberance of spirit: it is doubtless to our advantage 
that sometimes there are dark hours such as our dear 
Redeemer experienced when he said, "My soul is exceeding 
sorrowful even unto death." Such experiences 
no doubt draw us nearer to the fountain of comfort, 
of joy and peace, and are blessings in disguise, 
and amongst the "all things" which are working together 
for our good. But even in the very midst of 
trials and difficulties, and while cast down so that the 
songs do not abound, we may nevertheless in all conditions 
and at all times realize God's love and care and 
so firmly hold on to the Lord, with the hand of faith, 
that we would in the darkest moments be able to realize 
the joy of our Master's sympathy and love and help, 
and thus have the joy which no disaster of the present 
time can interrupt. 

Despondency and loss of these joys and songs may 
sometimes result from ill health: in which case, if the 
illness be the result of selfish gratification, we have 
room for a lesson and reform; or it may seem to be the 
result of unselfish fidelity to the service of the truth, 
along the lines of duty, and if so, as soon as this is recognized, 
our joys and songs will return. In illustration 
let us remember Paul and Silas praising God in the 
prison of Philippi, while their backs were still lacerated 
and bleeding. 

It should be the aim of the Lord's people to cultivate 
this joy and the conditions favorable to it, daily. 
The condition of our hearts has much to do with it; 
for this joy is not wholly dependent upon the heads,— 
our knowledge of the divine Word and plan. Its possession 
and increase depends chiefly upon the heart— 
the center of our affections. If we set our affections, 



our hearts, on earthly things and seek for joy through 

the various gratifications of the flesh, the lust of the 

eye and the pride of life, etc., we will thereby quench 

to some extent the spirit of the new mind, and correspondingly 

decrease the joys of the new mind. On the 

contrary, the more we overcome the world, the flesh 

and the devil, the more we seek to do the will of our 

Father who is in heaven, the more we seek for the fellowship 

and communion of our dear Redeemer, the 

more we seek to do those things which are pleasing in 

his sight, so much the more will we have of the joy 

and peace which no man taketh from us and which 

trials, difficulties and persecutions can only make the 

more sweet and precious. 

And the more we have of this new mind, and the 
closer we are in sympathy with the Lord, the more we 
will desire to sing heartily "The old, old story of Jesus 
and his love." 

"How happy and blessed the hours, 
Since Jesus I always can see! 

Sweet prospects, sweet birds and sweet flowers 
Have all gained new sweetness to me." 

R2238 : page 307 

"MY PEACE I GIVE UNTO YOU." 



"When He giveth quietness, who then 
can make trouble?"— Job 34:29. 

"Like a river glorious is God's perfect peace, 
Over all victorious in its glad increase. 
Perfect— yet it floweth fuller every day; 
Perfect— yet it groweth deeper all the way. 

"Stayed upon Jehovah, hearts are truly blest, 
Finding, as He promised, perfect peace and rest. 
Hidden in the hollow of His blessed hand, 
Never foe can follow, never traitor stand. 

"Not a surge of worry, not a shade of care, 
Not a blast of hurry toucheth spirit there. 
Every joy or trial cometh from above, 
Traced upon our dial by the sun of love. 

"We may trust Him solely all for us to do; 
They who trust Him wholly, find Him wholly true. 
Stayed upon Jehovah, hearts are truly blest, 
Finding, as He promised, perfect peace and rest." 



R2233 : page 307 



WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY. 



REPORT FOR FISCAL YEAR ENDING DEC. 1, 1897. 



AN ANNUAL report of this Society's work is due 

to our readers, almost all of whom, directly 

or indirectly, financially or otherwise, are colaborers 

and associates in this service of the Lord and his truth. 

It will be encouraging to you to know of the prosperity 

of the general cause, even as it encourages us, to 

learn of the progress of the work of grace in your own 

hearts and in the local churches in various quarters. 

The Lord's work is one, and every feature of it must 

be of deep interest to all who love him and who recognize 

that we are living in the "harvest" of the Gospel 

age, and that the Chief-Reaper is the Superintendent, 

under whose guidance the sickle of truth is being 

thrust in, for the gathering of all the true wheat into 

his Kingdom garner. 

Hence, these annual statements should not be 
construed as boasting, nor yet as solicitations for further 
donations. Surely there is no room for boasting; all 
that we all unitedly have done, or can do, is so little, 
compared with what we all would like to do, so little 
in comparison to what we have received of our Lord, 
the value of which is beyond computation in silver or 
gold, that we feel regret for its smallness, and realize 
that we are not profitable servants who bring our Master 
gain, but are still his debtors to an infinite amount 
and can only hope to have him say to us, Well done, 
good, faithful servants, you have done what you could! 

As for soliciting, we have never done it and will 
never do it. If this is the Lord's work, and as we believe 
a special "harvest" work, and he, the great Reaper, 
is in charge, we need not fear that voices and money 
and all things needful to its successful accomplishment 
will not be supplied. Our only concern should be lest we 
should fail to embrace all the opportunities which come 
our way. Let us fear, lest an opportunity for service 
being put within our reach (along any line), any of us 
should fail to improve such opportunities and be unworthy 
of the words, "She hath done what she could." 
In the election of the "little flock" for the Kingdom, 
nothing is more evident than that God has refused to 
define what sacrifices we must make— except that it 
shall primarily consist of a broken and a contrite heart. 
The outworking of our consecrated lives will prove to 
what extent our naturally selfish hearts have been 
broken and are contrite. He who loves the Lord and 
his cause much, will serve proportionately, and will 
know no limit to that service except ability; which will 
be so used as to make the most of it. 



Nor are money talents and voice and pen talents 
the only ones the Lord is pleased to use in the "harvest" 
work: many are rendering very efficient service 
to the truth as Colporteurs and tract distributors. Indeed, 
probably one half of all who now rejoice in the 
present truth are indebted under God's providence to 
these efficient colaborers,— whose work in many respects 
closely resembles that of the twelve and the 
seventy sent out by our Lord in the Jewish harvest, 
who went from house to house with the good tidings 
of the Kingdom. Besides the fruitage already seen, 
it is not unreasonable to suppose that a wide influence 
for the truth and against error has been exerted by the 
DAWNS and TRACTS and TOWERS, far beyond those 
who have confessed the truth. There are many evidences 
of this, not only in the increased opposition of 
the "chief priests and scribes," but also in the many 
private and anonymous letters received, asking questions, 
asking for literature and expressing confidence; 
but as at the first advent "for fear of the Jews" holding 
back. Many of these of course may never become 
"overcomers," and may constitute members in the 
"great company" that will fail to take a proper stand 
for the Lord and his truth until the complete collapse 
of Babylon and the attendant "great tribulation" shall 
thoroughly arouse them. Others of these, however, 
altho timid and fearful and disposed to inquire, "Have 
any of the chief priests or scribes believed?" will by 
and by gain strength and courage from the "meat in 
due season" and come out bravely on the Lord's side 
as "overcomers." 

We see no reason to think, as some appear to, 

R2233 : page 308 

that all that can be reached with the truth have already 
been reached. Quite to the contrary, altho this may 
be true in some places, it does not seem to be generally 
the case. We are inclined to believe that the Lord is 
using certain channels to divert conscientious persons 
from "Babylon" and to more or less prepare them for 
the full message of present truth; and from these we 
expect large results during the next few years. For 
instance; Socialism, Single-Taxism and Nationalism 
have attracted some people of excellent intentions who, 
as they see the impossibility of these systems and theories 
bringing the Balm of Gilead and real blessings 
for which the groaning creation waits, will be good 
subjects for the truth. We have considerable hope for 
a favorable influence from DAWN, VOL. IV., upon such. 
We see also among various earnest "come-outers" and 
amongst Baptists and Mr. Dowie's followers and the 
Christian Alliance people and Plymouth Brethren and 
Adventists good fields for active service with tracts, 
TOWERS and DAWNS,— meekly, lovingly, wisely presented, 
with a word in season, "seasoned with salt." 



The work from this standpoint divides itself into 
the following branches:— 

(1) The WATCH TOWER, which as your servant 
seeks to do you all the good possible, by stirring up 
your pure minds by way of remembrance, altho you 
know many of the things which it presents from the 
Scriptures, and altho its readers are generally established 
in the present truth. You will be glad to know 

that its subscription list, which quite generally represents 

the deeply interested, is gradually increasing. 

We were greatly surprised, also, that notwithstanding 

the depression in financial matters the number who get 

the TOWER free, as the Lord's poor, decreased about 

two thousand, while the self paid subscriptions increased 

about the same number. Our only fear is that 

some who cannot afford to pay are neglecting to avail 

themselves of this feature of the Lord's bounty, which 

he provides, and which we as his servants take pleasure 

in dispensing. 

(2) The Correspondence Department, with which 

is associated the keeping of accounts, attention to your 
orders for DAWNS, TRACTS, TOWERS, BIBLES, etc. 
This department handled about twenty-one thousand 
of your letters, and sent out about fourteen thousand 
four hundred replies. Thank God for the mail facilities 
of our favored day. Your welcome letters, some 
full of joy and rejoicing and telling of successes, and 
some full of sorrow and trouble, asking our prayers 
and counsel, are all esteemed a privilege and a part of 
the service which we rejoice to be privileged to engage 
in. We trust that we of the TOWER office are also remembered 
in your prayers, for we have trials and discouragements 
as well as joys and encouragements. 
"Blest be the tie that binds 

Our hearts in Christian love, 
The fellowship of kindred minds 

Is like to that above." 
While this love and fellowship extends to all who 
own our Lord (whether or not they follow with us) 
yet properly it extends in an especial degree to those who 
manifest the holy spirit of love, who are striving to 
walk the narrow way of selfsacrifice and to whom the 
Lord's favor has been manifested, in the opening of 
their understanding to the present truth. We have 
efficient colaborers in this department, and will extend 
it to meet your demands upon it as far as possible. As 
frequently as possible, however, we refer to the DAWNS 
or back TOWERS as replies to questions; because the 
answers there given are generally more thorough than 
we could give in the compass of a letter, and besides 
will save time for other features of the work. 

(3) The Colporteur Department— This department 
might be termed the Evangel-department in 

this "harvest" work. Dear, consecrated brethren and 
sisters devote their time and strength and talents to 
house to house visitation to call the attention of fellow 



Christians to the "meat in due season" now provided 

by the Lord for all "the household of faith." Largely 

through the agency of this department nearly a million 

copies of MILLENNIAL DAWN in its several volumes 

have been put into the hands of the public, and millions 

of tracts distributed. Many who read this article 

owe their knowledge of the truth (under divine providence) 

largely to the courage, faith and perseverance 

of the dear children of God who serve in this department. 

Laboring not for worldly applause or advantage, 

but at the expense, the loss, of these, they shall surely 

have a gracious reward from the great Judge when he 

makes up his jewels. One dear brother, an Express 

Co.'s agent in a western city, recently interested and 

very active in the Lord's service, longed to be in the 

colporteur work or to do something to assist in this 

department, and finding another brother anxious for 

the work he became sponsor for his account and started 

him as a colporteur. His deficit during the year 

was probably $120., but he rejoices in this as the next 

best thing to being a colporteur himself. He has become 

still more deeply interested, and besides a liberal 

donation has written promising the proceeds of some 

property as soon as he can sell it. It is needless to 

add that he is greatly blessed in heart, and growing 

in grace and knowledge. 

The past year has been one of greater encouragement 
to these vineyard laborers than several preceding, 
and very generally they have been able to fully 

R2234 : page 308 

meet their expenses by economy. They were greatly 
helped and encouraged by the assistance rendered them 
last year by Bro. Hay's donation. Several new laborers 

R2234 : page 309 

have recently entered this service. The fourth volume 
of DAWN promises to be specially saleable and an entering 
wedge for the other volumes and thus an aid to 
the Colporteurs, some of whom now are making more 
than their expenses. Let us remember at the throne 
of grace constantly these whose special service puts 
them into the forefront of the battle for the truth. 
(4) The Tract Distribution Department.— Every 
WATCH TOWER reader is invited to become an active 
participant in this branch of the service— by enclosing 
them in your letter, or by wrapping one in each bundle 
if you keep store, or by handing them to your fellow 
passengers if you travel, or by handing special ones 
to friends and neighbors as you have opportunity, or 
by street distribution about the hour when prayer 
meetings, lectures, etc., take in or dismiss— standing 
at a little distance (say half a block) so as not to give 
offence as implying that church people need tracts, however 



much you may be sure that they do need them. 

By reference to another column of this report it 
will be seen that the tract circulation for the past year 
reached the highest point yet attained— nearly thirty 
millions of pages. We congratulate you on the faithfulness 
which this implies. The Lord's blessing surely 
has been with you as fearlessly and not ashamed to 
own the Lord and his Word you have done what you 
could to dispel superstition and darkness from the minds 
of God's people, and to enable them to worship the 
Father in spirit and in truth. 

All the interested have not the same opportunities 
for tract distribution, and some who used comparatively 
few were the most zealous in furnishing the financial 
means by which these could be supplied free in so large 
quantities: for be it remembered that all tracts are 
supplied free, being published out of voluntary contributions 
to the tract fund. However few and unpopular 
we are, dear friends, no other tract society can 
make so favorable a report. The Lord be praised that 
his free grace shed abroad in our hearts prompts us to 
the voluntary services. And having done what we 
could we feel it an offering far too small, and wholly 
unworthy of divine notice and acceptance, except in 
and through the merit of our dear Redeemer's sacrifice. 

(5) The "Pilgrim" Preaching Department- 
While all of the Lord's people are pilgrims and strangers 
and pilgrims journeying toward the heavenly 
Canaan, and while all also are preachers to the extent 
of their opportunities and talents, yet we use the above 
term to describe those who are going about from 
place to place where as many as four TOWER subscribers 
reside to meet with and encourage the brethren, 
both with public and private meetings. Like 
other departments this one is for your service and the 
Lord's glory, and not for money making. You are 
not asked to guarantee a salary of one or two hundred 
dollars per night for the service, but it is free— no collections 
even are taken up, and no money solicited in 
any manner: not even for traveling expenses. Three 
brethren are at present giving their entire time to this 
branch of the service, while twelve give more or less 
of their time; all of them are very zealous, however, 
and seeking to be more qualified and used by the 
Master in his service. 

The traveling and other necessary expenses of 
these ministers (servants) are met out of your voluntary 
donations to the Tract Fund; and they ask no wages, 
preferring to wait for the rewards which God has 
promised. Nor are they laggards and drones: when 
they visit your town or city or village it means business 
—the King's business, which requires energy. 
They come to you expecting to hold afternoon and 
evening meetings daily, while they stay; and their 
stay will be for one, two or three days as per cards of 
notification. These are the Lord's servants, and your 



servants for his sake: receive them as such. Let them 
receive the love of brethren; show toward them the 
hospitality you would surely extend to the Lord, for 
they are "members of his body," and like yourself 
his representatives. 

One very earnest Brother, who for years has been 
a generous contributor to the work and helpful every 
way, writes us that being appreciated by his employer 
he has received a substantial increase in his salary and 
thereby expects to be able to considerably increase his 
'98 contributions to the general fund for the spread of 
the good tidings: and having heard one of the "Pilgrims" 
he desires to become responsible for the expenses 
of one of these, after which, if he be able to 
give more, it shall go to the general work. This dear 
Brother, who resides in eastern Pennsylvania, is as 
modest and meek as he is zealous and unselfish and insists 
that his name be not mentioned. But he does 
this unto the Lord, and the Lord knows of it and, we 
may be sure, appreciates it and will by and by reward. 
Graciously our Lord has provided that every one that 
loves him may in some manner manifest that love;— 
whether by casting two mites into his treasury or 
by giving even a cup of cold water to one of his disciples. 
"Where there's a will there's a way." 

(6) Through the "Pilgrims" and through leaders 
and others, we have reports from all over the "harvest" 
field, continually. We are glad to be able to inform 
you that while our great adversary, Satan, is permitted 
by the Lord to trouble and prove and sift his 
people as heretofore, and in some respects more than 
ever, yet in our opinion the Church everywhere has 
been growing in grace during the past year, more than 
ever before; and consequently is better able to stand 

R2234: page 310 

such attacks and get a blessing instead of an injury 
out of them, even tho the sittings result in the falling 
away of some, who despite every effort toward "pulling 
them out of the fire," become "offended." 

Many letters have told us of blessings which resulted 
from following the suggestions of the Aug. 15th 
TOWER,— that as an assistance in the cultivation of the 
holy spirit of love each should ask help from on high 
each morning and should review the success or failure 
of the day before the Lord at evening prayer; and that 
on alternate Sundays Matt. 5:1-16 and 1 Cor. 13:1-13 
be read and pondered. We trust that many more 
than we have yet heard from have followed this plan 
and experienced a blessing. There is a blessing in it 
for all who will practice it we believe and for our own 
part we will continue it during 1898. Who will join 
us? Brethren and Sisters, pray for us, as we also pray 
for you all! 



DISTRIBUTION ACCOUNT. 

During the year from Dec. 1, 1896, to Dec. 1, 1897, 
there has been circulated free the following reading 
matter, paid for out of the voluntary donations to the 
Tract Fund,— 
Copies of OLD THEOLOGY TRACTS, 1,423,010. 

" " ZIONS WATCH TOWER, 332,212. 

Since tracts vary greatly in the number of their pages, 
it is customary to state their circulation by pages. 
Thus stated the foregoing represent a 
Total of Tract Pages 29,347,838. 

The total number of copies of MILLENNIAL DAWN, 
circulated by the cooperation of this fund (not at its 
expense), was 69,891. 

FINANCIAL ACCOUNT. 



EXPENDITURES :- 

For Tracts and TOWERS sent out free, $7,296.90 

Labor, for mailing same, 540.00 

Postage, freight, wrappers, etc., 760.00 

Foreign translations, etc., account, 1,341.99 

Traveling expenses, "Pilgrims," etc., 1,935.20 

Balance cash on hand, 191.80 



Total, $12,065.89 



RECEIPTS :- 

Cash balance on hand, Dec. 1, '96 $ 314.35 

From "Good Hopes," 8,165.61 

" other sources, 3,585.93 



Total, $12,065.89 



"Good Hopes" blanks go with this issue, as usual; 
but do not understand them to be requests, they are 
merely notifications of an opportunity to join in this 
service. 

The office associates and colaborers join in sending 
to all the TOWER readers our best wishes, Christian 
love, and the compliments of the holiday season. 
May our Lord give us all more and more to abound in 
all the fruits of the spirit and the service of each other 
and the truth. 



R2235 : page 310 

CONFESSION AND FORGIVENESS. 
-DEC. 19.-1 JOHN 1:5-2:6.- 



"If we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our 
sins and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness."— 1 Jno. 1:9. 

THE Apostle's address is not to unbelievers, unjustified 

persons, "sinners" in the ordinary sense 

of the word; on the contrary, he is addressing the justified 

and sanctified in Christ Jesus, and he classes 

himself with these, using the plural pronoun "we." 

The frequent mistake of applying this and similar passages 

to sinners in general has been injurious in two 

particulars: 

(1) It has been injurious to the unregenerate, 

in that it has given some the impression that there is 

no difference between the Church and the world; and 

that all alike have access to God in prayer and for the 

forgiveness of daily trespasses. It has thus hindered 

some from realizing the necessity of faith in the atonement, 

and from definitely entering into covenant relationship 

with the Lord under the terms of the New 

Covenant. On the contrary all should be clearly informed 

of the fact that repentance and a particular, 

positive acceptance of Christ as their personal Savior 

are absolutely necessary, before they can "be accepted 

in the Beloved," and be treated as "sons of God," and 

enjoy the privileges of this relationship,— prayer, fellowship 

with God, divine care or providential oversight 

of their affairs and interests, and the favor of forgiveness 

of daily trespasses through the merit of the great 

High Priest. 

(2) This oversight has had an injurious effect 

upon some Christians who have gone to the extreme of 
claiming that they can never commit sin, after their 
past sins have been graciously forgiven by the Lord, and 
after they have entered into the New Covenant relationship. 
Hence, we have the very wrong views and teachings 
of so-called "perfectionists" who claim, not merely 
that they are reckonedly perfect now, but that they 
are actually perfect in all their thoughts, words and 
deeds,— deceiving themselves and laying themselves 
liable to many grievous errors, as the Apostle declares 
in this connection.— Verses 8,10. 

The object of the Apostle John in writing this 
epistle he clearly states, saying, "These things write 
we unto you, that your joy may be full." It is a noteworthy 
fact that the vast majority of Christians never 

R2235 : page 311 

experience the fulness of joy and peace and blessing 
that they might possess. Too many are content with 
simply diluted first principles of the doctrine of Christ; 
and, as the Apostle Paul declares, such are merely 
"babes in Christ." They have a blessing of course in 
any relationship to the Lord, but they have not the 
fulness of joy which would be theirs if they progressed 



in grace and in knowledge "to the full stature of a 
man in Christ." The object of the Apostle's writing 
them was to stir up the pure minds of believers to an 
appreciation and enjoyment of their privileges, that 
thereby they might grow and develop. 

The Apostle follows the example of our Lord Jesus 
in symbolizing truth and righteousness as Light, and 
sin and every evil way as so much of opposing Darkness. 
God himself thus considered would be the very 
perfection of light,— "in him is no darkness," no sin, 
no imperfection. With this thought before the mind, 
the Apostle points out that any growth of fellowship 
with God which we may aspire to, must be along the 
lines of truth, goodness, purity; and he points out that 
it would be sin for us to say to others or to imagine 
in our own hearts that we are walking with God and 
having fellowship with him, if our course of life is a 
dark, a sinful one. Such are merely deceiving themselves 
and others: they are not deceiving God, and 
they are not getting the blessings of those who do 
"walk in the light." 

Moreover, to the extent that we walk in the light 
and in harmony and fellowship with God, we will find 
ourselves in fellowship with all others who are like-minded. 
So then, if we do not "love the brethren, 
whom we have seen," so as to be able to have fellowship 
and spiritual pleasure with them, that would 
be an indication that we are not wholly in harmony and 
fellowship with God. But who are the "brethren?" 
Our Lord tells us that not all who profess his name are 
true brethren; he says, "Not everyone that saith Lord, 
Lord, shall enter into the Kingdom of Heaven [be recognized 
as his brethren and joint-heirs], but he that 
doeth the will of my Father which is in heaven." We 
thus see that it is by our deeds and not merely by our 
professions that we are accepted of the Lord who again 
says, "Who are my brethren?. ..Verily, I say unto 
you he that doeth the will of my Father the same is 
my brother. "-Matt. 7:21; 12:50. 

So then, we are not to anticipate "fellowship" 
with all who name the name of Christ as a proof of fellowship 
with the Father, and that we are in the light: 
we are merely to anticipate this true fellowship with 
those who are earnestly seeking to do the Father's 
will, to serve his cause and exemplify the instructions 
of his Word, in their deeds as well as in their professions. 
Between all such there must be, whether hidden 
or open, a bond of fellowship and union— that bond 
is the one faith and one baptism into the one Lord. 

But while this fellowship between us and the Lord 
and all who have his spirit is based upon our walking 
in the light, our following in his footsteps to the extent 
of our ability, nevertheless it does not imply absolute 
freedom from the imperfection of sin; altho under 
the New Covenant arrangement nothing is charged up 
to us as sin except in proportion as it has been wilfully 



done. Nevertheless, because of the manifold temptations, 
and the weakness of our flesh, the result of inherited 
predisposition toward sin, it is impossible for 
us to avoid "short-comings" and faults. These may 
be properly termed sins as in this lesson, because "sin 
is a transgression of the law," however unintentional. 
But the divine arrangement under the New Covenant, 
on behalf of the Lord's people, is that these unintentional 
faults and short-comings need not be charged up 
against us as sins; but instead may be cleansed away 
upon our application to the Great High Priest, through 
the merit of the precious blood. Thus it is that the 
blood of Jesus Christ our Lord cleanseth us from all 
sin— keeps us clean from sin, if realizing our imperfections 
we continually make application for forgiveness. 

The Apostle uses the word "sin" in a different 
sense than the above, further on in this epistle, saying 
(3:6-9), "Whosoever abideth in him sinneth not: whosoever 
sinneth hath not seen him nor [even] known 
him. ...He that committeth sin is of the devil.... 
Whosoever is begotten of God doth not commit sin; 
for his seed remaineth in him: and he cannot sin because 
he is begotten of God." Again he says (5:18), 
"We know that whosoever is begotten of God sinneth 
not; but he that is begotten of God keepeth himself, 
and the wicked one toucheth him not." 

In these passages the Apostle uses the word "sin" in 
its full or absolute sense, meaning wilful sin, deliberate 
sin, intentional sin; sins that are not merely short-comings 
and faults, due largely or wholly to the imperfections 
of the flesh, inherited from our ancestors. 
No one, the Apostle assures us, who has been begotten 
of the spirit of the Lord, the spirit of holiness and 
truth, could have any sympathy with sin so as to wilfully, 
knowingly and intentionally engage therein. 
All who so love sin and wilfully do it and approve it 
after they have a knowledge of the truth, are children 
of darkness who love darkness and who thus show that 
they have the spirit or disposition of Satan. 

But let us return to the consideration of the other 
use of the word "sin" as found in this lesson, applying 
the term to the faults and imperfections which 
God's people are zealously striving against, and seeking 
to stamp out of their mortal bodies, and against 
which they are continually fighting a good fight and 
coming off conquerors, and more than conquerors, 
through him who loved us and bought us with his 
precious blood. The Apostle intimates that there is 
danger that some will go to the extreme of denying 
that they have any faults, and thus deceive themselves 
and get into a snare of the adversary. It may be asked, 
What difference can it make if they are seeking to live 

R2235 : page 312 

godly, whether they claim to live perfectly, or admit 



that they are imperfect and apply continually for cleansing 

through the precious blood. We reply that it makes 

a great difference: only as we confess our sins can they 

be forgiven, consequently those who deny that they 

have any sins, faults, imperfections, have a great load 

of them uncancelled, unforgiven, charged up against 

them; and because of this they would be accounted unworthy 

to be taken further along in the path of light, 

under the lead of the holy spirit, into the heights and 

depths and lengths and breadths of the love and wisdom 

of God, as revealed in his Word as meat in due 

season for the household of faith. Thus we see that 

there is but the one proper course of faith and conduct, 

in which we may have a complete fellowship with the 

Lord: those who take any other course are making God 

a liar, and he would not fellowship with them, but he 

will leave them to the darkness of their own way. Can 

we wonder then that so many are in darkness and lack 

evidences of fellowship with God, when we see how 

few confess their faults and seek to overcome them and 

to be cleansed in the only way of divine appointment? 

These things are written not to cultivate in us the 
thought that we may sin with impunity, and be overtaken 
with faults through carelessness and inattention 
to the divine Word, and then go to the Lord for forgiveness. 
Quite to the contrary, these assurances of 
divine favor and willingness to forgive are designed to 
have upon our hearts a mellowing influence which will 

R2236 : page 312 

make us all the more careful to avoid sin, and to maintain 

fellowship with him who is the perfection of light 

and holiness. "These things are written that we sin 

not;" that we become not boastful of self, self-righteous, 

self-justified, and thus abominable in the Lord's 

sight: but that, fleeing from our weaknesses and imperfections, 

we lay hold upon the grace of God in 

Christ for their forgiveness, and for grace and strength 

increasingly to fight a good fight against sin. 

"If any man [in Christ] sin, we have an Advocate 
with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous." 
Here again, "any man" does not refer to those who 
are out of Christ, but to those who are under the terms 
and conditions of the New Covenant. Such alone are 
addressed in this Epistle. The world has no Advocate 
with the Father, because it has not accepted Christ, 
and he is the Advocate only for those who have accepted 
him and who are striving to overcome sin. 

Our Advocate is more than an advocate, more 
than a representative at the bar of divine justice, interested 
in our welfare and forgiveness; he is in addition 
the one who gave himself for us, who at Calvary 
finished the work of making a propitiation (satisfaction) 
for our sins. This is the reason why we may 
come "with boldness to the throne of grace," not only 



realizing that God is for us, and that our Lord Jesus 
sympathizes with and is our Advocate, but also and 
specially realizing the merit of the sacrifice which he 
has already paid to Justice, and which he has made 
fully applicable on behalf of all who love and obey 
him, on application. 

But, says the Apostle, he is the propitiation not 
merely for our sins (the Church's sins), but "also for 
the sins of the whole world." What does this mean? Is 
he the Advocate for the whole world? No; not yet. 
The world has not yet been called and drawn to holiness 
and truth. During the present age "no man can 
come unto Christ except the Father draw him." And 
this drawing influence of the truth is at present extended 
only to "him that hath an ear to hear." A great 
mass of mankind have never heard in any sense of the 
word of the grace of God, and of the propitiation and 
forgiveness, provided for all in Christ. Indeed, it is a 
remarkably small number who "have tasted that the 
Lord is gracious." 

Yet so surely as the propitiation was made "for 
the sins of the whole world," just so surely shall every 
member of mankind be brought to a knowledge of the 
fact, and to an opportunity to avail himself of the 
provided blessing. It is to this end that the great 
Millennial age has been promised and is being prepared 
for: and it is concerning that age of blessing to "all the 
families of the earth" that the Lord declares through 
the prophet "In that day the blind eyes shall be opened 
and the deaf ears shall be unstopped." It is of that 
time that our Lord Jesus also declared, "And I, if I be 
lifted up, will draw all men unto me." It is by virtue 
of his having been lifted up as the propitiation, the sin-offering, 
"for the sins of the whole world," that our 
glorified Lord will eventually be privileged to be the 
Judge of the world and to grant forgiveness and reconciliation 
and restitution to all who will heartily obey 
him; while "whosoever will not obey that Prophet will 
be cut off from amongst the people,"— in the second 
death. -Acts 3:23. 

As the drawing now, by the Father, is not a compulsion, 
but merely a constraining by the truth, 
through a knowledge of it, so the drawing of the 
Millennial age upon the world of mankind will not 
be a compulsion, but merely the influence of righteousness 
and truth constraining toward love for righteousness 
and thus to the reward of righteousness- 
eternal life. 

The Apostle seems to intimate in our lesson that 
quite a good number may claim an intimate knowledge 
of God falsely, and hence with great plainness of speech 
he informs us that, "He that saith I know him, and 
keepeth not his commandments is a liar, and the truth 
is not in him." It is thus very evident that the Apostle 
does not mean merely a knowledge about God but an 
intimate knowledge of God; implying fellowship and 



communion with him: he then gives us a test by which 
we may judge accordingly whether or not we are new 
creatures in the Lord and have the love of God developed 
in us to any extent. The test is obedience. In 
proportion as we keep the Lord's Word, in like proportion 
the love of God is perfected in us; for if we 
have received the mind of Christ, the holy spirit, the 
spirit of God, the effect will be to cause us to both will 
and do his good pleasure— to the extent of our ability. 
And this ability should be continually on the increase 
year by year. And altho we may not hope to be perfected 
until we shall be "changed" and be granted our 
new resurrection bodies, nevertheless all the while we 
may keep so closely in touch with the Lord in the spirit 
of our minds that we may have continual fellowship 
with him: and by confessing our faults and seeking 
his forgiveness we may continue to the end of our 
journey clean from sin, even tho we must still acknowledge 
the imperfections of the flesh,— that in our flesh 
dwelleth no perfection. 



R2236 : page 313 

BAPTISM OF JESUS AND ANNOUNCEMENT OF HIS WORK. 

-JAN. 2.-MATT. 3:7-17.- 

"This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased."— Matt. 3:17. 

JOHN, the Baptizer, was a fearless minister of the 
truth, whose courage qualified him well for the 
work given him to do, the announcement and introduction 
of our Lord Jesus and the new dispensation 
which his ministry inaugurated. And unless it be 
clearly recognized that a great change of dispensation 
was due and at hand at that time, and that John was 
the divine agent in announcing that crisis in their affairs 
to Israel, the lesson before us cannot be rightly 
appreciated or understood. 

At the time in question, Judaism was in many respects 
in a more flourishing condition than it had ever 
before been: idolatry in its cruder forms was unknown, 
and Phariseeism was the controlling influence. The 
word Pharisee to-day has come to be the synonym of 
hypocrite and impostor, but at that time it was the 
name given to and accepted by the professedly most 
pious class in Israel, people who professed consecration 
to the Lord, who studied the Law diligently and were 
zealous in prayer and the propagation of the Jewish 
religion. It was the time of the greatest missionary 
effort that had ever been made by the Jews, as our 
Lord testified, "Ye compass sea and land to make one 
proselyte." The Sadducees also professed holiness of 
life, altho they denied much of the Scripture and were 



practically the "higher critics" in religious matters, 
among the Jews of that day. 

Under these circumstances we may imagine the 
surprise and consternation which John's preaching 
would arouse when he addressed members of the leading 
religious sects as sinners, "a generation of vipers." 
He thus implied what our Lord plainly stated to the 
same classes, namely, that their religion was one of 
outward forms and ceremony merely, and not of the 
heart. We fear that if the same inspired teacher were 
to preach to-day he would similarly address and surprise 
many who have "a form of godliness" and outward 
devotion to Sectarianism and to its propagation. 

"Who hath warned you to flee from the wrath to 
come?" We do not understand John's language here 
to refer to flames and torments after death, but to a 
wrath of God about to come upon that nation; because 
of its hypocritical formalism and failure to live up to 
the light and privileges which it enjoyed.— Compare 
1 Thess. 2:16; Rom. 9:22,27-29 and Luke 21:23,24. 

The fact that the Scribes and Pharisees came to 
John and were baptized of him signified repentance 
and turning to God; but John points out that more 
than an outward profession of repentance is necessary; 
that there should be such a reform of life as would yield 
fruit and clearly show the repentance. He clearly saw 
that the Jews were resting self-satisfied in the divine 
promises to Abraham; feeling that because they were 
his natural offspring they must therefore, necessarily, 
be the heirs of the promises made to him. Thus God's 
favor to them was proving an ensnarement, a hindrance 
to their proper humility of heart and carefulness of 
life. John would have them see that to be heirs of the 
Abrahamic promise would necessitate that they should 
have also Abraham's faith, and works or fruits corresponding 
and resulting. And he declares, therefore, 
that God is able to raise up children to Abraham, to 
inherit the promises, wholly outside of Abraham's 
fleshly posterity: which he has done during this Gospel 
age;— taking not stones, but Gentiles for the purpose. 

Proceeding, John boldly declares that the testing 
time, the critical time for them as a people, has come. 
For centuries they had been the recipients of divine 
favor and blessings and mercies: now the question with 
them was,— To be or not to be longer God's peculiar 

R2237 : page 313 

people. The axe of divine judgment is whetted, and 
the time of crisis has come, and it would thenceforth 
be an individual matter and not a national question as 
to who shall be the children of Abraham. Every one 
of them in whom would be found the good fruitage of 
righteousness would be spared of the Lord and transplanted 
into the more favorable condition of the Gospel 
dispensation, while every one of them found unworthy 



would be cut off from divine favor, even tho 

they outwardly made loud professions. Thus cut down 

they would be cast into the fire,— the fire of trouble 

which came upon that nation, the "wrath" of verse seven, 

which ended with the complete overthrow of 

their polity. 

John recognized and freely stated that his work was 
merely a reformatory and preparatory work and that 
the one who was to do the testing was mightier than 
himself— the Messiah. He declared himself so inferior 
as to be unworthy to be his sandal-bearer. This 
greater one, for whom he was the forerunner or introducer 
or herald, was the one who would bless all those 
found worthy of a blessing, by baptizing them with the 
holy spirit from on high; and he also would be the one 
who would send the "fire," judgment, tribulation or 
destruction upon the others of that nation found unworthy 
of the holy spirit. This prophecy of John we 
recognize as amply and literally fulfilled. Those gathered 
out as a result first of John's preaching, and subsequently 
of the preaching of the Lord and his apostles 
during his ministry, were blessed with the benediction 
of the holy spirit, the "spirit of adoption," at Pentecost; 
and others subsequently were gathered and likewise 
blessed by the ministry of the holy spirit in these; 
and it was not long after Pentecost before the fires of 
sedition, strife, envy, malice, hatred, etc., began to 
burn throughout the land of Israel and ultimately resulted 
in the utter destruction of their national existence, 
A.D. 70. 

John uses the harvesting process as an illustration 
of our Lord's work; and this is in full accord with the 
statement of Scripture, that our Lord in the end of the 
Jewish age was the reaper or harvester who had a definitely 
appointed harvesting time, in which he gathered 
the real wheat of that nation into the Gospel garner 
and then cleaned up the field by burning the chaff or 
refuse. John declared that he would thoroughly cleanse 
the "wheat," fan out the "chaff" from the "wheat." 
The separation between the mere professors and the 
Israelites indeed should be thoroughly and completely 
accomplished at the hands of this great harvester during 
the harvest time of that age. The unquenchable 
fire in which the chaff of that people suffered, was the 
time of trouble already referred to in verses seven and eleven, 
which culminated A.D. 70. It was an "unquenchable 
fire" or destruction: they endeavored to 
quench or stop the trouble many times, but all their 

R2237 : page 314 

efforts were fruitless: it was unquenchable because the 
Lord intended that it should thoroughly consume them 
nationally. Nor have they ever since succeeded in restoring 
their national polity; nor will they succeed until 
the full number of the elect Church has been completed 



(Rom. 1 1:25), and until the times of the Gentiles 
(the period apportioned to Gentile governments, 
Luke 21:24) shall have run their course, A.D. 1915. 

Another Scripture shows us that our Lord at this 
time, when coming to John to be baptized of him, was 
thirty years of age. The age of thirty was the beginning 
of manhood's estate according to the Law, and 
since John was only six months older than Jesus, it is 
the reasonable presumption that he had been preaching 
just six months before our Lord's baptism occurred. 
John's objection to the baptism of Jesus (his cousin) 
whose nobility of birth and character he already recognized 
(Luke 1:41-44), was because he recognized 
baptism only from the Jewish standpoint, and not from 
the standpoint of the new dispensation, which began 
with our Lord. John's baptism of the Jews signified 
merely a repentance of sin and reformation of life. But 
not so our Lord Jesus' baptism: it meant another thing 
entirely. Our Lord had no sins to repent of, nor to 
reform from, being "holy, harmless, separate from 
sinners," as John also recognized. Our Lord's baptism 
signified consecration, a full giving up or burial of 
the will, its immersion into the will of God. Our Lord 
made such a consecration himself at the earliest moment 
possible under the Law, thirty years of age. And now 
he was merely symbolizing that real baptism by a water 
baptism, which constituted an outward confession of 
his consecration to God, and was an example for all 
who should afterward seek to walk in his footsteps. 

As our Lord came up out of the water the Father 
granted a special manifestation of approval, by communicating 
to him the holy spirit, marking his acceptance 
and sealing him as the heir of the blessings already 
promised. Not only was the holy spirit given, 
but an outward manifestation of the gift was granted, 
especially to John; that he might know of a surety that 
Jesus was the Messiah, accepted of God as such, and 
might announce him to those who had accepted his 
ministry and become truly repentant of sins and desirous 
of bearing the fruits of righteousness. It does 
not appear that the multitude saw the manifestation of 
the spirit in the form of a dove lighting down upon 
our Lord.-John 1:29-34. 

Why the form of a dove should be adopted for a 
manifestation of the holy spirit is a question. We presume 
because a dove is a fit representative or emblem 
of gentleness and meekness; and from the time that a 
dove returned to the Ark of Noah, with an olive 
branch in its mouth, both the dove and the olive branch 
have been symbols of peace and good will. The dove, 
therefore, was a most fitting emblem of the spirit of 
meekness, patience, long suffering, brotherly-kindness, 
love, and faithfulness which is the spirit of the Father 
—the holy spirit. 

At this same time came a voice from heaven, saying, 
"This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well 



pleased." It would appear that such a voice was heard 
on three different occasions. (1) At the time of our 
Lord's baptism here narrated. (2) On the mount of 
transfiguration. (Mark 9:7.) (3) At the close of our 
Lord's ministry, just before the crucifixion. (John 12:28.) 
Yet apparently these voices, while understood 
and appreciated by some as attestations to our Lord's 
acceptance with the Father, were by others variously 
attributed; some saying that an angel had spoken and 
others that it thundered. (John 12:28,29.) And so 
it seems to be with every manifestation of divine truth. 
Those who are in a right attitude of heart can and do 
receive the Lord's message and find abundant ground 
for faith and trust; while others, out of harmony with 
the divine arrangement, are continually therefore skeptical 
and lacking of to them satisfactory evidence. The 
truth, evidently, then as now, was meat only for those 
who hunger and thirst after righteousness; and these 
who have the hearing ear are such as have honesty of 
heart and a full consecration to the Lord. 

To draw a lesson from these things specially applicable 
to our own day should be a part of our object. 
We have come to the "harvest" time of the Gospel 
age: again the Chief Reaper is present; not in the flesh, 
to be a sin-offering, but now in the glory of his exalted 
divine nature. The axe is laid to the root of the 
trees again. It is no longer a question of being a citizen 
of favored Christendom, nor of being a member of 
its various sects; but it is an individual test. Every 
one (not every individual in the world, just as it was 
not every individual in the world in the days of John 
the baptizer— then it was every one in the Jewish nation, 
now it is every one in the nominal Christendom, 
and does not at all refer to the masses of heathendom) 
is now to be subjected to certain tests, and by these 
tests he will either be accepted and further blessed 
or be rejected and suffer the consequences. The testings 
of the "harvest" of this age which are parallel to 
those of the Jewish age and were typified thereby, are 
clearly pointed out in our Lord's discourse of Matt. 13:24-43. 
The Jewish harvest is spoken of as being a 
separation of wheat from chaff, while the harvest of 
this age is designated a separation of "wheat" from 
"tares." As the Jews little realized that the Lord and 
his apostles in their ministry were doing this separating 
work by the preaching of the truth, so nominal 
Christendom little realizes to-day that a similar work 
and separation as between "wheat" and "tares" is now 
in progress. As the Jews in general failed to recognize 
the gathering of the "wheat" of their age into 
the garner of the Gospel dispensation, so nominal 
Christians to-day fail to see that the "wheat" of this 
age is being gathered by the Lord into his garner, 
the Kingdom. As the Jews failed to recognize the 
binding and blinding influences which came upon them 
and enkindled amongst them the fires of judgment, 



wrath, destruction, so nominal Christians to-day, while 
they recognize the peculiar binding together in social 
bundles now in progress, and while they see all the 
preparations for the coming great social revolution, 
time of trouble, wrath, burning, destruction of present 
systems, etc., are nevertheless blind respecting what 
all these things really mean, and fail to see that these 
are features of the "harvest" work now in progress, 
under the supervision of the great Reaper. They fail 
also to recognize him present, notwithstanding the repeated 
declaration, similar to that made by John at the 
first advent— "There standeth one among you whom 
ye know not." 



page 315 

INTERESTING LETTERS. 



Pennsylvania. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-My letters to you recently 
have been few and far between; but now thankfulness 
to our Lord and to you as his instrument for 
the good things of DAWN, VOL. IV., calls for a letter of 
recognition at least. 

As with the other three volumes, it is as far as I 
can see in thorough harmony with the Scriptures. 
Chapters 1, 11, 12, 13 and 14 are grand— they impressed 
me especially. Chapters 2 and 3 are also splendid— 
and the testimony in the remaining portions of the 
book, from the press, etc., is wonderfully corroborative 
of Scripture. I suppose most all of the Lord's people 
are like myself, especially interested in his Word: so 
while I think the statements of ministers, philosophers, 
statesmen, etc., in the DAWN will be very helpful to 
the Church, in fact almost invaluable, and were greatly 
appreciated by me, yet the greatest teachings and 
the lessons most enjoyed were such as "Our Lord's 
Great Prophecy." It always was a great prophecy to 
me, but now it has a greater meaning still. I am so 
thankful for a clear comprehension of that discourse of 
our Savior. 

How many passages of Scripture make reference 
to this time of trouble, and yet how few we meet seem 
willing to believe it. They all admit we are in "dull 
times," "things are bad," etc.; but, as a gentleman 
said to me, "It is only like a point on a wheel, it is going 
down now, but soon it will start to go up, and we 
will have prosperous times till it passes the top again." 
That voices the popular sentiment; they fail to see the 
length and severity of the trouble, neither do they 
know that this trouble ends creation's groaning. Thank 
God for giving us light! 



The Lord has still continued his blessings to us. 
I feel unworthy of them, and am trying to show my 
appreciation by using the opportunities and talents he 
gives me. Suffering for Christ is not yet unknown, 
neither is the accompanying grace. We love him more, 
know him better and trust we may ever continue to 
draw nearer to him who is our strength and shield, as 
well as our God and Father. 

Yours in Christ's service, BENJ. H. BARTON. 

Scotland. 

DEAR BROTHER:-Brother Houston and myself 
frequently call upon each other, and have much good 
fellowship in the truths of MILLENNIAL DAWN. Many 
a time I feel overjoyed and thankful to the Lord for 
the clear light which you so well show us on God's 
own Word. My only regret is that being so busily 
occupied with my daily duties I am able to do so little 
in cooperation with Bro. H. to make known the truth. 
In this town, however, the views are fairly well known 
to most of the leaders in church matters, but their prejudice 
is great and their opposition most bitter. Be 
the truth ever so carefully set forth, and altho the 
vast importance of the gospel to this age be ever so 
strongly emphasized, any idea of future probation 
for the ignorant masses of the world at once 
sets up a strong prejudice, and we have to be careful 
that injury is not done to these precious truths 
in our hands. Bro. H. and myself feel more and more 
that the great thing is the personal living of the truths 
of DAWN. But oh! how we feel the littleness of all we 
can do, and how unworthy we are to be witnesses to 
the truth even in this limited degree. 

Of Bro. H. I should not say that his work has 
been little. He has been able to make some very successful 
journeys in colporteuring DAWN, and has great 
power and fluency in declaring the glad tidings. Both 
of us take every opportunity in suitable conversation 
of bringing the truth under notice, and place tracts 
from time to time. At our Young Men's Guild meetings 
I have had several opportunities of presenting the 
doctrine of the ransom in its true light, and a good 
many have been interested. 

As an introduction to the truths of DAWN, I find 
it usually very efficacious to draw attention to the endless 
doctrinal contradictions in the so-called Orthodox 
creeds of the day. In correspondence, too, I am able 
to do a little in the way of getting friends interested, 
but I must say a vast amount of indifference to such 
things abounds on all hands. Bro. H. and I have 
talked of getting up a little "DAWN Circle for Bible 
Study," and will see if it cannot possibly be managed 
judiciously this winter. 

Before closing I must add that we are delighted 
to see that VOL. IV. of MILLENNIAL DAWN is now out, 
and pray that our Lord's blessing may follow every 



copy, and be the means of turning many from darkness 
to the marvelous light. 

I remain, your brother in the faith of our great 
Ransomer, R. J. G. MILLAR. 



Wisconsin. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-The last TOWER 
came to hand in due course, and is very welcome after 
its vacation. "The Day of Vengeance" was, you say in 
the preface, partially a review, but its order, and putting 
affairs so plainly and compactly, is a great service 
to those older in the truth, while making it particularly 
timely and valuable to those more recently coming to 
a consideration of these things. 

The spirit of the last TOWER is especially refreshing 
and edifying. Oh! that we all might be so thoroughly 
in the Vine that his spirit only would control 
us, rooting out all variance, emulation, strife, and 
everything contrary to this blessed spirit of the truth, 
that all might more and more be transformed into the 
likeness and character of him who bought us with his 
own precious blood. 

I send you this word of fellowship and greeting, 
praying a continuance of divine favor on you and all 
your associates, to whom I send greeting. 

Yours in the Redeemer, W. E. PAGE. 



Pittsburg, Pa. 
"The fourth volume of the MILLENNIAL DAWN 
series, issued under the ominous title of 'The Day of 
Vengeance,' certainly takes in a very wide field, as it 
gives an extensive collection of facts and figures relating 
to almost every phase of social, political, financial 
and religious matters, as they bear upon the present 
situation. Nor are these dryly stated; on the contrary, 
they are introduced in such a manner as to fascinate 
every reader who is at all interested in the consideration 
of the wonderful events of 'our day.'"— 
Pittsburg Press. 



