Are You Thoroughly Accomplishing Your Ministry?
1 In the book of Acts, we are told that Jesus’ disciples accomplished their ministry by bearing “thorough witness” to the people. (Acts 2:40; 8:25; 28:23) That was certainly the apostle Paul’s objective. (Acts 20:24) Is that not your goal as a minister of the good news? How can you accomplish this?
2 Prepare Your Presentation: To ensure that you give a good witness in the ministry, preparation is important. This is especially true when offering the magazines, since the subject matter changes constantly. To help equip us better, this issue of Our Kingdom Ministry is introducing a new feature​—the column at the left, which lists sample presentations for the current Watchtower and Awake! magazines. A timely subject that will appeal to many people will be highlighted for each issue. How might you develop these brief presentations?
3 Choose a suggestion that you feel will be most effective in your territory. Carefully read the featured article, and take note of specific points that are likely to stir interest. Find a cited scripture in the magazine that ties in with the discussion and that you may be able to read to the householder. Add a brief conclusion to encourage your listener to read the magazine and a brief statement, if appropriate, that the householder may make a donation to the worldwide work of Jehovah’s Witnesses. Now, rehearse your presentation.
4 Plan to Use the Bible: With good planning, a scripture can often be worked into your presentation. For example, experienced publishers in many places are having success by going to the door with Bible in hand, greeting the householder, and saying:
▪ “We are asking people if they believe this . . .” Read Genesis 1:1, and then ask: “Do you agree with that statement?” If the person agrees, then say: “I do too. However, do you think that if God created all things, he is also responsible for wickedness?” After acknowledging the person’s response, read Ecclesiastes 7:29. Open the Knowledge book to page 71, and read paragraph 2. Encourage the person to read the book. If the householder does not agree with the statement at Genesis 1:1, urge him to examine the Creation book.
5 Follow Up All Interest: You cannot fully accomplish your ministry if you do not follow up the interest that is found. When you have a good discussion, regardless of whether you place magazines or other literature, make note of the person’s name and address. Diligently try to cultivate the person’s interest by returning promptly. By all means, offer a Bible study.
6 The first-century disciples knew that Jesus had ordered them “to give a thorough witness.” (Acts 10:42) That same command applies to us, for it is the only way that we will be able to make disciples. (Matt. 28:19, 20) Let us do our utmost to accomplish our ministry thoroughly.​—2 Tim. 4:5.

