Is It an Obstacle to Preaching?
1 Most people lead busy lives. Jehovah’s Witnesses are among the busiest​—studying God’s Word, attending congregation meetings, and sharing in the field service. In addition, we are busy caring for secular work, housework or schoolwork, and many other responsibilities, which all take time. This is especially challenging for family heads.
2 Because of unfavorable economic conditions in various places, heads of households may have to work long and hard to make a living. When demanding secular jobs take most of their time and strength, they have little left for the preaching work. Since they have an obligation to provide materially for their families, some may feel that they can have only a limited share in the ministry. (1 Tim. 5:8) Granted, today there are many pressures connected with obtaining the necessities of life. But one’s secular work need not become an obstacle to preaching the good news. (Mark 13:10) Hence, we do well to examine our actual situation.
3 Because the world scene is always changing, a family head may be inclined to spend an excessive amount of time on the job, with a view to building up his financial reserves for unforeseen crises. (1 Cor. 7:31) While increased secular work may seem to provide extra material things or additional opportunities for recreation and entertainment, will this make the family happier and more contented if it is done at the expense of time for spiritual pursuits and regular meeting attendance? We would certainly want to avoid anything that would endanger our spirituality. Heeding Jesus’ counsel to ‘store up treasures in heaven’ and be “rich toward God” is the wise course.​—Matt. 6:19-21; Luke 12:15-21.
4 Seek Kingdom Interests First: Jesus taught his followers to put spiritual matters ahead of everything else. He urged them: “Never be anxious and say, ‘What are we to eat?’ or, ‘What are we to drink?’ or, ‘What are we to put on?’” Why would he say that? He explained: “For your heavenly Father knows you need all these things.” If we are truly convinced of that, there will be no obstacle that will prevent us from doing what Jesus next said: “Keep on, then, seeking first the kingdom and his righteousness, and all these [necessary material] things will be added to you.” God will see to that! (Matt. 6:31-33) This certainly is no time to be distracted by undue anxiety over making a living or by a desire to get comfortably situated in a system of things that will soon pass away.​—1 Pet. 5:7; 1 John 2:15-17.
5 The primary purpose of secular work is to provide for one’s material needs. But how much do we need? The apostle Paul wrote: “Having sustenance and covering, we shall be content with these things.” Are we trying to acquire more than that? If so, we may be reaping the consequences that Paul warned about: “Those who are determined to be rich fall into temptation and a snare and many senseless and hurtful desires, which plunge men into destruction and ruin.” (1 Tim. 6:8, 9; Matt. 6:24; Luke 14:33) How can we tell if we are being hindered by excessive desires?
6 If because of our secular pursuits we have only a minimal share in field service or fail to see the need to make sacrifices for the sake of the good news, then there is a need to adjust our priorities. (Heb. 13:15, 16) A more modest life-style will go a long way toward eliminating this obstacle to our preaching. Kingdom interests should always be the first priority when it comes to the use of our time and energy.
7 The Labor That Is Not in Vain: Paul’s words encourage us always to have “plenty to do in the work of the Lord, knowing that [our] labor is not in vain in connection with the Lord.” (1 Cor. 15:58) The foremost “work of the Lord” is the Kingdom-preaching and disciple-making work. (Matt. 24:14; 28:19, 20) To have as full a share as possible, we should schedule time for the field service each week and endeavor not to use that time for any other pursuit. (Eph. 5:15-17) Then, neither secular work nor anything else will become an obstacle to our ministry.
8 When we give of ourselves in sharing Bible truths with others, we experience the superior happiness that comes from giving. (Acts 20:35) By pursuing the Kingdom-preaching work, we can look to the future with confidence, “for God is not unrighteous so as to forget [our] work and the love [we] showed for his name.”​—Heb. 6:10.

