Service Meeting Schedule
Week Starting September 10
Song 86
10 min: Local announcements. Selected Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry.
13 min: Local needs.
22 min: “Are You Thoroughly Accomplishing Your Ministry?”a After discussing paragraphs 1-3 with the audience, demonstrate two brief magazine presentations​—one using the September 15 Watchtower and the other using the September 22 Awake! After discussing paragraph 4, demonstrate the suggested presentation, with the Knowledge book.
Song 124 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting September 17
Song 92
15 min: Local announcements. Accounts report. “It’s in the Index.” Show how to find presentations for the Creation book.
15 min: How Did We Do Last Year? Talk by the service overseer. Give highlights of the congregation report for the 2001 service year. Commend everyone for the good things accomplished. Focus on how the congregation has done in meeting attendance, in regularity in field service, and in the Bible study activity, outlining practical suggestions for improvement. Set reachable goals for the coming year.
15 min: Question Box. A talk. Review the congregation’s weekly schedule of meetings for service. Explain how all who attend can contribute to a productive discussion at these meetings. Encourage the congregation to support these service arrangements.
Song 129 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting September 24
Song 97
15 min: Local announcements. Using suggestions offered in “What to Say About the Magazines,” demonstrate two presentations​—one using the October 1 Watchtower and the other using the October 8 Awake!
30 min: Love God​—Not the Things of the World. (1 John 2:15-17) Talk and audience discussion reviewing the circuit assembly program that was held during the past service year. Invite publishers to comment on key points learned and how they were able to apply them personally or as family groups. (Portions can be assigned in advance.) Feature these program parts: (1) “Love for God Motivates Us in Our Ministry.” Such love helps us cope with negative feelings that might inhibit our preaching​—timidity, feelings of inadequacy, fear of men. (2) “Lovers of Jehovah Hate What Is Bad.” (w99 10/1 28-31) Having a relationship with God depends on our hating what he hates​—not only what is obviously wicked but also subtle wrongs. (3) “Pursue the Surpassing Way of Love.” (w92 7/15 27-30) First Corinthians 13:4-8 shows why we patiently put up with the imperfections of others, avoid self-centeredness and competition, do not spread harmful gossip, and remain loyal to God’s organization. (4) “Things in the World​—How Do We View Them?” We should not love the things in the world, succumb to desires of the flesh, be misled by desires of the eyes, or make a showy display of our means of life. (5) “Being No Part of the World Safeguards Us.” Second Corinthians 6:14-17 shows how certain beliefs, customs, and practices can make us unacceptable to God. We must discern and avoid pitfalls devised by the Devil. (6) “Divine Promises to Those Loving God.” (w86 6/15 5-6) Jehovah’s blessing adds delight to our lives and enriches us spiritually.​—1 Tim. 6:17-19.
Song 133 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting October 1
Song 106
10 min: Local announcements. Remind publishers to turn in field service reports for September.
15 min: How Can I Do Better in School? An elder and his wife or a ministerial servant and his wife talk to their school-age child. They are concerned because the child is lagging behind in schoolwork. They review advice in Young People Ask, chapter 18, and discuss what the child needs to do to improve. Parents stress the importance of getting a good basic education in order to use one’s full potential in pursuing sacred service.
20 min: “Is It an Obstacle to Preaching?”b Stress the need to be balanced in secular work, establishing priorities that keep Kingdom interests first. Invite some family heads in the congregation to relate how they are meeting the challenge of providing for their households materially without sacrificing their spiritual needs.
Song 137 and concluding prayer.
[Footnotes]
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.

