2000 “Doers of God’s Word” District Convention of Jehovah’s Witnesses
1 “I will laud you in the big congregation; among a numerous people I shall praise you.” (Ps. 35:18) Imagine how thrilled David would be today to see so many thousands peacefully assembling together to take in divine instruction at our conventions! Were you among the 1,414,534 who attended one of the “God’s Prophetic Word” District Conventions? From late May through early September 1999, a total of 201 conventions were held in 71 cities in the contiguous United States. Our district conventions in 2000 will provide us with new opportunities to gather with fellow praisers of Jehovah, who are “conscious of their spiritual need” and happy and eager to “hear what the spirit says to the congregations.”​—Matt. 5:3; Rev. 2:29.
2 Making Your Hotel Reservation: Each year we are happy to provide you with information on how you can make rooming arrangements for the convention, and we appreciate very much your cooperation with these instructions. The local Rooming Department has prepared a Recommended Lodging List of hotels that will begin accepting reservations in January. Please carefully follow the instructions in this insert in the box entitled “Steps in Making Your Hotel Reservation.” Because of fire and safety regulations, you should arrange for no more than four persons in each room. If a particular hotel permits more than four persons to a room, this will be clearly indicated on the Recommended Lodging List under the heading “Adults.”
3 Hotels available for your convention appear on the first Recommended Lodging List. When these hotels are filled, a revised list will be sent to your congregation. If you have called all the hotels on the list and no rooms are available, please inform your congregation secretary. Using the address or telephone number shown at the top of the list, he will contact the Rooming Department and advise them of the situation. Rather than making a reservation at a hotel not on the list, wait for the new list.
4 Once you make a reservation, please do not switch your reservation to another hotel. Hotels are added because there are brothers and sisters who still need rooms, not to provide more choices for those who already have rooms reserved. Following this direction gives us the opportunity to demonstrate our love for our Christian brothers and to avoid the “me first” attitude so prevalent in the world today.​—1 Cor. 10:24.
5 Sending Deposits to Hotels and Handling Hotel Problems: To guarantee a room reservation, within ten days of making your reservation, a one-night deposit must be made for each room reserved. Without a deposit, the hotel has the right to give your room to someone else. For any difficulties experienced before or after the convention, you may write or call the Rooming Department, using the address or telephone number shown at the top of the Recommended Lodging List. If a problem arises during the convention, you should go to the convention Rooming Department as soon as possible so that the brothers can assist you before you check out of the hotel.
6 Caring for Those With Special Needs: Relatives, the elders, and others in the congregation who are aware of the unique circumstances of the elderly, the infirm, full-time servants, or others with special needs can show their loving concern and care by assisting these ones to attend the convention. (Compare 1 Timothy 5:4.) The Society’s Special Needs Room Request form outlines the qualifications for submitting this form. This provision is only for publishers in good standing, including those with well-behaved children, who have been approved by the Congregation Service Committee. These requests should be sent to the Rooming Department as soon as possible, using the convention address shown on the reverse side of the form.
7 Attending Another Convention: If you need a Recommended Lodging List or information for another convention, the congregation secretary can provide you with the address of the convention headquarters, which is found on the reverse side of the Special Needs Room Request form. Always enclose a stamped, self-addressed envelope with your request. If there is more than one convention held in that city, be sure to indicate the dates of the convention you will attend.
8 Arrange to Be in Attendance All Three Days: Has Satan tried to distract you from giving attention to spiritual things? Sadly, many brothers and sisters and their families are missing out on vital spiritual food. How? By not attending the Friday district convention sessions. In some instances it has been noted that a large percentage of our brothers are missing the spiritual instruction and fellowship that the Friday sessions provide.
9 It is possible that some brothers are reluctant to approach their employers to request the time off to attend the convention. Is this your situation? Why not pray to Jehovah about the matter and muster up the courage to explain your situation to your employer? Remember the good outcome for Nehemiah, who was in a similar situation. (Neh. 2:1-6) Have faith in our heavenly Father’s willingness to help you, knowing that if you put Kingdom interests first, he will provide life’s necessities.​—Matt. 6:32b, 33.
10 How Do Our Conventions Affect You? A sister from the eastern United States wrote: “Thank you so much for the 1999 district convention. Associating with brothers whom I see only once each year brings me much joy. I came in contact with the truth as a pregnant teenager, and I still recall with great fondness when my Bible study conductor took me to my first convention. I looked at the clouds above my head in that open-air stadium as we sang the Kingdom song ‘Myriads of Brothers,’ and I wept. ‘With all these beautiful people around me,’ I asked myself, ‘how could Jehovah want me?’ That day I decided to serve Jehovah fully.” How heartwarming! It is certainly a pleasure to be associated with Jehovah’s clean people, is it not?
11 During the final part of the last days, we need our annual district convention more than ever before. It is a provision from Jehovah to maintain our spiritual health and balance. Therefore, be resolved to attend all three days of this year’s “Doers of God’s Word” District Convention. How can you follow through with your resolve? Ask your employer beforehand for the time off from work to attend the entire convention. If your means are limited, start now to set aside the necessary funds to attend. Ask Jehovah to help you overcome any obstacle. As you do so, you can look forward to enjoying the warm companionship of your brothers and sisters and to hearing the sayings of everlasting life from our loving heavenly Father, Jehovah.​—Compare John 6:68.
[Box on page 3]
Program Times
Friday and Saturday
9:30 a.m. – 5:00 p.m.
      Sunday
9:30 a.m. – 4:00 p.m.
[Box on page 4]
Steps in Making Your Hotel Reservation
 1. Call hotels during regular business hours (in January, if possible). Use the hotel telephone numbers provided on the Recommended Lodging List.
 2. Inform the hotel that you are one of Jehovah’s Witnesses attending the Watchtower convention.
 3. Provide the dates you will stay in the hotel.
 4. Be sure that you are receiving the room rate(s) shown on the Recommended Lodging List. Do not accept a higher rate.
 5. If rooms are not available, call another hotel on the list.
 6. Make your reservation, and ask for a confirmation number.
 7. Make your deposit by credit card, check, or money order. Do NOT send cash. If deposit is made by
Credit card: Instruct the hotel to charge the deposit to your card immediately.
Check or money order: Write the confirmation number on the front, and mail within ten days.
Also, Please:
▪ Stay only in hotels on the Recommended Lodging List.
▪ Reserve room(s) only for yourself or for people with whom you have made specific arrangements.
▪ Keep your first reservation.

