Haven’t We Heard That Before?
1 Of course we have! Jehovah repeats many things in his Word for the benefit of his people. Jesus often repeated his teachings about various aspects of the Kingdom. His apostles continually reviewed spiritual matters with those who were firmly grounded in the truth.​—Rom. 15:15; 2 Pet. 1:12, 13; 3:1, 2.
2 In our time Jehovah’s organization has arranged for important subjects to be reviewed over and over again at congregation meetings. Certain publications have been studied repeatedly. Yes, it is important to hear things that we have heard before!
3 Repetition Fills a Vital Need: Jehovah’s reminders deepen our understanding, expand our viewpoint, and strengthen our determination to stay on course spiritually. (Ps. 119:129) Reviewing God’s standards and principles is like looking in a mirror. It helps us scrutinize ourselves and counteracts the tendency to be “a forgetful hearer.”​—Jas. 1:22-25.
4 If we do not keep reminding ourselves of the truth, other things will influence our hearts. God’s reminders strengthen us to resist the corrupting influences of Satan’s world. (Ps. 119:2, 3, 99, 133; Phil. 3:1) The regular reminders we receive regarding the fulfillment of God’s purposes prompt us to “keep on the watch.” (Mark 13:32-37) Repetition of Scriptural truths helps us remain on the road to everlasting life.​—Ps. 119:144.
5 How to Benefit Personally: We must ‘incline our hearts to God’s reminders.’ (Ps. 119:36) When a familiar subject is to be considered at a congregation meeting, we should prepare in advance, look up the cited scriptures, and reflect on how we can apply the information. Let us not skip the written review in the Theocratic Ministry School, thinking that it is not needed. (Luke 8:18) Never would we want to become inattentive because basic truths are often repeated at our meetings.​—Heb. 5:11.
6 May we share the attitude of the psalmist: “In the way of your reminders I have exulted, just as over all other valuable things.” (Ps. 119:14) Yes, we have heard these valuable things before, and likely we will hear them again. Why? Because Jehovah knows that we need to hear them!

