Imitate Jehovah’s Impartiality
1 Jehovah is concerned about people. He impartially accepts anyone who does his will. (Acts 10:34, 35) When Jesus preached to people, he likewise was impartial. (Luke 20:21) We need to imitate their example, as did Paul, who wrote: “There is the same Lord over all, who is rich to all those calling upon him.”​—Rom. 10:12.
2 Proclaiming the good news of God’s Kingdom to all whom we meet brings glory to God. We must continue to share this wonderful message with others, regardless of their race, social status, education, or financial standing. (Rom. 10:11-13) This means preaching to those who will listen​—men, women, young, and elderly. We need to call at every door to give each householder an opportunity to hear the truth.
3 Take an Interest in Everyone: Our goal is to contact everyone we can. With this in mind, some publishers have been successful in witnessing to people in doctor’s offices, hospitals, nursing homes, welfare offices, and rehabilitation centers. Additionally, publishers have witnessed to funeral directors, school supervisors and counselors, and judges. When approaching officials, it is appropriate to express appreciation to them for the helpful services they provide in the community. Be respectful, and select timely articles that deal particularly with their type of work and the problems associated with it.
4 In one instance a sister managed to speak to a judge in his office. After a lively conversation, he volunteered this comment: “Do you know what I like about Jehovah’s Witnesses? They have well-founded principles from which they do not deviate.” A fine witness was given to this influential person.
5 We cannot read the hearts of people. However, by talking with everyone we meet, we show our faith in God’s ability to direct our work. In addition, this gives people the privilege to hear and respond to the message of hope. (1 Tim. 2:3, 4) Let us use our time wisely and endeavor to imitate Jehovah’s impartiality by reaching all the people we can with the good news.​—Rom. 2:11; Eph. 5:1, 2.

