What Will You Say to an Atheist?
1 “I am an atheist,” a professor from Poland told a missionary in Africa. However, the sister was able to have a discussion with the woman and gave her the book Life​—How Did It Get Here? By Evolution or by Creation? When the missionary returned the next week, the professor told her: “I’m no longer an atheist!” She had read the entire Creation book and now asked for a Bible study. What can you do to succeed in giving a witness to those who say that they do not believe in God? First, consider the various reasons why people make this claim.
2 Factors That Contribute to Disbelief: Not all atheists were raised as such. Many were exposed to a form of religion and at one time believed in God. However, serious health or family problems or certain injustices they experienced weakened their faith. For others, courses taught in schools of higher learning have had a negative impact on their concept of God. Note the following examples of atheists who eventually developed a strong belief in Jehovah God and became his Witnesses.
3 A woman in Paris had been born with a debilitating bone disease. Although baptized as a Catholic, she proclaimed herself an atheist. When she asked the nuns why God had allowed her to be born with such a disability, their answer was: “Because he loves you.” She refused to accept that absurd idea. Also, consider a young person in Finland who was diagnosed as having an incurable muscle disease and was confined to a wheelchair. His mother took him to a Pentecostal who claimed to cure sick people. But there was no miraculous healing. As a result, the young man lost interest in God and became an atheist.
4 A man in Honduras was raised a Catholic but studied Socialist philosophy and atheism. Convinced by university teaching that mankind is the product of evolution, he ceased to believe in God. Similarly, a woman in the United States was raised a Methodist. In college, she took psychology classes. How was her belief affected? She said: “In one summer they destroyed every bit of faith I had in religion.”
5 Reaching the Hearts of Sincere Ones: Many individuals who say that they do not believe in God would appreciate knowing if there is a solution to the problems of poor health, family discord, injustice, and so forth. They are sincerely interested in finding answers to such questions as: ‘Why does evil exist?’ ‘Why do bad things happen to good people?’ and ‘What is the meaning of life?’
6 A husband and wife living in Switzerland had both been raised as atheists. When they were first contacted with the truth, their response was negative. But they had serious family problems and were considering divorce. When the Witness visited again, she showed the couple from the Bible how to overcome their problems. The couple were astonished at the practical counsel contained in the Scriptures, and they agreed to a Bible study. Their marriage was strengthened, they progressed spiritually, and they got baptized.
7 What You Can Say to an Atheist: When someone tells you he is an atheist, endeavor to find out the reason why he says that. Is it because of the education he has received, the problems he has experienced, or religious hypocrisy and false teachings he has seen? You might ask him: “Have you always felt this way?” or “What is the reason for your conclusion?” His answer will help you determine what to say. Where powerful arguments are required, the book Is There a Creator Who Cares About You? may be just what is needed.
8 You might pursue a conversation with an atheist by asking:
▪ “Have you ever wondered: ‘If there is a God, why is there so much suffering and injustice in the world?’ [Allow for response.] May I show you the Bible’s view on this subject?” Read Jeremiah 10:23. After reading it, ask his opinion of the text. Then show him pages 16 and 17 in the brochure Will There Ever Be a World Without War? Or, instead, you may use chapter 10 of the Creator book. Invite him to accept the publication and read the material.​—For further suggestions, see the Reasoning book, pages 150-1.
9 Admittedly, not all atheists will accept the truth. But there are many who are willing to consider another viewpoint. Use logic, persuasion and, above all, the power of God’s Word to help them see the truth.​—Acts 28:23, 24; Heb. 4:12.

