Announcements
◆ With the August Kingdom Ministry there will be an insert. Please remove all of these from the copies of Kingdom Ministry before they are distributed to the congregation. Trim them neatly along the left-hand edge so as to separate pages 3 and 4 from pages 5 and 6. The first portion will be distributed to newly interested ones at the conclusion of the first meeting in September; the second portion will be distributed at the second service meeting in September, to those who are publishers.
◆ With the September issue of Kingdom Ministry the Society plans to provide details concerning a special series of public talks to be given in the congregations during November and December. To the extent possible, we recommend that they be scheduled on consecutive weeks until they have all been heard.
◆ It is requested that, on the next literature order for the congregation, presiding overseers order for each regular pioneer twelve monthly report cards.
◆ Literature offer for July: True Peace and Security​—From What Source? for 25c. You may also carry other 25c publications or larger books in case householders have the smaller ones. For August: The Truth That Leads to Eternal Life or other pocket-size publication for 25c. For September: Evolution book for 25c.
◆ Beginning in September, circuit overseers will give the public talk “Into the New Order Under Christ’s Leadership.” District overseers will speak on the subject “What the Near Future Holds.”
◆ New Publications Available:
Is the Bible Really the Word of God?​—Slovenian
Listening to the Great Teacher​—Afrikaans, Ibo, Iloko, Tagalog, Xhosa, Zulu
Life Everlasting​—in Freedom of the Sons of God—​Ibo, Xhosa
Divine Rulership​—the Only Hope for All Mankind—​Cibemba, Cinyanja
◆ The regular edition of the New World Translation (bi12) is temporarily out of stock. We do have a limited supply of the pocket edition of the New World Translation (bi24), price $1.50, and these may be ordered.
◆ The Society has in stock some German Elberfelder Bibles; these may be obtained at $2.25 each.
◆ Please keep in mind that there is no pioneer rate or special campaign rate for publishers for renewal subscriptions. As to the pioneer rate for subscriptions please see the Watchtower Cost List, paragraph 42.
◆ Correction: In the June 1974 Kingdom Ministry it was announced that Tract #1 was available in the Ronga language; it should have said Tract #8, Life in God’s New Order.

