Presenting the Good News​—What Prompts People to Listen?
1 What is it that, right from the start, attracts you to a certain person more than to others? Is it that person’s friendliness? Undoubtedly that is a factor. And, no doubt, honest-hearted ones that we meet in our field service react similarly. Some brothers project this friendliness more readily than others. Their countenance easily brightens up into a warm smile that invites trust and confidence. Is it possible for you to be more friendly without being overly so, “sweetish” so to speak? The first impression is important and, undoubtedly, in many cases is what determines whether the householder will listen.
2 Some listen to us because it is obvious to them that we are interested in their welfare and have a sincere desire to help. We all have that desire or else we would not be calling on others. But to convey that feeling quickly to the householder we need to have it prominent in our own thoughts. Some brothers and sisters, though they cannot express themselves as well in the language of the country, readily convey to people their sincerity. At times, if one is too fluent or smooth, people are reminded of a fast-talking salesman and tend to get suspicious. And if we repeat the same introduction too often, we may begin to sound mechanical. But if we really feel sincere interest in the householder and speak from the heart, the heart of the householder can be more readily reached.
3 One way to show people that you are interested in them is to listen to what they say. This does not mean simply to stand politely silent while they speak. It means listening with sincere interest. Then you can comment intelligently on what they have said, showing that you are interested in their viewpoint and also understand it. This will aid you to witness with their viewpoint in mind. We have long been encouraged not to do all the talking but to ask questions so as to draw the householder into the conversation. Circuit and district overseers indicate that many publishers are doing this well, but they also observe that some could beneficially give more thought to this matter of really listening to the householder after asking a question.
4 Mostly, though, people listen because of what you say. What you speak is the good news of the Kingdom, and Christ Jesus said the sheep would hear his voice and respond. (John 10:4, 16) The subject you introduce attracts them. The thoughts you express have the ring of truth to them. You really believe what you are saying, so you speak with confidence and conviction. What you talk about is something that you clearly understand, thus what you say is understandable to others.
5 So there are various reasons why people listen to us at the door. Usually it is the message itself that attracts honest-hearted ones. But sometimes it is our friendliness, sometimes it is our interest in them and at times it might be something else that moves them to stay at the door long enough to hear what the message is. It is good to analyze what we do, to see if we can determine just why people listen on a certain occasion or why they do not. Then we can set about to make improvements or to strengthen certain qualities where this might be necessary. Not only will we be cultivating qualities that Jehovah wants to see in us, but we will be making ourselves better representatives of him in the preaching and teaching work.

