Support Earth’s New King
1 Christ is actively ruling as king. If it is his kingship that we support, there are opportunities every day to show that. After his resurrection and before ascending into heaven in 33 C.E., Christ Jesus entrusted to his disciples the field of interest that he had cultivated respecting God’s Messianic kingdom. This field they could make productive by assisting interested ones to progress to Christian maturity. The wealth that Jesus wanted then was not gold and silver but more disciples. (Luke 19:16; Matt. 28:19, 20) Today, nineteen centuries later, the anointed remnant left on earth have the same privilege of thus working for earth’s new King, Jesus Christ. And the “great crowd” of other sheep are extended the opportunity of assisting them in this grand work.​—Rev. 7:9; Luke 19:11-27.
2 July will furnish excellent opportunities for showing our support of earth’s new King by urging others to put their confidence in his rulership. To aid in this work, we will be offering the book True Peace and Security​—From What Source? on a contribution of 25c. Other pocket-size publications can be carried along if desired and, in fact, some of the larger bound books can also be taken along in case people have the smaller publications. Bible studies can be started in any of these publications in which the householder shows interest.
3 July will be assembly month for many of us, and our attending along with others who believe in the Kingdom is a fine way to show our support for the King. The program will offer much that will allow us personally to be strengthened in a spiritual way. Also, our Christian conduct when we are traveling to and from these assemblies can attract honest-hearted ones to the King we serve.
4 If attending an assembly and going on vacation will take you away from your congregation during the latter part of July and the beginning of August, be sure to turn in a field service report before you leave home; the remainder of your activity for that month can be reported the following month. Or, if you prefer, take along report slips and the address of the field overseer, and send him your reports at the end of the month.
5 Young or old, male or female can share in the King’s work. Summer is a time when the young ones usually have more time to serve. There is still time to temporary pioneer before school begins. Talk to your parents and then your presiding overseer if you have been thinking about it. The Bible counsels: “Remember, now, your Grand Creator in the days of your young manhood.”​—Eccl. 12:1.
6 Hundreds of thousands of persons have been streaming into Jehovah’s visible organization in recent years, just as he indicated they would. Proverbs 14:28 says: “In the multitude of people there is an adornment of a king, but in the lack of population is the ruin of a high official.” All of us take great pleasure in being an “adornment” to our King, Jesus Christ. It is a joy to have some share in making disciples of still others and, in doing so, showing our support for Christ as our King.
[Blurb on page 1]
Increasing the Wealth of Earth’s New King.
[Blurb on page 4]
“Pay Attention to How You Listen” at Assembly Time.

