Your Service Meetings
WEEK STARTING JULY 14
12 min: Song 19. Introduction, text and comments. Include discussion of Branch Letter.
 8 min: Accounts report. Include comments from May 1, 1974, “Watchtower” article, “Tenderly Compassionate​—Like Our God.”
15 min: “Support Earth’s New King.” Questions and answers. Include some experiences that publishers locally have enjoyed in offering and placing the “Peace and Security” book thus far this month or in previous campaigns.
15 min: Two Promises of Peace and Security. Sermon for use in presenting the “Peace and Security” book.
Chairman should point out that publishers may decide how they can best present this book in the territory. However, we will discuss and demonstrate a sermon that publishers might like to try. It can be made brief and simple if that is what the publisher prefers. Or, it can be lengthened, depending upon the householder’s response. It fits the “Peace and Security” book. Can use scriptures with it or not, depending upon circumstances. Also, can use just one scripture or more depending upon interest found. Publisher can decide where to pause to ask a question and draw the householder into the conversation. (Chairman: The above points are important. So, get them clearly in mind and make them stand out clearly in your introductory remarks.) Chairman should discuss with audience first the introduction; consider advantages of following the outlined thoughts closely, also whether any adjustments would be advantageous for local territory. Then consider with audience the body and conclusion of this Scriptural discussion. The information is taken from the “Peace and Security” book, Chapter 1, especially paragraphs 10 and 11.
Theme: Two Promises of Peace and Security
Good morning! My call will be brief, but I have an important message. The point is this: Today, in a time of real trouble, there are promises of peace and security. These promises come from two sources: First, from men​—national leaders. Second, from God, through his Word, the Bible. These are the differences in the two promises:
1. Men promise to reduce arms by treaties.
God says he will remove the root cause of war. (Isa. 2:2-4)
2. Men say they will control crime.
God says he will root out attitudes and conditions that start crime. (Gal. 5:19-21)
3. Men promise better care for the sick and aged.
God says he will completely eliminate sickness and problems of old age. (Rev. 21:3, 4)
4. Why believe God? For one thing, because his promises have never failed, whereas promises of men on these matters have failed to produce true peace and security. (Josh. 23:14)
People have the right to know these things. They are made clear in this book “True Peace and Security​—From What Source?” We place it on a contribution of 25 cents.
(If you find a listening ear and feel that more could be said, read some of the scriptures; otherwise, just state the points, if possible, and offer the book. Use as many of the four points as you think best.)
Have capable, experienced publisher demonstrate thoroughly prepared sermon without the scriptures. Then have second such publisher give demonstration with some of the scriptures. Chairman concludes with appropriate comments.
10 min: Concluding comments. Local field service plans. Song 22.
WEEK STARTING JULY 21
12 min: Song 25. Introduction, text and comments. Include appropriate items from Announcements.
18 min: “Study​—Important in Your Life.” Question-and-answer discussion with audience.
15 min: “What Kind of a Wedding?” A talk, based on information in the article from the May 1, 1974, “Watchtower.”
15 min: Concluding comments. Include thoughts from the article “How God’s Spirit Can Help You,” in the July 1, 1974. “Watchtower,” emphasizing those parts that relate to field service. Song 34.
WEEK STARTING JULY 28
10 min: Song 35. Introduction, text and comments.
15 min: “The Music You Choose.” Talk based on May 15, 1974, “Watchtower” article. Might be good to draw audience into the discussion to some extent.
20 min: “Presenting the Good News​—What Prompts People to Listen?” Discuss with audience by means of questions and answers. After discussing each separate reason why some people might listen, chairman could take time to ask audience: “If this is true, then what is required on our part? How can we prepare ourselves and our presentations so as to improve and get more people to listen? Can you think of some scriptures that show the need to have these qualities mentioned?” Other like questions can be used in order to make application of points.
15 min: Concluding comments. Include some Theocratic News items. Song 41.
WEEK STARTING AUGUST 4
15 min: Song 43. Introduction, text and comments. Include Question Box.
20 min: “Social Gatherings.” Discuss with audience by means of questions and answers. Read paragraphs.
10 min: “Dutifully Pursuing Peace in Jehovah’s Way.” A talk on theme for August. See “Watchtower” of June 1, 1973, pp. 330-335.
15 min: Concluding comments. Offer some helpful suggestions regarding presenting the “Truth” book in August. Of course, any other pocket-size book can be used too. Can carry larger books along also. Could continue to use same sermon as in July. Note how the thoughts in that discussion fit in with points made in Chapter 1 of “Truth” book. Paragraph 9 shows failure of man’s rule. Paragraph 5 shows how God will eliminate sickness and death. Paragraph 6 shows why we can believe God’s promises. Song 26.

