





One Act of Christian Kindness




IN A small town in Gujarat, India, John’s father was baptized as one of Jehovah’s Witnesses in the late 1950’s. But John, his five brothers and sisters, and their mother were Roman Catholics and were very religious. For this reason, they were opposed to the father’s faith.
One day, John’s father asked him to deliver an envelope to a brother in the congregation. But that morning, John cut his finger badly while opening a large tin barrel. Still, he wanted to obey his father, so he tied a rag around his bleeding finger and went out to deliver the envelope.
When John arrived at the address, he gave the envelope to the brother’s wife. She was one of Jehovah’s Witnesses. She noticed John’s injured finger and offered to help. She got out her first-aid kit, cleaned the wound, and put a bandage on the finger. Then she made John a cup of hot tea. The entire time she was talking to him in a friendly way about the Bible.
Because of her kindness, John’s feelings toward the Witnesses started to change. So he asked her two questions about beliefs of Jehovah’s Witnesses that differ from those of the Catholic Church. He asked if Jesus is God and if Christians should pray to Mary. The sister had learned Gujarati and was able to answer John in his own language. She showed him the answers from the Bible and gave him the booklet “This Good News of the Kingdom.”
Later, when John read the booklet, he knew that what he was reading was the truth. He went to his priest and asked him the same two questions. The priest got very angry and threw a Bible at him, shouting: “You’ve become Satan! Show me where the Bible says that Jesus is not God. Show me where it says that you should not worship Mary. Show me!” John was shocked that the priest would act this way. He told the priest that he would never go into a Catholic church again. And he never did!
John started to study with the Witnesses, accepted the truth, and began serving Jehovah. In time, several other family members did the same. Some 60 years later, the scar on John’s finger still reminds him of the act of Christian kindness that moved him to spend a lifetime serving Jehovah.​—2 Corinthians 6:4, 6.



