Assembling Still More as the Day Draws Near
“NOT forsaking the gathering of ourselves together, as some have the custom, but encouraging one another, and all the more so as you behold the day drawing near.” As familiar as we are with this Scripture text it is again being stressed, making it the basis for our service theme for July.—Heb. 10:25.
What day is drawing near? Not the general “day of Jehovah,” for it is here, having begun in 1914. Rather, it is the special day of Jehovah for his vindication: “Wait ye for me, saith Jehovah, until the day that I rise up to the prey; for my determination is to gather the nations, that I may assemble the kingdoms, to pour upon them mine indignation, even all my fierce anger; for all the earth shall be devoured with the fire of my jealousy.” That day is rapidly approaching.—Zeph. 3:8, AS.
Why assemble still more in view of that day drawing near? Because the old-world pressures upon our time and strength are steadily increasing, making it more urgent than ever that we heed Jesus’ admonition: “Pay attention to yourselves that your hearts never become weighed down with overeating and heavy drinking and anxieties of life, and suddenly that day be instantly upon you as a snare.” Because lawlessness is increasing there is ever greater danger that our love will cool off unless we assemble together. Satan knows he has but a short period of time, and he acts accordingly. We also know that we have but a short time to preach this good news of the Kingdom and to warn the wicked and so we also should act accordingly. To that end it is imperative that we assemble ourselves together still more.—Luke 21:34, 35.
Where is it that we are to assemble still more? At our five weekly congregation meetings: at the Bible study with the aid of The Watchtower, at the service meeting and theocratic ministry school, at the public lecture and at the neighborhood Bible study with the aid of “Your Will Be Done on Earth.” Included also are our semiannual circuit assemblies and, right now, the Peace-pursuing District Assemblies.
In what way are we to assemble still more? In three different ways, in fact. First of all, “still more” suggests the thought of increased urgency. It has ever been important that we assemble together, but in view of the nearness of Jehovah’s day of vindication it is more important, more urgent than ever before. “Still more” would, of course, also mean still more times. If any of us have not been regular in attending the seven different meetings above mentioned, then we should see to it that we assemble still more and more until we are regular in our attendance.
But what about those of us who already are one hundred percent regular in our attendance at these meetings? In what way can we be ‘assembling still more as the day draws near’? By striving for still more quality in our assembling. Are we always punctual? Do we always prepare in advance? Do we pay strict attention from beginning to end? Do we take part to the fullest extent possible? At our circuit assemblies, are we there on time Friday evening? Are we on hand for the field service programs and for the baptism talk? At our district assemblies, do we plan on being there for all four days, from beginning to end, not slighting any sessions?
So, especially during the month of July let us all heed the admonition to assemble still more. And may we ever feel like David, who rejoiced when they said to him: “To the house of Jehovah let us go.”—Ps. 122:1.

