Dwelling Together in Honor
“How good and how pleasant it is for brothers to dwell together in unity!”—Ps. 133:1
 1. To whom is all honor due, and why?
JEHOVAH is due all honor, praise and glory. It is due him by reason of his omnipotency and because in such position he maintains perfect integrity. His principles are right, as are his laws and judgments, and he guards them zealously, never deviating one iota in his loyalty to them. They are so treasured by him that he not only complies himself, but requires conformity to these principles by his angelic hosts and his faithful servants on the earth.
 2. What was required of those in the heavenly realm, and what happened to those who digressed?
2 Just as a good reputation is required of those who dwell together in honor in Jehovah’s presence in the heavenly realm, so, too, he places a similar responsibility upon his creatures on the earth. There was a digression from integrity in the heavens when the one who became Satan rebelled against this honorable atmosphere in which the heavenly host all dwelt. As the result, in due time he was removed. Now he bears a name of ill repute.—Rev. 12:9.
 3. (a) Why should a good name be cherished? (b) What are the qualities of the possessor of a good name?
3 A good reputation should also be cherished among men and sought after since it is set forth as a requirement in God’s Word. At Proverbs 22:1 (margin) it states: “A good name is to be chosen rather than abundant riches.” We see from this that Jehovah has high respect for a good name. Such a name is acquired by an exemplary course of action, because a person who is upright is honorable and holds to right principles. So it is obvious that an individual possessing a good name is trustworthy, loyal, faithful, steadfast—which fact shows the person to be praiseworthy before Jehovah.
 4. (a) What standards will a reputable man pursue? (b) What are the consequences to the violator and to the Christian body?
4 Honorable standards are maintained in every walk of life by the Christian minister. They are practiced within the Christian congregation, in the marriage relationship, in business with one’s associates, with others of the New World society; yes, and for that matter, before those of the world also. In other words, in all his relationships he is a man of repute. When honorable principles are not followed or there are infractions of them, difficulties soon develop; and if these are continued, they bring disastrous results. When violations occur, such as adultery, perversions, business fraudulently practiced, lying or reviling, the consequences are calamitous. Disregard for Jehovah’s law and a practicing of vile things are a violation of God’s standards. One doing such things brings dishonor to Jehovah God, to the Christian congregation with which one is associated, to his friends and upon himself, this resulting in one’s removal from the congregation. Consequently, the dwelling together harmoniously, unitedly and honorably is not only required, but also cherished by those who serve Jehovah with exclusive devotion.
 5. (a) What relationship should exist among those in a congregation? (b) How did Christ Jesus maintain unity with his Father?
5 Where there is a group of faithful Christian ministers assembled together in a congregation, the relationship of one with the other is a true picture of cooperation. It can be likened to the body, which is made up of many members. When the members function as directed by the head, wonderful accomplishments can be expected, because all are working toward the same end. Co-operative effort on the part of all members can be maintained with full and complete respect for one another’s position. The important thing is to follow the lead of the head. Honoring the head was illustrated well by Christ Jesus when, at John 5:30, he stated relative to his position before Jehovah God, whom he always recognized and acknowledged as his head: “I cannot do a single thing of my own initiative; just as I hear, I judge, and the judgment that I render is righteous, because I seek not my own will but the will of him that sent me.” And, at John 8:29, “I always do the things pleasing to him.” So in the case of Christ Jesus there were absolutely no exceptions in his being in complete unity with his Father; and, truly, it can be said that ‘they dwelt together in unity and honor.’
 6. (a) What honorable principle is maintained within the theocratic organization? (b) What counsel did Paul give those of the congregation and overseers in this regard?
6 The same principle is recognized in the theocratic organization when proper respect and honor are rendered to authority. The Christian congregation is in no wise a democratic arrangement, but it is completely theocratic, with the ministerial servants being appointed to positions of service therein by Jehovah’s spirit, through his organization. The apostle Paul gave advice as to how those in the congregation should be congruent to the godly principles of oversight. He requested them to “have regard for those who are working hard among you and presiding over you in the Lord and admonishing you, and to give them more than extraordinary consideration in love because of their work.” Not because of the individual holding the position, but because of the position itself. True Christian ministers hold the position in proper honor and respect. Paul gave further counsel in behalf of the overseers when he stated: “Be obedient to those who are governing you and be submissive, for they are keeping watch over your souls as those who will render an account, that they may do this with joy and not with sighing, for this would be damaging to you.” In properly taking care of his position of oversight the congregation overseer does not render his own expression or instructions, but merely carries out those from Jehovah’s Word, the Bible, and also as he is directed through God’s organization which is governing him. In all respects, in honor, he keeps watch over the individuals as an expression of love that he has for his brothers. It is, too, an unselfish expression of love, in that he does it joyfully, not as though it is burdensome to him.—1 Thess. 5:12, 13; Heb. 13:17; 1 Pet. 5:2.
BROTHERHOOD
 7. What is the proper feeling of Christian ministers toward one another in the congregation?
7 Not only will the Christian ministers receive instructions properly from the overseers, but they will also have love, respect and consideration for their brothers with whom they have constant association in the congregation. With emphasis the psalmist stated: “Look! how good and how pleasant it is for brothers to dwell together in unity!” (Ps. 133:1) It is most proper that respect and consideration for one another be rendered. The statement, “familiarity breeds contempt,” has no place in the structure of Jehovah’s organization. Actually intimate acquaintance should bring Christians closer together and make them more tolerant toward one another as far as overlooking shortcomings is concerned, and absolving the minor inherent qualities possessed by each in his imperfection.—Col. 3:13.
 8. (a) How should differences between those in a congregation be settled? (b) What illustration sets us a good pattern? Explain.
8 If dissensions do arise between brothers, they are settled in the atmosphere of tolerance and thoughtfulness for the ones involved. Thereby they avoid a more serious situation or circumstance. As an example of the proper attitude in these matters, let us look to the experience of Abraham and Lot. As they were traveling about together in their new territory, a quarrel arose between the herdsmen of Abraham’s livestock and the herdsmen of Lot’s livestock. It was necessary for them to separate and each take a different portion of the land. Notice the generous settlement that Abraham offered to Lot. He stated: “Please, do not let any quarreling continue between me and you and between my herdsmen and your herdsmen, for we men are brothers. Is not the whole land available to you? Please, separate from me. If you go to the left, then I will go to the right; but if you go to the right, then I will go to the left.” “So Lot raised his eyes and saw the whole district of the Jordan, that all of it was a well-watered region before Jehovah destroyed Sodom and Gomorrah, like the garden of Jehovah, like the land of Egypt as far as Zoar. Then Lot selected for himself the whole district of the Jordan, and Lot moved his camp to the east. So they separated the one from the other. Abram dwelt in the land of Canaan, but Lot dwelt among the cities of the District [Lower Jordan].” (Gen. 13:8-12) This shows that Abraham did not look to his own selfish interests first, but wanted to settle things amicably. When settlement of disagreements or disputes is required between brothers, they might well think of this illustration. The avoiding of dissensions and ill feelings within the congregation is vital to the health and growth of the congregation.
 9. What advice did Paul give when he encountered dissensions in Corinth? in Rome?
9 On an occasion the apostle Paul came to Corinth and he found an unpleasant situation where there was division among some in the congregation. Some stated they belonged to Paul, others said they belonged to Apollos, and others to Cephas, and some to Christ. Paul said: “Disclosure was made to me about you, my brothers, by those of the house of Chloʹe, that dissensions exist among you.” “Now I exhort you, brothers, through the name of our Lord Jesus Christ that you should all speak in agreement, and that there should not be divisions among you, but that you may be fitly united in the same mind and in the same line of thought.” (1 Cor. 1:10, 11) Where difference of opinion arises, the source of the difficulty should be sought out so that it can be eliminated; and Paul advised the Romans: “Return evil for evil to no one. Provide the right things in the sight of all men. If possible, as far as it depends upon you, be peaceable with all men.” And as a further warning Paul stated: “Keep your eye on those who create divisions and causes for stumbling contrary to the teaching which you have learned, and avoid them. For men of that kind are slaves, not of our Lord Christ, but of their own bellies, and by smooth talk and complimentary speech they seduce the hearts of guileless ones.” This is good precautionary advice. Watch for and eliminate trouble so as to maintain the unity of the congregation.—Rom. 12:17, 18; 16:17, 18.
SETTLING DIFFERENCES
10. If a Christian minister has a grievance with his brother, what should he do about it?
10 If there is a difference of opinion between brothers, or if one has wronged another, or if a brother observes his fellow Christian sinning, or has a grievance, he should go to the one involved personally and discuss the matter with him. This is entirely Scriptural, inasmuch as we are advised: “If your brother commits a sin, go lay bare his fault between you and him alone. If he listens to you, you have gained your brother.” What a sane and logical manner this is in which to settle disputes! Too frequently where there may be a grievance between two persons, one goes about discussing it with many others. This is not the Christian thing to do. Even if he goes to the person and that one does not listen to him, it still would be out of place for him to go about discussing the matter with those not concerned. The proper thing under such circumstances would be to ‘take along one or two more [mature brothers] in order that out of the mouth of two or three witnesses every matter may be established.’ If this method fails, take it to the congregation.—Matt. 18:15-17.
11. When forgiveness is sought, how should the injured one treat the offender, and even if there is a recurrence?
11 A true Christian will see his fault and ask forgiveness of the wronged person. What should a member of a congregation do in the event he is again wronged by the same person? Then a repetition of the same procedure is in order, and again the offender could ask forgiveness. Can he continue to ask forgiveness after committing further injury, perhaps unintentionally? Can a brother be forgiven or pardoned on more than one occasion by his fellow Christian? Yes, most assuredly! Recognizing that you too are a sinner and make many mistakes, ask yourself, Would I want to be forgiven only one time? In this light the wronged one will accept the apology of the transgressor. On this very point the apostle Peter inquired: “Master, how many times is my brother to sin against me and am I to forgive him? Up to seven times?” “Jesus said to him, ‘I say to you, not, Up to seven times, but Up to seventy-seven times.’”—Matt. 18:21, 22.
12. (a) Why would it be wrong for an offended one to continue declaiming a brother who apologized or made proper retribution? (b) Why is it necessary to consider such a matter closed?
12 Obviously, then, it is mandatory for the one abused to accept the apology of the violator and let that conclude the matter. If he does not do so, then he would not be living at unity with his brother. In the event that he continued to harangue his brother or would not accept the apology or a remedied situation, and continued to tell others about how he had been wronged, then he himself would become a violator of God’s righteous principles. We are told: “Where there is no wood the fire goes out, and where there is no slanderer strife grows still.” (Prov. 26:20) This indicates that when a matter has been properly settled, that should end it. If the flame of the fire is continually fanned, it will result in further contentions and embarrassment, violating God’s principles of unity and dwelling together in honor, because “as charcoal for the embers and wood for the fire, so is a contentious man for causing a quarrel to glow.” (Prov. 26:21) Such a person, even though he had been wronged originally, would be classified as a slanderer; and the Bible clearly states: “The words of a slanderer are like things to be swallowed greedily, which do go down into the innermost parts of the belly. As a silver glazing overlaid upon a fragment of earthenware are fervent lips along with a bad heart.” (Prov. 26:22, 23) Since a man’s outward appearance may not disclose what is inside him, there could be a bad heart underlying the outer innocent-appearing surface. It is an honorable thing to let contentions die, when proper forgiveness is sought, when justice is rendered toward the injured one and when the matter is permitted to rest. Then it is possible to live together honorably.
MEDDLING
13. Why is it a virtue to mind one’s own affairs?
13 Minding one’s own affairs is a virtue among Christian ministers. Show respect and love for one another and promote unity within the organization. “It is an honour for a man to cease from strife: but every fool will be meddling.” About a thousand years after this statement was made similar counsel was given to Christians in Thessalonica: “For we hear certain ones are walking disorderly among you, not working at all but meddling with what does not concern them.” Prying into the affairs of others is very annoying. Yes, it usually does not stop at this point; and when it does not stop, it causes strife.—Prov. 20:3, AV; 2 Thess. 3:11.
14. What may happen if ministers are not utilizing their time in caring properly for their ministerial duties and what advice did Paul and Peter offer?
14 Frequently this occurs when people do not have enough to do or do not occupy themselves in the ministerial work to such an extent that their time is fully utilized advantageously. When it occurs that people have excessive time on their hands, difficulties can arise. Because of this very danger in the early Christian congregation, Paul wrote: “At the same time they [young widows] also learn to be unoccupied, gadding about to the houses, yes, not only unoccupied, but also gossipers and meddlers in other people’s affairs, talking of things they ought not.” Again we can see that disunity can enter into a congregation and strife can arise between the members thereof when some talk about matters that they should not discuss, meddle in other people’s affairs, and gossip. In view of this let us all therefore take to heart Peter’s sound counsel. “Let none of you suffer . . . as a busybody in other people’s matters.” We have an abundance of counsel illustrating the prudence of being busily occupied in our ministerial work; otherwise, we are liable to be engaging in the very things we have been warned against, and thus we would be jeopardizing the harmony and unity of Jehovah’s organization.—1 Tim. 5:13; 1 Pet. 4:15; 2 Thess. 3:11.
HONOR WITHIN THE FAMILY CIRCLE
15, 16. (a) What position does the husband and father occupy in the Christian home? (b) What is the proper position of the wife in the family unit?
15 Patriarchal rule was directed by Jehovah in times past. Under this arrangement the husband (and father) was obligated to instruct his entire family according to God’s law. As long as all members of the family observed the instructions and followed them obediently, there would exist a harmonious family unit. The family can be likened to a small organization in this respect.—Heb. 7:4, margin; Acts 7:8; 2:29.
16 Within the family arrangement the wife too holds a very respected position. Holy women of old illustrated this, and such information is drawn to our attention at 1 Peter 3:5, 6: “For so, too, formerly the holy women who were hoping in God used to adorn themselves, subjecting themselves to their own husbands, as Sarah used to obey Abraham, calling him ‘lord.’ And you have become her children, provided you keep on doing good.” A woman’s place as a helpmate is an honorable one too, as confirmed by the writer of Proverbs: “In her the heart of her owner has put trust, and there is no gain lacking. She has rewarded him with good, and not bad, all the days of her life. Her mouth she has opened in wisdom, and the law of loving-kindness is upon her tongue. She is watching over the goings on of her household.”—Prov. 31:11, 12, 26, 27.
17. What circumstances should exist in the family unit?
17 When parental authority is properly exercised and children respond, acknowledging and conforming to it, one sees a family group as Jehovah purposed. Honorable conduct toward those outside Jehovah’s organization will also be practiced. All will watch carefully so they do not bring reproach upon the high standards and principles of Jehovah’s Word.—Eph. 6:1-3.
18. (a) How would failure to discipline children jeopardize a family unit? (b) To what extent should parents guard the activities of their children?
18 If disciplinary measures are not taken when children require them, parents would be negligent in their theocratic duties as well as being ultimately injurious to the child’s Christian welfare. “The rod and reproof are what give wisdom; but a boy let on the loose will be causing his mother shame.” (Prov. 29:15) Failure to discipline when needed could impair the family unity. The parents should see that their children are properly caring for their ministerial duties, attending meetings to obtain proper instruction, having a Bible study in the home for the advancement of the family spiritually, as well as oversee their recreation. When children are busy they are not likely to get into trouble. The time of relaxation requires equally as close supervision by parents as other activities. The associations of children also need to be guarded. Anyone, old or young, can be affected greatly by the persons and things he associates with. There is an adage among men, ‘Show me a man’s friends and I will tell you what he is.’ If children fellowship with those whose habits are not compatible with the high standards of the New World society, they will soon adopt bad practices and ideas. Let us heed this strong counsel: “Do not be misled. Bad associations spoil useful habits.” Conversely, we may say that useful habits lead to salvation of one’s family. If one has been weakened by bad associations, immediate action to recover the erring one should be taken, as shown by these words: “Wake up to soberness in a righteous way and do not practice sin, for some are without knowledge of God. I am speaking to move you to shame.” Since it is truly prophetic as to what will happen if bad associations are tolerated, parents should remove such stumbling stones from the life path of their children. This proper course will enhance the blessings of the family.—1 Cor. 15:33, 34.
MORALITY
19. (a) How could a chaste record of a Christian be soiled? (b) What requirements apply to a single person regardless of the amount of time spent in the ministry?
19 A Christian may follow a clean and honorable course for many, many years, having lived entirely by Jehovah’s high and lofty principles. Then, by one act of immorality, he may shatter his fine record and jeopardize his place in the New World society and even his very life. Let us not be deceived to take this very foolish course. An act of fornication or adultery violates a Christian’s integrity and his vows of dedication to his God. Let us live clean lives, above reproach, free from the entanglements of self-gratification and loose living so freely practiced in this twentieth century. In this respect, singleness is spoken of highly in the Bible and is considered the better course, because a person living in singleness is undivided in his servitude to Jehovah. This, however, does not guarantee that he will not take a course leading to immorality. He needs to keep strict watch on how he walks so as not to engage in loose conduct. “If they [single persons] do not have self-control, let them marry, for it is better to marry than to be inflamed with passion.” Notwithstanding, not everyone can make allowance for this gift of singleness in his life. It is true the single person may be able to devote more of his time and energy to the ministry, but regardless of how much of his time he may offer, it is worthless if he cannot refrain from the unchaste course. Fornication on the part of a single person may not be sanctioned regardless of his position or the amount of time devoted to the ministry, as clearly shown in God’s Word. “Because of prevalence of fornication, let each man have his own wife and each woman have her own husband.”—1 Cor. 7:2, 9.
20. What is the standard to be met by those who are married?
20 The marriage contract between man and woman is one established by Jehovah. He set the standard that the marriage contract must not be defiled. Corroborating this, it is stated at Hebrews 13:4: “Let marriage be honorable among all, and the marriage bed be without defilement, for God will judge fornicators and adulterers.”—1 Thess. 4:3; 1 Cor. 6:15-18.
21. What constitutes eligibility for marriage among dedicated Christians?
21 Dwelling together in honor would also include stipulations that Jehovah has set constituting eligibility for marriage for the dedicated Christian. Just as we are strongly admonished to be separate from the world, the same is true in the marriage relationship, in that we should marry “only in the Lord.” That establishes a requirement for a Christian witness anticipating marriage. If a man is going to marry a woman, she should therefore qualify as a dedicated wife. A dedicated woman should be certain that her intended mate is eligible by the same standard. This is showing proper respect for Jehovah, who is the author of marriage. For a marriage to be completely honorable, both participants should be dedicated. It does not end there, however, as good conduct in the marriage partnership must continue so as to bring honor to its author, Jehovah.
BUSINESS RELATIONS
22, 23. What should be the attitude of the employee to the employer? the attitude of the employer to the employee?
22 Another circumstance where conduct must be honorable is between employer and employee, and especially among those who are dedicated servants of Jehovah. This relationship is to be upright, with the conduct of each becoming to faithful Christians. Trustworthiness in business relations is a virtue. However, this relationship can be impaired, and frequently is, where one takes advantage of the other simply because they are both related in the faith. At times a Christian will say, ‘I work for one of Jehovah’s witnesses and can therefore take things easy. It is not necessary that I work hard at all, and anytime I want to, I can leave.’ Should this be the proper thought on the part of an employee? Assuredly not, because an employer is entitled to a full and fair day’s work, and all the more so if the employee is in covenant relationship with Jehovah. In fact, the dedicated employee working for such a one should see that he gives his Christian brother the full day’s work for which he is getting paid.
23 The converse of this is true also, where the employer should not take advantage of the employee simply because the employee is a servant of Jehovah and a fellow witness of Jehovah. Paul spoke of the proper relationship. “You masters, keep dealing out what is righteous and what is fair to your slaves . . . you, too, have a Master.” This is also emphasized in the law of Moses where it states: “You must not defraud a hired laborer . . . , whether of your brothers or of your temporary residents . . . In his day you should give him his wages.” Therefore true Christians follow the policy of fairness that must be practiced in the relationship between employer and employee.—Col. 4:1; Deut. 24:14, 15.
24, 25. (a) What principles must guide a Christian in business dealings? (b) What should be shunned, and why?
24 In other business relationships where an employer or employee is not necessarily involved, there are certain right policies that Christians follow at all times in order to avoid the jeopardizing of an honorable standing before God and men. This would be true in business, in selling various commodities, or in other dealings. In selling, full measure is required and must be meted out, just as the law directed the Israelites to do: “You must not come to have in your bag two sorts of weights, a great one and a small one. You must not come to have in your house two sorts of ephahs, a great one and a small one. A weight accurate and just you should continue to have. An ephah accurate and just you should continue to have, in order that your days may become long on the soil that Jehovah your God is giving you. For everyone doing these things, every doer of injustice, is something detestable to Jehovah your God.” (Deut. 25:13-16) The practices of a Christian in a business way, therefore, must be honorable, not only among those of like precious faith, but in every association. The point is made at Micah 6:11, 13, 16 (Mo): “Can I condone wrong balances and short weights in the trader’s bag? Nay, nay; I will be striking you with ruin for your sins.” “I make you a horror, and your folk a scorn, to bear the derision of pagans.”
25 Unethical practices are abhorred by Jehovah; and if any within the structure of the theocratic organization were to become guilty of these practices, it would require disciplinary measures, in hope that chastisement would draw to the attention of the wrongdoer his wayward course and that such discipline would save the one practicing fraud. On the other hand, if there was no repentance shown and wrongdoing was fostered, the guilty one would be removed from the New World society. The reputation of Christians in business relationships therefore must be completely trustworthy, so there will never be reason for doubting the integrity of the loyal adherents to God’s Word.
26. How does the New World society regard Jehovah’s principles in its dealings, and for what reason?
26 The New World society of Jehovah’s witnesses in all its business relations lives up to Jehovah’s standards and guards them zealously, that nothing may reflect upon it so as to bring dishonor. Exemplary conduct toward all is demonstrated continually by the Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society, resulting in a very good reputation in business dealings in this world. The same high standard should be practiced on the part of the individuals making up the New World society of Jehovah’s witnesses so that no reproach is brought upon Jehovah’s clean organization and upon themselves individually. Infractions would bring dishonor upon the individual Christian and upon the New World society as a whole.
27. How was Ananias spoken of in Damascus, and why was it so creditable?
27 Some very fine examples of individual Christians who possessed excellent reputations are found in the Bible and set forth so that we may take note. We are told about a faithful Christian, Ananias, “a certain man reverent according to the Law, well reported on by all the Jews dwelling there.” This is all the more creditable considering that he was a Christian and was so spoken of by the Jews.—Acts 22:12.
28. What kind of reputation did Cornelius have not only in Caesarea but in the entire nation?
28 Cornelius, when he was seeking the truth of God’s Word, was also a man highly respected in the community where he lived. “Cornelius, an army officer [margin, a centurion; in command of 100 soldiers], a man righteous and fearing God and well reported by the whole nation of the Jews.” It would certainly appear that his reputation was above reproach since he, although a Roman soldier, was spoken of in this praiseworthy manner by the Jews themselves.—Acts 10:22.
29. How do we know that Daniel was an honorable man?
29 The prophet Daniel’s conduct was an ethical example. Of him men stated that it was impossible to find any reason against Daniel whereby a just law could be enforced to have him put in prison. “We shall not find any occasion against this Daniel, except we find it against him concerning the law of his God.” In order to “get him” it was necessary for these evil men to frame mischief by law and have King Darius sign a written edict wherein Daniel’s rendering prayer and supplication to Jehovah would constitute a violation of the law of the Medes and Persians.—Dan. 6:5-9, AS.
30. According to Peter, how must a Christian conduct himself among those of the world, and why is deviation prohibited?
30 Likewise, Christians will maintain an honorable report, even among the nations, to such an extent that they cannot be spoken against in this respect. “Maintain your conduct right among the nations, that, in the thing in which they are speaking against you as evildoers, they may as a result of your right works of which they are eyewitnesses glorify God in the day for his inspection.” If we are called upon to suffer for righteousness’ sake and right works, we will bear this and not compromise in order to win the plaudits of men. Such would be dishonorable conduct and would bring Jehovah’s disfavor, and disrespect from people who would view such a course of action.—1 Pet. 2:12.
LIVING HONEST LIVES
31. Since Jehovah’s witnesses are under such close scrutiny, what care must they exercise relative to their conduct?
31 Surely it is an honorable course when a person maintains a good report within the congregation of God. However, even more than this is desirable, because a Christian should have a good report from those outside as well. This is shown in the words of Paul to Timothy, at 1 Timothy 3:7, where it states that the overseer should also have a favorable testimony from people on the outside in order that he might not fall into reproach and a snare of the Devil. This would certainly be evident to the people outside who are constantly scrutinizing the conduct of Jehovah’s witnesses. They would see that they are men and women of integrity and genuinely living according to godly principles. Paul readily recognized this important quality, as shown in his words to the Hebrews: “Carry on prayer for us, for we trust we have an honest conscience, as we wish to conduct ourselves honestly in all things.”—Heb. 13:18.
32. What strong counsel did Paul give regarding the conduct of Christians?
32 Would it not, then, be wise for all of us to prove to have seared deeply into our hearts and minds Paul’s words as recorded at Philippians 4:8, 9? “Finally, brothers, whatever things are true, whatever things are of serious concern, whatever things are righteous, whatever things are chaste, whatever things are lovable, whatever things are well spoken of, whatever virtue there is and whatever praiseworthy thing there is, continue considering these things. The things which you learned as well as accepted and heard and saw in connection with me, practice these; and the God of peace will be with you.” Let every member of the New World society therefore so do, and thus all dwell together in honor.

