God’s Word Is Alive
Beware of Love Based Only on Passion
ALMIGHTY GOD placed in man and woman a marvelous attraction for each other. But when this attraction is not controlled, real tragedies often occur. This is shown in the case of Amnon, the son of King David.
Amnon fell deeply in love with his beautiful half sister Tamar. His feelings were so strong that he became lovesick. But he felt distressed because he could not get close to Tamar. When Amnon’s cousin Jehonadab learned how much Amnon was in love with Tamar, he told him: ‘Play sick. Then when your father, King David, comes to see you, tell him, “Please let Tamar come and prepare some food for me.”’
Well, David did just as Amnon asked. Tamar came and, as you can see, prepared some food for Amnon. However, when she took it to him, he refused to eat. He said: ‘Send everyone away.’ The persons in the house may have thought Amnon felt so sick that he did not want company, and they all left except Tamar.
Now Amnon said: ‘Bring the food here to my bed and serve me as a patient.’ As she did, Amnon grabbed her and said: ‘Come to bed with me.’ But Tamar tried to get away. Amnon, however, was stronger, and he forced himself on her. What happened then? Did this make Amnon’s love for Tamar stronger?
No, the effect was just the opposite. Amnon began to hate Tamar even more than he had loved her. So he told her: ‘Get out.’ When she refused to go, he called his personal servant and told him: ‘Throw this woman out and lock the door.’ But that was not the end of the matter.
Tamar tore her robe, put ashes on her head, and went away crying. When her full brother Absalom saw her, he learned what Amnon had done. This caused Absalom to hate Amnon, and he waited to repay Amnon for violating Tamar.
Two years later Absalom invited all the sons of King David to a banquet. But Absalom told his servants: ‘When Amnon has had too much to drink, kill him.’ And that is what they did at Absalom’s command. After that Absalom fled the country. So, can you see what a lot of trouble was caused because Amnon did not control his passionate desire for beautiful Tamar?​—2 Sam. 13:1-38.
The marvelous attraction between the sexes is truly a blessing, contributing to a happy courtship and marriage. Yet, when sexual desires are not controlled, illegitimate births, abortions and venereal diseases, not to mention many other troubles, often occur. Will you benefit from Bible accounts such as this one by seeking God’s help to keep passionate desires under control?​—Gal. 5:22, 23; Col. 3:8; 1 Thess. 4:3-7.

