From Our Readers
Computer Games  I am 15 years old, and I want to thank you for the article “Young People Ask . . . Should I Play Computer or Video Games?” (August 22, 1996) It really showed the dark side of those games, and it will help Christians weigh the positive and negative aspects of playing them.
F. R., Indonesia
I am 17 years old, and I used to love violent computer games. I thought they didn’t affect me, but I became very addicted to these games—especially the violent type you described. Now I have destroyed all my computer disks that had to do with violence and blood. The result? I feel much better, and I have more time to spend studying, learning, and talking about Jehovah God.
S. A., Greece
Virginity  Thank you for the brief but wonderful article entitled “Virginity—Why?” (August 22, 1996) In this day and age when people think you must be ugly to choose to be a virgin, it was a real encouragement to see young, beautiful people upholding Jehovah’s standards. Thank you again!
R. D., United States
American Indians  I want to express my appreciation for the series “American Indians—What Does Their Future Hold?” (September 8, 1996) I devoured the articles and will read them again. The part about the resurrection particularly moved me.
S. B., Italy
These articles moved me as no others have. They helped me realize that my view of Indians was discriminatory and not in line with divine principles. Since my school days, I have had the view that Indians were nothing more than vicious savages. The history books simply did not give us a clear view of the world around us. Your articles helped me see the sad plight of the Native Americans—another example of ‘man dominating man to his injury.’—Ecclesiastes 8:9.
M. M., United States
As a descendant of Native Americans, I read your articles with great excitement. It brought tears to my eyes to read of the suffering endured by a people who have such a love for creation. How I long for the day when God will bring about a reversal of the injustices done to all mankind and we can share a paradise earth together.
N. S., United States
Pompeii  I recently read and thoroughly enjoyed your article “Pompeii—Where Time Stood Still.” (September 8, 1996) It was almost like being there! But I would appreciate clarification of one point. The article says that any who visit Pompeii “can still observe the mills for grinding corn.” Correct me if I am mistaken, but is not corn a grain native to the American continent that was unknown to Europeans until the days of Christopher Columbus?
R. D., United States
Sorry if we caused any confusion in this regard. It would have been better to have said that mills for grinding “grain” can be seen there. Interestingly, the English word for “corn” can simply mean “the seeds of a cereal grass,” such as wheat or oats.—ED.
Since childhood I have been fascinated by ancient history. The history of Pompeii in particular has always captivated me. When I read the article, I felt as if I were traveling through the city. Marvelous! I learned many details that were new to me. I also liked the comparison that was made with the time of the end in our day. Thank you for helping me get to know places that I cannot visit.
J. S. A., Brazil

