From Our Readers
The Vanishing Wild Kingdom
For a long time I have felt bad that only a little has been published about the terrible modern attitude and ignorance about nature and the animals. Your article “Is the Wild Kingdom Vanishing?” (May 22, 1983) was so timely and so necessary. Thank you for speaking out the truth about the “hunter’s role” so boldly.
G. H., Germany
Thank you for the informative, realistic and well-rounded report on the use and abuse of animals. It is good to know that you are willing to speak out for those who are unable to speak for themselves. I especially appreciated the reminder that soon Jehovah will bring a halt to all of this and teach man to exercise his stewardship over the earth in a knowledgeable and proper way.
K. G., Australia
Thank you for the article on “The Wild Kingdom.” We especially enjoyed your insight into the Nimrod syndrome and the overstepping of man’s stewardship. While the cheetah vanished years ago in India because of the “shikari” (game hunters), today a by-product of overpopulation and poverty seems to be the misuse and extreme inhumane treatment of domestic animals and beasts of burden. We simply wonder if any animals will continue to exist in India. Rare is the child who has seen a butterfly in Bombay.
I. B., India
Population Explosion
I was shocked at your one-sided presentation of the subject of the Population Explosion. (August 8, 1983) Your treatment was by no means neutral. You presented arguments only from those who believe there are too many people on the earth and none from those who believe that the earth can support many, many more people. I get the impression that you support those who want to control population growth by restricting childbirth and seeing to it that old and sick people do not live so long.
B. W., New Jersey
We did not intend to give that impression. The first two articles on the subject endeavored to present the problem as many world leaders view it and to show that men are baffled by such global problems as famine, extreme poverty, pollution, war threats, and so forth, which they feel are exacerbated by the increasing world population. These are not our views. In quoting from “Great Decisions 1973” we were showing that even the editors of that publication acknowledge the need for a world government to solve the problem. The third article presented clearly our view that God’s Kingdom by Christ Jesus is the one world government able to solve this problem. It will remove selfish governments that exploit the earth. Then, the Kingdom will teach men how to manage earth’s resources for the benefit of a population that we believe will grow to many through childbearing and the resurrection of the dead​—many times the number of the 4.7 billion presently living on the earth.​—ED.

