Young People Ask . . .
Is Religion for Me?
“IF YOU want to be part of the future, progress, the real world, leave your faith behind. If you want to remain old fashioned, stay in the Church! The success of your life is at stake.”
This is the cautioning cry of many to young people. Many feel that when the principles of religion are pitted against the glittering values of today’s sophisticated world, they appear obsolete and lifeless. And you, too, may wonder if religion has relevancy. But why has the importance of religion waned among so many young people? Many have soured on religion because of
Religious Hypocrisy
The English word “hypocrisy” stems from the Greek “hypokrisis”​—an “act of playing a part on the stage.” One 17-year-old wrote: “Am I supposed to go to church, which is like a theater where everyone goes through the motions?” Hesitant to condemn all, he continued: “I suppose some of the people there are sincere; but what disgusts me is that others play their role badly. I hate this hypocrisy.” Echoing this refrain, an 18-year-old said: “I see the way Christians around me live. I try to find real Christians, I look for love in them, for that assurance which their faith ought to give them.” Yet she found “nothing but egoism, pettiness, and a pretense of love.”
Surprisingly, however, a recent survey of U.S. teenagers disclosed that 95 percent of those polled still confessed belief in God or a “universal spirit”! The conclusion of The Adolescent by F. Philip Rice is, “While the modern generation is antichurch, it is not unconcerned, nor is it . . . unreligious.”
While there has been some revival of interest in the Bible among youths, many have radically departed from “traditional” religion. They may seek Eastern religions or join strange cults.
What Is the Appeal of the Cults?
The book Those Curious New Cults explains: “Young people began to see the hypocrisy of their elders more clearly than ever before. They saw hypocrisy . . . in their parents’ playing with religion . . . Everyplace they looked they seemed to hear people saying one thing and doing another.” The cults seemed different. They appeared to offer meaningful involvement​—a genuine commitment to the precepts of religion.
Some young people say of the cults: “They display a warmth and comradery seldom seen in mainstream churches.” Similarly, a psychiatrist said of his inside experience with the Sun Myung Moon organization: “For a year I was . . . love-bombed. . . . The individual is offered all the attention, affection, and approval that anyone could ever have craved.”
Entrenched as the world is in greed and materialism, the simple life-style advocated by the cults seems inviting. Says Those Curious New Cults: “Reacting against the hard-driving, success-oriented culture today, youth realizes that money and material possessions haven’t brought satisfaction to their parents.” Nevertheless, while the cults may seemingly solve some problems, they have created equally serious ones. For one thing, they replace individuality with group identity. The Jonestown tragedy underscores the danger of this. Still, this interest and fascination with the cults clearly establishes that young people are concerned with religion and seek to fill a
Spiritual Need
In Man, God and Magic, Dr. Ivar Lissner stated that a “fundamental difference between man and beast” is that “man is not content merely to sleep, eat and warm himself.” Man has a “strange and inherent urge” that can be termed spirituality. Hence, Great Religions of the World noted: “Anthropologists have found no culture without religion.”
The Son of God therefore declared: “Happy are those conscious of their spiritual need.” (Matthew 5:3) In joining cults, youths are merely attempting to fill a spiritual void unsated by the churches. But as Fred Graham, professor of religious studies, observed, “Practically anything can fill a religious void, and it can be healthy or demonic.”
Maybe you will agree you have such spiritual needs. But what about the feeling of some that religion is outmoded? Are there benefits to be reaped in genuinely practicing religion? The Bible states: “To be sure, it is a means of great gain, this godly devotion.” (1 Timothy 6:6) “Godly devotion” is reverent worship and service to God. Is there “gain” in this?
Benefits From Pursuing Godly Devotion
Some young people, now pursuing a religious course, say it has aided them in restraining hostile feelings and violent tempers. Nineteen-year-old Tyrone confessed: “I had a quick temper. If my younger sister said a cross word, I’d punch her. I would do the same to my classmates; I was quick to fight.” After deciding to serve Jehovah, he says, “I have learned to control myself, even if I am wronged.”
Is there benefit in this? Some think not. ‘It’s cowardly to remain calm; vent your anger!’ they say. Is this wise? No! Unchecked anger can result in your doing violence you may later regret. (Genesis 4:5, 8) Wise, indeed, is the Bible’s counsel: “Let anger alone and leave rage; do not show yourself heated up only to do evil.”​—Psalm 37:8.
Other youths say their religion has helped them resist the temptation to engage in criminal practices. Of his school days, 21-year-old Victor recalls: “On lunch break, many of my classmates would crowd into stores distracting the clerks while others stole food, candy, comic books and other items.” Why did he refrain? Was his prime concern not to get caught, or was he concerned about what his parents would think or do? “Yes,” he answers. “I thought about my parents’ reaction and the consequences, but I thought more of its effects on my friendship with God.”
Bible counsel such as this helped Victor: “Son, when sinners tempt you, don’t give in. Suppose they say, ‘. . . Come and join us, and we’ll all share what we steal.’ Son, don’t go with people like that. Stay away from them.” (Proverbs 1:10-15, Today’s English Version) Heeding such counsel will benefit you too.
Interestingly, a 1979 survey disclosed, “Persons who fit the category of ‘very religious’ . . . tend to be happier . . . and have a higher level of achievement.” More importantly, however, the apostle Paul recommended godly devotion as a way of life, saying: “Godly devotion is beneficial for all things, as it holds promise of the life now and that which is to come.” (1 Timothy 4:8) But, if you wish to reap these benefits you must practice godly devotion. Still, some may wonder, ‘Why be religious when you’re young?’
Why Youth Is the Best Time
Wise King Solomon admonished: “Young people, enjoy your youth. Be happy while you are still young. . . . But remember . . . you aren’t going to be young very long. So remember your Creator while you are still young, before those dismal days and years come when you will say, ‘I don’t enjoy life.’”​—Ecclesiastes 11:9, 10; 12:1, Today’s English Version.
There are tens of thousands of young people like Tyrone and Victor who are ‘remembering their Creator.’ They are acutely aware that youthful energies and stamina are ephemeral, fleeting. They know that service to their God and Benefactor brings lasting benefits, however. These young people are not soured on religion, for they are in association with people who practice what they preach, people who are known globally for their display of genuine love. As Jehovah’s Witnesses they are happy because their spiritual need is satisfied. Why not investigate? Religion can be for you too.
[Blurb on page 11]
“Am I supposed to go to church, which is like a theater where everyone goes through the motions?”
[Pictures on page 12, 13]
Pious in church . . . . . . but not at home

