The Way Out
THE Bible warns: “A man reaps what he sows.” (Galatians 6:7, New International Version) If ever a generation proved those words true, it is this generation. On the preceding pages, we have examined the epidemic of sexual immorality and seen some of the ugly physical plagues it has produced. Other diseases caused by immorality have produced similar results.
For example, two of the big killers today are cancer and heart disease. About these two plagues the World Health Organization reports: “90 per cent of [lung cancer] cases occur in [tobacco] smokers. Smokers are five to ten times more at risk from cancer of the mouth, throat and gullet.” It goes on: “Coronary heart disease is the leading cause of death in most developed countries, and the risk of dying from it is two to three times greater in smokers than in non-smokers.”
No, not everyone who dies from cancer or heart disease smokes tobacco. But if nobody used tobacco, these two killers would claim far, far fewer victims than they do. The self-indulgence of the smoker who risks his life for a habit, and the greed of the commercial interests that make money out of his addiction combine to multiply horrendously the needless deaths from these epidemics.
Third World countries are still reeling from epidemics that are under control elsewhere. The Sunday Times of London reports: “Today . . . more than 500 children will go blind​—just for lack of vitamin A. And for about 3p [5c, U.S.] per child it could be prevented. Prospects that the money will be found and the vitamins dispensed are bleak.”
Around the world, 25,000 people die of various physical diseases every day because their drinking water is not clean. The technology exists to provide clean drinking water for every human on this planet. The cost of applying the technology would be about one tenth of what the world spends on tobacco and only a small fraction of what is spent on armaments. Yet 25,000 people a day continue to die. Surely this betrays a sickness of the spirit in human society.
Consider, too, the widespread abuse of alcohol, which produces cirrhosis of the liver and causes “between a third and a half of all road deaths in industrial countries​—and a growing number in the Third World.” (World Health) Remember the widespread illegal dumping of dangerous chemicals that puts the population in general at grave risk. Yes, in many, many instances, the physical health problems of mankind are closely related to its moral sicknesses.
The Problem Foretold
Jesus Christ prophesied a time when mankind would be under assault by epidemics. He said: “Nation will rise against nation, and kingdom against kingdom; and there will be great earthquakes, and in one place after another pestilences and food shortages.”​—Luke 21:10, 11.
The apostle Paul foretold a future onslaught of epidemics of the spirit. He warned: “In the last days critical times hard to deal with will be here. For men will be lovers of themselves, lovers of money . . . without self-control . . . lovers of pleasures rather than lovers of God.”​—2 Timothy 3:1-5.
There is no doubt at all that these prophecies are being fulfilled today. Does this mean that the human race is destined to sink deeper and deeper into the mire of moral and physical decay, until eventually it is completely overwhelmed by such epidemics?
You Can Help Yourself
No, that is not the case at all. The Bible not only prophesied our present plight but also showed us the way out. Even now, if we avoid the moral epidemics that plague mankind, we are protected to some extent from physical disease. Consider this Biblical advice:
“Let fornication and uncleanness of every sort or greediness not even be mentioned among you.”​—Ephesians 5:3.
“Let us cleanse ourselves of every defilement of flesh and spirit.”​—2 Corinthians 7:1.
“Supply to your . . . knowledge self-control, to your self-control endurance.”​—2 Peter 1:5, 6.
Do you apply this advice in your life? If so, you are avoiding the epidemic of immorality and are thus protected from the pandemic of venereal diseases. Also, you are not a slave of tobacco, drugs or alcohol; thus you have reduced considerably your risk of contracting numerous other diseases. That is a good feeling, is it not?
But that is only part of the problem. What about your neighbors who put you at risk because of their moral sicknesses? What about the drunk driver who might crash into you? Or the people who pollute your environment? Or the selfish commercial and nationalistic interests that cause thousands to go blind or die unnecessarily? Clearly, we cannot entirely avoid the results of the epidemics of immorality of this system of things. Neither can we completely avoid the physical epidemics​—the influenzas, the cancers not related to smoking, and so forth.
To overcome these problems we need a strong central authority that will protect us from the morally sick actions of others and that will promote the kind of society where the physical epidemics of mankind will be attacked and defeated. That authority exists. It is called God’s Kingdom.
The Problem Solved
God’s Kingdom has a program to save the human race from epidemics, and so far its program is right on schedule. First, after its establishment in the heavens in 1914, it had to cast Satan down to earth and rid the heavens of his sick influence. (Revelation 12:7-12) It also had to organize a worldwide teaching program to inform mankind of its existence and goals and to begin to cure right-hearted ones of their sicknesses of the spirit.​—Matthew 24:14; 28:19, 20; Isaiah 61:1, 2.
Of these two steps, the first has been accomplished and the second is well under way. When the preaching work is completed, things will be ready for stage three: the active intervention of the Kingdom in world affairs. The prophet Daniel foretold this: “In the days of those kings the God of heaven will set up a kingdom that will never be brought to ruin. And the kingdom itself will not be passed on to any other people. It will crush and put an end to all these kingdoms, and it itself will stand to times indefinite.”​—Daniel 2:44.
God’s Kingdom will thus “bring to ruin those ruining the earth.” (Revelation 11:18) It will bring in a system of things where physical epidemics will be conquered. And, more importantly, the epidemics of immorality will be overcome.​—Compare Isaiah 33:24.
Finally, the human race will be safe for all time from epidemics of the flesh and epidemics of the spirit. Then the divine promise will find complete fulfillment: “[God] will wipe out every tear from their eyes, and death will be no more, neither will mourning nor outcry nor pain be anymore. The former things have passed away.”​—Revelation 21:4.
No one will say: “I am sick.”​—Isaiah 33:24.

