Plan Now to Expand Your Ministry
 1. What is something significant about the Memorial season, and how can we prepare for it?
1 Each Memorial season gives us new opportunities to “laud Jehovah very much.” (Ps. 109:30) Will you expand your ministry during March as one way to show appreciation to the ransom Provider? Now is the time to begin making plans.—Prov. 21:5.
 2. How did you and others respond to the provision of a reduced hour requirement for auxiliary pioneers last April?
2 Auxiliary Pioneering: Last year congregations were abuzz with excitement when they learned of the provision to auxiliary pioneer in April with a reduced hour requirement. One brother wrote: “I am still in high school, and I have not found it possible for me to regular pioneer. But I am going to apply for 30 hours and strive for 50 hours in the month of April.” A sister who works full-time wrote: “Thirty hours—that is so very achievable!” When this provision was announced, one former pioneer, now in her 80’s, said: “This is the moment I’ve been waiting for! Jehovah knew pioneering was the best time of my life!” Others who could not auxiliary pioneer set goals to do more in the ministry.
 3. What reasons are there to consider auxiliary pioneering during March, April, and May?
3 March will be an excellent month to auxiliary pioneer because we will again have the option of a 30- or a 50-hour requirement. In addition, beginning Saturday, March 17, we will participate in a special campaign to invite others to join us for the Memorial on April 5. Many will enjoy their enlarged share in the ministry so much that they will want to auxiliary pioneer in April and May too, with a 50-hour requirement.
 4. How can we enlarge our share in the ministry, and with what result?
4 During your next Family Worship evening, why not discuss how each one in the family can expand his ministry during the Memorial season? (Prov. 15:22) Ask Jehovah to bless your efforts. (1 John 3:22) As you enlarge your share in the ministry, not only will you add to your praise of Jehovah but you will also increase your joy.—2 Cor. 9:6.

