The Campaign to Advertise the Memorial Begins March 17
 1. What campaign will begin on March 17?
1 The Memorial observance each year serves to proclaim the death of Jesus. (1 Cor. 11:26) Therefore, we want others to attend with us and hear about Jehovah’s loving gift of the ransom. (John 3:16) This year our campaign to invite people to come to the Memorial will begin on Saturday, March 17. Are you looking forward to having a full share?
 2. What could we say to present the invitation?
2 What We Could Say: It is best to have a brief presentation. We might say: “Hello. We’re here to give your family this invitation to an important annual observance that will be held worldwide on April 5. A free Bible talk will be given that explains what Jesus’ death accomplished and what he is doing now. This invitation shows the address and time of the meeting being held in our community.” When sharing in the distribution on the weekends, we should also offer the magazines when appropriate.
 3. How may we invite as many people as possible?
3 Invite as Many as Possible: Our goal is to invite as many people as possible. So make sure to invite your Bible students, return visits, relatives, workmates, schoolmates, neighbors, and other acquaintances. The local elders will provide direction on how to cover your territory. Our annual campaign to invite people to the Memorial produces results. When a woman walked into the auditorium last year, an attendant offered to help her find the publisher who invited her. However, the woman said that she did not know anyone there and that she received her invitation from someone going from house to house earlier that day.
 4. What reasons are there to have a zealous share in the campaign?
4 Perhaps someone in attendance at your Memorial will be there because of an invitation left by you. Whether someone responds or not, your diligent efforts will still provide a witness. The invitations you distribute will proclaim that Jesus is now a powerful King. Your zealous participation will demonstrate to all observers—those in the territory, fellow publishers, and most importantly, Jehovah—that you deeply appreciate the gift of the ransom.—Col. 3:15.

