VOL. XII. OCTOBER, 1891. NO. 10. 

VIEW FROM THE TOWER. 

"AS I HAVE LOVED YOU." 

"By this shall all men know that ye are my disciples, 
if ye have love one to another. A new commandment I 
give unto you, That ye love one another. As I have 
loved you, love ye also one another."— John 13:34,35. 

The law of love is the golden rule which, if 
in operation, would settle all disputes and controversies, 
and wipe out all bickerings, jealousies, 
strife and contention. In the world it does 
not prevail, though all men acknowledge that 
it should. Yet the world is not wholly loveless. 
In the midst of all its suffering and woe and 
sin we often hear of brave, heroic deeds, even 
by those who know not God; while abroad in 
the world there is a very general effort for the 
general good of mankind, prompted to a considerable 
extent by the somewhat latent principle 
of love which is a part of our common inheritance 
from our father Adam's original perfection 
not yet wholly lost. 

How often have men risked their own lives 
to rescue their fellow-men from drowning, or 
burning, or shipwreck, or railroad disasters. 
How often has the benevolent hand contributed 
freely to the necessities of suffering neighbors, 
or suffering communities. And while much of 
the more public charity is often ministered with 
ostentation which betrays an undue love of approbation, 
it is but just to conclude that there 
is at least a mixture of the higher motives. 
And to that extent is such a one blessed in his 
deed. 

At the present time, as never before in the 
history of the world, men are studying, if not 
very generally practicing, the golden rule of 
love. They see that if it were in general operation 
the whole world would be greatly blessed 
by it. But how would it operate? How should 
it operate?— that is the perplexing question. 
One of the most popular suggestions among the 
masses of the people is what is commonly 
termed socialism. And just here we wish to introduce 

R1326 : page 129 

a brief article on the subject clipped 

from a recent issue of a secular journal. The 

article is as follows:— 



A QUESTION OF TO-DAY. 
SOCIALISM AND PROGRESS. 

"All readers and thinkers are watching with 
interest the struggle of the civilized world with 
Socialism— a product evolved from the conditions 
and thoughts of the masses, peculiar to 
the closing years of the Nineteenth Century. 
In different nations it assumes different names, 
but all its aims and objects tend to a re-organization 
of society and the distribution of wealth. 
The masses read and think and reason something 
like this: 'Well, here I am, a poor man, 
doomed to labor the year in and out; and, do 
the best I can, I am only able to pay my rent, 
keep body and soul together, get few luxuries 
and much misery, and no prospect to better my 
condition. 

'"What matters it to me what becomes of the 
princes, dukes and generals who wear fine linen 
and fare sumptuously every day? Let revolution 
come; my condition can not be any worse, 
and might be bettered by killing off our oppressors.' 
In this frame of mind he is an easy 
prey to the wily agitator, and thus the ball rolls 

R1326 : page 130 

on, gathering force as it goes, in all the European 
countries. 

"In the United States, only the extreme agitators 
are prominent, and work under the name 
of Anarchists, but they are few in number and 
are not gaining much ground. In Germany the 
social agitators are gaining rapidly, but there 
the Socialists must not be confounded with the 
Anarchists, for the latter have all been expelled 
from the Socialists' clubs. The Socialists there 
really represent the progressive ideas of the nation; 
and, with some slight modifications, their 
platform is almost identical with modern republicanism. 
They have become so powerful in that 
country as to force the resignation of Bismarck. 

"In Russia we have the Nihilists, who represent 
the advanced thought of that despotic nation; 
in France are the Radicals; in England 
the Liberals; and so on, in every nation, the 
social leaven is at work. The toiling millions 
are endowed with all the natural faculties of 
those who 'toil not, neither do they spin.' 

"The poor man reasons that if this world was 
made for man to enjoy, it is self-evident that all 
the enjoyment was not intended for a few individuals; 
that if a man inherits a fortune and 



title, he deserves no credit for the accident of 
birth, and there would be just as much reason 
and justice in making the rich man divide with 
his less fortunate neighbor as to let him spend 
it in riotous living or hoard it up. 

"The average toiler also can not see why he 
should be heavily taxed to support an army of 
cut-throats, whose sole business was to fight for 
the glory of a few kings and generals, posing 
as figure-heads. And so the peasant comes to 
the conclusion that the people would be all 
the better off if the armies were disbanded, the 
titled rulers abolished, and the rich made 
to disgorge. A settled conviction soon becomes 
a duty, and the agitators who have nothing to 
lose and everything to gain by revolution have 
little difficulty in wielding the toilers in battalions 
and leading them to vote and work for the 
overthrow of the government under which they 
chance to live; for it is a well known fact that, 
in every nation, this class of people saddle all 
their woes upon the government, no matter 
what its form. 

"England groans under the oppression of landlords, 
dukes, titles, lords, etc., and the masses 
see no reason why they should be taxed to support 
a royal house which is, at best, only a figure-head; 
and so social democracy grows apace. 

"But while the poor man always is entitled to 
be heard, the question arises: Suppose property 
were divided equally, how long would it be 
before those who have it now would get it back 
again? The extreme Socialist says, We'll remedy 
that matter by making an equal division 
every ten years. But if you do this you destroy 
the spirit of competition and the desire for 
improvement, and with all the human aspirations 
put under this sort of a ban, man would 
relapse into a semi-savage state, and all law and 
order be hurled into chaos. To share equally 
in property unequally earned is contrary to all 
political economy. The best thing for a man to 
do is to do the best he can under the 
circumstances. 

"To abolish law and order would put every 
poor man at the mercy of the desperado and the 
cut-throat: and, with no one to see after the 
welfare of society, everything would go to 
eternal smash. 

"If the people would devote their intelligence 
and energy to the reforming of existing institutions 
and give the agitators a wide berth, much 
of the existing evil might be ameliorated. 

"Communistic Democracies all end in social 
chaos, and promiscuous socialism means social 
anarchy. 



"Germany is so situated that a strong centralized 
government will always be necessary for 
self-protection. 

"With Russia on the east with her barbaric 
millions, and a half million soldiers who are 
veritable heathen, and France on the west with 
her desire for revenge, the Kaiser's country must 
always be on the alert and ready to defend herself. 
France is more favorably situated, and, 
if the conservative element keeps the ascendency, 
may continue a moderate Republic. England 
will never be what she ought to be, until 
the masses own the soil. Great reforms are 
necessary in all the nations, and can only be 
brought about by reforming existing institutions, 
and not by adopting the views and impracticable 
theories of the socialistic agitators." 

Here is some sound logic, and some not so 
sound. The reforming of existing institutions, 
for instance, would be a hopeless task. The 
fact is, they are so imperfect that nothing but 
revolution will reform them. And such a revolution, 
we are forewarned, is coming; the signs 
of the times also clearly indicate its rapid approach; 
and the outcome of that revolution 
will be the utter wreck of existing institutions- 
civil, social and ecclesiastical. 

But what of socialism? will it survive the 
world-wide wreck and bring men to a realization 
of their common brotherhood and to the 
actual practice of the law of love? No: socialism, 
however moderate its principles and course 
in the beginning, must and will degenerate into 

R1326:page 131 

wild and ungovernable anarchy, which, as this 
writer claims, places every man at the mercy of 
the desperado and the cut-throat. The writer 
truly claims that, "To share equally in property 
unequally earned is contrary to all political 
economy." Why? Because it would crush out 
individuality and enterprise, and rob the worthy 
individual of his just need of credit and remuneration, 
and encourage the unworthy in a 
shiftless and ignoble dependence. The general 
tendency of such a course, it is easily seen, 
would be toward national, as well as individual, 
imbecility. Any system of political economy 
which would subordinate the individual to community 
interests is imperfect and unjust; for the 
individual has rights, as well as the nation, and 
the real interests of the nation can only be 
properly considered as the accumulated rights 
and interests of every individual of the nation. 
When the Kingdom of God, which is to displace 



all present institutions, is set up, it will 
have respect, not only to national or community 
interest, but to every legitimate individual 
interest as well. At first, in the great time of 
trouble, there will be a great and very necessary 
leveling process; for the pride of man 
must be humbled and his dependence upon God 
must be realized before he can be exalted to the 
true dignity of manhood. That the individual 
right of property will be respected is manifest 
from the promise that "they shall build houses 
and inhabit them, and they shall plant vineyards 
and eat the fruit of them. They shall 
not build and another inhabit; they shall not 
plant and another eat.. .and they shall long 
enjoy the work of their hands."— Isa. 65:21,22. 
The promise here is not that every man must 
build his house and plant his vineyard according 
to a fixed common idea, so that every one 
will be exactly equal in convenience, elegance 
or tastefulness. Each man may work out his 
own ideas and enjoy the results, and also the 
approbation of God and of his fellow-men for 
his commendable progress. Will it seem selfish 
for a man thus to build and plant for his 
own enjoyment? No. Will it be in strict accord 
with the golden rule of loving his neighbor 
as himself? Yes. The golden rule is not 
to love your neighbor more than yourself, but 
simply as yourself. If this man works out his 
own ideas and carefully guards against any infringement 
upon his neighbor's right to work 
out his ideas; and if he is pleased with his 
neighbor's prosperity as he is pleased with his 
own, and is pleased under proper circumstances 
to lend a helping hand if needed and desired, 
then he is loving his neighbor as himself, and 
doing unto his neighbor as he would have his 
neighbor do unto him. And God's great storehouse 
of blessing is large enough and full 
enough to supply all their need when justice 
rightly balances the affairs of men. There will 
be an abundance, not only of comfort, but of 
luxury, too, for every man; but men will have 
to learn by degrees how to acquire it. God 
will not put money into the pockets, nor grand 
ideas into the minds, of the slothful. Success 
and approbation and ease and luxury and honor 
and glory and blessing will reward the righteous 
and persevering effort of each individual. 
And the law of God, re-written upon the human 
heart, will strictly forbid the coveting of 
another man's lawful right; but every man may 
rejoice in his neighbor's achievements and prosperity 
and may be stimulated thereby to greater 
attainments on his own part: not, however, 



from a selfish, ignoble ambition to outdo his 

R1327:page 131 

neighbor, but from a healthful and pleasurable 
ambition to develop his own powers and to enjoy 
the added comfort, etc. While individual 
interests will be thus conserved to the finest 
point and to the high purposes of development, 
thrift and culture, community interests will also 
be adjusted to the highest degree of national 
prosperity. 

Socialism, therefore, is not God's ideal condition 
for the human race, but it will be the 
last attempted experiment of fallible, fallen men 
to adjust their own affairs; and its predicted 
result is world-wide anarchy and dire confusion. 

But though socialism is not God's ideal for 
man's future happiness, says one somewhat influenced 
by the infection in the air of these 
times, would not such a condition be the 
proper one for the Church of God now? Should 
they not have all things common, so that 
there could be no difference in the body of 
Christ? and would not unfeigned love surely 

R1327:page 132 

lead to such a course? Well, let us see; but let 

us bear in mind that God acts and would have 

us act upon established and well founded principles. 

Where God does not directly express 

his will concerning the details of our course, 

he has left them to be gathered from observation 

of his dealings. So when we discover, as 

above, that socialism is not according to his 

purpose, and that such a scheme would be detrimental 

to man's highest interests of development 

and happiness, we know, or ought to 

know, that it would be similarly detrimental 

now to the highest interests of the body of 

Christ. 

Let us see how. Suppose, for instance, that 
all who claim to be fully consecrated to the 
Lord, and therefore members of his body, the 
Church, were to decide to-day to have all things 
common— what would be the effect? Well, in 
the first place, it would necessitate an organization; 
not merely a small organization here and 
there, but a world-wide organization, including 
all such professors, so that all could be on an 
equal footing. Secondly, It would impose upon 
each one entering the organization the obligation 
of placing all his possessions at the 
disposal of the whole company, or rather of 
some representatives of the whole company, 



notwithstanding the obligations or the opposition 

of friends and relatives; and therefore it 

would relieve him of all personal responsibility 

as a steward over those possessions. Then there 

would be differences of judgment among those 

thus opposed as to the reasonableness of the opposition, 

and as to how far it should be heeded; 

and these individual differences of opinion would 

have to be decided by the representatives of 

the company in order to avoid general dissatisfaction. 

And in time these representatives would 

assume the dignity of a clerical class with despotic 

power over all the interests of the Church. 

Then, again, some of those thus entering the 
Church might, as they often do, fall away from 
the faith and desire to withdraw from the 
organization; when, if they could not reclaim 
some or all of the means put into it, they would 
feel that they had been deceived and cheated, 
and the whole Church would be scandalized. 
Then, if it were possible for the Church to claim 
and thus actually to confiscate all the property 
of its individual members and to re-distribute 
it in equal measure amongst them all, such 
a course would gather into it many who, having 
nothing to lose but all to gain, would come 
merely for "the loaves and fishes," and the 
acquisitiveness of many of those already in would 
be apt to make them anxious to interest others 
who would add to their financial welfare. And 
very soon this would be generally understood 
to be the spur to all efforts of the Church to 
preach the gospel. Thus such an organization 
would rapidly fill up with poor tares; it would 
be a scene of contention, bickering, strife and 
evil-speaking, and a reproach to the cause of 
Christ. In other words, it would result in the 
Church, as its attempt will in the world, in anarchy 
and ruin. 

In the Church, therefore, as in the world, 
we must recognize individual rights and responsibilities, 
and also the fact that the accountability 
of each member is to God alone; 
and that to our Master, who is able to read 
the heart, to measure the circumstances, and 
to judge righteous judgment, we must each 
severally stand or fall. The Lord never commissioned 
the Church to consume its precious 
time and energy in thus looking after temporal 
affairs and minding earthly things. The 
Church's talents are consecrated to a higher 
service— to the service of heralding the good 
tidings, by the voice, the press and the pen, 
and in endeavoring to build one another up in 
the most holy faith— mutually to stimulate zeal, 
faith, love and the spirit of sacrifice and of 



patient endurance of hardness as good soldiers 
for the truth's sake. 

In the body of Christ there must of necessity 
in the present time be different degrees of 
prosperity in temporal things. We are not all 
equally endowed either mentally, morally or 
physically, nor by circumstances nor by education. 
Some have five talents and some have 
only one. The question with each consecrated 
believer, as he comes into the body of Christ, 
should be, not How can I better my temporal 
condition? but, on the contrary, How can I 
sacrifice some of the things which I already 
have? In some cases the earthly store is very 

R1327 : page 133 

small and yet the spirit of sacrifice finds many 
a little love-token to present to the Lord; and 
the Lord, though he is rich and could well spare 
the trifles thus received, accepts them and commends 
the deed. But being rich in grace and 
plenteous in mercy he gives to such due credit 
on the bank of heaven, and in due time they 
will receive their own with compound interest. 
Every act of sacrifice here is thus laying up 
treasures in heaven where moth and rust do not 
corrupt, and where thieves do not break through 
and steal. 

The manner in which each member of the 
body of Christ shall exercise his stewardship of 
the consecrated talents entrusted to his care 
is left by the Lord with each individual member. 
He may use either good or bad judgment 
in their use, but the Lord will commend 
and reward according to the motives and not 
according to actual results. The poor widow 
was commended for casting her last two mites 
into the Jewish treasury, because her evident 
motive was devotion to God and a desire to 
serve him; though actually she might have 
made better use of the money than in further 
supporting that system of worship which was 
then being displaced by the teachings of Christ. 
Good judgment, even when prompted by the 
most zealous spirit of sacrifice, would seldom 
prompt to the immediate surrender of all one's 
money talent. The poor widow probably still 
had, however, a surplus of health and strength 
and knew she could earn more for her immediate 
wants; and probably neither she nor a 
family of starving children lacked the necessities 
of life on account of it. 

If we have families dependent on us, the Lord 
has made the necessary provision for them our 
first duty. Children must be clothed and fed 



and sheltered and trained; and each consecrated 
parent can use only his own best judgment 
as to how it shall be done, remembering 
to do all as unto the Lord, and not as unto the 
world. If he does so, they will come up ready 
for the Master's use and will be trained in his 
love and in his service; the spirit of the world 
will be pointed out to them in contrast with the 
spirit of Christ; and they will learn to see the 
deformity of the one and the grace of the other. 

As much, therefore, of the money talent as 
in the judgment of any individual member is 
necessary to this work is properly used in it, if 
so used with an eye single to the glory of God, 
and without any reference to the spirit of the 
world. 

In view of this individual responsibility of 
the various members of the Church to God direct, 
we are also told not to judge one another. 
Each consecrated child of God is made a steward 
of the talents in his keeping— whether they 
be talents of money, of time, of influence or of 
intellect; and no brother or sister has any thing 
to do with those talents, either by way of management 
or of adverse criticism; nor can he 
covet them and stand before God guiltless. 
But he may observe their right use in any 
case, may emulate the example furnished, and 
may rejoice in their value to the Church at 
large. 

The question now arises as to how that love 
among the body of Christ, which should make 
them manifest to the world as the Lord's disciples, 
is to be manifested, if not by a socialistic 
community of goods. There are many 
ways. In the first place, this love will work no 
ill to its brother: it will neither slander his 
character, nor cheat, nor envy, nor in any way 
wrong him. And it will not only be thus negatively 
good to him, but it will be active to do 
him service. It will think as favorably of his 
motives of action as possible and decline to 
pronounce judgment against them; it will speak 
kindly and cordially to him and of him; it will 
sympathize in his afflictions and rejoice in his 
prosperity; it will, when desired, counsel with 
him in perplexity and assist him when possible 
and when needed in adversity; it will rejoice 
with him in the blessings of divine truth and 
engage heartily with him in its service. Indeed, 
all who thus love each other will stand shoulder 
to shoulder in the great work to which their 
united talents are consecrated, not coveting the 
talents of any for their temporal use, but anxious 
to see as much as possible directed into the 
great channel of the service of the truth. So 



the Lord loved the disciples, and so they loved 
each other and worked together in the common 
cause. 



R1344 : page 134 

RENEW A RIGHT SPIRIT WITHIN ME. 



Renew a right spirit within me, 

O Lord, is my prayer; 
That only the perfect and holy 

May find echo there. 

The spirit of faith's adoration- 
Devotion to Thee. 

No more should the world's senseless idols 
Hold sway over me. 

A spirit of humble submission; 

Of sweet, lasting peace— 
That warrings of earthly ambition 

Forever may cease. 

The spirit of Christ and His teaching— 

Thy spirit divine— 
Which finds in Thy service its duty, 

Its pleasure in Thine. 

A spirit of deep understanding, 

Of wisdom and love; 
As wise as the serpent, and harmless 

And pure as the dove. 

Renew a right spirit within me— 

All gifts of Thy grace; 
That all who my character study 

Thy likeness may trace. 

Oh! make me a living epistle- 
Inscribed with Thy name, 

And sealed with the blood of the Savior— 
Thy love to proclaim. — R. J. BALL. 



R1328:page 134 

DIVINE LOVE AND HUMAN RECIPROCATION. 



-John 3:1-21.- 



This subject forms part of a memorable discourse 
preached by Jesus of Nazareth to Nicodemus, 
a ruler of the Jews. The words, "God 
so loved the world that he gave his only begotten 
Son, that whosoever believeth in him should 
not perish, but have everlasting life," must be 
understood in the light of their context, or they 
will be largely robbed of their beauty and 
power. It rarely happens that every element 
of this brief passage is taken into account; and 
yet, if anyone is left out the others become 
comparatively meaningless. It is necessary to 
consider each element in detail. 

I. -THE EXTENT OF GOD'S LOVE. 

This is expressed by a very familiar phrase, 
"the world." "The earth" is not "the world," 
nor is "the age." Both the words and their 
ideas are different. The world here contains 
many ages, but it is itself a unit. The primary 
idea of it appears to be that of "an arrangement," 
the human race under an arrangement. 
Of "the Word," who "was in the beginning 
with God," the Apostle says, "He was in the 
world, and the world was made by him, and 
the world knew him not" (John 1:10). The 
world here, which was made by "the Word," 
must include every individual of the human 
race, from the first man to the very last of his 
posterity. So with the world which God so 
loved, no individual who has descended from 
Adam can be beyond its scope. This is corroborated 
by another phrase in the immediate 
context— "That which is born of flesh is flesh." 
That which is born of the flesh is born into the 
world. "The flesh" and "the world," here, 
are co-extensive; and as these phrases cover 
every human being, so the love of God covers 
every human being. If the love of God does 
not extend to every man, the man to whom it 
does not extend cannot be part of "the flesh" 
spoken of here. 

II.-THE PROOF OF GOD'S LOVE. 

The love of God here does not supersede his 
justice. There is no genuine love where there is 
not absolute justice. God so loved the world 
that he GAVE his only begotten Son. The 
proof of God's love here is not in what he 
taught, or felt, or willed, or said, but in what 
he did: "In this was manifested the love of 
God toward us, because God sent his only begotten 
Son into the world, that we might live 



through him. Herein is love, not that we 
loved God, but that he loved us, and sent his 
Son to be the propitiation for our sins." "He 
is the propitiation for our sins; and not for 

R1328:page 135 

ours only, but also for the sins of the whole 

world." (1 John 2:2; 4:9,10.) The same 

apostolic witness says, "The Word was made 

flesh, and dwelt among us, and we beheld his 

glory, the glory as of the only begotten of the 

Father, full of grace and truth" (John 1:14). 

"The Word" and "the only begotten of the 

Father" here refer, of course, to the same person. 

Being made flesh, the sent of God and 

the gift of God refer to the same thing. Giving 

the Son, and sending him into the world, 

was making him flesh. In other words, these 

phrases all refer to one change— the change 

from his pre-human to his human existence. 

The idea of this change is not so much that 

from one locality to another, as it is from one 

nature to another. Being sent to the earth 

and being sent into the world (kosmos— arrangement) 

are not necessarily the same. Christ 

might be on the earth without being in the arrangement. 

He was sent into the arrangement, 

and he entered it when he became a factor of 

it. The chief need of those previously in the 

arrangement was never met, nor could it be 

met, until Christ met it. When genuine love 

gives, and gives wisely, it gives what is most 

needed. The love of God is real love, it is 

wise love. He gave that which meets the dire 

necessities of humanity, the dire necessities of 

every individual, from the first to the last. 

There are those who see in the Son of God 
taking upon himself our nature, and becoming 
the propitiation for our sins, no proof of the 
love of God. They say, That is proof of the 
Son's love, but where is the proof of the Father's? 
The answer is, In the Father's gift. 
A real father would much rather die himself than 
give a beloved child up to death. There 
is far more love displayed in God giving 
his only begotten and well-beloved Son up to 
death than there would have been in God dying 
himself, had that been possible. "Greater love 
hath no man than this, that a man lay down his 
life for his friends" (John 15:13); "but God 
commendeth his love toward us, in that, while 
we were yet sinners, Christ died for us" (Rom. 5:8). 
The proof of the love of God is not 
only the most conclusive on record, but it is 
also the most conclusive conceivable. 



III.-THE PURPOSE OF GOD'S LOVE. 

In expressing this part of his subject our 
blessed Lord makes it as unmistakable and as 
forcible as possible. He says, "God sent not 
his Son into the world to judge (R.V.) the 
world." The world had been judged previously. 
The first life of the world had been judged 
in its entirety. That judgment was on the representative 
principle; and in it the whole world 
was judged in one man— the first Adam. God 
did not send his Son into the world to do that 
over again. Men blunder and have to do their 
work over again. God never blunders, nor has 
he ever to do his work over again. Christ says 
twice over that God sent his Son into the world 
that the world "should not perish." The world 
was already perishing. It had been perishing 
over four thousand years. God sent his Son into 
the world that it might not always perish. The 
penalty under which the world was perishing is 
death; and when a man is once really dead he 
is always dead, unless the penalty is nullified. 

On the positive side, Christ says that God 
sent his Son into the world "that the world 
through him might be saved"— "might have 
everlasting life"— "might have eternal life." 
The word here rendered "everlasting" and 
"eternal" does not necessarily mean endless. 
Competent authorities render it "age-lasting;" 
and the age may be long or short, according to 
the nature and circumstances of the case. Age-lasting 
life and salvation here are practically 
the same thing; and there can be neither soundness 
nor safety without untainted life. Salvation, 
of course, pertains to the whole man- 
physically, mentally, and morally— and when 
thus saved he continues to live. The purpose 
of God's love in sending his Son into the 
world is, in the first place, to nullify death— 
the first death; and, in the next place, to bring 
in untainted life— the second life. There could 
be no further judgment until untainted life was 
brought in, because the tainted life had previously 
been judged. 

"Now is the judgment of this world." Now 
the world's crisis has come. Now. Not before. 
This is the beginning of the second judgment. 
The second judgment is the judgment 
of the world individually. There could be no 

R1328:page 136 

individual judgment until there was individual 
untainted life, and there was no individual untainted 



life until Christ brought it in. Whenever 
and wherever he has been offered to any 
man, or will be offered to any man, his testing, 
trying, or proving has begun, or will begin. 
In view of this our blessed Lord exclaimed: 
"Now is the judgment of this world: now shall 
the prince of this world be cast out: and I, if 
I be lifted up from the earth, will draw all men 
unto me."— John 12:31,32. 

IV.-THE RECIPROCATION OF GOD'S LOVE. 

The extent of the love of God is the extent of 
the world; the proof of the love of God is the gift 
of his Son; and the purpose of the love of God 
is that the world might have life. These were all 
matters of fact over eighteen hundred years ago; 
but that does not put the world into possession 
of this life. There is a definitely prescribed 
medium through which this life is communicated 
to man; and every man has to use this 
medium for himself. "As Moses lifted up the 
serpent in the wilderness, even so must the Son 
of Man be lifted up; that whosoever believeth 
in him should not perish, but have everlasting 
life." The Israelites sinned against Moses and 
against God. They were bitten by fiery serpents, 
and were perishing in consequence. By 
divine command, Moses made a brazen serpent 
and set it upon a pole. That brought it within 
the range of their vision; "and it came to 
pass, that if a serpent had bitten any man, when 
he beheld the serpent of brass he lived." (Num. 21:4-9.) 
It was not when the serpent was 
made that the serpent-bitten men lived, nor 
was it when it was elevated: it was when they 
looked that they lived. Even so, it was not 
when "the Word was made flesh" that sin-bitten 
men lived, nor was it when the Son of Man 
was exalted, but it is when they look that they 
live. The serpent-bitten had to look with their 
physical eyes, and the sin-bitten have to look 
with their mental eyes. In each case the divinely-appointed 
medium of communication is 
looking, and that is indispensable. Looking 
with the eyes of the understanding is expressed 
by the word believing; and as this is the indispensable 
medium of communication it is imperative 
that there be no vital mistake respecting 
it. Recklessness will not do, nor will 
ignorance, nor superstition, nor credulity: it 
must be genuine faith. 

1. The basis of faith is the testimony of God 
himself.— "If we receive the witness of men, the 
witness of God is greater; for this is the witness 
of God which he hath testified of his Son. 



He that believeth on the Son of God hath the 
witness in himself; he that believeth not God 
hath made him a liar, because he believeth not 
the record that God gave of his Son." "That 
which was from the beginning, which we have 
heard, which we have seen with our eyes, which 
we have looked upon, and our hands have handled, 
of the word of life." "That which we 
have seen and heard declare we unto you, that 
ye also may have fellowship with us; and truly 
our fellowship is with the Father, and with his 
Son Jesus Christ." "I pray for them; I pray 
not for the world, but for them which thou hast 
given me." "Neither pray I for these alone, 
but for them also which shall believe on me 

R1329 : page 136 

through their word; that they all may be one; 

as thou, Father, art in me, and I in thee, that 

they also may be one in us; that the world may 

believe that thou hast sent me." (1 John 5:9,10; 

1:1,3; John 17:9,20,21.) The testimony 

on which faith rests is not man's, it is 

God's own. Man had no testimony on this 

matter worth listening to until God spoke. 

God has made himself responsible for the extension 

of his testimony; and he who promised 

is faithful and sure to fulfil his promise. Those 

who live the life of God, breathe the Spirit of 

God, conform to the law of God, do the works 

of God, and speak the words of God, are the 

agency for the extension of God's testimony. 

"In due time" he will see that his testimony 

is extended, not only to "the ends of the 

earth," but to the uttermost extremities of "the 

world;" not only to every individual "on the 

earth," but also to every individual "under the 

earth." 

2. The testimony of God is (a) that Christ 
is the life of the world.— God sent his Son into 
the world "that the world through him 
might be saved," and there is no complete salvation 
without untainted life. "This is the 

R1329 : page 137 

record, that God hath given to us age-lasting 
life, and this life is in his Son. He that hath 
the Son hath life, and he that hath not the Son 
of God hath not life." "The bread of God 
is he which cometh down from heaven, and 
giveth life unto the world." "The bread that 
I will give is my flesh, which I will give for the 
life of the world." (1 John 5:11,12; John 6:33,51.) 
The testimony of God is (b) that Christ 



is the light of the world: "In him was life, and 

the life was the light of men." "That was the 

true light which lighteth every man that cometh 

into the world." "I am the light of the 

world; he that followeth me shall not walk in 

darkness, but shall have the light of life." 

(John 1:4,9; 8:12.) The testimony of God 

is (c) that Christ is the love of the world: "He 

that loveth his brother abideth in the light." 

"This is the message that ye heard from the 

beginning, that we should love one another." 

"We know that we have passed from death unto 

life, because we love the brethren." "Hereby 

perceive we love,* because he laid down 

his life for us, and we ought to lay down 

our lives for the brethren." (1 John 2:10; 3:11,14,16.) 

And the testimony of God is (d) 

that Christ is the judgment of the world: "This 

is the judgment, that light is come into the 

world, and men loved darkness rather than 

light, because their deeds were evil." "As the 

Father raiseth up the dead and quickeneth them, 

even so the Son quickeneth whom he will. 

For the Father judgeth no man, but hath committed 

all judgment unto the Son." "As the 

Father hath life in himself, so hath he given to 

the Son to have life in himself and hath given 

him authority to execute judgment also, because 

he is the Son of Man." (John 3:19; 5:21-27.) 

Many talk about the judgment of the 

world without its love, and the love of the world 

without its light, and the light of the world 

without its life; but that completely reverses 

the divine order. Christ is the judgment of 

the world because he is its love, and he is its 

love because he is its light, and he is its light 

because he is its life. Some still talk about 

those who never heard the gospel being judged 

by "the light of nature," "the light of conscience," 

and so on. They might as well talk 

about them being judged by the light of darkness 

or enlightened by the life of death. The 

divine order is the life, the light, the love, and 

after that the judgment of the world. It is not 

enough that we exhort one another to "earnestly 

contend for the faith which was once delivered 

unto the saints." It is imperative that 

we see that it is the faith for which we contend. 

We may contend for something called "the 

faith," or for this, that, or the other element 

of the faith; but none of these will do instead 

of the faith. We must have the faith, the 

whole faith, and nothing but the faith, and 

earnestly contend for that. 

The man who denies that there is life in 
Christ for the world has no adequate evidence 



that there is life in Christ for himself. One 
says, I am one of the "predestinated," or one 
of the "elected," and therefore believe that 
there is life in Christ for me. But it requires 
as much evidence to prove that he is either 
elected or predestinated as that there is life in 
Christ for him; and where is that evidence? 
Another says: The holy Spirit in my heart tells 
me that there is life in Christ for me. But it 
requires as much evidence to prove that the 
holy Spirit says anything in any man's heart 
differing from what he says in his Word as that 
there is life in Christ for him; and where is 
that evidence? And another quite triumphantly 
quotes the words— "Whosoever believeth," 
and says, I believe, and therefore there is life 
in Christ for me. But faith is not the basis of 
testimony, it is testimony that is the basis of 
faith. Without testimony, what is called faith 
is mere credulity; and without adequate testimony 
there is no genuine faith. Here all men 
are on one level. No man has had a revelation 
to himself and for himself alone. Every 
man has to believe the testimony which is intended 
for all, or be without faith, because there 
is no other. This is a vital point for every man 
and for every mission. It is quite right to discredit 
all unscriptural theology, but let us see 
that it is replaced only by what is sound and 
defensible. The life, the light, the love, and 
judgment of God are all links of one chain, 
and pertain to the same individuals. Drop out 



*The words "of God" are not in the Greek text. 

R1329:page 138 

any one link of the chain and the others become 
useless and misleading. 

The mere assent to the truthfulness of even 
all the elements of the faith is not enough. 
We may advocate the life of God in Christ, and 
the judgment of God in Christ, while we remain 
as selfish as sin and as hard as nether millstones. 
To have unfeigned faith in Christ is 
to trust him, adhere to him, and be faithful and 
steadfast in conforming to him. Our perception 
of the love of God must lead to appreciation, 
our appreciation to reciprocation, and our 
reciprocation must never come to an end. 
This is particularly emphasized by our blessed 
Lord. He says, "This is the judgment, that 
light is come into the world, and men loved 
darkness rather than light, because their deeds 



were evil. For every one that doeth evil hateth 

the light, neither cometh to the light, lest 

his deeds should be reproved. But he that doeth 

the truth cometh to the light, that his deeds 

may be made manifest, that they are wrought 

in God." Here "evil" is the opposition of 

"truth." He "that doeth evil" is the opposite 

of he "that doeth truth." He who doeth 

evil has been begotten of the evil one, and he 

who doeth the truth has been begotten of the 

True One. He who has been begotten of the 

evil one loveth the darkness and hateth the 

light, and he who has been begotten of the 

True One loveth the light and hateth the darkness. 

He who loves the darkness remains in 

the darkness, and he who loves the light comes 

to the light. And he who remains in the darkness 

manifests that his deeds are wrought in 

Satan, while he who comes to the light manifests 

that his deeds "are wrought in God." 

Whenever and wherever God is manifested in 

the life, the light, and the love of Christ, men 

are being tested, tried, or proved, and ultimately 

they either reject or reciprocate the love of God. 

Those who reject the love of God cannot continue 

to live; and to those who reciprocate the 

love of God, the ratio of their reciprocation will 

always be the extent of their salvation. 

Some say, The love of God is omnipotent, 
and therefore all men will ultimately become 
pure and good. Were the writer to say, This 
talk about "omnipotent love" is omnipotent 
nonsense, the reader might say, and very truly, 
That is meaningless. Well, there is no more 
omnipotent love than there is omnipotent nonsense, 
there being neither the one nor the 
other. Love is a moral force, and no moral 
force can be omnipotent. Divine love, though 
it "passeth knowledge" in "breadth, and 
length, and depth, and height," is to man no 
force whatever until it is perceived; and its 
force is, and always will be, in the ratio of his 
perception, appreciation, and reciprocation. 
Man can no more be forced to love anything, 
or any being, than he can be forced to be free. 
Everyone will ultimately have an adequate opportunity 
of partaking of "the water of life 
freely," and every one who will not partake 
"shall be destroyed from among the people." 

Many admit that all who are "on the earth," 
at one time or another, will be offered the life 
that is in Christ, and deny that those who are 
"under the earth" will ever have an offer of it. 
That position is utterly untenable. Christ was 
sent into the world "that the world through 
him might be saved." Those who were on the 



earth when those precious words were uttered 
were not the world, they were a part of it— a 
small part. Those who were under the earth 
at that time were not the world, they were a 
part of it— a large part. Those who are on the 
earth now are not the world, they are another 
part of it— comparatively, a smaller part. And 
those who are under the earth now are not the 
world; they are another part of it— comparatively 
a larger part. So has it been ever since 
these words were uttered. The part which is 
on the earth at one time becomes a part of the 
part which is under the earth at another time; 
and so will it continue to be until all are raised 
from the dead. But no one can rationally affirm 
that any part of the world is the whole 
world. It requires all the parts to make up the 
whole, whether on the earth or under it; and 
as sure as Christ is "the life of the world," so 
sure is it that every individual will have an offer 
of life. Death itself cannot be any insuperable 
barrier in the way of this being accomplished: 
"Verily, verily, I say unto you, he that heareth 
my word, and believeth on him that sent me, 
hath age-lasting life, and shall not come into 

R1329 : page 139 

judgment, but is passed from death unto life. 
Verily, verily, I say unto you, the hour is coming* 
when the dead shall hear the voice of the 
Son of God, and they that hear shall live." 



*Sinaitic MS. omits the words "and now is." 

R1330:page 139 

"Marvel not at this, for the hour is coming in 

which all that are in the graves shall hear his 

voice, and shall come forth; they that have done 

good unto the resurrection of life, and they that 

have done evil unto the resurrection of judgment." 

(John 5:24,25,28,29.) The revisers 

having made a clean sweep of the word "damnation, 

some are quite busy trying to read the 

word "condemnation" into this glorious passage, 

as though it were the equivalent of the 

word "judgment." Condemnation is no more 

the equivalent of judgment than damnation is. 

The process of judgment will result either in 

justification or in condemnation, according to 

the merits or demerits of each case. The testimony 

which is necessary for the faith of those 

who are on the earth is necessary also for the 



faith of those who are under the earth; and as 
that testimony is being presented to some now, 
so will it, "in due time," be presented to all; 
and whether they are at present on the earth or 
under the earth cannot be permitted to interfere 
with God's gracious purpose. 

Others are ridiculing the idea of "post mortem 
salvation." "They know not what they 
do." Do they not teach the resurrection of the 
dead? If they do, they are ridiculing their 
own position, because that is certainly post 
mortem. The fact is this: Salvation, according 
to the Scriptures, and Resurrection, according 
to the Scriptures, are substantially one and 
the same thing. Tell me in what sense and to 
what extent you are being saved, and I will tell 
you in what sense and to what extent you are 
being raised from the dead. During the present 
age the moral element of salvation is coming 
first; so is it with resurrection. During 
the future age the physical element of resurrection 
will come first; so will it be with salvation. 
But the order in which their various 
elements will be fully realized makes no essential 
difference in either salvation or resurrection; 
because every element will have to be fully 
realized before there can be complete resurrection 
or complete salvation. 

"My thoughts are not your thoughts, neither 
are my ways your ways, saith the Lord. For 
as the heavens are higher than the earth, so are 
my ways higher than your ways, and my 
thoughts than your thoughts." 

JOSEPH MOFFITT. 



R1330 : page 139 

"THE BOND OF PERFECTNESS." 



"And above all these things put on love, which is the 
bond of perfectness."— Col. 3:14. 

The Apostle says love is the bond of perfectness; 
and Jesus said love is the fulfilling of the 
divine law. Every intelligent being, from the 
humblest to the most exalted, craves love. The 
dog craves his master's affection and expresses 
his delight at every indication of it; a horse 
and even a cat will return your caresses; the 
birds reward your love with notes of joy; the 
lisping infant rewards your love with smiles and 
caresses. The young want to be loved; the 



middle aged, in the heat and strife of life's great 
battle, want the soothing solace of loving sympathy; 
the aged, weary and worn with the strife 
of years, want to lean upon the strong arm of 
love. The angels in all the glory of their 
higher state want it; our Lord Jesus wants it; 
and our heavenly Father wants it. We never 
grow weary of it; nor can we get too much 
of it. 

It is not merely weakness that craves love; 
but strength and glory want it, too. What is 
this desirable thing so universally craved by 
every grade of intelligent being? It is one of 
those things which pen cannot describe. People 
may sing about it, and talk about it, and 
read about it, and write about it, and yet have 
but a faint idea of its reality. But stop reading 
and writing and talking for a moment, and call 
to mind the few living illustrations of love that 
have chanced to cross your pathway. In the 
long past years of sunny childhood can you recall 
the tenderness of Mother's love that covered 

R1330 : page 140 

your dimpled cheeks with showers of kisses that 

could not half express the wealth of her affection? 

And do you not recall the tenderness 

of Father's care, who patiently toiled and sacrificed, 

and then delighted to see in you the 

fruit of his labor? Or perhaps you have tasted 

the sweets of conjugal love, and have realized 

in the chosen partner of your life one ready always 

to rejoice in your prosperity, to share 

your burdens and to cheer and urge you on to 

life's truest and highest attainments. 

Or in a dark hour of sorrow and tears 
some tender hand has soothed your throbbing 
brow, some kindly ministry has strengthened 
your weakness, or some timely word of cheer, 
of counsel and encouragement has inspired you 
with new zeal for the stern conflict of life. 
What life has been so barren and drear that no 
such gleam of sunshine has ever brightened the 
pathway? Such illustrations give us some idea 
of what it is to be loved. 

Then again consider for a moment the joy of 
loving— the joy of loving your own sweet child, 
or the manly glory of your noble husband, or 
the womanly grace of your devoted wife, or the 
tender sweetness of your sainted mother, or the 
ripened glory of your aged father, or the blessed 
communion of tried and faithful friends— the 
communion of saints. Then, rising above these 
earthly loves, some have tasted the sweets of 
that divine love that surpasseth all other loves. 



As yet, however, that divine love is only manifest 

to those who have faith in the divine 

promises and who walk in obedience to the divine 

commandments. 

Now with these illustrations of what it is to 
love and to be loved, let our imaginations 
widen the sphere of this noble virtue, and do 
we not see that, when it reigns in all hearts, it 
will prove to be just what the Apostle says it is 
—viz.: "the bond of perfectness," and the 
greatest of all the Christian virtues? Indeed 
he shows that, though we might have all the 
other virtues combined, yet, lacking this one, 
we would be as sounding brass and as tinkling 
cymbals. In fact, the putting on of the other 
virtues, except as prompted by this virtue, 
would be mere sham and hypocrisy. Yet with 
this, though lacking the others to some extent, 
the heart would prove itself loyal, though the flesh 
might be weak to perform the dictates of love. 

The Lord is saying a great deal for this virtue 
when he declares that love is the fulfilling 
of the law; or in other words, that if we had 
perfect love, we could easily and naturally keep 
the whole law of God. But here is our difficulty: 
we cannot love perfectly. Well, the Lord 
knows that we cannot, but he wants to see us 
endeavoring to love more and more, and making 
actual progress in this direction. Paul, 
too, shows us how love in the heart manifests 
itself in the outward life. We scarcely need to 
be told this, for the language of love is natural 
and its impulses are spontaneous; and yet, 
because we are not yet perfect in love, Paul's 
description makes manifest the absurdity of 
calling that love which is unworthy of the name. 
He says, "Love suffereth long and is kind. 
[It is kind even to the unthankful and the unholy, 
endeavoring to show them by example a 
more excellent way.] Love envieth not. [It is 
pleased rather to see another's success.] Love 
vaunteth not itself, is not puffed up. [There is 
no pride in love, delighting in display and 
vain glory: it is rather humble and retiring.] 
Love doth not behave itself unbecomingly 
[It is consistent with its profession in all its 
actions]; seeketh not its own [is not on the 
alert for self-interest, but more for the interest 
and blessing of others]; is not easily provoked 
[endeavors to make due allowance for the weaknesses 
of others]; thinketh no evil [is slow to 
impute evil motives, and anxious to see and to 
foster every good intent]; rejoiceth not in iniquity, 
but rejoiceth in the truth [has no pleasure 
in either hearing or telling evil tidings, or 
in evil of any kind, but delights in God's truth 



and in its fruitage of developed holiness]." 

"Love covers all things [makes due allowance 
for the weaknesses of the flesh]; believes 
all things [believes in the conquering power of 
love to help the weak and erring in the struggle 
against sin]; endures all things" [endures the 
necessary reproach and trials of faith and patience 
in the careful endeavor to build up and 
strengthen the weak]. 

The child of God who is studiously endeavoring 
thus to manifest and cultivate the spirit 

R1330:page 141 

of love will indeed become more and more like 
his blessed Master. What contradiction of sinners 
against himself did he bear! How patiently 
he bore with the weaknesses and the 
short-comings of his disciples! And how faithfully 
he taught them and led them to follow 
in his steps ! There was the perfect pattern of 
that self-sacrificing love which was set for our 
imitation. 

Well, says one, as he looks into this beautiful 
law of love, I would like to be fully actuated 
by such a noble principle, but some people are 
so despicably mean that I cannot love them. 
But are you sure you cannot love such people? 
Is it not rather the sins that you dislike and 
which ought to be despised by every heart that 
is truly loyal to God and righteousness? You 
say it is hard to distinguish between the two; 
and so it is sometimes, when inherited deformities 
of character have been fostered and cultivated 
and even gloried in, as they often are. 
But here is a way to examine the real disposition 
of your own heart toward such. Would 
you cheerfully do them kindness and help them 
to the extent of your ability to see the error of 
their way and to overcome it; can you tenderly 
pray for them and patiently bear with their 
weaknesses, their ignorance and their lack of 
development, and try by a noble example to 
show them a more excellent way? If such be 

R1331 :page 141 

the case, then it is the sin that you despise, and 
not the sinner. The sin you should hate, but 
the sinner, never. Not until God's unerring 
judgment declares that the sin and the sinner 
are inseparably linked may love let go its hold 
upon a brother man. 

Love, however, properly differs, both in kind 
and in degree, according to the worthiness of 
the object upon which it centers. There is a 



love of admiration, a love of sympathy and a 

love of pity. The former is the highest type 

of love, and is properly bestowed only upon 

that which is truly lovely and worthy of admiration. 

On this line our Heavenly Father 

and our Lord Jesus claim our supreme and 

most ardent affection; and all the good and 

noble and true of our fellow men, in proportion 

as they approximate the glorious likeness 

of God, may also share this love of admiration. 

Of this same kind is the love of childish innocence; 

and of this same kind should be the 

love of conjugal felicity. The chosen life partner 

should be one beloved in this highest sense; 

and parental and filial affection should also be 

established on the same basis, and then the 

dearest earthly relationship would be akin to 

the heavenly. 

The love of sympathy we can extend to the 
weakest one that is painfully toiling up the hill 
of difficulty toward a better life; and affectionately 
we may reach the sympathizing, helpful 
hand to such. If we are a step or two in advance 
of some such on the way, and if we 
realize a little less difficulty in making the ascent, 
let us thank God and use our superior vantage 
ground for the assistance of the weaker ones. 

Then there is the love of pity for those so 
steeped in ignorance and sin as to be unable 
even to raise their eyes heavenward to catch 
the first inspiration toward a better life. Would 
we indeed scorn the degraded, or add another 
pang to those already so bruised by the fall? 
Ah, no: love pities the vilest, sympathizes with 
the weakest and glories in the truest and purest 
and loveliest of earth and of heaven. Thus 
our blessed Lord loved supremely our all-glorious 
Heavenly Father; thus he loved with tenderest 
sympathy his devoted disciples; and thus 
he loved with wondrous pity all the fallen sons 
and daughters of Adam's race, even to the extent 
of giving his life to redeem them. Let us 
emulate his example and walk in his footsteps. 



R1331 :page 141 

ARRIVAL OF BROTHER AND SISTER RUSSELL. 



WATCH TOWER readers will be glad to learn 
of the safe arrival of the Editor and his wife, 
just as we go to press. They report a pleasant 
and successful trip through the most civilized 



portions of Europe, Asia, Africa and America, 
and promise an account in the next and succeeding 
TOWERS. An article intended for this issue 
miscarried en route. 



R1331 :page 142 

MR. GLADSTONE ON THE BIBLE AND SCIENCE. 



Dr. Reville, professor in the College of 
France, in his "Prolegomena to the History of 
Religions," 1884, questioned the correctness 
of what Mr. Gladstone had said some time before 
in support of "a primitive revelation in 
the testimony of the Holy Scriptures." Dr. 
Reville disputed the accuracy of the account of 
the creation and of the beginning of religious 
worship. In the Nineteenth Century of November 
last, Mr. Gladstone defends his position 
with signal ability, and completely demolishes 
his critic in regard to the dawn of worship. The 
article is entitled "Dawn of Creation and of 
Worship," and concludes with these sentences: 

"But none of these circumstances discredit 
or impair the proof that in the book, of which 
Genesis is the opening section, there is conveyed 
special knowledge to meet the special 
need everywhere so palpable in the state and 
history of our race. Far, indeed, am I from 
asserting that this precious gift, or that any 
process known to me, disposes of all the problems, 
either insoluble or unsolved, by which 
we are surrounded; of 

'The burden and the mystery 
Of all this unintelligible world.' 

"But I own my surprise, not only at the fact, 
but at the manner in which in this day, writers, 
whose name is legion, unimpeached in character 
and abounding in talent, put away from 
them, cast into shadow, or into the very 
gulf of negation itself, the conception of a 
Deity, an acting and a ruling Deity. Of this 
belief, which has satisfied the doubts, and wiped 
away the tears and found guidance for the footsteps 
of so many a weary wanderer on earth; 
which among the best and greatest of our race 
has been so cherished by those who had it, and 
so longed and sought for by those who had it 
not, we might suppose that if, at length, we had 
discovered that it was in the light of truth untenable, 
that the accumulated testimony of man 
was worthless, and that his wisdom was but folly, 



yet, at least, the decencies of mourning 
would be vouchsafed to this irreparable loss. 
Instead of this, it is with a joy and exultation 
that might almost recall the frantic orgies of 
the Commune, that this, at least at first sight, 
terrific and overwhelming calamity is accepted, 
and recorded as a gain. 

"Evolution, that is, physical evolution, which 
alone is in view, may be true (like the solar 
theory), may be delightful and wonderful in its 
right place; but are we really to understand 
that varieties of animals brought about through 
domestication, the wasting of organs (for instance, 
the tails of men) by disuse, that natural 
selection and the survival of the fittest, all 
in the physical order, exhibit to us the great 
arcanum of creation, the sum and centre of 
life, so that mind and spirit are dethroned from 
their old supremacy, are no longer sovereign 
by right, but may find somewhere by charity a 
place assigned them, as appendages, perhaps 
only as excrescences of the material creation? 

"I contend that evolution in its highest form 
has not been a thing heretofore unknown to 
history, to philosophy, or to theology. I contend 
that it was before the mind of Paul when 
he taught that in the fulness of time God sent 
forth his Son, and of Eusebius when he wrote 
the 'Preparation for the Gospel,' and of Augustine 
when he composed the 'City of God;' 
and, beautiful and splendid as are the lessons 
taught by natural objects, they are, for Christendom 
at least, infinitely beneath the sublime 
unfolding of the great drama of human action, 
in which, through long ages, Greece was making 
ready a language and an intellectual type, 
and Rome a framework of order and an idea of 
law, such that in them were to be shaped and 
fashioned the destinies of a regenerated world. 

"For those who believe that the old foundations 
are unshaken still, and that the fabric built 
upon them will look down for ages upon the 
floating wreck of many a modern and boastful 
theory, it is difficult to see anything but infatuation 
in the destructive temperament which leads 
to the notion that to substitute a blind mechanism 
for the hand of God in the affairs of life 
is to enlarge the scope of remedial agency; that 
to dismiss the highest of all inspirations is to 

R1331 :page 143 

elevate the strain of human thought and life; 
and that each of us is to rejoice that our several 
units are to be disintegrated at death into 
'countless millions of organisms;' for such, it 



seems, is the latest 'revelation' delivered from 
the fragile tripod of a modern Delphi. Assuredly, 
on the minds of those who believe, or else 
on the minds of those who after this fashion 
disbelieve, there lies some deep judicial darkness, 
a darkness that may be felt. While disbelief 
in the eyes of faith is a sore calamity, 
this kind of disbelief, which renounces and 
repudiates with more than satisfaction what is 
brightest and best in the inheritance of man, 
is astounding, and might be deemed incredible." 



page 143 

EXTRACTS FROM INTERESTING LETTERS. 



Illinois. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-Receiving Volume 
Three, paper cover, Friday evening, answers 
my inquiry in regard to the same; so I 
will have some special circulars printed to put 
out with the Arp slips, and see if I cannot sell 
more DAWNS than I have of late. 

I have read the third volume to the 10th chapter, 
and every page is full of interest. It all 
makes me feel as though I would like to be free 
from all else except to try and interest others 
in the light. That does not seem to be the 
order of things, however, and I must continue, 
apparently, the local work with my other duties; 
but I want in some way to do more if I can. 
With the guidance of our heavenly Father and 
the wisdom he can give I shall, I trust, be shown 
the way. So may it be. In Christian fellowship, 
your brother, JOHN H. BROWN. 



California. 

MY DEAR SIR: -I am reading with profound 
interest your third volume of MILLENNIAL 
DAWN. I have read and re-read the first and 
second volumes. I am more than convicted 
of the correctness of your deductions. The 
Bible seems to me a new book, and yet it has 
always been to me a wonderful book. 

"Thy Kingdom Come" fills me with wonderful 
emotions. Blessed be God for the assurance 
that Babylon is fallen and that Christ is setting 
up his kingdom. Oh, how I have prayed that 
it might come, and be established in all the 
length and breadth of this world, casting down 
all usurpers. Praise God! It is too good, I 



sometimes say, to be true. God bless you. 
Yours for the kingdom in all the earth, 
G. W. MORGAN. 



Texas. 

C. T. RUSSELL, EDITOR: -Having seen, in a 
copy of your worthy paper, your generous offer 
to unfortunates— poor and unable to subscribe 
for your paper— I, as one of those who am not 
only poor, but separated by prison walls from 
the world, beg of you, in the name of him who 
said, "I was in prison and ye visited me," 
for as many or as few copies as you can find it 
convenient to send me. Not only myself, but 
all who have read the ZION'S WATCH TOWER, 
have expressed an earnest desire to read more and 
to learn from it the way of life more perfectly. 

And may you hear the blessed words, when 
you come to stand before the judgment bar of 
God, "Inasmuch as ye have done it unto the 
least of these my brethren, ye have done it 
unto me." 

May the blessing of God rest upon you and 
yours. I am yours very truly, . 



New York. 

DEAR BROTHER AND SISTER RUSSELL:-I received 
the third volume of DAWN, and have 
hurriedly read it through. I shall read it all 
over again carefully, probably several times. 
I am much pleased with it all, and especially 
was I interested in the chapter on the Great 
Pyramid. It is all wonderful! but like all Jehovah's 
works. Man could never have planned 
it. He is scarcely able to comprehend it. Just 
so with the Bible— when rightly understood it 
towers far above the ability of any finite mind, 
and can be comprehended only when the added 
grace of God is vouchsafed to its assistance. 

I am more anxious than ever to send out 
"this Gospel of the Kingdom" to the hungry 
and thirsty children of God. I will send you 
$10. Please send me two copies of Vol. III., 
in paper, and one package of tracts, and apply 
the remainder for the spread of the Gospel. 

We are doing what we can here. The letters 
are coming in daily asking for help. May God 
direct us wherever we may be doing the harvest 
work. You will, of course, understand what 
this work is doing for me. When we settle a 
matter for another by the sure Word, it is fixed 
in our own minds. Verily it is more blessed to 



give than to receive. In Christian love, 
MRS. J.H. PATTERSON. 

page 144 

New York. 

DEAR BROTHER:-I cannot refrain from 
writing once more to tell you that I have not lost 
any interest in the harvest work, but that I am 
thankful I can say it is steadily increasing, and 
I desire to engage in it more and more as the 
way is being gradually opened up to me. From 
a conversation last spring you know my circumstances, 
and my decision to continue in my profession 
till my debts are paid off; and as things 
look now, it would seem to require several 
months yet to accomplish this. Meanwhile, I 
am preparing myself as best circumstances permit, 
and am stirring up a few of the local 
preachers, in hopes some one among them may 
prove an efficient co-laborer in the near future. 

Your remark to guard against being blown 
away by every wind of doctrine, etc., is certainly 
very timely, and I will carefully heed it as best 
I can. Let us hope, however, that we will be 
spared spiritual cyclones, if not hurricanes, or 
be in the cleft of the rock while they pass over. 
I will look over the chronology you refer to, so 
as to get that still clearer in my head. Yesterday 
it was a stormy day in the New York pulpits, 
though very deeply significant to me, and 
all others who know something, at least, of the 
signs of the times. 

I expect ere long to be so busy and burdened 
with the grand work of the harvest that 
I will not have time to feel lonely at all. The 
tremendous importance of the work and the 
events now so close at hand demands all my 
zeal, time, attention and talents, so that nothing 
is left for anybody or anything else. I am 
pressing towards the mark. Your article on 
"Strong Delusion" in the April number proved 
to me strong meat in due season; for I shall 
need much of it, and trust you will remember 
me with all the brethren and sisters constantly, 
that I may be strong in the Lord and in the 
power of his might, fearless and with a clear 
insight in the truth now due to be revealed to 
the heirs of the kingdom. 

With best wishes and greetings to sister Russell 
and all the brethren and sisters, I remain 
your brother and fellow-servant, 

A. J. VERKOUTEREN. 



England. 

MY DEAR BROTHER IN THE TRUTH:-I have 
been preaching for the past fifty years (as a lay 
preacher), but have been blind to God's plan 
through Jesus Christ, as taught in MILLENNIAL 
DAWN. But four years ago, through meeting 
a brother Cattermole, in London, my eyes 
were opened. He kindly loaned me "Food 
for Thinking Christians." I read it through 
once, laid it aside for a year, then took it up 
again. After reading it three times, the light 
began to dawn. 

Two years ago, I received from the same 
brother the PLAN OF THE AGES, and have been 
digesting it ever since; and I thank God from 
my very heart that I ever saw it. 

I commenced last September and preached 
from it my first sermon in a Methodist Chapel 
in the presence of some of their big men, and 
was kindly asked not to advance such doctrines 
again— to which I replied I would preach it to 
my dying day. 

I may tell you that I am a gardener by trade. 
I am now in my seventieth year, but, thank God, 
I enjoy the best of health and am so situated 
that I meet with many people, and I always 
take the opportunity of setting the Truth before 
them; but I cannot do as much as I would 
like. You will well understand the uphill work 
we have in England. The people here are very 
ignorant in spiritual truths, and the majority 
are still under the power of the Romanists. 

Sister Garrett has been here two Sundays, and 
together we have held a meeting on the seashore, 
and the people have behaved very kindly 
toward us. But as she is going away, I shall 
have to go alone as far as human help is concerned; 
yet I know my Father will support and 
strengthen me, and I hope to do a work, if he 
spares me this summer. I request your prayers 
that God will help me to stand firm though all 
human friends forsake me. 

I find that the people gladly receive the 
Tracts. And I know, by the questions asked, 
that they are seeking truth. Truly, "The harvest 
is great, but the laborers are few." 

I will not write much for the first time, but 
close with an earnest prayer that God will bless 
you and Sister Russell in your noble work. 
May you long be spared to give out "meat in 
due season." Yours in a loving Savior, 
SAMUEL BATHER. 



R1331 :page 144 



ANOTHER EVIDENCE OF THE WORKING OF 
THE GREAT TROUBLE. 

DEAR TOWER:— A great scheme has been devised 
within the Farmers' Alliance. It is proposed 
to withhold the year's crop from market 
until the farmers can get their own price. The 
plan is unfolded in a circular, issued to the 
farmers' organizations. It suggests a great combination 
of the organizations and has the relative 
importance and force of an official order for 
a strike. The circular, which is presumed to be 
a secret document, will be sent to the five and a 
half millions of farmers. WM. M. WRIGHT. 



R1339 : inside cover 
THE TOWER FOR 1892. 



In response to numerous requests from our 
readers, we purpose an enlargement of this 
journal. Commencing with the issue for January 
next, the number of pages will be increased 
from 16 to 28, under white covers. 
This will afford considerably more space and 
will, we believe, be much better every way 
than to make the paper a semi-monthly of its 
present size. We trust that the TOWER readers 
in general will coincide with our judgment in 
the matter of this change. 

This additional presswork, paper, composition 
and postage will necessitate an increase in 
the price to $ 1 .00 (4/-) a year. This price, it is 
hoped, will clear the cost of the publication- 
including those sent gratis to the LORD'S POOR 
interested in the present truth, who, because 
of infirmities of age or accident or other 
causes, are unable to pay for it. These constitute 
a much more numerous class than most 
would imagine, as the poor and the infirm are 
specially drawn to the "good tidings of great 
joy." Should any surplus remain after the actual 
cost of the publishing of the TOWER has 
been met, it will go into the Tract Fund for 
scattering Old Theology tracts, as the Editor 
and the Publishing Co. serve the cause gratuitously, 
from love for the Master and the Truth. 



OLD THEOLOGY TRACTS. 



In the VIEW of this issue, we have shown the 
necessity for supplying large quantities of the 
O.T. Tracts gratis to interested brethren and 
sisters who can use them to great advantage for 
the spread of the Truth. We therefore propose 
a plan which, if it can be worked out, will, we 
believe, meet the case fully. 

(1) The new price for the TOWER will include 
a year's subscription for two copies of the 

OLD THEOLOGY TRACTS, published quarterly. 
Thus every TOWER subscriber will be also an 
O.T. Tract subscriber, and will receive two 
copies of each tract as issued. 

(2) Any subscriber (as above— including 
those accepted on the list of the Lord's poor) will 



have the privilege of ordering FREE as many extra 
copies of any of the tracts as he can use judiciously 
—from No. 1 onward except Nos. 8 and 11. 
Thus all may become scatterers of the "hail." 

(3) It is proposed to meet this immense demand 
and the great cost which it will entail- 
even though with our great economy $1.00 will 
do nearly as much as $2.00 ordinarily— by the 
FREE WILL OFFERINGS of those whose hearts, 
touched by the truth, burn with desire to serve 
it and its Author. 

This will be a work of faith; yet seeing the 
necessity for it, we conclude to adopt the plan, 
feeling sure that he who declares that all the 
gold and silver of the mountains are his will 
send the amount needful for its economical accomplishment. 
We will not even wait until 

the first of the year, but invite all TOWER subscribers, 
who have the heart desire and the ability 
to engage in the work, to order at once such 
tracts as they can and will judiciously use. 



CHRISTIAN HOME EMBELLISHMENTS. 



While passing through London we noticed 
some very beautiful Motto Cards suitable for the 
adornment of the walls of Christian homes, and, 
thinking the prices cheaper than in the United 
States, we purchased some, purposing to advise 
the TOWER readers and to supply orders if any 
desired them. We present herewith a descriptive 
list. The prices include postage. 



MOTTO CARDS. 

ASSORTED HEAVY MAROON AND GREEN CARDS 

STAMPED IN SILVER. 

No. EACH. 

1. LARGE STARS (6 different Mottoes), $ .25 

2. LONG SHAPED (4 " " ), 25 

3. SMALLER, Square shaped (4 Mottoes, with Chromo 
Illustrations), 20 

4. SMALLER, "REST IN THE LORD"-verses, 15 

5. " SHIELDS (6 Mottoes), 10 

MOTTO CARDS. 

PRINTED IN GILT AND COLORS, ON HEAVY, 

FINE, TONED PAPER. 

No. EACH. 



6. FAITH & LOVE (Moss Roses) (4 Mottoes), $ .10 

7. GOD'S FAVOR (Floral Wreaths) (6 Mottoes), 10 

8. LOOKING TO JESUS (Roses) (4 Mottoes), 10 

9. CHRISTIAN SOLDIER MOTTOES (2 Mottoes), 10 

10. EASEL MOTTOES FOR MANTEL (6 Mottoes), 05 

11. CHRISTMAS CARDS (assorted, illuminated), .05 & .10 



page 144 

CHRISTIAN SOLDIER CALENDAR FOR 1892. 

-VERY CHOICE- 

WITH A BIBLE TEXT AND VERSE OF POETRY FOR EACH DAY OF THE YEAR 1892. 

PRICE, 30 CENTS (USUAL PRICE 50 CENTS), POSTAGE INCLUDED. 



R1332 : page 145 
