R1037 : page 1 

VOL. LX. 

ALLEGHENY, PA., JUNE, 1888. 

NO. 10. 



page 1 

Zion's Watch Tower 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S 
PRESENCE 



PUBLISHED MONTHLY. 



TOWER PUBLISHING COMPANY. 



BUSINESS OFFICE: No. 151 Robinson St., Allegheny, Pa. 
C. T. RUSSELL, EDITOR. 



The Editor recognizes a responsibility to the Master, relative to 
what shall appear in these columns, which he cannot and does 
not cast aside; yet he should not be understood as endorsing 
every expression of correspondents, or of articles selected from 
other periodicals. 

TERMS OF SUBSCRIPTION. 

TERMS :-FIFTY CENTS A YEAR, POSTAGE FREE. 
Including special number (Millennial Dawn, Vol. I., paper 
bound) seventy five cents. Remit by draft, P.O. Money Order, or 
Registered Letter, payable to C. T. RUSSELL. 

FOREIGN TERMS. 

Three shillings per year. Including "Special Number," four 
shillings. Remit by Foreign Postal Money Order. 

TAKE NOTICE. 

This paper will be sent free to any of the Lord's poor who will 
send a card yearly requesting it. Freely we have received and 
freely we would give the truth. "Ho, every one that thirsteth, 
come ye to the waters; and he that hath no money, come ye, buy 
and eat— yea, come, buy wine and milk without money and 
without price." And you that have it- "Wherefore do ye spend 



money for that which is not bread? and your labor for that which 
satisfieth not? Hearken diligently-and eat ye that which is good, 
and let your soul delight itself in fatness. "-ISAIAH 55:1,2. 



Entered as SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER, at the P.O., 
Allegheny, Pa. 



page 1 

PLENTY of Missionary Envelopes now: 25 for lOcts. or 100 
for 35cts. or 300 for $1.00. "Tell the whole world the blessed 
tidings." 



R1037 : page 1 

"ARP TRACTS" FREE, in any quantity, postage paid by us, to 
those who will promise a proper distribution of them. In 
ordering say what quantity you can judiciously use. 



R1037 : page 1 

THE CHURCH at Allegheny City, still meets every Lords-day 
in the "upper room" No. 101 Federal St. We have a general class 
for Bible study at 2:30 P.M. and preaching at 3:30 P.M. Brother 
Zech addresses the German friends in the same place at 10:30 
A.M. Friends of the cause are always very welcome and are 
requested to make themselves known before or after service. 



R1037 : page 1 

DAWN TO COLPORTEURS. 

By the name Colporteurs, we designate those noble Brethren 
and Sisters, who leaving other pursuits, and other forms of 
ministry, are devoting all their time to spreading the truth, in that 
form which has been most successful— namely selling the paper 
bound edition of MILLENNIAL DAWN Vol. I. To enable this 
work to go on largely, it was found necessary to reduce the price 
of the book to the popular price of 25cts. per copy—for any 
quantity. 

In order to provide for the expenses of these Colporteurs an 
allowance of lOcts. per copy was made to them as "expense 
money" from the TOWER TRACT FUND. (A general fund 
consisting of voluntary donations of those who have themselves 
been blessed by the truth, for the spread of the same in any and 
every way). And this allowance or discount of lOcts. for 
expense was afterward extended to others who do not and 



cannot give all their time to this kind of preaching but who give 
some one day each week or an hour or so each day; and also to 
some whose special opportunities are favorable to loaning and 
giving away the books, but not for selling. 

Experience has proved that many of those who give all their 
time to the work and depend on the expense money entirely, 
cannot make it meet all their expenses of travel, lodging, 
clothing, food, etc. Some, very desirous of rendering this service 
of the truth and who tried it, have been obliged, in order to 
"provide things honest in the sight of all," to go at other work on 
this account and give but the fragments of their time, instead of 
all, to the work with which their hearts are filled. For this reason 
the TRACT SOCIETY has decided to hereafter allow all those 
Colporteurs (who are devoting all of their time to the work) to 
have 12-l/2cts. per copy, but others not devoting all their time, 
15cts. per copy. These special terms are however restricted to 
such persons as are subscribers to Z.W. TOWER, as it costs us 
extra postage to all who are not subscribers. 

We trust that this arrangement will enable a larger number than 
ever to give all their time in the work. The harvest is truly great, 
but the laborers are comparatively few. While praying the Lord 
of the harvest for more laborers, let us all do with our might 
what our hands find to do. 



R1037 : page 1 



ABOUT TRACTS. 



We receive many suggestions about tracts. Many readers wish 
that they had something that in few words would state clearly 
the truth on all subjects. We attempt no such brief statement of 
so large a subject, knowing it would be unwise. Because with 
the many errors and prejudices filling the hearts and minds of 
God's children, such condensed food would be too strong. So 
long as prejudice remains the truth seems ungainly and 
unreasonable, and only a gradual meeting of the objections and a 
gradual showing of the beauty and reasonableness of the truth, 
can bring conviction and overthrow the power of prejudices 
favoring papal errors received in early training and supported by 
popular sentiment. 

For this reason we purposely avoid all such condensed 
statements, knowing from experience that they never convert 
any from error to the truth. They would appear strong and 
incontrovertible and convincing to you, because your eyes are 
opened, but to others whose eyes are closed they would merely 
seem to be another creed— your opinion added to the general 
confusion already existing. 



We believe, and to us experience proves, that the plan we do 
pursue is the best; namely to treat God's Plan of the Ages 
comprehensively and connectedly, as for instance in DAWN 
VOL. I., and to use something brief and pointed like the 'Arp 
Tracts," which implies much but does not attempt to present the 
proofs, to call attention to and introduce DAWN to such as have 
an ear to hear. 

Those whose interest is not awakened by reading this little tract, 
are too fast asleep to do anything with at present— the political, 
financial and ecclesiastical thunderings of the "day of wrath" 
and the crashing and falling of Great Babylon will awaken them 
and liberate them by and by,-then they will be interested. 

Those whose interest is sufficiently awakened and who are 
honest enough to concede the inconsistency of their own and 
other so-called "orthodox" views, will get DAWN and read it 
and be blessed and comforted, and truly turned from the 
darkness of error to God's light of truth. The dishonest, who like 
the Pharisees of old, say that they see, when in their hearts they 
know that they are "blind, and cannot see afar off" and can 
neither understand nor apologize for the character and plan of 
God which they profess to believe and call great and grand, - 
these are not now worthy of the truth which is only for the truth- 
hungry. By and by they will get honest enough to receive the 
truth or else be cut off in the second death as those who make 
and love a lie.-Rev. 21:27; 22:15. 

In this matter of tracts, as well as in all things, our zeal should 
be according to knowledge, and we should as our Lord said, be 
wise as serpents and harmless as doves. Wise in our doing of 
good, as the serpent is crafty for evil. 

For similar reasons we prefer to use special numbers of the 
TOWER, and thus introduce the reader to several phases of 
truth, rather than publish special articles as tracts as some 
occasionally suggest. 



R1037 : page 1 

VIEW FROM THE TOWER. 

Some of our readers may have felt that the View in last month's 
TOWER was too severe an arraignment of the land- lord system 
of the old world, that we should not have intimated that the 
majority at least of the present aristocratic land-holding class are 
the descendants of robbers who took the land from the people. 

We feel however that we did not draw too dark a picture of the 
injustice; and in fact that the truth on the subject is rarely stated 
for fear of offending those high in influence, or their friends. It 
may be claimed by some that the peasantry were more happy 



years ago when they were without educational advantages, 
ignorant, etc., and virtually bought and sold with the land. This 
may be true in many instances, and so too, no doubt, many of 
the Negroes once slaves in the United States were happier and 
better provided for in slavery, than now that they are their own 
masters. But the principle involved is that the freedom is needful 
to the development of the human mind and of self-control and 
progress in general toward the true ends of human existence. 

We were reasoning of righteousness, not of temporary 
expediency as viewed by narrow minds from a selfish 
standpoint. We reasoned too, of "judgment to come, " and that 
speedily now, for we are in the beginning of the great Day of 
Judgment -the Millennial age, in which judgment shall be laid 
to the line, and righteousness to the plummet (Isa. 28:17); in 
which, too, the unjust shall receive a just recompense there-for. 
Though it may be claimed for the masses, that "ignorance was 
bliss," it can be claimed no longer. Soon this and similar wrongs 
will bring the great time of trouble foretold in Scripture. Let all 
the saints scrutinize closely, every act of dealing and 
relationship with each other and with the world; let us make 
certain that justice prevails in every instance-that we do to 
others not differently from what we would wish them to do to us 
if our places were changed— making sure to err, if at all, on the 
side of benevolence. And if we are among those suffering 
injustice, we, above all others, must be patient and forbearing, 
not seeking to recompense evil for evil, but call to mind the 
words of the Apostle —Avenge not yourselves dearly beloved 
but rather let your wrath give place to sympathy and pity, 
remembering that it is written, "Vengeance is mine I will repay 
saith the Lord. " Our condition is far different from that of the 
poor world. If we suffer losses or injustice in earthly matters, let 
us remember that to us those things are already counted "loss 
and dross." (Phil. 3:8.) We have our real 

R1038 : page 1 

heart-treasures, grand and precious reserved in heaven for us; 
we have the comfort of the Scriptures, while they have naught 
but earthly joys and comforts in the present life, and often few 
of them (and often fears for the everlasting future) and no 
wonder if they cling to their little all, and sometimes try and get 
yours and feel restless. We can well afford to be patient indeed. 
And patience in earthly matters on the part of the consecrated, 
will go far toward impressing the hearts and watering the seeds 
of truth concerning God's glorious Plan of the Ages, which from 
time to time we may be able to drop into aching hearts. 

Our statement of last month that the few hold the titles to the 
lands of the old world is amply borne out, by an exhaustive and 
able article entitled "Landed Income and Landed Estate," in the 
London 



R1038 : page 2 

Quarterly Review. It gives very full statistics relative to the 
ownership of the soil of Great Britain and Ireland, showing that 
three-fourths of the land is owned by 58, 170 persons, showing 
an average of 6,576 acres to each person. These figures include 
none with a less acreage than 380 acres, and twelve thousand of 
them average over 16,000 acres each. And from such facts the 
writer draws the sensible conclusion:- "It is of importance to the 
country, and of pressing importance to landlords, if they wish to 
be secure from confiscation and pillage in the future, that the 
land-owning class should be increased. " 

We print below a clipping from the Pittsburgh Times, referring 
to the eviction of some of the poor of Scotland, which is 
valuable, as showing that worldly men no less than ourselves see 
these wrongs and are bold enough to speak the truth on the 
subject. Alas! that self-interest should close the eyes and mouths 
of so many. 

R1038 : page 2 

MEN WHO HA VE NO RIGHTS. 

"Twenty- five families of honest Scotch people, escorted by 
Highland pipers, playing funeral dirges, to the ships which were 
to take them into exile! That was a picture presented at a port in 
the Hebrides, and is a striking example of the workings of the 
British land system. These people were not sent into exile for 
any crime, but simply because they could not pay the rent 
demanded for the land stolen from their ancestors. 

"In the Scotch Highlands we see the system of a landed 
aristocracy in its worst forms. Under the old clan system the 
land belonged to the tribe and was divided afresh at the 
accession of each new chief, the chief taking his share like the 
other members, but exacting nothing from his subjects but civil 
obedience and military service. After the second Jacobite 
rebellion in 1745 the process of dissolution of the old clans, 
which had already begun, was completed. The chief was 
transformed into the landlord, the land of the clan into his 
property, and the members of the clan into his tenants. Under the 
old system a man who was disabled from personal service in 
war paid for exemption in cash or in kind. These payments 
under the new system became the rule and were called rent. 
Thus the landlord system was established. 

"The old independent chieftains, living in simplicity with their 
clans as with a big family, were now transformed into bewigged 
autocrats, fluttering around the court in London and only going 
to their Scotch estates to hunt in the autumn. Those estates were 
left in charge of stewards, whose fidelity was measured by the 
amount of rent they could grind out of the tenants. As the rage 
for hunting increased the landlords came to consider their 



Scotch estates valuable only as shooting preserves, and they 
frequently leased their shooting rights to rich Englishmen. 

"Then began the "clearing" of these estates, in which the Duke 
of Sutherland was the first. Wide valleys and hillsides dotted 
with the dwellings of the humble crofters were cleared of their 
human habitations and again made into a wilderness whose only 
inhabitants were deer and grouse, pheasants and foxes. The most 
productive use to which the land was put was sheep raising. The 
human inhabitants were driven off to America and the colonies, 
or to the sea-port towns, where they gained a miserable 
subsistence by fishing. Some refused to leave the homes where 
their ancestors had dwelt for centuries. Their dwellings were 
burned from over their heads and the bailiff drove them out. 
Thus, while the American backwoodsman was clearing away the 
forest from the fertile plains and bringing them under the 
domain of man, the British landlord was clearing away the 
human inhabitants of the Highland valleys and making them 
again a howling wilderness, where only the wild beasts roamed. 

"Of late years the growth of population has created such a 
demand for the small patches of lands which the lords still left 
their tenants to live on, that their rents have steadily risen until 
the crofters could not force a subsistence from the soil. Then 
they refused to pay the rent, resisted those who came to exact 
payment and were only dragooned into submission by military 
force. But popular sympathy had been aroused on their behalf 
throughout the British Empire, and their few champions in 
Parliament demanded that the law should be changed so that 
such abominations might cease. The Tory Government said it 
could not do this, but admitted that the case of the crofters was a 
hard one and made an appropriation to enable them to emigrate 
to Manitoba. Those twenty-five families who left the Hebrides 
to the mournful music of the bag-pipes were the first of the 
exiles. They leave the homes of their ancestors to carve out new 
homes in the wilderness and leave the land, which, according to 
their old laws belongs to them, in possession of the robbers 
whom the English Government protects. 

"What feelings towards the English Government will these 
people carry into exile? Will their hearts be burning with loyalty 
to Queen Victoria because her Government paid their expenses, 
or will they be burning with hatred against the country which 
exiles the poor and industrious to feed the vices of the rich and 
lazy?" 



R1038 : page 2 



EXTRACTS FROM 
INTERESTING LETTERS. 

Macedonia European Turkey. 

MY DEAR BRO. IN CHRIST:-My hands are filled with work. 
Many here are interested in the truth. Am preaching now in 
Bulgarian, which is a Turkish language. During the three weeks 
that passed, I had from 150 to 200 hearers, and many others 
came while there was no room to receive them. I rented a larger 
house for meetings and I expect to have three more houses 
where I can preach the truth. 

Turks, Jews, Bulgarians and Macedonians are much interested 
in the truth. Pray for us in Macedonia. 

From Bulgaria I had calls to go and preach the "one faith," with 
the "one hope." In Sophia, the Capital city of Bulgaria, I have 
baptized two. 

Love to all far and near. With Christian salutation and greeting 
to you and your wife, I am yours in Christ. 

Basil Stephanoff. 

Reynolds Co., Mo. 

MY DEAR BROTHER:-Please indulge me, a little. I had a 
copy of "ZION'S WATCH TOWER" (Oct. 1886) handed me the 
other day by Mr. Cobb. I am wonderfully well pleased with it. It 
has brought certain strange things to my eyes, that I have been 
for years desiring to look into. I have toiled many long years as 
a minister under the Baptist banner. The more I study the 
Scriptures, and the better I understand Baptist Theology and 
discipline, the less I esteem them. 

For years I have fought the palpable, absurd and inconsistent 
doctrine of eternal punishment. I am now 7 1 years old and 
unable to work; but thank God, I can talk yet, if I can't work; 
and when I speak, I wish to speak the truth; but feel confident I 
cannot do it under my confused conditions. I need a kind hand to 
lead me out. If you please send me the TOWER, I will use it to 
the best of my ability, and will undertake to pay you for it 
during the year. 

I am fraternally yours in hope of eternal life. 

D. M. Lee. 

page 2 

Wayne, Ind. 

DEAR BRO. IN CHRIST:-I have long desired to write to you, 
and I can no longer refrain, feeling assured that you will be glad 
to hear from those who have participated in the celebration of 
the Passover of the Lamb. There were only three of us— and 
three others were present. 



A solemn awe seemed to pervade every soul present, and the 
intervals of silence seemed audible with the words— God is here. 
I never felt before how deep the significance of this ordinance. 
One gentleman, who was present, afterwards remarked he had 
never witnessed such an impressive service of the Lord's supper. 
I am told, he seems awakening to a knowledge of the Truth. 

I have absented myself from the Christian church of which I am 
a member, for many months, and shall soon ask that my name 
be erased from its books. The "FOOD" and "TOWERS" 
supplied me by my friend, Mrs. Foster, and the "DAWN" 
presented me by Mrs. Turner, came to a hungry, thirsty, and 
deeply bereaved soul. I had already turned from the world, from 
whence all I loved best, seemed to have been rudely taken away. 
I was reaching out in the darkness, trying to trust in the terrible 
God which Orthodoxy had presented; and I think I did trust. But 
these precious books discovered to me such perfect harmony in 
the sacred Record, such beauty in God's great Plan, such 
boundless love for all his creatures, having actually planned to 
bring every soul into the full light of the Gospel-if not in this 
age, then in the next, when Christ and his saints will come in 
power and glory to "perfect" them. My poor father, clinging to 
human traditions, is much perplexed, when I ask him, to whom 
the call is given? and why God made the promise to Abraham, 
that "in his seed, all the families of the earth should be blessed, " 
without making any exception or qualification? 

He makes much ado about my "fatal mistakes," but he will not 
always be thus blind, and I can wait, feeling sure it will not now 
be long, 

When the shadows, weary shadows, 
Shall forever pass away. 

In renewed strength and hope, praying for heaven's blessing 
upon your labors, I remain, Yours sincerely, 

MRS. S. C. H . 

Bristol, Fla. 

BRO. RUSSELL:-Please send 80 DAWNS as soon as 
convenient. Send all the Arp slips you can spare. I inclose 
twelve dollars ($12.00). I have sold 73 of the 120 sent. Among 
the buyers are three men who represent their counties in the state 
capital, two M.D.'s, two Lawyers, three or four Infidels, one 
General and Ex-Governor, two Baptist ministers, two Methodist 
ministers and one Presbyterian minister. One of the Methodist 
preachers told me he would not part with his book for fifty 
dollars and be forced to do without. Although he has read from 
his boyhood days until he is a white haired man, he never saw or 
read a book so full of information. Some of the Infidels have 
said, that it is the clearest and most powerful reasoning they ever 
saw. They have been close readers and had been for a time close 



students of Ingersol's lectures. I take each name and address 
carefully so that I may know who to visit specially when VOL. 
II. is ready. The Lord bless you my brother. 

J. C. G . 

R1038 : page 2 

Brooklyn. 

C. T. RUSSELL. DEAR SIR:-A year has passed since I had the 
joy of reading the first No. of the Z.W. TOWER, and ever since 
I have desired to write you a few lines, and more so after 
reading "MILLENNIAL DAWN." I was born in Iceland, but 
came to Copenhagen [Denmark] when a boy [1869], and to 
America 1880. 1 was brought up a Lutheran, but was converted 
in 1884, and ever since I have been an honest seeker of the truth. 
I prayed the dear Lord to send me light, that I might know his 
way; and I thank God, my eyes have been opened, to behold his 
wondrous truth. All the glory and praise be to him. I am not able 
to pen the feelings of my heart, but I am glad to say that I am at 
the Master's feet learning from him. 

I had the pleasure of being at two of Bro. Blundin's meetings in 
Brooklyn. It was a feast to my soul. I feel that God wants me to 
tell the "good tidings of great joy" to all whom I know, but so 
few will 

R1039 : page 2 

accept of it. 

I would be glad to have some "Arp Slips" to distribute. I am, Sir, 
Yours at Jesus' feet. 

T. B . 



[It refreshes our hearts to get such letters of rejoicing in the 
light of truth. How surely the truth is reaching the truth-hungry 
of every nationality! The Master's words (Matt. 5:6) are proved 
true by almost every mail. We cannot tell you how much we 
should enjoy answering every such letter, if time and the general 
welfare of the Lord's work permitted. We are glad to read your 
letters, though we cannot answer each separately. Accept the 
TOWER articles as our answers to your welcome letters please. - 
-EDITOR.] 

page 2 



Oceana Co., Mich. 

DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:-I have just finished the canvass of the 
village of Hart, and I write this to let you know the result. I sold 
32 copies of paper bound MILL. DAWN. I am not proud of my 
success as a canvasser. I expected to make a better showing, but 
at the same time I am thankful to be able to do something, be it 



ever so little, for the Master. I am in hopes it may be the means 
of bringing into the field some more laborers who will be more 
and better fitted than I am to perform harvest work. I have been 
greatly cheered while going from house to house, by realizing 
more clearly that in this way I am privileged to preach the glad 
tidings to the meek, "to bind up the broken hearted, to proclaim 
liberty to the captives, and the opening of the prison to them that 
are bound," etc. 

Glory to Jesus, this is indeed the everlasting Gospel that is to be 
preached under the whole heaven. 

At Hart I discovered that another laborer had been in the field 
before me. I learned that he was a peddler by trade. He had only 
a cloth bound sample with him, and took some orders to be 
delivered in June. When I got back to M. I met him and 
introduced myself, and the acquaintance was pleasurable to us 
both. He told me that he had got the book from a friend in New 
Buffalo, and becoming convinced of its truth, he, in connection 
with his regular business, takes what orders he can. He 
apologized for working on my territory, but I assured him I was 
glad to know that the Lord had sent another laborer in this part 
of the field, and wished him God speed in his labors. He 
impressed me as being a true brother in Christ. He has his book 
well marked and underlined, and says it is worth its weight in 
gold. I advised him to procure some of the paper bound DAWN, 
and I hope he will. 

Praise the Lord his work is bound to increase and multiply. 
When a man becomes filled with the true spirit of the Gospel, he 
cannot keep still about it, but wherever he goes he tells the grand 
old story. I enclose order for $4.50 for 30 more books less 
expense money. 

Your Brother in Christ. T. B . 



Day, Md. 

TOWER PUBLISHING CO.-Gentlemen: For a quarter of a 
century I have looked with no very limited degree of 
apprehension to the coming of the present social troubles, as the 
inevitable result of cause and effect; and have long believed that 
this turmoil and strife would be the birth-throes of the good time 
coming. With an anxious desire to look into these things, I have 
threaded the meanderings of various not well defined theories, 
broken here and there by the inconsistent and absurd; but the 
labyrinthian mysteries of God's plan in its beauty of conception, 
wisdom of design, harmony of operation, and grandeur of 
results, are followed and mapped out in the "Plan of the Ages," 
as set forth in "MILLENNIAL DAWN," more in accord with 
the inspired writings, and more consistent with that plan's 
component parts, than in any work I have read. 



I would say to all, read the book and think; and he that hath an 
ear to hear, let him hear what the spirit saith. 

D 



R1039 : page 3 

THE CHURCH OF GOD. 



Zion, arise, break forth in songs 
Of everlasting joy; 
To God eternal praise belongs, 
Who doth thy foes destroy. 

Thou Church of God, awake, awake, 
For light beams from on high; 
From earth and dust thy garments shake, 
The glory's drawing nigh. 

To raise thee high above the earth, 
God will his power employ; 
He'll turn thy mourning into mirth, 
Thy sorrow into joy. 

In shining robes thyself array, 
Put on thy garments pure; 
Thy king shall lead thee in the way, 
That's holy, safe and sure. 

In thee, the Lord shall place his name, 
And make thee his delight, 
And place on thee a diadem, 
Divinely fair and bright; 

And thou shalt be the dwelling place 
Of him that reigns above. 
Yes, thou shalt be adorn'd with grace 
And everlasting love. 

The joy of nations thou shalt be; 
A bright and shining light; 
For God is in the midst of thee, 
To keep thee day and night. 

He'll bring thy wandering children home, 
And gather those without; 
And with a wall of jasper stone, 
Will guard thee round about. 

Arise, O Zion, praise thy King, 
And make his name thy trust; 
With joy and triumph loudly sing; 
For he is true and just. 



O Zion, sing with truthful voice, 
Thy great Redeemer's praise; 
In his almighty power, rejoice 
Throughout eternal days." 



R1039 : page 3 

EVERLASTING PUNISHMENT. 

One who has read, evidently with care, the articles "About 
Hell" which appeared in the Jan., Feb. and March TOWERS of 
this year, and who seems convinced of the falsity of the ideas 
generally attached to the translations where the word hell occurs 
in our common versions of the Bible, writes to us thus:— 

Suppose that you are right in all that you say about the meaning 
of the original Greek and Hebrew words translated hell in our 
English Bibles; suppose that, as you show, those original words 
never meant, nor were intended to convey the idea of a place of 
everlasting torment, is there not proof of such a punishment for 
the wicked in other Scriptures aside from this word hell 
entirely? For instance, consider the statement of our Lord in 
Matt. 25:41 and 46. Even if we shall admit that, as you claim, 
that parable of the Sheep and Goats applies to the Millennial 
age, "when the Son of man shall come in his glory and sit upon 
the throne of his glory," and even though we admit your claim, 
that the separating between the sheep and goats is a gradual 
work which progresses throughout that thousand-year-day of 
Judgment, or trial; after admitting all that, as we must, does it 
not seem evident from verses 41 and 46 that the finally 
incorrigible will be tormented forever, some place? No matter 
how much our finer sensibilities might revolt at the thought, 
must we not in candor admit that our Lord taught this in these 
verses, and also in Rev. 20:10? 

I am acquainted with the Greek, and know that the words 
rendered "everlasting" and "eternal" in Matt. 25:41,46 are from 
the Greek root aion, and I admit that it does not always mean 
never ending like our English word everlasting, but rather has 
the meaning of lasting without the ever: but, in this case, verse 
46 shows the lasting life of the righteous or sheep class in 
contrast with the lasting punishment of the wicked or goat class; 
and the contrast seems to teach that the punishment of the one 
class will be as long lasting as the reward of the other. If I fail to 
reason correctly in this, I pray you in God's name help me: for I 
desire the truth and the truth only, and fain would if I could, see 
that everlasting torture is no part of the divine plan and that it is 
not taught in the Word of God. Your articles on hell are 
powerful and almost convincing; and if this my last objection, 
can be cleared away thoroughly, I shall praise God and worship 
Him as never before. 



OUR REPLY. 

It affords great pleasure to answer one so evidently honest; and 
seeing you are hungering and thirsting after truth, we make no 
doubt that the answer to your questions will be satisfactory and 
conclusive, God helping us. 

We are glad to note that the Brother has the correct 
understanding of the Greek word aionios, that it means lasting; 
but we shall take no advantage of this and for arguments sake 
shall treat it as meaning everlasting,-unending punishment to 
the one class and unending life to the other. 

The everlastingness of the punishment being thus quickly 
disposed of, it leaves only one point open for discussion, 
namely, of what sort or kind will the punishment be? Take your 
Concordance and search out what saith the great Judge 
regarding the punishment of willful sinners who despise and 
reject all his blessed provisions for them through Christ? What 
do you find? Does God there say,-All sinners shall live in 
torture forever? We do not find a single text where life in any 
condition is promised to that class, but on the contrary, we do 
find scores of passages which in so many words declare that the 
punishment of this class will consist in the blotting out of their 
existence in the second death. Those who, after the full 
opportunities of the Millennial Kingdom, fail to conform 
themselves to the law of the spirit of life, cannot have life at all. 
God's declarations assure us that he will have a clean universe, 
free from the blight of sin and sinners, when the plan of 
redemption has separated the sheep from the goats. 

But while we do not find one verse of the Bible to say that this 
class can have life in torment or in any other condition, we do 
find hosts of passages teaching the reverse. Of these we merely 
give a few as samples— "The wages of sin is death." (Rom. 
6:23.) "The soul that sinneth it shall die." (Ezek. 18:4,20.) "All 
the wicked will God destroy." (Psa. 145:20.) The wicked shall 
"perish," shall be as though they had not been, etc. (Psa. 37:20; 
Job 10:19.) Thus God has told us plainly of what sort the 
everlasting punishment of the wicked shall be-that it will be 
death, destruction; and He never said one word about a life of 
punishment. 

The false ideas of God's plan of dealing with the incorrigible 
taught us from our cradles, ever since the great "falling away" 
came, which culminated in Papacy, is alone responsible for the 
view generally held, that the punishment provided for willful 
sinners is a life of torture, in the face of the many clear 
statements of God's word that their punishment is to be death. 
Hear Paul state very explicitly what the punishment is to be. 
Speaking of the same Millennial Day, and of the same class, 
who despite all the favorable opportunities and the fullness of 
knowledge then, will not come into harmony with Christ, and 
hence will know not God and obey not, He says- "Who shall be 



R1040 : page 3 

punished. " Ah yes ! but how punished? pray tell us Paul. And 
Paul does tell us how: They "shall be punished with everlasting 
destruction from the presence of the Lord and from the glory of 
his power." —2 Thes. 1:9. 

Thus the meaning and reasonableness of this statement 
concerning everlasting punishment, is readily seen when we 
look at it from the correct standpoint. The fire of the parable by 
which the punishment [destruction] is to be accomplished, will 
not be literal fire, for it is as much a symbol as the sheep and the 
goats are symbols. Fire here as elsewhere symbolizes 
destruction, and never in any sense preservation. 

We might well leave this subject here and consider that we have 
fully shown that the everlasting punishment of the goat class 
will be destruction; but we must not fail to direct attention to 
one other point which clinches the truth upon this subject. We 
refer to the Greek word kolasin translated "punishment" in verse 
46; its signification is, -to cut off, or prune, or lop off, as in the 
pruning of trees, and a secondary meaning is-to restrain. 
Illustrations of the use of kolasin can easily be had from Greek 
classical writings. The Greek word for torment is basinos, a 
word totally unrelated to the word kolasin used in this case. 

Kolasin the form of the word used in Matt. 25:47, occurs but 
one other place in the Bible, viz., 1 John 4:18, where it is 
improperly rendered torment in the common version, whereas it 
should read, "Fear hath restraint. " Those who possess a copy of 
Prof. Young's Analytical Concordance will see from it that he [a 
ripe scholar and a Presbyterian] gives as the definition of the 
word kolasis (page 995) "pruning, restraining, restraint." And 
the author of the Emphatic Diaglott, that valuable translation of 
the New Testament, after in Matt. 25 :46 translating kolasin by 
the words "cutting off," says in a foot note: "The common 
version and many modern ones render kolasin aionioon, 
EVERLASTING PUNISHMENT, conveying the idea as 
generally interpreted of basinos, torment. Kolasin in its various 
forms only occurs in three other places in the New Testament- 
Acts 4:21; 2 Pet. 2:9; 1 John 4:18. It is derived from kolazoo 
which signifies, 1. To cut off; as lopping off branches of trees, to 
prune. 2. To restrain, to repress. The Greeks write,-"The 
charioteer (kalazei) restrains his fiery steeds." 3. To chastise, to 
punish. To cut off an individual from life, or from society, or 
even to restrain, is esteemed as a punishment; hence has arisen 
this third or metaphorical use of the word. 

Now consider carefully the text, and note the antithesis or 
contrast shown between the reward of the sheep and that of the 
goats, which the correct idea of kolasin shows;— the one class 
goes into everlasting life while the other is everlastingly cut off 
from life-forever restrained in death. And this exactly agrees 



with what the Scriptures everywhere else declare concerning the 
wages or penalty of willful sin. 

Consider for a moment the words of verse 41 : "Depart from me 
ye cursed [redeemed by Christ from the Adamic curse or 
condemnation to death once, but now condemned or cursed, as 
worthy of second death, by the one who redeemed them from 
the first curse]-into everlasting fire [symbol of perpetual 
destruction] prepared for the devil and his messengers" 
[servants]. This "everlasting fire" is shown in Rev. 20:14 to be 
the second death, destruction. 

Remember that this is the final sentence at the close of the final 
trial-at the close of the Millennium. And none will then be 
servants of Satan ignorantly or unwillingly, as so many now are; 
for the great Deliverer, Christ, grants a Jubilee, and sets all free 
from the weaknesses and besetments within and without, which 
now prevail as a result of Adam's fall,— from which he has 
redeemed all by his own precious blood. These "goats" who love 
evil and serve Satan, are the messengers ["angels"] of Satan, for 
whom with him, and for no others, God has prepared the 
everlasting destruction— the second death, here symbolized by 
fire. 

Turn next to Rev. 20:8-10. This is another symbolic presentation 
of the same cutting off from life mentioned above; it applies to 
the same class of willfully wicked, at the close of the thousand 
years of instruction and restitution under Christ's government 
while evil is bound. At the close of that reign of righteousness 
evil will be permitted to again break loose in the world in some 
form, to test* the multitudinous population of that time and to 
lead into outward opposition all who at heart are rebellious 
toward God. The fate of these is clearly shown in verse 9: —Fire 
will come from God out of heaven and consume them. 
Consuming fire and devouring fire all can appreciate, except 
their eyes be holden by false doctrine and prejudice; and no one 
ever knew of a preserving fire; and as fire never preserves but 
always consumes, God so uses it here as a symbol of utter 
destruction, the second death. 

Verse 9 settles the matter concerning the goat class: they will 
not be preserved, but devoured or consumed in fire. This being 
the case, verse 10 cannot refer to these human beings. Hence the 
question narrows down to this, Will Satan and a false prophet 
and a beast be tortured forever? and does this verse teach this? 

We answer in God's own words, "All the wicked will He 
destroy." Concerning Satan, the arch enemy of God and men, 
God expressly advises us that he will be destroyed, and not 
preserved in any sense or condition.-See Heb. 2:14. 

About this wonderful Beast, and the False Prophet which 
wrought miracles before him, the account of whose doings is so 
prominent in this book of symbols, (Rev. 19:20; 16:13,14; 



13:11-18 and 20:14.) we can now only say that they are 
symbols, and not really a beast and a man. 

The Beast and Prophet are symbols of false systems, which 
during the Gospel age have deceived and led astray. These 
systems will be cast into a great consuming trouble in the close 
of this Gospel age. The torment of those systems will be aionoin 
i.e. LASTING. It will continue as long as they last, until they are 
utterly consumed. So at the end of the Millennial age the system 
of error which will then manifest and lead to destruction the 
"goats" will also be consumed. That deceiving system, (not 
specified as to kind, but merely called Satan, after its instigator), 
will be cast into the same sort of trouble and destruction in the 
end of the Millennial age, as the Beast and False Prophet 
systems are now being cast into, in the end of the Gospel age. 

We hope at some time to present the interpretation of these 
symbols of Revelation so that all may see clearly that the 
systems represented by the Beast and False 



*The statement of verse 8 should be understood to apply to the 
testing of all. How many will follow, as servants of Satan, we 
are not informed, but we may presume they will be 
comparatively few. 

R1040 : page 4 

Prophet, are now going into the fire of trouble which shall 
torment and ultimately destroy them. But, meantime let us say to 
those who cavil, that it illy becomes them, after the whole Bible 
is shown to be against them, to attempt to support the doctrine of 
everlasting torture by a few words in a verse, the remainder of 
which they do not pretend to understand, and in a chapter whose 
other verses are confessedly dark to them, and in a book of 
symbols, which they claim is so sealed by God, that they cannot 
understand it. 

Our Brother does not mention Rev. 14:9-1 1, but concerning it 
we here incidentally remark, that all will at once concede that if 
a literal worshipping of a beast and his image are meant in verse 
9, then few if any in civilized lands are liable to the penalty of 
verse 1 1 ; and if the beast and image, and worship, and wine, and 
cup are symbols, so also are the torments, and smoke, and fire, 
and brimstone. 

Permit us to express the hope that our Brother may be freed 
from the bondage of fear, and more fully acquainted with the 
gracious designs of our Heavenly Father as portrayed in his Plan 
of the Ages: and that he may not only be brought into closer 
fellowship and sympathy and love, but also quickened and 
energized as an ambassador for him, realizing the grandeur of 
the "ministry of reconciliation" which he hath committed unto 
us.-2 Cor. 5:18,19. 



R1040:page4 



FIGHT THE GOOD FIGHT. 

"Fight the good fight of faith, lay hold on eternal life whereunto 
thou art also called. "— 1 Tim. 6:12. 

If we are naturally combative, we may see, or think we see 
cause for a continual warfare from the cradle to the grave, and a 
little warping of sound judgment may give this disposition a 
seeming religious turn and deceive such a one into the idea that 
he is fighting the good fight above referred to, when in reality he 
is only cultivating a quarrelsome disposition, out of harmony 
with that spirit of meekness and temperance which is a most 
essential feature of the Christian character. Again, many of an 
opposite disposition are inclined to ignore the fact that the 
Christian life is to be a warfare, and to regard only those 
scriptures which counsel meekness, forbearance, patience, 
gentleness, etc. 

Here are two extremes, both of which must be guarded against; 
and in order to help us to rightly judge and balance ourselves, 

R1041 : page 4 

the Apostle recommends us to mark, to observe closely, those 
who walk circumspectly, according to the rules laid down in the 
Scriptures, and counsels us to beware of the influence of those 
who do not so walk: "For," he says, "many walk of whom I have 
told you often, and now tell you even weeping, that they are 
enemies of the cross of Christ, whose end is destruction, whose 
God is their belly, and whose glory is their shame, who mind 
earthly things," which they covenanted to sacrifice.— Phil. 3:17- 
19. 

Let us then mark some worthy examples that we may see how 
they ran for the prize and notice if there is any indication that 
they ran successfully. First, we mark the perfect example of our 
Lord, our leader and forerunner, in whose footprints we are 
invited to follow. We notice that his course in the "narrow way" 
of sacrifice, began with an entire consecration of himself to the 
will of God. His consecration was made with simplicity and 
sincerity, and included all that he had-"Lo I come to do thy will 
O God." (Heb. 10:7.) 

He did not say, Father, I will give thee a tithe of my time, my 
service, and my means, and retain the remainder for myself and 
for the pursuit of my own ambitions and plans. He did not say, 
Father, I have chosen this or that special work, and I trust thy 
blessing will attend it. He did not say, As far as I understand thy 
will, Father, I am willing to do it- with the implication that if the 
Father should ever ask anything too severe, or seemingly 



unreasonable, he might change his mind. No, his consecration 
was simply to the doing of the Father's will, whatever that will 
might prove to be. And then he earnestly applied himself to the 
study of the Law and the Prophets, that he might know the will 
of God concerning him. When tempted to change his course he 
replied, "How then shall the Scriptures be fulfilled, that thus it 
must be". .."The cup which my Father hath given me to drink 
shall I not drink it?" (Matt. 26:54; John 18:1 1.) He laid aside his 
own will and carried out the will of God, though it cost him 
privation at every step and finally a death most painful and 
ignominious. From this course of sacrifice he never wavered 
even for a moment. 

That was a grand character for our imitation. Yes, but, says one, 
Our Lord was perfect and therefore could do the Father's will 
perfectly. Very true; we are thankful and rejoice in this, for had 
he not been perfect he could never have redeemed us; yet we 
needed also just such an example; for however imperfectly we, 
like school children, may succeed in imitating the copy, we need 
to have a perfect copy. 

But while Christ was much more to us than a perfect example 
for our imitation, which under our present infirmities we cannot 
fully duplicate, we have other examples furnished among 
brethren of similar infirmities with ourselves. Let us mark them, 
and see how they followed the Master. There was Peter with his 
quick impulsive nature, always loving, yet so vacillating— now 
defending his Master at his own peril, and again disclaiming and 
denying him; now boldly contending for the faith, and again 
compromising with Jewish prejudices, calling forth and justly 
meriting Paul's faithful reproof. Yet rightly exercised by reproof 
and discipline, and endeavoring to rule himself, his Christian 
character ripened and beautified from year to year as evidenced 
by his grand and noble epistles to the church, written by 
inspiration and handed down from generation to generation for 
nineteen centuries; and he had many evident marks of the Lord's 
loving approval. Before he had time to express in words his 
regret of his denial of the Lord, he was assured of his acceptance 
with him and of the continued favor of feeding his sheep; for the 
Lord knew the sincerity of his love and that through weakness 
and fear he had sinned. Mark too, Peter's affection for his 
"beloved brother Paul" (2 Pet. 3:15,16) who had so plainly 
reproved and rebuked him; and for the Lord, who had said "Get 
thee behind me Satan (adversary): thou art an offence unto me; 
for thou savorest not the things that be of God, but of men. 
(Matt. 16:23.) Poor Peter; it was an up-hill road for him, but he 
seemed to consider and appreciate his own weakness and to put 
his shoulder to the wheel in a more determined effort to 
overcome the propensities of his old nature, and to cultivate the 
graces of the Christian character. 



But did he finally overcome? and was he accepted as one of that 
glorious company which shall constitute the Bride of Christ? 
Yes truly; for the risen Lord himself declared that his name is 
written with the others of the twelve apostles in the very 
foundations of the heavenly city, the New Jerusalem, the 
Kingdom of God. (Rev. 21:14.) See what poor weak Peter 
gained by his meekness and patience under painful discipline. 

Paul was a stronger character by nature. He had evidently made 
a life-business of ruling himself, though he was naturally 
positive and firm; and when the truth reached Paul he had a 
great advantage at once, both in his natural disposition, and in 
his early culture, so that he could walk more firmly and steadily; 
and using all his energy in this direction he furnishes a noble 
example for our imitation of steadfastness and endurance, of 
untiring zeal and sincerest devotion. See and ponder well, 2 Cor. 
11:23-33 and 12:10,15. 

John was loving, gentle, and meek naturally and that very 
disposition would make it difficult for him to sever the many 
ties of human friendship which such dispositions always draw 
about them. Yet John was faithful to his Master regardless of the 
human ties. He was a patient faithful teacher of the doctrines of 
Christ, and willingly suffered banishment to the lonely isle of 
Patmos for his faithful witnessing to the truth. 

And similar was the course of all the apostles: they were bold 
faithful advocates of the truth, and examples of its power to 
sanctify them wholly, as they gradually grew in grace 
submitting themselves to its transforming influence. They were 
men of similar and varied dispositions like ourselves. Mark 
those who so run and do likewise. Our Lord marked these, and 
kept a careful record of their course judging them by their 
motives and endeavors; and he shows us that their course thus 
judged, all their imperfections being covered by the imputed 
righteousness of their Leader, was acceptable to him. They left 
all and followed Christ. Their all was not so very much, not any 
more in many cases than we have to leave, but it was their all, 
and so was acceptable. Peter had left his fishing business, and 
his friends, to travel with the Master and learn and teach the 
truth; he had thus given up his own will and present interests to 
do the will of God. And when he said to the Lord "Lo we have 
left all and have followed thee," the Lord did not say his little all 
was not worth mentioning, but he recognized it and encouraged 
Peter to continue to sacrifice all, with the assurance that in due 
time he would be rewarded. (Mark 10:28-30.) And so shall we 
all be, if we faint not; for faithful is he that hath called us, who 
also will exalt us in due time. 

As we thus mark the course of the faithful ones, we see that their 
warfare was one largely with themselves. It was their endeavor 
to keep their own human wills down while they carried out the 
divine will. And even in the one case of our Lord, where the 



human will was perfect, it was a hard thing to do, as evidenced 
by his words, "Father if it be possible, let this cup pass from me. 
Nevertheless not my will, but thine be done. " 

But there is another side of this warfare which we have not yet 
considered, and which we dare not overlook if we would be 
faithful overcomers. The truth has its enemies now, as well as in 
the days of the Apostles, and we are set for the defence of the 
truth; hence the forces against which we must contend are not 
only those within, but also those without. To be listless and 
indifferent under such circumstances as surround us, is certainly 
no evidence that we are fighting the good fight of faith. 

To fight the good fight of faith, implies, first, that we have a 
faith to fight for. No man can fight this good fight therefore who 
has not come to some knowledge of the truth— a knowledge 
sufficient to awaken his sympathies and enlist his energies in its 
propagation and defence. 

Now look at the warfare on this side and see how the faithful 
soldiers of the cross from the beginning of the age to the present 
time have contended for the faith delivered to the saints. Did 
they calmly and comfortably rest in luxurious ease, enjoy what 
they knew of the truth themselves, and say nothing about it 
where it would cause a ripple of opposition, and then flatter 
themselves with the idea that their lazy do-nothing tranquility 
was an evidence of their growth in grace? By no means. They 
endured hardness as good soldiers for the truth's sake. They 
proclaimed it boldly, and took the consequences of public scorn 
and contempt, the loss of earthly friends, the sacrifice of 
business interests and earthly prospects, together with stripes, 
imprisonments, and perils to life on every hand, and met violent 
deaths in many cases. They not only enjoyed the glorious 
prospect of future blessedness, but they became active to the 
extent of their ability in carrying out God's plan for securing that 
end. Had they done otherwise they would have been proving 
themselves unworthy of the high honors to which they were 
called. And so it has been throughout the entire age, and is still. 

When the great Mystery of Iniquity, or Papal system had 
reached the height of its power and the very depths of its 
corruption, and the eyes of a few faithful children of God were 
opened to see its 

R1042 : page 4 

true character, noble reformers stepped out and boldly declared 
their convictions in the face of most violent persecution. And 
many other noble souls encouraged by their example, braved the 
same dangers and endured great hardships while contending for 
the truth, and gave evidence of their zeal and consecration by 
their faithfulness even unto death by violent hands, and unto 
persecution and torture of the most revolting and fiendish 
character. 



It is well that we should consider frequently such examples, that 
they may serve to spur our own zeal, and that we may the more 
lightly esteem the comparatively light afflictions which we are 
now called upon to endure, in our efforts to disseminate and 
defend the truth to-day. We have now no bloody persecutions, 
though it is still true that they who will live Godly shall suffer 
persecution. To live Godly however, implies earnestness and 
consequent activity in God's service. 

Remember too, that the Apostle refers to these last days of the 
age as the most perilous times of all. Why? Because the errors 
and temptations of this day come in more subtle forms than 
heretofore. This is emphatically the age of reason; an age of 
advancement in almost every direction; many are running to and 
fro and knowledge is increasing on every hand. And yet, human 
conceit and presumption is running vastly ahead of knowledge; 
and reason, unguided by the Divine Revelation, is falling into 
many foolish and hurtful errors, which are passing current 
among those who profess to be the children of God, who are 
deceived by these errors and are falling away from the faith once 
delivered to the saints. And though the great Babylon system is 
crumbling into decay, multitudinous errors, far more injurious 
than the formalism and slumber of Babylon, are at work, to 
build upon its ruins other systems of iniquity in which even the 
foundation principles of Christianity find no place whatever. 

These errors must be met by the faithful 

R1042 : page 5 

few who are armed with the truth,- others cannot detect or 
defeat them. It is for these armed with the Sword of the Spirit, 
which is the word of God, to show by its profound reasonings 
the difference between truth and error, and that God's plan in 
God's way is superior to all the plans and ways of human 
arrangement. To escape falling into these errors, and being 
deceived by their subtle sophistries, and by the professions of 
loyalty to God on the part of the deceived deceivers who 
advance them, the children of God must keep close to their 
Father's Word, and be filled with his spirit; and when they see 
the truth they must be bold and fearless in its defence regardless 
of all consequences. 

This is fighting the good fight of faith whether you are severely 
wounded in the conflict or not. And those who, sacrificing home 
comforts, etc., to scatter the truth, which read and pondered over 
by those who receive it, gives light and scatters darkness, are 
just as surely fighting the good fight of faith as if by word of 
mouth they were arguing with those they meet. They do it thus, 
much more effectually often. And such shall just as surely 
receive their reward and lay hold on eternal life as will Peter and 
Paul and other faithful soldiers of the cross,-if they faint not. 



This little army of faithful soldiers, all told, is but a handful, "a 
little flock;" but though in numbers they are so insignificant that 
the hosts of the opposers of the truth fear little from their efforts, 
the final victory shall be theirs; and God's power will be 
glorified and manifested in them proportionately more. Like 
Gideon's three hundred picked men who feared not to face the 
hosts of Midian because the Lord was with them, these have but 
to go forth likewise, strong in faith, sounding the trumpet of 
truth and breaking their earthen vessels (sacrificing their human 
nature) that the blessed light of God's spirit may shine out; and 
at the appointed hour the hosts of the enemy shall take the alarm 
and flee. Systems of error new and old shall be turned to 
destruction, and, as in the case of the Midianites, each shall turn 
upon the other to accomplish the work of their destruction. 

To have the privilege of fighting this good fight of faith and of 
being the Lord's chosen ones for the great work now to be done, 
God's children, like Gideon's army, must first be proved-tested. 
At first there was a host of thirty thousand with Gideon; and 
when all that were fearful were told to return to their homes, 
only ten thousand remained, and when God further tested these, 
only three hundred remained; a little insignificant company truly 
they must have appeared, not only to the Midianites, but also to 
themselves. Yet, God's power was made the more manifest by 
their smallness and weakness. 

Just so it is now. No one is compelled or urged into this service. 
All who are fearful, whose faith in God's ability and intention to 
carry out his plan is not strong enough to make them bold and 
courageous, and in haste to go forth, anxious to sound the 
trumpet tones of truth, and willing to break their earthen vessels 
(to sacrifice themselves) in the service, have the privilege of 
retiring from the scene: but of course such shall have no part in 
the honors of the victory with the greater Captain than Gideon. 

Previous to Paul's exhortation to the faithful few, to fight the 
good fight of faith, he gives the very wholesome advice that we 
lay entirely aside from us the weights of our former earthly cares 
etc., -pride, ambition, discontent, money-loving, etc. We cannot 
grasp or hold the treasures of this life, and at the same time run 
successfully for the heavenly prize— "Ye cannot serve God and 
Mammon," and "A double minded man is unstable in all his 
ways. Let us then take Paul's counsel— flee these earthly things, 
and following after righteousness, godliness, faith, love, 
patience, meekness, fight the good fight of faith, and lay hold on 
eternal life as joint-heirs with Christ in the glory of victory 
shortly to be granted. If after we have consecrated our all to 
God, we turn to mind and seek earthly things, and glory in their 
possession, we are really glorying in our shame; and the end of 
such glory if pursued to the end, is destruction. See that ye walk 
circumspectly, not minding earthly but heavenly things, and not 
yielding to the temptations of those who walk otherwise. Thus 



we also shall be setting an example to others worthy of their 
imitation. 



R1042:page5 

THE GULF AND TORMENT. 

A Brother who read the exposition of the parable of the Rich 
Man and Lazarus in January. TOWER, would like to have an 
explanation of the statement, "In hell he lifted up his eyes being 
in torment: " also of the meaning of the gulf between them. 

We thought the explanation full enough to cover these points, 
but perhaps it was not sufficient. We therefore answer this query 
publicly. 

Please read the explanation given in January TOWER again 
very carefully. Then note that the gulf is the wide difference 
between the Gospel church and the Jew; the former enjoying 
free grace, joy, comfort and peace, as true sons of God,— and the 
latter holding to the Law, which condemns and torments him. 
Prejudice, pride and error, from the Jewish side form the 
bulwarks of this gulf which hinders the Jew from coming into 
the condition of true sons of God by accepting of Christ and the 
gospel of his grace. The bulwark of this gulf which hinders true 
sons of God from going into the bondage with the Jew-the 
Law— is their knowledge, that by the deeds of the Law none can 
be justified before God, and that if any man keep the law (put 
himself under it to try to commend himself to God by reason of 
obedience to the Law) Christ shall profit him nothing. (Gal. 5:2- 
4.) So then we who are of the Lazarus class will not attempt to 
mix law and gospel, knowing they cannot be mixed and that we 
can do no good to those who still cling to the Law and reject the 
sacrifice for sins given by our Lord. And they, not seeing the 
change of dispensation which took place, argue, that to deny the 
Law as the power to save, would be to deny all the past history 
of their race, and to deny all of God's special dealings with the 
"fathers" (promises and dealings which through pride and 
selfishness they failed to rightly apprehend and use), hence they 
cannot come over to the bosom of Abraham into the true rest 
and peace- the portion of all the true children of faith. -John 
8:39; Rom. 4:16 and Gal. 3:29. 

True, a few Jews probably came into the Christian faith all the 
way down the Gospel age, but so few as to be ignored in a 
parable which represented the Jewish people as a whole. With 
the end of the Gospel age, comes the end of this parable. It is 
now ending, and the Jew therefore is getting out of the 
TORMENT in which he has been for eighteen-hundred years. 
The torment has not only been as above described,-the torment 
of a law which none of them ever did, or ever could keep 



perfectly (except the one perfect man), but they are getting out 
of another kind of torment, viz., persecution. The Jew has been 
bitterly persecuted by Pagans, Mohammedans and professed 
Christians for centuries, but is now-rising to political freedom 
and influence gradually. And as a people they will be very 
prominent among the nations in the beginning of the 
Millennium. The vail of prejudice is being taken away as the 

R1043 : page 5 

light of the Millennial morning gradually dawns, and we hear of 
great awakenings among the Jews, and many coming to 
acknowledge Christ. They are thus leaving their hadean state of 
torment and coming, the first of the nations, to be blessed by the 
true seed of Abraham which is Christ. Their bulwark of race- 
prejudice and pride is falling in some places and the humble, the 
poor in spirit are beginning already to look unto him whom they 
pierced, and to inquire, Is this not the Christ? And as they look 
the Lord pours upon them the spirit of favor and supplication. - 
Zech 12:10. 

We are thus enabled to look beyond the limits of this parable 
and to read the future as foretold by the prophets, the apostles 
and by our Lord himself. Therefore, "Speak ye comfortably to 
Jerusalem and cry unto her that her appointed time is 
accomplished."— Isa. 40:1,2, marginal reading. 



R1043:page5 

LETTERS TO OUR CHILDREN.--NO. 1. 

BY W. I. M. 

DEAR PAPA:-We have for next Sunday's lesson "The Ten 
Talents." One of the questions is, "Will those be saved who die 
in childhood, before they know good and evil?" The answer 
given is, "They will, for Jesus said, 'Of such is the kingdom of 
heaven.'" It doesn't seem to me that this is what Jesus meant; 
please explain this as soon as you have time. 

MARION. 

MY DEAR MARION:-When you have read Millennial Dawn 
through carefully you will understand God's plan of salvation 
for both young and old, better than I can explain it in letters, but 
if you will follow me closely, I will try to make your question 
plain to you. 

If the whole world were now-in this life— being tried for their 
own sins, and were not affected by the sin of Adam, and if they 
came into the world with a pure nature, then babies and lunatics 
and very ignorant people (heathen, etc.,) not being responsible 
for their actions, -therefore not sinners strictly-would not be 



condemned; and so might, in God's loving kindness be saved. If 
this were God's plan then heaven (as the popular idea is 
expressed) would be filled with babies and idiots and the most 
ignorant people of the world; while the other place (if orthodoxy 
were true) would receive nearly all the intelligent people, and all 
who were simply good, moral and kind hearted, but not 
Christians. Do you think God, who is infinitely wise and 
intelligent, and who made man originally in his own likeness as 
to intelligence, wants to have all the knownothings, and to give 
all the wise to Satan? In this age very few of the wise (as to the 
world's wisdom) are converted to God. The simplicity of the 
Gospel is foolishness to them It was so intended. Paul said 
"Behold your calling, brethren, how that not many wise after the 
flesh, not many mighty, not many noble, are called; but God 
chose the foolish things of the world, that he might put to shame 
the things that are strong, -that no flesh should glory before 
God." Read 1 Cor. 1:18-31; 2:1-10,13,14. 

God intends also to save the wise, and will in the coming age 
reveal to them his saving plan in all the richness of its wisdom 
and glory. But in this Gospel age, he has a special message 
adapted to the simple and CHILDLIKE, (the teachable, 
believing, trusting ones) "Of such [not babies] is the kingdom of 
heaven" -now. God's children are those who love, obey and trust 
their Heavenly Father, as good, loving girls and boys do a 
faithful earthly father. Through God's plan these simple, faithful 
children of our Father, who learn his truth now, and search and 
study his wonderful "Plan of Salvation" will in the age to come 
be the teachers of "all men;" (1 Tim. 2:4-6; 4:6-10) the "Royal 
Priesthood" (1 Pet. 2:5) who will be God's instruments in filling 
the earth with the knowledge of God as the waters fill the depths 
ofthesea.-Habak. 2:14. 

Perhaps you are ready to ask Why do you call the way of 
salvation a plan? Because it is a systematic arrangement; a 
design prepared beforehand, and followed out to the end for a 
certain result, also seen and intended from the beginning. 

Briefly, God's plan is this: Adam-a perfect man- was created 
and placed on trial in Eden as the representative of the whole 
race of mankind, who were to follow. He sinned and the penalty 
of sin— death-passed upon him, and through him upon all his 
descendants. He had a perfect mind-being a perfect man. He 
was capable of being taught wonderful things, but was really 
untaught, being without experience. God foresaw the Fall and 
had the remedy also provided. In due time He sent Jesus our 
Lord to earth to become a man; (a perfect one,) just like Adam— 
so he is called the Second Adam, (1 Cor. 15:45) to preach, and 
to show us an example, and then to die, TO GIVE HIS LIFE 
FOR THAT OF THE FIRST ADAM, and all those who had 
been represented in Adam- ALL HIS DESCENDANTS. 



Suppose you were at a party where they had parlor games. One 
game had forfeits. That is if you failed to pass some test agreed 
on, your penalty was either to pay ten cents or go to jail— jail 
being a corner or another room. Now if you failed and had no 
money you would be put in jail. But suppose some one wanted 
you out to help them play, they might pay the ten cents for you, 
and you would go free. 

So God, to show that finally only the good and obedient would 
be permitted to live, told Adam he would lose his life if he failed 
to obey. He failed and God sent him away from the tree of life 
so that his life would not be sustained by it, and he began to die 
that day, and finally reached death. Jesus came, and after 
proving himself a perfect man, gave his life as the forfeit for 
Adam's, thus PURCHASING for Adam (and for us in Adam) a 
resurrection back to life again. Jesus left his human nature 
(which was like Adam's) in the tomb. His Father took him out of 
death as a different being— that is a DIVINE, a spiritual being. 

Now read carefully Rom. 5:12-21. This shows how by the SIN 
of one man— Adam— death came upon all; and also how by the 
OBEDIENCE of one man-Jesus -all were redeemed, justified 
again. 

For this reason (Christ's redemption) all will have a resurrection. 
(Acts 24:15.) You may ask "If ALL have been redeemed by 
Christ, will not ALL be saved?" So Universalists think, and they 
quote 1 Cor. 15:22, but the verse before tells us that the 
resurrection is what is referred to. All are brought up again in a 
resurrection by Christ Jesus, but all do not live forever, unless 
they submit themselves to him. If they remain willful after the 
opportunities of that glorious day, they die for their own 

R1043 : page 6 

sins. We do not die now for our own sins, else Christians would 
not die— having been forgiven. All-good and bad-die "in 
Adam," because we are sharers in his fallen nature. Or to be 
more exact, because we were in him— in the sense that he was 
the father of the whole human family -when he sinned and was 
put under the dominion of death. 

When we have been freed from Adam's penalty (death) by the 
resurrection, we will be ready to be tried for ourselves. Now see 
the advantage the world will have in their trial, over Adam in 
his. I now say "the world" because "we" of the Gospel church 
"are not of the world" (John 17:16), and we are an exception to 
the rule. Adam when tried having had no previous experience 
with sin, did not know how dangerous, how exceedingly sinful 
sin was. The world having had a life experience (longer or 
shorter) with sin will after their resurrection, and under Christ's 
righteous rule (for he will reign then) be PREPARED, by 
experience, to go on trial for themselves. And this is God's 
plan,-that all mankind (except the exception, the Gospel 



Church), should first experience the bitterness of sin and death, 
and after that rise to be put on trial for themselves; after they 
have found out how strong sin is; how weak they are; and how 
much they need a Saviour to redeem and lead them out of sin 
and death. Out of death he has already ransomed them and will 
lift them, and then stand ready with a "Whosoever will," (Rev. 
22:17) the call of the Bride (the Gospel church AFTER the 
marriage with Christ), from the New Jerusalem to all the nations 
of earth. Then, in the Millennial age, ALL babies, little and big; 
the foolish, both by nature and by false teaching and reasoning; 
the blind, both naturally and spiritually; the lame and dumb and 
the deaf shall all be restored and brought to a knowledge of the 
truth. It is a foundation doctrine of the Bible that there is "no 
other name under heaven, given among men, whereby we may 
be saved." (Acts 4:12.) Neither innocence nor ignorance, nor 
any other natural condition will save. Jesus is "the WAY, the 
truth, and the LIFE." Again, "without FAITH it is 
IMPOSSIBLE to please God." (Heb. 1 1:6.) So neither babies, 
nor the ignorant can be saved until they learn the way of faith- 
to Christ. This will all be done in God's "due time. " He is not in 
such a hurry as we sometimes are. 

Let us not remain "Babes in Christ," for there are such; (1 Cor. 
3:1) but while always retaining the childlike- trusting-spirit, let 
us grow in the favor and knowledge of our Lord and Savior 
Jesus Christ (2 Pet. 3:18), "unto a full grown man, unto the 
measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ: that we may be 
no longer children, tossed to and fro and carried about with 
every wind of doctrine, ...but speaking truth in love, may grow 
up in all things into... Christ."-Eph. 4:13-15. Papa. 



page 6 



THE HEBREWS IN GERMANY. 



It is reported that when the Emperor Frederick of Germany 
drops off, a crusade against the Jews will begin. In the respite 
which they are at present enjoying the leading Hebrews of 
Germany are consulting with their brethren in England and 
France concerning the best course to pursue in the event of the 
succession to power of their enemies. Of course, the interests of 
the great majority are so identified with the land which is their 
home that they cannot leave it without making ruinous sacrifices 
of their business, and others are too proud to fly before the 
threatening storm, but it has been determined to assist those who 
wish to emigrate, and who are qualified to earn their living in 
other countries. -Selected. 



R1044 : page 6 



CHICAGOANS IN JERUSALEM. 

CHANGES THAT HAVE TAKEN PLACE IN SIX YEARS- 
A GREAT DAY COMING. 

A letter from Jerusalem dated Nov. 23d, published in a Chicago 
paper, bears remarkable testimony to the gradual progress of 
restitution in that land and God's preparation for promised future 
blessing upon it and its people. By the time the "little flock," the 
Body of Christ, is fully completed and perfected, Jerusalem and 
the fleshly house will be ready for the great things foretold 
concerning them. Indications of both are multiplying. The 
following is an extract from said letter:— 

I am very glad to tell you of the glorious things that we have 
been witnesses of during the six years we have lived here. When 
we arrived here, six years ago, the 26th of September, we 
numbered fourteen adults and five children. As we drove up 
from Jaffa we were deeply impressed with the desolation of the 
land. Not a spear of green could be seen anywhere; the olive 
trees and vines were so covered with the gray dust of a hot, dry 
summer, that you never could imagine there could be any green 
underneath, and the whole earth seemed dried to its foundations. 
We realized to the full, that it was a land under the curse of God 
still, for sin. But we have never seen it look like that since that 
time. Every year it looks greener and greener, and now, so many 
of those barren hill-sides are covered with vineyards, and olive 
yards, quite changing the appearance of everything. 

You will ask, what is the cause of this great change? God has 
promised that like as He brought all this evil upon this land, so 
He will bring great blessings unto it, and it has evidently begun 
by God's sending more rain than for many thousand years. He 
sends beautiful showers and heavy dews, where there used not 
to be any, and He sends clouds in summer, which were never 
known even twenty years ago. This tempers the heat, so that it 
does not dry up the ground so. Five years ago He sent, in July 
and August (months in which it never used to rain), three hours 
of rain in Jaffa, and sixteen hours in Damascus, and much all 
around, so that the American papers remarked upon it as a proof 
that the climate of Palestine is changing. Also, when we came 
here, there were very few Jews coming back to this land, but the 
persecutions in Russia and Germany and other places began to 
drive them out, and, in spite of the edicts of the Sultan, they 
began returning to this land, buying land, planting and building, 
and getting possession of the trade of the city; and so to-day 
there are many thousands more than when we came. 

Jerusalem is in reality now in the hands of the Jews, so far as 
trade is concerned, and the Jew is no longer under the heel of the 
Mohammedan as he once was. They are also rapidly building up 
a new city, exactly on the line of the description in Jer. 31 :38-40 
and 32:43-44, so that even the Turks, who are in power, are 



taking notice of it, and are saying one to the other, 'It is God, 
and what can we do?' And, dear friend, what can we say to all 
this, but that God is rapidly fulfilling in our day His word and 
the covenant He made with Abraham, and we are witnesses of 
these things." 

AMELIA GOULD. 

In this connection let us remember the prophecies which read:— 

"The Lord hath comforted Zion; he hath comforted all her waste 
places, and hath made her wilderness like Eden, and her desert 
like the garden of the Lord; joy and gladness shall be found 
therein, thanksgiving and the voice of melody. Break forth into 
joy, sing together, ye waste places of Jerusalem, for the Lord 
hath comforted his people. He hath redeemed Jerusalem. And 
they shall build the old wastes, they shall raise up the former 
desolations, and they shall repair the waste cities, the desolations 
of many generations. At that time they shall call Jerusalem the 
throne of the Lord; and all the nations shall be gathered unto it, 
to the name of the Lord, to Jerusalem: neither shall they walk 
any more after the stubbornness of their evil heart. "-Isaiah 51:3; 
52:9; 61:4; Jeremiah 3:17- Revised Version. 



R1044 : page 6 

A HINDU CHRISTIAN'S CREED. 

The following, indicates that some of the long darkened heathen 
minds, grasp the principles of Christianity much more clearly 
and truthfully than many born in civilized lands and educated in 
colleges and theological seminaries. 

"Pundita Ramabai, who visited Boston, and who has more 
recently been with Miss Willard, at Evanston, 111., and who is 
preparing to return to India to engage in teaching high caste 
Indian women, does not find it easy here to tell what 
denomination she belongs to. A reporter asked the question, and 
she answered: "I belong to the universal Church of Christ. I 
meet good Baptists, Methodists, Episcopalians and 
Presbyterians, and each one tells me something different about 
the Bible. So it seems to me better to go there myself and find 
the best I can. And there I find Christ the Saviour of the world, 
and to him I give my heart. I was baptized when in England, and 
I commune with all Christian people who will allow me to do 
so. I do not profess to be of any particular denomination, for I 
would go back to India simply as a Christian. To my mind it 
appears that the New Testament, and especially the words of our 
Savior, are a sufficiently elaborate creed. I believe as the Savior 
has told us, and His message through John has come to us, that 
God is a Spirit, is light and love; in his threefold nature He 



creates, illuminates and pervades the universe; that Jesus His 
Son and Servant, the Apostle of our faith, was sent by Him to be 
the Savior and leader of His children; that as many as believe on 
Him have the right to be the sons of God; and that the Holy 
Spirit is our guide and comforter, the great gift of God through 
Christ; that there is but one Church, and that all who 
acknowledge Jesus as their Savior are members of that Church. I 
believe that whatever is needed for my salvation will be given 
me, and I pray earnestly that God may grant me the grace to be a 
seeker and follower of truth and a doer of His will. In Boston 
they said I was a Unitarian; I told them I was not. Neither am I a 
Trinitarian. I do not understand those modern inventions at all. I 
am simply a Christian, and the New Testament teaches me my 
religion. " 



In the Chautauquan Miss Frances E. Willard writes 
interestingly of this young Hindu woman, from which we quote 
the following incident: 

"When she spoke in our Sunday gospel meeting of the W.C.T.U. 
at Evanston, I asked her what hymn she preferred, and in her 
clear, earnest voice she instantly replied- 

I heard the voice of Jesus say 
Come unto me and rest. 

But the regulation missionary hymn was given out, "From 
Greenland's Icy Mountains." Standing beside her I wrote the 
words, "Take notice, this is none of my selecting." Just then the 
audience was rolling forth, "Where every prospect pleases and 
only man is vile"— a comment not specially delightful to one 
whose relatives were "heathens." Volumes were spoken in her 
swift, half-indignant, half -pathetic smile. 

In the speech she made that day she responded to my earnest 
persuasion that she should "tell us of herself." She spoke in 
glowing language of her parents, saying, "If any one wishes to 
say my father, so eager to learn of God, and my mother so 
tender and sweet, have gone to hell because no Christian ever 
reached them with the glad tidings of Christ, I have only to tell 
you: Never say so in my presence, for I will not hear it." 



R1044 : page 6 



AN EXAMPLE FROM JAPAN. 

A missionary of one of the Evangelical denominations writes 
from Japan as follows, to a friend:— 

"One of the things which most of all pains and torments these 
Japanese is that we teach them the prison of hell is irrevocably 
shut, so that there is no egress. They grieve over the fate of their 



departed children, parents and relatives, and often show their 
grief by tears. They ask us if there is any hope; any way to free 
them by prayer from that eternal misery, and I am obliged to 
answer there is absolutely none. Their grief at this, affects and 
torments them wonderfully; they almost pine away with sorrow. 
They often ask if God cannot take their father out of hell? and 
why their punishment must never be at an end? They do not 
cease to grieve and I can hardly restrain my tears at seeing men 
so dear to my heart suffer such intense pain. Such thoughts have, 
I imagine, risen in the hearts of missionary teachers of all 
churches. Again and again, I and my brother missionaries were 
questioned by people about their dead parents and fore-fathers 
who had not heard the gospel. These distressed hearts ask if they 
could pray for their ancestors. I have had most painful scenes, 
and I think many American church missionaries have had. " 

This is the same old experience coming to the front again in a 
new place. Over and over again have we presented examples of 
these same sad results of preaching the orthodox (?) doctrine of 
irrevocable punishment. The Evangelical missionary world is 
receiving constant notifications that the religion of Christ, as 
interpreted by their standards, is not a welcome message 

R1045 : page 6 

even to the pagan world. It is not good news, or the gospel, for 
the heathen to be informed that their ancestors who died without 
the light, so called, have sunk into an eternal abyss of suffering 
in the future world; that the condition of the vast multitudes of 
the dead of their race is irrevocably fixed in despair when they 
pass out of this life. The missionary experiences of "Orthodoxy" 
are undoubtedly more full of testimony in this respect than has 
been heretofore made known. Much has been told, but more 
undoubtedly has been concealed. From the instances in which 
we are permitted by correspondence to get glimpses of the 
unrest of the heathen under the teaching of this faith, we may 
well conclude that there is a larger amount of the same kind 

R1045 : page 7 

of suffering which is not allowed to pass into current missionary 
history. 

It is remarkable with such instances as above constantly brought 
to attention, that the American Board cannot see the propriety of 
sending out ministers who cherish the larger hope and who 
could conscientiously carry to the pagan world a Gospel that 
would give comfort and satisfaction to those anxious and 
suffering souls. But instead of this they refuse to send out such 
ministers, and insist that only those who believe the repellant 
doctrines are fit for the foreign field. The time is coming, and 
rapidly coming, when this action will be reversed; when 
missionaries will be authorized to carry their own enlarged faith 



and hope to those who are waiting anxiously for the comfort and 
blessing of a true gospel.— Selected. 



R1045 : page 7 

ONE TENTH OR ALL? 

One who believes that every dollar belongs to God, and is to be 
used for Him, will not imagine that he has discharged all 
obligation by "giving a tenth to the Lord." One who talks about 
the "Lord's tenth," probably thinks about "his own" nine-tenths. 
The question is not what proportion belongs to God, but having 
given all to Him, what proportion will best honor Him by being 
applied to the uses of myself and family, and what proportion 
will best honor Him by being applied to benevolent uses. 
Because necessities differ, this proportion will differ. One man 
has a small income and a large family; another has a large 
income and no family at all. Manifestly, the proportion which 
will best honor God by being applied to benevolence is much 
larger in the one case than in the other. If men's needs varied 
directly as their incomes, it might, perhaps, be practicable and 
reasonable to fix on some definite proportion as due from all to 
Christian and benevolent work. But while men's wants are quite 
apt to grow with their income, their needs do not. When John 
Wesley's income was L.30, he lived on L.28, and gave two; and 
when his income rose to L.60, and afterwards to L. 120, he still 
lived on L.28 and gave all the remainder. 

There are multitudes in the land who, after having given one- 
tenth of their increase, might fare sumptuously every day, 
gratifying every whim, and live with the most lavish 
expenditure. Would that fulfill the law of Christ?-self sacrifice. 

There is always a tendency to substitute form for spirit, rules for 
principles. It is so much easier to conform the conduct to a rule 
than to make a principle inform the whole life. Moses prescribed 
rules; Christ inculcated principles— rules are for children, 
principles for men. 

The law of tithes was given when the race was in its childhood, 
and the relations of money to the kingdom of God were radically 
different from what they are now. Money had no such spiritual 
equivalents then as now. The Jew was required simply to make 
provision for his own worship; and this might appropriately be 
met by levying upon a certain portion of his increase. But, under 
the Christian dispensation, the world is our country, and the race 
our kindred. The needs of the world to-day are boundless; 
hence, every man's obligation to supply that need is the full 
measure of his ability; not one tenth or any other fraction of it. 

The principle that every dollar is to be used in the way that will 
best honor God is as applicable to capital as to increase or 



income, and in many cases requires that a portion of capital be 
applied directly to benevolent uses. "But," says one, "I must not 
give of my capital, because that would impair my ability to give 
in the future. I must not kill the goose that lays the golden egg." 
The objection is of weight, especially in ordinary times; but 
these are times wholly extraordinary; and this is the world's 
emergency. It may be quite true that giving one dollar now out 
of your capital would prevent your giving five dollars fifteen 
years hence. But one dollar now may be worth ten dollars fifteen 
years later. 

Money, like corn, has a two-fold power -that of ministering to 
want, and that of reproduction. If there were a famine in the 
land, no matter how sore it might be, it would be folly to grind 
up all the seed-corn for food. But, on the other hand, suppose, in 
the midst of the famine, after feeding their families and doling 
out a handful in charity, the farmers were to put all the increase 
back into the ground, and do it year after year, while the world 
was starving ! That would be worse than foolish. It would be 
criminal. Yet that is what multitudes of men are doing. Instead 
of applying the power in money to the end for which it was 
intrusted to them, they use it almost wholly to accumulate more 
power. A miller might as well spend his life building his dam 
higher and higher, and never turn the water on to his wheel. 

Bishop Butler said to his secretary: "I should be ashamed of 
myself, if I could leave ten thousand pounds behind me. " Many 
professed Christians die "disgracefully and wickedly rich. " The 
shame and sin, however, lie not in the fact that the power was 
gathered, but that it was unwielded. 

It is every man's duty to wield the widest possible power for 
righteousness. But let a man beware! This power in money is 
something awful. It is more dangerous than dynamite. The 
victims of "saint-seducing gold" are numberless. If a Christian 
grows rich, it should be with fear and trembling, lest the 
"deceitfulness of riches" undo him; for Christ spoke of the 
salvation of a rich man as something miraculous.— Luke 18:24- 
27. 

Let no man deceive himself by saying: "I will give when I have 
amassed wealth. I desire money that I may do good with it; but I 
will not give now, that I may give the more largely in the 
future. " That is the pit into which many have fallen. If a man is 
growing large in wealth, nothing but constant and generous 
giving can save him from growing small in soul. In determining 
the amount of his gifts, and the question whether he should 
impair the capital, or to what extent, a man should never lose 
sight of a distinct and intelligent aim to do the greatest possible 
good in a life-time. Each must decide for himself what is the 
wisest, the highest use of money; and we need often to remind 
ourselves of the constant tendency of human nature to 
selfishness and self-deception. —Selected. 



R1046:page7 

AN APPRECIATIVE EDITOR. 

The editor of a Missouri newspaper received and read 
Millennial Dawn Vol. I., and then published in his journal a 
reprint of the "Arp Tract" with the following additional 
comment:— 

"I could add many words to the above, and have attempted to 
write them, but none satisfy me because the effect of "Millennial 
Dawn" upon my inner nature is beyond words. I have read, and 
have found that light which for years I had been reaching out 
after. No longer are the "gates ajar" but the "portals are wide 
open. " Professing Christians of any denomination will receive it 
almost in the light of a "new revelation," and yet 'tis nothing but 
the "same old truth" made plain. Honest skeptics and so-called 
infidels will treat it with respect, and as their minds become 
illuminated with new light they will "Praise God from Whom all 
Blessings Flow." I feel it my duty to become a medium for its 
distribution among all classes and if the "Home Seeker and 
Farmer" has no other mission than to put it into the hands of but 
one seeker after truth, whose soul has been narrowed by the 
Orthodoxy of generations, I shall feel that it has not been in 
vain." 

VAN B. WISKER. 



R1045 : page 7 

AMBASSADORS FOR CHRIST. 

DEAR BRO. RUSSELL. 

Thinking our Master might use the enclosed, though it is but a 
feeble and halting effort, I enclose it to you for such use as the 
Spirit guides you to make of it. 

There are some awakenings occurring out here; just enough now 
to show that the seed is sprouting-here and there a little blade 
thrusting itself up. How blessed the assurance is that in every 
such case, "His word shall accomplish that for which it is sent. 

Just received May Tower and am reading it with much 
edification. Oh! that all God's truly consecrated children might 
see these new things coming so richly from the store house. In 
His good time (then due time) they will, and my greatest desire 
is, to be an instrument in His hands in leading some to the "True 
Light that lighteth every man that cometh into the world. " 



What a hero the Bishop of London proved. Surely our God is 
abundantly blessing him in all good things. His example will 
encourage all of the saints, sure. 

May God bless you and yours more and more. Hurriedly, but 
earnestly in the work. 

Yours, W. E. PAGE. 

"Now then we are ambassadors for Christ, as though God did 
beseech you by us: we pray you in Christ's stead, be ye 
reconciled to God. "-2 Cor. 5:20. 

We who are consciously receiving "Meat in due season" are 
especially called to proclaim the Glad Tidings of reconciliation, 
and the necessarily consequent "restitution of all things." The 
translation in the Diaglott emphasizes the meaning of this verse, 
so that it is worth while in this connection to repeat it, "On 
behalf of Christ, therefore, we are ambassadors; as if God were 
inviting through us, we entreat on behalf of Christ, be you 
reconciled to God. " As we realize, the apostolic writings were to 
the saints, and their true meaning "is veiled to those that are 
perishing: to those unbelievers whose minds the God of this age 
blinded, in 

R1046 : page 7 

order that they might not see clearly the effulgence of the Glad 
Tidings of the Glory of the Anointed one, who is in the likeness 
of God." (2 Cor. 4:3-4, Diaglott.) Realizing this and having the 
"ministry of reconciliation" entrusted to us, we must eagerly, "in 
season and out of season," proclaim it; relying on our God for 
wisdom and strength. We must bear in mind that, with Paul, we 
"can do all things through Christ which strengtheneth us;" and 
as we see more and more clearly that "the day of the Lord is at 
hand," and realize that "it shall come as a day of destruction 
from the Almighty," let us make haste to publish the more the 
sure mercies of our God, through Christ. 

We must be on the alert to use every opportunity presented, not 
only as messengers to call forth from Babylon the consecrated 
children who are "Heirs of Glory, " but also to proclaim the fact 
that "God is in Christ reconciling the world unto himself, not 
imputing their trespasses unto them" (2 Cor. 5:19), to all who 
will hear. If we are thus enabled to lead some to a knowledge of 
God now, and thus help them to prepare for the time that shall 
be "a day of destruction from the Almighty," what joy and 
comfort will be ours! ! Though we "sow in tears, we shall reap in 
joy. " We may often wonder why God does not with his spirit 
give us more freedom from our bodily infirmities, not only of 
health, but of mind and will. It is his pleasure "that we have this 
treasure in earthen vessels, in order that the excellence of the 
power may be of God, and not from us." (2 Cor. 4:6 and 7, 
Diaglott.) We can thus rejoice that our infirmities will cause 



God's power to shine forth the more brightly; we realize fully 
now that our ability "to will and to do of his good pleasure" is 
from his favor, (Phil. 2:13). And hereafter it will be equally 
apparent to all people. 

With the favors of knowledge and love given us now, we have 
only ourselves and the enemy to blame if we remain long cast 
down. We can "come boldly to the throne of Grace" at all times. 
We must not expect to see the fruit of our labor to any extent 
now, only let us, in Christ, "add to our faith virtue, to virtue 
knowledge, to knowledge temperance, to temperance patience, 
to patience Godliness, to Godliness, brotherly kindness, and to 
brotherly kindness charity," knowing "that if these things be in 
you and abound, they make you that ye shall neither be barren 
nor unfruitful in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ (2 Pet. 
1:5-8). Our forerunner did not see of the "travail of His soul," 
until he entered within the second veil. So shall we then "know, 
even as we are known. " 

Some of us who have come into light during this eleventh hour, 
may be inclined to worry and wonder about our destiny; whether 
we shall be "crown wearers," or "palm bearers." We can cast all 
this anxiety on Christ. He will do for us "even more abundantly 
than we can think or ask. " He will be all in all, and we shall be 
satisfied. Until then let us "Be not anxious about anything; but in 
everything let our petitions be made known to God, by prayer 
and supplication with thanksgiving: and that peace of God 
which surpasses all conception shall guard your hearts and 
minds by Christ Jesus (Phil. 4:6 and 7, Diaglott. Also read John 
14:27). The peace of God keeping guard over our hearts and 
minds. Think of it! 

W. E. P. 

[For our encouragement we should remember, that the only 
"call" yet made is to membership in the little flock. We are all 
called in one hope of our calling. (Eph. 4:4.) God has not during 
the Gospel age called some to the human plane and others to the 
"little flock of crown wearers," and others to the second class or 
"great company of palm bearers." 

Only to the one class were any of us called, and all who have 
seen the prize, and accepted the invitation can, if they will, make 
their calling and election sure, by obedience to the conditions- 
full, complete self-sacrifice in the service of the Lord and under 
his direction. Those who shall compose the "great company" of 
palm bearers are those who have not done what they could— who 
after having consecrated all, even while they love righteousness 
and desire to see the truth prosper, are unwilling to sacrifice 
present comforts and interests by an open warfare on behalf of 
the truth and against error. These, while they love the Lord and 
the truth, do not love ardently enough to be acknowledged and 
crowned as overcoming soldiers of the cross. Surely our 



R1046 : page 8 

actions speak as loudly as our words, and it is in vain that any 
profess great love, if when the Master and the truth are assailed 
and misrepresented, they specially recognized agents and 
ambassadors shall keep quiet and fail to protest against the error 
for fear of some earthly disadvantage resulting. 

Whoever then is begotten of the Spirit, and therefore able to 
appreciate and run for the prize of the "high calling" of the 
Gospel age, may know that he is called by the only call yet 
issued: and if willingly he shall sacrifice his all, he may be as 
sure of the prize as any other one running the same race. Such a 
disposition is an evidence of a timely consecration and 
acceptance and therefore of a begetting of the Spirit. Press nobly 
on, then, dear fellow- laborers, whether you have entered the 
harvest field recently or earlier: we serve the one Lord, in the 
one Faith, and by the one Baptism into his death; and for all 
such he has the crown of life reserved. "Hold fast that which 
thou hast, let no man take thy crown." Be strong in the Lord; be 
valiant; yea, be also of good courage.— EDITOR.] 



R1046 : page 8 

THE FOUR GOSPELS. 



In the attempt to unify by harmonies, much of the true scope of 
the Gospels is lost sight of. The evangelists differ, but do not 
disagree. Dean Stanley says that few persons have any idea of 
the distinct features of any one of these four records. The 
opinions of some men are that these differences are to be 
accounted for by the apostles' copying from one another, by 
each one's supplying the omission of the preceding writers, or 
by the fertility of their memories, or the fact that accounts were 
obtained at second hand. But these opinions entirely deny the 
divinity of the Gospels. 

In the beginning we must rest on the foundation that God is their 
author. They stand in their right order, in the right relation to 
each other, beginning the canon of the New Testament. 
Matthew, Mark, and Luke give the outward and earthly work of 
Christ, and John his inward and heavenly works. The four great 
countries of that time, Palestine, Italy, Greece, and Asia Minor, 
were the places where the Gospels were written. Matthew is the 
Jewish Gospel, connecting the Old Testament with the New 
Testament, and is written to prove the Messiahship of Christ. 
Mark is written to the Gentiles, and its theme is Christ's 
ministry, his works. Luke applies universally to both Jew and 
Gentile, and brings out Christ's humanity; while John's is an 
essentially spiritual Gospel, dealing wholly with the divinity of 
our Lord. 



The first speaks of Christ as the Son of David, hence his 
genealogy is complete (1 : 1-16); in Mark there is no genealogy, 
for there he is spoken of not as a son at all, but as a servant. 
Luke calls Christ the Son of man, and gives so comprehensive 
an account of his birth as to defer the genealogy to chapter 3:23- 
38, while John begins with it and calls Christ the Son of God. In 
Matthew he is said to have been born king of the Jews; in Luke 
the good tidings are of a birth of a Saviour, and John proclaims 
him pre-existent. The key to each Gospel, giving its theme, may 
be found in Matthew 1:1, Mark 10:44,45, Luke 19:10, Jno. 
20:31. In the first Gospel, Christ is described as a king, in the 
second as a worker, and in the other two as a philanthropist and 
as God manifested, respectively. 

The central truth emphasized in Matthew is righteousness, in 
Mark power, in Luke sympathy, and in John divine glories. 

R1047 : page 8 

The great discourse of Matthew is the Sermon on the Mount, 
and that of Luke is the sermon on the plain, and that of John the 
gospel in the upper room, which extends through chapters 13- 
17. This very fact shows the inspiration of the Scriptures. All 
four evangelists heard this discourse, but it was left to John to 
describe it. The great subjects of the Gospels are respectively 
law, labor, love, and life. Matthew always introduces a quotation 
with "that it might be fulfilled;" Mark, with "as it is written;" 
and John, with "as said Esaias." Luke seldom makes any 
introductory references. 

Matthew prefaces the parables with reference to the kingdom of 
heaven; Mark, to the kingdom of God; Luke makes it 
impersonal by beginning, "A certain man;" while John 
emphasizes their importance by saying, "Verily, verily, I say 
unto you. " The parables are grouped in Matthew, and given in 
order in Luke. In Mark only two are recorded, and in John new 
parables not mentioned by the others are recorded. The character 
of Matthew as a writer is topical, that of Mark is chronological, 
of Luke biographical, and of John metaphorical. The ministries 
of Matthew and Mark were Galilean; that of John, Judean; and 
that of Luke partook of the characteristics of both. Christ is said 
to have come to save the lost sheep of the house of Israel in 
Matthew; in Luke, it is "all flesh," and in John, "whosoever 
will." 

The most important of all is the conclusion. Here is seen the 
development in the Gospels as they are arranged in the New 
Testament. Matthew announces that Jesus is risen; Mark, that he 
is risen and ascended; but Luke goes further and adds the 
promise of the Holy Spirit; while John is beyond them all in 
declaring Christ's promise to come again.- W. W. Clark. 



R1047 : page 8 



WISE STEWARDS. 



Our stewardship is over what we have and not at all over what 
we have not. Many failing to see this clearly let talents they do 
possess lie idle, while they make unprofitable endeavors to 
create and use others not given them by the Master, only to find 
in the end that they have been unwise stewards. 

Quite a great many, seeing the necessity for money in carrying 
forward the work, ignore many opportunities (talents) and 
abilities (talents) for using time, hands, feet, and tongues to 
serve the truth, and endeavor to make money, generously saying 
that when they once get a good start, then, the truth will be 
liberally provided for, and in fact that the needs of the truth and 
not ambition or selfishness are the motives which prompt them 
to attempt money making. Alas, unwise stewards! Nearly all 
such efforts are failures, snares by which the adversary gets your 
hands and heads so full that all other talents are choked. And the 
very few who do "get a good start" financially are so injured by 
the greedy strife for gold, that they never use it as they honestly 
thought they would. 

If when you consecrated yourself to God you had wealth— the 
money talent, then it should be your delight to use that talent 
with whatever others you possess, but never think of burying in 
a napkin the talent you have, to seek one you have not got. The 
talents which were added in the parable were the increase from 
the use of the talents first given the stewards. 

The talents of oratory and sermonizing are evidently possessed 
by few, and hence we may well reason that sermons are not the 
things the Lord most wants. He is well able to give such talents 
when and where he sees their exercise needful, and it is the 
height of presumption for a steward to seek to use talents which 
the Master has not given him to use. Note carefully the 
exhortation of Rom. 12:1-3-9. 

It is our old, not our new natures that would lead us to ignore 
little, humble matters which we can do, to waste our time in 
trying to do something "great" and "grand" which we as well as 
others know we have not the talents for. Let us not forget that if 
we were great, grand, influential orators, we would probably not 
be fit for the Master's use, for it is not the great he is now 
seeking, but the humble. If you have an eloquent tongue or other 
such gift, be sure to use it zealously, but always remember that it 
is written, "Not many wise men after the flesh, not many 
mighty, not many noble are called: but God hath chosen the 
foolish things of the world to shame the wise; and God has 
chosen the weak things of the world to shame the powerful; and 
the lowly-born of the world and things which are despised God 
hath selected, and things which are not, to bring to nought things 



that are." (1 Cor. 1:26-31.) Yea, God hath chosen generally 
those not richest in talents or opportunities, but the poor of this 
world rich in faith, to be heirs of the kingdom and co-workers 
with him now. God has arranged his plans thus that he might 
hinder human pride and vain-glory -the very thing so many are 
disposed to cultivate. See the context above cited. 

Be honest, earnest, unpretentious; and if you speak in public, or 
whatever you do, seek not to make self prominent and 
impressive, but seek to show forth the truth, relying upon its 
impressiveness as God intended. Remember that it is written, 
concerning the Gospel age and God's ambassadors, ministers of 
the truth, "Out of the lips of babes and sucklings thou [Lord] 
hast perfected praise. " So then, even if the mighty and grand of 
this world have to some extent honored the Lord, his assurance 
that his praise is most perfect in those the world does not count 
great and grand— in His "little ones," should cause us to rejoice 
in humility and even to avoid imitating the style, tones and 
methods of the worldly great. 



Other stewards need a caution in an opposite direction; they do 
not quickly enough note talents which might be utilized in the 
Lord's service. These should remember that our commission 
does not limit us in the use of all, even the smallest talents, but 
reads, "Go ye into all the world and preach the good tidings." 
(Matt. 28:19,20.) It is not necessary to preach in the usual 
formal manner: Preach, as the twelve disciples preached, by the 
way side, or wherever you find a hearing ear. If you have a good 
voice for public speaking and lack the talent for preparing a 
discourse be not ashamed of it, and do not try to memorize some 
one else's words. By so doing you will fail of good results. 
Better far, if opportunity offers and you possess a suitable voice 
etc., read forcibly and clearly something touching the subject 
you consider most needful to your hearers. 

What we all want first of all is honesty with ourselves as well as 
with others; and a few words honestly spoken even though 
rough and brokenly expressed will carry more weight to your 
hearer than a parrot-like repeating of more polished sentences. 
To be an acceptable minister of the truth, pride and vain-glory 
must be cast out and trampled upon. Those whose object in 
preaching is to appear great, wise and profound are not working 
with the right motive and will not get the great prize. 



Do not be ashamed to acknowledge it if you received your first 
introduction to the truth from the humblest man or woman of 
your town. Those who are ashamed of the humblest member of 
the body of Christ are dishonoring also the head of that body 
who used that member as his honored ambassador to bear his 
message. 



All truth is of God and not of our fellow-men; it is ours when it 
comes to us and we receive it into good and honest hearts, no 
matter by which or how many channels or agencies it reached 
us; it all came from the one great fountain of truth. But while 
thanking God for the refreshing draught, let none despise, 
dishonor or ignore the humblest of the instruments by which the 
truth reached him. Remember God loves most and uses oftenest 
the humble. "The Lord abhoreth the proud, but giveth favors to 
the humble! Pride goeth before destruction, a haughty spirit 
before a fall." Beloved, let us flee these snares of the adversary! 
Let us as wise stewards use the talents given us faithfully, and 
not only will they be increased, but to such stewards the Master 
will say, Well done good faithful servant: Thou hast been 
faithful over a few things [I gave thee], I will make thee ruler 
over many things. Our Lord wants great, grand co-laborers in 
the glorious work of the next age, but he is choosing the humble 
and unpretentious of the present for that honor, and when the 
right time comes to make us rulers over many things (talents) we 
shall be "changed"-made "like him" and be with him and share 
his glory and power. "He that humbleth himself shall be 
exalted." 


