VOL. XVIII. AUGUST 1, 1897. No. 15. 



CONTENTS. 



Special Items 222 

Views from the Watch Tower 223 

"Young People's" Societies 223 

Mohammedans Insolent and 

Bloodthirsty 225 

Poem: The Pilgrim 226 

Covered Sins to Be Blotted Out 226 

"I Will Come Again and Receive You" 229 

Self-denial in the Interest of Others 233 

Interesting Letters 235 

page 222 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
--ADDRESS TO- 
TOWER PUBLISHING CO., BIBLE HOUSE, 58 & 60 ARCH ST., 
ALLEGHENY (NORTH PITTSBURG), PA., U.S.A. 

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 

INCLUDES A SUBSCRIPTION TO "THE OLD THEOLOGY TRACTS"-QUARTERLY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, N.Y. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, 

OR REGISTERED. FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN 

MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS: 

Those of the interested, who by reason of old age or accident, or 
other adversity are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, 
if they will send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and 
requesting the paper. 



R2192: page 222 

OUR "PILGRIMS." 



THE extreme heat and other considerations have necessitated slight 

changes of program for several of the traveling brethren; but in 

all cases where positive appointments had been made we were enabled 

to give timely notice: we hope that no serious inconvenience was experienced. 

Brother Ransom took unwell; Brother Cone is aged and 

needs a little rest; Brother McPhail's son took sick and has since died; 

and others had various hindrances. Remember these all with us at the 

throne of grace. 

On the whole we have reason to rejoice that the Lord's blessing 
seems to go with this branch of the service in so wonderful a manner. 



Many of the scattered ones are reached, in parts we never expected to 
reach; and the meetings seem to do much good, judged by the letters 
and reports we receive from all along the various routes. 

Whenever there are five or more WATCH TOWER subscribers we 
make an effort to reach them;— especially if a desire for public or parlor 
meetings has been expressed. 

Wherever a positive appointment is made, you may expect it to be 
kept to the very hour. The routes are mostly arranged at the WATCH 
TOWER office. One to three days are all that can be spared generally, 
as the field is large and the laborers are few: so make the best use possible 
of the "pilgrims," while they are with you. 



R2192 : page 223 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 



THE Christian Endeavor and other societies of 
"Young People" are keeping well to the front, 
influentially and otherwise, in religious matters. When 
we remember that these young people's societies represent 
about five millions of members, and that the 
majority of these are no longer very young, we can 
readily see that within ten years these people will include 
the most active representatives of normal Christendom. 
They are likely to have considerable influence 
in forming the coming Protestant Federation. 
In view of this, we have been on the lookout for reports 
of what was accomplished by the recent C.E. 
Convention at San Francisco, California. 

We have seen the report of the President of the 
Society, congratulating it upon its growth and size, 
and giving a brief account of his recent trip around 
the world, in the interest of the Society. But we have 
as yet seen no report of any important action taken, or 
even proposed. Indeed, it seems to be an immense combination 
of well-intentioned young people, anxious to 
do something great— and good, rather than bad. But it 
scarcely knows what to adopt as its mission. Hitherto 
this subject has not been so important; for all energies 
were employed in growing. Now it has corporeal 
size, and weight of influence, and feels strong, and realizes 
that it must have a policy and a mission, or else 
it will look foolish; and it, no doubt, will decide this 
question shortly. 

It is fearful to adopt any very spiritual work or 
mission; because doctrine is more or less necessary 
to every such movement, and doctrines must be sedulously 
avoided, lest they split the organization, and 
thus wreck all that has so far been attained— size and 
union. For instance: suppose it were resolved that 
the Society of Christian Endeavor shall hereafter devote 
its main energies to Foreign Mission work, among 



the barbarous and heathen. Questions would at once 
arise, such as, Shall we determine and expect to convert 
the world? Shall we understand this to be God's 
purpose, and that he has raised us up to do it, and that 

R2193 : page 223 

he will give us success in its full accomplishment? 

And how quickly can we do this, if it has required 

eighteen centuries to reach the present degree of development? 

Or, shall we undertake it merely as a 

witnessing to all nations, to gather out an elect "little 

flock"— through whom, at the second advent of Christ 

God will "bless all the families of the earth"? 

Here would be a split at once. Would the Y.P.S. 
of C.E., as a whole, declare its belief in a pre-millennial 
advent of Christ, or in a post-millennial advent? 
It would do neither; but would refuse to discuss the 
matter, lest it cause division; because some of its most 
earnest members are on each side of that question. 
But to avoid the question as to object of work, is to 
avoid those lines of work which necessitate decision 
as to object. And so it is with all spiritual questions 
and activities; they are inseparably connected with 
faith; and all faith is built upon doctrines— true or false, 
divine or human. 

If, then, these societies are built upon wrong principles 
for spiritual work (in that they ignore doctrine, 
the basis of faith, as faith is the basis of spiritual activities), 
what will they do with their immense organizations, 
restless as they are for some great activity- 
some mission? 

The next plane of labor, lower than spiritual work, 
is moral or social or political reform work. For activities 
in these directions, doctrines are unnecessary, 

R2193 : page 224 

or at least easily avoidable. The faith of a Buddhist, 
or a Brahmin, or a Christian, need not interfere if the 
holder thereof will sink every other ambition and work, 
and devote himself solely to the reform work. But 
which of these phases of reform work will it probably 
decide on— the moral, the social, or the political? 

These three reforms, all good, are more or less near 
to religion and spiritual things. Moral reform probably 
comes nearest— lifting up the depraved and fallen, is 
next, we may say, to preaching the gospel, because it 
helps often to prepare the way for the gospel. In fact, 
moral reformers often rank their work far above the 
commission given by our Lord— "Preach the gospel to 
the meek." But the Young People's Societies are not 
likely to take up that field as their mission; because it 
is already fairly well occupied. They will want a new 
work, which will show as distinctly theirs. 

The second reform in nearness to religion would 



naturally be social reform. This is a large field, in 

which great good to a great number would be possible, 

if five million Christian men and women were to take 

hold of it. The world's social conditions sadly need 

an uplift— the poor need a protecting arm, to help 

ward off the pinch and grind coming as a result of invention, 

over-production and monopolies. But this 

field is apt to be left to Socialists, Populists and Anarchists; 

for the "Young People" generally feel that they 

and their benefactors belong to the other side of the 

question. 

This still leaves the door of political reform open; 
and we incline to believe that these societies will decide 
that in that direction lies their mission. In some 
places they are already beginning this work; and of 
course there are politicians who will be glad of their 
co-operation, and who will teach them how to make 
this movement somewhat of a success. But where will 
this leave the more spiritual work and doctrine and 
faith within ten years? They will evidently be obsolete 
—abandoned. The reform movements will come 
gradually to be considered the real gospel to the 
world. And the world will, of course, approve the 
change; for it never has comprehended spiritual things; 
these and the cross of Christ have always been foolishness 
untoit-1 Cor. 2:12-14. 



Many of the C.E. Societies have adopted yells, 
similar to those used by college students, and these 
were freely poured forth as the delegations gathered 
at their Convention and en route. A published report 
of the Convention, for instance, says: 

"The Colorado delegation came in with a ringing 
yell: 

"Pike's Peak, or Bust! 
Pike's Peak, or Bust! 
Colorado, Colorado! 
Yell we must!" 

The editor of one of the Pacific coast journals 
writes of the Convention delegates under the caption, 
"Christians Who Yell," as follows: 

"There is no other body in the country like that 
of the Young People's Society of Christian Endeavor. 
It is strictly a religious organization, but it is the best 
exemplification of muscular Christianity that ever appealed 
to robust piety. There is nothing sanctimonious 
about its members or sniveling about its methods. 
It unites good fellowship with Christian brotherhood, 
with no affectation of manner, speech or 
action. 

"There is no other religious fraternity which goes 
to a convention with a college yell and a whoop. The 
war cry of the Spokane Club: 'Who can? We can, 
Spokane, Wash., Wash., Wash.,' is not only funny, but 



it is vastly superior to the ordinary run of baseball 
club and college yells, which are, indeed, frequently 
idiotic. The Colorado delegation also has a yell which 
must be very effective when uttered by a large body. 

"The Christian Endeavorers have done more than 
any other organization to bring into the ranks of a 
Christian society young men and young women, and 
especially young men, who are ordinarily disinclined 
to be regarded as 'good' in the sense of being pious. 
There are some things which no amount of argument 
will change, and one of them is the suspicion and even 
dislike which attaches to too many young men who 
assume to be leaders in church work. Pastors know 
this, if they know anything in the world, and young 
men who are not professing Christians, although they 
may be good enough as the world goes, also know it. 
Although the Christian Endeavorers have been the 
most successful in the new departure, other organizations 
are awakening to the difficulty which they 
really have to overcome. The establishment of athletic 
clubs by the Y.M.C.A., for instance, has done 
much to impart a manlier tone to the members of that 
body. 

"When, in order to be an acceptable member of 
a church organization, it is no longer necessary to 
wear a sanctimonious look and speak with a nasal 
twang, when a young man feels that he is no longer 
derided because he is an active church worker or a 
Sunday school teacher, it will be a great deal better 
for the churches, and we shall not hear that wail about 
the worldliness of the present generation. Men with 
fifty years of experience in English-speaking countries, 
at least, are aware that there has been a great improvement 
in the morals of the average young man. 
The number of those who are addicted to intoxicating 
drinks in an excessive degree is much smaller, and 
the experience of physicians is that there is much less 
unhealthiness due to preventable causes than there 
used to be, and the number of stalwart Christians who 
do not belong to churches is greater. 

"The chief cause of this change is the realization 
by many pastors of the fact that all that is worldly is 
not vicious; there are songs which are harmless, although 
they are not hymns; amusements which are 
not sinful, although they are not strictly in the line of 

R2193 : page 225 

church work. Dancing is no longer condemned as 
it used to be, nor is whist regarded as an occupation 
invented by the devil. There never was a time when 
flirting could be entirely prevented, even by the most 
rigid disciplinarian and in the most Puritan communities, 
but it was regarded as a sin by the mistaken 
judgment of ministers." 



The writer of the foregoing likes the change which 
he notices, and as much as says that he himself never 
was one of the over-pious, and is glad to find those 
of his mind greatly on the increase in numbers and 
influence. But Christians who have learned the way 
to God and the "narrow way" of discipleship in following 
the footsteps of Christ, will take a wholly different 
view of the change. 

If these were claiming to be merely moral or social 
clubs, there would be no grounds for objection. The 
objection is to the desecration of the name Christian, 
to the erroneous thought that every man and woman 
who does not steal, nor get drunk, nor use vile and 
profane language, and who is moral and honorable, is 
therefore a Christian. 

Here the ignoring of doctrines has a bad effect. If 
the doctrines of Free Grace and Election must be avoided, 
and if it is right to avoid and ignore them, then may 
not the entire subject of grace be ignored? and may 
not all faith be ignored as a standard by those who 
bear the name of Christ? This certainly is the tendency, 
not only of the young people, but also amongst 
the older Christians of all denominations. But all 
who see the Scriptural definition of a Christian falling 
into disuse and contempt, should be the more careful 
to hold firmly to "the faith once delivered to the saints," 
viz., that the steps into "the body of Christ, which is 
the [true] Church" are (1) Faith in the efficacy of the 
precious blood of Christ, shed for the remission of sins; 
(2) acceptance thereof with repentance and reformation: 
and (3) an unreserved consecration of every talent 
to the Lord's service. 

The reason for such a falling away from doctrine 
is not difficult to find. It is because the doctrines of 
God's Word were so terribly mixed with God-dishonoring 
human traditions. For instance, the doctrine 
that an eternity of torment awaits all who are 
not of the elect, has brought the Scriptural doctrines 
of "an election according to favor" and the perseverance 
of the saints into disrepute. Intelligent people 
say to themselves, the saintly are few, the decent, moral 
and semi-moral are many. These are too decent and 

R2194: page 225 

too good to be everlastingly tormented after death, 

and we must therefore suppose that they will go to 

heaven. And the next argument is, If they will go to 

heaven, can they go there without being Christians? 

The third step is to claim that they are Christians, and 

a letting down of all the terms and conditions of Christianity 

—on the score that if a moralist is a Christian, 

and will gain the reward of heaven, no one need be 

required to be more. Thus, the blasphemous doctrine 



of everlasting torment, foreign to God's Word, and 
invented during the dark ages, is rapidly destroying 
the Scriptural doctrine of the necessity of making our 
calling and election sure by faithfulness and holiness 
unto the Lord. 



The "Cincinnati Post" gives the figures of a statistician, 
who has estimated the cost of four conventions 
of Young People's Societies this year, as follows: 
Christian Endeavor Convention, fares etc. .$2, 875, 000 
Baptist Young People's Convention, fares, 

etc 1,400,000 

Epworth League Convention, fares, etc 1,700,000 

Brotherhood of St. Andrew Convention, 
fares, etc 200,000 

Total $6,175,000 

The Post's article concludes by saying: 

"The aggregate sum equals the contributions of 
all Protestant denominations for Foreign Missions." 

The following statement by Mr. W. N. Coler, just 
returned from Japan, is significant, and fully in line 
with the foregoing— only "broader." He said: 

"In Japan there is much talk of getting up a new 
religion. Japanese students and thinkers are studying 
religion as a practical problem, which they believe will 
throw much light on the question they are now asking, 
'Why has the West gone so far ahead of the East in 
civilization?' 

"They are reaching the conclusion that strict morality 
has much to do with it, and a large body of advanced 
thinkers are seriously considering the proposition 
of getting up a new religion. 

"It is proposed to do this by dissecting the Christian 
and Buddhist religions and Confucianism and 
uniting the best doctrines and principles of each into 
the new system. 

"In Tokyo and other Japanese cities all the religions 
are being liberally discussed. I think they are 
getting to the point of believing that the Christian religion 
is the most civil of them all, though believing 
in the principle of evolution and improvement." 

Mr. Coler believes that the result of missionary 
work in India, China and Japan has been to detach 
many orientals among thinking classes from Buddhism, 
and has made them free thinkers, who will readily 
attach themselves to a new religion embracing the 
best points of the religions named. 

MOHAMMEDANS INSOLENT AND BLOODTHIRSTY. 



The success of Turkey in the recent war with 
Greece, has a tendency to encourage the followers of 
Mahomet to hope that they may yet conquer Christendom 

R2194 : page 226 

and the world, "for Allah and his prophet." 

We quote from a New York "World" a cablegram as 

follows: 

"Sayid Rayhan Allah (the Mollah) has planned 
the extermination of all the Hebrews in Persia. He 
has summoned the chief rabbi, and informed him that 
the Hebrews must accept the Mahometan faith, or he 
will do all that he can to oppress and exterminate 
them. 

"Sayid Rayhan has formulated the following 
restrictions: 

"Every Hebrew must have all of his hair cut off, 
must never ride an animal throughout the city, must 
wear European dress, and must wear a mark to distinguish 
him from the Mahometan. 

'"Hebrew women must veil. They must not wear 
the chador, or chaghchoor, the outdoor dress which 
Persian etiquette expects of every woman. 

"A Hebrew must not build a house higher than 
that of his Mahometan neighbor. The entrance to the 
house must be distinguished from the Moslem's. He 
is not to come out of his house on a rainy day, and is 
not to touch articles of food. 

'"When a Hebrew dies, any relative who is a convert 
to Mahometanism may possess all his property. 

'"A Hebrew who, having once accepted Islam, renounced 
it, will be put to death.'" 

Poor Jews! Much of Jacob's trouble lies yet 
ahead, before the faithful are gathered back to Palestine, 
there to have the eyes of their understanding 
opened to recognize him whom they pierced, and to 
mourn for him and to be accepted. 

The Zionist movement, noted in our last issue, 
although strong and very popular with some Jews, 
is opposed by others, as likely to bring greater 
persecution. 

For fear of persecution, it has been decided that 
the convention will be held in Switzerland, instead of 
in Germany, as first proposed. 



R2199 : page 226 

THE PILGRIM. 



Wild shrieks the wind, how rough's the way! 
But, see, one star's alight! 



Up! let us follow, where its ray 

Strikes through the shuddering night 
O'er yonder roof, serene and clear. 
And hark! what music is't we hear? 

My heart scarce beats, my steps are slow, 

Almost I faint and die: 
Sick, worn, benumbed amidst the snow, 

Ah! what a pilgrim I! 
Yet will I follow stagg'ring on, 
Ere light and music both be gone. 

For One waits there, the only one, 
Who knows my heart and me; 

All that I am, all I have done, 
All I may chance to be: 

Who will not spurn the piteous thing, 

The sole, best offering I can bring: 

Who will not chide me, poor and late, 

Nor scorn my sorry wit; 
Who will not fling me to my fate— 

O God, the thought of it! 
Once that I look in those dear eyes, 
What virtues shall my soul surprise! 

Then up, my heart, gather thy strength 

A little longer! see, 
Almost our journeying ends; at length 

Almost at home are we: 
Sheltered, my heart, from storm and night 
In that Friend's house of sure delight! 

— Selwyn Image. 



R2194 : page 226 

COVERED SINS TO BE BLOTTED OUT. 



MANY make the mistake of confounding the 

"blotting out" of sins with the covering of 

sins; but the two thoughts are distinctly 

separate. The covering of sins takes place instantaneously, 

as soon as the believer has repentantly accepted 

of the redemption which is in Christ Jesus. 

This covering of sin, and of all the blemishes of the 

believer is symbolically represented as accomplished 

by his putting on the "wedding garment," the pure 

robe of Christ's righteousness imputed to true believers. 

This constitutes the justification by faith of which 

the Apostle speaks, saying, "David describeth the 

blessedness of the man unto whom God imputeth 

righteousness without works [righteousness which he 



had not worked out] saying, 'Blessed are they whose 
iniquities are forgiven, and whose sins are covered. 
Blessed is the man to whom the Lord will not impute 
sin.'"— Rom. 4:6-8. 

While it brings to the believer joy and peace to 
realize that his imperfections are covered, and not permitted 
to hinder his approach to the Heavenly Father, 
he nevertheless properly battles against those imperfections, 
a continual warfare— the newly-begotten and 
renewed or transformed mind being resisted by the 
natural, depraved will of the flesh. But, nevertheless, 
every true child of God, rightly instructed from the 
Father's Word, is distinctly looking forward to the 
end of his warfare-probation, when his "covered" sins 
and weaknesses shall all be "blotted out." 

This blotting out of sins, so far as the overcoming 

R2194 : page 227 

Church is concerned, will not be completed until the 

first resurrection has been completed; for, as the work 

of grace began by the covering of the imperfections of 

the flesh for believers, it will end with the complete 

destruction of the flesh in death, and the raising of the 

elect Church spiritual bodies, free from all the blemishes 

and imperfections which belong to these present, 

mortal bodies. Now the consecrated "have this treasure 

[the new nature] in earthen vessels:" and all know 

how seriously marred is every one of these vessels, 

so that our very best intentions and desires are liable 

to have more or less of blemish or imperfection, when 

viewed from the Divine standpoint. But by-and-by 

this treasure, the new will, the new creature in Christ 

Jesus, will be delivered into the perfect condition, the 

new spiritual bodies, described by the Apostle (1 Cor. 15:42-44,48-50), 

saying: "Thus also is the resurrection 

of the dead [the first or chief resurrection of the overcoming 

class amongst the dead]. ..It is sown in corruption, 

it is raised in incorruption"— all the marks 

and blemishes of sin which belong to the earthen vessel 

will be destroyed, "blotted out." When buried in 

death, the Church is actually imperfect, dishonorable 

and weak, except as her Lord's robe of righteousness 

is her covering, and his strength is made perfect in 

her weakness. But all these dishonorable, weak and 

imperfect conditions now covered are to be completely 

and everlastingly blotted out with the passing of the 

present life; for the promise to the overcomers is, "It 

is sown in dishonor, it is raised in glory; it is sown 

in weakness, it is raised in power; it is sown an animal 

body, it is raised a spiritual body"— the image of the 

heavenly one, our Lord. 

It was in harmony with this view of matters that 
the Apostle wrote "We [the newly begotten spirit beings, 
the Church] while in this tabernacle [earthly 
body] do groan; not that we desire to be unclothed 



[that we should lose our imperfect human bodies in 
death, and be obliged to wait or 'sleep in Jesus' until 
his second coming]; but that we might be clothed 
upon with our heavenly house [or spiritual bodies]"— 
experience the blessings of a participation in Christ's 
resurrection— the first resurrection.— Phil. 3:10-12; 
Rev. 20:6. 

The Apostle had in mind the same earnest desire of 
the spirit-begotten ones for the completion of the work 
of grace in them at the resurrection, when he said: 
"Ourselves, also, which have the first fruits of the spirit, 
even we groan within ourselves, waiting for the adoption 
—to wit, the deliverance of our body— [the Church 
—from the bondage of corruption into the glorious 
liberty of full sonship]." Rom. 8:23. The "wedding 
garment" of Christ's imputed righteousness, under 
which are granted to us all the privileges of sons without 
removing our weaknesses and frailties, leaves us 
to wage a warfare with these, thus to prove our love 
of righteousness and our faithfulness to the commands 
of "him who called us out of darkness into his marvelous 
light," and to become sharers of his sufferings, 
and of the glories to follow. Through the merit of 

R2195 : page 227 

our robe we were begotten to the new mind, the new 

nature; and it will serve every purpose until such times 

as we shall have proved ourselves faithful as new creatures, 

and shall be permitted to pass from the probationary 

sonship to the enjoyment of the full measure 

of the Father's blessing and complete adoption into 

his family and nature. But there, at the moment of 

transition, when being received from the begotten and 

probationary stage of sonship into the everlasting state, 

it is eminently proper, and all that we would ask or 

desire, that every trace of the hitherto covered and forgiven 

sins and blemishes should be blotted out, and 

no longer need covering. And all this is a part of the 

Divine provision for those who love God, "the [faithful] 

called ones according to his purpose." Then, it 

will be that that which is perfect having come, "that 

which is in part [our present standing graciously covered 

with Christ's imputed righteousness, covering 

our defects] will be done away." 

"Oh, hail happy day! 

That ends our tears and sorrows, 

That brings us joy without alloy; 

Oh, hail happy day! 

No more by doubts and fears distressed, 

We now shall gain our promised rest, 

And be forever blest, 

Oh, hail happy day!" 

The tears and sorrows and battlings in strife 
against the world, the flesh and the devil are all very 
necessary in the present time; and we should neither 



hope nor expect to be crowned as victors, without 
passing through such experiences. In this battle, we 
learn not to think of ourselves more highly than we 
ought to think; we learn of our own weaknesses and 
imperfections and our need to walk closely with the 
Lord, if we would keep our garments unspotted from 
the world. We learn also to trust his grace, and that 
"our sufficiency is of God." We learn that "greater is 
he who is on our part than all they that be against 
us." We learn that the victory that overcometh the 
world is neither the strength and perfection of our 
flesh, nor merely the strong resolution of our minds, 
but the latter helped and strengthened by him who 
assures us that his strength can be perfected in our 
weakness. It is here that we learn that all things are 
working together for good to them that love God. 
In this battle with the world, the flesh and the devil 

R2195 : page 228 

we learn also to appreciate the whole armor of God: 

the value of the "helmet of salvation," the intellectual 

appreciation of the Divine plan and promises; the 

value of the "breastplate of righteousness," Christ's 

righteousness covering our most vital parts; the value 

of "the shield of faith," which is able to quench all 

the fiery darts of the Adversary; and the invincible 

quality and sharpness of "the sword of the spirit, which 

is the Word of God"; and to put on the preparation 

of the gospel in a meek, patient and quiet spirit, which, 

as sandals, permits us to pass over the sharpest difficulties 

of life successfully. In this conflict we learn 

to cultivate the graces of the spirit, through many trials 

and temptations; which though for the time being are 

not pleasant but grievous, nevertheless work out for 

all who are rightly exercised thereby, "a far more exceeding 

and eternal weight of glory." 

The Apostle in our text declares that the blotting 
out of the Church's sin shall be in connection with 
"times of refreshing" or spirit outpouring, at the second 
advent of our Lord. How consistent this is with 
reason, and with all the facts of the case: it was after 
our Lord Jesus had bought us with his precious blood 
that the Heavenly Father granted to his Church a 
great blessing, a season of refreshing from the presence 
of the Lord, at Pentecost, as marking his approval of all 
covered by the "wedding garment," and as a foretaste 
of his greater blessing, to be bestowed when her trial 
would be complete, and the sins actually blotted out. 
That season of Pentecostal refreshing from the Divine 
presence, under the blessed influence of which Peter 
was preaching when he used the words of our text, 
was only an earnest or hand-payment of the great 
perfect refreshment and spirit-energizing that will come 
to the Lord's people at the farther end of the narrow 
way, when the Bridegroom shall come to receive to 



his nature and his throne and to confess her before 
his Father and the holy angels. As the Apostle intimates 
in our text, the very first work then will be the 
complete blotting out of the Church's sins, in the first 
resurrection. 

And immediately following this perfecting of the 
Church will come a work for the world— "times of 
restitution of all things which God hath spoken by 
the mouth of all the holy prophets since the world 
began." This signifies a similar blessing (blotting out 
of sins) upon all the world of mankind, who shall then, 
after being brought to a knowledge of the truth, obediently 
accept the Divine mercy under the terms of the 
New Covenant. Since man as originally created was 
in the moral likeness of his Creator, but has lost that 
likeness by the blemishes of sin, restitution to the likeness 
lost, would signify the blotting out of those blemishes 
wrought by sin. But there will be a great difference 
between the blotting out of the sins of the obedient, 
overcoming Church and the blotting out of the 
sins of the obedient ones of the world. The Church's 
sins will be instantly blotted out in the moment of the 
resurrection; the world's sins will be gradually blotted 
out during the period of Christ's reign— during the 
Millennium. The terms and conditions will be different 
also. While the Church has her sins and imperfections 
covered during the period of her trial, and 
does not have her efforts to overcome the weaknesses 
of the flesh rewarded by physical restitution, but is 
rewarded instantaneously at the end of her race, according 
to her faith and her endeavors to conquer, the obedient 
of the world, in the next age, will, on the contrary, 
have their sins blotted out, not as the reward of 
faith and effort merely; but as the reward of successful 
and continuous effort, which will then be possible, 
and be rewarded step by step with restitution blessings 
or the gradual blotting out of sins. 

Describing the judgment (trial) of the world during 
the Millennial Age, our Lord shows that all will 
then be "judged according to their works"— not according 
to their faith, as the Church is now being judged. 
(Rev. 20:12,13; 1 Jno. 5:4.) Faith, which is now 
difficult and therefore highly rewarded, will by and by, 
when the mists have rolled away, be the most easy and 
only reasonable thing; and while it will be required, being 
easy it will not be specially rewarded as now. And 
perfect works, which under present conditions are impossible 
with all our efforts, because of our blemished 
bodies, will then be the standard for which and toward 
which all who attain to everlasting life will be required 
to labor, building up character in breaking off evil 
propensities and in bringing themselves into full accord 
with righteousness in thought, word and deed. 
And under the favorable conditions of that time, a 
restitutionary blessing will be present to reward every 
effort, not only with an upbuilding of moral character 



and will-power, but also with proportionate strength 
and upbuilding of the mental and physical powers. 
Thus, item by item and step by step, throughout 
the Millennial Age, the worthy ones of the world will 
be helped out of their weakness and imperfections, 
back to the perfection originally lost by the disobedience 
of father Adam, the right to return to which 
(by the cancellation of Adam's sentence) was secured 
by the ransom-price given by our Redeemer. And 
since every victory over self and sin and imperfection 
will be promptly rewarded, it will be rightly seen 
that the blotting out of the world's sins will gradually 
progress little by little, until at the close of the Millennial 
Age, all who have been willing to hear and obey 
the voice of the Great Prophet (Head and Body), will 
have attained to an unblemished perfection, mental, 

R2195 : page 229 

physical and moral, with none of the blemishes of sin 
remaining. 

Mankind, as originally created, as represented in 
father Adam before his transgression, was in the image 
of God: the mind, the will, the judgment were true 
copies of the Lord's; and thus it might properly be 
said that Adam had the law of God written in his 
heart, in his head, in his very organization. But, this 
Divine likeness has been marred, ruined by the fall. 
Man's organization, mental and moral, can no longer be 
said to be in the image of God. The selfish qualities have 
grown at the expense of the moral and intellectual 
qualities, so that he is very unlike his Creator, and 
his own original, as represented in Adam. But God's 
promise is that when he begins to deal with the world 
under the New Covenant in the hands of the Great 
Mediator, a great work will be accomplished for all 
the families of the earth who will obey him through 
the then exalted seed of Abraham; until all shall be 
blessed and be permitted to become God's people— 
"Israelites indeed," children of Abraham through faith 
—multitudinous as the sands of the sea. 

Then will be fulfilled the promise of the Lord 
(Jer. 31:29-34), that they who die will die for their own 
iniquity, and not as now, for Adam's iniquity. And 
under the conditions of the new covenant, the Great 
Mediator of that covenant will re-write the law of God 
in the hearts of the repentant ones, as it originally was 
in the heart and very organism of Adam before his 
transgression: as it is written, "I will put my law in 
their inward parts, and write it in their hearts; I will 
be their God, and they shall be my people." This 
promise does not apply to the present time, but indicates 
the completed results of the Millennial work, 
when the willing and obedient of mankind shall have 
been brought to perfection; all their iniquities and sins 
being blotted out. This is shown by the context, 



which says, "They shall teach no more every man his 

R2196 : page 229 

neighbor and every man his brother, saying, 'Know 
the Lord'; for they shall all know him, from the least 
of them unto the greatest of them, saith the Lord: 
for I will forgive their iniquity, and I will remember 
their sins no more." 

This blotting out of sins for the world during the 
Millennial Age will begin with Israel according to the 
flesh; "to the Jew, first." So the Apostle informs us 
in so many words. Read Romans 11:25-29. As spiritual 
Israel is the first-fruits of all God's creatures, the 
first to enter into the fullness of his blessing and be 
recovered from death, so natural Israel is to constitute 
the first-fruits of the nations to be saved from the blinding 
influences of the Adversary, and to be granted a 
blessing under the New Covenant. 

But, the blessing which begins with the return of 
fleshly Israel to Divine favor, will not end with them; 
for as the casting away of Israel under Divine providence 
resulted in the bringing in of some from amongst 
the Gentiles to be joint-heirs in the Abrahamic promise 
and covenant, so the blessing of Israel under the New 
Covenant means, not only an opportunity of life from 
the dead to them, but also a similar blessing of opportunity 
for all the families of the earth; because it is 
through the seed of Abraham (first the spiritual, secondly, 
the natural) that all the families of the earth 
are to be blessed with an opportunity of becoming children 
of Abraham, who is the "father" of all who are 
faithful to God. Thus, eventually, there shall none 
remain except the seed of Abraham, first the spiritual 
seed as the stars of heaven, and secondly, the earthly 
seed, as the sands of the seashore, all partakers of father 
Abraham's faith and obedience. See 
Romans 11:12,15. 

The original perfection of mankind (father Adam) 
and the fall were symbolically represented in the first 
tables of the Law which God himself prepared and 
wrote, but which were broken, because of sin; they 
also represented the Law Covenant, and how it was a 
failure, broken so far as the people of Israel were concerned. 
The hewing out of the new tables of stone, 
whereon to rewrite the Law of God, symbolized the 
preparation of mankind, through the justification accomplished 
by the sacrifice of Christ. And not only 
was the preparation of the second tablets the work of 
Moses (type of Christ, Head and Body), but also the 
second writing of the law on those tables was the work 
of Moses and typified the work of Christ (Head and 
Body) during the Millennial Age— the engraving of 
the Law of God in the very hearts and constitutions 
of all of mankind, willing to submit to his gracious 
hands. 



R2196 : page 229 

"I WILL COME AGAIN AND RECEIVE YOU." 

--AUGUST 8.-1 THESS. 4:9-5:2.- 

WHILE our lesson deals chiefly with the second 
coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, it is introduced 
with a description of the class who will rejoice 
in his second coming, and with good reason. The 
Apostle (vs. 9-12) points out some of the true characteristics 
of those to whom he elsewhere says, "Ye, 
brethren, are not in darkness that that day should overtake 
you as a thief; ye are all children of the light, and 
children of the day." 
An essential of Christian character is "the love of 

R2196 : page 230 

God," "the love of Christ," extending to all the household 
of faith possessed of his spirit; and a spirit of 
sympathy toward the entire "groaning creation." 

Although the Church at Thessalonica was composed 
of those who in respect to length of Christian 
experience were but "babes in Christ," yet very evidently 
the persecution which had come upon them 
had caused them to grow very rapidly. It was but a 
year since they had received the gospel, and yet the 
Apostle witnesses to their rapid development, as evidenced 
by their love one for the other; and not only 
love for the company at Thessalonica, but the 
breadth of their love extending to and manifesting an 
interest in all of the household of faith throughout the 
Province of Macedonia. The Apostle declares 
that this love of the brethren was a manifestation of 
the fact that they had been "taught of God." This 
reminds us of the statement of another apostle, "He 
that loveth not his brother, whom he hath seen, how 
can he love God, whom he hath not seen." 

One of the first effects of a knowledge of the grace 
of God in Christ, and of a full, thorough consecration 
to the Lord, is this love for all fellow-servants— "brethren." 
Would that the fervency and zeal of first love, 
both toward the Lord and toward the entire household 
of faith, might not only continue, but increase with 
all. But alas! many who start warmly and earnestly 
grow lukewarm— become captious, cynical, hypercritical, 
high-minded and self-assertive— and lose much of 
the simplicity, zeal and humility of their first faith and 
first love. This is the first attack of the great adversary 
through the weaknesses of the flesh, to re-ensnare 
those who have escaped his chains of darkness, and 
gotten to see some of the glory of God shining through 



Christ. If they do not resist these temptations, the 
effect is sure to be not only lukewarmness toward the 
Lord and his cause and the members of his body, but 
eventually the cultivation of the fruits of darkness, 
envy, malice, hatred, strife, instead of the fruits of the 
spirit of Christ, meekness, gentleness, patience, brotherly 
love and kindness. Hence, the Apostle urges the 
Church, "We beseech you, brethren, that ye increase 
more and more," in love and service one for the other, 
which imply a growth in all the graces of the Spirit. 

The expression "that ye study to be quiet" might 
be rendered literally "that ye be ambitious to be quiet," 
or that ye have a quiet ambition— not a restless bustling 
for notoriety and great exploits, but a quiet earnest 
perseverance in well-doing; in which condition the 
fruits and graces of the Spirit thrive best. They were 
to be ambitious also to attend to their own affairs, and 
to work with their own hands: home and family duties 
were not to be neglected. The religion of Christ is 
designed to enter into and blend with all the proper 
duties, perplexities, trials and pleasures of the home 
and family; and thus the majority can best let shine the 
light which they have received from the Lord. 

True, the light received will make a great change 
in many of the affairs of the home. It sets before us 
new ideals to be esteemed and to be copied. It introduces 
us to a new relationship, a new kindred— the 
family of God— and thus brings some new responsibilities 
and privileges. And if filled with the spirit of the 
truth, with love toward God and all who have any of 
his likeness, it will make us very zealous in the dispensing 
of the grace of God, which has brought so 
much blessing to our own hearts. But, we should not 
consider it necessarily the Lord's will that we all should 
go forth as public teachers, abandoning entirely our 
homes, trades, duties, responsibilities, etc. 

The Lord's call will never conflict with proper duties 
and responsibilities previously upon us. The man 
or the woman who has a family to provide for should 
not think of leaving such obligations, nor consider himself 
called to public preaching, if it would imply the 
neglect of duties and obligations already resting upon 
him. He or she, however, should quietly and thankfully 
be ambitious to do all in the Divine service that 
a proper regard for others dependent upon them would 
permit. On the other hand, those who are free to 
give time and energy to the Lord's service, and who 
have talents, should when they receive the truth, humbly 
present their all to the Lord and seek to use their 
every opportunity in his service as he shall open the 
way; and such consecrated ones should be very careful 
that they do not encumber themselves so as to hinder 
usefulness in such service. 

Not only have we duties and a ministry toward 
every member of the body of Christ, but (v. 12) we 
have certain responsibilities toward those who are without 



—in darkness, out of Christ. The Christian is to 
be a burning and shining light toward the world. The 
world sees not from the inside, as does the household 
of faith, but merely from the outside; hence the necessity 
that Christians should so live before the world as 
to be "living epistles, known and read of all men," 
honoring to the Lord and to the teachings of his Word. 
The Apostle's statement really is "walk honorably 
toward them that are without." The Christian life 
should be seen by the world, not merely as just and 
honest, but also as noble and honorable. There are 
honest people who are mean, truthful people who tell 
the truth in a combative and repellant manner; in the 
true Christian, love should produce so generous a 
sentiment as would ennoble every virtue. In other 
words, as the same Apostle expressed it, "He that giveth, 
let him do it with simplicity (without ostentation)"; 
"he thatruleth, with diligence"; "he that showeth 

R2196 : page 231 

mercy, with cheerfulness," etc., Rom. 12:7-20. 

To this end, also, the Christian should strive "to 
have need of nothing"— So far as possible not to be 
dependent upon charity— but, rather, as the Apostle 
elsewhere states it, in harmony with the foregoing, 
he should "labor, working with his hands at useful 
employment [not to accumulate great wealth, but] that 
he may have to give to him that needeth." (Eph. 4:28.) 
The Lord's instruction to fleshly Israel that they should 
lend, but should not borrow, may well be applied in 
principle by spiritual Israel. And this principle applies 
to buying on credit; which should be avoided by 
the Lord's people, and as a rule would be found advantageous 

R2197 : page 231 

to mankind in general. 

"THEM THAT SLEEP IN JESUS." 



Having given us some general idea respecting the 
brethren, their general character, etc., the Apostle proceeds 
to speak of their hopes. Under the Apostle's 
instruction, supplemented by Timothy's, the Church at 
Thessalonica had in a very short time attained a considerable 
knowledge of the Divine plan; much more 
apparently than is enjoyed by a majority of Christian 
congregations to-day. For instance, (1) They knew 
what many to-day are ignorant of, that their hope centered 
in the second coming of the Lord Jesus Christ, 
and their being gathered to him then. (2) They knew 
that their friends who had died were "asleep," and their 
hope was that they would be awakened from the sleep 



of death by the Lord at his second coming. Realizing 
that all hopes of eternal life depended upon the second 
coming of the Lord as the great Life-giver, there was 
no danger that the early Church should ever lose sight 
of this inspiring hope set before us in the gospel. And 
it is because this fact (that the dead "sleep" and cannot 
be awakened until the second advent) has been lost 
sight of for several centuries past, that faith in and 
hope for the Lord's second coming has so generally 
languished. It has come to be generally believed by 
Christian people that the dead do not "sleep," but are 
more awake than they ever were— that they go to 
heaven or to hell in the moment of dissolution; and 
that these conditions are permanent, unalterable. With 
such unscriptural thoughts before their minds, who 
can wonder that to them the second coming of the 
Lord is an event without special interest; and hence 
regarded lightly, and by many wholly disbelieved, and 
declared to be a useless, uninteresting and pernicious 
faith. 

However, "the brethren," who have been instructed 
by the Word of the Lord, and who do not follow 
"cunningly devised fables" originated by the deceiver, 
find that the Scriptures as a whole from Genesis to 
Revelation are illuminated with the grand hope of the 
coming of Messiah in glory and power, to establish his 
kingdom of righteousness in the earth, and to awaken 
and lift up those who have fallen under the hand of 
death; to give beauty for ashes, and the oil of joy for 
the spirit of heaviness— to as many as will accept his 
blessing, under the terms of the New Covenant sealed 
at Calvary with his own precious blood. 

The penalty against our race, as originally pronounced, 
was not a sleep of death, for a few days or for 
a few centuries; on the contrary, it was absolute death 
—destruction. But God had purposed a redemption 
from the curse of death, and for this purpose Christ 
Jesus came into the world and died, the just one for 
the unjust, that he might bring us to God— back to 
Divine favor, where the gift of God, eternal life, will 
be a possibility to the obedient. Ever since the ransom-price 
was paid at Calvary, and its acceptance 
manifested at Pentecost, it has been proper to regard 
the whole world as being no longer dead— wholly cut 
off from life— but as merely sleeping— waiting for the 
return of the Redeemer as the Awakener, Vivifier, 
Life-giver. 

In this sense of the word, all mankind, redeemed by 
the precious blood, may be said to "sleep in Jesus"; because, 
by his death Jesus bought the world, and secured 
for all another trial for life (instead of the one lost by 
father Adam through disobedience). And Jesus himself 
declared that as a consequence of his being lifted up as 
the great sin-offering upon the cross, he will yet 
"draw" all men unto him— thus showing that the world 
is not to be considered as dead, extinct, but as merely 



"asleep," waiting for the drawing time foreordained of 
the Father, and provided for by the ransom for all. 
This drawing, like the drawing exerted for the selection 
of the Church, will be through a knowledge of the 
truth, and signifies that all mankind will ultimately be 
made aware of God's gracious provision, under which 
if they will (when brought to a knowledge of the truth), 
they may obtain life everlasting. Since the majority 
of mankind went into death before the ransom was 
paid, this implies an awakening from death in order 
that they may be drawn or come to a knowledge of the 
truth. In harmony with this are the words of our 
Lord, that the hour is coming when all that are in the 
graves shall hear his voice and come forth; and then 
they that hear (obey) shall live (everlastingly). 

All have been redeemed by Jesus, who "gave his life 
a ransom for all"; and the fact that their death-sentence 
has been met, paid by the Redeemer, makes it proper 
that they may now be spoken of as "asleep in Jesus," 
instead of as being dead in Adam. The fact that many 
of them did not know of their redemption would work 
no greater hindrance than the fact that many of the 
same ones had no knowledge in particular of the original 

R2197 : page 232 

sentence through Adam— they came under Adamic 
sentence without choice or knowledge, and latterly 
came under the benefits of the redemption similarly 
without choice or knowledge— Rom. 5:18. 

That the Apostle in this connection in the use of 
the words "them also which sleep in Jesus," does not 
refer merely to the saints is very evident, when we 
remember that the gospel had only been preached at 
Thessalonica for one year, and that in that year not 
very many of the saints could have died. When we 
remember further that the saints are not very generally 
related, according to the flesh, we can readily see that 
in appealing to their hopes that they should sorrow 
not as others, the Apostle must have meant not only 
hopes for the saints, but also hopes for all of their 
friends who died— including those who had previously 
died. If their hopes were merely for the saints, and 
if they believed that all others were hopelessly and 
everlastingly lost, it would be in vain that the Apostle 
would appeal to them not to sorrow as others who have 
no hope; for, such bad hopes respecting the great majority 
of their dying and dead friends and relatives 
would be a cause for more sorrow than they or any 
other heathens could have had when they had no 
knowledge, and no definite hopes. 

This is set forth by the Apostle (v. 14): he points 
out that our faith is built upon the fact, (1) that Christ 
died; and (2) that he rose again. He died for our sins, 
"and not for ours only, but also for the sins of the 
whole world" (1 John 2:2). His resurrection is an 



evidence that his sacrifice was acceptable on behalf 
not only of his Church, but also on behalf of all for 
whom he died; and it becomes a guarantee or pledge, 
not only of God's gracious proposition, that he will in 
his own due time establish Christ and his Church as his 
kingdom, but a guarantee, also, of the further promise 
that Christ's kingdom when established shall "bless all 
the families of the earth," with "the knowledge of the 
truth." Believing this, we are bound to believe also 
that all who were redeemed by his precious blood shall, 
according to his promise, yet come forth from the sleep 
of death to hear his Word as the great Law-giver of 
the new dispensation; and by obedience to it, under 
the New Covenant, sealed by the precious blood, to 
have if they will the gift of God, eternal life, through 
Jesus Christ our Lord. (See Acts 3:22,23.) As God 
accepted the sacrifice of Christ and raised him from the 
dead, even so, them also which sleep in Jesus will God 
bring [from the sleep of death] with him— through his 
instrumentality. 

But let us not confound this thought of the future 
of the whole world being changed from "death" to 
"sleep" by the ransom which Jesus gave for all, with 
the very different expression "new creatures in Christ," 
and "the dead in Christ," expressions which are applicable 
to the elect Church only. 

IN JESUS, VS. IN CHRIST. 



Many will notice at a glance that the name Jesus, 
which signifies Saviour, has special applicability to the 
ransom and restitution features of our Lord's work, 
while the name Christ is the title of his kingly office. 
The call to "be baptized into Jesus Christ" (the anointed) 
is an offer which is restricted to the "called and chosen 
and faithful," "elect" Church of this Gospel age; but 
the redemptive benefits covered by the name Jesus are 
"for all," for "every man," for "whosoever will" accept 
those mercies on New Covenant conditions. 

So, then, in the language of the Apostle, we exhort 
Christians that in respect to all their dead, in 
Christ and out of Christ— new creatures and old creatures, 
those enlightened and blessed by the marvelous 
light of the gospel, and those who have died while yet 
blinded to the truth by "the god of this world," that 
they sorrow not as others who have no hope. We believe 
that Jesus died for all, and that he has risen, and 
that all the dead on this account are to be reckoned as 
sleeping, waiting for his return and his exaltation with 
his elect bride in glory; and that then all whom God 
counts as asleep in or on account of or through him 
and his work, shall be also brought from the dead. 

And few have noticed the frequency with which 
the Scriptures use this word "sleep." Notice that it is 



used three times in three successive verses in this lesson. 
Notice also the following instances: Jno. 11:11,12; 
Acts 7:60; 13:13,36; 2 Peter 3:4; 1 Cor. 15:6,13-18,20,51; 
Matt. 9:24; 13:25; 25:5; Mark 5:39; Luke 8:52; 
1 Thess. 5:10; Matt. 27:52; 1 Cor. 11:30. 

These instances of the use of the word sleep, instead 
of the word death, are all from the New Testament, 
and used in full view of the ransom by which 
all were redeemed from the Adamic sentence, and a 
majority of them after the sacrifice had been given. 
What was the custom previously? Looking back we 
find Daniel (12:1-3) prophetically speaking of those 
who "sleep in the dust of the earth," and describing 

R2198 : page 232 

the sleepers as of two classes— some who will awake 

to everlasting life, and some to shame— the latter representing 

those whose trial will take place during the 

Millennium. And similarly of the kings and prophets 

one after another, good and bad, it is declared he "slept 

with his fathers." 

The basis for this expression and of the faith in 
a future life which it implied is explained by our Lord 
saying, "That the dead are [to be] raised, even Moses 
showed at the bush" (Luke 20:37). "Have ye not read in 
the book of Moses, how in the bush God spake unto him 

R2198 : page 233 

saying, I am the God of Abraham, and the God of 

Isaac, and the God of Jacob" (Mark 12:26). "He is 

not a God of the dead [the extinct, for whom no future 

is designed] but [he is the God] of the living, because 

all live unto him" (Luke 20:38). It was as a result of 

this lesson the Jews thereafter spoke of their dead as 

"asleep," and "waiting for the morning" to be "awakened." 

And, be it noticed, God's grounds for speaking 

of humanity as yet having a hope of life beyond the 

grave, rests not upon any change of the sentence from 

death (extinction) to a profound "sleep" for a period, 

but upon his predetermined plan to provide a Savior 

who would redeem or purchase back for Adam and all 

his race "that which was lost" of privilege of life everlasting 

in harmony with God. 

If, then, sentence of death which came upon all 
men by Adam's transgression is changed to a sleep, 
through whom came the change? We answer, It is in 
or through Jesus that they may now be said to sleep; 
because his sacrifice is the ground for the expression 
"sleep." 

Having spoken of the general hopes of the entire 
"groaning creation" which all centre in the second 
coming of our Lord, the Apostle delivers, not an opinion 
or a guess, but a special message, to the effect that 
the sleeping saints will suffer no less by reason of having 



fallen asleep, but that, on the contrary, they will be 
granted a priority over the living saints, in that they 
will be "changed," "glorified," be like and see the 
Lord, and share his glory, before those of the same 
class who are alive at that time. Elsewhere we have 
given at considerable length our reasons for believing 
that the shout, the voice and the trumpet here mentioned 
by the Apostle are symbols, as in other parts of 
the Scriptures— for instance, the shouts, voices and 
trumpets of Revelation, connected with the same topic. 
See Millennial Dawn, Vol. II., chapter V., particularly 
pages 143-150. 

It would appear that the Church at Thessalonica 
had been studying this subject of the Lord's second 
coming, and were fearful lest some of them might "fall 
asleep" before his coming, and were doubtful as to how 
much of the blessing might thus be lost by them, as 
well as solicitous for their friends, hence the Apostle 
says, "Comfort one another" with these words. 

We here notice that the word coming in verse fifteen 
is in the Greek parousia, which really does not 
have the significance of our English word "coming," 
but instead signifies presence— after arrival— giving 
the thought that the Lord will be present before the 
dead in Christ are "raised," although that will be prior 
to the "change" of the living. This, as well as many 
other Scriptures, indicate distinctly that the Lord's 
presence will not be manifest, visible, to the world 
during this time; as our Lord said before he went 
away, "Yet a little while and the world seeth me no 
more." This thought is emphasized by the Apostle's 
subsequent remarks respecting the day of the Lord, 
and the fact that the world would not know of it, but 
only the "brethren" who were "not in darkness." 

It speaks well for the rapid growth in knowledge 
on the part of the Church at Thessalonica that the 
Apostle could say to them, "Of the times and seasons, 
brethren, you have no need that I write unto you: for 
yourselves know perfectly, that the day of the Lord so 
cometh as a thief in the night; and when they [the 
world, unbelievers] shall say, Peace and safety! then 
sudden destruction cometh upon them, as travail upon 
a woman with child, and they shall not escape; but, 
"ye brethren, are not in darkness that that day shall 
overtake you as a thief." How definitely the Apostle 
here separates the body of Christ, the Church, from 
the world; and how particularly he shows that the one 
class may, will, must have knowledge on this subject, 
while the other class must be in ignorance on the same 
subject. And that subject is a knowledge of the day 
of the Lord— the day of the Lord's presence— "the 
harvest" or end of this age, in which the great Chief 
Reaper will not only gather the sleeping ones first, but 
proceed also to seal and to gather all the living ones 
of the elect class, who shall be accounted worthy to 
escape the great things that are about to come upon 



the world, in the great time of trouble which will dissolve 
present institutions and make ready for the establishment 
of Christ and his little flock of joint-heirs, as 
the heavenly kingdom. 



R2198 : page 233 

SELF-DENIAL IN THE INTEREST OF OTHERS 

-AUGUST 15.-1 COR. 8:1-13.- 

GOD'S Word, both of the Old and New Testaments, 

has been, and yet is, the very cornerstone 

of human liberty and independence. Every other 

system of religion has tended more or less to fetter the 

mind and the conscience with priestcraft and superstition. 

And the various so-called Christian religions, 

from Roman and Greek Catholicisms down, have likewise 

tended toward priestcraft, superstition and conscience-bondage, 

in proportion as they have ignored 

the teachings of God's Word, substituting therefor the 

"traditions of the elders," Decrees of Councils, theological 

dogmas, etc. As we look over the world to-day, 

R2198 : page 234 

it is an unquestionable fact that the largest liberty, 
social, political and mental is possessed by the peoples 
who have the Bible, and who read it freely. And the 
largest Christian liberty amongst these is enjoyed by 
those who study it with the greatest candor and 
simplicity. 

But if this knowledge and liberty be not accompanied 
by a full self-surrender to God, a complete consecration 
of one's self to him who is the Author of our 
liberties and privileges, we stand in great danger; for, 
as the apostle here declares, knowledge alone without 
self-submission to God would incline to puff us up, 
to make us heady, arrogant, self-sufficient. But if 
the knowledge be accompanied by a love to God, which 
leads to self-consecration in his service, in harmony 
with his instructions, the knowledge will work good 
for us, by thus introducing the spirit of love as the 
controling factor in our lives, because the effect of love 
is to "build up" instead of to "puff up." Love is constructive, 
and tends not only to build up our own characters 
after the Divine pattern, but by so doing it makes 
us co-workers together with God, in our sympathies 
for and interest in others— in their upbuilding and general 
welfare. 

After making this point clear, the apostle proceeds 
to apply it to the Christians at Corinth. As in all other 
cities of the Gentiles at that time, there were plenty of 
idols, plenty of gods, and plenty of temples; and it was 



the custom to eat consecrated food— meat that had 

been offered before an idol. The Apostle assures his 

readers that he fully agrees with their knowledge and 

logic upon this subject; to the effect that since the idol 

is not a god, therefore the offering of meat to it could 

not in any manner injure the meat to those who really 

understood the matter. Their increase of knowledge 

had given them a liberty which they could not have appreciated 

at first; but he urges that as Christians it is 

our duty to consider not merely our own liberties, but 

in such cases to waive our liberties in the interest of 

others, upon whom the influence might be injurious. 

We should, therefore, be very careful in the use of our 

knowledge and liberties, to see that it worked no injury 

to others— or otherwise to abstain from such liberties 

as might be injurious to others. 

Every one knows how easy it is to meddle with 
the delicate machinery of a watch, and thus to render 
it absolutely useless. So the conscience is a delicate 
mechanism, and we should be on guard against any 
and every influence which might injure either our own 
conscience or the consciences of others. The Corinthian 
brethren who fully understood that an idol was nothing, 
and that an idol temple was therefore nothing, might 
be fully at ease in their own consciences, if as guests 
they attended a municipal feast or banquet in such an 
idol temple; they might be able even there to recognize 
the true God and to eat and drink with thankfulness 
to him; but there might be onlookers, or amongst 
them, other brethren with knowledge less clear upon 
these subjects, who, nevertheless, would want to follow 
their example, and who in so doing would be violating 
and injuring their consciences. And no one could 
know what serious results might come from such a 
violation of conscience; the conscience which submitted 
to violation reluctantly at first, would incline 
to become hardened, and finally would cease to speak 
at all. And the owner of that conscience would be 
likely to drift according to the inclinations of his fallen 
nature into the very worst extremes of depravity. For 
this reason those who have knowledge of the Divine 
Word and the liberties wherewith Christ makes free, 
need more than ever an increase of the Divine spirit- 
charity, love— which would make them careful that 
their every act would not only be in harmony with 
their own consciences, but such, also, as would not 
prove stumbling blocks to the consciences of others, 

R2199 : page 234 

whose knowledge or logic could grasp the situation 
less clearly. 

To fail to have this love and this active, self-sacrificing 
consideration for the welfare and conscience of a 
weaker brother, the Apostle declares would not only be 
a sin against the brethren and wound their consciences, 



but a sin also against Christ— against the very spirit of 
his law of love one for the other. How nobly the Apostle 
sums this matter up when he declares that as for himself, 
if he found it necessary, in order that he 
might be a help to the brethren, and not a stumbling 
block to any, he would take pleasure in denying himself, 
not only the meat offered to idols, but all meat of 
every kind, as long as he lived. Paul thus manifested 
the true spirit of brotherly love; and every follower 
of the Lord Jesus Christ should seek to have this same 
spirit and sentiment active in all their intercourse with 
each other. 

While there is nothing in this lesson directly bearing 
upon intoxicating liquors, the principle inculcated 
can be very properly applied to the great evil of intemperance 
which is doing so much injury to the whole 
world, and in some cases even to those who have named 
the name of Christ. We do not dispute the principle 
of liberty, that each Christian has a right to decide the 
right and wrong of such matters according to his own 
conscience, but we do offset this knowledge and liberty 
with the doctrine of love, as the Apostle does in this 
lesson. Whoever is a child of the King, not only has 
liberty, but must also have the spirit of love; and he 
who boasts the liberty and manifests nothing of the 
spirit of love and consideration for others, raises the 
question whether he is a bastard or a son; for if any 

R2199 : page 235 

man have not the spirit of Christ (love), he is none of 
his. 

The Christian whose heart is full of the Lord's 
spirit of love will not only be careful that he may set 
a good example before the brethren, lest they should 
be stumbled, but he will also be careful of the example 
which he sets to his own sons and household, and to 
all "them who are without"— those who have not yet 
accepted the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, but who 
are reading the lives and characters of his disciples, as 
living epistles of his doctrines. 



Incidentally our lesson brings before us a very 
clear and positive statement respecting God. While 
the world has many that it calls gods and lords and 
masters, to the Christian, as the Apostle expresses it, 
"There is but one God, the Father." The Apostle 
evidently knew nothing of the doctrine, started in the 
second century, and patterned after the heathen ideas, 
to the effect that there are three gods, of whom the 
catechisms declare that they are "equal in power and 
in glory." The Apostle knew of only one God who was 
supreme, "the Father." And he declares that of him 
(proceeding from him, directly or indirectly) are all 



things, including ourselves, who are his children. 

But, the Apostle by no means ignored our Lord 
Jesus Christ, who claimed to be not "the Father," but 
"the Son of God." Of him the Apostle has elsewhere 
said after telling us how he humbled himself for our 
sakes, leaving the glory of the Father's presence in 
obedience to the Father's will and plan, and how he 
suffered for us, the just for the unjust, death itself, even 
the death of the cross," then adds, "Him hath God highly 
exalted, and given him a name that is above every name, 
that at the name of Jesus every knee should bow, both 
of things in heaven and things on earth, to the glory of 
God, the Father"— and that all men "should honor the 
Son, even as they honor the Father." Nor does the 
Apostle here omit to mention Jesus, but says, that to 
us there is "one Lord, Jesus Christ, by whom are all 
things, and we by him." 

How clearly and how simply the Apostle states the 
relationship existing between the glorified Father, the 
glorified Son, and all the creation of God, which is or 
will be blessed through the Son. Although, all things 
are of the Father, in the sense that the original power, 
life, etc., proceeded from the Father, nevertheless all 
things are by the Son, in the sense that he from the 
very beginning has been the Father's active and honored 
agent in every feature of the Divine plan. Himself 
declared to be "the beginning of the creation of 
God," it is also declared that "all things were made by 
him, and without him was not anything made that was 
made" (though of the Father, by the Father's power, 
etc.). See Rev. 3:14; Jno. 1:2,3; also our issue for 
June '92 and April 15, '93. 



page 235 

INTERESTING LETTERS. 



Ontario. 

DEAR BROTHER IN CHRIST:-I must say that I 
have been surprised, delighted and astonished beyond 
measure at the truth revealed in your tract on hell. 
Oh, how I have been deluded by the traditions of men! 
How I have misrepresented and traduced God in preaching 
such a doctrine. 

I have been outside of all sects and systems of men 
for years, yet bound by the traditions of men, when I 
thought myself free. May he, the spirit of truth, 
guide me quickly into his perfect light. 

I would be pleased to circulate any literature on 
these subjects that you have for free distribution in 
this dark town in which I live, and will send you my 
subscription for ZION'S WATCH TOWER as soon as I 



am able. Yours in Christ, I. W. HAMMOND. 



Kansas. 

TOWER PUBLISHING CO.:-Through the Christian 
kindness of my brother I have been furnished VOLS. 
L, II. and III. of MILLENNIAL DAWN. How blind 
and stiff-necked I have been, I can hardly tell. After 
reading the first volume I was not at all convinced, 
but through courtesy to my brother I re-read it, the 
second time comparing references carefully. Then I 
commenced at Isaiah's prophecy, and read all the prophets 
and the New Testament through. And altho I 
had read the same many times, I was surprised at what 
I found there, that I had never seen before. Five years 
ago I felt my ignorance of the Word of God, not being 
able to "rightly divide the word of truth," so I sought 
the Lord, pleading that promise, "If any lack wisdom, 
let him ask of God, who giveth to all men liberally, 
and upbraideth not." And how wonderfully he has 
answered my prayers! I am now feasting on the hidden 
manna. 

Yesterday I stepped out of the ship [the nominal 
church— ED.], alone on the troubled sea. For a little 
while I felt as if I was sinking, when I heard, by faith, 
"Oh thou of little faith, wherefore didst thou doubt." 
MRS. S. C. SMITH. 



California. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-We rejoice in the 
truth. Our pet doctrines, immortality of the soul, everlasting 
torment, triune God, have been exchanged for 
the pure gold. Now we can do nothing against the 
truth, but feel it our reasonable service to do all we 
can for the truth. 

Silver and gold we have not; but such as we have, 
our time, testimony and influence to serve the truth to 
others, we give. We appreciate your offer very much, 
in sending us tracts for free distribution, as it opens the 
way to have a little talk and then leave the silent messenger 
with them (the people). They will read the 
tract, but cannot argue with it. The tract entitled 
"The Wages of Sin" proved a great blessing to me. I 

page 236 

marked it well, and accompanied with a long letter sent 
the same to a friend. 

I have learned to appreciate this kind of reading 
matter so much, because of the glorious light it has 
brought me— "glad tidings of great joy." Blessed be 
God, I have learned to love him better, because I know 
him better and his wonderful plan; in fact it has brought 



me into harmony as a co-worker with him, and I am 
able to understand and willingly do the work he has 
for me to do in this harvest time. 

A strong sectarian spirit prevails in this place. 
Something that will strike at the root of this evil with 
the many false doctrines and teachings of the popular 
denominations seems to be one thing needful. You 
may judge as to what tracts would suit, and I will 
faithfully distribute the same. 

We shall be glad to take up the colporteur work 
and do what we can along that line. Will let you know 
when we are ready to take up that work. We know 
much good is accomplished in that way. 

Yours in the love of God and the fellowship of the 
one spirit, P. J. SHOQUIST. 



Michigan. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-Allow me to address 
you a few lines concerning the effect of your work, the 
I., II. and III. volumes of MILLENNIAL DAWN, upon 
me. It found me through a friend in a creed bed. And 
reading and examining it I found the bed too short. 
I was acting as superintendent of a Sunday School at 
the time, and I resigned and withdrew from the Evangelical 
Association; not without a church meeting, 
however. 

I was able to get a great deal of truth before them, 
and the minister, having more knowledge of the Scriptures 
than the rest, and I having given him my reason 
for withdrawing before the meeting, confessed to the 
truth privately, but simply said he would have to defend 
the discipline or he could not preach. He lacked 
a love and appreciation of the truth. He could not 
condemn and did not do so, but by his silence allowed 
the members to condemn the truth. 

This step cost me the friendship of all my neighbors 
for a time, but they have shown every respect 
since, tho the minister keeps them so guarded that I 
cannot get them to read MILLENNIAL DAWN and examine 
the truth for themselves. 

I am so thankful to God for his great mercy to me 
in revealing this truth to me. Oh! I desire strength to 
fight the good fight of faith to the end. I pray God 
to be with you in his might in strengthening you in 
spreading the truth, and may the Lord reward you for 
your good work, as no one else is able to bless. Pray 
for me. Yours in Christ, L. L. PARNEY. 



Ontario. 
DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I take the liberty of 
writing to thank you for your very clear, forcible, logical, 
convincing and satisfactory presentation of the 



truth in your three volumes of MILLENNIAL DAWN. 
Altho I have been acquainted with the Word of God 
from childhood, I never knew so much of my heavenly 
Father's glorious provision for our fallen race as I 
have learned since reading your valuable works. While 
I am surprised and ashamed that for so many years I 
knew nothing of what is so clearly pointed out in God's 
Word, I feel very thankful that at eventide it is light. 
Praise the Lord for clearly revealing his glorious purposes, 
which till lately were hidden from me. I long 
to tell others the blessed tidings that gladden my heart. 
Glory to God, my Savior is here; Christ, the divine 
Bridegroom is present. 

Since I have seen something of the Millennial 
Dawn, I have been trying to point others to its glorious 
light. I have conversed about it whenever I had an 
opportunity, and lent DAWNS to any who were willing 
to read them. Last May I publicly left the Methodist 
church of which I had been a member from my youth. 
All our family were members of that church, but two 
of them have left because they are believers in the great 
truths you teach. Our youngest son, who lives at M., 
left before I did. He is very diligent and earnest in 
his efforts to spread the light. 

The people here are strongly prejudiced against 
what they think are new doctrines. One of them told 
me he wanted to die in the same faith as his fathers. 
I told him that if all his forefathers had been of his 
opinion they would have been Roman Catholics, and 
farther back they were heathen. One man to whom I 
lent the DAWNS acknowledged that no one could disprove 
them, but said that it was hard to give up opinions 
that had been instilled into the mind in childhood. 
Some are so prejudiced that they will not read the books 
at all. We never tire of reading them and the TOWERS 
over and over again. 

My husband joins with me in kind regards to yourself 
and Sister Russell. May the Lord bless you abundantly 
in your great work. Your Sister in Christ, 
MRS. ELIZABETH HALL. 



Ohio. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I bless God for the 
MILLENNIAL DAWN, for it has removed all doubts 
and fears and revealed to me the perfect plan of God 
for the redemption of man, and I have since reading it 
made a personal acquaintance with my Savior, our Lord 
Jesus Christ, and he is now ruling supreme in my heart, 
and I am looking for his coming [the full establishment 
of his Kingdom?] when I shall see him as he is 
and be like him. O, bless the Lord all my soul! 

I was groping in darkness, but I was seeking after 
truth, and hungering and thirsting after righteousness, 
and bless God he has filled me and given me the Comforter, 



who he has promised shall abide with me forever. 

I will tell you how the DAWN happened to fall into 
my hands. One day in looking over the books in 
the Public Library, under the head of Religion, I saw 
this book, and in scanning its pages I thought it was 
just what I wanted, so I took it home and read it on 
three different occasions, and it has been a great blessing 
to me; and not only to me, but I showed it to a 
friend of mine who had almost fallen into infidelity, 
and was attending meetings of a club which is composed 
of Anarchists, Communists and Socialists, and 
proffered to believe in their teachings; but praise God, 
he is now interested in the truth, and my prayer is that 
the Lord will manifest himself to him that he may 
make a personal acquaintance with Him and accept the 
ransom provided for all who will accept its benefits. 

Yours in Christ, CHARLES PETERSON. 



page 237 