Do You Remember?
Have you read recent issues of The Watchtower carefully? If so, you will doubtless recall these points:
● What explains the remarkable friendship of Jonathan and David?
Jonathan, though heir apparent to the throne, accepted David as Jehovah’s choice for the kingship and loved him for his fine qualities.​—11/15 pp. 9-11.
● On what basis can people of all nationalities become spiritual Israelites?
This is on the basis of Jesus’ “corresponding ransom,” making it possible for them to be taken into the new covenant, of which Jesus Christ is the mediator. (1 Tim. 2:5, 6)​—11/15 p. 26.
● How can a person attain peace with God?
He must recognize himself as a sinner, acknowledging that he has no power within himself to prove pleasing to the Creator. Then, to gain forgiveness of sins, he needs to repent and accept the atoning sacrifice of Jesus Christ. After that, it is a matter of continuing to walk in harmony with the cleansing that a person has received through Christ’s sacrifice.​—12/1 pp. 7, 8.
● What does Jehovah God require of those who will gain everlasting life?
He requires that we manifest genuine faith in the fact that Jesus Christ took upon himself the full penalty for sin and is now “both Lord and Christ,” the promised Messianic King. (Acts 2:36) Such faith is demonstrated by sharing the “good news” with others, maintaining upright conduct and being willing to respond to the needs of fellow humans.​—12/15 pp. 7, 8.
● What might we be able to do to help bereaved fellow believers?
We may give them a hearing ear, showing that we care about them. A telephone call, a visit or an invitation to a meal can be encouraging. There may be opportunities to arrange for times to discuss comforting thoughts from the Scriptures. It may be that we can give of our time in helping them with essential affairs of life while they are caring for official or financial formalities. The circumstance may call for providing monetary help.​—1/1 pp. 25-27.
● Why could John the Baptizer proclaim, “The kingdom of the heavens has drawn near”?​—Matt. 3:2.
This was because Jesus Christ, the King-designate, was on the scene.​—1/15 p. 12.
● What happened to Ebed-melech because of his coming to the aid of Jehovah’s prophet Jeremiah, and what encouragement can be drawn from this?
Ebed-melech was promised his “soul as a spoil.” (Jer. 39:18) This meant that his soul or life would not fall prey to the Babylonian conquerors of Jerusalem. Like a person who rejoices over spoil, he could rejoice over retaining possession of his life. Similarly, a “great crowd” will be spared alive at the approaching “war of the great day of God the Almighty.” (Rev. 7:9-15; 16:14)​—2/1 pp. 26-28.
● What was pictured by the waving of the barley sheaf on Nisan 16?
This pictured the resurrection of Jesus Christ, “the firstfruits of those who have fallen asleep in death.” (1 Cor. 15:20)​—2/15 p. 9.
● When did the antitypical festival of booths begin, and when will it end?
This antitypical festival had its beginning when the Christian congregation came into existence on Pentecost 33 C.E. The joy of the congregation, however, did not continue, as an apostasy occurred. In modern times, Jehovah’s Witnesses entered a period of great joy from 1919 C.E. onward, thus resuming the antitypical festival of booths. Not until the completion of Christ’s 1,000-year reign does the antitypical festival come to its end.​—2/15 p. 22.

