Growth—Impelled by Jehovah
 1. Describe man’s outlook on growth.
THINGS are growing everywhere—animals, plants, trees, vegetation of all sorts, mankind, organizations, cities, countries, conditions, projects. In fact, where there is any kind of change, it may be called growth. Situations or conditions may grow from bad to worse. Because some cannot see outward changes, they conclude there is no growth. In this modern age man looks for great advancements and drastic changes. In communication, transportation, styles, architecture, entertainment, and everyday standards of living, man has been educated to expect and look for extraordinary changes. Changes often bring adventure and excitement that hold man’s attention and take him momentarily out of his bored view of everyday life. Yet day after day man looks at himself in the mirror and barely notices any changes. Physically he changes so very slowly. Having reached adult stature, he remains more or less the same for years. But what about the growth that is not apparent in a reflection on a mirror? What about mental balance, spiritual growth? Yes, what about growth of you as a servant of God?
 2. What stimulates growth? Can it be hindered?
2 Behind it all is the impelling force that pushes growth. Of course, we know that rain and nutrient soil induce growth of vegetation and that food also stimulates growth in man physically. But what is it that impels a person to grow spiritually? What is it that activates a person to worship God? What is it that not only keeps him faithful year after year but also causes ministers of God to grow still more fully in all those fruits of the spirit described at Galatians 5:22, 23? In the fields of vegetation and among animals we can always find those stunted ones, some that seem to be hindered in their growth somehow. On examination this can also be found in the Christian congregation. (See Galatians 5:7.) Why? Should not all those serving Jehovah be found flourishing and thriving on their rich spiritual diet?
 3. Give reasons for there being growth both physically and spiritually.
3 To serve the purpose for which a creature is made, there must be growth both physically and spiritually. Physical growth is impelled by Jehovah, because he supplied the material things in the first place for man’s needs and enjoyment. He has maintained an abundant supply of food, air and water through generations of time, and even though man has abused these provisions, billions of mankind still live by making use of these essentials for life. Jehovah has not held back in supplying these needs, nor has he followed the course man takes sometimes of restricting the few good people because of the misuse by the many bad people. No, “he makes his sun rise upon wicked people and good and makes it rain upon righteous people and unrighteous.” (Matt. 5:45) He also supplied his Word, his Son and his spirit to nurture man for growth. Though he is ignored and opposed, we still have God’s Word available in many languages. His Son is still alive, the ransom is still paid and its benefits are kept open to the whole world of mankind. (John 3:16) God’s spirit operates as well today to accomplish his will as it did at the very beginning.—Gen. 1:2; 2 Pet. 1:21.
 4. Illustrate the pleasure of enjoying life while growing.
4 Jehovah has provided more than just the bare essentials. There is an overabundance, extras that add so much to the pleasure of just living. Consider the necessity of eating. One can survive quite easily by taking in plain food in any hurried fashion and limited facilities. But, spend a little more time preparing the food, adding tasty flavors and spices; serve each course in an appetizing, colorful manner, arrange the table in simple colorful settings, add the warmth of flickering candles. Surround the table with appreciative friends, hear their pleasant, happy conversation, perhaps with soft relaxing music in the background. Is not this a most enjoyable occasion? One or all of these extras prove to be growth-stimulating, much more so than just taking in food on the run. Yet all these are extra features that man can enjoy, not only in eating, but in other aspects of life as well.
 5. Why can you not set up a schedule for someone else’s growth?
5 Another matter to remember is in dealing with your brothers. Everyone has a limit, and each one wisely knows his own. However, others often interfere with this personal responsibility by urging one beyond what he wants to do. It is the truth from God’s Word under Jehovah’s spirit that impels his people to greater service. They must answer to God for their actions. They respond to their own conscience. No one can listen to another person’s conscience or speak to God for him. Then it should not be necessary to question the whereabouts or motives of your brother, requiring a report from him on his every action. If your brother refuses an assignment or privilege of service, do not be hasty and conclude that he is slipping out of the truth. (Prov. 18:13) If his service drops some, he may be working on another facet of his ministry that requires attention and is his personal business. If someone takes a vacation or arranges a rest from strenuous activity, there is no need to get unduly excited. Jesus saw the need for rest and to get away from the press of everyday activity. After a very busy program the apostles gave a report to Jesus and he told them: “Come, you yourselves, privately into a lonely place and rest up a bit.” For “there were many coming and going, and it was not convenient even to eat a meal.” (Mark 6:31; see also Matthew 14:13.) Yet Jesus or the apostles were not growing weak in the faith or faltering in their growth as a result. Would you interfere with another man’s servant as he goes about his assigned duties? No, of course not. Well, that is how Paul puts the matter at Romans 14:4: “Who are you to judge the house servant of another? To his own master he stands or falls. Indeed, he will be made to stand, for Jehovah can make him stand.”
6, 7. (a) What are the weeds in the field of growth? How do they get started? (b) In what way can we protect ourselves from all invading doubts?
6 Doubts may be likened to weeds in the field of growing ministers, sapping strength and playing havoc with one’s contentment, peace of mind and joy in the service of Jehovah. Doubts may come as a result of insufficient knowledge on some subject, causing concern. Others may cultivate some personal like and, because it is not acknowledged at once, they find fault and begin to doubt Jehovah’s backing of his “faithful and discreet slave.” Some slack off in their worship and, being under constant bombardment by the spirit of independence and rebellion in this old system of things, they do not have the strength to keep doubts out of their thinking. Many become anxiously concerned over material food, clothes, homes and available luxuries, filling their mind with desirable things, which warps their sense of values and fills their thinking with a dread of being without them. Luke 12:29 counsels in this way: “So quit seeking what you might eat and what you might drink, and quit being in anxious suspense.”
7 Self-discipline has so much to do with defense against all invading doubts. Jesus said that, where faith was found, doubt would be missing. (Matt. 21:21) There is the need to protect one’s thinking then, and this calls for self-discipline, even as Proverbs 5:1, 2 vividly points out: “My son, to my wisdom O do pay attention. To my discernment incline your ears, so as to guard thinking abilities.” Paul points out at Philippians 4:7 that the peace of God “will guard your hearts and your mental powers by means of Christ Jesus.” If one keeps his mind working on some pursuit continually, he most likely desires to go in the direction of attaining that goal. This thinking is fed and strengthened then by further knowledge of this subject that appeals to the individual more strongly as time goes by, and this desire acts like a motor to impel one on to that goal. “For those who are in accord with the flesh set their minds on the things of the flesh.” (Rom. 8:5) If one does not want to arrive at that goal, then one has to exercise self-control and quit thinking about the matter. Proverbs 23:7 describes it this way: “For as one that has calculated within his soul, so he is.” Job explains that Jehovah acts in accordance with his thinking and desire; notice Job 23:13: “And he is in one mind, and who can resist him? And his own soul has a desire, and he will do it.”
8, 9. (a) How may some view life governed by Bible principles? (b) Describe briefly the realm in which man should be governed by reasonableness.
8 So it is that growth is often stopped or hindered because individuals do not spend the effort really to enjoy life. Others feel that to serve God and abide by the Bible principles is restrictive and hinders their growth. Yet an examination will reveal that, if one lives by Bible principles, he can grow to greater development and reach out farther than the majority of men have so far. The Bible brings to our attention a governing principle: “Let your reasonableness become known to all men.”—Phil. 4:5.
9 This field of reasonableness takes in our needs as a central point. On one hand will be our likes, wants, desires and the never-ending variety of things provided by Jehovah, our dislikes and the freedom that others are entitled to. On the other hand, outside the realm of reasonableness are found fads, rebellion, independence, fear, such as fear of man and of the future, fear of losing jobs, of running out of food, clothing and shelter, fear of death and calamity.
MAN’S NEEDS
10. What are man’s needs, and how are they cared for?
10 Our needs are simple, plain, body-sustaining food, found everywhere in the earth, bare essentials that keep man alive and strong enough to work. It may be bread, rice, fish, fruit, meat, vegetables, but it is there. Of this there is an assurance that is hundreds of years old and still in application, found at Psalm 104:14, 15, 24: “He is making green grass sprout for the beasts, and vegetation for the service of mankind, to cause food to go forth from the earth, and wine that makes the heart of mortal man rejoice, to make the face shine with oil, and bread that sustains the very heart of mortal man. How many your works are, O Jehovah! All of them in wisdom you have made. The earth is full of your productions.” And yet further, at Psalm 136:25: “The One giving food to all flesh: for his loving-kindness is to time indefinite.” We need clothing, and this was provided in early times of man’s existence by Jehovah. (Gen. 3:21) Shelter, another basic need, is constructed by man in various ways and in varied architecture by using the materials provided by Jehovah.
MAN’S LIKES AND DESIRES
11. Should man enjoy the things he desires and is able to obtain?
11 In addition to basic needs there are many things that we like and desire to have. In giving instructions to the Israelites, Jehovah told them: “You must also give the money for whatever your soul may crave in the way of cattle and sheep and goats and wine and intoxicating liquor and anything that your soul may ask of you; and you must eat there before Jehovah your God and rejoice, you and your household.” (Deut. 14:26) So we add to our needs tasty foods, variety in clothing, comforts in our homes, pleasant sounds to our ears and upbuilding association of our brothers. Jehovah holds out even more: “You are opening your hand and satisfying the desire of every living thing.”—Ps. 145:16.
ENDLESS VARIETY PROVIDED BY JEHOVAH
12. Do man’s desires exceed what Jehovah provided for him to use? Please explain.
12 But man’s desires, even those within his means, do not begin to use the quantity and quality of material things created by God for the enjoyment of man on earth. Paul exclaimed: “O the depth of God’s riches and wisdom and knowledge!” (Rom. 11:33) God’s wisdom is easily identified in multitudes of things for man. Our use of them is invited in this language: “Every creation of God is fine, and nothing is to be rejected if it is received with thanksgiving.” (1 Tim. 4:4) Limited? Explored in a few minutes? Ecclesiastes 8:17 reports on one investigator’s search: “And I saw all the work of the true God, how mankind are not able to find out the work that has been done under the sun; however much mankind keep working hard to seek, yet they do not find out. And even if they should say they are wise enough to know, they would be unable to find out.” There lies before man beauty beyond description. What painter’s brush or camera’s lens can capture the color, the depth, the feelings, the expanse of the heavens? Have you sampled all the flavors existent today? Have you heard all the music and songs of the earth? Have you joined in the carefree gaiety of the open-minded child, where every turn in the road reveals a never-to-be-forgotten experience? Have you experienced the wonderful world of people by associating with those of every nation and tribe of earth?
MAN’S DISLIKES AND PREJUDICES
13. How can we cause our prejudices to give way to reasonableness? What would be the safe course to follow?
13 Closely linked with pride and unstable tradition is prejudice, which springs from ignorance. It is usually found among those without sufficient knowledge of other people, and so they are willing to accept hearsay or unfounded propaganda. There are many kinds of prejudices: pride of race, of family, of country, of wealth, of class or profession, of religion, and over wrongs and other things. The attitude is a common one, ‘If I don’t like it, it’s wrong and should not be allowed.’ Peter spoke as recorded at Acts 10:34, 35: “For a certainty I perceive that God is not partial, but in every nation the man that fears him and works righteousness is acceptable to him.” Another scripture revealing Jehovah’s mind on the matter is found at 1 Corinthians 4:6, 7: “‘Do not go beyond the things that are written,’ in order that you may not be puffed up individually in favor of the one against the other. For who makes you to differ from another? Indeed, what do you have that you did not receive? If, now, you did indeed receive it, why do you boast as though you did not receive it?” Too many factors enter into your feelings affecting your decisions, so that it is not safe to go by your dislikes or prejudices. Your parents’ view, your own pliable years under various environments and present-day pressures from the spirit of this system of things will not allow you to be completely free of favoritism. It is a common fault among humans to remember errors of others, and even a single wrong move will be remembered and acted upon for years later. Every time the person’s name is mentioned the fault is brought to mind. It is a form of getting even, though it was a matter that was cleared up and was to have been erased. The wise course, then, is to follow Bible principles. Love what God loves, and hate what God hates.—See Proverbs 6:16-19; Psalms 97:10; 11:5; Hebrews 1:9.
FREEDOM GRANTED TO OTHERS
14. In granting freedom to others, what Bible instruction would you follow? How far can we go in this matter?
14 In our overbearing dislike for some things we may find ourselves depriving others of the freedom they are entitled to. Paul deals with this matter very frankly in Romans, chapter fourteen. “Welcome the man having weaknesses in his faith . . . for God has welcomed that one.” (Rom. 14:1-3) Food and drink can cause problems now just as they did back there, and Paul said not to make such the big thing, but, rather, focus attention on the Kingdom. “Stop tearing down the work of God just for the sake of food.” (Rom. 14:20) It reaches into other matters besides food. Zealous brothers may be so taken up with the truth that they are constantly pushing others to greater activity without allowing them to decide for themselves how much time they want to devote to various activities in the congregation. Go only as far as the Scriptures go. (1 Cor. 4:6) Allow others to care for the responsibilities that they have, which you may not understand or even know about. Help where you can, but do not push. “The wisdom from above is first of all chaste, then peaceable, reasonable, ready to obey, full of mercy and good fruits.”—Jas. 3:17.
OUTSIDE THE FIELD OF REASONABLENESS—HURTFUL DESIRES
15. What do you find prevails outside the field of reasonableness? Is it wise to follow the majority of people or their ideas?
15 Strong desires rule and motivate man in this present system of thingS. Impelled by explosive-powered forces, it becomes increasingly difficult to find those following the advice at Titus 3:2: “Speak injuriously of no one, not to be belligerent, to be reasonable, exhibiting all mildness toward all men.” The spirit of the world is to direct attention to self, to push ahead, to be somebody fast, and its whole concept is so well described at 1 John 2:16: “Because everything in the world, the desire of the flesh and the desire of the eyes and the showy display of one’s means of life, does not originate with the Father, but originates with the world.” These hurtful desires take in a wide field of activity. Fads that appeal to selfish interests sweep the populations like epidemics, to be crowded out of the picture only by the next wave of extremes. Why would a reasonable person want to pass hurriedly by Jehovah God’s unlimited provisions for man’s pleasure and drop down to the product of low-grade thinking of imperfect human creatures? Styles of dress are designed to sell sex; the once-useful and needed eyeglasses are now designed to attract attention to the wearer. Food and drink are taken from their intended purpose and diverted into a channel of providing thrills.
OUTSIDE THE FIELD OF REASONABLENESS—FEAR
16. Describe the many fears that plague man, and what would you recommend to overcome these fears?
16 The fear of man is a constricting force; it can freeze growth and squeeze the minister of God into inactivity. If you know the Bible principles to live by and you do your best to follow them, why fear what man, yes, even what your brother thinks? Fear indicates lack of the knowledge of right or the holding back from doing what one knows is right. If one knows the right thing to do and does it without fearing what men think, he is growing. Jesus said: “Take good care not to practice your righteousness in front of men in order to be observed by them.” (Matt. 6:1) Rather, gain the blessing of fearing Jehovah, as mentioned at Proverbs 15:33: “The fear of Jehovah is a discipline toward wisdom”; and again at Psalm 145:19: “The desire of those fearing him he will perform.” So we can be reasonable and avoid the fear of other gods, of superstition and of calamity. The results: “In peace I will both lie down and sleep, for you yourself alone, O Jehovah, make me dwell in security.” (Ps. 4:8) Death loses its fearful hold on us and we have the promise of freedom from its lord soon. (Heb. 2:14, 15) With proper dignity and respect, and void of cowardly fear, we keep clear of many problems: “Trembling at men is what lays a snare.”—Prov. 29:25.
17. What should be humble man’s conclusion forever?
17 Life is complicated enough without adding further problems to hinder someone else’s growth or stall your own. Enjoy life now while you serve Jehovah. Regardless of how many privileges of service you receive, how capably you handle your work, how efficient and well-organized you may be, never rely on man’s ability for growth, but forever recognize that ‘it is God who makes it grow.’—1 Cor. 3:7.

