VOL. XV. FEBRUARY 1, 1894. NO. 3. 

"HALLELUJAH! WHAT A SAVIOR!" 



CHRIST THE INSTRUCTOR, JUSTIFIER, 
SANCTIFIER AND DELIVERER OF HIS CHURCH. 
"Who of God is made unto us wisdom, and 
righteousness [justification], and sanctification, 
and redemption [deliverance]."— 1 Cor. 1:30. 

[A CANADIAN journal, The Expositor of 
Holiness, reached our table as we finished 
this article. We extract a few statements from 
one of its leading articles which show how blind 
are both the writer and the Editor respecting 
true holiness and a gospel faith in Christ. 
Ignoring the fact of the fall of the race in 
Adam, and of our consequent imperfection, 
because we are his offspring, born in sin and 
shapen in iniquity (Rom. 5:12; Psa. 51:5), 
the redemption accomplished by Jesus our 
Lord, and our justification, by faith in his 
blood, are not seen. This is the seducing 
spirit and tendency of our times, part of the 
"doctrine of devils"— no fall, no death, 
no ransom; Christ merely a pattern; salvation 
by works, following Christ's example, crucifying 
your own sins in your own flesh, as he 
crucified sin in his flesh (?)-- "in whom was 
no sin," who was "holy, harmless, and separate 
from sinners." We quote:— 

"Because Jesus lived right, men imagine 
that they can substitute his life for theirs when 
they come to be judged. ...They have 
carved out the beautiful fiction that God will 



look only upon Jesus' life instead of upon 
theirs. He will see that Jesus' life was very 
good,— that Jesus' life pleased him, and therefore 
he will look only upon Jesus.... 
Therefore they expect to come up for judgment 
...with shortcomings, with failures, with 
infirmities of the flesh, with sins of omission, 
with sins of commission, and expect God's divine 
favor, by this substitutionary process,— 
God looking upon Jesus. ...The only 
atonement God will have anything to do with 
is based on righteousness,— that we should live 
right, act right, think right. Jesus did se- 
lf a man's deeds be righteous he will escape 
condemnation."] 

CHRIST OUR WISDOM. 



Since God's dealings with his creatures recognize 
their wills, therefore the first step in 
his dealing with them, is to give them knowledge, 
or "wisdom," as it is translated in the 
above Scripture. It is for this reason that 
preaching was the first command of the Gospel 
age. To the worldly minded the preaching of 
forgiveness on account of faith in the crucified 
Jesus did not seem the wise course. To them 
it would have seemed better for God to have 
commanded something to be done by them. 
But, as Paul says— "It pleased God to save 
those who believe by [knowledge imparted 
through what the worldly consider] the foolishness 
of this preaching."— 1 Cor. 1:21. 

The first gift of God to our redeemed race, 
therefore, was knowledge. 

(1) Knowledge of the greatness and absolute 
justice of the God with whom we have to 

do. This knowledge was prepared for by the 
Mosaic Law, which was a "schoolmaster," or 
pedagogue, to lead men to Christ. And Christ, 
by his obedience to that Law, magnified the 

R1616:page36 

Law and showed its honorableness, its worthiness; 
and thus honored God, the author of 
that Law, and showed his character. 

(2) Knowledge of his own weakness, of his 
fallen, sinful and helpless condition, was also 
needful to man, that he might appreciate his 
need of a Savior such as God's plan had provided 
for him. 

(3) Knowledge of how the entire race of 
Adam fell from divine favor and from mental, 



moral and physical perfection, through him, 
was also necessary. Without this knowledge 
we could not have seen how God could be 
just in accepting the one life, of Christ, as the 
ransom price for the life of the whole world. 

(4) Without knowledge as to what is the 
penalty for sin— that "the wages of sin is 
death"— we never should have been able to 
understand how the death of our Redeemer 
paid the penalty against Adam and all in him. 

(5) Knowledge, in these various respects, 
was, therefore, absolutely necessary to us, as 
without it we could have had no proper faith, 
and could not have availed ourselves of God's 
provision of justification, sanctification and 
deliverance through Christ. 

Most heartily, therefore, we thank God for 
knowledge or wisdom concerning his plan. 
And we see that this wisdom came to us through 
Christ; because, had it not been for the plan 
of salvation of which he and his cross are the 
center, it would have been useless to give the 
knowledge, useless to preach, because there 
would have been no salvation to offer. 

CHRIST OUR JUSTIFICATION. 



That Christ is made unto us righteousness 
or justification implies,— 

(1) That we are unjust, or unrighteous, in 
the sight of God, and unworthy of his favor. 

(2) That, in view of our unworthiness, God 
had in some manner arranged that Christ's 
righteousness should stand good for "us," 
and thus give "us" a standing before God 
which we could not otherwise have because of 
our imperfections— our unrighteousness. 

(3) This scripture does not imply that 
Christ's righteousness covers every sinner, so 
that God now views every sinner as though he 
were righteous, and treats all as his children. 
No, it refers merely to a special class of sinners 
—sinners who, having come to a knowledge of 
sin and righteousness, and having learned the 
undesirableness of sin, have repented of sin, 
and sought to flee from it and to come into 
harmony with God. This is the particular 
class referred to in this scripture— "who of God 
is made unto us justification" or righteousness. 

(4) How God has arranged or caused 

Christ to be our "righteousness," or justification, 
is not here explained; but what we know 
of divine law and character assures us that the 
principle of Justice, the very foundation of 



divine government, must somehow have been 

fully satisfied in all of its claims. And other 

scriptures fully substantiate this conclusion. 

They assert that God so arranged as to have the 

price of man's sin paid for him; and that the 

price paid was an exact equivalent, a ransom 

or corresponding price, offsetting in every particular 

the original sin and just penalty, death, 

as it came upon the original sinner and through 

him by heredity upon all men. (Rom. 5:12,18-20.) 

He tells us that this plan of salvation 

was adopted because by it "God might be 

[or continue] just, and [yet be] the justifier of 

him [any sinner] that believeth in Jesus"— that 

comes unto God under the terms of the New 

Covenant, of which Christ Jesus is the mediator, 

having sealed it or made it a covenant by 

his own precious blood. —Heb. 13:20,21; 10:29. 

(5) While the benefits of this gracious arrangement 
are only for "us," for "believers," 

for those who come unto God by Christ— under 
the provisions of the New Covenant— 
these benefits are, nevertheless, made applicable 
to all; for God's special provision for the 
whole world of sinners is that all shall "come 
to a knowledge of the truth," that they may, if 
then they will accept the conditions of God's 
covenant, be everlastingly saved. A knowledge 
and a rejection of error— of false doctrines 
which misrepresent the divine character, even 
though they be mixed with a little misconstrued 
truth— will not constitute grounds for 
condemnation; but a knowledge of the truth 
and a rejection of it will bring condemnation 
to the second death. The Greek text states 

R1616:page37 

this much more emphatically than our common 
English translation. It says, "come to an accurate 
knowledge of the truth."— 1 Tim. 2:4. 

(6) The provision made was sufficient for 
all men. Our Lord gave himself [in death] a 
ransom— a corresponding price— for all; he 
was a "propitiation [or sufficient satisfaction] 
for the sins of the whole world." (1 John 2:2.) 
As a consequence, he is both able and willing 
"to save unto the uttermost [i.e., to save from 
sin, and from divine disfavor, and from death, 
and all these everlastingly] all that come unto 
God by him." (Heb. 7:25.) And inasmuch 

as God's provision is so broad, that all shall 

come to an exact knowledge of the truth respecting 

these provisions of divine mercy under 

the terms of the New Covenant;— inasmuch 

as the provision is that all the sin and 



prejudice blinded eyes shall be opened, and 
that the devil, who for long centuries has deceived 
men with his misrepresentations of the 
truth, is to be bound for a thousand years, so 
that he can deceive the nations no more; and 
that then a highway of holiness shall be cast 
up in which the most stupid cannot err or be 
deceived; and in view of all this provision 
God declares that all men will be saved from 
the guilt and penalty incurred through Adam's 
sentence. Because, when all of these blessed 
arrangements have been carried into effect, 
there will be no reason for a solitary member 
of the human family remaining a stranger and 
alien from God's family except by his own choice 
or preference for unrighteousness, and that 
with an accurate knowledge that all unrighteousness 
is sin. Such as, of their own preference, 
knowingly choose sin, when the way and 
means of becoming servants of God are clearly 
understood by them, are wilful sinners on their 
own account, and will receive the second-death 
sentence as the wages of their own opposition 
to God's righteous arrangements. 

The world's salvation will be complete the 
moment all have come to an accurate knowledge 
of the truth concerning God's great plan 
of salvation; because then they will know that 
by accepting Christ and the New Covenant 
which God offers to all through Christ, they 
may have life everlasting— salvation to the uttermost. 
Whether they will hear (heed) or 
whether they will forbear (refuse to heed) will 
not alter the fact that all will thus have been 
saved from Adamic sin and death— will have 
had a full salvation tendered to them. Thus, 
the living God will be the Savior of all men— 
especially or everlastingly, however, the Savior 
of only those who accept his grace and become 
"his people" under the New Covenant. 
-1 Tim. 4:10. 

(7) It is only to "us" that Christ is made 
justification or righteousness. Though all men 
are to be saved in the sense of being brought 
to the knowledge and opportunity of salvation, 
none have Christ as their justification, the covering 
of their imperfections, imputing his righteousness 
to them, except "us"— the household 
of faith. "To you who believe he is precious." 
(1 Pet. 2:7.) He of God is made unto us justification, 
righteousness, covering and cleansing 
from the unintentional weaknesses and 
shortcomings of the present, as well as from 
the original sin and its sentence. Who is he 
who condemns us? "Will that Anointed One 
who died; and still more who has been raised, 



who also is at the right hand of God, and who 
intercedes on our behalf?" Nay, he has been 
made our justification: it is the merit of his 
great sacrifice that speaks our justification. -- 
Rom. 8:34. 

Justification signifies to make right or whole 
or just. And from the word "whole" comes 
the word "(w)holiness," signifying soundness 
or perfection or righteousness. None of the 
fallen race are either actually or reckonedly 
whole, sound, perfect or just by nature. "There 
is none righteous [just, sound, holy], no, not 
one; all have sinned." But all who come unto 
God by Christ, whom he has accepted as the 
justification or righteousness of all who accept 
the New Covenant, are from that moment accepted 
and treated as sound, perfect, holy. 
Although we are actually unholy or imperfect, 
we are made "partakers of God's holiness;" 
first, reckonedly, in Christ, and, second, more 
and more actually by the eradication of our 
sinful tendencies and the development of the 
fruits and graces of the spirit, through chastisements, 
experience, etc. (Heb. 12:10.) God not 

R1616:page38 

only begins on the basis of holiness, imputing 
to us Christ's merit to cover our demerits, but 
he continues on the same line, and ever urges 
us to "be holy [to strive after actual soundness 
and perfection], even as he is holy." (1 Pet. 1:15,16.) 
And he promises the faithful strivers 
that they shall ultimately attain absolute holiness, 
soundness, perfection— in the resurrection, 
when they shall be made actually like 
Christ, as now their wills are copies of his. 
For "without holiness [thus attained] no man 
shall see the Lord." (Heb. 12:14.) Hence, 
"Every man that hath this hope in him purifieth 
himself, even as he [Christ] is pure"— 
seeking to be as much like him as possible now, 
and by and by fully in his image.— 1 John 3:3,2. 
Justified persons and no others are Christians, 
in the proper use of that term. 

CHRIST OUR SANCTIFICATION. 



The term "Sanctification," used in this text, 
means, set apart, consecrated, devoted to, or 
marked out for, a holy use or purpose. 

Christ by God is made unto us sanctification. 
That is to say, God through Christ sets 
apart or marks out for a special share in his 



great plan "us"— the Church. 

Many make the serious error of supposing 
that God is sanctifying the world,— sanctifying 
sinners. As a consequence of this error, 
many are seeking to copy Christ's example, 
and thus, be sanctified before God, while they 
repudiate the doctrine of the ransom, or justification 
by faith. They confound sanctification 
and justification in their minds, and suppose 
that if they consecrate or sanctify or set 
apart their lives to God's service and to deeds 
of kindness they are thereby justified. 

This is a serious error. Justification is entirely 
separate and distinct from sanctification; 
and no one can be sanctified in God's sight, 
and in the Scriptural sense, unless he has first 
been justified or cleansed from all sin. 

Consecrating a person or a thing to God's 
service does not cleanse that person or thing. 
On the contrary, God always refuses to accept 
anything imperfect or unclean. This is distinctly 
and repeatedly shown in the typical 
arrangements of the Law given to typical 
Israel. The priests were obliged to wash 
themselves and put on new, clean linen garments 
before consecration to their office and 
work as God's typically set apart, or sanctified, 
priesthood. Their cleansing and new 
clothing represented justification, the appropriation 
of Christ's righteousness instead of the 
filthy rags of their own unrighteousness, as 
members of the fallen race. 

The seal or mark of their consecration was a 
totally different one, and followed the cleansing 
ceremony, as consecration should in every 
case follow justification. The sign or mark of 
consecration or sanctification was the anointing 
with the holy oil, which symbolized the 
holy spirit. 

The anointing oil or symbol of consecration 
was poured only upon the head of the High 
Priest, but the under-priests were represented 
in the members of his body, even as Christ is 
the Head over the Church which is his body, 
and all together constitute the royal priesthood. 
So the holy spirit given without measure 
to our Lord and Head applies to us (his 
body) through him. The Father gave the 
Spirit to the Son only: all of the anointing 
oil was poured upon the Head. At Pentecost 
it ran down from the Head to the body, and 
has continued with the body ever since, and 
whoever comes into the "body" comes thereby 
under the consecrating influence— the spirit 
of holiness, the spirit of God, the spirit of 
Christ, the spirit of the Truth.— Acts 2:4. 



But in consecrating the typical priests the 
blood was not ignored. It was put upon all, 
upon the tip of the right ear, upon the thumb 
of the right hand and upon the great toe of 
the right foot, thus showing that the hearing 
of faith, the work of faith and the walk of 
faith must all be touched and made holy by an 
appreciation of the precious blood of atonement 
—the blood of Christ— the blood of the 
New Covenant. And then the garments of all 
the priests— their clean linen garments— were 
sprinkled with a mixture of the blood and the 
oil, implying that both justification through 
the blood and sanctification through the possession 
of the spirit of holiness are necessary 
in our consecration. 

R1616:page39 

To what end or service are God's people, 
the royal priesthood, consecrated or set apart? 

Some would be inclined to answer: To live 
without sin, to practice the graces of the spirit, 
to wear plain clothing and in general to 
live a rather gloomy life now, hoping for 
greater liberty and pleasure hereafter. 

We reply, This is the common but mistaken 
view. True, God's people do seek to 
avoid sin; but that is not the object of their 
consecration. Before consecration, they learned 
the exceeding sinfulness and undesirableness 
of sin, and saw Christ Jesus as their sin-bearer 
and cleanser. Consequently they had 
fled from sin before consecration. When consecrated 
they will still loathe and abhor sin, and 
that more and more as they grow in grace and 
knowledge; but we repeat that to seek to live 
free from sin is not a proper definition of consecration 
or sanctification. 

It is true also that all of the consecrated will 
seek to put on the graces of Christ's spirit 
and example; but neither is this the object of 
our call to consecration under the Gospel 
high-calling. 

It is true, also, that our consecration may 
lead to plainness of dress, and bring upon us 
sufferings for righteousness' sake, in this present 
evil world (age); but, we repeat, these are 
not the objects of our consecration. They are 
merely incidental results. 

The object of God in calling out the Gospel 
Church, providing for the consecration or 
sanctification of its members, is a grand and 
worthy one; and when once clearly seen by the 
eye of faith it makes all the incidentals which 
it will cost, such as self-denials in dress, loss 



of friends and companionships, and even persecution 

for the truth's sake, etc., to be 

esteemed but light afflictions, not worthy to be 

compared to the glorious object of our consecration, 

which is that we may become "partakers 

of the divine nature" and "joint heirs 

with Christ," and together with him bless the 

world during its day of judgment— the Millennium 

—as we will show. 

God in his wisdom and foreknowledge knew 
that sin would enter this world and bring its 
blight,— sorrow, pain and death. He foresaw 
that after their experience with sin some of his 
creatures would be, not only willing, but anxious, 
to forsake sin and return to his fellowship 
and love and blessing of life everlasting. 
It was in view of this foreknowledge that God 
formed his plan for human salvation. 

In that plan Christ Jesus our Lord had first 
place, first honor. As he was the beginning 
of the creation of God, so he was the chief of 
all God's creatures thus far brought into being. 
But God purposed a new creation— the 
creation of a new order of beings different and 
higher than men, angels and arch angels- 
higher than all others, and of his own divine 
essence or nature. The worthiness of anyone 
accepted to that great honor should not only 
be recognized by God himself, but by all of 
his intelligent creatures. Hence God, who 
knew well the character of his first-begotten 
Son (our Lord Jesus), decided to prove or test 
his well-beloved Son in a manner that would 
prove to all of his intelligent creatures, what 
they all now recognize in the new song, 
"Worthy is the Lamb that was slain to receive 
power, and riches, and wisdom, and strength, 
and honor, and glory and blessing."— 
Rev. 5:12. 

But the exaltation of our Lord, who already 
was the chief of all creation, was even less remarkable 
than another feature of the divine 
plan, foreordained before the foundation of the 
world (1 Pet. 1:2; Eph. 1:4); namely, that 
he would make to some of his human creatures 
(of the race sentenced as unworthy of any future 
life but redeemed from that sentence by 
Christ's sacrifice) an offer of joint-heirship and 
companionship with his beloved Son, in the 
order of the new creation (of the divine nature), 
of which he has made the worthy Lamb 
the head and chief, next to himself. 

This offer is not made to all of the redeemed 
race, but to many— "Many are called." The 
called are only those who in this age are justified 
by faith in Christ's atoning sacrifice. Unbelievers, 



and scoffers are called to repentance 
and faith, but none are called to this high 
calling of participation in the divine nature 
(2 Pet. 1:4) until they have forsaken sin and 
laid hold upon Christ as their Redeemer. 

R1616:page40 

If the worthiness of the Lamb was necessary 
to be shown, the worthiness of these whom he 
redeemed to be his joint-heirs (called also the 
bride, the Lamb's wife) would also need to be 
shown, proved, manifested, before angels as 
well as before men, that God's ways may be 
seen to be just and equitable. 

It is for this reason that God calls upon those 
whom he does call to consecrate themselves to 
him; not in dress or word merely, but in every 
thing. It is not a consecration to preach 
merely, although all the consecrated will delight 
to use every opportunity in telling to 
others the good tidings of God's love. It is 
not a consecration to temperance reform, social 
reform, political reform, or any other work 
or reform, although we may and should feel a 
deep interest in anything that would benefit 
the fallen race. But our attention should be 
as that of a maid to her mistress, or of soldiers 
to their officers, or, better yet, as that of a 
dutiful child toward a beloved parent— swift 
to hear, quick to obey, not planning or seeking 
our own wills but the will of our Father in 
heaven. Just such an attitude is implied in 
the words sanctified or consecrated to God. 
It takes hold of the will, and therefore rules 
the entire being, except where uncontrollable 
weaknesses or insurmountable obstacles hinder. 
And since our call and acceptance are based 
upon the New Covenant, which accepts a 
perfect will on the part of those trusting in 
the precious blood, and does not demand perfection 
of deeds, it follows that all, no matter 
how degraded by the fall, may be acceptable 
to God, in the Beloved, and make their calling 
and election sure. 

Nor is this arrangement of the New Covenant 
(by which those in Christ whose wills and 
efforts are right toward God are not held responsible 
for the full letter of God's law, but 
for the observance of its spirit or meaning, to 
the extent that they have knowledge, opportunity 
and ability) a violation of Justice, as some 
have assumed. God's law was designed for 
perfect creatures, and not for fallen ones; but 
under the New Covenant in Christ, God has 
adapted his law to the condition of the fallen 



ones without interfering with that law itself 
or even with its spirit. The perfect law, dealing 
with the perfect man, demanded a full 
consecration of his will to the wisdom and will 
of his Creator, and an obedience to that Creator's 
Word to the extent of his ability. But 
since man was created "upright" (and not 
fallen), in the moral image and likeness of God 
(and not born in sin and shapen in iniquity), 
it follows that his perfect will, operating 
through a perfect body and under favorable 
conditions, could have rendered perfect obedience; 
and hence nothing less could be acceptable 
to God. 

How just, how reasonable and how favorable 
is God's arrangement for us. Yet he assures 
us that, while he has made all the arrangements 
favorable for us, he must insist on our wills 
being just right,— we must be pure in heart, 
and in this respect exact copies of his Beloved 
Son, our Lord. (Rom. 8:29--Diaglott.) Of 
those who learn of and accept God's grace 
in Christ, in the forgiveness of sins under the 
New Covenant, all of whom are called to this 
high calling of joint-heirship with Christ in 
the divine nature and its honors, only a few 
will make their calling and election sure (or 
complete); because the testings of their wills 
and faith are so exacting— so crucial. 

Nor should either of these God-declared 
facts surprise us: it is not strange, but reasonable, 
that God should test severely, yea, with 
"fiery trials" (1 Pet. 4:12), the faith and love 
of those invited to so high a station. If they 
be not loyal and trustful to the last degree, 
they surely are "not fit for the Kingdom," its 
responsibilities and its divine honors. Nor 
should it surprise us to be informed by God's 
Word that only a "few," a "little flock," will 
gain the prize to which many are called and for 
which many consecrate. Few are willing to 
"endure" a great fight of afflictions; partly 
whilst made a gazing stock, both by reproaches 
and afflictions, and partly as companions of 
those who are so abused for Christ's sake and 
his truth's sake.-Heb. 10:32,33. 

In a word, the trial of the justified and consecrated 
consists in the presenting to them of 
opportunities to serve God and his cause in this 
present time, when, because of sin abounding, 

R1616:page41 

whosoever will live godly and hold up the light 
will suffer persecution. Those whose consecration 
is complete and of the proper kind will 



rejoice in their privilege of serving God and 
his cause, and will count it all joy to be accounted 
worthy to suffer in such a cause, and 
thus to attest to God the sincerity of their love 
and of their consecration to him. Such consecrated 
ones, pure in heart (in will or intention), 
realizing the object of present trials, 
glory in tribulations brought upon them by 
faithfulness to Christ and his Word, realizing 
that their experiences are similar to those of 
the Master, and that thus they have evidence 
that they are walking in his footsteps who said, 
"Marvel not if the world hate you; ye know 
that it hated me before it hated you. If ye 
were of the world, the world would love its 
own, but because ye are not of the world, but 
I have chosen you out of the world, therefore 
the world hateth you." "Be faithful unto 
death, and I will give thee a crown of life." — 
1 John 3:13; John 15:18,19; Rev. 2:10. 

Furthermore, they glory in tribulations because 
they realize that the Lord will be near 
them while they endure faithfully, and that 
he will not permit them to be tempted above 
what they are able to bear, but will with every 
temptation provide some way of escape; because 
they realize the necessity of forming 
character, and that tribulation worketh patience, 
and patience experience, and experience 
hope— a hope that maketh not ashamed; 
and because they realize that all these favorable 
results of tribulation follow, because of a 
genuine consecration in which the love of God 
has been shed abroad in the heart, displacing 
the spirit of the world, the spirit of selfishness. 
--Rom. 5:3-5. 

"He that committeth sin [wilfully] is of the 
devil." "He that is begotten of God cannot 
sin [wilfully]." (1 John 3:3-10; 5:18.) And 
we have seen that all of those acceptable to 
God in Christ were obliged to come unto him 
under the New Covenant, whose first condition 
is faith in Christ, and whose second 
condition is an entire consecration of their 
wills to God's will and service. Hence, any 
wilful sin would mean that they had repudiated 
the New Covenant and were no longer recognized 
as begotten of the truth, but under the 
influence of sin, and hence begotten of the 
devil— his children. 

If any justified and consecrated child of God 
commit sin it will be, at most, only partially 
wilful— largely of weakness or deception. He 
may feel his shame and weep bitterly, as did 
Peter; but all such penitence would but prove 
that his sin was not of the wilful kind that 



would mark him as "of the devil." No: so 

long as the seed of the Truth, and of his consecration, 

remains in him, he cannot sin (wilfully). 

But if any trespass under deception or 

weakness, and not wilfully, he has an advocate 

with the Father,— "Jesus Christ the [absolutely] 

righteous" one, whose merit is applicable for 

all such unwilful errors, of such as abide under 

the shadow of the New Covenant. If he 

confess his sin, God is just to forgive him— because 

Christ died. (1 John 1:7,9; 2:1.) But 

if we should say that we have no sin, no imperfection, 

we deceive ourselves, make God a liar, 

and disown the Advocate whom God provided; 

for we are weak through the fall, and liable to 

deception and error at the hands of the world, 

the flesh and the devil.-- 1 John 1:8,10. 

Having seen what Sanctification is, its object 
or result and its present cost, we note that 
Christ by God is made unto us Sanctification 
—in that we could have no such call and could 
experience no such work of grace, under the 
divine plan except for Christ and the work he 
did for us;— justifying us before the Law of 
God, sealing for us the New Covenant and 
making us fit for this call to "glory, honor 
and immortality." 

CHRIST OUR REDEMPTION OR DELIVERANCE. 



Many readers confound the words redemption 
and redeem found in the New Testament, 
whereas they refer to different features 
of the work of Christ. The word redeem in 
its every use in the New Testament signifies 
to acquire by the payment of a price, while the 
word redemption in its every New Testament use 
signifies the deliverance or setting free of that 
which was acquired by the payment of a price. 
"We were redeemed [purchased] with the precious 

R1616:page42 

blood [the sacrificed life, the death] of 

Christ." We wait for "the redemption [the 

deliverance] of our body" [the Church] from 

present imperfections and death. We wait 

for "the redemption [deliverance] of the purchased 

possession.-l Pet. 1:18,19; Rom. 8:23; 

Eph. 1:14. 

In Christ is our redemption or deliverance; 
for so God has ordained. He who redeemed 
or bought us with the sacrifice of his own life 
gives us, as our Prophet or Teacher, wisdom 



by his gospel, to see our fallen state and himself 
as our helper; as our Priest, he first justifies 
us and then sanctifies or consecrates us, as his 
under priesthood; and, finally, as King, he will 
fully deliver the faithful from the dominion of 
sin and death, to the glory, honor and immortality 
of the divine nature;— for "God will 
raise up [from the dead] us also, by Jesus." If 
faithful to our call and covenant, even unto 
death, we shall, at the second coming of our 
Redeemer, "Receive a crown of life that 
fadeth not away, reserved in heaven for us who 
are kept by the power of God [His Word and 
Providence] through faith unto salvation, 
ready to be revealed in the last time."— 1 Pet. 1:5; 
Rom. 1:16; 2 Cor. 4:14. 

"Hallelujah! What a Savior!" 
Truly he is able and willing to save to the 
uttermost all that come unto God by him.— 
Heb. 7:25. 

WHOM GOD DID PREDESTINATE. 



In the light of the foregoing, now read a 
hitherto obscure passage of Scripture: "We 
know that all things work together for good to 
them that love God, to them who are the called 
according to his purpose. For whom he did foreknow, 
he also did predestinate must be conformed 
to the image of his Son, that he might 
be the first born among many brethren. Moreover, 
[the class] whom he did predestinate 
[must be copies of his Son], he also called [or 
invited to that honor through the gospel]; 
and whom he called he also [previously] justified 
[because he could not consistently call 
to honor and glory, those who were under his 
own sentence of death as sinners] ; and whom 
he justified those he also [previously] honored 
[by sending to them the gospel message]."— 
Rom. 8:29,30. 

Thus the Apostle continues his argument 
concerning the favor of God toward the 
Church, asserting that God has a purpose to 
fulfil, and that the call of the Church is in accordance 
with that purpose. (Peter declares 
the same thing. 1 Pet. 1 :2.) And he asserts 
that all of God's dealings and arrangements 
correspond with that purpose, and co-operate 
for its accomplishment. God's predestination 
was, (1) that he would have a class of beings 
of the divine nature; (2) that each one of that 
class must have a fixed character, like that of 
his ever faithful, Beloved Son. To get such a 



class the Apostle reasons and declares, God 
must call or invite some (just as we see he is 
doing), because "no man taketh this honor to 
himself." (Heb. 5:4.) But whom would God 
call or invite? None were worthy; all had 
gone out of the way; none were righteous, no 
not one. Hence it was necessary that God 
provide for the justification of those he would 
call. But he could justify only such as believed 
in Jesus; and how could they believe on him 
of whom they had not heard, and without a 
preacher sent of God? (Rom. 10:14.) Hence 
it was necessary that these be honored with 
the gospel message in this age, in advance of 
its general revealing, to every creature, during 
the Millennial age.--Rom. 1:16; 2 Cor. 4:6; 
1 Cor. 15:1. 

True, many more were called than will be acceptable 
—many more than will acquire the 
likeness of the Beloved Son; and many were 
justified who did not, after believing, consecrate 
themselves, and whose justification consequently 
lapsed; and many were honored with 
a hearing of the gospel who, after hearing a 
little of it, rejected the message of mercy and 
favor. But all the preaching, justifying and 
calling of this Gospel age has been to the intent 
that the foreknown class of the predestinated 
character might be selected and made 
joint-heirs with Christ.— See also 2 Tim. 1:8-10. 

What shall we [who have been so highly 
favored by God, and for whose successful running 
of the race every necessary arrangement and 
provision has been made] say to these things? 

R1616:page43 

"If God be for us, who can be against us?" 
And in view of this let each say,— "What shall 
I render unto the Lord for all his benefits toward 
me? I will take the cup of salvation, and 
call upon the name of the Lord. I will pay my 
vows [fulfil my covenant of consecration] unto 
the Lord, now, in the presence of all his 
people. [This will mean, as in our Lord's case, 
faithfulness (dying daily— 1 Cor. 15:31), even 
unto death, but] Precious in the sight of the 
Lord is the death of his holy ones."— 
Psa. 116:12-15. 



R1616:page43 

THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 



II. 

ITS OBJECT, AND ITS RELATION TO THE DIVINE CANON. 



THE object of the book is to reveal to us the 
material universe; man's origin and relation 
to God the Creator, and the equality of 
all men before him; the divinely constituted 
relation of the sexes; the origin of moral and 
physical evil; the primaeval history of the human 
race, and the origin of nations; the selection 
of one as the depository of the sacred 
records, and of the divine purpose and method 
for man's redemption; the history of its ancestral 
founders, and their relation to its subsequent 
history, etc. 

Of these truths, to the knowledge of which 
we owe the present advancement in civilization, 
it is the object of the book to furnish a 
divinely accredited record. Its value is apparent 
on the face of the above statement, and 
is attested by the history of civilization. In 
these truths, and the divine attestation of them, 
lies the only basis of popular progress, and 
of permanent national prosperity; and on all 
these we should be in the profoundest ignorance, 
without the revelations contained in this book. 

Auberlen, in his defense of the Scriptures 
as a divine revelation, has the following just 
thoughts on the historical value of these eleven 
chapters: "If we had not the first eleven chapters 
of Genesis, if we had, on the beginnings 
of the world and of humanity, only the myths 
of the heathen, or the speculations of philosophers, 
or the observations of naturalists, we 
should be in the profoundest darkness concerning 
the origin and nature of the world 
and of man. It is with these chapters on the 
one side, as with the prophecies of Scripture 
on the other. There we get the true light on 
the first, here on the last things; there on the 
foundation principles, here on the ultimate 
tendencies of history; there on the first cause, 
here on the object of the world; without which 
a universal history, or a philosophy of history, 
is impossible. But prophecy itself also has its 
roots in these chapters, on which all later revelation 
plants itself. Happily, these primeval 
records of our race, far more widely than we 
are aware, have penetrated our whole mode of 
thinking, and sway even those who believe 
they must reject the historical character of these 
accounts. These chapters maintain the consciousness, 
in humanity, of its own God-related 



nature, of its original nobility and its eternal 
destination." 

From this results its relation to the divine 
canon. Its teachings are presupposed in all 
subsequent revelations, and are assumed to be 
known to the reader. Passing allusions are 
made to them, in which they are recognized 
as known; but no formal, full and connected 
statement of them is elsewhere made, as though 
it were not already done and familiar to the 
reader. The ground-truths, on which the whole 
structure of religious teaching rests, are assumed 
to have been already taught; such, for 
example, as the relation of the material world 
to the Supreme Being, who created it out of 
nothing, and who therefore controls all the 
forces of its elements, brought into existence 
by him, and hence subject to his will; the relation 
of man to the Being who created him, 
and who therefore has a sovereign right to control 
the use of the powers which he created; a 
right paramount to that of the creature himself, 
who possesses these powers by the gift of 
Him who brought them into being; the cause 
of the moral and physical evils that universally 
prevail, throughout the world and among 
all races and generations of men; the inviolable 
sanctity of human life in every individual, 
until forfeited by his own violation of it in another; 
the initiatory steps for perpetuating the 
knowledge of the true God, and for carrying 
into effect the divine plan for the redemption 
of the race. 

These are the ground-work of all subsequent 
teachings, and in all of them are assumed as 
known. 

Moreover, the histories of various personages, 
treated of here in their minutest details, 
are often referred to as already known; so that 
no part of subsequent revelation could be 

R1616 : page 44 

understood, without a familiar acquaintance 
with this book. 

UNITY OF PLAN IN THE BOOK. 



The book first reveals God's relation to the 
universe, and to its sentient and intelligent 
occupants, as the Creator and rightful Proprietor 
and Sovereign of all. 

It then records the early history and universal 
corruption of man, and the interposition 



of divine justice in the destruction of the 
guilty race. 

It then proceeds with the general history of 
the new race of man, till it becomes manifest 
that the original lesson is without effect, that 
the tendency to evil is innate and universal, 
and that there is no power of self-renovation. 

It then records the initiatory steps of the 
divine arrangement for the renovation of man, 
and for perpetuating the knowledge and worship 
of the true God. 

Thenceforward it is occupied with the personal 
history of the family, in whom and their 
descendants the divine purpose was to be carried 
into effect. In the details of their history, 
as in the subsequent history of the nation, it 
is made evident that the wonderful truths of 
which they were the depository did not originate 
from themselves, but were divinely communicated. 
If an intellectual and philosophic 
people, such as the Greeks for example, with 
a capacity for acute and metaphysical speculation, 
had been selected as the depository of 
these truths, it might with more show for 
reason be maintained that they originated in 
the tendencies of the national mind. But how 
should the pure monotheism of the Hebrew 
Scriptures, the doctrine of the One Eternal 
God, have originated with a people ever prone 
to idolatry? And whence was that light which 
illuminated Palestine, a mere patch on the 
earth's surface, while all other nations, the 
world around, were enveloped in darkness? 
And whence were those conceptions of God 
and his attributes sung by Psalmists and Prophets, 
and now the ground-work of the highest 
civilization to which man has ever attained, 
while Homer and Hesiod were singing of the 
gods of Olympus and the mythic fables of the 
Theogony? He who believes that the unphilosophical 
and unlearned Hebrews outstripped 
the most intellectual and wisest nations of antiquity, 
put to shame their learning and philosophy, 
and have become the instructors of 
the most enlightened nations of modern times, 
believes a greater wonder than the divine inspiration 
of the Hebrew Scriptures. 

In this plan of the book there is a manifest 
unity of design, indicating a special purpose 
and aim in its composition. 

It should be observed of this, as of every 
other part of the divine volume, that it is not 

R1617 : page 44 

a declaration of abstract principles, or of abstract 



truths, which convince without moving. 
It takes hold on the life, through its details of 
life, and influences action by showing the 
power and tendencies of principles in action. 
The minuteness of its details of every-day life 
is therefore in harmony with its spirit and 
purpose, as it is with all other parts of the divine 
Word; and on these depend its power, 
instrumentally, as an element in progressive 
civilization. — T. J. Conant. 



page 44 

STUDIES IN THE OLD TESTAMENT. 

--INTERNATIONAL S.S. LESSONS.- 

SUGGESTIVE THOUGHTS DESIGNED TO ASSIST THOSE OF OUR 
READERS WHO ATTEND BIBLE CLASSES WHERE THESE 
LESSONS ARE USED; THAT THEY MAY BE ENABLED TO 
LEAD OTHERS INTO THE FULNESS OF THE GOSPEL. 



R1617:page44 

GOD'S COVENANT WITH ABRAHAM. 



I. QUAR., LESSON VI., FEB. 1 1, GEN. 17:1-9. 

Golden Text— "He believed in the Lord, and he 
counted it to him for righteousness."— Gen. 15:6. 

God had promised to make a definite covenant 
with Abram before he left his native 
land, Haran. (Gen. 12:1-4.) He actually 
made that covenant after Abram had complied 
with the conditions and come into 
the land of Canaan. (Gen. 12:6,7.) And now, 
in the words of this lesson, we find God 
encouraging Abram's faith by amplifying 
and explaining that covenant, and counseling 
him to continue to keep his heart in the 
proper attitude to receive such favors, saying, 
"I am the Almighty God; walk before 
me, and be thou perfect. And I will 
perform my covenant between me and thee, 
and will multiply thee exceedingly." 

The covenant was to give all "the land 
of Canaan" to Abram and to his seed for 
an everlasting possession. The terms of 
the covenant clearly indicate an earthly inheritance, 



an inheritance of that which 
Abram actually saw with his natural eyes. 
And Abraham (for his name was here 
changed as a confirmation of the covenant) 

R1617 : page 45 

believed the word of the Lord, and never 

relaxed his faith, even to his dying day; for, 

says Paul, he "died in faith, not having received 

the promises; but, having seen them 

afar off, he was persuaded of them and embraced 

them" (Heb. 11:13), although, during 

his past life, as Stephen said, "God 

gave him none inheritance in the land; no, 

not so much as to set his foot on; yet he 

promised that he would give it to him and 

to his seed after him, when as yet he had 

no child."— Acts 7:5. 

That was indeed a remarkable covenant, 
and a wonderful manifestation of the favor 
of God toward his faithful servant Abraham; 
and it was a remarkable faith on the 
part of Abraham which was able to grasp 
and appreciate a promise whose realization 
must be beyond the floods of death; and 
extending to a posterity so numerous as to 
be beyond all hope of reckoning. 

But, great as was Abraham's faith, there 
was a feature of that covenant of which it 
was impossible for him to have the slightest 
conception; for it was to have both a literal 
and an anti-typical fulfilment. This we 
are enabled to see from subsequent divine 
revelations through the Apostle Paul, who 
shows that the seed of Abraham was to be 
understood in two senses: that there was 
to be a natural seed, an Israel after the 
flesh (1 Cor. 10:18), and a spiritual seed, 
"which seed is Christ" (Head and body): 
"and if ye be Christ's, then are ye Abraham's 
[antitypical] seed and heirs of the 
[antitypical] promise" (Gal. 3:7,29), which 
includes a much more glorious inheritance 
than the earthly possessions of the fleshly 
seed, rich indeed though their portion will 
be; for Christ is the heir of all things, and 
those who are Christ's are heirs together 
with him of all things. All things are yours, 
for ye are Christ's, and Christ is God's, 
who created all things by and for his well 
beloved Son.--Heb. 1:2; Rom. 8:17; 1 Cor. 3:21-23; 
Col. 1:16. 

A hint of this double significance of the 
promise to Abraham was given for our 
benefit in the illustrations which God gave 



of his numerous posterity. They were to 
be as the sand by the sea-shore and as the 
stars of heaven (Gen. 22:17)— the former an 
apt illustration of the fleshly, and the latter 
of the spiritual seed. 

Let all those who are of the faith of 
Abraham mark these precious promises and 
follow them up until, the eyes of their understanding 
being opened, they see by faith 
the city established for which Abraham 
looked, the city which hath foundations, the 
glorious Kingdom of God in both its earthly 
and heavenly phases. (Heb. 1 1:9,10. 
See MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. I., Chap, 
xiv.) The prophet Micah describes its coming 
glory (Micah 4:1-7) and says that, when 
the children of Abraham do thus come into 
possession of the land, they shall rest there 
in peace; for the nations shall have beaten 
their swords into ploughshares and their 
spears into pruning hooks, and nation shall 
not lift up sword against nation, neither 
shall they have war any more. Then "they 
shall sit every man under his vine and under 
his fig tree, and none shall make them 
afraid; for the mouth of the Lord of hosts 
hath spoken it." And we believe it, because 
we are of the faith of Abraham, and 
know that all that the Lord has promised 
he is able to perform. 

And not only so, but to-day we stand 
upon the very threshold of that new dispensation 
—the Millennial reign of Christ, when 
all of these things are shortly to be fulfilled 
—when Abraham himself shall return from 
the captivity of death (Isa. 61:1; Luke 4:18), 
when his natural seed also shall return 
and possess the land; and when God will 
take away their stony hearts and give them 
a heart of flesh and enable them to keep his 
covenant and to walk before him with a 
perfect heart and make them indeed a channel 
of blessing to all the families of the 
earth. (Ezek. 11:19,20.) See MILLENNIAL 
DAWN, VOLS. I & II. 

R1617 : page 45 

GOD'S JUDGMENT ON SODOM. 



I. QUAR., LESSON VII., FEB. 18, GEN. 18:22-33. 

Golden Text— "Shall not the Judge of all the earth do 
right?"-Gen. 18:25. 



The subject of this lesson is an important 
one, though the limits assigned do not cover 
the event, which includes all of chapter 1 8, 
and chapter 19:1-28. Though the narrative 
is familiar to every Bible reader, its lessons 
have been very generally overlooked. 

Before considering these it is well to note, 
in corroboration of our observations on 
lesson iv., concerning the ministration of 
angels prior to the beginning of the law 
dispensation, (1) how promptly they were 
recognized by those to whom they appeared. 
Although these appeared in human form, 
Abraham very quickly recognized them as 

R1617 : page 46 

more than human, and honored them accordingly. 

So also Lot recognized them; 

and, because he honored them as the messengers 

of the Lord, he sought to protect them 

from the Sodomite mob, even at the expense 

of his virgin daughters if need be. 

But while Abraham and Lot recognized 

them as the angels of God, the men of 

Sodom thought them to be only men. Nor 

were Abraham and Lot excited, or in the 

least disconcerted by the honor of such a 

visit. They received their remarkable guests 

with becoming dignity and grace, and with 

great composure; not with superstitious 

fear, nor as if it were a thing hitherto unknown; 

but as a rare occurrence and a 

special honor. 

(2) Note also the expression of one of 
these heavenly visitants— one of the three 
representatives of Jehovah, possibly his beloved 
Son, afterward our Savior. Speaking 
for Jehovah, he said, (verse 17), "Shall 
I conceal from Abraham what I am about 
to do, seeing that Abraham shall surely become 
a great and mighty nation," etc.? 
"The secret of the Lord is with them that reverence 
him," says the Psalmist. (Psa. 25:14.) 
Thus it was in Abraham's day, and thus it 
is still. The Lord does not honor the world, 
nor the worldly wise, with a knowledge of 
his secret purposes.— Dan. 12:10; 1 Cor. 1:19,20; 
3:18,19. 

In verses 22-33 we have the account of 
Abraham's pleading with the Lord for the 
possible righteous souls that might yet remain 
in Sodom, and an illustration of the 
promise that the fervent prayer of a righteous 
man availeth much. (Jas. 5:16.) But 



when not even ten righteous persons were 
found in Sodom, the four that were found 
were first gathered out before the visitation 
of wrath descended on the condemned city; 
for "the eyes of the Lord are upon the righteous, 
and his ears are open to their cry." 

Coming now to consider the severe judgment 
upon Sodom, let us note its prominent 
lessons carefully— (1) We see that the city 
was wholly given up to wickedness and the 
basest immoralities. Not even a strange 
man was safe in coming among them. Sin 
had there reached that dreadful enormity 
to which the Apostle Paul seems to have 
reference in Rom. 1:18-32. See also Jude 7 
and Ezek. 16:49,50. They were sinning, 
too, against sufficient knowledge from the 
light of nature, as Paul indicates, so that they 
were, as he affirms, "without excuse." 

(3) We observe next that the penalty inflicted 
upon them was not eternal torment, 
but a cutting short of the present life with 
its privileges and advantages: "I took them 
away as I saw good, saith the Lord." (Ezek. 16:50.) 
And by the same prophet he declares 

R1618:page46 

his intention to bring them back, together 

with wayward Israel, the children 

of the covenant, saying, "When I shall 

bring again the captivity of Sodom and her 

daughters, and the captivity of Samaria and 

her daughters, then will I bring again the 

captivity of thy captives in the midst of 

them. ...I will remember my covenant 

with thee in the days of thy youth, and I 

will establish unto thee an everlasting covenant. 

Then thou shalt remember thy ways 

and be ashamed when thou shalt receive 

thy sisters, thine elder and thy younger 

[Samaria and Sodom— Verse 46]. And I 

will give them unto thee for daughters, but 

not by thy covenant. And I will establish 

my covenant with thee; and thou shalt 

know that I am the Lord: That thou may est 

remember, and be confounded, and never 

open thy mouth any more, because of thy 

shame, when I am pacified toward thee for 

all that thou hast done [which he declares 

to be worse than Sodom had done— Verses 47,48], 

saith the Lord Jehovah." 

When the Lord thus declares his purposes, 
and that in full view and statement of all 
the circumstances, and signs his name to 
the document, there is no room left for cavil 



or doubt. Wicked Sodom and Samaria and 

Israel and all the families of the earth shall 

be brought back from the captivity of death 

—the only captivity which could possibly 

be referred to here; for this was spoken 

long after Sodom was laid in ashes. Nor 

was there a single Sodomite left to perpetuate 

the name; for it is written that, "the 

same day that Lot went out of Sodom it 

rained fire and brimstone from heaven and 

destroyed them all." (Luke 17:29; Gen. 19:24,25.) 

Our Lord also adds his testimony 

saying, "Marvel not at this, for the 

hour is coming in which all that are in the 

graves shall hear the voice of the Son of 

man and shall come forth; they that have 

done good unto the resurrection of life, and 

they that have done evil unto the resurrection 

of judgment"*— trial. (John 5:27-29.) 



*The Greek word krisis, rendered damnation in the 
common version, does not mean damnation, but a trial or 
judgment, and is so translated thirty-nine times in the 
New Testament. 

R1618:page47 

And the Apostle Paul states, "There shall 
be a resurrection of the dead, both of the 
just and unjust."— Acts 24:15. 

The statement of Jude 7 that "Sodom 
and Gomorrah are set forth for an example, 
suffering the vengeance of eternal fire," 
may be thought by some to be at variance 
with the above quoted scriptures. But not 
so. The word of the Lord spoken by prophets 
and apostles and by the Lord Jesus himself 
must of necessity be harmonious; and 
any interpretation which does not manifest 
that harmony must be erroneous. The word 
"fire" is here used as a symbol of destruction, 
and the word eternal is from the Greek 
word aionios, which signifies age-lasting. 
Thus Sodom and Gomorrah are represented 
as suffering the vengeance of age-lasting destruction. 
They were destroyed, says Luke (17:29), 
and they have remained so ever 
since, and will so remain until the appointed 
time for bringing them again from the 
captivity of death, as declared by the Prophet 
Ezekiel. 

Mark also the statement that these were 
set forth for an example of God's treatment 
of the evil doers (See also 2 Pet. 2:6)— an 



example both of his vengeance and of his 

mercy. His vengeance was manifested in 

their destruction; and his mercy is specially 

manifest in their promised deliverance. God 

will punish the evil doers, but he will have 

mercy also. Those who have sinned against 

a measure of light shall be punished accordingly 

(Luke 12:48); and those who, during 

this Gospel age, have been fully enlightened, 

and who have tasted of the heavenly 

gift of justification, and been made partakers 

of the holy spirit, and who have tasted 

of the good word of God (not its perversion), 

and the powers (advantages) of the coming 

age, and have spurned these, and counted 

the blood of the covenant wherewith they 

were sanctified a common thing (Heb. 6:4-6; 

10:26-31), will be cut off from life in 

the second death. 

However, the Sodomites and others, 
though great and shameful sinners, and 
worthy of many and severe stripes, some of 
which, at least, were received in their past 
life, as, for instance, in their fearful overthrow 
and destruction, were not thus fully 
enlightened, and consequently were not condemned 
to the second death, from which 
there will be no resurrection. And, therefore, 
even the wicked Sodomites will hear 
the voice of the Son of man and come forth 
in due time; for "God our Savior will have 
all men to be saved and to come unto the 
knowledge of the truth. For there is one 
[just and merciful] God, and one mediator 
between [that just and holy] God [who 
cannot tolerate sin] and [fallen, sinful] men, 
the man Christ Jesus [the only begotten 
and well beloved Son of God, whom God 
gave to redeem us, because he so loved the 
world even while they were yet sinners, 
and] who gave himself [in accordance with 
the Father's plan] a ransom for all [the 
Sodomites and all other sinners included], 
—to be testified in due time." (1 Tim. 2:3-6.) 
And while this testimony was not given 
to the Sodomites in their day, it is just as 
sure that they shall have it in the coming 
age under the Millennial reign of Christ, 
when they shall come forth to judgment— 
to a shameful realization of their guilt, and 
to an opportunity for repentance and 
reformation. 

Our Lord's statement with reference to 
their future judgment (Matt. 10:14,15) is 
also worthy of special note. In sending 
out his disciples to preach the gospel of the 



Kingdom of heaven (verse 7), he said it 

would be more tolerable for Sodom and Gomorrah 

in the day of judgment than for the 

city or house that would not receive their 

message— "And whosoever shall not receive 

you, nor hear your words, when ye 

depart out of that house or city, shake off 

the dust of your feet. Verily, I say unto 

you, It shall be more tolerable for the land 

of Sodom and Gomorrah in the day of judgment 

than for that city." The implication is 

that it will be tolerable for both classes, but 

less tolerable for those who wilfully reject 

the light of divinely revealed truth, and 

thus prefer the darkness to the light, because 

their deeds are evil (John 3: 19,20), 

than for those who even sinned egregiously 

against the dimmer and waning light of 

nature. 

Hear again the Lord's warning to the 
caviling Jews who had seen his mighty 
works, but who wilfully refused to admit 
their testimony of his Messiahship— "Then 
began he to upbraid the cities wherein most 
of his mighty works were done, because 
they repented not: Woe unto thee, Chorazin! 
woe unto thee, Bethsaida! for if the 
mighty works which were done in you had 
been done in Tyre and Sidon, they would 
have repented long ago in sackcloth and 
ashes. But I say unto you, it shall be more 

R1618:page48 

tolerable for Tyre and Sidon at the day of 
judgment than for you. And thou, Capernaum, 
which art exalted unto heaven, shalt 
be brought down to hades [the grave]; for 
if the mighty works which have been done 
in thee had been done in Sodom, it would 
have remained until this day. But I say unto 
you, that it shall be more tolerable for 
the land of Sodom in the day of judgment 
than for thee." (Matt. 11:21-24.) 

Tyre and Sidon had suffered a terrible 
overthrow in the midst of carnage, pestilence 
and blood, and Sodom had perished 
under a deluge of fire and brimstone*; but 
the more guilty (because more enlightened) 
Judean cities remained. Why? Because the 
great day of judgment had not yet come, 
and except in a very few instances— of 
which those cited are in point, which were 
summarily judged and punished before the 
appointed time for the world's judgment, 
for examples, as stated— the punishment of 



evil doers tarries until the appointed time, 
the Millennial age. Thus it is written, 
"The sins of some men are previously 
manifested, leading on to judgment, but in 
some [instances] indeed they follow after." 
(1 Tim. 5:24. See also Luke 13:1-5.) The 
Lord points forward to the day of judgment 
when all the guilty shall receive their 
just desserts, and when chastened and penitent 
sinners may return to God. 

The judgments of that day will be tolerable 
for all; and the special revelations of 
divine truth and the helpful discipline and 
instruction which were not due in the days 
of Tyre and Sidon and Sodom, but which 
our Lord says would have led them to repentance, 
will be given in the coming day 
of judgment, both to those wicked cities 
and also to the cities of Judea. 

How plainly all these scriptures point to 
the coming "times of restitution of all 
things" of which Peter speaks in Acts 3:19-21, 
saying, "Times of refreshing shall come 
from the presence of the Lord; and he shall 
send Jesus Christ, which before was preached 
unto you, whom the heaven must retain until 
the times of restitution of all things, 
which God hath spoken by the mouth of all 
his holy prophets since the world began." 

Then these times of restitution are the 
times of Christ's second presence; and this 
work of restitution is the grand object of 
his predicted thousand years reign on earth; 
and that must be the day of judgment to 
which the Lord referred as the time for the 
"tolerable" discipline and final settlements 
with Tyre and Sidon and Sodom and Chorazin 
and Bethsaida and all the rest of mankind 
—the day spoken of by the Apostle 
Paul (Acts 17:31), saying, "God hath appointed 
a day in which he will judge the 
world in righteousness by that man whom 
he hath ordained [Jesus Christ], whereof 
he hath given assurance unto all men in 
that he hath raised him from the dead." 



*The whole region about Sodom abounds with slime 
or bitumen pits (Gen. 14:10), sulphur and salt; and the 
fire was probably from lightning. Thus God used the 
natural elements with which they were surrounded in accomplishing 
their destruction. 

R1619:page48 



We rejoice in the blessed testimony thus 
assured to all men that God, who so loved 
the world, even while they were yet sinners, 
that he gave his only begotten Son that 
whosoever believeth on him should not perish 
but have everlasting life, hath also appointed 
a day— a period of a thousand years 
—in which he will grant to them all a righteous 
judgment, trial, by him— by that same 
Son, now risen from the dead— who also so 
loved us that he freely laid down his life for 
us all, that thus by the merit of his vicarious 
sacrifice he might remove the legal disability 
to our restoration. And we rejoice, 
too, in the mercy and love and helpfulness 
vouchsafed to our sin-sick race by the character 
of the Judge who has given such 
ample proof of his love. 

He will be a just Judge, laying "justice 
to the line and righteousness to the plummet;" 
"a merciful High Priest touched with 
the feeling of our infirmities;" a wise and 
good physician able to apply the healing 
balm of the tree of life which is for the 
healing of the nations; and indeed the 
blessed seed of Abraham in whom "ALL 
the families of the earth (from Adam to the 
end) shall be blessed." 

With such blessed assurances, who could 
doubt that the Judge of all the earth will 
do right? 



page 48 

KEEP ORDERS SEPARATE. 



We are always pleased to hear from TOWER 
readers everything pertinent to their spiritual 
welfare and the progress of the truth. In fact, 
we are disappointed to get a mere business 
order, and nothing more, from personal friends. 
But please always keep your general letter 
separate from your business order. This will 
be to your advantage, as well as ours. 



page 50 

ZION'S WATCH TOWER 

AND 



HERALD OF CHRIST'S PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED TWICE A MONTH. 



TOWER PUBLISHING COMPANY, 

"BIBLE HOUSE" 

ARCH STREET, ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

C. T. RUSSELL, EDITOR; MRS. C. T. RUSSELL, ASSOCIATE. 



SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 
By Express Order, Postal Money Order, Bank Draft, or 
Registered Letter. Foreign only by Foreign Money Order. 

FREE TO THE LORD'S POOR. 

N.B.— Those of the interested, who by reason of old 
age or accidents, or other adversity, are unable to pay, 
will be supplied FREE, if they will send a Postal Card each 
December, stating their case and requesting the paper. 



The Memorial Supper anniversary will this 
year be in April: particulars in due season. 

R1619:page50 

THE EUROPEAN OUTLOOK--YET THERE 
IS TIME. 



Washington Diplomats and others are calling 
attention to the fact that European armies 
were increased fully one hundred thousand 
men during 1893. They assert that the long 
feared, general European war involving all nations 
is sure to begin during 1 894. They expect 
that a movement in Norway, looking to a 
separation of that country from Sweden and 
its conversion into a Republic, is likely to be 
the beginning of a war between Norway and 
Sweden; that this will be followed by an attempt 
on the part of Russia to acquire certain 
winter ports for ships of war and commerce on 
the coast of Norway, said ports being desirable 
because, being warmed by the Gulf Stream, 
they are open the year round. This action on 
the part of Russia, it is asserted, would provoke 



Germany and England to opposition, and 
thus speedily the dreaded, greatest conflict of 
the old world be speedily precipitated. 

All this looks probable; but we nevertheless 
do not expect a general war, the great trouble 
of Scripture, for some years yet. We feel confident 
that the winds of war are being held, 
under our Lord's direction, until the "harvest" 
message shall have sealed in their foreheads (intellectually) 
all of God's saints in those lands; 
be they few or many, we know not.— Rev. 7:3. 

Who are ready to take the field as colporteurs 
amongst the Swedes, Danes and Norwegians? 
The Swedish edition of M. DAWN, VOL. 
I., is already out, and the Dano-Norwegian edition 
is nearly ready. These will be furnished 
to colporteurs at 12-1/2 cents (one-half their actual 
cost) per copy by freight or 15 cents by 
mail in packs of five or its multiples. 

Here is an excellent opportunity for Brethren 
and Sisters of those nationalities to serve 
the Lord and their countrymen— in this country 
or in their native lands. The books sell at 35 
cents, so that those who can sell only a few 
can cover their expenses. 

All should think soberly concerning their circumstances, 
and all the consecrated who are 
unencumbered should do what they can to 
spread the good tidings. Every foreigner in 
this country who becomes deeply interested is 
apt to send the truth to friends abroad as well 
as at home. Brother Larson, a deeply interested 
Dane, sent an English copy of M. DAWN to a 
friend in Denmark, who, not being able to appreciate 
it himself, forwarded it to Prof. Samson, 
of the Morgan Park University. The latter 
became deeply interested, and is the translator 
of the Dano-Norwegian edition now on the press. 

So the Truth is spread. Let each be sure 
that he is doing what he can do; and let all 
leave the general results to God. Sow the 
seed broadcast and liberally, wherever you 
have reason to surmise that it might take root; 
for thou knowest not which will prosper, this 
or that. 

A CANDID CONFESSION. 



On resigning his position as editor of The 
Review of The Churches, Archdeacon Farrar 
is quoted as having said— "The whole cause 
of the Reformation is going by default; and 
if the alienated laity do not awake in time, and 
assert their rights as sharers in the common 



priesthood of all Christians, they will awake, 
too late, to find themselves nominal members 
of a church which has become widely popish 
in all but name." 

Commenting on this, Brother Gillis remarks,— 
"He thus bewails the very state of things the 
clergy helped to bring about by suppressing 
the spirit of reform on all matters of faith and 
doctrine. In such pitiful straits they cannot 
contend against popish advances, their own 
clerical authority being involved. His confession 
implies that the court is called and 
Protestantism fails to appear. The case goes 
by default, and the pride of three hundred 
years falls in the dust, and defendant must pay 
the fearful cost."— How true! 



R1619:page51 
