From Our Readers
Music
Your series “Young People Ask . . .” is especially wonderful, very appealing to me, a 16-year-old. Especially true was the article dealing with music. (August 8, 1982) Before I realized that music could also be corruptive, it used to put me into a dream world​—I forgot everything. But that, of course, was not realistic. The facts of life cannot be changed by “bad” music.
M. M., Germany
TV​—Family Life
Your series of articles on television (October 22, 1982) coincided exactly with the one-year mark since we sold our TV. It was a hard decision to make, and the experience bore a resemblance to breaking an addiction. It has proved to be a blessing. Improvement in our study habits, reading, talking with one another, playing games as well as a new awareness of seeking people’s companionship and enjoying being outdoors are some of the benefits we have felt.
K. H., Canada
This letter is in appreciation of the series of articles on TV. Three years ago, in March, our television quit working. We discussed the situation as a family​—we have a 10-year-old daughter—​and decided that we would not get it repaired. The first month it felt as if we were going through withdrawal, but we began to notice an improvement right away in the family. We began to plan things together more as a family and also began to visit others more. Our daughter started taking piano lessons and began to take up other hobbies. She also checks out books from the library, which has improved her reading habits. We can see that it has really drawn us closer as a family, while at the same time protecting us from the violence and twisted and warped view of sex that is subtly presented on TV.
D. K., Kentucky
The Slimming Nightmare
It seems that every time I have a problem it is cleared up or talked about in an article, just like the article “The Slimming Nightmare.” (November 8, 1982) I am an anorexic, but different from that kind mentioned in the article. I suffer from bulimarexia [bulimia]. This is where one purges the system through vomiting or laxatives. People who have this are afraid to mention it to anyone because it is humiliating and disgraceful. At least this is how I felt. Thanks to my best friend and to my family I am beginning to feel and look better. Anyone who has this illness should seek immediate help.
E. S., Canada
I want to thank you for the article “The Slimming Nightmare.” I have had this experience. It was a nightmare, as the article said, not only for me but also for my family and friends. Fortunately I did not have to be hospitalized and am glad to say I’m 90 percent better. The article was excellent, timely and very informative. Thank you again.
L. P., Connecticut

