Give Consideration to Jehovah’s Word Every Day!
1 Each day presents new challenges to your faith. Perhaps a worldly acquaintance keeps pressuring you to go out on a date. Your teacher wants you to pursue a secular career, or your employer wants you to work longer hours. Your physical health may be declining. Although such trials may confront you at any time, you are not alone. Jehovah is ready to give you the wisdom needed to cope with them. Considering the Bible text and comments in Examining the Scriptures is one means by which you can take in Jehovah’s Word on a regular basis. Do you take advantage of this provision?
2 Help Is Available: Isaiah 30:20 describes Jehovah as the “Grand Instructor” to whom God’s people can look for help. He supplies you with just what you need to face challenges to your faith. How? The next verse Isa 30:21 explains: “Your own ears will hear a word behind you saying: ‘This is the way. Walk in it.’” Today, Jehovah sends out his “word” through the Scriptures and the publications of ‘the faithful slave.’ (Matt. 24:45) There is a wealth of wisdom in past Watchtower articles alone, touching on virtually every aspect of Christian living. Reviewing the ones that are quoted in Examining the Scriptures helps you build a storehouse of knowledge that is invaluable in dealing with trials of all sorts.​—Isa. 48:17.
3 Make Room for It: Even though mornings were a busy time, one mother made it a point to read and discuss the text and comments with her son while he ate breakfast. These words along with prayer were the last words that he heard each morning before leaving for school. They fortified him to resist sexual advances, to take an uncompromising stand in the face of nationalism, and to give a courageous witness to students and teachers alike. Although he was the only Witness at school, he never felt alone.
4 Look to Jehovah and his Word for direction and guidance. If you do so, he will be real to you, like a trusted friend. Turn to him every day! Along with millions of others the world over who daily consult God’s Word, may you find that your eyes become “eyes seeing your Grand Instructor.”

