Use Tracts to Start Conversations
1 Would you not agree that giving an effective witness depends largely on your taking the initiative to start conversations? The challenge is to say something that captures the person’s interest and gets him involved. But how can this be done effectively?
2 Many publishers have found that with a few well-chosen words, offering one of our Bible-based tracts can start conversations. The titles are appealing, and the illustrations are colorful and eye-catching. A tract does not overwhelm a person, giving the impression that there is a lot of information to read. Still, the concise messages in tracts are absorbing and can be used to lead into a Bible study.
3 This is how one Witness personally felt: “In this hurry-up world, people often do not want to take much time to read, but the tracts are just long enough to give an important message but not so long as to turn people away before they even look at it. I read many of the tracts, and I eventually learned the truth.” Never underestimate the power of God’s Word as explained in these brief, printed messages.​—Heb. 4:12.
4 Four Easy Steps: Many have enjoyed success by using a simple approach. (1) Show a person a few of the tracts and ask him which one would be of interest to him. (2) After the person chooses one, ask a well-prepared question that highlights a main point in the tract. (3) In answer to the question, read an appropriate paragraph or scripture from the tract. (4) If you get a favorable response, continue discussing the contents of the tract or refer to a lesson in the Require brochure or a chapter in the Knowledge book that provides further comments. In this way you may be able to lead right into a Bible study. The following suggestions will help you prepare what to say using four of the tracts.
5 The title of the tract “Who Really Rules the World?” might be posed as a question.
▪ If in answer to it the person with whom you are talking says “God” or “I don’t know,” read the opening two sentences on page 2 and the first paragraph on page 3. Highlight 1 John 5:19 and Revelation 12:9. Whether or not the person doubts the existence of Satan the Devil or acknowledges his hold on the world, you can pursue the line of reasoning found under the subheading “A Clue From World Conditions” to continue the conversation. If interest is shown, offer to explain where the Devil came from, using the points on pages 3 and 4 of the tract.
6 The tract “What Hope for Dead Loved Ones?” may arouse immediate interest. You might initiate a conversation by asking:
▪ “Do you think we will ever see our dead loved ones again?” After the person responds, point to the second paragraph on page 4 of the tract and read John 5:28, 29. Then explain that it helps to understand the information under the first subheading in the tract. Offer to discuss it together.
7 The “Enjoy Family Life” tract has universal appeal for families. Using it, you could say:
▪ “You would probably agree that the family is under attack today. What do you think can be done to strengthen family ties?” After the person responds, direct his attention to the points in the first paragraph on page 6. Pick one of the scriptures quoted on pages 4 and 5 of the tract, and explain what it means. Then offer a free home Bible study.
8 The tract “Why You Can Trust the Bible” might be used with this presentation:
▪ “Most people have heard the story of Cain and Abel, which is found in the first book of the Bible. The account in Genesis also refers to Cain’s wife. Have you ever wondered where she came from?” Use the last paragraph on page 2 of the tract to give the answer. Explain that the tract also discusses the Bible’s important comments about what our future holds. Beginning with the third paragraph on page 5, proceed with the discussion, using the supporting scriptures.
9 Distributing Bible tracts is a time-tested, effective means of presenting the good news. Because they are easy to carry wherever you go, you can use them effectively in your door-to-door activity and when witnessing informally. Tracts play an important role in fulfilling our ministry. Be sure to carry a variety, and use them liberally to start conversations.​—Col. 4:17.

