Will You Be There?
1 A longtime Witness once said: “If you miss the first day of the convention, why, you have just missed too much!” Why did he feel that way? Because the first day is the beginning of a rich spiritual banquet that Jehovah’s organization has prepared for us. (Isa. 25:6) Our being there right from the start shows that we agree with the psalmist’s sentiments: “I rejoiced when they were saying to me: ‘To the house of Jehovah let us go.’”​—Ps. 122:1.
2 Last year at some of the “God’s Prophetic Word” District Conventions, however, the attendance on Friday was substantially less than on Saturday and Sunday. This means that a large percentage of our brothers lost out on hearing convention parts that presented vital information about the prophetic word. They also forfeited delightful association with fellow believers.
3 Do Not Let Secular Work Interfere: Concern about jeopardizing one’s employment may be the reason why some did not attend on Friday. However, many Witnesses have found that their employers are willing to cooperate with them in this matter if they ask for time off well in advance. One employer was so impressed by a pioneer sister’s firm determination to attend all congregation meetings and assemblies that he spent an entire day at her convention!
4 You should not assume that your employer is not disposed to grant you time off, nor should you conclude that missing a day of the convention will not matter. With heartfelt conviction, prepare to show your employer tactfully from the Scriptures why attending the convention is an important part of your worship. (Heb. 10:24, 25) Then put your full confidence in Jehovah’s promises, recognizing that whatever you require materially will be provided if you keep spiritual needs foremost in your life.​—Matt. 6:33; Heb. 13:5, 6.
5 The key factor is appreciation for “the more important things.” (Phil. 1:10, 11; Ps. 27:4) This moves us to make plans to benefit fully from this vital provision from Jehovah. Start making your definite plans now, and be determined that you will be there all three days!

