Is Your Family Preparing for Survival?
1 Fulfilled Bible prophecy gives convincing evidence of the fast-approaching end of this wicked world. We now live in critical times very similar to those before the Flood. (Matt. 24:37-39) Noah survived the destruction of that ancient world because he “walked with the true God.” (Gen. 6:9) Noah must have taught his family Jehovah’s ways because they too were preserved alive. In what way can we imitate Noah and prepare as a family to survive the end of this present wicked system of things?
2 Preacher of Righteousness: Noah persevered for some 40 to 50 years as “a preacher of righteousness.” (2 Pet. 2:5) His neighbors, whether under the influence of rebellious materialized angels or not, must have scoffed at his preaching. Our ministry is often met with apathy and ridicule, proving that this system of things is near its end. (2 Pet. 3:3, 4) However, unlike people in Noah’s day, many are responding to our efforts and ‘streaming’ to Jehovah’s worship. (Isa. 2:2) We will save ‘ourselves and those who listen to us’ only if we persevere. (1 Tim. 4:16) How vital it is for parents to teach their children about the urgency of the preaching work both by word and by example!​—2 Tim. 4:2.
3 He Did “Just So”: The survival of Noah and his family depended on their carefully following Jehovah’s instructions. (Gen. 6:22) It is also important for us today to be “ready to obey” direction from the Bible and the faithful slave. (Jas. 3:17) Adult children in one family recall how their father applied suggestions received from Jehovah’s organization. For example, he conducted a family study every week and took the family in the ministry every weekend as recommended. He endeavored to have one of his children accompany him in the ministry each week. His steadfastness in doing “just so” made a deep impression on his children, and all six of them grew up to be loyal servants of Jehovah.
4 The end of this system will come suddenly. (Luke 12:40) By imitating Noah and exercising faith for salvation, we and our family will surely be ready!​—Heb. 11:7.

