Service Meeting Schedule
Week Starting June 9
Song 121
10 min: Local announcements. Using the suggestions on page 4 or other presentations appropriate for your territory, demonstrate how to offer the June 1 Watchtower and the June Awake!
20 min: How to Prepare to Conduct a Bible Study. Talk based on the August 2004 Our Kingdom Ministry, page 1. At the end of the discussion, have a demonstration of a publisher who hastily tries to get ready to conduct a Bible study. Then have another publisher who prepares by taking into consideration some of the suggestions presented in Our Kingdom Ministry.
15 min: “Preach Without Letup.”a As time permits, invite audience to comment on the cited scriptures.
Song 201
Week Starting June 16
Song 90
10 min: Local announcements. Selected Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry. Remind audience to bring the July 1 Watchtower and the July Awake! to the Service Meeting next week and to be prepared to discuss appropriate presentations they plan to use.
15 min: Highlight the Practical Value of the Good News. Talk and audience discussion based on the Ministry School book, page 159. Invite audience to comment on issues that are presently of concern to people in the local territory. Ask for suggestions on how we may address such concerns in our presentations.
20 min: “Is Your Family Preparing for Survival?”b As time permits, invite audience to comment on the cited scriptures.
Song 54
Week Starting June 23
Song 140
10 min: Local announcements. Read accounts report and donation acknowledgments. Mention the literature offer for July, and have one presentation demonstrated.
20 min: An Enriched Life Through Regular Pioneering. Talk based on the January 15, 2008, Watchtower, pages 17-19. If available, two regular pioneers, a new one and one who has served for many years, may be interviewed. Have them relate how their lives have been enriched by this precious form of service.
15 min: Prepare to Offer the Current Magazines. Audience discussion. After giving a brief overview of the July 1 Watchtower and the July Awake! ask the audience which articles may appeal to people in the local territory and why. Invite audience to mention specific points in articles they plan to feature. What question could be asked to start a conversation? Which scripture in the article could then be read? Using the sample presentations from Our Kingdom Ministry or a presentation suggested by the audience, demonstrate how each magazine might be offered.
Song 82
Week Starting June 30
Song 97
10 min: Local announcements. Remind all to turn in field service reports for June.
20 min: How to Improve Our Conversation Skills. Talk and audience discussion based on the Ministry School book, from page 62, paragraph 4, to the end of page 64. Tailor the information to the local territory. Briefly interview a publisher who is known for his ability to draw people into conversations when in the door-to-door ministry or when witnessing informally.
15 min: Do You Remember? Audience discussion based on the April 15, 2008, Watchtower, page 29.
Song 179
Week Starting July 7
Song 125
10 min: Local announcements.
15 min: Local needs.
20 min: “When a Householder Speaks Another Language.”c To be handled by the service overseer. When considering paragraph 2, inform the congregation of different language groups or congregations that are preaching in the same area as the congregation. Outline any specific arrangements put in place to help the language groups or congregations involved to cooperate in the preaching activity.
Song 188
[Footnotes]
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.

