VOL. XXI. JUNE 15, 1900. No. 12. 

CONTENTS. 



Views From the Watch Tower 179 

Thoughtful Words of an Able Man 179 

The Anomalies of Orthodoxy 179 

Methodism and Higher Criticism 180 

Educated White Savages 181 

Keep Yourselves in the Love of God 182 

Jesus Walking on the Sea 184 

I Am the Bread of Life 186 

Lord, Help Me! Matt. 15:25 190 

Revised Price List of Bibles, Etc 192 

Special Items: The Volunteer Work 178 

Attention Watch Tower Readers! 178 

page 178 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
--ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, N.Y. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



BRITISH BRANCH NO. 131 GIPSY LANE, FOREST GATE, 
LONDON EAST, ENGLAND. 



THE VOLUNTEER TOWERS. 

The friends of the truth in every direction are joining heartily 
in circulation of this special issue of the WATCH TOWER. They 
evidently consider, as we do, that it should be regarded as a 
sharp sickle of truth for gathering the ripe "wheat." 

We have already printed over half a million copies of it, a 
good share of these being already in the hands of the people. 
We are proceeding with the work, and hope to make the total 
at least a million. We regret that we cannot as yet supply foreign 
orders except from Great Britain on account of freight rates. 
We are having an edition printed in London for Great Britain. 

Do not waste any, nor let any lie idle; but send us your requests 
for all you can use judiciously— amongst intelligent readers. 

R2653 : page 178 

ATTENTION WATCH TOWER READERS! 



We have learned recently of some readers of this journal 
who have not read the MILLENNIAL DAWN volumes entire. This 
is a great mistake. None can rightly understand or appreciate 
the precious truths presented herein unless he first have a clearly 
outlined view of the great divine plan of the ages: and hence 
we urge upon all that they begin this study at once. 

All on our list are supplied the DAWNS at wholesale rates 
(to assist in their wide circulation through loaning, etc.) and 
any too poor to pay even this small sum will be supplied gratis 
for their own reading if they will let us know, requesting under 
this offer. For prices and descriptions, etc., see next column. 

In view of the fact that our "earthen vessels" are so leaky 
we all need to replenish our stock of grace and truth continually; 
and hence we advise repeated readings of the DAWNS. When 
reading them you are really reading the Bible; for they are 
merely an arranged and systematized Bible. It is for this reason 
that like the Bible they do not grow old to the truth-hungry. 



R2646 : page 179 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 



THOUGHTFUL WORDS OF AN ABLE MAN. 



AN EXCHANGE quotes epigrammatic statements 
from various addresses delivered before 
the "Ecumenical Mission Conference" held recently in 
New York City, and among them all none impressed 
us so much as the following by Mr. Benjamin Harrison, 
ex-President of the United States:— 

"The natural man lives to be ministered unto— 
he lays his imposts upon others. He buys slaves that 
they may fan him to sleep, bring him the jewelled 
cup, dance before him, and die in the arena for his 
sport. Into such a world there came a King, "not to 
be ministered unto, but to minister." The rough 
winds fanned his sleep; he drank of the mountain 
brook and made not the water wine for himself; would 
not use his power to stay his own hunger, but had 
compassion on the multitude. He called them he had 
bought with a great price no more servants but friends. 
He entered the bloody arena alone, and, dying, broke 
all chains and brought life and immortality to light." 

THE ANOMALIES OF "ORTHODOXY." 



The "Ecumenical Conference" on Missions recently 



in session in New York City, considering ways 
and means for preaching the gospel to Brahmins, 
Buddhists, Confucians, Greek Catholics and Roman 
Catholics— in its very name ignoring Romanism as 
anti-Christian, since its missions were not recognized 
or included under the comprehensive term Ecumenical 
—was of course "orthodox." At the same time there 
was in session in the city of Boston another and quite 
different convention or Religious Congress, which being 
under the lead of the famous "orthodox" preacher, 
Heber Newton, supported by many other notable reverend 
gentlemen and Doctors of Divinity also "orthodox," 
must be considered equally as "orthodox" a 
conference as the one which met in New York City. 
Yet note the wide difference in these applications of 
the term "orthodox;" for the Boston Convention accepted 
and heard all religions— Christian, anti -Christian, 
Buddhist, Brahmin and Confucian on a common 
level. 

As a matter of fact this word orthodox, which signifies 
"correct or sound doctrine," is claimed by everybody; 
for no one could conscientiously hold to anything 
he considered unsound or incorrect. But in applying 
the term to others is the difficulty: how for instance 
can a Methodist agree that Presbyterian doctrine of 
foreordination and predestination is correct or "orthodox" 
and still refuse to accept it? Or how can a Presbyterian 
agree that Methodist doctrine is "orthodox" 
when it differs so radically from his own? And how 
can "Disciples" and "Baptists" recognize as "orthodox" 
or correct and sound other doctrines which ignore 
water immersion, which Baptists and Disciples strenuously 
claim is absolutely essential to a membership 
in the Church of Christ, and to the salvation which 
they claim is provided only for the Church? 

The fact is that the various sects were much more 
consistent when they each denied that the other was 
"orthodox" and each claimed that itself alone was the 
"orthodox," the correct and doctrinally sound church. 

What brought about this change? We answer, 
two things conspired to produce the present inconsistent 
condition. 

(1) Religious doctrinal convictions have softened, 
tho the professions continue as hard and stout as ever. 
Instead of conviction has come uncertainty, doubt, 
skepticism and the general feeling that "nobody knows 
—we may be right, you may be right or all may be 
wrong." 

R2647 : page 180 

(2) Not knowing who is right we will simply 
stick to our own church [not to Christ's one, true 
Church "whose names are written in heaven"] as being 
as good as any other man-made church, and merely 
recognize all others claiming the name of Christ and 



having influence, wealth and numbers as being also 
"orthodox," correct also— for all we know to the contrary. 
But in preventing any advanced thought being 
known as "orthodox" all are agreed— they have already 
sufficient confusion unavoidably covered by that 
term: unavoidably, because to deny the term "orthodox" 
to any popular system would be to invite it to 
denounce yours as "unorthodox," and thus to raise a 
doctrinal discussion which neither cares to risk before 
the people, lest the weaknesses and fallacies of all be 
disclosed to those now "at ease in Zion," dozing, if 
not sound asleep, on all such subjects. 

This is the meaning of the general opposition of 
all denominations to what we are presenting from the 
Scriptures as present truth: they see that it is a positive 
doctrine and that those who receive it have convictions: 
they see, too, that these appeal to the Bible 
and apply its statements in a manner that brings order 
out of the hitherto confusion and babel of the sects: 
they perceive, too, that it is reasonable (which they 
know none of the others are) and they each individually 
and all collectively fear that if heard upon its 
merits it would sweep all theories before it into oblivion. 
It is therefore "Self-preservation, the first law 
of nature" which incites the so-called "orthodox" 
against the glad tidings of great joy which shall be 
unto all people. For just the same reasons the various 
sects and parties of the Jews, however diverse, 
united against the true Light as God revealed it in the 
close of the Jewish age. 

We of course claim that the WATCH TOWER presentations 
are orthodox, correct, sound doctrinally— 
otherwise we would not promulgate them. And we 
go farther and deny that the various inconsistent, unreasonable 
and unscriptural doctrines of Babylon are 
orthodox. We claim that altho almost all the creeds 
of Christendom contain some grains of truth, they 
contain much more error, which quite beclouds and 
nullifies their elements of truth. 

Nevertheless, we claim that our standard of "orthodoxy" 
is not narrow when applied to Christian people, 
tho it is so exclusive as respects all the creeds of 
Christendom. It is just as broad as the Bible will 
permit: and who that acknowledges its authority has 
a right to ask for more or to accept less? 

Our standard of orthodoxy as applied not to sects 
but to Christians, personally, recognizes as correct and 
sound in doctrine all who acknowledge the following 
points. (1) That he is by nature a member of the 
fallen, condemned race and hence a child of wrath 
even as others, and justly under the divine sentence 
of condemnation. (2) That Christ died for the ungodly, 
for Adam and all his condemned race; and 
hence God can now be just in justifying him and all 
who believe in Jesus. (3) That his justification is the 
basis of his call to full consecration in self-sacrifice, 



and that he has thus devoted his all to the Lord, in 
exchange for the share in the Millennial Kingdom 
which the Lord has promised to all such "overcomers." 
-Rev. 2:26; 3:12,21. 

All the above described class are properly recognized 
as "orthodox" and "brethren," however they 
may differ on minor details in the correct knowledge 
of which they may be expected to grow under the 
Lord's guidance;— building one another up in [the 
details of] their most holy faith, as revealed in the 
Word of the Lord, which, as they come more and more 
to understand it, will make them wiser and wiser respecting 
the good and acceptable and perfect will of 
God,— unto salvation,— until salvation actual, the 
"crown of life," with glory, honor and immortality, 
shall be the grand outcome of the finished race. 

Who knows any fault to find with this Bible standard 
of "orthodoxy"? No one! But this is the chief 
ground of objection to it in the eyes of churchianity: 
it antagonizes and would speedily destroy not only 
one but all sects: hence all oppose it:— the far-seeing 
preachers leading their ever-confiding flocks into the 
battle against the Lord and his truth,— in which 
through temporary success they eventually are the sad 
losers. 

METHODISM AND HIGHER CRITICISM. 



It was expected that the General M.E. Conference 
would be asked to take some stand for or against 
"higher criticism;" but so far we have seen no mention 
of it. The expectation was based upon the protest 
made by a few students against "Higher Criticism," 
Evolution, etc., being taught at the M.E. 
Boston Theological Seminary. The students resigned, 
intending to go to other M.E. colleges presumed to 
be sound on the Scriptures; but to their surprise they 
found a solid denominational front against them, which 
conspired so successfully that they were refused admittance 
to any. This means that infidelity to the 
Bible, under the name of "higher criticism," is being 
impressed upon every M.E. minister now issuing from 
these seminaries. And it means that the greatest 
power of Methodism, its ministry, scattered all over 
the land, is to be exerted to the gradual undermining 
of the faith of Methodists. And, "like priest like people," 
it means that Methodism will soon be fighting 
God's Word stealthily, covertly, from the inside— inside 

R2647 :page 181 

the house of its professed friends. However, this 
will only awaken some of the Lord's true saints in 
that house and show them that it is high time for them 



to come out from Babylon— and from its confusion of 
false doctrines. 

Zion's Herald publishes the results of an investigation 
respecting the number of "conversions" made 
by two hundred M.E. ministers, educated in the Boston 
Seminary since Higher Criticism and Evolution 
began to be taught there fifteen years ago. The results 
are reported with great satisfaction as giving evidence 
that Methodism is prospering exceedingly under the 
diet which repudiates the doctrine of the ransom and 
makes void the Word of God. These two hundred 
ministers report 6,023 "conversions" during the six 
months preceding March 1, 1900. The argument 
drawn from this is that M.E. prosperity lies in that 
direction, and that the sooner the old fogy believers in 
the Bible and the Cross wake up and abandon these 
the more rapidly will Methodism prosper. Hence it 
was taken as beyond question that the General Conference 
would certainly not raise its voice to interrupt 
successful procedure. 

But to what were these 6,023 persons "converted"? 
To Methodism! Possibly a very few of them may have 
been converted to the Lord. Yet when one remembers 
that nearly all such so-called converts are children 
of from eight to fifteen years it seems amusing 
to credit their "conversion" to either truth or error 
or to call them "conversions" at all. 

Principle seems to be disappearing in respect to 
religious matters. Churchianity of all denominations 
seems to be getting to be a business governed by "rules 
of trade" and "laws of supply and demand." What 
do the people want? What will draw the crowd, add 
to the church list and treasury? Evidently these are 
the queries which cause preachers most of their anxious 
thoughts rather than— What message does the 
Lord's Word give me for his people? What is the 
Truth and how can I best make it plain to the Lord's 
sheep? 

But then again, how could we expect these wise 
"higher critics" to lay much emphasis on the words 
of our Lord and the apostles and prophets when they 
have concluded themselves to be wiser than they— 
claiming that our Lord and the apostles made numerous 
and grievous mistakes in quoting from Moses, 
David, Isaiah and other prophets, words which these 
modern wise men declare were never uttered by these 
prophets. The conclusion is that if the Lord and the 
apostles erred in these matters they were not infallibly 
inspired respecting others: and if they, the "higher 
critics," could correct them on these points they could 
give them general instruction, and are surely more 
competent authorities themselves. 

Alas for the poor sheep ! How many may be expected 
to follow the pernicious ways of these false 
shepherds! None too extravagant is the prophetic 
declaration, "A thousand shall fall at thy side"— only 



the sanctified in Christ Jesus, copies of God's dear Son, 
will be able to stand complete in him. These will be 
the "very elect," and it will not be possible for them 
to be deceived and ensnared; for God will give his 
messengers a charge [a message] for them [present 
truth] and thus these "feet" of the body of Christ shall 
be upheld that they stumble not.-Psa. 91:1,7,11,12. 

EDUCATED WHITE SAVAGES. 



That education is valuable no one will dispute, nor 
is it to be denied that it frequently puts a refined polish 
upon the actions and words of men and women who 
are therefore known as gentle-men and gentle-women. 
It is a mistake, however, to confound this kind of surface 
polishing with the "begetting of the spirit," "a 
new heart." The one is a gilding of the surface manners, 
the other a transformation of the entire being 
affecting the sentiment as well as the conduct. 

As a painful lesson on this subject, proving that 
fine education may leave men still savage at heart and 
only needing opportunity to develop it, we quote below 
an article from the Literary Digest. It relates 
specially to college bred men of two nations, both of 
which combine religious and secular education— Protestant 
Germany and Roman Catholic Belgium: the 
representatives of the former probably were three-fourths 
Protestants and one-fourth Catholics and of the 

R2648 :page 181 

latter all Catholics, corresponding to the populations 
of those countries. Both claim to be "Christian nations," 
kingdoms of God, and their coins declare that 
their rulers reign "by the grace of God." We are 
glad that we hope for a very much better Kingdom 
for which all the more we pray, "Thy Kingdom come, 
thy will be done on earth even as it is done in heaven." 
The article follows:— 

"THE WHITE MAN'S SAVAGERY IN AFRICA. 



"While it is customary to speak of the African 
natives as 'savages,' and to deplore the cruelty of the 
Sultan of Turkey, who permits the slave trade to 
flourish between his dominions and the east coast of 
Africa, late revelations prove that men of more civilized 
nationalities can be quite as cruel. The Brussels 
Petit Bleue relates the following: 

"The rise of the Bundja tribes against the Kongo 
authorities was caused by Belgian tyranny. Hundreds 
of men died with Lothaire and other Kongo agents in 



defense of the cruel practices there. The agent Moray 
says: 'The rebellion of the Mongalla region is due 
solely to the cruelty with which the natives are treated. 
Rubber is the booty of the white invader now. If, in 

R2648 : page 182 

a village of 100 male inhabitants able to work, only 
50 appear with the required amount of rubber, soldiers 
are sent to kill the other fifty. The 'loyal' natives 
are used to fight against the 'disloyal,' and as all are 
man-eaters, it is easy to reward the loyalists by promises 
of feasts on the corpses of the slain. 

"The following statement which appears in the 
continental papers speaks for itself. 

"CONGO STATE, DISTRICT BENGALA: Before me, 
Agent of the Antwerp Trading Society, appeared at 
Mandika, the sergeants Massamboko and Mulanda, 
and the privates Mutuana and Pongo, all of the Station 
of Mandika, who swore as follows: 

'"White Man! We have returned from the war. 
We marched thirty hours' distance with the white man 
Imela (Van Eyken). He ordered us to enter the villages, 
to see if the inhabitants had gathered enough 
rubber. If they had not, we were to kill them. In 
one village we told him we had fulfilled his orders. 
He told us we had not done enough. He told us to 
cut up the men, placing the pieces on poles; the bodies 
of the women and children we were to put in a big 
scaffold in the shape of a cross. Returning through 
N'Dobe we found all the natives treated like that. We 
swear that this is true. Follow marks and agent's 
name: Moray.' 

"According to other reports hundreds of natives 
have had their hands chopped off because they did not 
furnish the required quantity of rubber. Similar cruelties 
are reported from the French Sudan. Several 
high officials formerly in the German employ have also 
been punished as offenders of this kind. The Dutch 
papers remark that the French, English and Spaniards 
have a great advantage in the patriotic discipline of 
their newspapers, for while the Dutch and German 
papers will report an outrage of their countrymen immediately, 
Frenchmen and Englishmen will exercise 
patriotic prudence." 



R2648 : page 182 

"KEEP YOURSELVES IN THE LOVE OF GOD." 

-JUDE2L- 

WE CANNOT KEEP ourselves in this love unless 
we have gotten into it. And that all 



men do not possess it, or are not in this condition of 
heart, is not only manifested to our senses through the 
experiences of life, but testified to by our Lord Jesus, 
who said to some of the holiness people of his day, "I 
know that ye have not the love of God in you."— 
John 5:42. 

We are to distinguish then between natural love 
and the love of God. All mankind has some share at 
least of natural love— self-love, love for family, love 
of friends. Our Lord, speaking of this kind of love, 
implies that it is not the love of God, saying, "If ye 
love them that love you, what thank have ye? For 
sinners also do even the same." (Luke 6:32.) The 
love of God, therefore, is a different kind of love to 
that which is common to the natural man, and we 
need to be directed into it, and to grow or develop in 
it, as the Apostle testifies, saying, "The Lord direct 
your hearts into the love of God." (2 Thess. 3:5.) 
We are directed into this love through the divine Word 
which brings to our attention the peculiarity of God's 
love as distinguished from that of the natural fallen 
man. While love in the natural man is more or less 
selfish, even in our very best exercise of it, on behalf 
of friends, God commendeth his love toward us as 
being of a superior kind, in that while we were yet 
sinners, aliens, strangers, enemies through wicked 
works, under his gracious, loving plan Christ died for 
us. This kind of unmerited, sacrificing love is wholly 
different from anything that is known to fallen humanity. 
As our Lord Jesus said, the greatest love 
amongst men would be that a man should lay down 
his life for his friends, but to lay down his life for his 
enemies is certainly a much higher type of love,— unselfish, 
gracious, heavenly.— John 15:13; Rom. 5:7. 

The first blessing that comes to us, as the eyes of 
our understanding open and we come to some knowledge 
of the divine character and love, is that we perceive 
or discern or come to realize this higher type of 
love— the love of God. As the Apostle says, "Hereby 
perceive we the love of God, because he [Christ] laid 
down his life for us." "Herein was manifested the 
love of God toward us, because God sent his only begotten 
Son into the world that we might live through 
him."-l John 3:16; 4:9. 

It is after we have thus perceived the love of God 
that it begins to operate upon us, if we are in a favorable 
condition— if our hearts are good ground, prepared 
under divine providence for this knowledge. 
Of such the Apostle says, "The love of Christ constraineth 
us"— draws us, awakens a reciprocating love 
in our hearts, so that in turn we love God. Not that 
we first loved God, but that his love attracted and developed 
ours. (1 John 4:19.) The effect of this love 
upon the good-ground heart is that very shortly it 
decides that it could do nothing less than love similarly 
in return, and thus be willing to lay down life 



itself in God's service. It esteems that this would be 
but a reasonable service, a reasonable recompense for 
divine favors. 

The Apostle Paul sums up this transformation 
from selfishness to the love of God in a few words, 
saying, "We ourselves also were at one time foolish, 
disobedient, deceived, serving divers desires and pleasures, 
living in malice and envy, hateful and hating 
one another; but when the goodness and love of God 
our Savior toward man appeared he saved us [delivered 

R2648 : page 183 

us from this evil condition of heart], not on account 

of works of righteousness which we had done, but according 

to his own mercy, he saved us by the washing 

of regeneration and renewing of the holy spirit, which 

he shed on us abundantly through Jesus Christ, our 

Savior."— Titus 3:3-6.— See Diaglott. 

This newness of spirit, this new mind, this mind 
in accord with the love of God, the Apostle assures us 
is not received except by those who receive the holy 
spirit. Those who merely take the step of justification 
may to some extent experience a reformation of 
life, so that instead of living an openly evil course 
they will seek to live at least moral lives. But none 
can expect to receive the begetting of the holy spirit 
of love, and thus to become possessed of "the love of 
God," a self-sacrificing love, unless he takes the step 
of consecration to the Lord, which brings him into the 
condition in which he may indeed have the holy spirit, 
the spirit of divine love, shed abroad in his heart. Let 
none then hope to obtain the love of God in any other 
way than the way which God has provided. Undoubtedly 
in the Millennial age it will be made possible 
for the natural man to come into "the love of 
God" through a process of restitution; as he shall 
more and more attain to the perfection of human nature 
in that time he may to that extent more and more 
become possessed of the love of God until, when finally 
perfected, he may possess this love of God in full 
measure,— because humanity, in its perfect condition, 
is a fleshly image of the invisible God. But now, 
while we still have these mortal bodies that are imperfect, 
and while restitution has not commenced, 
there is only the one way of attaining the love of God 
—by obedience to the call of this age, to present our 
bodies living sacrifices, holy and acceptable to God, 
through Jesus our Lord. 

The new creature is to grow and to be more and 
more filled with the holy spirit— more and more filled 
with the love of God; hence we may expect that there 
will be differences of attainment in this matter, and 
we should know what to look for as evidences of our 
growth in grace and of our attainment of this love of 
God. The Apostle John declares, "This is [proof of 



our possession of] the love of God, that we keep his 

commandments, and do not find them grievous." (1 John 5:3.) 

He who keeps the Lord's commandments, 

but who finds them grievous, has thus an evidence 

that he is not in heart-harmony with them, that he 

has not made a full consecration of himself to the 

Lord— the obedience of such an one would be no proof 

whatever of the possession of "the love of God." But 

whoever of the Lord's people is so in harmony with 

him that they delight to do his will, have in this an 

evidence that the love of God is dwelling in them 

R2649 : page 183 

richly and abounding. This is the same thought which 

the Apostle again expresses, saying, "Whosoever 

keepeth his word [loves the word of God, and takes 

pleasure not in turning, twisting and endeavoring to 

avoid the force of that Word, but who keepeth or cherisheth 

it, loveth it, and seeketh to conform thereto] in 

him verily is the love of God perfected."— 1 John 2:5. 

This reminds us of our dear Redeemer, in whom 
verily the love of the Father was perfected, and who 
is represented by the Prophet as saying, "I delight to 
do thy will, O God; yea, thy law is within my heart." 
(Psalm 40:8.) And our Lord marked out the same 
spirit, as being essential to those who would be his 
disciples, saying, "If ye keep my commandments, ye 
shall abide in my love, even as I have kept my Father's 
commandments, and abide in his love." (John 15:10.) 
There is no suggestion in any of these or in other 
Scriptures that mere outward formalistic obedience 
and piety count anything with the Lord. The Lord 
"seeketh such to worship him as worship him in spirit 
and in truth"— such as have the spirit of righteousness, 
love for righteousness, love for truth, love for 
all the qualities of the divine character, and a desire 
to conform thereto in thought, word and deed. 

Nor are we to make the mistake that some have 
made, of supposing that the commandments referred 
to by our Lord are the Ten Commandments upon which 
hung the covenant which God made with the Jews. 
We are not Jews, and hence have nothing whatever 
to do with their covenant, given through Moses, its 
mediator, at Sinai, nor with the Law upon which it 
was based. We are Christians, and have to do with 
a better covenant, sealed with the precious blood of 
Christ our Mediator, and based upon a still higher law 
than the Decalogue— a law which instead of saying, 
"Thou shalt not" do this, "Thou shalt not" do that, 
is positive, and declares what we shall do, saying, 
"Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, 
with all thy mind, with all thy being, with all thy 
strength; and thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself." 
This is a higher law, of which our Law-giver, Jesus, 
said, "A new commandment I give unto you, that ye 



love," and of which the Apostle said, "Love is the 
fulfilling of the law." The Apostle John says, "He that 
dwelleth in love dwelleth in God; he that loveth not 
knoweth not God, for God is love."— 1 John 4:8,16. 
Altho the first evidence of the possession of "the 
love of God" is a love for God, nevertheless the Scriptures 
distinctly point out to us that an additional requirement 
is specified, viz., love for the brethren— for 
those who have the spirit of God, especially, but in a 
general way at least a sympathetic love for all mankind. 
Thus the Apostle says, "If we love one another, 
[it is an evidence that] God dwelleth in us, and [that] 

R2649 :page 184 

his love is perfected in us." (1 John 4:12.) The same 
Apostle emphasizes this same point, saying, "Whosoever 
hath this world's goods [interests, affairs], and 
seeth his brother have need, and shutteth up his bowels 
of compassion from him, how dwelleth the love of 
God in him?" (1 John 3: 17.) The intimation is that 
such a lack of love and sympathy, and such a restraint 
of assistance from a brother in need, would imply that 
the love of God either did not at all dwell in such an 
one, or that it was but slightly developed— far from 
being perfected. 

Nor does this love merely exercise itself toward 
the brethren in matters of temporal necessities; rather, 
it affects all the affairs of life, leading the one who 
enjoys it to "walk in love," "forbearing one another 
in love." (Eph. 5:2; 4:2.) And even were it necessary 
to speak an unpalatable truth, the spirit of the 
Lord, "the love of God," will dictate the speaking of 
the truth in love, which the Apostle assures us is essential 
to our growth in Christ.— Eph. 4:15. 

Knowledge is valuable, but only incidentally; of 
itself the Apostle assures us knowledge would be inclined 
to puff us up, make us vain and boastful, and 
thus quite out of harmony with the spirit of God, the 
spirit of love, meekness, gentleness. Knowledge might 
make us merely tinkling cymbals giving out a sound, 
but possessing no real merit in the Lord's sight. But 
knowledge, when it serves its proper purpose, brings 
us to the appreciation of "the love [that is] of God" 
and to a realization of the wisdom of copying his character, 
that we should seek so far as possible to be like 
our Father which is in heaven, copies of his dear Son, 
our Lord. The Apostle brings this position clearly to 
our attention when he says, "That ye being rooted 
and grounded in love may be able to comprehend with 
all saints what is the breadth and length and depth and 
height and to know [appreciate] the love of Christ... 
and be filled with all the fulness of God.— Eph. 3:17-19. 

Undoubtedly love is the principal thing to be 
studied, to be appreciated, to be copied and practiced 
in our lives. We trust that a large proportion of the 



WATCH TOWER readers have already become partakers 
of this "love of God," and that all such are seeking 
to have it perfected in them, and to be rooted and 
grounded in it. We have the Apostle's assurance that 
only those who take this standpoint can make permanent 
and thorough progress in grace and knowledge. 
Those who have entered the school of Christ, and who 
refuse to progress in it toward perfection, may assuredly 
expect that sooner or later their knowledge 
of the divine plan will slip from them; while those who 
do make progress in this proper direction may expect 
that the lengths and breadths of the divine plan will 
continue opening before them, and that their growth 
in knowledge will keep pace with their growth in love. 

Finally, in harmony with our text, let us remember 
that this is not a matter that God attends to, but 
a matter which requires our own attention. God has 
made all the provisions whereby we may know of his 
love, and may be constrained by it, and may be accepted 
into it, but it devolves upon us to keep ourselves 
in the love of God: and we can only thus keep 
ourselves in his love by seeking to practice in the daily 
affairs of life the principles of his love: permitting the 
love of God to constrain us daily to sacrifice ourselves 
in the Lord's service, for his honor and for the spread 
of his truth; permitting the love of the brethren to so 
fill our hearts that, as the Apostle expresses it, we 
may be glad to "lay down our lives for the brethren" 
(1 John 3:16); permitting a sympathetic love for mankind 
in general, the "groaning creation," in all of its 
trials and difficulties, to exercise our hearts so that we 
shall more and more feel kindly and generously toward 
all with whom we have contact and to make us helpful 
to them as we have opportunity; permitting this 
love even to extend to the brute creation under our 
care, so that we will not be negligent of their interests; 
all this seems essential to our keeping ourselves in 
this love of God. Let us more and more practice, and 
thus become more and more perfected in this love, 
which is the spirit of our Father, the spirit of our 
Lord, and the spirit of all who are truly members of 
the body of Christ. 



R2649 : page 184 

JESUS WALKING ON THE SEA. 

MATT. 14:22-33.-JULY 1. 

"Of a truth thou art the Son of God." 

OUR LAST LESSON, respecting the feeding of 

above five thousand persons with five barley 

loaves and two small fish, and the twelve haversacks of 



fragments gathered, and the illustration this afforded 
of divine ability to care for the Lord's people, and at 
the same time the propriety of frugality on their part, 
was followed that same night by another miracle and 
another lesson. After the multitudes had been fed, 
toward the close of the day, they evidently were loth to 
leave the company of one so able and willing to care 
for their necessities, and probably it was to expedite 
their dispersion that our Lord urged the apostles to 
start in their boat for Capernaum. 

Our Lord, after dispersing the multitude, sought 
the solitude of the mountain in prayer. Tho he sometimes 
prayed with his disciples in their hearing, so that 

R2649 : page 185 

they recorded the words of his prayer, it is evident that 

he was not content with merely these opportunities, but 

frequently sought the Father alone, as he has counseled 

his disciples to do, saying, "Enter into thy closet [private 

apartment] and pray to thy Father in secret." 

(Matt. 6:6.) All Christians of experience have realized 

the value of such secret personal communion with the 

heavenly Father, nor are we surprised that our Lord 

Jesus felt the need of a similar communion. His knowledge 

of the Father, and his fellowship with him before 

the world was made, so far from satisfying him and 

rendering prayer unnecessary, rather stimulated his desire 

for further fellowship and communion, especially 

as he was alone in the world— even his beloved disciples, 

not having yet been begotten of the spirit (John 7:39), 

could not enter into fellowship with him in respect 

to spiritual things, nor appreciate the trials which 

came to him as a perfect man, in a way in which they 

do not come to fallen humanity. He needed such fellowship 

with the heavenly Father for the refreshment 

of his own zeal, for the keeping warm of his own love 

and devotion, which was the basis of his consecration 

and his daily sacrificing of himself as a man, even unto 

death. 

There is no intimation given that our Lord spent 
much time at prayer, morning and evening, yet we may 

R2650 : page 185 

reasonably suppose that he never neglected to seek the 
Father's face; but these brief seasons of worship and 
prayer daily were evidently supplemented by occasions 
like the one mentioned in this lesson, in which our 
Lord spent, apparently, considerable of the night in 
prayer and communion with the Father. There is a 
lesson in this for the Lord's people. The duties of life, 
pressing upon us daily, are not to be neglected; each 
is to feel, as our Lord expressed it, "I must be about 
my Father's business," and this would imply, ordinarily, 
short prayers, which our Lord commended, saying, 



"When ye pray, use not vain repetitions, as the 
heathen do; for they think they shall be heard for their 
much speaking. Be ye not therefore like unto them; 
for your Father knoweth what things ye have need of 
before ye ask him." (Matt. 6:7,8.) And the example 
of a prayer, given his disciples, is brief. Nevertheless, 
in proportion as we feel the importance of the great 
work in which, by the Lord's favor, we are privileged 
to be co-laborers with him, our hearts should be and 
will be drawn to seasons of spiritual communion;— not 
necessarily a prayer in the sense of making requests of 
the Father, for much of such seasons will doubtless be 
devoted to thanksgiving for the mercies and favors already 
experienced, and for the gracious promises upon 
which we base our faith for the future, and communion 
with the Lord, in the sense of pondering his will respecting 
us, and how we may most acceptably serve 
and please him. 

While our Lord was thus holding communion with 
the Father, the apostles rowing the boat were having 
difficulty to make headway, a strong head-wind having 
arisen, which made the lake very rough, boisterous, 
billowy. John, who was one of those in the boat, tells 
us that they had only gotten about twenty-five or thirty 
furlongs (two and a half to three miles) from the shore, 
in the several hours they had been rowing. This was 
what is termed the fourth watch of the night, viz., between 
three and six o'clock in the morning. While 
thus rowing hard, worn and sleepy, they saw the figure 
of a man near them, walking on the water, and apparently 
intending to pass their boat. (Mark 6:48-50.) 
Some of them cried out in fear, thinking that they had 
seen a supernatural being, and that it foreboded some 
calamity, but it was Jesus who spoke to them, and set 
at rest their fears. 

The boldness of Peter's faith was then most strikingly 
illustrated by his request that the Lord should 
bid him walk on the water; and having received the 
permission, his faith was so strong that he did walk for 
a few steps, until seemingly appalled by his own temerity 
and the boisterousness of the water, he began to 
sink, and cried to the Lord for help, which he received 
through touching the Lord's hand. If the miracle of 
the loaves attested the superhuman authority of our 
Lord, so likewise did this manifestation of his power 
attest the same; and if the former illustrated his power 
to protect his people from want and to supply all their 
necessities, this last manifested that divine power is unlimited 
and able to preserve his people in all the storms 
and difficulties and trials of life. 

This is a good lesson for us to apply individually, 
realizing, as we all must, that our Lord has supernaturally 
fed us with spiritual food, and that during the 
darkness of the night-time which precedes the Millennial 
dawn and sunlight there will be storms and difficulties 
arising which would overwhelm us without the 



Lord's aid. We are to remember that not only the 

natural winds and waves obey his power and command, 

but that all the storms and billows of trouble and persecution 

which may impede and weary us are amenable 

to his control. The more we are able to realize this, 

the more of joy and peace we will experience, because 

the stronger will be our faith in him who is able to 

succor us and who has promised eventually to do so, 

and that meantime all things shall be overruled for our 

highest welfare, if we abide in him. 

But the boat and the twelve toiling rowers, and the 
storm and darkness of the night, all picture still more 
perfectly the experiences of the Lord's people as a 
whole— not the experiences of a sectarian church, but 
the experiences of the one true Church, of which the 
Lord is the Head, the "Church of the First-born, whose 

R2650 :page 186 

names are written in heaven." (Heb. 12:23.) This 
true Church has indeed had a stormy time since parting 
with her Lord who ascended to the Father. The 
darkness came down upon them— darkness of error and 
superstition; and the great Adversary, through the Antichrist 
and many less antichrists, has aroused all through 
this Gospel age a great storm against the Lord's faithful 
few. The difficulties of their position have caused them 
to bend every effort to make progress against such fearful 
opposition, of which one of the apostles declares, 
"We wrestle not against flesh and blood [merely], but 
against principalities, and against powers, against the 
rulers of the darkness of this world, and against wicked 
spirits in high positions." (Eph. 6:12.) This battle 
against adverse influences has continued throughout the 
night-time of this Gospel age, and yet the Church has 
not reached the harbor nor has the storm abated. 

As our Lord came to the disciples in the midst of 
the storm, in the fourth watch of the night (that is, in 
the early morning), so his second coming in the Millennial 
dawn is to the Church and to "help her," rescue 
her from her toil and weariness and peril, as the 
Prophet says, "The Lord shall help her early in the 
morning." (Psa. 46:5.) And as the manner of our 
Lord's coming to his disciples was different from that they 
had expected, so the manner of his second advent differs 
from what has been expected, and Peter would seem 
to represent a class living now, in the end of the age, 
who being fully convinced of the Lord's presence are 
privileged to walk to him by faith. But as Peter's faith 
was unequal to the occasion, except as the Lord came 
to his rescue, so all of the faithful now will need the 
Master's hand stretched to their relief, otherwise they 
would sink in discouragement, because of the lack of 
faith. 

Is there not a good lesson here for all who have 
been faithfully laboring in self-control, and in the Lord's 



service, to bring all their thoughts and words and doings 
into full accord with the will of God in Christ, and who 
experience from the world and the flesh and the Adversary 
serious opposition as the Lord's people? The 
lesson here, in harmony with its presentations elsewhere 
in the Scriptures, is that little progress can be made by 
the Lord's people until the Master himself shall join 
them; and that then their blessedness and privileges 
will be proportioned to the measure of their faith. How 
strongly this speaks to us, then, of continued faithfulness 
and of growth in faith, not in ourselves but in the 
Lord, and of his ultimate deliverance of all who put 
their trust in him. 

In John's account we learn that as soon as the 
Lord and Peter got into the boat, immediately the wind 
and storm ceased and the ship was at the harbor. So 
it will be with the Lord's people, the "little flock;" so 
soon as their faith has been fully tested at the Lord's 
second presence, he will join their number, and immediately 
the trials and storms, difficulties and oppositions 
will be at an end, and the desired haven of 
heavenly condition will have been reached, the Kingdom 
will have come. Courage, then, dear brother-mariners 
on the sea of experience, seeking to make your 
calling and election sure! Let us note carefully the 
Master's words to Peter as especially applicable to ourselves, 
viz., that all that will hinder us from walking 
out to meet the Lord is lack of faith. "O thou of little 
faith: wherefore didst thou doubt?" 

Let us learn to trust the Lord, not only in the 
matters which pertain to his Church and all of its interests 
and affairs, but also in all of the matters and interests 
of ourselves and families. The lessons will be profitable 
to us, and prepare us for larger measures of divine 
favor, and for the joys of the Kingdom. And all this 
faith is based upon a clear realization of our Golden 
Text, viz., that our Lord Jesus is truly the Son of God. 
If the Son of God, he is true, and if he is true then all 
the exceeding great and precious promises which he 
left for us may be relied upon, built upon, anchored 
into; and such reliance in them will give us the faith 
requisite for the overcoming of all the difficulties and 
obstacles of life, that we may come off more than conquerors 
through him who loved us and who bought us 
with his own precious blood. 



R2651 :page 186 

"I AM THE BREAD OF LIFE." 

--JOHN 6:22-40.-JULY 8.- 

SOME OF THE MULTITUDE who dined on the 
five loaves and two fish were evidently very 



deeply impressed with the miracle, and inspired with 
great respect for Jesus. A number of them (we cannot 
suppose very many) concluded that they would follow 
this great Teacher, possessed of such wonderful powers, 
feeling assured that becoming his disciples would at 
least safeguard them from want; and this, to a people of 
their kind and under those conditions, was evidently 
quite an inducement. However, when they found the 
Lord on the other side the lake, at Capernaum, and expressed 
to him their interest, and how it had led them 
to follow him, he told them plainly that theirs was a 
selfish or mercenary interest, and not the kind that he 
desired to cultivate, namely, an interest in the truth. 
Taking advantage of the situation, our Lord gave, 
not only to these but also to his disciples and to us 
through them, a most valuable lesson on the proper 

R2651 :page 187 

things to be sought after; pointing out that the chief 
aim and desire and object of life should not be the meat 
that perisheth, earthly food, earthly comforts, earthly 
pleasures, which at very most can be but transitory, 
but that on the contrary the chief aim of all should be 
to attain life eternal, beyond the present dying condition. 
He points out that God's provision for his creatures 
is not merely earthly food for the sustenance of our 
natural bodies for a little time, but much more important, 
a spiritual nourishment, of which, if we partake, 
we shall attain eternal life. 

He would have them see that the miracle which 
he had performed, and whose blessing they had shared, 
was merely an illustration of a greater gift, of a more 
valuable bread of life, that he, the Son of God, was 
alone able to give them— and the same is true of us and 
of all. By way of assuring them that he was as able to 
provide the bread of eternal life as he had shown himself 
able to provide the natural food, he declared himself 
to be the Son of God; and that the heavenly Father 
had sealed him, marked him, granted him the evidences 
and proofs of sonship in the powers conferred upon him. 
The seal was the holy spirit, the holy power of God, 
which acting upon our Lord Jesus enabled him to turn 
the water into wine and to increase the broken barley 
loaves and two little fish so as to feed the multitude. 
These powers were the evidences or outward manifestations 
to men that God's holy spirit was with him, the 
mark or seal of his relationship to God as an honored 
representative, a Son. On the strength of these evidences, 
the witnesses having the right condition of heart 
should have been prepared to heed our Lord's testimony, 
as a message from the Father. 

The discourse was not without its effect: the hearers 
felt the force of the suggestion that the important food 
to be sought after was that which would give the life 
eternal, and as Jews they had before their minds the 



further thought that God had made a covenant of works 
with their nation, with promises of eternal life attached 
thereto— the Mosaic Law Covenant. Hence their inquiry, 
What works shall we do that would be pleasing 
to God, and that thereby we might have eternal life? 
Give us whatever message you have that will help us 
in this matter. 

Our Lord's answer may at first seem to us a peculiar 
one, in that he declares that to believe on him would 
be a "work"— the work most acceptable before God— 
the only work that could possibly make them acceptable 
to God. What is meant by this we will consider further 
along. His hearers evidently understood exactly what 
he meant, viz., that the thing most pleasing in God's 
sight would be that they should acknowledge him as 
the Son of God, the Messiah, coming into the world 
according to divine promise, to establish the Kingdom 
of God, and to begin the blessing of all the families of 
the earth. But now they asked a sign of his Messiahship, 
instead of realizing that they had already seen the 
sign or signet or seal of God upon the Lord Jesus, as 
manifested not only in his spirit of love, kindness, 
generosity, goodness, purity and truth, as well as in 
his doctrines, but additionally that they had seen outward 
manifestations and evidences of the divine power 
upon him, as shown, for instance, in the miracle of the 
day before. This was because they were hard-hearted, 
as the Scriptures elsewhere express the matter (Mark 3:5; 
John 12:40), that is to say, they were in a faithless 
attitude, not readily impressionable, but rather inclined 
to be skeptical: hence these signs or evidences 
of the seal of God upon Jesus were not sufficient for 
them. 

We can readily see, however, that if sign upon sign 
had been given, the same "evil heart of unbelief" could 
reject ten signs as well as it could reject one. Just so it 
was in the case of Pharaoh: he was really more impressed 
with the first sign given by Moses than by the 
succeeding ones, each of which being received in an improper 
spirit tended to make his heart the harder, until 
the last. Just so it is with some today in respect to the 
Lord's promises. They incline to ask, Did the Apostle 
say this, that is contrary to my prejudices? And if 
convinced of the fact they would want to know whether 
any other apostle had said it, and thirdly, whether the 
Lord himself had said it, and fourthly, whether any of 
the prophets had said it,— seeking not so much to believe 
as for an excuse for disbelieving. Such persons usually, 
if they had all of these evidences, would be no more 
convinced by the multiplicity of testimony. On the 
contrary, he who really believes the Bible to be God's 
Word believes its every authentic testimony, whether 
by the Lord or an apostle or prophet, and whether stated 
once or many times reiterated. 

The workings of skepticism in the minds of our 
Lord's auditors is evidenced by their statement. In 



substance they said, "We cannot acknowledge that your 
miracle was so great or so wonderful as necessarily to 
imply that you are the Son of God, for we remember 
that Moses exercised a power something of this kind; 
in fact, he provided bread enough for our forefathers, 
the whole nation of Israel, for quite a long time in the 
wilderness, and that without any loaves and fish to begin 
with,— we refer to the manna." 

Our Lord's response is that the manna was not 
produced by Moses, that he had nothing whatever to do 
with sending it; that it came directly as a provision of 
the heavenly Father, Moses not being even an agent in 
the matter. And then our Lord pointed out that the manna 
given in the wilderness was typical of the true Manna, 
the true bread of eternal life— himself and the truth he 

R2651 :page 188 

proclaimed— which he now desired them to receive at 
his hands. 

They did not yet get the thought that he referred 
to himself, but rather were getting a crude and natural 
thought, that as God had given manna from heaven 
that sustained their fathers in the wilderness, so now 
this great Teacher, Jesus, was telling them of a still 
higher class of manna, the partaking of which would 
yield eternal life, and hence they exclaimed, "Lord, 
evermore give us this bread!" Our Lord then explained 
the figure or parable, declaring, in the language of our 
Golden Text, "I am the bread of life; he that cometh 
to me shall never hunger, and he that believeth on me 
shall never thirst." 

It is evident that in the words "cometh to me" our 
Lord did not mean to approach him as his hearers had 
done, coming across the lake. The expression "cometh 
to me" must be understood, therefore, as coming 
to the Lord with hunger and thirst for righteousness, 
with a desire for the life eternal, and hence for the bread 
of life by which it might be attained. All who would 
thus come to Jesus, in this proper attitude of heart, 
would find him to be indeed a satisfying portion. Likewise 
the expression, "He that believeth on me shall 
never thirst," must be understood to mean more than 
merely believing that such a person lived, for it is written 
that "devils also believe and tremble:" to "believe," 
therefore, must be understood to signify accepting 
the Lord, not merely intellectually, but with the 
heart, as it is written, "With the heart man believeth 
unto righteousness" [to a change of heart which aspires 
to righteousness]. He who thus believes in the Lord 
from the heart, recognizing him as the Son of God, 
through whom are to be fulfilled all the exceeding great 
and precious promises of the divine Word, receives such 
a refreshment, such a slaking of thirst, such a satisfaction, 
as will never end so long as he maintains this 
faith. (Rom. 10:10.) Such find the divine provision 



in Christ so abundant that they could not ask for more, 
and exclaim,— "It satisfies my longings, as nothing else 
could do." 

And now we see the meaning of our Lord's words 
of verse 29, "This is the work of God [the work which 
God would be pleased with], that we believe on him 
whom he hath sent." There is a work connected with 
believing;— not a work with our hands, but a work with 
our heads and our hearts: and no work that we could 
do with our hands would be as acceptable in the Lord's 
sight as this. Indeed, when we realize that in our fallen 
and imperfect condition it is impossible for us to 
do anything perfectly, when we remember also that 
God is perfect, that all his work is perfect, and that he 
cannot therefore be in sympathy with imperfection, or 
any degree of sin, we can readily see that the very best 
works we could offer him aside from faith would be 
unacceptable. 

But God has proposed to do a great work for us— 
he has done that great work in that he has provided the 
Redeemer, through whom the ransom-price has been 
paid for our race: and now God can be just and yet be 
the justifier of him that believeth in Jesus. Hence, 
while no work that we can do could be accepted of the 
Lord so long as we are under condemnation, yet he 
can, by his own provision, accept our faith in Christ, 

R2652 : page 188 

and justify us through that faith: this, our first work 
possible, is therefore what God calls for. He will accept 
no other work, except it is preceded by this one 
and based upon this one. O that all could realize the 
importance of faith in the Lord's sight! "Without 
faith it is impossible to please God," and the more faith 
we exercise the more do we please him: not credulity, 
not a belief of something which God has not said; not 
a belief in our own imaginings or those of other men; 
but a belief in what God has said, and a firm, confident 
trust therein: this is acceptable with God, and becomes 
to all who exercise it the ground or base of justification, 
that "being justified by faith we might have peace with 
God through our Lord Jesus Christ."— Rom. 5:1. 

The Lord did not here discuss the further step to 
the high calling of this Gospel age; hence we will not 
discuss it now. He is dealing merely with our first 
necessary step in approaching God,— justification. The 
thing necessary, in order to justification, is the acceptance 
of Christ as the Bread of Life— which must be preceded 
by the realization that we have no life in ourselves, 
death having passed upon all of our race through 
father Adam's transgression; and that the Lord Jesus 
was made flesh in order that he might meet the penalty 
that was upon father Adam, and thus upon the race; 
and that now, therefore, whoever accepts this free grace 
of God in Christ, whoever appropriates to himself the 



merit of Christ's sacrifice, is thereby eating, partaking 
of the great benefits and blessings provided by God in 
the Anointed one, who gave his life for the life of the 
world, a ransom price. Whoever mentally accepts this 
fact, and feeds upon it in his heart, is represented as 
feeding upon the flesh of the Son of Man— partaking of 
the human rights, privileges and blessings of restitution 
[or in this age justification] provided in him. 

Our Lord pointed out to his hearers the fact that 
their slowness to receive him, and the slowness of the 
people of Israel in general, was not an evidence that he 
was not the Messiah, but rather was an evidence that 
they were not in a condition to receive the Messiah. 
And further, that it was not God's purpose that he 
should attract the whole Jewish people, but merely that 
he should draw to himself, by the gracious words which 
should proceed out of his mouth, and by the miracles 

R2652 : page 189 

or evidences of power of the Lord in him, such as the 
Father had "given" him— such as were pleasing to the 
Father, such as were ready to receive a further blessing 
through this channel which the Father had provided. 
And he assured them that while not expecting all to be 
thus drawn to him, nevertheless all who would be drawn 
thus of the Father he would most gladly welcome, because 
he was not in the world on a mission of his own 
merely, but to fulfil the Father's purposes,— with which 
he was in full harmony. 

In the two verses following, our Lord seems to distinguish 
between the two classes of saved ones, verse 39 
referring to the elect class of this Gospel age, and verse 
40 to the general blessing upon mankind to follow this 
age, during the Millennium,— and to the opportunity 
that will then be afforded to every creature to be blessed 
with this great gift of eternal life, purchased by our 
Lord at such high cost as his own life. 

The elect are frequently, as here, spoken of as specially 
given to Jesus, while the whole of mankind are 
referred to as his because bought with his own precious 
blood. The Father draws to the Son during this age a 
special class, and gives such a class to him to be companions, 
joint-heirs in his Millennial Kingdom— these 
are sometimes called his "brethren," as when it is said 
that Jesus was "the first-born among many brethren" 
(Rom. 8:29); and again, they are designated his bride 
and joint-heir, in contradistinction to the saved of the 
world of mankind, who will be recognized as the children 
of Christ, and of whom he will be the "Everlasting 
Father. "-Rev. 21:9; 22:17; Rom. 8:17; Isa. 9:6. 

Our Lord declares it to be the Father's will that all 
whom he has "given" him shall be saved, shall be 
raised up— not one of this class shall be lost. Who, 
then, are these thus sure of salvation? We answer that 
the Apostle Paul adds a word of explanation along this 



line, informing us of the class whom the Father has 
elected and predestinated: they are such as receive the 
Lord Jesus now by faith, and who hearing the invitation 
of this Gospel age, the "high calling," are so impressed 
with it that they lay aside every weight and run 
with patience the race set before them in the gospel;— 
and so doing, under divine providence and direction 
they are molded and fashioned as respects their characters 
so that they become "copies of God's dear Son." 
-Rom. 8:29.-Diaglott. 

The heavenly Father fixed the marks and conditions 
of his predestination of this class, not so much 
in respect to all who shall hear the good tidings (altho 
he has to do with sending the message); not so much 
in respect to who all shall be drawn by the message of 
his grace in Christ (tho he has to do with the drawing, 
and in the present time is drawing only a particular 
class); not so much with reference to the call that goes 
forth to all who accept Jesus, inviting them to run the 
race of self-sacrifice in his footsteps (tho he is interested 
in this call, and supervises the affairs of those who accept 
this call, causing that all things shall work together 
for their good); but especially he has predestinated in 
respect to the number who shall constitute the Bride of 
Christ, and to the character of all who shall be in that 
company: that it shall be composed of such and such 
only as shall during this Gospel age, while in the school 
of Christ, learn thoroughly the lessons of faith and obedience, 
developing characters of like pattern to that so 
gloriously manifested in Jesus, whom the Father sent 
forth to be not only our Redeemer, but also our Pattern. 

It is the Father's will that every one who thus obeys 
the leadings of divine providence, and attains to the 
likeness of the Lord Jesus in his heart, his will, his intention 
(not perfection of the flesh), shall everyone of 
them be saved in this great salvation, and be sharers 
with Jesus in the "first resurrection," and in the glory, 
honor and immortality to which it leads. Not one of 
these shall be lost; every one of them shall be raised up 
to that glorious station at the appointed time— "the last 
day," the seventh of the great week of thousand-year 
days,— the Millennial day. And as the Prophet declares, 
it will be early in that day, for "God shall help 
her [Zion] and that right early [in the morning]." 

The 40th verse does not refer to those whom the 
Father specially gives to the Son to be companions and 
joint-heirs in the Kingdom, and whom he draws through 
his providences during this age: it refers to the remainder 
of mankind whose ransom price our Lord Jesus has 
paid, and who, according to the Father's program, our 
Lord Jesus himself is to draw unto himself, during the 
Millennial age; as it is written, "I, if I be lifted up, 
will draw all men unto me." But even as the Father's 
drawing is not a compulsory drawing, so likewise the 
drawing of the Son will not be compulsory. But since 
we may assume that the majority of those who now resist 



the Father's drawing do so because of blindness, 
ignorance, etc., because the prince of this world is now 
reigning and deceiving, we may reasonably suppose that 
when our dear Redeemer's Millennial Kingdom shall 
have been established, and when Satan, the prince of 
this world, has been "bound" (Rev. 20:2), and when 
the knowledge of the Lord shall fill the whole earth,— 
then the drawing influence upon the world of mankind 
exerted by the Redeemer himself and by the Church, 
his body, associated with him in glory, will be a drawing 
which will yield much larger results, so that many 
will yield to it and come to the Lord truly and heartily, 
and receive of the blessings which God has provided 
in him;— all except those who wilfully love sin and refuse 
the terms of the Kingdom, faith and obedience. 
Of this class our Lord declares (verse 40), that it is 

R2652 : page 190 

his Father's will that all such shall see the Son (their 

blinded eyes being opened in that Millennial day, as 

the Lord has promised through the prophets.— Zech. 12:10.) 

Their eyes of understanding being then opened, 

they will be able to appreciate, as they cannot now appreciate, 

the Lord and the covenant of eternal life which 

he offers to all who obey him. They will not thus see 

him, however, until the god of this world, who now 

blinds the eyes of their understanding, shall be bound 

for the thousand years, and his baneful influence offset 

with the light of the knowledge of God which will then 

shine out to the world from the great Sun of Righteousness, 

—the Lord and the glorified Church, his body. 

It is God's will that all who shall accept Christ 
then shall have everlasting life too; and that they shall 
be raised up by the Lord Jesus to perfection also,— tho 
theirs will be an earthly, and not like the others a heavenly, 
perfection; and their raising up will also be "at 
the last day," but not at its beginning as with the 
"elect" of the "first resurrection." The overcomers of 
this Gospel age, the body of Christ, will be perfected in 
his likeness in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, 
and then subsequently, throughout that age, the work 
of raising up the world of mankind out of sin and depravity 
and degradation will go gradually and grandly 
forward, until by the close of the Millennial age all the 
willing and obedient shall have eaten to their fill of the 
bread from heaven and shall be fully raised up, out of 
sin and death, to life eternal— in the image and likeness 
of God as was Adam before sin, but with characters 
perfected and tested in righteousness by their Millennial 
experiences. 



R2653 : page 190 



"LORD, HELP ME!"-MATT. 15:25. 

--MARK 7:24-30.~JULY 15.- 

AFTER OUR LORD'S discourse on the bread from 
heaven (we know not how long after) he and 
his disciples went westward to the border of Phoenicia. 
There, entering into a house with the evident design of 
secluding himself from general notice, and possibly to 
gain quiet and rest, the Lord was quickly discovered by 
a Syro-Phoenician mother, whose daughter was possessed 
of a demon, and who availed herself of this opportunity 
to importune the Lord for her daughter's 
deliverance. The fame of Jesus and his miracles, in the 
healing of the sick, etc., had evidently extended throughout 
that region, yet it must also have been known that 
Jesus was a Jew, and that his miracles and favors were 
confined to his own race. 

We can readily see that there were numerous obstacles 
to the woman's faith, and the strength of faith 
which surmounted them compels admiration. 

(1) She was a foreigner, a heathen, for whom 

God had manifested no favors, "without God and having 
no hope in the world." (Eph. 2:12.) Hence, coming 
to Jesus she not only had to overcome the prejudices 
of her own heathen ideas and instruction from infancy, 
but had also to overcome everything akin to pride and 
the fear of being despised and rejected as one unworthy 
of the favor she sought. 

(2) As a poor and uneducated woman she would 
naturally have great diffidence in approaching a learned 
man, especially one so notable as this great Prophet of 
Israel, of whom no doubt she had heard much. 

Notwithstanding these obstacles, her love for her 
daughter, and her confidence in Jesus, were so great 
that she sought him out; and after the manner of that 
time and place, in a loud voice and probably with weeping, 
"cried" to the Lord for compassion and assistance, 
in her trouble, saying, "Have mercy upon me, O Lord, 
thou son of David: my daughter is grievously vexed 
with a devil." She met with a rebuff at the very start, 
for according to Matthew's account (15:23) our Lord 
ignored her entirely, not answering her a word. To 
many this would have been sufficient to have discouraged 
faith, and sent them away weeping; but not so 
with this woman: she kept up her cries and importunities. 
She was confident that the Lord had the power 
to assist her, and had not yet refused to do so, and hence 
her faith continued to cling. 

The disciples seem to have been annoyed with her 
cries, which probably kept up for some time, and Jesus 
and the disciples had evidently left the house in which 
they were lodging and proceeded on their journey, the 
woman still following and crying out for assistance. 
The disciples came and besought him, saying, "Send 
her away, for she crieth after us. But he answered and 



said, I am not sent but unto the lost sheep of the house 
of Israel." 

Our Lord's answer to the disciples would seem to 
indicate that the meaning of the apostles' words was 
that he should grant her request and send her away; 
and his answer shows why he delayed so doing. The 
blessings he had to give were for God's covenanted people, 
the typical seed of Abraham, and this woman was 
not of that nation to which God had granted much 
favor every way; she was of a heathen nation, with whom 
God had not entered into any covenant relationship whatever, 
and for whom as yet he had done nothing. Our Lord 
explained this to the disciples, and in the hearing of the 
woman, not merely for their benefit and hers, but also, 
we may presume, for our admonition. 

Altho our Lord would seem to have been resisting 

R2653 :page 191 

the woman and unwilling to grant her favor, we consider 
it not unreasonable to suppose that he thoroughly 
understood the case from the beginning, and that he 
adopted the method he did to draw out her faith, preparatory 
to the giving of the blessing desired. 

And herein we have a lesson respecting persistency 
in entreating the Lord for relief from the power of the 
devil, however exercised, whether in our friends or in 
ourselves. As the woman knew that the case was a 
hopeless one as respected relief from any other quarter, 
so we know to hope for relief from the Adversary only 
through the Lord's interposition. Like this woman, 
therefore, our faith should be equal to the emergency, 
and should persistently hold on to the Lord for the 
blessing which, with a greater knowledge than she, we 
may be sure he will be pleased to grant in his own due 
time and way. "Shall not the Lord avenge his own 
elect, which cry day and night unto him, tho he bear 
long with them?" (Luke 18:7.) If in our case the 
Lord shall not see best to grant a prompt response to 
our prayer, "Abandon us not in temptation, but deliver 
us from the Evil One" (Matt. 6:13), we may be sure 
that it is not from lack of interest in our welfare, for has 
he not manifested his interest by redeeming us, and by 
calling us to joint-heirship in the heavenly Kingdom? 
If then the response shall not come in the way or at the 
time we had inclined to hope, let faith still hold her 
anchorage in the divine goodness and power, and in the 
exceeding great and precious promises, and let us remember 
that according to these the time, at very farthest, 
will not be long, until the Millennial Kingdom, 
when the great Adversary shall be bound, and deliverance 
full and complete from his power shall be granted, 
not only to ourselves and those immediately dependent, 
but also to all of the "groaning creation" now under 
his baneful influence. 

The hearing of the reason why she had been ignored, 



so far from discouraging the poor woman, seemingly 

convinced her the more that Jesus had the power 

to help her, and, quite probably in front of him, she 

prostrated herself at his feet, after the custom of the East, 

so expressive of humility, dependence and entreaty, accompanying 

this with the plea, "Lord, help me!" (Matt. 15:23-25.) 

When finally our Lord addressed the poor 

woman prostrate at his feet, importuning his assistance, 

his words were again a rebuff, calculated to dishearten 

one of little faith, but correspondingly to strengthen a 

great faith. His answer to her was not one of disdain 

and contempt, nor of indifference to her woe; for indeed 

we well know that our dear Lord had no such feelings 

toward any. It implied interest and sympathy, but 

explained to her a reason why she was not a proper 

subject, namely, that as the children of a household 

would be provided for first, before the dogs, so it was 

proper that the Lord's covenant people, the Jews, should 

be ministered unto, healed, taught and blessed, first,— 

before these blessings should in any manner or degree 

be extended to the Gentiles, who in comparison were 

as the dogs of the household. And, by the way, we 

should notice here that altho dogs amongst the Jews 

were spoken of frequently with great disrespect, as for 

instance, in Rev. 29:15, "Without are dogs," etc., referring 

to the wild dogs which roamed the country and 

were pests, yet the Jews were in the habit of having 

house dogs which were esteemed and petted by the family, 

and the word that is here used by our Lord, and 

also by the woman, signifies these house dogs or little 

dogs, pet dogs, and not the objectionable kind. 

The woman triumphed over the obstacle of the 
Lord's argument, and with wonderful keenness and 
humility she acknowledged that she was not one of the 
children who had a right to the Father's blessing, but 
was merely one of the dogs under the table, desiring a 
stray crumb of divine favor. Then our Lord, appreciating 
such great faith and earnestness, said, "For this 
saying go thy way; the devil is gone out of thy daughter," 
and that the woman's faith was of the proper kind 
was demonstrated by the fact that she believed the 
Lord's word, ceased her importunings, and went to her 
home, to find the matter even as Jesus had said. 

How different is our case in many respects from 
that of this poor woman! So far from resisting us the 
Lord has graciously called us to a knowledge of himself 
and of his gracious plan, and we who were once 
aliens and strangers and foreigners have not only been 
redeemed with the precious blood, but upon making a 
covenant with the Lord have been adopted into his family, 
have been privileged to surround his table, and he 
has set before us as "meat in due season," in great abundance, 
all the exceeding great and precious promises of 
his Word. We need not to importune for these; they 
are ours for the taking. We simply need by faith to 
accept them and to use them. And if the poor woman 



of this narrative could exercise such faith in the Lord, 
and could get so great a blessing, it evidences to our 

R2654:page 191 

minds what is abundantly stated elsewhere in Scripture, 
that nothing that we have or could offer to the Lord 
would be more acceptable in his sight than faith— faith 
in him, in his power, in his love and in his promises. 
Whoever will not exercise faith in these things cannot 
grow in knowledge of the Lord, cannot make development, 
cannot be overcomers, gaining the desired victory, 
for, "This is the victory that overcometh the world, 
even our faith," and "Without faith it is impossible 
to please God."-l John 5:4; Heb. 11:6. 

There is little that any of us possess that we could 
reasonably hope would be acceptable to God outside 
those mercies which he has bestowed upon us through 
Christ— faith, trust in God, is one of those heart-qualities 
which we can bring to the Lord, that he will not 
despise; honesty of heart is another; humility, realizing 
our utter dependence upon him, and confessing it, is 
another. These various sentiments were expressed by 
the woman in the narrative, by her actions and by her 
words, and as these brought to her divine favor, even 
before it was due to come to the Gentiles, much more 
should our humility, faith and candor prevail and make 
us endeavor to do that which is pleasing to God, who 
has already accepted us in the Beloved, and with whom 
he is well-pleased in proportion to the measure of our 
accepting through the Lord all the exceeding riches of his 
grace, which he has promised to them that love, reverence, 
trust and obey him. 



page 192 

REVISED PRICE LIST OF BIBLES, Etc. 



Our Society does not supply Bibles free, but it justifies 
the Bible feature of its name by supplying Bibles, Testaments and 
Bible Study Helps at wholesale rates. Additionally we give our 
readers the benefit of our experience and judgment respecting which 
Bibles are the best value at the wholesale rate. Publishers expect 
to make a further advance in prices of cheap Bibles January, 1901. 

OXFORD PRESS BIBLES. 

The Students' Hand Bible. 

No. 04403 Minion type, French Seal, Divinity circuit, Selected 
Helps, including Concordance 75c Post, extra 20c 



The Self-pronouncing Teachers' Bible. 

No. 0823 Bourgeois type, French Seal, Divinity circuit, 

Round corners, Red under Gold edge, $1.00, Postage 25c 
This is a wonderful book for the price, and its self -pronouncing 
feature is on a new plan preferred by many. 

The Revised Version Teachers' Bible. 

No. 02752 (not self-pronouncing), Bourgeois type, French 
Morocco, Divinity Circuit, Round corners, Red under 
Gold edge $1.75, Postage extra, 25c 

OXFORD PRESS INDIA PAPER BIBLES. 

No. 01 157x Ruby type, French Morocco, Postpaid $1.45 

No. 03009x Pearl type, Persian Levant " 2.25 

No. 031 14x Ruby type, Persian Levant " 2.50 

No. 03229x Ruby type, Persian Levant " 2.65 

No. 03265x Emerald type, Lev. Morocco " 3.25 

No. 03464x Minion type, Persian Levant " 3.80 

No. 03554x Bourgeois type, Alaska Seal " 3.80 

No. 0358 lx Long Primer type, Pers. Lev. " 4.67 

No. 0863x Long Primer type, Alaska Seal " 5.21 

No. 0865-l/2x Long Primer type, Levant " 6.55 

Thumb Index, if desired, 25 cents extra. 

THE COMBINATION SELF-PRONOUNCING TEACHERS' BIBLE. 

This remarkable Bible is really two Bibles in the 
space of one, for it shows in footnotes on each page 
the readings of the Revised Version whenever it 
differs from the Authorized version. 

No. 932 Bourgeois type, French Seal, Divinity circuit, Round 
corners, Gilt edge $1.15, Postage extra, 25c 

No. 934 Bourgeois type, French Seal, Div. circuit, Leather 

lined, Red under Gold edges $1.35, Postage extra, 25c 

BAGSTER TEACHERS' BIBLES. -LONG PRIMER TYPE. 

No. 8701 French Seal, Divinity Circuit, Red under Gold $1.05 

No. 8706 Egyptian Seal, Flexible, Divinity Circuit, Silk 

Sewed, Leather Lined, Red under Gold Edges 1.45 

No. 8722 Norse Morocco, Divinity Circuit, Silk Sewed, 

Leather Lined, Red under Gold Edges 2.00 

Postage on above Bibles 25 cents each, extra. 

HOLMAN PICTORIAL TEACHERS' BIBLES.-BOURGEOIS TYPE. 

These are handsomely embellished with eighty 

choice photographic reproductions of scenes in Palestine, 

which alone are worth the price of the Bibles. 

No. 8816 French Seal, Linen lined, Red under Gold edges $1.75 

No. 8836 Persian Levant, Silk Sewed, specially recommended 



for service $2.35, Postage .25 

OTHER DESIRABLE BIBLES AND TESTAMENTS. 

Lap Bibles for the Aged.— No References. 

These contain Family Registers. 

No. 01600 Small Pica type, Cloth, red edges $ .90 Post, extra, 25c 

No. 01603 " " Fr. Seal, Limp 1.25 " 25c 

No. 01605 Div. circ. 1.75 " 25c 

Ditto New Testaments for Aged. 

No. 212 Small Pica type, Roan Sq. cors 35c Post, extra, 12c 

No. 283 Same as No. 212 with Psalms added 45c " 15c 

Pocket Bibles Without References. 

No. 01 103 Diamond type, India paper, Divinity Post, extra 

circuit, Red under Gold edges $1.00 3c 

No. 178 Pearl type, Cloth, red edges 18 7c 

No. 010 " Fr. Seal, Red under Gold 50 5c 

No. 013 Pearl type, Fr. Seal, Divinity circuit, 

Red under Gold edges 50 5c 

No. 038 Pearl type, Padded, Red under Gold 50 5c 

No. 035 " Padded and clasp, Red under 

Gold edges 55 5c 

No. 01 150 Ruby type, Fr. Seal, Red under Gold 40 7c 

No. 01 153 Ruby type, French Seal, Divinity circuit, 

Red under Gold edges 55 7c 

No. 01227 Ruby type, French Seal, Gold roll, Red 

under Gold edges 80 7c 

No. 01327 Minion type, French Seal, Divinity 

circuit, Red under Gold edges 70 12c 

No. 01329 Minion type, French Seal, Divinity 

circuit, Leather lined 1.25 12c 

Pocket Bible with References. 

No. 03008 Pearl type, Fr. Seal, Divinity circ. $ .55 Post, extra, 7c 

Child's Bibles, Profusely Illustrated. 

No. 140 Ruby type, Fr. Seal, Limp $ .80 Post, extra, 10c 

No. 145 Ruby " " Divinity circ 1.00 " 10c 

Pocket New Testaments. 

No. 801 Ruby type, Limp cloth, Sq. corners 
No. 030 " Fr. Seal, Fine Design 15c 

No. 033 " " Div. circuit 25c 

No. 0130 Same as No. 030 with Psalms added 

No. 0133 " " 033 35c 

No. 287 Brevier type, Roan, gilt edge, Psalms 
No. 010 Diamond type (very small), Limp, 

Red leather, Red under Gold edge 35c " lc 



5c Post 


:. extra, 

2c 


2c 


2c 






25c 


" 


3c 


3c 






35c 


5. 


c 



No. 014 Diamond type (very small), French 

Morocco, Divinity circuit, Leather 

lined, etc 80c " lc 

The Tischendorf New Testament with footnote readings of three 
oldest Greek MSS., 50 cents, postpaid. 

"Bible Talks in Simple Language." 

This is the best book of its kind we have ever seen. It presents 
the Bible Stories in simple but not childish language, and 
seems remarkably free from the bad theology so common in this 
class of books. All Christian parents should have a Sunday Bible 
lesson with their children, and this book furnishes interesting 
topics, to which may be added as much concordant "present 
truth" as the age of the children will justify. Parents are responsible 
for their children's training in theology as well as 
morals. This will assist you in the discharge of this duty, and 
thus be a blessing to yourself as well as to your children. 

624 pages, 250 illustrations; cloth sides, leather back and 
corners, gilt edges. A subscription book at $3.00. Our special 
price 75 cents, plus 25 cents postage. 

"Daily Food." 

Two texts and a verse for every day in the year. Have 
one on your breakfast table with the natural food. Appoint 
one of the family reader, and call for questions and comments. 
Feed the soul as well as the body. Small, neat, cloth bound, 
gilt edges. 15 cents, 2 for 25 cents, including postage. 

--WHEN ORDERING ALWAYS NAME YOUR EXPRESS 
OFFICE AND COMPANY AS WELL AS POST OFFICE.- 

ADDRESS ORDERS WATCH TOWER BIBLE & 
TRACT SOCIETY, BIBLE HOUSE, ALLEGHENY, PA. 



page 193 
