Do You ‘Feed Your Child a Scorpion’?
“THE movie also contains scenes of grisly sadism that are perhaps unequalled in recent popular entertainment.” One “artificial human slowly crushes the skull of his human creator.” Another character is shot in the torso. “We see her violently writhing and dying.” Then one of the principal characters “is shown putting his finger in the wound and licking her blood.”
These descriptions are taken from a New York Times article that asked whether this type of film violence is a socially destructive element. Regarding the film Blade Runner, it stated: “The vivid depiction of gore, and the plot emphasis on aggressive behavior, seems to raise to a new level a trend evident in many recent mass-audience science-fiction or fantasy movies that attract large youthful followings.” Herein lies the danger​—the younger generation is being brainwashed with gratuitous, or unnecessary, violence.
The article went on to state: “Psychologists interviewed emphasized the harmful effects of vividly depicted aggression. ‘Gratuitous bloodshed and violence is dangerous,’ said the Blade Runner’s director. ‘I think it does inspire violence. Children must be affected by it. It’s inevitable.’”
Do films that feature excessive violence and horror really affect children? According to Dr. Leonard Berkowitz, professor of psychology at the University of Wisconsin, the adverse effects of the graphic depiction of violence on audiences are well documented. A report by the National Institute of Mental Health indicates that ‘excessive violence on television leads directly to aggression and violent behavior among children and teen-agers.’
Dr. Berkowitz affirms that violence has a threefold effect on audiences. “First, it makes audiences in general less horrified by, and more indifferent to, violence. Secondly, audiences may learn the lesson that violence is approved behavior. Third, some can become stimulated by it.”
Science-fiction writer Isaac Asimov stated: “We get inured to violence, and that’s not good for our society. A callous population is a dangerous population.” Do you as a parent want your child to become callous and dangerous?
Who Should Decide​—Moviemakers or Parents?
Another director, Nicholas Meyer, “agrees that many movies are too gory. ‘Lots of movies are gratuitously violent. They pander to audiences​—certainly, it’s a form of pornography.’” Then he was asked if he was concerned that children might be disturbed by the scorpion scene or by the sight of the bloody corpses in the movie Star Trek II: The Wrath of Khan. His answer? “It’s a PG [Parental Guidance] movie. I never thought that either ‘Star Trek’ or ‘Time after Time’ should be seen by young children. . . . You can’t blame the film maker for the parents who don’t heed the rating system.”
That comment puts the responsibility where it should be​—squarely on the shoulders of the parents. Do you as a parent take an active interest in the movies that your children watch, whether on TV or at the local cinema? Official film ratings are somewhat of a guide as to the moral content of a film, even though measured by present low standards. Film critiques published in the press are another way of knowing whether a film is suitable fare for your children. Do you check these opinions and the TV program résumé before allowing your child to see a film?
Just as a loving parent pays special attention to the food his child eats, making sure that nothing bad or poisoned gets into a meal, likewise care should be taken with regard to the kind of information and images being fed into a child’s mind. Much attention is being paid these days to having a healthy body; yet relatively little care is taken about the more vital factor of a healthy mind. As a consequence, hatred, violence and prejudice easily get ingrained into a youngster’s mind.
Jesus’ illustration of a loving father applies in this case: “Indeed, which father is there among you who, if his son asks for a fish, will perhaps hand him a serpent instead of a fish? Or if he also asks for an egg, will hand him a scorpion?” (Luke 11:11, 12) When it comes to choosing entertainment for your children, and even for yourself, do you make sure you do not end up with a “serpent” or a “scorpion”?
Remember that the apostle Paul’s wise counsel also applies to our entertainment: “Finally, brothers, whatever things are true, whatever things are of serious concern, whatever things are righteous, whatever things are chaste, whatever things are lovable, whatever things are well spoken of, whatever virtue there is and whatever praiseworthy thing there is, continue considering these things.” Or as The New English Bible concludes that verse: “Fill all your thoughts with these things.”​—Philippians 4:8.
With this definition of what is upbuilding, there should be no room for gratuitous violence and horror in Christian entertainment. The decision whether to watch such films or not should be easy for the trained conscience and the conscientious parent.​—Hebrews 5:14.
[Picture on page 14]
Is your child’s mind feeding on violence and horror?

