Announcements
FULFILLING YOUR COMMISSION TO PREACH
“Go,” said Jesus, “ . . . and make disciples of people of all the nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father and of the Son and of the holy spirit, teaching them.” (Matt. 28:18-20) Today the commission to go preach must be carried out as never before, for we are living in the last days of this old system of things. Now is especially the acceptable time for all witnesses of Jehovah to say in fulfillment of Isaiah 6:8, 9: “Here am I; send me.” (AS) This is done by spending as much time as possible preaching the good news of Jehovah’s kingdom. During July Jehovah’s witnesses will fulfill their commission to go preach by going from house to house, delivering to all who will listen an important three-to eight-minute Bible sermon. Persons interested in gaining additional vital Bible knowledge will be glad to accept two Bible-study aid books and two booklets on the contribution of $1.
YOUR PLACE IN GOD’S KINGDOM
Do you repeat the Lord’s Prayer? Did you realize in doing so that you can expect a complete change in man’s affairs? that God’s kingdom will bring an end to all forms of violence, crime and corrupt government and restore righteous rule over all people? Jesus taught us to pray: “Let your will come to pass, as in heaven, also upon earth.” Such blessings would insure a new and better world. But our part in it will depend upon the course of action we take as individuals. You can secure your place in that perfect arrangement of God by learning from God’s Word what he expects you to do. Can you afford to overlook such a responsibility? Your family will benefit too by your interest in their welfare. To help you in your study, send for the two books “New Heavens and a New Earth” and “This Means Everlasting Life”. Both books are hard bound and contain a total of over 700 pages. Both have complete subject and scripture indexes and questions at the bottom of the pages to make family study simple. Send a contribution of only $1 for both books and receive free two inspiring booklets on Bible subjects.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES FOR THE WEEKS
July 20: Be Balanced in All Things, ¶1-36. Page 369.
July 27: Be Balanced in All Things, ¶37-43, and Maintaining Good Balance. Page 375.

