“As You Go, Preach”
WHEN Jesus sent out his twelve disciples he commanded them: “As you go, preach, saying, ‘The kingdom of the heavens has drawn near.’” (Matt. 10:7) Wherever they went throughout the land they did not fail to proclaim this good news.
This was done not only by the apostles but by all who became Christ’s followers. The early Christians did not keep silent about the Scriptural truths they had learned. Philip, for example, was one who preached as he traveled. On one occasion, while traveling on the desert road from Jerusalem to Gaza, he encountered an Ethiopian who was a proselyte to the Jews’ religion. The man was returning to his homeland after worshiping at Jerusalem. Philip noticed that he was reading from the Scriptures, and this gave him an opportunity to speak to the man. It opened the way for him to preach the good news of the Kingdom and its King, Christ Jesus.
Modern-day Christians can show the same initiative while traveling that Philip did. They can get into a conversation with a fellow traveler and then manipulate it so that they can talk about the good, upbuilding truths of the Scriptures. Many interesting experiences have been had by those who have done this.
This summer will be a fine time for Jehovah’s witnesses to preach in this manner. Thousands of them will be coming to New York for the big international assembly that is scheduled for eight days. Some will travel by plane, others by boat and still others by train or car. They can make good use of the time by talking tactfully with other travelers. While sitting next to a person on a train or in an airplane the witness can start a friendly conversation and then turn the conversation toward the Scriptures. If the other person does not want to listen the witness will not make the trip unpleasant for him by continuing to talk about the good news. He will be considerate, knowing that there is “a time to keep quiet and a time to speak.” (Eccl. 3:7) He is interested in finding ears that want to hear the good news.
Because some witnesses have preached while they traveled, a number of people have heard the good news of the Kingdom, even though they could not be reached at their homes or places of business. Others have had misunderstandings cleared away.
There will be many opportunities for those witnesses who drive to New York to preach along the way. They can talk with people they have business transactions with in the towns they pass through. There are also other car travelers that might stay overnight in the same town. These too can be witnessed to as opportunity affords.
Thus there are many ways that God’s servants can preach the good news of the Kingdom while they are traveling. What is necessary is for them to take the initiative in starting casual conversations with people. But in this type of witnessing the Christian must be especially considerate and kind. “Accordingly, as God’s chosen ones, holy and loved, clothe yourselves with the tender affections of compassion, kindness, lowliness of mind, mildness, and long-suffering.”—Col. 3:12.
Like the early Christians, Jehovah’s witnesses are preachers of the good news of God’s kingdom. They find pleasure in talking about Him and his mighty acts. “And your men of loving-kindness will bless you. About the glory of your kingship they will talk, and about your mightiness they will speak, to make known to the sons of men his mighty acts and the glory of the splendor of his kingship.”—Ps. 145:10-12.
As tens of thousands of Jehovah’s witnesses travel from many parts of the earth to their assembly in New York city this summer a mighty witness will be given to the glory and might of the Creator. Many ears may hear the good news of God’s kingdom for the first time and many hearts will be lifted up and given hope. They will follow the example of Christ’s apostles by preaching wherever they go.

