Announcements
FIELD MINISTRY
During March Jehovah’s witnesses, in loyalty to God and his kingdom, will continue to preach the good news of God’s kingdom. (Ps. 86:2, 12) As an aid to Bible study they will offer a year’s subscription for The Watchtower for only $1. All new subscribers will receive free three booklets containing timely Bible lectures.
MEMORIAL
Over 1900 years ago the Lord Jesus instituted the memorial of his death. In this simple observance bread without yeast and red wine were used as symbols of his sacrificed body and blood. Directing the annual observance of this memorial celebration, Jesus said: “Keep doing this in remembrance of me.” This year Jehovah’s witnesses and other good-will persons will assemble on Tuesday, April 17, after 6 p.m. Standard Time, to commemorate this event. At each such meeting, following a discourse on the significance of the occasion, the Memorial emblems, the bread and the wine, will be passed, separately, after Jehovah’s blessing has been asked upon each. In conclusion an invitation will he extended to those present to have a share in preaching the Kingdom good news with the congregation. All persons of good will toward Jehovah God are invited and encouraged to attend the Memorial. If you do not know where the nearest Kingdom Hall is located, write the publishers of this magazine for information.
WATCH TOWER PUBLICATIONS INDEX
How long have you been reading the Watch Tower Society’s publications? Would you like to be able to locate in a moment any one of the thousands of points that have made you appreciate so much what these publications contain? The Watch Tower Society has published a comprehensive index, both subject and scripture, of its publications produced during the past thirty years. It is the Watch Tower Publications Index and it will be sent to you for $1. A supplement covering the year 1961 is also available for 10c. Ask for the Watch Tower Publications Index for 1961.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES FOR THE WEEKS
April 22: “Keep Proving What You Yourselves Are.” Page 169.
April 29: Keep Proving What You Are by Accepting Responsibility. Page 175.
FOR OWNERS OF NEW WORLD BIBLE TRANSLATION
The following corrections are now being made in additional printings of the 1961 edition of the New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures. Owners of such edition can cut out from the bottom of this page the two corrected lines to paste in their Bible copies over the faulty lines, namely, on page 289, in Judges 5:5, the second line of the verse; on page 730, the first line for Psalm 148:9:
face of Jehovah,
9 YOU mountains and all YOU

