Flying High in Japan
By “Awake!” correspondents in Japan
AGAINST the background of a superb winter sunset a solitary figure stands on a bridge. His attention is completely fixed on a dark form bouncing in the sky. What entrances him? A kite.
Have you ever flown a kite? A hobby like this will take you to open spaces with fresh winds. In the West, kites generally are viewed as children’s toys, although a few adults enjoy them too. In Japan, however, people of all ages find kiteflying to be a refreshing and relaxing pastime.
Kite making has become an art here. Pride is taken in making the most of color, shape and design. Japanese skill in making kites and sending them aloft has preserved the creating of kite masterpieces in this land.
From Days of Old
The first kite on record in Japan dates back to 931 of the Common Era. It had been brought here from China, where kites originated. At that time, along with Buddhism, washi (the very tough paper developed in the East) was introduced to Japan. These events were concurrent because kites were made of washi and were used for Buddhist ceremonies.
In the eleventh century, kites were used as military symbols. Then, and at later times, they were employed to carry communications and food to allies during battles. Just as American Indians used to send up smoke signals, so in wartime the Japanese flew kites to show their position. The Japanese evidently had good knowledge of geometry hundreds of years ago, for, by attaching a long tail to a kite and flying it directly over the enemy’s camp, they were able to calculate the distance between themselves and the foe. Thus, they were even able to tunnel right into the opposing camp.
During the sixteenth century kites became popular as toys. Since they were large and were flown unskillfully in town areas, many serious accidents occurred as the cumbersome kites came down on people’s heads. Laws forbidding kiteflying were ignored and this pastime enjoyed its biggest boom ever.
Fishermen, too, found uses for kites. Since days of old, fishermen have used them to determine air currents and by doing so decide whether it was safe to go to sea or not.
The eighteenth century brought about great changes in Japanese kite designs. One reason for this was that wood-block-print pictures were being copied and developed into kite designs. Additionally, Japan began opening her doors to the outside world, and before long influences in picture designs from China, Southeast Asia and even India were showing up in kites.
Kite Traditions
Kites have been used as talismans supposedly to avert evil spirits. If a son was born to a family, as the year came to a close the grandfather would paint a picture of a demon on an enormous kite. This would then be hung from the ceiling above the baby boy. On the first day of O-Shogatsu (New Year), the kite would be removed and flown by the family in the belief that all evil would thus be drawn from the house and taken away with the winds. Supposedly having removed all possibilities of disaster in this way, the health and happiness of the child was thought to be assured. This ancient custom still exists at one or two places in Japan.
Wherever a person goes in Japan today, kite giving is still observed in festivals for children. Each year there is a festival for boys and one for girls. The pictures on the kites vary and convey certain wishes​—a crane or a tortoise for a long life, a dragon for prosperity, a carp for strength, and so on. On these occasions, kites are considered to be good-luck charms.
The origin of the famous Nambu kites, which gained great popularity in Europe, also reflects old religious superstitions. Shintoists painted their petitions to the gods on Nambu kites. These were taken to the shrines and flown in the belief that in this way the requests could be taken directly to the gods, instead of waiting for the deities to come down to earth.
An amusing custom still is carried on in remote mountain villages. After the hard work of gathering the rice crop, much fun is had when the young men assemble to have a kiteflying contest. The most skilled among them wins the hand of the landowner’s most beautiful daughter in marriage!
Nevertheless, a person not wishing to become involved with religious traditions can still enjoy kiteflying. A kite need not have religious connections. And those who would like to add a touch of color can paint designs of their own choice on plain kites. In fact, why not make the whole thing?
Making a Kite
Stage 1: Take three strips of thin light wood that can be bent without breaking it (bamboo, if possible). In Figure 1 you will see how to line these up. Suggested thicknesses are 4 x 2.5 millimeters, 3.5 x 2 mm., and 3 x 2 mm. (1 millimeter = .04 inch). The medium-sized strip is used for the top of the kite, the lightest for the bottom and the heaviest for the vertical. For successful flying, the balance of the kite is all important. Therefore, the vertical slat must cross the horizontals at their centers.
Now bind the frame with thin string at points a and b. As you do this, please remember the balance of your kite. You should not use more string on one point than on the other.
Stage 2: Prepare a sheet of washi or strong lightweight paper, as shown in Figure 2. Now is the time to show off your artistic skills and paint a picture. After several attempts, you may decide on a plain kite.
Place the kite face down and apply to the tabs and frame a light paste made of flour and water. (See Figure 2.) With the vertical strip lying on top of the horizontals, place the frame on the paper and stick down the tabs. Care should be exercised so that no wrinkles appear in the paper. Afterward a light spray of water will make your kite taut. Snip off the piece of wood protruding beyond the top triangle of paper.
Stage 3: For the guide strings, stronger string is needed. Figure 3 shows the attachment points on the front of the kite (c, d and e). Tying the guide strings to the frame will require puncturing the paper. But be careful not to tear it. If the knots are tight, the string need only be wound around the wood once at each point. The length of each guide string should be, roughly, double the width of the kite. It is important that the strings meet directly above point x. Incidentally, an experienced person is able to make the three guide strings from one length of unbroken string.
Figure 4 shows that the kite is curved by tightening the string between points c and d. The string used for flying will be attached to the knot of the guide strings. Slackness in any of the strings will cause the kite to lean badly or even spin. To make flying easier, a tail one yard (1 meter) long can be stuck on at the point shown in Figure 4. If you can make the kite fly without a tail, you have joined the professional class.
Whether young or old, single or married with a family, great fun can be had in kite making. Parents can use this opportunity to teach their children something about winds, clouds, the sky​—things that “speak” silently about the Grand Creator. Why not get together and turn kite making into a family project, or call some friends to join you in the making and the flying of a kite?
Kite Games
One popular competitive game in Japan is based on the idea of crossing kites. The object is to cut another player’s kite free. This is done by winding the string of one’s kite around the other person’s kite string while the kites are in flight. The string is cut by friction. But, really, in this game would you like to lose the kite you worked so hard to make?
Variations on the basic kite increase a person’s fun. For example, children, particularly, are thrilled when a bow is attached to the top of a kite. This is so because of the loud noise the bow produces in the wind.
Oh, yes! Here is another interesting kiteflying amusement. Fill a paper cone with flower petals and hold it partially closed with a thin strip of paper and a little paste. Thread this cone onto the main flying string. Gradually, the little parasol travels up the string of the flying kite. The strong wind breaks the thin strip of paper, causing a pretty shower of petals.
With some imagination, soon you may be thinking of new games and new kites.
Some Kite Tales
It is claimed that in 1712 a notorious thief named Kakinoki Kinsuke used a kite to carry himself to the top roof of the dungeon of Nagoya Castle. There he is said to have helped himself to the gold scales from the dolphin ornaments in revenge for having had his lands taken away. Fifty years later, Kinsuke’s escapade became a play, and to this day it can be seen in Japan.
Another tale is told about a feudal lord and his young son. In the twelfth century, they were banished to a certain island. To reclaim his lost position, legend has it that this feudal lord sent his son back to the mainland on a kite.
Like some fishermen, many kite fliers have ‘tall stories’ to tell. It is hoped that after some kiteflying episode you will not talk about ‘the one that got away,’ or relate an exaggerated account of your achievements.
There is much to be said for having a hobby that all the family can enjoy, especially when it is inexpensive and does not demand a lot of time. If your kite is not too heavy and you fly it carefully in a safe place, the hobby is harmless. You will learn something about building, flying and, yes, having fun. All ages enjoy the thrill of feeling the pull of a kite in flight. Why not try it? And may you and your kite enjoy good flying.
[Diagram on page 19]
(For fully formatted text, see publication)
Figure 1 (Framework)
Figure 2 (Paper)
Figure 3 (Assembled kite)
Figure 4 (In flight)

