What Are Jehovah’s Witnesses Like?
‘A LARGE portion of the U.S. population still considers Witnesses to be un-American, un-Christian or crackpots,’ said the Cleveland Press. However, the late syndicated columnist Louis Cassels noted that Jehovah’s witnesses “are orderly, clean-living, well-behaved people.”​—Houston Chronicle, August 26, 1973.
Since views differ so greatly, it is evident that considerable misinformation exists regarding Jehovah’s witnesses. What are they really like? An opportunity to find out was afforded this past summer at the “Divine Purpose” District Assembly of Jehovah’s Witnesses.
Sixty-nine of these four-day assemblies were held in the United States, and there have been over a hundred and forty more in other countries. Already 1,822,672 persons have attended these gatherings in forty-seven lands; 891,819 persons did so in the United States alone!
What have the thousands of visitors, including many news reporters, learned about Jehovah’s witnesses? A Roman Catholic woman from Mexico came to visit her daughter in California and attended the Inglewood assembly. “This is something truly amazing to me,” she said. “I have never in my life seen anything like it. This is the first time I have had a chance to learn the truth about the Witnesses. Now I know that a lot of things the priests told me are nothing but lies.”
Are They “Un-American”?
Jehovah’s witnesses have often been accused of being “un-American.” But are they? Do they seek to undermine the law and order of the United States or of any other country in which they live? The New York Amsterdam News noted in an editorial during a summer assembly there:
“At a time when the morality of our nation is being seriously questioned, and our major religions find themselves faced with revolts against long established moral codes, it is a pleasure to welcome the convention of the Jehovah’s Witnesses. . . . Such Keepers of the Faith are good for our city and good for our sinful nation because of the example they set amid the scandals, murders and moral breakdowns of our times.”​—August 10, 1974.
Rather than their being a lawless, subversive people, does this not sound as though Jehovah’s witnesses are an asset to the community? This is what persons have concluded who have come to know them. “It was a pleasure to witness the members of your organization, carrying out their numerous tasks so efficiently, and with a smile. Everyone I came in contact with was . . . mannerly and helpful,” wrote the chairman of the park where the Witnesses held their assembly in Guyana this past summer. Also, note what an editorial in the San Diego Union says in this regard:
“In an era when large crowds at public facilities usually add up to headaches for law enforcement officers and clean-up crews, the district convention of Jehovah’s Witnesses in San Diego last weekend was a remarkable exception. At the peak of the four-lay meeting, 37,000 members of this religious sect, including teen-agers and children, were gathered in and around the San Diego Stadium, with no suggestion of the problems that such large gatherings can create.
“The Witnesses were a reminder of what can be accomplished with self-discipline. As one stadium official remarked, their clean-up operation was so efficient that they left their meeting site in better condition than they found it. The Witnesses are the kind of guests any city would like to have.”​—July 10, 1974.
Le Soleil reported: “Quebec City’s police officials offered their services to assembly organizers, but so far no call has been made. And rightly so, for in the Youth Pavilion there is quite a crowd, yet no one is smoking nor drinking alcoholic beverages.”​—August 9, 1974.
In view of such reports, why do many consider Jehovah’s witnesses to be out of line with the best interests of the nation? In particular, it is because religious leaders have often made that false accusation, and many persons believe them. These leaders dislike Jehovah’s witnesses for exposing the hypocrisy and false teachings of the churches. And they envy the Witnesses’ accomplishments, as indicated by this in the Providence Journal-Bulletin:
“‘I wish we had their zeal.’
“This, or some similar statement about the missionary endeavors of Jehovah’s, Witnesses, has been made countless times to this reporter by both clergymen and laymen of the so called ‘mainline’ denominations.
“The speakers are referring, of course, to the door to door witnessing that is the hallmark of Jehovah’s Witness public activity.
“Less obvious, however, is the way in which Jehovah’s Witnesses do things themselves that other religious organizations hire contractors and other paid labor to do.
“Their churches​—called ‘kingdom halls’—​are built by Witnesses. . . . When Jehovah’s Witnesses have large district assemblies such as that under way at Narragansett Park, Pawtucket [R.I.], since Thursday, there is a similar outpouring of volunteer talent to make arrangements and handle details.”​—July 6, 1974.
Such activity made it possible for all to enjoy the assembly program, which featured twenty-five Bible talks and three Bible dramas. This program made clear that Jehovah’s witnesses do not look to any human government, including the United Nations, to solve world problems. The assembly’s principal discourse, “Human Plans Failing as God’s Purpose Succeeds,” showed why human efforts can never bring permanent peace to earth, but that only Almighty God can.
For this reason Jehovah’s witnesses put their trust in God’s purpose to establish a Kingdom government. It is this very rulership that Jesus Christ championed, even teaching his followers to pray to God, “Let your kingdom come. Let your will take place, as in heaven, also upon earth.” (Matt. 6:10) So, their attitude on the matter of government is the one that is advocated in God’s own Word, the Bible.
Are Their Teachings Christian?
Well, then, what about the accusation that Jehovah’s witnesses are unchristian? Is this true?
First, what is a Christian? The Bible shows that he is a disciple of Jesus Christ​—a person who believes that Christ is “God’s Son,” and that only through him can one gain God’s favor and eternal life. (Acts 11:26; Luke 1:35; John 14:6; Eph. 1:7) He is a person who patterns his life after Christ’s example.​—1 Pet. 2:21.
Well, anyone who heard the assembly program knows that many talks focused on Christ’s teachings and example. One, entitled “Prove Yourselves True Disciples of Christ,” showed what persons must do to demonstrate that they are Christ’s disciples. Another had as its title Jesus’ admonition to the apostle Peter, “Strengthen Your Brothers.” (Luke 22:32) Also, Christ’s command to his followers, “Preach, Saying, ‘The Kingdom of the Heavens Has Drawn Near,’” was the subject of another talk.​—Matt. 10:7.
Further, a two-hour, full-costumed Bible drama portrayed the activity of the apostle Paul, showing how he faithfully adhered to Christ’s teachings and example.
In addition, two new 192-page Bible study helps were released at the assemblies, highlighting Christ’s prominent position in God’s purpose, as well as his teachings about the sure hope of everlasting life. One book is entitled “God’s ‘Eternal Purpose’ Now Triumphing for Man’s Good”; the other, “Is This Life All There Is?”
Clearly, Jehovah’s witnesses advocate Christianity. Does their conduct show this?
Is Their Conduct Christian?
Christ freely gave of himself in behalf of others. Is that same spirit manifest among Jehovah’s witnesses? The Macon Telegraph, & News noted regarding the assembly there:
“Even in its opening hours Thursday the four-day event was apparently perking along as if it had been rehearsed with every one of the 11,500 attending. . . .
“Inside, hundreds of attendants and volunteer workers answered questions, manned first-aid rooms, cut up tomatoes for the cafeteria salad, stocked refreshment stands, counted attendance and spoke into walkie-talkies.”​—July 6, 1974.
Yes, Jehovah’s witnesses are noted as a people who give of themselves in behalf of others. Young and old, and people of all walks of life volunteer to share in the work, to the amazement of visitors. Even those physically handicapped often find ways to share. At the Pullman, Washington, assembly a blind and deaf Witness worked in a sandwich-making line so effectively that observers did not realize that she was so handicapped until they were told about it!
Christ was noted particularly for his warm kindness and integrity, which made him a truly pleasant. companion. Do Jehovah’s witnesses imitate this example of his? In Portland, Oregon, the sister of a new Witness had the day off and agreed to visit the assembly. “I’ve never seen anything like it!” she exclaimed. “Everyone is so kind and loving . . . like one big family.”
What occurred at a Pawtucket, Rhode Island, assembly indicates why people feel so trusting and at ease among Jehovah’s witnesses. A non-Witness couple from Florida lost a wallet containing $180 in cash while in Westerly, Rhode Island. One of Jehovah’s witnesses found it, and noted the name and address of a Rhode Island resident inside. He phoned and told the people that the wallet would be left at the assembly’s Lost and Found. When the couple picked up the wallet there, the husband was deeply grateful.
People who come to know Jehovah’s witnesses realize that they are truly trustworthy. At the Münster assembly in Germany a Witness, needing change to make a long-distance phone call, went to a nearby ice-cream vendor. Upon asking for change for a 20-mark bill, the man handed him the cash box, saying: “Please help yourself.” When the Witness wanted to show the man the money he had taken in change, the man said: “That’s OK. With you people I know I don’t have to check it.”
Most persons who are Jehovah’s witnesses had not previously imitated Christ’s example of honesty and integrity. Many had been drug addicts, alcoholics, fornicators, adulterers, thieves, and so forth. But they changed. At the sixty-nine assemblies in the United States this summer 22,760 new Witnesses were baptized, and at assemblies in forty-six other countries 31,971 more persons were baptized. All of these had completed a study of the Christian requirements outlined in the Bible, and had conformed their lives to them.
Many people this summer had opportunity to see firsthand what a change in personality this results in. They offered accommodations in their homes to Jehovah’s witnesses during the assembly, since almost all other facilities were filled. One Johnson City, New York, resident who did this was moved to write the following to the editor of the Binghamton Sun-Bulletin, and it was published July 27, 1974:
“I had the opportunity recently of offering housing to four young men from out of town who were attending a convention at the Arena in Binghamton. I was amazed at the conduct and behavior of these young men. They were like from another world, a different breed altogether from what we see all around us. They did not smoke, drink or take drugs. They were kind and considerate. They were clean in mind and appearance, left my home spotless after a week. They were intelligent, and I had many interesting talks with them. . . .
“The world is in such distress and turmoil. There are lots of people who are hoping for intelligent beings from another planet to come and teach us how to live. What nonsense! For we have them right here with us, but people know nothing about them and are inclined to condemn and persecute. They are dedicated servants of God and imitators of Christ. They are the ‘Jehovah’s Witnesses’ . . . I am humbly grateful that I was given the privilege of meeting these true Christians.”
Obviously it is a misconception that Jehovah’s witnesses are unchristian.
Are They Crackpots?
But what about the accusation that they are crackpots? Are they really erratic, impractical or crazy?
Well, consider what is involved in organizing the scores of large assemblies. Does it seem as though these are operated by erratic, impractical people who do not know how to plan things? The Escondido Times Advocate noted in its report on the San Diego assembly: “The sheer logistics involved in moving and feeding such multitudes has long been the envy of other groups, including the Red Cross and the armed services.”​—July 7, 1974.
In amazement an Omaha, Nebraska, city health inspector exclaimed on seeing the feeding operation: “Our manual says it can’t be done this fast, but I’m seeing it and I’ve got to believe it.” Officials frequently visit assemblies to learn from Jehovah’s witnesses how to organize such operations.
Yet some may consider them crazy to hold assemblies that feature Bible instruction. But do you? In a world that ignores Bible teachings, hatred, discord and war are everywhere rampant. However, while Greeks and Turks fought one another on the island of Cyprus, over 8,000 Greek and Turkish Witnesses were meeting side by side in peace and unity on the same assembly grounds in Munich, Germany. When you see such results, believing and applying the Bible does not seem like a crazy idea, does it?
The Bible promises that God’s kingdom soon now “will crush and put an end to all these kingdoms,” or earthly governments, “and it itself will stand to times indefinite.” (Dan. 2:44) On the basis of the Bible, Jehovah’s witnesses believe that Almighty God actually will bring an end to this system of things and that his Kingdom rule will usher in righteous earthly conditions.​—2 Pet. 3:5-7, 13.
You owe it to yourself to examine the evidence. Check your own Bible and see what it teaches on the matter. Jehovah’s witnesses will be very happy to help you to do this. Accept their help. Learn what Jehovah’s witnesses are really like.
[Picture on page 18]
13,937 were present at the Illinois State Fairgrounds in Springfield. A total of 891,819 persons attended the 69 assemblies in the United States
[Picture on page 20]
Sharing in food preparation for the more than 40,000 persons who were present at County Stadium in Milwaukee

