“Christ, the Son of the Living God”
AFTER his disciples reported who men were saying that he was, Jesus asked: “‘You, though, who do you say I am?’ In answer Simon Peter said: ‘You are the Christ, the Son of the living God.’”​—Matthew 16:15, 16.
Was Peter alone in reaching this conclusion? By no means! Notice who else did so, and note their basis for this identification.
EARLY SUPPORTERS: John the Baptizer, the disciples Nathanael and Martha, and Saul of Tarsus, among others, all called Jesus God’s Son. (Matthew 14:33; John 1:33, 34, 49; 11:27; Acts 9:20) Their conviction was strengthened as they saw how prophecies designed to identify the promised Messiah were fulfilled in Jesus.
EARLY OPPOSERS: Jews who wanted to kill Jesus referred to him as God’s Son, as did soldiers present at his impalement. (Matthew 27:54; John 19:7) Although this does not necessarily indicate belief on the part of such opposers, at least it shows that they were familiar with what others were claiming about Jesus; and the supernatural events surrounding his impalement evidently caused some of them to reconsider the question of his identity.
ANGELS: When announcing Jesus’ birth, the angel Gabriel called him God’s Son. (Luke 1:32, 35) Even demon-possessed persons under the influence of wicked angels cried out: “What have we to do with you, Son of God?” (Matthew 8:28-32) Because of Jesus’ prehuman existence in heaven, it is obvious that both good and bad angels would know who he was.
JESUS HIMSELF: Jesus never boasted of being God’s Son in an attempt to gain favor with others or to revel in the prestige that this relationship offered. On the contrary, in most cases he humbly referred to himself as “the Son of man.” (Matthew 12:40; Luke 9:58) But on several occasions he did admit to being God’s Son.​—John 5:24, 25; 10:36; 11:4.
JEHOVAH GOD: Who could identify Jesus Christ with greater authority than Jehovah God himself? Twice Jehovah testified from heaven: “This is my Son, the beloved, whom I have approved.”​—Matthew 3:17; 17:5.
God Approved of Jesus​—Do You?
In the first century, thousands of people accepted Jesus for what he was: the promised Messiah, or Christ, sent to earth to vindicate Jehovah’s sovereignty and to offer his life as a ransom for mankind. (Matthew 20:28; Luke 2:25-32; John 17:25, 26; 18:37) In the face of bitter opposition, people would hardly have been motivated to become Jesus’ followers if they had been unsure of his identity. Zealously and courageously, they embraced the work he gave them, to “make disciples of people of all the nations.”​—Matthew 28:19.
Today, millions of Christian disciples know that Jesus is no myth. They accept him as the heavenly enthroned King of God’s established Kingdom, who is now progressively taking control of the earth and its affairs. This incoming divine government is welcome news because it promises relief from world problems. These true Christians demonstrate their wholehearted support of God’s chosen Ruler by declaring “this good news of the kingdom” to others.​—Matthew 24:14.
Those who support the Kingdom arrangement through “Christ, the Son of the living God,” will live to enjoy eternal blessings. These blessings can be yours too!
[Blurb on page 8]
Millions once unsure about Jesus’ identity are now united in supporting him as the Ruler of God’s Kingdom
[Picture on page 7]
Peter identified Jesus as “Christ, the Son of the living God.” So do over 3,000,000 witnesses of Jehovah today

