Announcements
FIELD MINISTRY
Those who have dedicated their lives to Jehovah God desire to magnify his name and aid their fellowmen to love and serve him. As the Bible shows, the “God of peace” equips his people as an organization “with every good thing” so they might perform his will. (Heb. 13:20, 21) So equipped, they pattern their ministry after that of Jesus and his apostles, calling from house to house to find persons interested in the Word of God. During August, they will be offering, in their house-to-house ministry, such Bible-study aids as the books “Things in Which It Is Impossible for God to Lie” and Life Everlasting—in Freedom of the Sons of God, on a contribution of 50c each, or either of these in combination with the book Did Man Get Here by Evolution or by Creation? for 75c.
THE ANNUAL MEETING IN PITTSBURGH
At ten o’clock in the forenoon of Tuesday, October 1, 1968, the annual meeting of the members of Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society of Pennsylvania will be held at the Society’s office located at 4100 Bigelow Boulevard, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. All members of the corporation should be certain that the Secretary’s Office has their addresses so that the letters of notice will reach them shortly after September 1.
Along with the notice of the annual meeting, which will be mailed to all the members of the corporation, proxies will be sent. The proxies are to be returned so as to reach the office of the Secretary of the Society not later than September 15. Each member should complete and return his proxy promptly whether he is going to be at the meeting personally or not.
THE BIBLE, A BENEFICIAL BOOK
Is the Bible just a fine book, only of literary value? Or perhaps a book to be read just for comfort or consolation when one is discouraged or depressed? Certainly it has proved its worth in these regards, but the Bible is of far more benefit. One of its own writers claimed for it: “All Scripture is inspired of God and beneficial for teaching, for reproving, for setting things straight, for disciplining in righteousness.” (2 Tim. 3:16) Are you deriving these benefits? Learn more about this Book of books. Send for and read “All Scripture Is Inspired of God and Beneficial.” It will acquaint you with all sixty-six books of the Bible, their writers and contents and why each book is beneficial for our day. Send only $1.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES FOR THE WEEKS
September 8: The Book of Truthful Historical Dates, and Why Are You Looking Forward to 1975?, ¶1-3. Page 488. Songs to Be Used: 22, 43.
September 15: Why Are You Looking Forward to 1975?, ¶4-37. Page 495. Songs to Be Used: 45, 68.
September 22: How 1st-Century Events Are Dated in the 20th Century. Page 501. Songs to Be Used: 77, 79.

