From Our Readers
Practical Jokes
Many thanks for your article “Practical Jokes​—How Funny Are They?” (November 8, 1983) I once wanted to frighten my mother. As she came from the living room I scared her, causing her to fall down. For several seconds she did not move. I could only hear her heavy breathing. I knelt down beside her and helped revive her, but every part of her body was trembling. Now I was the one that was frightened!
K. P., Germany
Safeguard Your Hearing
Your article “Safeguard Your Gift of Hearing” (August 22, 1983) really touched me. I have a problem with my ears and I thank you for the proper counsel in this article. I now realize, even more so, how valuable this gift of hearing is.
V. A., Greece
Valérie
The article on Valérie (January 8, 1984) brought tears to my eyes. The love and commitment of her parents, the determination to learn and overcome on the part of Valérie, the understanding shown by her brother, Laurent, plus their togetherness in worship is what the real meaning of family is all about. I cried in joy for their family but in sadness for those who do not have such a loving atmosphere in which to grow.
M. B., Pennsylvania
Attending School
Your article “Young People Ask . . . Do I Have to Go to School?” (January 8, 1984) brings out that many youths do not want to go to school because of pressure. I think that Christian parents should be more sensitive to their children. These children have the added pressures of not participating in school activities such as celebrating holidays. This makes them subject to much ridicule and could be damaging to their mental health. I have seen many children very upset by ridicule, yet not able to tell their parents because the parents had no compassion or understanding for the feelings of their children.
L. L., Michigan
We agree that parents need to show understanding and empathy and to strengthen their children to cope with such problems in attending school. But it is not wise to try to shield children from all unpleasant situations. It is actually good for youths to learn to stand firm for right principles even if this means putting up with ridicule. Such will help them to face greater tests in the future. Please see the articles in “Young People Ask . . .” entitled “Why Won’t the Kids Let Me Alone?” (February 8, 1984) and “How Can I Make Kids Stop Picking on Me?” (February 22, 1984)​—ED.
Romance Novels
I was particularly pleased with the article “Young People Ask . . . Are Romance Novels Harmless Reading?” (November 8, 1983) because my mother is always reading them and leaving her work undone.
U. B., Germany

