A Historic Visit Makes an Island Rejoice
Cuba, a beautiful island in the Caribbean, recently experienced an unprecedented season of spiritual refreshment. The close of 1998 brought a long-awaited blessing for Jehovah’s Witnesses living in this West Indian country. For the first time in more than 30 years, members of the Governing Body of Jehovah’s Witnesses paid a visit, and they were accompanied by 15 other delegates. The visitors were citizens of Australia, Austria, Belgium, Great Britain, Italy, New Zealand, and Puerto Rico.
THIS was a historic event for the 82,258 Kingdom publishers there and the 87,890 who joined them to celebrate the Lord’s Evening Meal in the spring of 1998.
From December 1 to 7, 1998, Lloyd Barry, John Barr, and Gerrit Lösch visited the Bethel Home in Havana and attended some of the “God’s Way of Life” District Conventions held in Cuba. They were happy to be able to meet with traveling elders and become better acquainted with Cuban public officials.
“This was a theocratic highlight of a lifetime for me and my wife,” said John Barr. “Our dear brothers and sisters in Cuba are so full of zeal for the truth! I came away feeling that our worldwide brotherhood is truly precious!” “This momentous week helped me to have a better understanding of the situation of our brothers there,” added Lloyd Barry.
During the past five years, Jehovah’s Witnesses have been granted greater freedom of worship in Cuba, and comments by Cuban authorities lead one to believe that they wish this trend to continue.
In September 1994, a printing operation was established in the Bethel Home in Havana. Once again, Jehovah’s Witnesses were able to meet openly and to witness from house to house. Later, in 1998, the authorities permitted this visit of an international delegation of 18 Jehovah’s Witnesses, including three members of the Governing Body.
Happy Reunion
When the delegation arrived at the José Martí airport in Havana, they were hospitably received by a contingent of public officials and a group from the Bethel Home, among them a brother who remembered the last visit to Cuba of a Governing Body member​—Milton Henschel—​in 1961. The brother was then 12 years old; he is now a traveling overseer.
When the delegates arrived at the Bethel Home, they were greeted with bouquets of gladioluses, roses, jasmine, and yellow and red daisies, grown by a brother especially for this occasion. Tears flowed freely as the Bethel family welcomed the delegates. Later, they shared a meal of Cuban roasted pork, rice and beans, salad, yucca with mojo (a sauce made of garlic and olive oil), and fresh fruit. After the meal each member of the Governing Body gave an upbuilding talk on the treasure of Bethel service. Brother Lösch’s comments were particularly moving, as he spoke to the brothers in Spanish. The Bethel family is made up of 48 regular volunteer workers and 18 temporary helpers.
Although books and Bibles are printed in Italy for the brothers in Cuba, black-and-white editions of the Watchtower and Awake! magazines are produced in the country itself, on two mimeograph machines. Long hours and repetitive manual work in cramped quarters are required to produce all the magazines that are needed. The volunteers value their treasure of service to Jehovah in a very special way.​—2 Corinthians 4:7.
Convention Highlights
The 18-member delegation divided into three groups so as to attend district conventions held at three locations​—Havana, Camagüey, and Holguín. On each of the three days, a large group of brothers and sisters, including many elders and pioneers, were invited to attend at each location. The local Witnesses had been told that this would be a special occasion, but they did not know that members of the Governing Body would be in attendance. Imagine their surprise to see these dear brothers and their wives step off the rented buses on Friday morning!
The conventions were held in open-air facilities constructed by the brothers with the permission of the authorities. At the Havana convention site, engraved on one of the entry stones was the citation “Psalm 133:1.” This reminded the brothers of the words found in that text: “Look! How good and how pleasant it is for brothers to dwell together in unity!” Certainly, during the convention, there was good and pleasant Christian fellowship in that location.
The visitors remarked on the excellent delivery of the talks and the interviews, and they were impressed by the presentation of the drama, which was based on the Bible story of Daniel chapter 3, set in ancient Babylon. A sister commented: “All the actors were superb, and the voice synchronization was so well done that you were unaware that the sound had been pretaped. . . . The evil Babylonian looked really evil, and the three Hebrews were firm and determined.”
Representatives of the Office of Religious Affairs and other officials of the government who came to see the conventions commended the brothers on their organization and fine conduct. Brother Barry expressed his sincere gratitude for the excellent treatment extended to the visiting delegates by the Cuban authorities. With standing ovations, often lasting several minutes, the brothers expressed their appreciation for the talks and also for the authorities’ permitting the conventions. “This is more than we expected​—a small-scale international convention!” said one Christian family. “It has been wonderful, for it has given evidence of Jehovah’s great power to make his promises come true.”
The conventions also provided an opportunity for others to get to know the Witnesses better. One of the bus drivers attended the convention on Saturday and again on Sunday. He said that he had heard many things about Jehovah’s Witnesses, but he now knew that they are good, peaceful people.
“Things We Shall Never Forget”
The people of Cuba impressed the delegates with their warmth and friendliness. Cubans are industrious, principled, and kind. “More than once, total strangers offered to help us,” said one delegate.
The delegates were deeply impressed by the faith, happiness, and love displayed by fellow Witnesses in Cuba. In spite of tremendous obstacles, they have made Jehovah their stronghold. (Psalm 91:2) John Barr said: “So many things pleasantly surprised me on this, my first visit to Cuba​—the beauty of the country, the pleasant temperament of the people I met, and above all, the sheer exuberance of the Cuban Witnesses. Never in my life have I heard such heartfelt singing of our Kingdom songs and such prolonged applause when spiritual matters touched their hearts! These are things we shall never forget. We shall always cherish them.”
Psalm 97:1 says: “Let the many islands rejoice.” Truly, Jehovah’s Witnesses on the island of Cuba rejoice over their increased freedom to worship God and over the historic visit of this international delegation.
[Pictures on page 8]
Many families attended the special “God’s Way of Life” District Conventions in Cuba
[Picture on page 8]
The Bethel Home in Havana was reopened in 1994
[Picture on page 8]
Governing Body members sign gift Bibles for public officials

