The Christian Congregation​—A Source of Strengthening Aid
POPI, a woman in her early 20’s, was frustrated because of a painful family situation involving lack of open communication with her parents.a After pouring her heart out to a Christian elder and his wife, she wrote to them: “Thank you so much for taking the time to talk to me. You do not know how much it means to me that you care. I thank Jehovah for giving me people I can trust and talk to.”
Toula, a recently widowed woman with two teenage children, found herself in a quagmire of troubling emotional and financial difficulties. She and her children regularly received the strengthening visits of a Christian married couple from the congregation. After she successfully coped with her situation, she sent them a card, saying: “I always remember you in my prayers. I recall the numerous times you stood by me and supported me.”
Do you sometimes feel that you are “loaded down” by the increasing pressures of this world? (Matthew 11:28) Have “time and unforeseen occurrence” marred your life with painful experiences? (Ecclesiastes 9:11) Then you are not alone. But as thousands of distressed ones have already found, you too can find meaningful help in the Christian congregation of Jehovah’s Witnesses. In the first century C.E., the apostle Paul found that certain fellow believers were an especially “strengthening aid” to him. (Colossians 4:10, 11) You can have a similar experience.
Support and Assistance
In the Christian Greek Scriptures, the word “congregation” is translated from the Greek term ek·kle·siʹa, which means a group of people called together. Inherent in that word are the ideas of solidarity and mutual support.
The Christian congregation upholds the truth of God’s Word and declares the good news of his Kingdom. (1 Timothy 3:15; 1 Peter 2:9) However, the congregation also provides spiritual support and assistance for those associated with it. Therein, one can find a group of loving, concerned, and caring friends, who are ready and willing to help and comfort others in times of stress.​—2 Corinthians 7:5-7.
Worshipers of Jehovah have always found safety and security in his congregation. The psalmist indicated that he experienced joy and a feeling of security among God’s congregated people. (Psalm 27:4, 5; 55:14; 122:1) Similarly today, the Christian congregation is an association of fellow believers who build up and encourage one another.​—Proverbs 13:20; Romans 1:11, 12.
Members of the congregation are taught to “work what is good toward all, but especially toward those related to [them] in the faith.” (Galatians 6:10) The Bible-based education they receive moves them to manifest brotherly love and tender affection for one another. (Romans 12:10; 1 Peter 3:8) Spiritual brothers and sisters in the congregation are moved to be kind, peaceable, and tenderly compassionate. (Ephesians 4:3) Instead of being just formal worshipers, they show loving concern for others.​—James 1:27.
In the congregation, therefore, crushed ones find the warm atmosphere of a familylike environment. (Mark 10:29, 30) The feeling of belonging to a close-knit and loving group strengthens them. (Psalm 133:1-3) Through the congregation, “the faithful and discreet slave” provides nourishing spiritual “food at the proper time.”​—Matthew 24:45.
Help From Loving Overseers
Members of the Christian congregation can expect to find in it loving, understanding, and qualified shepherds who provide spiritual support and encouragement. Shepherds with such qualities are like “a hiding place from the wind and a place of concealment from the rainstorm.” (Isaiah 32:1, 2) Spirit-appointed elders, or overseers, care for God’s sheeplike people, encourage the sick and depressed, and seek to restore those who have erred.​—Psalm 100:3; 1 Peter 5:2, 3.
Of course, the congregation’s body of elders is not a staff of professional therapists or health practitioners, able to cure physical or mental health problems faced by fellow believers. In this system of things, the ailing still “need a physician.” (Luke 5:31) Nevertheless, such shepherds can help those who are in need spiritually. (James 5:14, 15) Whenever possible, the elders also arrange for other assistance.​—James 2:15, 16.
Who is behind such a loving arrangement? Jehovah God himself! The prophet Ezekiel portrays Jehovah as declaring: “I will search for my sheep and care for them. . . . I will deliver them out of all the places to which they have been scattered . . . I myself shall feed my sheep, and I myself shall make them lie down.” God is also concerned about the feeble and weak sheep.​—Ezekiel 34:11, 12, 15, 16.
True Help at the Right Time
Is real help actually available in the Christian congregation? Yes, and the following examples illustrate the variety of circumstances in which the congregation proves to be of assistance.
◆ Loss of a loved one. Anna’s husband died after a chronic illness. “Since then, I have been the recipient of warm love from the Christian brotherhood,” she says. “The continuing kind words of support and encouragement from my fellow believers, including their heartfelt hugs, have kept my heart beating instead of breaking entirely, and I thank Jehovah. Their love has made me feel greatly supported, ultimately uplifted, tenderly cared for.” You too may have had the traumatic experience of losing a loved one in death. At such times, members of the congregation can provide much-needed comfort and emotional support.
◆ Sickness. Arthur, a traveling overseer from Poland, regularly visited congregations in Central Asia in order to strengthen them spiritually. During one of these visits, he became quite ill and his recuperation met with serious complications. “I want to tell you how the brothers and sisters in [a city in Kazakhstan] cared for me,” recalls Arthur with deep appreciation. “Brothers and sisters, many of whom I do not know​—and even interested ones—​brought money, food items, and medicine. . . . And they did it with great joy.
“Imagine my feelings when I received an envelope with some money and the following letter: ‘Dear Brother, I am sending you warm greetings. Mommy gave me money for ice cream, but I decided to give it to you for medicine. Please get better soon. Jehovah needs us for a long time. Best wishes. And tell us some more good, instructive stories. Vova.’” Yes, as shown in this case, young and old in the congregation can provide strengthening aid in times of sickness.​—Philippians 2:25-29.
◆ Depression. Teri had the heartfelt desire to serve as a pioneer, or full-time Kingdom proclaimer. Because of difficulties, though, she had to stop pioneering. “I felt tremendous guilt for trying to serve in this capacity and not even lasting a full year,” she says. Teri wrongly believed that Jehovah’s approval depended only on the amount of her service to him. (Contrast Mark 12:41-44.) Quite depressed, she isolated herself. But then refreshing help came from the congregation.
Teri recalls: “An older pioneer sister readily came to my assistance and listened to me as I poured out my feelings. When I left her home, I felt as if a weight had been lifted off me. From that point on, this pioneer sister and her husband, an elder in the congregation, provided valuable help. I received daily calls from them asking how I was doing. . . . They have allowed me to sit in on their family study at times, which has impressed upon me the importance of families remaining close together.”
It is not uncommon for many​—even dedicated Christians—​to become depressed, discouraged, and lonely. How grateful we can be that loving, unselfish assistance is available in God’s congregation!​—1 Thessalonians 5:14.
◆ Disasters and accidents. Put yourself in the shoes of a family of four who lost all their possessions when their house burned down. Soon they had what they called “an encouraging experience that will forever touch us and that impressed us with the true love among Jehovah’s people.” They explain: “Almost immediately we were overwhelmed with sincere calls of support and sympathy from our spiritual brothers and sisters. The phone rang constantly. Everyone’s genuine concern and love were so moving that we shed tears of gratitude.”
Before long, a large group of brothers was organized by the elders of the congregation, and in a few days, they built a new house for this family. A neighbor exclaimed: “You should see it! There are all kinds of people working there​—men, women, blacks, Hispanics!” This was clear evidence of brotherly love.​—John 13:35.
Fellow Christians also gave the family clothing, food, and money. The father comments: “This was during the Christmas season when everyone is giving gifts, but we can honestly say that no one else enjoyed the kind of genuine, overwhelming generosity that we did.” And they add: “Memories of the fire are slowly fading and are being replaced with cherished memories of kind acts and good friends. Our thanks go to our loving heavenly Father, Jehovah, that we have such a marvelous, united family of brothers on earth, and we are so grateful to be part of it!”
Of course, such intervention is not possible, nor is it expected, in every such tragedy. But this instance certainly illustrates the support that the congregation may provide.
Wisdom From Above
Many have found another source of help and strength in the Christian congregation. What is that? Publications that are prepared by “the faithful and discreet slave.” Prominent among these are the journals The Watchtower and Awake! In order to provide insightful counsel and practical instruction, these publications rely principally on the divine wisdom found in the Bible. (Psalm 119:105) Scriptural information is supplemented by responsible and authoritative research on such subjects as mental depression, recovery from abuse, various social and economic problems, challenges faced by young people, and difficulties peculiar to developing lands. Above all, these publications uphold God’s way as the best way of life.​—Isaiah 30:20, 21.
Each year, the Watch Tower Society receives thousands of letters of appreciation. Concerning an Awake! article on suicide, for instance, a young man in Russia wrote: “Because of my inclination toward depression, . . . I have many times considered suicide. This article strengthened my belief that God will help me handle my problems. He wants me to live. I thank him for his support given by means of this article.”
If the stormy waves of trouble in this world seem too violent to negotiate, you can be sure that there is a safe haven in the Christian congregation. Indeed, if the arid desert of this loveless system is sapping your strength, you can find a reinvigorating oasis in Jehovah’s organization. After experiencing such support, you too may echo the sentiments of a Christian woman who successfully dealt with her husband’s grave illness and wrote: “Because of the love and care shown to us, I feel as though Jehovah carried us through this crisis in the palm of his hand. How thankful I am to be part of Jehovah’s magnificent organization!”
[Footnote]
Names have been changed.
[Pictures on page 26]
We can provide strengthening aid for the sick, the bereaved, and others

