
SIERRA LEONE AND GUINEA
Something Better Than Diamonds
Tamba Josiah

BORN 1948

BAPTIZED 1972

PROFILE Worked in diamond mines before coming into the truth. He is now a member of the Sierra Leone Branch Committee.











IN 1970, I worked for a British mining company in Tongo Fields, a diamond-rich area north of Kenema. I also prospected for diamonds in my spare time. Whenever I found my own stones, I dressed up and headed to Kenema to sell the gems and to have a good time.
In 1972, I met Jehovah’s Witnesses and started studying the Bible. Five months later, I qualified for baptism. Since I had no vacation time left, I asked a coworker to cover my shift so that I could attend the district convention and get baptized. He agreed but only on the condition that I give him one week’s salary. My baptism meant more to me than money, so I readily accepted his offer. When I returned from the convention, he told me to keep my wages because serving God was the right thing to do. Six months later, I left my well-paying job to store up treasures in heaven as a special pioneer.​—Matt. 6:19, 20.
For 18 years I served as a special pioneer and a circuit overseer in various parts of the country. Meanwhile, I married Christiana, a loyal and supportive partner, and we were blessed with a daughter, Lynette.
I once dreamed of finding literal diamonds, but I found something much better​—spiritual riches

During Sierra Leone’s civil war, Christiana and I pioneered in Bo, which is located in another major diamond mining area. Here we found many spiritual “diamonds”​—genuine Christian disciples. Within four years, our congregation grew by more than 60 percent. Now Bo has three thriving congregations.
In 2002, I was invited to become a member of the Sierra Leone Branch Committee. Christiana and I live near Bethel. I commute to work each day, while Christiana serves as a special pioneer. Lynette works at Bethel on the Krio translation team.
I once dreamed of finding literal diamonds, but I found something much better​—spiritual riches. I also unearthed 18 spiritual “diamonds,” or true Christian disciples. Truly, Jehovah has blessed me beyond measure.



