page 1 
VOL. XX. JANUARY 1, 1899. No. 1. 



CONTENTS. 



Greeting and Exhortation for the 

New Year, 1899 3 

Full Submission of Our Wills 4 

Not Strange Concerning Fiery Trials 5 

The Church's Divinely Appointed Mission 6 

The Correct View 8 

Poem: Now His Will is Mine-1899 12 

Questions: In Re Communication between 

Heaven and Earth 12 

Are Sacrifices & Sufferings Necessary 12 

Follow the Lamb Whithersoever 

HeGoeth 13 

Water Turned into Wine 16 

page 2 

THIS JOURNAL AND ITS MISSION. 



THIS journal is set for the defence of the only true foundation of 

the Christian's hope now being so generally repudiated,— Redemption 

through the precious blood of "the man Christ Jesus who gave himself 

aransom [a corresponding price, a substitute] for all." (1 Pet. 1:19; 

1 Tim. 2:6.) Building up on this sure foundation the gold, silver 

and precious stones (1 Cor. 3:1 1-15; 2 Pet. 1:5-11) of the Word 

of God, its further mission is to— "Make all see what is the fellowship 

of the mystery which. ..has been hid in God,. ..to the intent 

that now might be made known by the Church the manifold wisdom of 

God"— "which in other ages was not made known unto the sons of men, 

as it is now revealed."— Eph. 3:5-9,10. 

It stands free from all parties, sects and creeds of men, while it 
seeks more and more to bring its every utterance into fullest subjection to 
the will of God in Christ, as expressed in the Holy Scriptures. It is thus 
free to declare boldly whatsoever the Lord hath spoken;— according to 
the divine wisdom granted unto us, to understand. Its attitude is not 
dogmatical, but confident; for we know whereof we affirm, treading with 
implicit faith upon the sure promises of God. It is held as a trust, to 
be used only in his service; hence our decisions relative to what may and 
what may not appear in its columns must be according to our judgment 
of his good pleasure, the teaching of his Word, for the upbuilding of his 
people in grace and knowledge. And we not only invite but urge our readers 
to prove all its utterances by the infallible Word to which reference 
is constantly made, to facilitate such testing. 

TO US THE SCRIPTURES CLEARLY TEACH 



That the Church is "the Temple of the Living God"— peculiarly "His 

workmanship;" that its construction has been in progress throughout the 
Gospel age— ever since Christ became the world's Redeemer and 
the chief corner stone of this Temple, through which, when finished, 
God's blessings shall come "to all people," and they find access to 
him.-l Cor. 3:16,17; Eph. 2:20-22; Gen. 28:14; Gal. 3:29. 

That meantime the chiseling, shaping and polishing, of consecrated believers 
in Christ's atonement for sin, progresses; and when the last of these 
"living stones," "elect and precious," shall have been made ready, 
the great Master Workman will bring all together in the First Resurrection; 
and the Temple shall be filled with his glory, and be the meeting 
place between God and men throughout the Millennium.— Rev. 15:5-8. 

That the Basis of Hope, for the Church and the World, lies in the fact that 
"Jesus Christ, by the grace of God, tasted death for every man," "a 
ransom for all," and will be "the true light which lighteth every man 
that cometh into the world," "in due time."— Heb. 2:9; John 1:9; 
1 Tim. 2:5,6. 

That the Hope of the Church is that she may be like her Lord, "see him 
as he is," be "partaker of the divine nature," and share his glory as 
his joint-heir.- 1 John 3:2; John 17:24; Rom. 8:17; 2 Pet. 1:4. 

That the present mission of the Church is the perfecting of the saints for 
the future work of service; to develop in herself every grace; to be God's 
witness to the world; and to prepare to be the kings and priests of 
the nextage.-Eph. 4:12; Matt. 24:14; Rev. 1:6; 20:6. 

That the hope for the World lies in the blessings of knowledge and opportunity 
to be brought to all by Christ's Millennial Kingdom— the restitution 
of all that was lost in Adam, to all the willing and obedient, at the 
hands of their Redeemer and his glorified Church.— Acts 3:19-21; 
Isa. 35. 

CHARLES T. RUSSELL, Editor. 



SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 56-60 ARCH STREET, ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, N.Y. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS: 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age or accident, or other 
adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, if they 
send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting the 
paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list 
constantly. 



WITHDRAWAL LETTERS -FREE. 

We again remind our readers of these letters specially prepared 



and ready for the signature of any desiring to use them. 
Send for a sample, and then, if it suits your purpose, ascertain 
the address of each member of the church from which you wish 
to withdraw, and notify us of the number. We will be pleased 
to send you, free, enough letters to send one to each— with suitable 
tracts and envelopes. 

Experience proves the wisdom of this course: for your real 
sentiments, motives, etc., are so apt to be misunderstood and 
misrepresented. You owe it to your sectarian friends and to 
the truth, not to be misunderstood— not to have your good deed 
evil spoken of, or evil thought of. Besides, you did not join the 
preacher, but the congregation;— hence, your withdrawal and 
the reasons therefor should be addressed to the congregation, 
each, all. 



POEMS AND HYMNS OF DAWN-CHEAPER. 

The cost of paper, printing, binding, etc., is constantly falling 
(in other words, the purchasing value of our gold standard 
dollar is constantly rising): and thus we are enabled to reduce 
the price of these books nearly one-half. The price hereafter 
will be 50 cents each plus postage 8 cents each. The wholesale 
price (granted to TOWER subscribers) is one-half, namely 25 cents 
each, by freight or express,— if by mail, add 8 cents postage. 

We know of no other collection of poems and hymns so 
choice as this one. 



UNLESS WE HEAR FROM YOU PROMPTLY, 
YOUR NAME IS LIKELY TO BE DROPPED FROM OUR LIST, 
IF YOUR SUBSCRIPTION IS IN ARREARS. 



R2411 : page 3 

GREETING AND EXHORTATION FOR THE NEW YEAR. 

-1899- 

DEAR Friends of the WATCH TOWER family, 

accept, please, our editorial greetings and 

good wishes, as we cross the threshold of another year. 

We trust that each of us can truthfully sing with the 

poet,— 

"Looking back, we praise the way, 
God has led us, day by day." 
And let us remember that the great Watchman of 
Spiritual Israel, the Lord, changes not; his exceeding 
great and precious promises are all yea and amen to 
those who obey him— to all who by faith abide in him, 
trusting in the merit of his atonement— who, possessing 
his spirit of love, are seeking to walk circumspectly 



in his footsteps. To all such, if they continue thus 
and abound, we guarantee that the year, 1899, will be 
a happy year, basing our guarantee upon the Lord's 
promises. 

But how many, who know this full well, are disposed 
to be fearful, doubtful, unbelieving: and thereby 
are paving the way for troubles ! How long it requires 
for some of the pupils in the school of Christ to find 
out why they are in this school and under the Teacher! 
Surely, the object should be to be taught— to learn of 
him whom God has appointed to be the Teacher of all 
his justified and consecrated sons, adopted into his 
family. We do not come to this Teacher to obtain his 
certificate that we need none of his instruction; but 
that from his Word in conjunction with the daily experiences 
in life (his "providences" to all his pupils) 
we may grow daily in his likeness;— in grace and in 
knowledge. 

If at first we, as pupils, get confused and mistake 
self-will for God's-will, and our Teacher points this 
out to us by some failure of our projects, we are not 

(1) to be rebellious and resentful of the lesson; nor 

(2) to be discouraged and disheartened. On the contrary, 
we are to profit by every experience; seeking 

that the lessons of one day shall be put in practice and 
become our aids on following days. 

The most important lesson of this school-term is 
Faith: the faith with which we became the Lord's and 
entered his school must grow. And our faith can 
only grow by knowledge (We do not refer to worldly 
knowledge, worldly learning.), knowledge of the 
Lord— of his methods, his plan, his character. Hence 
we must study well our Teacher's words and general 
conduct and as well his providences or private instructions 
to us individually— interpreting these always by 
his words. Much of what we accepted at first by faith 
(respecting the Lord's goodness and wisdom) will gradually 
become knowledge: giving basis for still greater 
lengths and breadths of faith as well as for greater love 
and appreciation of our Redeemer. 

As in other schools, so in this, different degrees 
of learning are represented in the students;— some are 
in the primary stage of development; some in the intermediate, 
and some in the graduating class. The 
graduating degree of discipleship in the school of Christ 
is the one that all are to strive for: it is absolutely essential 
that we reach this degree, if we would pass examination 
—finish our course with joy and be granted 
the Master's "Well done!" and the prize of our high 
calling at the end. 

We want to outline this course of "study" and to 
ask all the dear brethren and sisters of the WATCH 
TOWER family, who have not already started in this 
course, to take it up for the year 1899. Blessed are 
sure to be the results. You will find as you progress 
in it the peace of God, which passeth all understanding, 



ruling in your hearts: this will transmute the trials 
of faith and of patience into blessings, and the sorrows 
and disappointments of earthly hopes into channels of 
God's grace, and the perplexities of life into full assurances 

R2411 : page 4 

of faith. This graduating degree of faith, 
hope and love is attained by— 

A FULL SUBMISSION OF OUR WILLS TO THE 
LORD'S WILL! 

Do you answer,— Why, that is what I have been 
wanting to do ever since I consecrated myself to the 
Lord; but I have not attained it;— What more can I 
do? Ah yes! so it has been with all fully consecrated 
children of God; for a long time we all made the same 
mistake of wanting to fully submit our wills to God's 
will, instead of doing so. 

A good wish is an excellent thing, very important 
indeed, but if the wish does not lead to performance 
it is valueless. Some people never get beyond the 
wishing point in any of life's affairs: they wish to rise 
at a certain hour in the morning, or to attend to certain 
recognized duties, or render some service, or speak 
some word of kindness or encouragement in the name 
of the Lord,— but they never fulfil their good wishes 
in deeds. The good wish should be followed by a good 
and determined will, which is sure to be favored by a 
way in matters fully in accord with the divine will. 
Now, without dropping a single good wish, let us begin 
immediately to make this a successful year, by 
throwing the entire strength of our wills into doing. 

But now take care— you are on treacherous ground: 
a strong will is as dangerous as it is valuable. If misdirected, 
you have started a force, an energy, which 
may lead you far astray. And conscientious people 
are in danger along this line especially: for when their 
wills get hold of a matter which their consciences approve 
they may make as much of a blunder as did Saul 
of Tarsus under similar circumstances. 

There is but one safe course; and to prepare the 
Lord's people to know, to realize this, is the object 
of all the preliminary courses in the School of Christ, 
leading up to this graduating course. This final lesson 
to be learned is that the wills that are to be exercised 
in good deeds and good words are not our own wills, 
except as by adoption we have taken the Lord's will 
to be ours. When we became the Lord's pupils it was 
by and as a consequence of the surrender of our own 
wills; and our first lessons in this school were in keeping 
our wills dead. We can see as we look backward 
that by the Great Teacher's aid we won some victories 
over self-will, and have come to the place where our 
real desires are, as expressed by the poet,— 



"Lord, at length Thy love hath conquered, 
None of self, and all of Thee." 
But even after we have adopted the Lord's will 
(as instead of our own natural preferences) and made 
it ours; and after we have resolved to do the Lord's 
will;— still we are in danger and need to walk carefully, 

R2412 : page 4 

lest we misapprehend the Lord's will and adopt the 
will and plans of fellow men or of a church, instead 
of the Lord's will. Consequently, without despising 
human aid in the ascertainment of the Lord's will, 
while remembering that God still, as in times past, 
makes use of human agencies in instructing his people, 
it must not be forgotten that Satan also uses human 
agents to mislead and to deceive, and that God permits 
this, in order to teach us that he is the real Teacher. 
Hence he puts his Word, the Bible, as the test by 
which his people are to distinguish between true and 
false teachers, saying, "If they speak not according to 
this Word, it is because there is no light in them."— 
Isa. 8:20. 

Coming to the Scriptures to ascertain God's will, 
we find that the great work which God asks of us is 
not work for others, but work in ourselves; subduing, 
conquering, ruling self. "This is the will of God [concerning 
you], even your sanctification!" (1 Thes. 4:3.) 
Everything else, therefore,— our service of the 
household of faith, and our doing good unto all men, 
by home and foreign missions, etc., etc., is subservient 
to this most important work within. For, as the Apostle 
by inspiration declares, Tho we should preach the 
gospel eloquently to others, and tho we should give 
all our goods to feed the poor, or become martyrs for 
a good cause, without love, the spirit of Christ and the 
Father, developed in us as the ruling principle of life, 
we would be nothing, from the divine standpoint. 

On the contrary, if we be sanctified to God by the 
truth— if our wills be dead, and the Lord's will be fully 
accepted as ours, in thought, word and act, we have 
attained the will of God and will win the prize as 
"overcomers"— even if, opportunities being denied us, 
we never preached, never gave to the poor and never 
suffered as martyrs for the truth's sake. Let us all 
note well this point,— "This is the will of God [concerning 
you], even your sanctification." Let nothing 
becloud or obscure this truth;— neither other truths 
nor errors. Let it dominate our course in life, and then, 
if God's will is really our will, we have a clearly marked 
pathway before us, which is very important. 

But without doubt, God will open before all such 
opportunities to serve the truth to others,— to let their 
light shine to the glory of the Father and the blessing 
of fellow creatures; for this is his command to us: and 
we may be sure he gives no commands impossible to 



be obeyed. If you have been seeking opportunities of 
service and finding none, there must be something 
wrong: you may have been seeking some special service 
of your own preference (your old will meddling with 
your newly adopted will— the Lord's). Possibly the 
great Teacher sees pride remaining— pride which you 
would have been prompt to crush, had you recognized 

R2412 : page 5 

it; but which hid itself from you under the cloak of 
"self-respect." Possibly the great Teacher by his 
providence and his Word is saying to you, "Do with 
thy might what thy hand findeth to do." Possibly he 
sees that you would be spoiled by giving you a more 
important service for others, before you have learned 
the lesson of humility— all important in the Lord's 
sight. Act quickly, therefore, the time is short,— 
"Humble yourselves, therefore, under the mighty hand 
of God [to do whatever service his providence has made 
possible to you], that he may exalt you in due time." 
-1 Pet. 5:6. 

"THINK IT NOT STRANGE CONCERNING THE 
FIERY TRIALS." 

Have you never suffered for righteousness' sake— 
a martyr to principle? Strange, when the Master so 
plainly declared that "Whosoever will live godly shall 
suffer persecution." Can it be that the Lord erred? 
Is not the danger rather that you have not been living 
godly? You say that it is your highest wish, to live 
godly: but do not forget the distinction already drawn 
between wishing and doing. Resign your own will 
entirely, put it all away and begin to do the Lord's, 
item by item, just as you are able to find and prove it 
in his Word— using the best human help you can obtain, 
in this seeking and proving. Soon the persecutions 
will come: and from most unexpected quarters. 

And when the persecutions come, be prepared for 
them— forearmed by God's Word; for they will be 
temptations to your flesh: through them the Adversary 
will seek to embitter your soul and to stir up in you 
the elements of the old nature reckoned dead— anger, 
malice, hatred, envy, strife. If this be the effect of 
persecutions in you, the Adversary is gaining the victory 
—you are not overcoming evil, but being overcome 
by it. The old nature will even call upon its best 
qualities to fight against persecution— it will call upon 
your natural sense of Justice to come, help and resist; 
it will call upon Conscientiousness to agree that the 
persecution is unmerited; it will call upon Benevolence 
and Spirituality, your love of family and friends, and 
every other good quality of your being— all will be appealed 
to either to fight the persecution or to abandon 
the course of godliness which led to it. 



Then you will be in the thick of the fight, and 
unless previously armed with the panoply supplied in 
the divine Word, you are almost sure to lose faith, become 
terrified and flee. And whoever does this is sure 
to be wounded, if not captured by the enemy: for our 
armor is a front armor, not a back armor. It is invulnerable 
so long as we stand firm for the right, the truth, 
in our great Captain's name and strength— it is a hindrance 
to those who draw back. 

But why should we flee terrified? Is not this the 
very test of our loyalty and devotion to the Lord and 
his Word, for which all of our previous experiences 
and instructions were but preparations? Is not this 
the very test the Lord declares indispensable to all who 
would be accounted victors and be made his joint-heirs 
in the Kingdom? Is not this the very opportunity for 
which we prayed, and are not the incidental persecutions 
exactly what our Lord forewarned us would be 
part of the cost of faithful discipleship? And are not 
these the very persecutions whose absence earlier in 
our Christian experiences made us wonder whether or 
not we were acceptable sons of God?— Heb. 12:8. 

Surely, our answer to these questions must be, 
Yea, Lord! even tho because of weakness of the flesh 
the answer be not joyous as it should be, but through 
unbidden tears. And with this answer on our part the 
Lord is pleased; and angels of his mercy— his promises 
exceeding great and precious— minister unto us and 
strengthen us. 

That is the time to "fight the good fight"— and, 
triumphing over self-will completely, to accept the buffetings 
and slanders and misrepresentations of good intentions 
and good deeds with meekness and patience. 
That is the time when the Lord's spirit of love, dwelling 
in us richly, will manifest itself in the control not 
only of our words and actions, but of our inmost 
thoughts. If even so much as a bitter feeling against 
our traducers and maligners arises, it is to be fought, 
and so complete a victory gained over it that every 
fiber of our beings will be in sweet accord with our 
Great Teacher's instructions, "Love your enemies. 
Pray for them which despitefully use you and persecute 
you. Bless and injure not." 

Your earliest definition of "injure not" will probably 
have been that you should not kill or wound your 
enemies physically: but as you look to the Teacher and 
heed his word you will hear him say, "Learn of me," 
and you will note with the Apostle, that tho he did no sin, 
neither was guile found in his mouth, yet, "When he 
was reviled he reviled not in return; when he suffered 
he threatened not; but committed his cause to him that 
judgeth righteously." (1 Pet. 2:22,23.) If you are 
a faithful pupil it will not be long until you see that 
the perfect law of liberty, the law of Christ, is a discerner 
of the very thoughts and intents of the heart, 
and that while you must hate all sin, you cannot hate 



any sinner and yet have the love of God perfected in 

your heart. You see that this means that you not only 

must not retaliate and revile your foes, but must 

not even wish to do so. The evil wish must be conquered 

and the selfish conditions which gave it birth 

must be utterly destroyed and replaced with love— the 

spirit of Christ— Compare 1 Cor. 4:12 with 

1 Cor. 6:10. 

R2412 : page 6 

Are you tempted to repine, to feel disappointed at 
your lot in life or your experiences by the way? That 
is the time to remember that all repining, discontent 
and disappointments indicate that self-will in you is 
not so dead as you had hoped. For he who has buried 
his own will completely in the will of the Lord can 
know no disappointment; but in every affair of his life 
he sees by faith divine appointment or supervision, and 
hears the Word of the Lord in all of life's affairs assuring 
him: "All things work together for good to them 
that love God, to them who are the called according to 
his purpose." (Rom. 8:28.) It is one of the evidences 
of reaching the graduating condition of heart, when 
we are able to take the oppositions of the great Adversary 
and of the world and of our own flesh patiently, 
uncomplainingly, unmurmuringly, "joyfully"— as a 
part of the disciplinary experience meted out to us by 
our all-wise and all-loving Lord. 

Such is the "good fight." The first battle is the 
severest, and each subsequent victory is easier; for 
with each victory the new will (the Lord's will in us) 
grows stronger, and Hope's sight of the things God 
has in reservation for the faithful grows keener, and 
Faith's strength and endurance greater. And with 
the very first victory come blessings, which are added 
to after every victory: blessings of rest, peace, joy in 
the holy spirit and full assurance of faith, as our Teacher 
promised,— "Blessed are ye when men shall revile 
you and persecute you and say all manner of evil 
against you falsely, for my sake. Rejoice and be exceeding 
glad!" 

R2413 : page 6 

From this standpoint, and from no other, is it possible 
to accept with fortitude and resignation whatever 
tests of patience, perseverance, faith, hope and love 
the Lord may see fit to permit to come upon you. In 
this condition all our experiences will result in blessings, 
however unpropitious they may appear on the 
surface. 

It is from this standpoint (of victory over self-will 
—unto sanctification of spirit through obedience to the 
truth) that all the blessings and promises of the divine 
Word are ours in the fullest sense— "All things are 



yours,. ..whether things present, or things to come; 
...[for] ye are Christ's; and Christ is God's." This 
is the graduating degree of the School of Christ, dearly 
beloved, in which we all seek to be approved during the 
year just begun. Let us unite our hearts and prayers, and 
above all our new wills, with each other's and with our 
Master's, to this end that we may be wholly sanctified 
and for the Master's use, present and prospective, 
made meet. "And the very God of peace shall bruise 
Satan under your feet shortly."— Rom. 16:20. 

Let our prayers every morning ascend to God,— 
"Let the words of my mouth, and the meditation of 
my heart, be acceptable in thy sight, O Lord, my 
Strength, and my Redeemer." (Psa. 19:14.) And 
every evening let us review the day, judging our hearts 
(wills) by the Lord's law of perfect love— praying his 
forgiveness of shortcomings, and thanking our Lord 
for the strength and grace which brought its victories. 



"Come, let us anew our journey pursue, 

Roll round with the year, 
And never stand still till the Master appear. 
His adorable will let us gladly fulfil, 

And our talents improve, 
By the patience of hope, and the labor of love." 



R2413 : page 6 
THE CHURCH'S DIVINELY APPOINTED MISSION. 



"Seeing we have this ministry, as we have 
received mercy, we faint not."— 2 Cor. 4:1. 

WHAT is the mission of the Church?— What 
ministry or service has the Lord appointed to 
his consecrated people? This question is one that 
should be prominent and clear before the mind of every 
consecrated child of God. It is of the utmost importance 
that the servant know what is expected of him 
before proceeding far in rendering service; otherwise 
he will be more than likely to waste his energies in 
wrong directions— leaving undone those things which 
ought to be done, and giving attention to matters which 
would better be attended to otherwise according to the 
plan and arrangement of the great Supervisor of the 
plan of salvation— the Lord. 

The answers to this question throughout Christendom 
would probably divide themselves into three groups 
—two of them quite unscriptural, and the third, altho 
Scriptural, by reason of other errors generally associated 



with it, is made unreasonable, and held in its purity 
and consistently by but few. We will examine these 
as follows:— 

(1) THE ROMAN CATHOLIC VIEW of the Church's 
mission is that she is the ruler of the world, appointed 

to be such by the Almighty, and duly empowered and 

authorized to rule over kings and nations, to order all 

the affairs of earth, moral, political, financial, social 

and ecclesiastical,— the pope and his hierarchy constituting 

this spiritual kingdom. This spiritual kingdom, 

it claims, reigned gloriously in the past,— during the 

period which the remainder of mankind denominate 

"the Dark Ages." They claim that now this kingdom 

is suffering a reverse at the hands of infidelity, Protestantism, 

etc., and is deprived of its proper, God-given and 

God-intended rights, as the supreme government of the 

earth. It claims that very shortly there will be a grand 

R2413 : page 7 

change in earth's affairs, which will put back again, 
into its possession and under its control absolutely, all 
peoples, nations, kindreds and tongues, so that again, 
as of yore, the pope shall be the recognized head of the 
world, all other religions be overthrown and effectually 
stamped out, and that thus the world shall be blessed 
—by a return to medieval conditions. 

We dispute this theory, and hold that the Scriptures 
teach to the contrary: that the reign of the Church 
as the Kingdom of God to rule and bless the world is 
declared to be not during this "present evil world" or 
age, but in one to follow this, to be inaugurated by our 
Lord Jesus with power from on high, at his second advent. 
The Scriptures point out, in harmony with 
sound reason, that the sufferings of the Church are not 
coincident with her reign, but precede it. The sufferings 
of this present time, they assure us, are not worthy 
to be compared with the glories which shall be (future) 
revealed in us. (Rom. 8:18.) These sufferings, tho 
they are to be unto death, are to be esteemed light afflictions 
and to be rejoiced in, because of the divine 
assurance that they are working out for us (preparing 
us for) a far more exceeding and an eternal weight 
of glory, as yet unseen.— 2 Cor. 4:17. 

(2) THE COMMON VIEW AMONGST PROTESTANTS 
respecting the mission of the Church resembles the 
foregoing considerably, except that the pope and his 
associates are rejected as respects their claims to special 
divine authority to rule the world. The claim of 

the Protestants, however, is that religion should undertake 

to rule the world, and to place its representatives 

in power amongst the nations; and that higher 

and better forms of religious sentiment should be cultivated, 

the religion of the world growing with its 

politics and its social conditions, and thus leading the 

world onward and lifting the degraded masses up to 



good citizenship. In other words, this claim, growingly 
prevalent amongst Protestants, is what may be 
termed the worldly idea of the Church's mission; viz., 
to engage in merciful, philanthropic, educational, 
moral and benevolent works, in the interest of mankind. 
In other words, this view recognizes the Church 
as the moral influence which God has placed in the 
world for the world's uplift and regeneration. 

We hold that this view is wrong, wholly unscriptural; 
that it is a mistake to suppose that the Church 
is placed in the world as a reformatory institution. 
But if we are asked, Should Christians not take a deep 
interest in all reforms— in temperance reform, for instance, 
in social purity, in political reform, in good 

citizenship, in anti-tobacco crusades, in socialistic developments, 
in financial reforms, etc.? we answer, Yes, 
indeed; no one could be a true Christian and yet be 
without sympathy as respects all these and every other 
possible effort for the mental, moral and physical uplift 
of our race. And yet you say that this is not the mission 
of the Church? Yes, we answer; altho our sympathies 
are with every good work, we are at the same time 
to inquire of the Lord respecting how, where, what, 
we may do in his service, if we would be colaborers 
together with him— "Lord, what wouldst thou have me 
to do?" Our query should not be addressed to fellow-men, 
nor should we accept the burdens and duties 
and obligations which their judgments and consciences 
would lay upon us. Rather we are to hearken to the 
voice of the Lord (the Scriptures), and are to follow 
his directions, regardless of our own and other people's 
conjectures as to what would be most expedient. 

Nowhere in the Scriptures are God's people directed 
to spend their time in efforts at morally reforming 
the world. Our Lord did not engage in this work, 
neither did the apostles, nor did they offer any suggestion 
to the effect that the work of the Church should 
ever differ from the work which they performed and 
directed us to continue. On the contrary, they declare 
that we have the apostles for ensamples of how we 
ought to walk. They declare that our Lord's course 
was in full, perfect harmony with the divine will and 
plan, and that the apostles faithfully followed his example: 
and we are exhorted to simply become coworkers 
together with God in his work, already instituted, 
—not to alter or attempt to improve on them. There 
were moralists and moral reformers in our Lord's day; 
some along the line of total abstinence, some along the 
line of asceticism, inculcating rigid self-denials in food, 
clothing, etc., as essential to a moral uplift of the people. 
There were also political reformers, who sought 
the establishment of republican institutions, in his day; 
and social reformers, who sought to establish forms 
of communism. There were also dress reformers at 
that time, who advocated certain peculiar styles of 
clothing, beneficial to health, morals and religious 



sanctity. Do we find that our Lord or his apostles 
ever associated with any of these, or that they ever in 
any word or act gave sanction or encouragement to any 
of these theories or reforms? No, not once. 

It may, indeed, be claimed that a kind of Christian 
communism at the beginning went without rebuke, 
even if it were not commended by the apostles. We 
answer that the short-lived communism of the early 
Church was to some extent the result of the new doctrines 
promulgated by Christ, the central feature of 
which was love to God and love to fellow-men, as opposed 
to the selfish sentiments of fallen man: so that 
without divine instruction there was a disposition on 
the part of believers to have "all things in common." 
But if the holy spirit sanctioned and permitted this, in 
the beginning, it was evidently only as a lesson, as an 

R2414 : page 8 

experience to the Church, to show that union and communion 
of this kind is not practicable under present 
conditions, while all are troubled by imperfections of 
the flesh— their own and that of other men. At all 
events we do know that the Lord did not permit that 
communism to last long, but, as we are told, permitted 
instead a great persecution to arise against the Church, 
which scattered the would-be communists everywhere 
to preach the Gospel. 

Nor did the apostles ever recommend such procedure, 
or attempt such an arrangement amongst the 
Christians elsewhere. If, then, the teaching and example 
of our Lord and his apostles are our criterion of 
the will of the Lord, the Church's commission is not 
to morally reform the world. But perhaps someone 
will say, Times are changed from what they were, and 
the Church's work should change accordingly. We 
answer, that the Apostle Paul declares in so many 
words, "I have not shunned to declare unto you all 
the counsel of God." (Acts 20:27.) Whatsoever, 
therefore, is additional to that which was stated by the 
Apostle is not the counsel of God. And any counsel 
from any other quarter is not to be received by Christians, 
and is sure to be misleading. Again, the Apostle 
says to Timothy, respecting the Word of God, "All 
Scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is profitable 
for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction 
in righteousness: that the man of God may 
be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all good works." 
(2 Tim. 3:16,17.) If, therefore, it was God's design 
that the Church's mission should change at some future 
time we should be able to find in the Scriptures some 
intimation of this kind, and some authority for the 
change. And if we find no authority for a change 
in her mission, we should make no change. 

But some one inquires, Did not our Lord especially 
go after the publicans and sinners, and specially 



welcome them; and was not this an indication to us 
that the Church's work is to be largely amongst the 
lower, depraved classes of mankind? We answer that 
the publicans and harlots were not made the subjects 
of special missionary efforts on the part of our Lord 
and his apostles: it was when these classes came to his 
ministry, to his preaching, manifested interest therein 
and signs of repentance and reformation, that he received 
them cordially; he did not refuse to recognize 
them, as did the Pharisees. The record is not that 
he went on slumming missions, after the publicans and 
harlots, but, he "receiveth [publicans and] sinners," 
and that many of these lower classes heard him gladly. 
(Luke 15:2; Mark 12:37.) Furthermore, be it noticed, 
these publicans and sinners were members of 
the Jewish Church— for that entire nation was accepted 
of God as his people, and they were all included under 
the typical sacrifices for sin, on the Day of Atonement; 
and they were all reckoned as under the Law Covenant 
—Covenanters. These lower classes had slipped 
away from the outward observance of the Jewish law, 
but our Lord testified that many of them were in far 
better condition of heart to receive his message than 
were many of the outwardly pious Pharisees. 

(3) THE CORRECT VIEW OF THE CHURCH'S MISSION. 



The question then arises, If the Church is not to 
rule the world in this present age, and if she is not to 
be the world's instructor, uplifter, by moral reforms, 
what is her mission— what other mission can she have? 
And this brings us to the third view, which quite a 
number hold in a more or less confused way— their 
commingled errors beclouding and vitiating the truth. 

(a) Her chief mission is toward herself. She is 
to lift up the light in the world, the True Light,— not 
with the expectation of enlightening the world, not 
with the thought that her feeble lamp shall scatter 
earth's night of sin and darkness of superstition; for 
that can be accomplished only by the coming of the 
morning, the Millennial morning, when the Sun of 
Righteousness shall arise with healing in his beams. 
She holds up the light of the truth, the light of the 
Gospel, during this night, to attract some— "a peculiar 
people"— not to attract and gather all, but "even as 
many as the Lord our God shall call." (Acts 2:39.) 
Her message respecting the love of God and the salvation 
which is in Christ Jesus, as it rings out into the 
world, is not expected to awaken the world and to lead 
the world to the Lord. No, she is merely bearing 
"witness"— a witness which will have to do also with 
a future knowledge and opportunity to be granted to 
the world during the Millennium. 

She is instructed by the Word of the lord not to 



expect that any but a comparatively small number will 
appreciate her light or her message: as the Prophet 
foretold, so she has found it, "Who hath believed our 
report? and to whom is the arm of the Lord revealed?" 
(Isa. 53:1; John 12:38.) As the Scriptures declare, 
so she finds it, that the vast majority of mankind are 
blind, so that they cannot see the light: some are stone 
blind, so as to see nothing: while others are partially 
blind and can get a little glimmer of it by which they 
can discern some things indistinctly. In hearing, likewise, 
the world's ears are dull of hearing— "deaf," 
say the Scriptures. Some hear nothing, others hear 
very imperfectly, few hear the message of divine love 
and mercy clearly and distinctly. The Church is to 
realize that her mission is not to these, the blind and 
deaf, but to him "that hath an ear [to hear],— let him 
hear! "-Rev. 2:7; 3:6,13,22. 
Our Lord remarked this condition to his followers, 

R2414 : page 9 

when present with them in the world, saying, "Blessed 

are your eyes, for they see, and your ears, for they 

hear," and he declared that his parables and teachings 

were not uttered with the intention of making the 

blind see and the deaf hear, but purposely so that the 

deaf might not hear, and so that the blind might not 

see. When the disciples inquired respecting the interpretation 

of a parable, he said, "To you it is given 

to know the mysteries of the Kingdom of God; but to 

them that are without, all these things are done in parables: 

that seeing they may see, and not perceive; and 

hearing they may hear, and not understand." (Luke 8:10.) 

They had indeed the natural sight, and the 

natural hearing, but they lacked the mental sight 

and hearing. And the message that our dear Master 

preached, and that he commissioned his apostles and 

his Church to preach throughout this age, is the same 

—not for the blind, not for the deaf, but for those 

"blessed," favored ones who have eyes and ears. 

As our Lord did not expect many to respond to 
his preaching, and particularly implied that only a 
small number would be able to do so, saying, "No man 
can come unto me, except the Father which sent me 
draw him," so his Church throughout this age is to 
realize that when she lifts up the light and lifts up her 
voice no man will come in response except as the Father 
draws him. And as the Father drew only a comparatively 
small remnant of the Jewish nation to our Lord, 
so the Church should not be surprised that he has 
drawn only a comparatively small proportion of Gentiles 
throughout this age. 

Following our text the Apostle points out why 
this is the case: why the majority of mankind are not 
in a condition of heart to see and appreciate the light, 
to hear and to rejoice in the Gospel, not in the condition 



to be drawn by the Father. He declares that it is because 
"the god of this world [Satan] hath blinded their 
minds" (vs. 4), and thus hindered the light of divine 
truth from shining unto them. He points out that all 
such are in a lost condition, without God and without 
hope in the world. Not, however, that they are any 
more lost now than they have been all along for six 
thousand years; for whoever is not in Christ, whoever 
is out of relationship to God, is a member of that large 
class, servants of sin, still under condemnation, still 
strangers from God, still lost in the wilderness of sin. 
They have not yet been found by the great Shepherd 
who promises that in due time all the true sheep shall 
be found;— that all the Satan- and prejudice-blinded 
eyes shall be opened to see the light of divine goodness 
and truth; and all the deaf ears shall be unstopped 
to hear the message of the grace of God.— Isa. 35:5. 

(b) It is another part of the mission of the Church 

to care for those who do see the light which she holds 

up, and who are attracted by that light, and who come 

unto the Lord. She is to teach and instruct such, and 

to introduce them to the full fellowship of the high calling 

by making clear to them, as the Lord's mouthpiece, 

"what is the hope of our calling," present and future 

—now to suffer with Christ for righteousness' sake, to 

cultivate his spirit, his disposition, to bear much fruit 

of the spirit in our own hearts and lives, and thus, 

under divine supervision, to be fitted, polished and prepared 

for a place in the glorious Temple of the future, 

for a share in the glorious work of the incoming age, 

—the blessing of the world.— 1 Cor. 1:26; Eph. 1:18; 

2Thes. 1:11. 

The Church is supplied by her glorious Head, 
Christ Jesus, with certain gifts of the spirit, amongst 
her members of the earth; and these coworking together 
in their various offices are to strengthen, establish, 
upbuild, develop, one another, growing in grace and 
in the knowledge and spirit of the Head, until the 
whole Church shall eventually, by the close of this age, 
be brought to the stature of the fulness of perfection 
as the Body of Christ, under the Lord Jesus as the 
Head. (Eph. 4:13.) But she is not to expect that 
all, even of those who see her light, and who hear her 
proclamation, and who draw near in harmony with her 
message, will eventually come into full membership in 
this glorious Body of Christ. On the contrary, she is 
assured of the Lord in advance that, while only a few, 

R2415 : page 9 

comparatively, will hear her message, the call, a still 
smaller number will accept the call— for many are 
called, proportionately, to the few who are chosen— 
who make their calling and election sure by faithfulness 
to the conditions imposed.— 2 Pet. 1:10. 

(c) The conditions imposed upon the Church are 



designed of the Lord to be crucial tests of her loyalty 
to him, and to the law of the New Covenant under 
which she was received by him. Trials, difficulties, 
persecutions, are useful in proving whether or not her 
covenant of consecration is from the heart: those who 
have merely made a lip covenant will be sifted out, 
manifested, separated from the true ones whom the 
Lord designates his jewels, and his sons; and whom he 
purposes to make joint-heirs in the Kingdom with his 
well-beloved Son, our Lord Jesus. It is for this reason 
that this call and election or selection of the Church 
takes place during this present age, while evil is still 
permitted to reign in the world, and while the majority 
of mankind are under the blinding influences of the 
great Adversary, not yet bound.— Rev. 20:1-3. 

As our Lord explained, the darkness of sin and 
error is in direct antagonism with the light of truth, 
and consequently when his people lift up the light, — 
"let their light so shine as to glorify the Father in 
heaven" who has called them "out of darkness into his 

R2415 : page 10 

marvelous light,"— the effect upon the darkened world 
will be to awaken opposition, antagonism; because the 
effect of the light is to make manifest the evils of darkness 
which would not otherwise appear; and thus to 
disturb and make uncomfortable those in sympathy 
with darkness. Consequently those who love darkness, 
those who love evil, those who love sin, in its 
varied forms, hate the light, neither come to the light; 
but either publicly or secretly oppose the children of 
the light, the enlightened ones, the light-bearers. And 
even those who have gotten out of the extreme darkness 
of moral pollution into a kind of twilight of civilized 
reformation and moral reform cannot endure the 
clear, searching light of the true Gospel; they much 
prefer a measure of darkness.— John 3:20. 

It is in consequence of this conflict between light 
and darkness that our Lord suffered at the hands of 
those who professed to be children of the light, children 
of God, and who had at least a little light. Our 
Lord was not maltreated by the Roman governor and 
the Roman soldiers of their own volition, for they were 
so totally blind as not to appreciate anything of the 
light which he displayed. His persecutors were those 
who had some light but who hated the brilliancy of 
the great light which shone upon them. Similarly, 
all the way down through this Gospel age those who 
have been burning and shining lights in the world have 
been hated and persecuted, largely, we might say chiefly, 
almost exclusively, by those who had some light, 
but whose light was darkness in comparison to the 
great light of the holy spirit shining in and through 
the Lord's fully consecrated ones. Thus was fulfilled 
our Lord's testimony, "If they have hated me, they 



will also hate you." "Whosoever will live godly in 
Christ Jesus shall suffer persecution." The Lord's 
followers in the present time are called upon to suffer 
persecution for righteousness' sake, not because it is 
either reasonable or proper, but because the Lord, 
wishing to test, prove and polish his people, is willing 
to permit the evil, opposing influences to prosper, and 
persecute and oppose his "members," and thus to serve 
his cause in the preparation of his elect for a future 
work of service. Thus the persecutors of the "Body," 
like the persecutors of the Head, are cooperating to 
fulfil the divine plan in a manner they little suspect- 
John 15:18; 1 John 3:13; 2 Tim. 3:12; 1 Thes. 2:14,15; 
2 Thes. 3:4; John 16:2; Acts 14:22. 

We might multiply the Scriptural declarations that 
this is the call of the Church in the present time— to 
let the light shine and thus to attract persecution, and 
to endure the persecution for righteousness' sake, and 
to be rightly exercised by it in patience, brotherly-kindness, 
pity and love— toward the persecutors and 
toward all men. 

As it was the mission of our Lord not to rule the 
world, nor to judge the world, at his first advent, but 
to lay down his life for the world, so it is the mission 
of the Church, the Body of Christ, not to rule the 
world, nor to judge the world now, but to "lay down 
our lives for the brethren." (1 John 3:16.) Our Lord 
declares, "I came not to judge the world." (John 12:47.) 
The Son of Man came to lay down his life for the 
world. (John 6:51; 10:15.) "My Kingdom is not of 
this world." (John 18:36.) And so the Apostle assures 
us that we are not to reign now, but on the contrary 
to suffer with Christ, if we would reign with him 
by and by: that we are not to judge the world now, 
but on the contrary to judge nothing before the time; 
but he assures us that in God's due time the saints 
shall judge the world, and that to the world's blessing. 
He assures us that it is our mission "to fill up that 
which is behind of the afflictions of Christ, for his 
body's sake, which is the Church." (Col. 1:24.) He 
tells us, along the same line, that while we are to do 
good unto all men as we have opportunity, our service 
is to be specially to the household of faith. Our efforts 
that will go toward the world of mankind in general 
are to be only the side-glances, as it were, the overflow 
of our efforts expended chiefly and directly upon the 
members of the body of Christ, the consecrated Church, 
—expended in building one another up in the most 
holy faith. -Rom. 8:17; 1 Cor. 4:5,6; 6:2; Gal. 6:10. 

(d) Quite a goodly number of Protestant Christians 
theoretically take more or less of the position 
which we have herein stated, especially our Presbyterian 
and Baptist friends. But when we come to consider 
God's object in thus specially dealing with the 
Church we find that very few indeed even of these 
have any comprehension of it. The general thought 



is that God merely wishes to elect the Church, and 
that he is thoroughly indifferent as respects the poor 
world, that for six thousand years has lain in a lost 
condition under the blinding influence of Satan, and 
deaf to the Gospel call. Here we must differ, for we 
find the Scriptures to teach a much more wonderful, 
much more just, much more benevolent, much more 
grand plan of God than that. 

We find it to teach that this Church, now being 
selected or elected, is merely a first-fruit unto God of 
his creatures, and that a great work is to be done for 
the world of mankind, through this Church, after she 
shall have been glorified and associated with her Lord 
in the heavenly Kingdom. The same Scriptures which 
tell us that now the world is blind and deaf, and that 
Satan, "the prince of this world," "the god of this 
age," has directly and indirectly had much to do with 
this blindness, tell us also that the time is to come when 
all the blind eyes shall be opened, and all the deaf ears 

R2415 :page 11 

shall be unstopped, and when Satan, the great deceiver, 

shall be bound, restrained, permitted no longer to 

deceive humanity. These Scriptures assure us that 

the Church now being selected and proved, and thus 

made meet for the inheritance of the saints in light, 

is to be God's channel of blessing to mankind; and 

that Head and Body, Jesus and his Church, shall constitute 

in the full sense the promised "Seed of Abraham," 

or Spiritual Israel, through which all mankind 

shall be blessed with a knowledge of God's true character, 

and with an opportunity for gaining eternal life 

in the Millennial judgment day which God has appointed. 

-Gal. 3:16,29. 

One of the particular trials with many of the Lord's 
people is that they are frequently upbraided by less 
consecrated, worldly-wise professors, with the suggestion 
that they are selfish, and neglectful of the true 
work of the Church, because they do not join with 
others in the various political, social, financial and 
moral reforms of the world; or in "revival" efforts to 
drive and scare the worldly, whom God has not "called" 
by the truth along Scriptural lines. If we are obliged 
to endure something on this score for Christ's sake, it 
is only a part of "the sufferings of Christ" in which 
we should rejoice; realizing that the Lord knows our 
faithfulness to him and to his Word. We may realize, 
also, that in due time others shall see the divine plan 
actually fulfilling, as we are now permitted to see it by 
the eye of faith; and they will then see that the "wise 
virgins" were wise in that they hearkened to and obeyed 
the Lord's Word, and made themselves ready for the 
future work of service for the world.— Rev. 19:7; 
Eph. 4:12. 

We can sympathize with those who see nothing; 



we can sympathize also with those who see a little, 
and who strive toward moral and other reforms, and in 
various ways for the sectarian prosperity rather than 
for the upbuilding of the saints, the Church of the 
living God, whose names are written in heaven. We 
should have patience, particularly with those who give 
evidence that they are laboring in harmony with their 
convictions. If they are engaging in good works of 
any kind they deserve our sympathy, and undoubtedly 
will obtain a blessing as a result. The true Church 
is laboring not merely for a blessing, but for the blessing 
—"the prize of our high calling of God in Christ 
Jesus." (Phil. 3:14.) Let all, then, who see the prize, 
and who see the light of God's glory shining in the 
face of Jesus Christ our Lord, be faithful to the Father's 
terms, conditions, calling, service. Let all such 
give attention to this ministry (service) which we have 
received, and faint not; be not discouraged, whether 
men hear or whether they forbear, whether they think 
ill of us or whether they speak ill of us; let us remember 
that our report at the end of the trial is to be rendered 
to the Lord himself, when he is making up his 
jewels. Let us remember that the first condition of 
acceptance with him is loyal obedience to his Word, the 

R2416 :page 11 

evidence of love for him and faith in him. (2 Cor. 10:5,6.) 
Let us remember, also, that the second qualification 
he will look for in us is love for the brethren, 
readiness to be, to do and to suffer, to die on behalf of 
those who are really, truly consecrated children of God, 
seeking to walk in his ways. 

All thus following in the ministry (the service) 
which we have received of God, find themselves to-day 
walking in the footsteps of Jesus and the apostles, and 
find the various predictions made respecting the entire 
Church applicable to its living members also, as, for 
instance, following our text, the Apostle declares of 
this class who have this ministry:— 

"We preach not ourselves, but Christ Jesus the 
Lord; and ourselves your servants [the Church's servants, 
not the world's servants] for Jesus' sake.... 
We are troubled on every side, yet not distressed; we 
are perplexed, yet not in despair; persecuted, but not 
forsaken; cast down, but not destroyed; always bearing 
about in the body the dying of the Lord Jesus [always 
representing Christ and his sacrifice as dying 
members of his body] that the life also of Jesus might 
be made manifest in our body. For we which live [as 
new creatures in Christ Jesus] are always delivered 
unto death for Jesus' sake [our consecration at the beginning 
was a consecration to death; it changes not; it 
will always so continue, until we have finished our 
course and have actually died], that the life also of 
Jesus might be made manifest in our mortal flesh."— 



Verses 5-11. 

In other words, the truly consecrated Church of 
Christ, all "whose names are written in heaven," are 
his representative members upon the earth, throughout 
this Gospel age. The Head suffered eighteen 
hundred years ago, the members of the Body have since 
been suffering with him, and have been learning the 
same lessons of obedience to the divine will, and trust 
and confidence in the divine wisdom, and love for the 
brethren; and by and by the entire Body of Christ will 
have finished its course, and will have been received by 
the Head into his glory, and then will begin God's 
great work for the world, for which all his dealings 
with the Church are but the divine preparation. In 
the Church the Lord will give to the world Kings, to 
rule in righteousness,— in love, instead of in selfishness 
and pride; but the Church will also be Priests, to 
bless with the knowledge of the truth, and with help 
out of the mire of sin, back to full harmony with God, 
all who desire to return to him. It will then be true, 
"Thou hast made us unto our God Kings and Priests: 
and we shall reign on the earth."— Rev. 5:10. 

R2417 : page 12 

NOW HIS WILL IS MINE- 1899. 



"Once I sought a blessing; now I've found my Lord; 
Once I sought for feeling: now I've found his Word; 
Once his gifts I wanted: now the Giver own; 
Once I sought flesh-healing: now himself alone. 

"Once it was my working: his it hence shall be; 
Once I tried to use him: now he uses me; 
Once the power I wanted: now the mighty One; 
Once for self I labored: now for Christ alone. 

"Once 'twas painful trying: now 'tis restful trust; 
Once a half-salvation: now the uttermost; 
Once 'twas ceaseless holding: now he holds me fast; 
Once 'twas constant drifting: now my anchor's cast. 

"Once 'twas busy planning: now 'tis trustful prayer; 
Once 'twas anxious caring: now he has the care; 
Once 'twas what I wanted: now what Jesus says; 
Once 'twas constant asking: now 'tis ceaseless praise. 

"Once I hoped in Jesus: now I know he's mine; 
Once my lamps were dying: now they brightly shine; 
Once for death I waited: now his presence hail, 
And my hopes are anchored safe within the vail." 



R2416 : page 12 

QUESTIONS ANSWERED. 



WILL COMMUNICATION BETWEEN HEAVEN AND EARTH 
BE RE-ESTABLISHED? 

Question.— If the saints and the Lord are not visible 
to the world during the Millennium, how will their 
loved friends, who did not have the same hope of union 
in Christ, have fellowship with them? 

Answer.— In the present life the "saints" themselves 
do the most of the loving: true, they also are beloved 
to some extent by some who are not now the Lord's 
people, and not called to the high calling, but the loving 
of the latter is usually more of the selfish order of 
love, and less fervent. 

The saints will be as able to love their kindred and 
the world in general as at present, and, we might say, 
more able, because of their perfected powers. Now, 
their chiefest love is for the Lord himself, their secondary 
love is for the household of faith, and as they love 
not the world, neither the things of the world, their 
love for the worldly is more of a benevolent hope— a 
wish for the welfare of mankind in general, and in particular 
of all to whom they are attached by earthly ties. 
The Prophet, speaking for these, declares: "I shall be 
satisfied when I awake in thy likeness;" with our perfected 
powers received in resurrection change we will 
comprehend the lengths and breadths, the heights and 
depths of the divine provision for our friends and for 
all men;— secured by God's love and wisdom, through 
the great sacrifice of atonement finished at Calvary. 

As for the worldly: they will have little difficulty 
generally in assuaging their sorrows. This is evident 
from the fact that partings caused by death so soon lose 
their poignancy. The chief cause of much of the grief 
manifested at the present time is the fear and uncertainty 
with which the majority of people regard the future 
of the present life, and of that which is to come. The 
latter fear is born of misinterpretations of Scripture, 
inspired by false human traditions. When they shall 
come to know that their erstwhile friends, the saints, 
are forever with the Lord, they will be as satisfied as 
we now are satisfied to think of our Lord Jesus, our 
best Friend, as being highly exalted and on a different 
plane of being from ourselves. 

As for the method of communication between the 
glorified Church and the world undergoing the disciplines 
of the restitution: we need not suppose that much 
communication and personal attention and care for our 
loved ones of earth will be necessary. What would be 
good for one person would generally be good for all, and 
our Heavenly Father's plan is so abundant in its provisions 



for the blessing of all that, understanding something 
of his character and plan, we already realize that 
he proposes to do for all mankind exceedingly abundantly 
more than all that we could have thought or asked 
for those we love most. So when the world has that 
which divine provision will make general during the 
Millennial age, there will be very little necessity, if any, 
for special interventions, or special communications by 
the saints to those for whom they now feel so solicitous. 

And yet we can readily suppose that God has made 
some arrangement by which, eventually, there will be a 
communication between the (restored) earthly and the 
heavenly planes of being, as there was in Eden before 
sin entered,— when God either personally or through a 
representative talked with our first parents. Just how 
this communication will be established we are not informed, 
nor need it specially concern us, since we know 
that our Father is abundantly wise, and abundantly 
able, and abundantly loving, to do for his creatures all 
things needful to the comfort and happiness of those 
who love and obey him. 

ARE GREAT SACRIFICES AND SUFFERINGS NECESSARY 
TO JOINT-HEIRSHIP? 

Question.— What about the majority of Christians 
who, believing in Christ, are not yet called upon to make 
any great sacrifices for his sake? 

Answer.— For a general answer, we refer to the article 
in our issue of May 1st, 1895, entitled, "Perfect 
Through Suffering." Everyone who seeks to walk carefully 
and honestly before the Lord, in the footsteps of 
Jesus, will surely find that it will cause something of 
self-sacrifice— the sacrifice of human aims or plans or 
preferences. 

But this question may be viewed in another light 

R2416 : page 13 

The questioner may mean to lay stress upon the word 
"great," and may have in mind the endurance of persecutions 
such as came upon our Lord, the apostles, and 
others of the faithful in the past— imprisonments, "cruel 
mockings and scourgings," and violent deaths. Our 
answer, from this standpoint, is that it is not for us to 
supervise the trials and difficulties which may beset us. 
It is for us to make an unreserved consecration of ourselves 
to the Lord, and then leave to him the decision 
of how great shall be our trials and besetments— how 
great our sacrifices in following his leadings. The Lord 
may see that some need special trials, more than others, 
and those things which to some would be great trials 
and imply great sacrifices, to others, because of greater 
love to the Lord and his cause, and greater zeal for service, 
the sacrifice might seem to be, as the Apostle expresses 
it of his own, "light afflictions, which are but 



for a moment, and which are working out a far more 
exceeding and eternal weight of glory." If we are doing 
our part faithfully— if we are faithful to the Lord 
and to his people, and to his truth, to the best of our 
knowledge and ability, God will surely oversee our affairs 
so that we shall have just the right experiences to 
develop us; just the proper opportunities of sacrifice 
which his wisdom sees to be appropriate and needful to 
us. He will leave no true son without chastisements, 
disciplines, neither will he forsake us in our trials, but 
will stand with us, so that we shall not be tempted above 
that we are able, having provided a way of escape. 

In this enlightened day physical scourgings are not 
sanctioned by the world, nevertheless we may be called 
on to endure patiently and uncomplainingly "cruel 
mockings" of the tongue;— we may be imprisoned in 
the sense of being ostracized for the truth's sake;— as our 
Lord foretold, "They shall cast you out of the synagogue 
and separate you from their company: yea, whosoever 
shall kill you shall think that he doeth God service." 
Many to-day are thus imprisoned and killed in 
influence for the truth's sake. Thus the Apostle also 
declared, "I die daily." And all who will constitute 
the elect overcoming Church, must die thus. In the 
symbolic language of Revelation this is termed beheading, 
and we are assured that all who will share the First 
Resurrection and the Kingdom will have been thus 
symbolically beheaded.— Rev. 20:4. 



R2417 : page 13 

FOLLOW THE LAMB WHITHERSOEVER HE GOETH. 

-JAN. 8. -JOHN 1:35-46.- 

"Behold the Lamb of God! "-John 1:36. 

JOHN'S mission was to bear witness to Jesus. He 
knew him well from his infancy to manhood, 
and as cousins according to the flesh they doubtless had 
discussed various features of the divine law, and they 
were of one heart as respects service to the Lord. Neither 
could begin a public service until thirty years of age, 
since this was one feature of the Law, but John being 
six months the elder was thus privileged to begin his 
ministry six months in advance of our Lord. During 
that brief period he had evidently made a considerable 
commotion as a reformer, his message being, "Repent 
ye, for the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand."— Matt. 3:2. 

The Jews had been waiting for the Kingdom for 
centuries; they realized that the Kingdom given to Saul, 
David, Solomon, etc., had not fulfilled the promises, 
and that a Kingdom in a larger sense, and under a 
greater than David and a greater than Solomon, was to 



be expected. The Apostle assures us that this thought 
was continually before their minds. (Acts 26:7.) John's 
mission to that nation, therefore, was the announcement 
that the fulfilment of the divine promise was at hand, 
and that in order to be ready to receive the divine favor 
they should repent of sin and turn to the Lord. And 
as our Lord declared subsequently, if that nation had 
believed John and acted upon that belief they would 
have been ready to receive the Lord himself, and to 
have fulfilled to them all the gracious promises of the 
Kingdom to which they were heirs, as the natural seed 
of Abraham. 

It was because they were not in a right condition 
of heart that they were not fit to have the Kingdom, 
the promise of which, therefore, was taken from them, 
to be given to a new nation, a peculiar people, a royal 
priesthood— which God has been selecting from amongst 
all peoples, kindreds and tongues, during this Gospel 
age, and which will now soon be completed, and be 
glorified, and begin the work of blessing all the families 
of the earth, as the Spiritual Seed of Abraham.— 
Gal. 3:29. 

John did not preach to the people that they should 
believe on God, for he was addressing only the believing, 
covenanted people, Israel. His message was respecting 
things already known to them, and believed 
by them. He therefore exhorted merely repentance 
from their sins, and a return to their proper and covenanted 
relationship with God. In all this John's ministry 
is very different from the ministry of the apostles 
to the Gentiles, who not only had been without knowledge 
respecting God's purposes, Kingdom, etc., but 
also without faith or any ground of hope. As the Apostle 
declares, they were "without God, and having no 
hope in the world." Nor did any hope reach them, 
nor was the Gospel message sent to them, until after 
Israel's rejection in consequence of their rejection of 
Messiah. 

"The baptism of John" was to the Jews only, and 
was wholly different from the baptism appointed for 

R2417 : page 14 

those called from amongst the Gentiles. The Apostle 

makes this fact very clear in Acts 19:2-5. John's baptism 

was not a baptism into any thing, or into any body, 

whereas our baptism is a baptism into Christ, as members 

of his body. John's baptism merely signified the 

putting away of sins, and thus to return to a condition 

of holiness and consecration already enjoyed. Our baptism 

signifies something very different from this— not 

the putting away of the filth of the flesh, but the submission 

of our consciences, our wills, fully and unreservedly 

to the will of Christ, that we should henceforth 

have no will of our own, but be guided entirely by the 

will of our Head, as members of his Body. Thus becoming 



dead to self-will we are reckoned alive as "new 
creatures," "members in particular" of the Body of 
ChrisL-1 Cor. 12:27. 

The Jews as a nation had already been baptized 
into Moses (1 Cor. 10:2), the mediator of their Law 
Covenant, and to the Jew, Christ took the place of Moses, 
and his New Covenant took the place of the Law 
Covenant, so that any Jew, already baptized into Moses, 
and already thus in covenant relationship, would, by 
merely accepting Christ as the Messiah, the antitype of 
Moses, and the Mediator of the New Covenant (and, in 
harmony with his faith, repenting of sin), be adopted, 
reckoned as a member in the Body of Christ, instead of 
as a member of the Body of Moses. All others, however, 
who were of the Gentiles, and not of the natural 
seed of Abraham, are not to come first to Moses and the 
Law, and then through John's baptism into Christ, but 
are to ignore the Law Covenant entirely, and avail themselves 
of the better covenant direct, and hence they are 
instructed to be baptized into Christ, by being immersed 
into his death, and to testify to this consecration outwardly, 
to their fellows and before God, by an immersion 
in water.*— Rom. 6:3,4. 

We have no record that John the Baptist was ever 
immersed himself— nor would we need to have, since 
he evidently was a godly man, living up, to the best of 
his ability, to the standard of the Law Covenant. His 
baptism, as he himself explained, was only for sinners, 
—those who had been living knowingly in violation of 
the principles of righteousness. Hence also John objected 
at first to the baptism of Jesus, assuring him that 
he was not a sinner, and that if Jesus needed to be baptized, 
much more appropriate would it be that John 
himself should be immersed. "I have need to be baptised 
of thee, and comest thou to me?" But our Lord, 
while admitting the force of John's argument that a 
baptism of repentance and remission of sins would not 
be appropriate in his own case, requested him to proceed 
with the matter anyway, intimating that he had 
some other reason why it was right. The fact is that 
our Lord's baptism was the beginning of the Christian 
baptism: it symbolized the consecration which he had 
just made (at the first hour of manhood), his full consecration 
to do the Father's will, even unto death;— the 
giving up of his human life, a sacrifice on behalf of the 
world. It required all of the Lord's three and a half 
years' ministry to complete what was there symbolized, 
and he said just before his crucifixion, "I have a baptism 
to be baptized with; and how am I straitened till 
it be accomplished." (Luke 12:50.) And so with the 
baptism of consecration, "death," into which we are to 
be baptized: as members of his Body we are to become 
living sacrifices, dead to the world, alive toward God, 
as is particularly set forth in Rom. 6:3-5. 

It was in connection with our Redeemer's symbolical 
baptism in water, which promptly followed his consecration 



to death at thirty years of age, and was the 
public declaration of that devotion unto death, that the 
Heavenly Father bore witness to his adoption to the 
divine nature. We are not informed that any but John 
witnessed the descent of the holy spirit upon him, but 
John bore witness that he saw the spirit thus descend, 
and that the Lord, in sending him to preach, had previously 
testified that this was to be the sign by which he would 
surely know the Messiah (John 1:32,33). It was in harmony 
with this that he declared to his disciples subsequently, 
as Jesus passed by, "Behold the Lamb of God." John 
doubtless knew and expected that some of his disciples 
would cease cooperation with him, to follow the Messiah. 
Indeed he declared to them, "He must increase, 
but I must decrease." 

The two who heard John's testimony promptly 
followed Jesus with a view to getting as close to the 
fountain head of the truth as possible; and all must admit 



*Our friends of the Disciple denomination wholly misunderstand 
this matter, and are practising John's baptism of repentance 
and remission of sins, instead of the baptism of Christ. 
They should note the Apostle's words and correct this matter, 
as he instructed others to do in his day— by a fresh baptism.— 
Acts 19:2-5. 

R2418 :page 14 

the propriety of their course. How this suggests 

to us our own proper course, to follow the Lord as nearly 

as possible, and to seek as much as possible to come 

into fellowship and communion with him. And the 

noble, self-ignoring course of John appeals to all who 

have the right mind upon the subject— that similarly 

all of the Lord's servants should call attention to the 

Lord and not to themselves. Let us each bend our energies 

to pointing men to the Lamb of God, and not to 

self-seeking. And let us remember that following Jesus, 

in the best sense, means that we walk in his paths, 

strive to do as nearly as we are able what he would do 

to-day, taking our lessons from what he did and said 

personally, and from the instructions which he has left 

for us, through the apostles, respecting the path of fellowship 

in his sufferings, the path to glory and joint-heirship 

R2418 : page 15 

in his Kingdom. The Lord is found of all 
those who diligently seek him from right motives, and 
such are by and by to be granted full joint-heirship with 
him. "Ye are my friends, if ye do whatsoever I command 
you."— John 15:14. 

The evangelist furnishes us the name of only one 
of the two who first heard John the Baptist speak of 



Jesus. It is possible that the Apostle John himself was 
the other one, and that through modesty he refrained 
from bringing himself into special prominence, in his 
own records, just as, in another place, he speaks of himself 
as "that disciple whom Jesus loved, who leaned on 
his bosom." Modesty is a gem, wherever found, one of 
the graces of the spirit, which all of the Lord's consecrated 
ones should seek to have largely developed and 
well polished. 

The narrative of how Andrew found Peter and how 
Philip found Nathaniel (supposed to be the disciple 
called Bartholomew) is interesting, and shows that true 
devotion to the Lord is unselfish— desires to confer upon 
others all blessings and truths enjoyed. This is still 
the spirit of true discipleship: having found the great 
Light of the world, and having seen thereby something 
of the lengths and breadths, heights and depths of the 
divine character and plan, we are and should be anxious 
to serve the same favor to others. And this desire to 
serve the Lord, the truth and our fellows should be so 
strong in us as to make it impossible for us to withhold the 
good tidings from any selfish consideration. Indeed, 
if we have the spirit of the Lord, which is the spirit of 
the truth, the spirit of true discipleship, we will be so 
anxious to make known the good tidings as to be willing 
to "lay down our lives for the brethren,"— to help 
them "out of darkness into his marvelous light." 

It will be noticed that these who found the Lord 
were full of faith respecting the Messiah, of whom Moses 
wrote in the first five books of the Old Testament, called 
the Law, and of whom all the prophets also wrote— 
Jesus of Nazareth, the reputed son of Joseph. They 
had not yet learned that Joseph was not the father of 
Jesus. 

Nathaniel's answer, "Can any good thing come out 
of Nazareth?" reminds us of the prejudice which now 
exists respecting certain quarters from which good things 
may or may not be expected. For instance, some of 
our English friends tell us that when the present truth 
was first brought to their attention they were inclined 
to disregard it, and consider it unworthy of special investigation, 
simply because it came from America; for 
tho they might expect many useful things to come from 
America, the product of "Yankee skill," they had no 
expectation whatever that any new light upon the Scriptures 
would come from America, where they seemed to imagine 
everyone given over to cheating and muck-raking 
for wealth, and that consequently it would be one 
of the last places in Christendom in which the Lord 
would cause the harvest light to shine out for the blessing 
of his people. This undoubtedly has hindered 
many foreigners from investigating the truths which are 
now meat in due season for the household of faith. 
America is Nazareth with them, and they expect nothing 
of the kind from this quarter. 

Similarly, others will inquire, What denomination 



backs up these religious teachings? and when told that 
no sect or party has endorsed these things, and that not 
many great, or rich, or wise, have in any sense of the 
word become interested, they say to themselves, if not 
to others, What could you expect?— Can any good come 
out of Nazareth? Nevertheless, all who are of the Nathaniel 
type of character, "Israelites indeed, in whom 
is no guile," will find sufficient reason for investigating, 
and on investigation will find sufficient proofs to satisfy 
them,— "as nothing else would do." Our answer to all 
such objections should be that of Philip, "Come and 
see,"— test, examine, prove for yourself. 

Another lesson here, that should prove of value, 
is found in the words respecting Andrew, "He first findeth 
his own brother Simon." So all who find the Lord, 
and who are anxious to make him known to others, 
should similarly begin in their own households, with 
their own brothers and sisters, father or mother, or husband 
or wife. There is frequently a diffidence about 
mentioning the Lord and the truth to those who are of 
the family and home circle which is surely much out of 
place. True love for our kin should lead us to make 
an extra and special effort on their behalf. 

In conclusion let us remember that those who 
follow the Lamb through evil as well as through good 
report— those who follow his teachings and example- 
are they who ultimately shall be with him and share 
his glory as members of his elect Zion.— Rev. 14:4. 



"Caesar's friends? or friends of Jesus? 

Solemn question for to-day! 
Friends of Caesar! Friends of Jesus! 

Take your sides without delay. 
If ye pause for man's forbidding, 

Caesar's friendship ye secure; 
If ye do the Father's bidding, 

Scorn, reproach, ye shall endure. 

"Free from Caesar, friends of Jesus! 

Stand in phalanx! never fear! 
Love, severely tried, increases; 

Courage yet! the Lord is near! 
Onward still, his name confessing, 

Weaving crowns to grace his brow; 
Lo! his hands are full of blessing, 

Lifted for your succor now." 



R2418 : page 16 

WATER TURNED INTO WINE. 
-JAN. 15. -JOHN 2:1-11.- 



"And his disciples believed on him."— John 2:11. 

THE third day from the calling of Nathaniel to discipleship 
found our Lord and his disciples invited 
guests at a wedding, in Cana. Cana was near to 
Nazareth, for many years the home of Jesus, and quite 
probably those who invited him, his mother and his 
disciples were either relatives or old acquaintances. This 
is implied in the fact that Jesus' mother knew when the 
wine was exhausted; a matter which rather implied 
scarcity of provision, and which would be carefully 
kept from the knowledge of outsiders who might be 
guests. It is also implied in the statement that Mary 
gave commands to the servants to do whatsoever Jesus 
should direct, a matter which would have been quite 
improper in an ordinary guest. 

The fact that our Lord was willing to attend the 
wedding implies a sympathy with the marriage institution. 
Indeed, we know that God himself instituted 
marriage as between our first parents, and we have the 
Apostle Paul's inspired explanation that this union between 
man and woman which God approved was designed 
to be an illustration of the union between Christ, 
the heavenly Bridegroom, and the Church, his Bride. 
-Eph. 5:22-28. 

Jesus' mother seems to have had some intimation 
of his power to help the friends out of the difficulty 
and ignominy of a feast in progress and the supplies 
run short: and yet she could not have known of the 
Lord's power to turn water into wine from any previous 
experiences during the thirty years of her acquaintance 
with him; for, contrary to all apocryphal stories, the 
boy Jesus did no miracles, nor did the young man Jesus 
do miracles, but, as here declared, the miracle at Cana 
was the beginning of his miracles. Nevertheless, his 
mother had considerable confidence of some sort, else 
she would not have instructed the servants to give heed 
to anything Jesus might command. 

Our Lord's reply to his mother has rather the appearance 
of rudeness, but we may be sure that this was 
not the case. The sense of the Lord's words would 
seem to be to call his mother's attention to the fact that 
while he had, in every sense of the word, been a dutiful 
son for thirty years, he had now reached the period 
of manhood, according to the Law, and was now devoted, 
consecrated, to the Lord. No doubt he and his 
mother had talked the matter over previously, and he 
was thus reminding her that his life being consecrated 
now she could not expect him to be under her direction 
to the same extent as formerly— the time had fully come 
that he must now be about his Father's business. 

R2419 : page 16 

The six water-pots mentioned as for purifying were 



probably intended for the use of the guests for washing 
their hands. Washing of hands had become an important 
part of the Jewish observance, and "unless they 
washed oft they ate not." (Mark 7:3.) We nowhere 
find these washings and waterpots referred to in the 
Law. They were, therefore, probably part of the tradition 
of the elders, to which our Lord so frequently 
referred as taking the place of the Law of God. These 
water-pots had handles, permitting them to be tipped 
over, so as to pour water upon the hands of those who 
washed, and the six held about one hundred and twenty 
gallons of water for the supply of the many guests. 
Our Lord made use of these water-pots in the performance 
of his miracle for two reasons: (1) Such vessels 
were probably rarely or never used for wine, so there 
could be no misunderstanding of his miracle. (2) He 
probably intended a symbolical lesson in their use; for 
we are expressly told that this miracle was a manifestation 
of his glory beforehand (vs. 11)— a manifestation 
of his work in the Kingdom. Water is a symbol 
of truth, both as respects its cleansing properties and 
also as respects its refreshment, one of the necessities of 
life, from which thought we have the expression, "water 
of life." Thus during the Millennial age the servants 
of the truth will fill up all of mankind who are suitable 
vessels, and all thus filled with the truth, and brought 
into harmony with it, under our Lord's direction, shall 
then, by supernatural power, find the truth transformed 
in them into the wine of joy— a joy superior to any 
other joy, as the wine in the miracle was superior to 
any other wine. 

It cannot be claimed for our Lord Jesus that he 
was a total abstainer from alcoholic liquors, and the 
claim made by some that the word "wine" here mentioned 
signifies a non-intoxicating wine, is not true. It 
can, however, be said on the other side of the question, 
that many of the wines of that vicinity and time contained 
much less alcohol than do many of the wines of 
to-day. It may also be noted that changes have taken 
place in humanity, so that the inhabitants, particularly 
of the temperate zone, are more highly nervous than 
those of any other time. Hence, with stronger wines 
and with weaker nerves, there is a largely increased 
tendency to excess and to injury. It is our opinion, 
therefore, that if the Lord were living where we do, and 
now, he would be a total abstainer from alcoholic liquors, 
not only on his own account, but also as an example 
for others. 

This miracle was evidently not only designed to 
establish faith in our Lord by his disciples, and 
amongst the people in the vicinity of his home, but 
also, as already suggested, was particularly designed to 
manifest in advance the still future glory of Messiah's 
great work. 



page 17 
VOL. XX. JANUARY 15, 1899. No. 2. 



CONTENTS. 



View from the Watch Tower 19 

Blindness Beginning to Turn from Israel 19 

Zionism Making Progress 21 

"Ye Must be Born Again" 22 

The Water of Life 25 

Faith Rewarded— "Thy Son Liveth" 27 

Poem: Encouragement to Faithfulness 

and Progress 29 

Who is Judging the Church? 30 

Letters from Distant Colaborers 31 

Items:— Tempt Not Thy Neighbor; 

Baltimore's One-Day Convention; 

The Date for the Memorial Supper 18 

page 18 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 56-60 ARCH STREET, ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, N.Y. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS: 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age or accident, or other 
adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, if they 
send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting the 
paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list 
constantly. 



R2421 : page 18 

TEMPT NOT THY NEIGHBOR. 

A brother recently mailed us a letter containing a donation to 
the Tract Fund in money. The letter was lost in transit— a person 
of weak conscience in the Post Office (by practice possessed 
of a keen sense of touch) recognized the nature of the contents 
and stole it. The brother wrote subsequently that, as the money 
was for the Lord's cause, he thought it proper to trust it to his 
care. This was a mistake of the head, not of the heart. We are 
to do all in our power before expecting divine interpositions. 



We are not to tempt Providence thus. See a Scriptural illustration 
of this principle in Matthew 4:6,7. 

On the other hand, the command is that we shall love our 
neighbor as ourselves, and lay no snare for his weaknesses. 
Covetousness, we know, is a general weakness amongst men; 
and we should so far as possible guard and shield them from 
temptations of this and of every kind: besides, this is only business 
prudence. P.O. Money Orders or Express and Bank drafts 
are safe, and we advise that these be used. 

During the month of December we received 3997 letters and 
cards and have reason to think that about one hundred sent to 
us were stolen by someone tempted to dishonesty by reason of 
the touch of a bank bill or the bulky appearance of the letters. 

By the way, last month's mail was our largest— exceeding any 
previous month in the history of this work. 



page 18 

BALTIMORE'S ONE-DAY CONVENTION. 

There will be a gathering of the friends of present truth residing 
in Baltimore, Md., and vicinity on Sunday, Jan. 22nd, 
at 10.30 A.M. and 2.30 P.M., at Dushane Post Hall, corner Baltimore 
Street and Postoffice Avenue, Baltimore. 

The Editor of ZION'S WATCH TOWER (D.V.) will address the 
meetings. Brethren and Sisters will be cordially welcomed, 
also their friends to whom they have been making known the 
heights and depths and lengths and breadths of the love of God. 
A noon luncheon will be provided. 



R2421 : page 18 

THE DATE FOR THE MEMORIAL SUPPER. 

In the interest of readers in "the uttermost parts of the earth" 
(Australia, South Africa, Russia, China, Japan, etc.,) we give, 
thus early, notice that this year the date fixed by Roman Catholics 
and Episcopalians agrees with the true date for the anniversary 
of our Lord's death, as reckoned by the old Jewish 
method. Consequently, Thursday evening, March 30th, after 
six P.M. (the beginning of the 14th of Nisan), will be the proper 
time for the celebration of the Memorial Supper. The next day 
("Good Friday") will be the anniversary of our Lord's death, 
and the Jewish Passover week should begin that evening— in 
exact accord with the record in the Gospels. But for contrariness' 
sake, to keep away from the Christian date, or for some 
other reason unknown, the Jews this year depart from their 
proper mode of reckoning and begin the Passover week on 
March 26th which would really be the 9th of Nisan instead of 
the 15th, if properly reckoned. 



R2419 : page 19 

VIEW FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 



BLINDNESS BEGINNING TO TURN FROM ISRAEL. 

A REMARKABLE lecture was recently delivered 

before the "Council of Jewish Women" at 

Philadelphia by Rabbi K. Kohler— on "The New Testament 

in the Light of Judaism." It illustrates the new 

attitude of Jewish thought toward Christianity, and indicates 

the first stage of fleshly Israel's recovery from 

the gross blindness of the past eighteen centuries.— 

Rom. 9:31-33; 11:7,10-12,20,25-29. 

The following extracts were the Doctor's most favorable 
references to Jesus and Christianity, and might 
be misleading, did we not explain that, while making 
these remarkable admissions and concessions to Christianity, 
he attempted to offset them and neutralize 
their effect by claiming that our Lord's most forceful 
teachings were merely a fresh presentation of the sentiments 
and sometimes the very phraseology of the 
Jewish teachers who preceded him. His criticisms of 
the Epistles of Peter, James and John are in similar 
strain. These, he claims, were all Jews and merely 
restated or rehashed Jewish doctrines and precepts. 
All the seriously anti-Jewish and anti-Law teachings 
are charged to the Apostle Paul. 

The Doctor fails to see the point. Biblical Christianity 
makes no claim of being in antagonism to ancient 
Judaism. Quite to the contrary, it claims that 
"holy men of old [Jews] spoke and wrote as they were 
moved by the holy spirit." It claims, however, that the 
real force and the true meaning of those inspired words 
were not appreciated, nor intended of God to be understood 
until, the antitypical sin-offering having been 
presented by "the Lamb of God," the holy spirit was 
granted to all consecrated believers. For instance, we 
heartily assent that the Golden Rule in "Thou shalt 
love thy neighbor as thyself"— was delivered to Israel 
as a part of the Law sixteen centuries before our Lord 
repeated it (Lev. 19:18); and our Lord quoted it, not 
as an original saying of his own, but as a teaching of 
the Law. (Matt. 19:19.) What we claim is that those 
words were never understood, never comprehended, until 
our Lord Jesus, the great Teacher sent of God and 
illuminated with the holy spirit, expounded them by 
his example and teachings. More than this, we claim 
that the Jews and the majority of professed Christians 
do not understand these words now;— that only such 
as have consecrated themselves to the Lord and have 
received the holy spirit are able to "comprehend the 
lengths and breadths and heights and depths" of this 



and other "deep things" of God's teaching. If any 
man will do my Father's will, he shall understand the 
teaching.— John 7:17; 1 Cor. 2:7-12. 

Respecting the writings of the Apostle Paul, not 
only the Jews, but all others, in proportion as they 
come into close accord with both the letter and the spirit 
of the divine Word, will find in them the keys of the 
mystery of God— supplied to the Church by the Lord 
that they may be "all taught of God"— "that the man 
of God may be thoroughly furnished unto every good 
work;"— revealing s of "the whole counsel of God;" 
capable of elaboration under the spirit's guidance, but 
quite "sufficient" for such elaboration.— John 6:45; 
2 Tim. 3:17; Acts 20:27. 

The extracts referred to follow:— 

"There was a time when you and I were taught 
not even to mention the name of Jesus the Christ in 
order not to transgress the Law, which says: 'Ye shall 
not mention the name of other gods, neither shall it be 
heard upon your mouth.' Nor need we wonder at that. 
It was little short of idolatry which a paganized church 
made herself guilty of in her worship of Jesus and his 
mother. Christianity has advanced since toward the 
light of Jewish monotheism. It is Jesus as a Man, as 

R2419 : page 20 

an ideal of humanity, that is now held up for adoration 
and emulation by Christian theology, in spite of 
the Trinitarian dogma. Both art and literature portray 
him no longer as a God, but as a wondrously gifted 
teacher and healer of men, who appeals to our human 
sympathy. Nay, more. His Apollo face gave way 
to the historically more correct type of the Jews. He 
is recognized as one of Israel's great sons, whatever 
the restriction in the flesh may amount to. Should we 
then, as Jews, not also gladly and proudly own him 
as one of our noblest of men and accord to him the 
proper position in our own history?. ..Ought we, 
notwithstanding all difficulties, not learn to appreciate 
the exquisite sayings and teachings contained in the 
New Testament, if only from a literary and humanitarian 
point of view? 

"There is but one answer: Find the right focus, 
and the colors and shades of the object in view will 
lead you in the direction of the one light. We need 
no clear sky to see the sun rise on the Eastern horizon. 
The clouds reveal rather than hide the dawn of light. 
So do the myths or legends that gather round a popular 
hero disclose rather than obscure the existence of 
a personality impressing the people with its charm and 
power. It must not needs be exact historical truth 
what we are told concerning Jesus. Those beautiful 
and strange tales about the things that happened around 



the Lake of Galilee show that there was some spiritual 

daybreak in that dark corner of Judea of which official 

Judaism had not taken sufficient cognizance, that 

a movement was inaugurated then which did not receive 

its impulse or its sanction from the regular authorities 

or schools. It matters not whether we accord 

to Jesus the claim and title of Messiah or Christ or not, 

whether the people and authorities of Judea did or not, 

or whether he himself assumed it at any moment of 

his life.... 

"It is one of the most interesting historical and 
psychological studies of Judaism to follow this movement 
through all its phases from the moment the cry 
of the coming— "the Kingdom of Heaven"— was heard 
on the shore of the Jordan among the humble Baptists 
until the fishermen of Galilee carried the good tidings 
or good spell (gospel) as the watchword of a new faith 
triumphantly out into the wide world. All the written 
and unwritten records point in unison to John the Baptist 
as the starter of the movement, the prophet-like 
preacher of righteousness whom, according to Josephus 
(Ant. xviii, 52), Herod the Tetrarch feared for the 
mighty power he wielded upon the multitudes following 
him to the Jordan to purify themselves of their 
sins. Of course Josephus, writing for the Romans, 
took heed not to allude to that Messianic message of 
his— the cry: "Repent, for the Kingdom of God is 
near;" that is to say, the kingdom of Rome, the satanic 
power of Edom, has reached its end. All New 
Testament reports agree that Jesus was among those 

R2420 : page 20 

who received the consecration of baptism from that 
popular saint of the time. Still, between the simple 
Messianic hope and promise of John the Baptist, with 
his fasts and ablutions and prayers and the bewildering 
faith of the Christians that the Messiah has appeared, 
and, tho crucified, has risen from the tomb, 
now to sit at the right hand of God as his son— there 
yawns a wide chasm which no ordinary reasoning of 
either Jew or Gentile could easily bridge over.... 
"Beneath the thick crust of the second century 
hatred which endeavored to malign the Jew in order 
to court the favor of Roman rulers, we can still read 
the true story of Jesus' tragic end from his own lips as 
he, on the road to Jerusalem, announces his fate to his 
disciples, saying that "He shall be delivered to the high 
priests and the scribes, and they shall condemn him to 
death and deliver him to the heathen to mock and to 
scourge and to crucify." (Mark 10:33; Matt. 20:18; 
Luke 18:32.) The priestly Sadducees and not the 
people and their Pharisean leaders were interested in 
having Jesus brought to trial for his open attack on 
the priestly misrule, and from fear lest the Romans 
might hold them responsible, as Caiaphas, the high 



priest, actually says in the older record in John's gospel. 

"All the anti-Jewish utterances are the work of 
the Pauline school. ...Every word uttered by Jesus 
was the ring of Jewish sentiment and betrays the originality 
of a religious genius.... 

"We cannot close our eyes to the one great fact 
that this man Jesus must have made a wonderful impression 
upon his hearers by the thousand and one 
sweet and beautiful things he said, no matter by whom 
they were uttered before or after, or else he could not 
have been made the author of all these a generation or 
two after he lived.... 

"Suffice it to say that his greatness consisted in 
belonging to no school. He was a man of the people. 
...'Christianity,' says Leroy Beaulieu, 'produced 
saints; Judaism, sages.' I say: Christianity gave us 
Sisters of Mercy; Judaism, noble types of wives and 
mothers." 



That Doctor Kohler is not merely giving expression 
to views of his own far in advance of the general 
trend of Jewish thought, is evidenced by the following 
comments on his lecture by the editor of The Jewish 
Exponent:— 

"Dr. Berkowitz, in discussing the lecture, said 
that it could not have been delivered in other times, 
because the lecturer's life would have been imperiled 
thereby. There was another reason why this was true; 
which is, that there would have been no one to listen 
to it. Christians, of course, would have objected, and 
to the Jews the New Testament was forbidden fruit. 
Our ancestors regarded the reading of the New Testament 
books as next door to apostasy itself. That Jewish 
mothers should wish to be acquainted with its contents 
would have been unheard-of perversity. 

"All this has largely changed. The Jews have 
gone out into the world; they meet Christians on equal 
terms. The dread of the Christian religion has disappeared 
with the effort to forcibly convert Jews. They 
have gone out into the full tide of Christianity, and 
behold, they have not been swept away. On the contrary 
the love of their own faith has grown. It is an 
evidence of strength that leads the Jew to wish to ascertain 
the true character of that literature so intimately 
connected with his own and yet so widely different; 
so world-embracing in its influence; so potent in its 
effects upon his neighbors, so freighted with consequences 
for himself. When before would rabbis have 
been found who would have invited their people, and 

R2420 : page 21 

especially the women, under any circumstances or conditions, 
to read the New Testament? Yet here it was 



done. It need hardly be said, however, that such reading 
must be conducted with care, and, if possible, under 
conditions which, if not favorable to Judaism, will 
be at least not hostile thereto.... 

"But, however the Bible is read, with whatever 
preconceptions, it is extremely difficult to escape the 
pervasive influence of its purity, its strength, its exaltation 
both of Deity and humanity, its powerful plea 
for righteousness. Its influence in the Christian world 
is incalculable; not so much in making Jews of Christians, 
as in refining and purifying Christianity of its 
dross and bringing it nearer to the pure stock whence 
it sprung. In every reformation of Christianity the 
testament of Israel has been the starting point and the 
great foundation for the religious enfranchisement. 
The trend of enlightened Christianity of to-day is towards 
a return to Israel's simple and pure religious 
conceptions. Not a little of the antagonism felt towards 
the Jews and their scriptures is due to the fears 
of Christian reactionaries, who would crush every attempt 
to elevate and purify the church under the opprobrious 
epithet, 'It's Jewish.' 

"What, then, would be the effect of the study of 
the Christian Testament in the light of the Jewish 
scriptures as indicated by Dr. K. Kohler? Certainly 
it will have an important influence. It will not only 
disclose beauties of its own, but also open Jewish eyes 
to treasures in their own scriptures, to which, with the 
indifference of inherited spiritual wealth, they have 
been hitherto oblivious." 



This means the opening of the New Testament to 
the Jews— not willingly upon the part of the Rabbis, 
but by force of circumstances, the growth of intelligence 
and the fact that the best people of the world 
have drawn their inspirations from it. It was this 
same force of circumstances that compelled the Roman 
Catholic Council of Baltimore some years ago to grant 
Roman Catholics residing in the United States liberty 
to own and to read the Bible. 

Surely this removal of the Jewish ban from the 
New Testament will mean the reading of it by the 
purest and best of that long blinded people. And the 
reading of the New Testament will mean the gradual 
turning away of their blindness. So far as our observation 
goes, nearly all the Jews who have ever gotten 
their eyes opened to see Christ as Messiah have been 
converted by reading the New Testament and not by 
tracts or other treatises— altho other writings are as 
necessary to them as to others as helps in understanding 
the divine plan of the ages, after they have accepted 
Jesus as Messiah. 

Is not this the beginning of the fulfilment of our 
Lord's words, "He that rejecteth me, and receiveth not 



my words, hath one that judgeth him [Compare John 5:45-47]: 

the word that I have spoken [directly and 

through the apostles] the same shall judge him in the 

last day." (John 12:48.) Are we not entering the 

Millennial period— "the last day?"— and are not the 

blinded ones getting ready for the eye-salve? They 

are still proud, and their words are still stout against 

Jesus as the Messiah— it is merely their race-pride perhaps 

which now leads them to acknowledge the great 

Teacher's greatness, because he was a Jew. But in 

the great time of trouble near at hand, which will include 

"Jacob's trouble" as well as "Babylon's" fall, 

the honest and humble ones will look unto him with 

the eye of faith and shall see him thus, and then will 

be fulfilled Zechariah 12:10. 

ZIONISM MAKING PROGRESS. 



Zionist Jews— those Jews who are identified with 
the recent movement for a resettlement of Palestine by 
the Jews— report that the cause so near their hearts is 
not languishing. Their leader, Doctor Herzl, has recently 
had interviews with the Sultan and the Pope, 
and with four prominent compatriots was present at 
Jerusalem at the time Emperor William visited that city 
and were kindly received by him. Dr. Herzl is reticent 
respecting the amount of encouragement given by these 
potentates; but as one result of his visit to the Sultan 
he bears a badge of the Order of Mejidie, which would 
seem to imply that the man and his plea were not disdained. 
That the door of Palestine will open to the 
Jew, and that shortly, we have no question; altho it 
has been effectually closed for now nearly seven years 
—no Jew being permitted to enter it except as a visitor 
whose period of stay is expressly defined and limited. 

Respecting Doctor Herzl's efforts, etc., Rabbi S. 
Wise, Hon. Secy. Amer. Fed. Zionists, writes:— 

"The exact tenor of the Kaiser's courteous reply, 
spoken in the presence of the Minister of Foreign Affairs, 
Von Bulow, has not been disclosed. Enough is 
known, however, to enable us to predicate that the 
Kaiser is prepared to vouchsafe his benevolent sanction 
to the Zionist movement, calculated as it is to foster 
the agricultural life of Palestine under the acknowledged 
sovereignty of the Sultan. The members of the 
deputation have since returned to Vienna and have 
practically made this declaration, altho they have 
couched their interviews, which appeared in the official 
organ of the movement, in terms of becoming 
reserve.... 

"We do not ask that the holy places be committed 
to our exclusive keeping; let these remain, as they are 
now, in the hands of those who guard and cherish 
them. Surely the Christian world requires no assurance 



on our part that every spot which Christians hold 

in reverence will be precious to us. The Jew shall not 

cease to honor true devotion to an ideal— least of 

all in the land which his past has hallowed for all time. 

"Not in vain do we place our reliance upon Kaiser 
and Sultan. Help and deliverance have come to us 
before through the grace of 'stranger kings.' Two 

R2420 : page 22 

historic instances recur to us of Israel marvelously 
saved and prospered with the help of reigning kings. 
In the year 538 of the pre-Christian era Cyrus took 
Babylon and graciously permitted the Babylonian exiles 
to return to their fatherland. 

"The momentous results which followed from the 
reestablishment of the Judean Commonwealth are part 
of— and the largest part of— the world's history. A 
tree of two great branches flourished in time on the 
soil which the former captives by the rivers of Babylon 
began to cultivate with all the ardor and assiduity of 
their nature— two branches, the one the religion of 
Ezra and the latest prophets, of Hillel and the rabbis, 
the other, the faith of Jesus, later become the Christianity 
of his countless followers. And all this came 
to pass, as Dr. Max Nordau has aptly pointed out, 
owing to the hardihood of a handful of the earliest 
Zionists, who, availing themselves of the rights accorded 
them by Cyrus, the noble, chose to give up their 
peaceful and secure residence in Babylon in order to 
live and labor in Zion and rebuild its waste places. 
The second exile is soon to end. In the words of Josephine 
Lazarus, 'once planted again upon native soil, 
"taking root downward," as Isaiah has it, who can tell 
what "upward flower and fruit" the immortal branch 
may bear— what new birth of the spirit, the undying 
spirit of Israel may give to the world?' 

"Another King there was, greater even than Cyrus, 
who, like him, befriended the Jews. In the course 
of his victorious marches Alexander visited Jerusalem 
in the year 332. Legends in great number have been 
woven around this visit, picturing the manner in which 
this youthful Prince, who had come to scoff, remained 
to pray. Whether it be true, as rabbinic tale has it, 
that Alexander was so deeply impressed by the visage 
of the venerable High Priest Jaddua and the priestly 
train that he was moved to bow in humility and adoration 
before these whom he had set out to conquer, 
and that he even caused sacrifices to be offered up to 
the Most High in the Temple of Jerusalem, we cannot 
tell. We do know, however, that this Macedonian 
ruler, far from despoiling and violating the shrine, as 
had been and continued to be the custom of earlier and 
later invading princes, openly befriended the Jews and 
treated them with the utmost consideration and 
generosity." 



R2421 : page 22 

"YE MUST BE BORN AGAIN." 

--JAN. 22. -JOHN 3:1-16.- 

NICODEMUS displayed both a noble and an ignoble 

disposition in coming to the Master. 

(1) He had a nobility of mind which was able to discern 

distinctly that Jesus was not an impostor, but a 

Teacher from God; and it was his desire for the truth 

which led him to seek it from the lips of one of no reputation 

amongst the worldly wise. (2) But he displayed 

the ignoble element of his disposition by coming 

privately, secretly, at night, whereas he should 

have acted up to his convictions fairly, and have come 

forward to inquire of the Lord, if not in public, at least 

in daylight and openly. There are a good many Christians 

of the Nicodemus type. They have a standing 

in the nominal church, and a great respect for the 

"honor of one another," so general in it. 

Some to-day, for instance, see something of the 
light of present truth, and are convinced that the meat 
in due season now spread before the household of faith 
is from God's Word, and not human speculations. 
They will confess this much to themselves, and privately 
to some of the servants of present truth, and 
privately, secretly, so far as their denominations are 
concerned, they procure and read MILLENNIAL DAWN 
and ZION'S WATCH TOWER-perhaps subscribing in 
the name of some one else, "for fear of the Jews." 
But altho this is an ignoble course, the Lord does not 
refuse them the opportunity they seek and, like Nicodemus, 
they are made acquainted with the truth. But, 
as we hear little more respecting Nicodemus, so the 
Nicodemus class of to-day very rarely develop into true 
overcoming disciples, servants of the truth. Fear is 
good, caution is good, when properly exercised; but 
when these are allowed to have any voice in dictating 
our course after we have found the truth, their influence 
can only be evil, enslaving, demeaning. Those 
who are thus bound by love of human approbation, 
and fear of the consequences of a public, bold advocacy 
of the Lord and his truth, are not worthy of him, 
as he declared: "He that is ashamed of me and my 
word, of him will I also be ashamed." We urge that 
all who find in themselves the Nicodemus disposition 
seek immediately to overcome it, and to get their hearts 
so filled with the love of God and the love of his truth 
that it will make them free from bondage to sectarianism, 
and to fear of man, which bringeth a snare. "Perfect 
love casteth out fear." Whom the Son makes free 
is free indeed.— 1 John 4:18; John 8:36. 



Evidently but a small portion of this conference 
between Jesus and Nicodemus is furnished us— merely 
the leading features. Evidently the questions which 
Nicodemus asked related to the Kingdom of God, 
which John the Baptist had declared was at hand, and 
which our Lord also declared to be at the door. As a 
teacher amongst the Jews, Nicodemus was surely imbued 
with this hope of Israel— that in due time God 
would send Messiah, who would establish the long-promised 
Kingdom of Israel— superior to all the kingdoms 
of the world, and over them all,— to bless all the 
families of the earth, according to the promise made to 
Abraham. Not only might we infer that his question 
pertained to the Kingdom, but our Lord's answer 
plainly indicates this, for he began at once to talk about 
the promised Kingdom. 

R2421 : page 23 

The great Teacher's explanation respecting the 
Kingdom-class must have struck Nicodemus as totally 
new. He had been accustomed to think of all the nation 
of Israel as being the children of the Kingdom, or, 
if not the entire nation, at least their most intelligent 
classes, the scribes, the Doctors of the Law, and their 
holiness class, the Pharisees. But here was a new 
thought— none would be in this Kingdom, sharers of 
its glory and of its work of blessing all the families of 
the earth, except they should be "born again." Nay 
more, the intimation was that the Kingdom would be 
an invisible Kingdom, that none could even see it, except 
he would be born again. Failing to grasp the 
thought of begetting and birth to a higher nature, 
Nicodemus was puzzled to think how a person who 
had reached maturity could ever be born again according 
to the flesh: and of course he was right in considering 
that an impossibility. The new birth is not to 

R2422 : page 23 

be a birth according to the flesh: as our Lord explains, 
"That which is born of the flesh is flesh, but that 
which is born of the spirit is spirit." The Master's 
teaching was not that we should be born again of the 
flesh, but quite to the contrary, that those who would 
constitute the Kingdom class must be begotten and 
born of the spirit of God, the spirit of holiness, the 
spirit of the truth. 

There is a great lesson here for many pre-millennialists, 
who vainly think, as Nicodemus, that the 
Kingdom of God will be a fleshly Kingdom, that the 
Kingdom-class will have what they are pleased to call 
"glorified flesh." Our Master's plain declarations 
thoroughly set aside all such expectations: and to us, 
as well as Nicodemus, he positively declares that none 
shall enter into the Kingdom except he be born again. 



The statement that "that which is born of the flesh is 

flesh, and that which is born of the spirit is spirit," is 

so unqualifiedly plain, and proves so emphatically that 

the spirit-begotten and spirit-born class, the "little 

flock," which will inherit the Kingdom, will not be 

flesh-beings in any sense of the word, but spirit beings, 

that there is no room for controversy or for misunderstanding 

on the part of those who have no will of 

their own in the matter, but are seeking to be taught 

of the Lord. 

All recognize the meaning of the expression, "born 
of the flesh," that it does not mean merely begotten 
of the flesh, but a birth into independent flesh-life as 
a result of the begetting and gestation. And precisely 
the same thought should attach to the expression, 
"born of the spirit." It does not relate merely to the 
begetting of the spirit through the word of truth, 
which occurs during the present life, and at the time 
of our consecration to the Lord, but on the contrary, 
it implies and includes a subsequent birth to perfected 
spirit conditions— the entrance of the spirit existence 
in the resurrection— the result of the present begetting 
of the truth, and the present period of gestation or development 
as "new creatures in Christ Jesus." 

That this is the proper Scriptural thought to be 
attached to this word, "born," is manifest from other 
Scriptures which declare that our Lord Jesus was, at 
his resurrection, "the first-born from the dead," and 
"the first-born amongst many brethren." (Rom. 8:29; 
Col. 1:18.) Our Lord was begotten of the spirit at 
the time of his baptism, when the holy spirit came 
upon him. The new nature there begun, in the flesh, 
developed during the three and a half years of his ministry 
in proportion as the flesh, the human nature, died. 
Thus, as the Apostle expresses it, he was dying daily, 
as the man Christ Jesus, but was being renewed day 
by day in the inner man, the new creature, the spirit 
being. -2 Cor. 4:16. 

The complete death of the flesh, with our Lord, 
was the victory of his new nature, which refused to 
draw back, refused to save the flesh, which had already 
been devoted to sacrifice, as our sin-offering. It 
was because of this faithfulness of our Lord, as the 
"new creature," in offering up his flesh as a sin-offering, 
that the Heavenly Father was pleased to resurrect 
the "new creature"— not the flesh, which was 
man's ransom price. The resurrection of the "new 
creature" in a spirit body, glorious, powerful, immortal 
(1 Cor. 15:42-44), was our Lord's birth of the spirit, 
as the first-born amongst many brethren. As the Head 
of the Kingdom was thus begotten of the spirit, and 
in due time born of the spirit, so likewise must it be 
with those who will be members of that Kingdom. 
"Flesh and blood [human nature]" shall not inherit the 
Kingdom of God,— "cannot inherit the Kingdom of 
God." (1 Cor. 15:50.) Hence, we who would be 



heirs of the Kingdom must all be changed— made like 
our spirit-born Head, ere we can either see the Kingdom 
or share its glorious work as members. 

Not only did our Lord clearly state the matter 
thus, but he gave an illustration which is in absolute 
harmony with this understanding of his words, but 
meaningless from any other standpoint. He declared 
that as the wind comes and goes, but is invisible to 
men, so will all those be who will be members of the 
Kingdom, born again. Our Lord illustrated this teaching 
in his own person, after his resurrection. Altho 
he was present forty days, he appeared only a few times 
to the disciples, in all apparently not more than seven, 
and even on these occasions he appeared in a form of 
flesh (as angels did during previous dispensations) and 
communed with them for a few moments, and then 
vanished out of their sight. As the wind he came, 
as the wind he went, and they knew not whither. Invisible 

R2422 : page 24 

as the wind, he was present with them, taking 
note of all their affairs, during all that forty days, and 
merely appearing at the proper times to give the needed 
counsel and directions and assistance. So it will 
be with all of the Kingdom class, when they are born 
of the spirit; they will be able to go and come and attend 
to all the various functions of the Kingdom, without 
being visible to mankind. They will be as the 
wind. It will be within their province to appear as 
men, as the angels have done, if there be necessity for 
so appearing, altho we incline to think that there will 
be no such necessity, as God has already provided an 
earthly class as the representatives of the Kingdom 
amongst men.— Heb. 11:39,40. 

We are in no sense denying or objecting to the ordinary 
thought, that a work of grace takes place in the 
heart of the Christian when he is adopted into the divine 
family as a son and prospective heir of God, a 
"new creature in Christ Jesus:" on the contrary, we 
are affirming this, as an absolute necessity to a share 
in the Kingdom, for whoever is not begotten of the 
spirit surely can never hope to be born of the spirit. 
We are merely making the proper distinctions between 
the begetting of the spirit, which is merely the beginning 
of the work of grace in us, and the birth of the 
spirit, which is the completion of that work, when we 
shall be like the Lord and see him as he is, and behold 
and share his glory. 

We cannot wonder that Nicodemus was astonished 
when we remember that the holy spirit was not yet 
given, and that Nicodemus was not a member of 
the house of sons, but merely of the house of servants. 
We wonder far more that some who have been begotten 
of the spirit do not readily comprehend this spiritual 
teaching: for it is their privilege to understand "the 



deep things of God." (1 Cor. 2:10.) As our Lord 
said to Nicodemus, "Art thou a master in Israel, and 
knowest not these things?" we may, with much greater 
point, say to Christians who cavil to-day, Are you begotten 
of the spirit, and taught of God, and yet ignorant 
of these things? 

Our Lord does not even class this teaching as being 
specially spiritual, but rather earthly, such as the 
natural man, in proper harmony with God, should be 
able to understand and appreciate. He says, "If I 
have told you earthly things, and ye believe not, how 
shall ye believe if I tell you of heavenly things?" 
Those whose minds are on so gross an earthly plane 
that they cannot appreciate so simple a matter as this 
are not in the condition to be inducted into the deeper 
things of God. They are at most but "babes," and 
have need to be fed with milk instead of with strong 
meat. (Heb. 5:12.) Nicodemus, unable (or perhaps 
we should say, because of prejudice, unwilling) to believe 
this message concerning the spiritual character 
of the Kingdom, was unprepared for any further teaching 
along that line— he was unwilling to receive the 
truth, the only message which Christ had to give, altho 
he was already persuaded that our Lord was a 
teacher sent from God. Hence our Lord says, "Ye 
receive not our witness." 

Our Lord's statement, "Except a man be born of 
water and of the spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom 
of God," deserves further consideration. We have 
seen what he meant by the expression, "born of the 
spirit," viz., born from the dead by the power of God 
as a spirit being, but what is signified by the expression, 
"born of water?" It is claimed by a very large 
number indeed that this refers to water baptism, and 
that those who are not born out of water will not have 
part in the Lord's Kingdom. We are willing to admit 
the truth of this only to a limited extent. We hold 
that the Lord refers to the true baptism, which is merely 
symbolized by immersion in water, and the rising 
out of it. We hold that the real thought is the burial 
of the old nature, and the rising of the new nature to 
newness of life, and that this is accomplished through 
consecration of the will to the will of the Lord, a burial 
or immersion of the human will to death, as the necessary 
step to be taken in connection with the obtaining 
of the holy spirit, the holy mind, the mind of Christ, 
the spirit of Christ, which is the beginning in our flesh 
of the new creature, which must be developed and made 
ready if it would be born of the spirit in the 
resurrection. 

This same thought seems to be in the mind of the 
Apostle, when he refers to the bath of a new birth, the 
making new by the holy spirit. (Tit. 3:5.) Cornelius 
evidently had this bath of the new birth, the making 
new by the holy spirit, before his baptism in water 
(which was a symbol of it, and an outward confession 



to others). And so it is, we believe, with some Christian 
people to-day. They have had the bath of the 
new birth, and the making new by the holy spirit, and 
are thus genuinely new creatures in Christ Jesus, without 
having had the symbolical immersion in water,— 
because, being mistaught as a result of the errors of 
the Dark Ages, they do not discern the beauty of the 
symbolic baptism in water, and the Scriptural command 
thereto; and this ignorance and disobedience God 
evidently has passed over, with many of us, for years. 
But when, in the abundance of his grace, a knowledge 
of his will on this subject ultimately reaches us, there 
should not be one moment's hesitation— there will not 
be one moment's hesitation, if the will of the flesh is 
entirely dead, and the mind of Christ fully in control. 

The oldest Greek MSS. (the Sinaitic and Vatican) 
omit the last four words of verse 13, with evident propriety, 

R2423 : page 25 

for, altho our Lord is now in heaven, he was 

not in heaven at the time he addressed Nicodemus. 

The words in this verse were intended to remind Nicodemus 

that he need not look to fellow-human creatures 

for information respecting heavenly things, as they 

could not know them, any more than himself; but incidentally 

this verse teaches us something more, viz., 

that no man has ever been in heaven except our Lord 

Jesus. This not only agrees with the statement of 

Peter, on the day of Pentecost, "David is not ascended 

into the heavens," but it also agrees with the Apostle 

Paul's statement, "Flesh and blood [human nature] 

cannot inherit the Kingdom of God."— 1 Cor. 15:50; 

Acts 2:34. 

The only ground for hope that any of the fallen race 
of Adam will ever know anything about the heavenly 
condition is then stated by our Lord to depend upon 
his own justifying work on man's behalf. He must be 
lifted up as the great sin-offering, the antitype of the 
brazen serpent which Moses lifted up in the wilderness, 
the antidote for the bites of the fiery serpents, which 
represented sin. 

Our Lord's reference to the results gives the 
thought of the wideness of God's mercy, and of his 
provision for our race. Altho now this mercy is confined 
to the elect Church, "even as many as the Lord 
our God shall call," it is in due time to be world-wide, 
and a blessing to "whosoever believeth on him." Then 
the grand Gospel provision is briefly stated in few 
words— God's sympathetic love for the world, his provision 
of the ransom in the person of his Son, and that 
provision made not merely for an elect class, but for 
the world of mankind in general— whosoever believeth. 

Another thought: God's provision is not to rescue 
any from the flames of hell, from an eternity of torment; 
but to rescue them from death, from destruction, 



from perishing, from nonentity, and to grant to 
whosoever is willing to have it, on the conditions of the 
New Covenant,— Everlasting Life. 



R2423 : page 25 

THE WATER OF LIFE. 

-JAN. 29.-JOHN 4:5-15.- 

"Whosoever drinketh of the water that I shall 
give him shall never thirst."— John 4:14. 

EARLY in his ministry, in sending forth the Apostles 
to preach the Kingdom of God at hand, our 
Lord had instructed them that they were not to go 
amongst Gentiles nor to Samaritan cities to deliver their 
message. It was easy to avoid the Gentiles, because 
comparatively few of them resided in Palestine: the 
governors of the land, Herod and Pilate, the centurions, 
and the soldiers, were probably the only Gentiles they 
were likely to meet, and these they were to seek to 
avoid, as the message of the Kingdom was not for them. 
But it was a difficult matter to avoid the Samaritans, 
for the district called Samaria lay between Judea proper 
and Galilee, and was necessarily passed through repeatedly 
by our Lord and his chosen twelve. 

The Samaritans, it will be remembered, were not 
Jews, altho they were worshipers of God, and had come 
largely under the influence of the teachings of the Law. 
They were descendants of those mixed peoples which 
were placed in possession of the land of Israel, as colonists, 
when the ten tribes were taken captive and colonized 
amongst the Gentiles. As the Israelites in a foreign 
land took up with the religious customs of those lands 
to a large extent, so these Gentiles, transported to Palestine, 
took up with many of the religious customs, etc., 
related thereto. But their belief in God, and the fact 
that they worshiped the true God, did not constitute 
them proper subjects for the Gospel call, which was confined 
exclusively to the natural seed of Abraham up to 
the time of our Lord's rejection;— then their house was 
left desolate, and the middle wall of partition between 
them and other nations was broken down, and the Gospel 
of the Kingdom was sent forth, without restraint, 
to whosoever would have the ears to hear it. 

It was while our Lord and his disciples were passing 
through this Samaritan territory, between Galilee 
and Judea, that, coming to one of the cities of Samaria, 
he was refused entertainment, and James and John inquired, 
Wilt thou that we command fire from heaven 
to destroy them? and Jesus refused, saying that his 
mission was one of salvation and not of destruction. 
The Samaritans did not refuse entertainment because 



they were opposed to the Lord and his teachings, for, 
quite to the contrary, they apparently would have been 
very willing to receive him, recognizing him as a teacher 
sent from God, who performed many wonderful works. 
Their refusal to entertain him was because he did not 
purpose to stop with them to teach them, perform miracles 
in their midst, heal their sick, etc., but was merely 
passing through in his journey to perform his miracles 
upon and teach the Israelites. 

It was while our Lord and the Apostles were similarly 
passing through Samaria again, that, weary with 
his journey, and probably not wishing to appear unkind, 
nor to be similarly repulsed again, Jesus waited 
beside Jacob's well, and rested, while the Apostles went 
to the city of Sychar to replenish their stock of provisions. 
And in the interim a woman of Samaria met 
Jesus at the well, when she came to draw water. It was 
evidently with less of a desire for the water for his own 
comfort, than from a desire to teach the woman, that 

R2423 : page 26 

our Lord asked her for a drink. While he could not 
invite her, or any other Samaritan, to a place in the 
Kingdom, which was the central thought of his Gospel, 
he could nevertheless appropriately give her some food 
for thought, which later on might do her good, and prepare 
her to have a hearing ear against the time when 
the Gospel call would be unrestricted— for whosoever 
hath an ear to hear. 

The completeness of separation between the Jews 
and Samaritans, as of different classes or castes, is clearly 
shown in the woman's surprised reply to our Lord's 
request. Not that the Samaritans were averse to having 
fellowship with the Jews, but that the Jews, imbued 
with the thought that the promises of God were to the 
seed of Abraham exclusively, would "have no dealings 
with the Samaritans," would ask no favors of them, and 
apparently would grant few favors to them. While our 
Lord was bound to act in line with that truth, that the 
seed of Abraham, and the promises made to it, were 
distinct and separate from all others, yet he was not influenced 
by feelings of pride, caste, etc., and in this 
instance he pursued a policy in harmony with the Apostle's 
admonition— that good be done to all men as we 
have opportunity,— preferably to the household of faith. 
(Gal. 6:10.) For the time our Lord was not in a position 
to speak to Israelites, to do them good, and he 
was prompt to embrace the opportunity to do what good 
he could to even a Samaritan woman. And therein is 
a lesson for all of his followers to-day: we should serve 
the household of faith wherever possible, but when this 
is impossible, and an opportunity offers, we should seek 
to do some good to others— to speak words which may 
help them by and by, if not in the present time or age. 

Not entering into a dispute with the woman, nor 



into explanations of the distinction between the seed of 

Abraham and others, our Lord proceeds to talk of something 

much more important to her, and in this also sets 

a good example to all those who would speak his truth 

in his name, in his way, wisely. He told the woman 

of a more important matter,— that he alone could give 

the water of life. While physically he was weary, and 

needed the natural water, yet in a higher sense the woman 

was the weary one, heavy-laden with sin, who 

needed the invigorating water of life of which the Lord 

himself is the fountain. 

The thought in the expression, "living waters," is 
that of a fresh spring in contrast with stagnant waters, 
which become contaminated and foul. The water which 
our Lord proposed to give the woman was certainly not 
the holy spirit, for this is distinctly termed the gift of 
the Father, and is symbolized by the anointing oil. The 
water of life is the truth, which both cleanses and refreshes. 
A portion of this our Lord could properly give 
to the Samaritan woman, if she were hungering and 
thirsting after it, and he did give her a drink of it. 

The woman classed herself as a daughter of Jacob, 
and thus implied a hope on the part of Samaritans that 
notwithstanding their rejection by the Jews from heritage 
in the Abrahamic covenant, they nevertheless trusted 
in some blessing. And indeed there was a mixture 
of Israelitish stock amongst the Samaritans, for certain 
poor Israelites had not been deported to foreign countries, 
and these, ignoring the strictness of the Abrahamic 
covenant, had intermarried with the Gentiles and in 
general had abandoned circumcision and the other conditions 
of Judaism, and hence could be no longer recognized 
by the Lord as in any respect different from the 
other nations,— Gentiles. So, too, it was with many of 
the Israelites who were deported: they mixed and mingled 
with the Gentiles, abandoned the sign of circumcision 
in the flesh, and in general all the provisions of 
the Lord's covenant: these, in every sense of the word, 
ceased to be Israelites, and had no further hopes under 
that covenant,— being as much strangers and foreigners 
to the promises of the Covenant as any Gentiles. 

R2424 : page 26 

Thus, from our Lord's treatment of the Samaritans 
we can readily see the baselessness of the expectation 
of some, who style themselves "Anglo-Israelites," and 
claim to be the descendants of these deported Israelites 
who abandoned circumcision and all the features of the 
Law Covenant, given to Israel. Those who lean on 
such a prop lean upon a broken reed. The only Israelites 
who can hope for any mercy and blessing at the 
Lord's hands, under the Law Covenant, and as the natural 
seed of Abraham, are those who have a sufficiency 
of Abrahamic faith to at least maintain the outward 
signs in the flesh, and an outward attempt at obedience 



to their Law Covenant. As for the others, who become 
part and parcel of the Gentiles, they have neither part 
nor lot any longer with Israel: they may, however, 
through Christ, come under the still more beneficent 
terms of the New Covenant, sealed with his precious 
blood. But the blessings of the two covenants cannot 
be mixed, and, as the Apostle Paul distinctly declares, 
whoever hopes for justification under the Law Covenant 
and under the New Covenant is making a great mistake, 
and is falling between them both. Whosoever he be, 
Christ profiteth him nothing; he is yet in his sins, and 
not an heir, neither as a member of the natural seed, 
nor yet as a member of the spiritual seed.— Gal. 5:2. 

The woman's slowness of comprehension is striking, 
and yet so it is with all of us when first we came 
in contact with spiritual truths. Our Lord's patience 
as a teacher, with a congregation of only one, and that 
one a woman of a low caste, should be a lesson to all 
of his followers who seek to distribute to others a taste 
of the water of life. 

Our Lord's explanation of the peculiarities of the 

R2424 : page 27 

water of life of which he is the fountain for mankind 
is very beautiful, but its force can be appreciated only 
by those who have received this blessing at his hands 
—only by those to whom he has communicated his 
truth and who have been sanctified by that truth, set 
apart as his disciples— as fountains of truth for others. 

Errors, falsities, may satisfy temporarily the cravings 
of those who have never yet tasted of the truth, the 
water of life; but nothing can give permanent, lasting 
satisfaction except the truth: and our Lord himself, the 
Word, the Logos, the message of the Father, full of 
grace and truth, is the embodiment and representative 
of this satisfying water of life. Whoever receives the 
Lord as his Redeemer and Leader and Teacher, through 
whom all the gracious promises of God are to be fulfilled; 
—whoever receives this water of life, receives a 
satisfying portion, and will never be found looking for 
truth in other directions. It will satisfy his longings 
as nothing else could do, and so abundantly as to leave 
no appetite for strange waters. 

The saints, the Body of Christ, the prospective 
Bride, are the only ones who receive this water of life 
in its fullest and completest sense during this Gospel 
age; and of them it is true that this water is always 
fresh, springing up within them everlastingly. And 
when these many well-springs shall in God's due time 
be brought together in the Kingdom, then will be fulfilled 
through them unitedly, as the Body of Christ, 
the prediction, "Out of thy belly shall flow rivers of 
living water."— John 7:38. 

This river of water of life does not flow at the 
present time: it cannot flow out to the "nations" until 



all the "little flock" as well-springs shall be brought 

together in the Kingdom. And thus it is pictured in 

Revelation, that after the throne, the Kingdom, is established, 

from under it shall flow the river of water of 

life, clear as crystal. Truth will then flow as a mighty 

river, refreshing and blessing the whole earth, and causing 

the trees of promise to bring forth "leaves for the 

healing of the nations [the heathen]." And then shall 

be fulfilled a promise of the Scriptures which is misapplied 

by many to the present time: "The spirit and 

the Bride say, Come; and let him that heareth say, 

Come; and let him that is athirst come; and whosoever 

will, let him take the water of life freely." (Rev. 22:17.) 

The Bride cannot say, Come, in this sense of 

the word, until she becomes the Bride, when the marriage 

of the Lamb is come, and the new age has fully 

opened. Neither can she invite the whole world to come 

to the river of truth until she herself has been glorified, 

and until that river of life flows. While looking 

forward to that glorious day, when grace shall be free 

to every creature, we nevertheless rejoice in the election 

of the present time, in which the Gospel call is intended 

not for everyone, but for only those who have ears 

to hear, "even as many as the Lord our God shall 

call."-Acts 2:39. 



R2424 : page 27 

FAITH REWARDED-"THY SON LIVETH." 

--FEB. 5-JOHN 4:43-54.- 

"Jesus said unto him, Thy son liveth: and himself 
believed, and his whole house."— John 4:53. 

TWO days were spent preaching to the woman of 
Samaria and completing the journey into Galilee, 
etc., ere the nobleman's son was healed. Galilee was 
a part of the territory which formerly belonged to the 
ten-tribe Kingdom of Israel, and the district called Samaria 
lay between Galilee and Judea. It will be noticed 
that, while our Lord journeyed hither and thither, he 
never went outside the territory occupied by the twelve 
tribes. It will be remembered that Jesus was born in 
Bethlehem of Judea, not far from Jerusalem, and that 
his parents, shortly after his birth, fled into Egypt, under 
the Lord's direction, before the slaughter of the 
babes of Bethlehem: and on the return from Egypt, instead 
of returning to Bethlehem, they located at Nazareth 
in Galilee,— "that he might be called a Nazarene," 
and that thus odium for eccentricity might attach to 
the Lord, as an offset to his wonderful personality and 
the "gracious words that proceeded out of his mouth" 
—"such as never man spake" before or since;— to the 



intent that only the Israelites indeed might hear in the 
true sense of the word, and be healed and accepted as 
sons of God under the New Covenant of grace. 

It will be remembered that our Lord's disciples 
were known as "Galileans," and himself as the "Galilean." 
And recognizing the truth expressed in the 
proverb, "A prophet is not without honor, save in his 
own country," our Lord did not begin his ministry in 
Galilee, but in Judea. It seems probable that after his 
first miracle at Cana he, with his disciples, went to Judea, 
and was present there at the time of the Feast of the 
Passover, and at that time performed many notable 
miracles, on account of which his fame went abroad, 
not only throughout Judea, but also into his own country, 
Galilee: for it was the custom for large numbers of 
the devout Jews to go to Jerusalem to the Feast of the 
Passover every year, and these from Galilee had brought 
back word of the works and fame of their countryman. 
Hence our Lord was now returning to his own country, 
a great prophet, because of the fame first gained 
elsewhere. 

Our Lord's experience was no exception to the general 
rule: it is a trait of human nature to lightly esteem 
things with which we are intimately acquainted. "Distance 
lends enchantment to the view." When one sees 

R2424 : page 28 

a mountain at a distance, its outlines stand out with 
boldness and symmetry, but when he comes close to it 
the beauty and grandeur are apt to be marred, in his 
estimation, because his eye rests upon the smaller fragments 
and the silt and soil and tangle of common weeds. 
Nevertheless, the view and thought from a greater distance 
are the truer ones, the proper ones. So, too, some 
of earth's characters who are highly esteemed to-day 
were much less esteemed by those who came most closely 
in contact with them in their day: not that the present 
view is the false one, but because those who were 
closest to them, and who were affected by the commonalities 
of daily life, failed to rightly appreciate them. 
This is often true in the households and family connections 
of the world's notables. The little things of life 
are seen, and the character is measured by these, rather 
than by its larger features, which alone are seen in the 
distance. For instance, Julius Caesar, who by all the 
world is acknowledged to have been a great man, was 
lightly esteemed by Cassius, his intimate friend and 
servant, who once saved his life from drowning, and who 
was with him when sick, and who measured him by 
the weaknesses of these occasions and others, rather 
than by the largeness and greatness exhibited at other 
times. He, for instance, called attention to the fact 
that "when Caesar was sick he cried, 'Give me some 
drink, Titanius,' like a sick girl." His closeness hindered 
him from seeing the greatness which others, less 



close, could readily discern; and thus he says,— 

"It doth amaze me, 

A man of such a feeble temper should 

So get the start of the majestic world, 

And bear the palm alone." 
So it was with Jesus: "Neither did his brethren believe 
on him" (which expression in olden times signified 
kinsfolk, including cousins as well as brothers). 
They knew Mary, his mother, they knew his brethren, 
they knew Joseph, the husband of Mary, and apparently 
they knew also that Jesus was not the son of Joseph, 
but was conceived before Joseph had taken Mary as his 
wife (Matt. 1:18); for this was the evident purport of 

R2425 : page 28 

their sneer at him, when contending with him they 

said, "We be not born of fornication." (John 8:41.) 

They knew him as the young man who probably had 

worked as a carpenter in their midst for years. They 

knew that his home city, Nazareth, had never been reputed 

for its wealth or its learning— its sons were not 

the bright ones of the Jewish firmament. It was correspondingly 

difficult for them to realize that this one 

whom they knew so well could be the great one of whom 

Moses and the prophets did write. 

Hence we find that in his own city, altho they said, 
"Whence hath this man this wisdom, and this miraculous 
power?" they also said, "Is not this the carpenter's 
son? Is not his mother called Mary, and do not his 
brothers James, and Joses, Simon and Judas, and all his 
sisters, live with us?. ..And they stumbled at him. 
...And he did not perform many miracles there because 
of their unbelief. "-Matt. 13:54-58. 

But, returning to our lesson: The news that the 
great Galilean Prophet and healer of the sick had returned 
to his home, soon reached Capernaum, which 
was only about twenty miles distant from Cana; and 
a person of social and political rank in that city was 
amongst the first to manifest his faith, and to receive a 
corresponding blessing; for we are told that the healing 
of his son was the "second miracle" performed by our 
Lord after his return from Judea. 

It was doubtless by way of testing his faith that 
our Lord seemed at first to object to his petition, saying, 
in effect, You do not have faith in me as the Messiah; 
it is my signs and wonders that you are interested in. 
The troubled and affectionate father showed by his answer 
that his interest was not merely one of curiosity 
and desire to see a miracle performed: his was a true 
faith in Christ's power, which, he did not question, was 
able to save his son from death— "Sir, come down ere 
my son die." His true faith had its reward, and yet 
he was required to exercise it still further, and to believe 
that his request was answered, notwithstanding he 
could have no proof of this for several hours. His faith 



again stood the test, and he went his way, ascertaining 

later that the child had begun to mend at the very time 

our Lord had granted the request. And his faith brought 

him a still greater blessing than the physical recovery 

of his son's health, for it made him and his family 

"believers" in the Messiah, and thus brought them 

within reach of the great privilege of sonship and joint-heirship 

mentioned in John 1:12. 

Our Lord's object in this and other healing miracles 
was evidently not merely the recovery of the sick from 
pain and disease. Had this been his object, he might 
have commanded the healing of all the sick in one 
breath: and more than this, he might have remedied 
the evil conditions which tended to promote sickness. 
For instance, the nobleman's son had a fever, and quite 
probably there were many others in Capernaum similarly 
afflicted, as the city was built near low, marshy 
ground, and is noted in history as a malarial locality, 
unhealthful. The Lord did not do this work of general 
healing, but this is no evidence of a lack of sympathy, 
nor of a lack of appreciation of what would be necessary 
to make that and other portions of the earth healthful, 
any more than it could be considered a lack of interest 
in mankind on God's part which had permitted 
malarial and other evil conditions and resulting sickness 
and disease throughout the whole world for thousands 
of years. On the contrary, God foreknew the sickness, 
and designed to permit the evil conditions, as accompaniments 

R2425 : page 29 

of the sentence against man as a sinner— as 
accessories and concomitants to his death sentence. 

The time will come when he who redeemed mankind, 
and who redeemed also from the curse the earth, 
"the purchased possession" (Eph. 1:14), will cleanse 
it from all evil, baneful influences— and there shall be 
no more death, nor pain, nor sickness, nor crying, for 
the former things shall have passed away, and all things 
will be made new. And the period of the renewing of 
the earth and of mankind, for whose use and blessing 
it was intended, is Scripturally termed, "the times of 
restitution of all things, which God hath spoken by the 
mouth of all the holy prophets since the world began." 
And this restitution the Apostle Peter, speaking under 
the inspiration of the holy spirit on the day of Pentecost, 
tells us will begin at the second coming of our 
Lord Jesus. -Acts 3:19-23. 

At his first advent our Lord's mission was specifically 
to give himself as the world's ransom price, and 
secondarily to furnish evidences which to a certain class 
would be a ground for faith in him, in his teachings, 
and in his future work— to the intent that such "believers" 
of the present age might come to the Father, 
receive the adoption of sons, and the promises; and 
through faith and obedience unto self-sacrifice might 



become joint-heirs with Messiah in his great future 
work of restitution— in the work of blessing all families 
of the earth. 

Bringing the matter down to an individual one, we 
find that the nobleman received the blessing through 
faith, and that his faith was attested by his conduct. 
And so must it be with all who would be acceptable to 
God, and who would win the great prize set before us 
in the Gospel. "This is the victory that overcometh 
the world, even your faith:" but "Faith without works 
is dead." Faith cannot live without manifesting itself. 
All of our services to the Lord are valuable chiefly as 
proofs of our faith in his promises.— 1 John 5:4; Jas. 2:26; 
Heb. 11:6. 

A story is told of how a private soldier in Napoleon's 
army exercised faith in his word, and as a result 
of acting thereon received promotion to a captaincy. 
Napoleon was reviewing his army in the city of Paris, 
when the bridle dropped from his hand and the horse 
started on a gallop. A soldier leaped from the ranks, 
caught the horse and returned the bridle to Napoleon. 
The Emperor thanked him, saying, "Much obliged, 
captain." The soldier immediately responded, "Of 
what regiment, sir?" And the Emperor, pleased with 
his quickness and confidence, answered, "Of the 
Guards." The soldier immediately took his place 
amongst the officers, altho his clothes were those of a 
private and notwithstanding the fact that they ridiculed 
his faith. He believed the Emperor's words, and acted on 
that belief, and was a captain. So our Lord has given unto 
us "exceeding great and precious promises, that by these 
we might become partakers of the divine nature;" and 
those who will attain the exceeding great and precious 
things which God has in reservation for them who love 
him will be the ones who take him at his word, become 
"children of the light," and "walk in the light." Such, 
ultimately, shall be members of the great Sun of Righteousness, 
which shall arise with healing in its beams, 
to refresh and bless the world by scattering the darkness 
of sin, superstition, evil.— Matt. 13:43. 

But let us guard ourselves against the error of 
some who have great faith in themselves, and consider 
this a proof that they are of the "elect." Only the 
soldier who served as well as believed Napoleon was rewarded. 
Each should therefore ask himself— Are the 
exceeding great and precious promises to me? Are there 
conditions attached to those promises? and if so, am I 
living up to the conditions so as to make sure of my 
calling and election? 

To answer his question so as to have "full assurance 
of faith," he should search the promises— their 
significance and conditions, and then act accordingly, 
if he would win the prize: remembering our Lord's 
word's, "Not every one that saith, Lord! Lord! shall 
enter the Kingdom, but he that doeth the will of my 
Father in heaven." 



R2429 : page 29 
ENCOURAGEMENT TO FAITHFULNESS AND PROGRESS. 



"Rouse up, O heart, brooding o'er earth's broken friendships, 
Mistakes and griefs. Retrospection truly brings 
Relief at times; but to scan too oft life's pages 
Brings weariness, sapping strength thou need'st for progress. 
The past forget! As a mighty vessel swings 
To right her course, while the skies, serene and fogless, 
And calming seas, tell no tale of tempests' rages, 
So thou, O heart, whilst her pennant Mercy flings, 
Retrieve the past; and returning calm and sun 
Shall not condemn— only speed thine onward journey, 
Forgiving and forgiv'n. 

"Fret not, O heart!— not because of evil-doers. 
They soon shall cease. When their cup of crime is full 
To overflow, then the great and just Avenger, 
With girded loins, sword unsheathed and wrath enkindled, 
Will tread the press, and his blood-stained hand annul 
Their ill kept lease, and shall vanquish all the tinseled 
Recruits of sin. But, O heart, heed thy great danger. 
Besetting sins, and fair vanities which lull 
To fancied safety the listless, thou must fear, 
Lest that dread sword thee mark also for its victim, 
A reprobate despised. 

"Awake, O heart! Hurriedly from drowsy slumbers 
Arise, arise! Night is sleeping time, not day. 
Press nobly on, heeding not the faithless numbers! 
The mid-day glare tempts to quietness and shadow; 
Suave lethargy, friendly false, persuades the way 
Is soon retraced from the cooling brook and meadow; 
But he who turns from the strife and glare, and cumbers 
Himself with pleasure's delights, will ne'er essay 
The path again; and yet thou, O pilgrim weary, 
Foregoing rest, shalt be strengthened with all might: 
Thy faith, sore tried, shall develop eagles' sight, 
And penetrate, past environment, to glory 
Unspeakable, where in Heaven's effulgent light, 
Thy glorious Leader dwells." —Unknown. 



R2425 : page 30 

WHO IS JUDGING THE CHURCH? 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-A brother who gave 
a lesson here recently spoke on the judgment— 
and claimed that Christ had been judging the Church 
during this age. A number of the friends took exception 
to this. For my own part, I have studied all the texts 
on this subject, and I cannot find one text that favors 
the idea that Christ is the Judge of the church, unless 
it be Rom. 14:10;— but that is a wrong translation. 
Tischendorf, Rotherham, Revised Version and all the 
best authorities render it "the judgment seat of God." 

In 2 Cor. 5:10, the Church is said to appear before 
the judgment seat of Christ— not to be judged, 
but to receive, etc. 

All krisis (judgment) has been given into the 
hands of the Son, but the Church does not come into 
the krisis.— John 5:22,24. 

The judgment seat of Christ does not come into 
existence until his thousand-year reign begins; and the 
krisis or the krisis day does not begin until the dead 
come out of their graves, and Christ sits on his own 
throne. -John 5:29; Rev. 14:7. 

"God has appointed a day [the krisis day] in the 
which he will judge the world by that man," but where 
does it say that God has been judging the Church by 
Christ? -Acts 17:31. 

Peter says, "If ye call on the Father [not on the 
Son] who without respect of persons judgeth," etc.— 
1 Pet. 1:17. 

Christ says, "I am the Vine, ye are the branches, 
and my Father the husbandman." "Whom the Lord 
[the Father] loveth he disciplines, and scourges every 
son whom he receiveth."— John 15:1; Heb. 12:6-10. 

When the judgment of the world is spoken of the 
Greek word krisis is always used, but never krima. 
On the other hand, in speaking of the judgment of the 

R2426 : page 30 

Church the word krima is used, but never krisis. The 
Church does not come into the krisis, but it does come 
into the krima.— 1 Pet. 4:17. Compare with John 5:24. 

It is this krisis, into which the Church does not 
come, that God has placed in the hands of Christ.— 
John 5:22. 

I would like to hear from you on this matter. I 
hope this communication will find you well in every 
way, and that the Lord will continue to give you 
strength for every trial. You are surely having abundant 
practice in suffering, and ought to become quite a 
proficient sufferer. Paul says, "I glory in tribulation, 
for tribulation works out the capacity for enduring. 
And the capacity for enduring works out approval, 
and approval works out hope, and hope maketh not to 
be ashamed." 

May our dear heavenly Father continue to be with 
you alway— and that you may continually realize his 



approval and smile— is my prayer. Sister McPhail and 
I often talk to ourselves about your severe trials, and 
wonder how you have been able to bear them as you 
have. I often think of Paul's words, 'We are troubled 
on every side, yet not distressed; perplexed, but 
not in despair; persecuted, but not forsaken; cast down, 
but not destroyed," etc. (2 Cor. 4:8-11.) God's grace 
was always sufficient for him, and will be for you. 

Wishing you a happy and successful new year, 
with Christian love from Mrs. McPhail and myself to 
you and all with you, 

Your brother in Christ, M. L. McPHAIL. 

IN REPLY: DEAR BROTHER:-I am glad to know 
that I have the Christian love and sympathy of yourself 
and family. One thing in connection with my 
troubles gives me great satisfaction, namely that, repeatedly 
and carefully searching my heart, I find in it 
no hatred toward those who have been maligning me 
—no desire to render evil for evil, but on the contrary 
a desire to do them all good, if possible. There is a 
great satisfaction in this, as it affords me one evidence 
that the spirit of love has possession of my heart. I 
trust that it may never be otherwise; but that more 
and more I may become a copy of God's dear Son, 
our Lord,— "who when he was reviled, reviled not 
again; when he suffered threatened not, but committed 
his cause to him who judgeth righteously." 
(1 Pet. 2:23; 1 Cor. 4:12.) You will be glad to 
know that I have on the girdle of love; that the peace 
of God rules in my heart; and that I have a conscience 
void of offense toward God and toward men.— Col. 3:12-15; 
Acts 24:16; 1 Pet. 2:19; 3:16. 

Respecting the proposition that Christ has been 
judging the Church during this Gospel age, would say: 
The Church is the Body of Christ, and as such is collectively 
at the judgment seat of the heavenly Father. 
Our Lord Jesus is not presented to us as our Judge, 
but rather as our Advocate before the Judge, our Bridegroom, 
our Friend, our Lover, our Redeemer, our Deliverer, 
our Head, our Governor, our Guide. As the Head 
he takes the supervision of the Body, he commands, instructs, 
guides, in the affairs of his Church, and takes 
it into fellowship with himself in the building up of 
the Body of Christ in the most holy faith. If we love 
him we will keep his commandments, and he that loveth 
him will be loved of the Father. Thus his commandments 
are to us a line of judgment, rules of life, 
daily; we are in him as members of his body, who professedly 
have given him our wills,— accepting his will 
or judgment instead of our own. Nevertheless he has 
given gifts unto men, unto the Church— a measure of 
his spirit, his will, to every man to profit withal; and 
for the use of these gifts received from our Lord Jesus 
we are accountable to him. And our use or misuse of 
these will constitute a judgment with which he will 
have to do, as represented in the parables of "The 



Pounds" and "The Talents." I presume these were 
the thoughts which the Brother had in mind, when he 
spoke of our Lord Jesus as judging the Church during 
this Gospel age. As the head judges or criticises the 
body, succors it, shields it, supervises its affairs, so 
does Christ with the Church, which is his Body. 

Seemingly you have overlooked the Greek word, 
krino, which is also rendered judgment, and which occurs 
more times than krisis and krima both together, 
in the New Testament. 

Strong (in substance) defines these words thus:— 

Krisis— Decision, for or against. Justice. 

Krima— Decision, in respect to crime. 

Krino— "To distinguish, decide, try," etc. 

Krino is used in referring to the judgment (trial) 
of the Millennial age when the Church (head and 
body) will be the judges. -See Matt. 19:28; Luke 22:30; 
John 12:48; Acts 17:31; 1 Cor. 4:5; 6:2,3. 

The same word, krino is used in attributing that 
coming judgment to God.— See Acts 7:7; Rom. 3:6; 
Heb. 3:10; 1 Pet. 1:17. 

R2426 : page 3 1 

These seemingly contradictory statements are 
made harmonious by two other texts in which this 
same word krino is used— thus: "God shall judge 
[krino] the secrets of men by Jesus Christ" (Rom. 2:16.) 
God "hath appointed a day in the which he will judge 
[krino] the world in righteousness by that man whom 
hath ordained;"— the Christ, head and body "one new 
man."— Acts 17:31. 

From this standpoint— of "God the judge of all," 
we need not be surprised if we find not only that the 
world's judgment (trial) by Jehovah is committed to 
the well beloved Son, but the Church's judgment 
(testing, trial) also. Hence our Lord's statement, 
"The Father judgeth [krino] no man, but hath committed 
all judgment [krisis] unto the Son." (John 5:22.) 
This judging in the Church is not only referred 
to in the parables of the Pounds and Talents, etc., but 
the Apostle particularizes respecting it in 2 Thes. 2:8-12. 
And here the statements respecting the Father's 
part and the Son's part are so intertwined as to prove 
that they are united in the one work of judgment— 
of the Father, by the Son. In this text krino is rendered 
"might be damned." 

Again, "ye that are spiritual" are to take part 
in the work of judging the Church now;— especially 
each one is to judge himself and help each other to look 
into the perfect law of liberty (Love) by which all are 
now being judged (Jas. 2:12) under the New Covenant. 
"If we would judge [dia-krino— "thoroughly judge"] 
ourselves, we should not be judged [krino]. But when 
we are judged [krino] of the Lord we are chastened, 
that we should not be condemned [kata-krino— "judged 



down"] with the world." 

It is in harmony with the above that the Apostle 
declares our Lord Jesus "the Lord, the righteous 
Judge," who will give him his crown of life (2 Tim. 4:8); 
and in harmony with this thought that the 
Church, the Lord's body, is being judged now, under 
his supervision, and is not (directly) in the Father's 
hands for judgment, is the Apostle's expression in 
Hebrews 10:31, "It is a fearful thing to fall into the 
hands of the living God." To be judged by Jehovah 
directly, none of the imperfect race of Adam could 
stand— all would fall under his just sentence: but under 
the New Covenant, God is dealing with the Church 
now as "the body of Christ"— so long as we severally 
abide under the robe of Christ's righteousness, our 
wedding garment,— not imputing our trespasses unto 
us, but unto our "Head" who died for us. Nevertheless, 
we (the Church) are "accepted in the Beloved" 
in a manner different from the world: they will not be 
accepted at all, nor have any intercourse with the 
Father until the close of their trial at the close of the 
Millennium.- 1 Cor. 15:24-28. 

Similarly Jehovah is the Creator of all things; 
yet he does this by proxy through him who was "the 
beginning of the creation of God." (John 1:1.) Likewise 
it is written, "They shall be all taught of God," 
yet Jesus was the Teacher sent of God; and we are in 
the school of Christ, learning of him. 

With much Christian love, very truly your brother 
and servant in the Lord, —THE EDITOR. 



page 3 1 

LETTERS FROM DISTANT COLABORERS. 



Massachusetts. 
DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-It is with pleasure 
that I write a few lines to you. I should have written 
before, had not sickness prevented. I am glad to say 
that I have nearly recovered from it, and hope to be 
in the colporteur work again very soon, and my purpose 
is to stay in the work just as long as I can do so 
and keep out of debt. Not having any family duties 
to keep me from doing so, I see that it is my duty as 
well as my privilege to be thus engaged; for I realize 
that it is a very important part of the harvest work. 
How much the truth and knowledge derived from reading 
the DAWNS have done for me, the dear Lord and 
myself only know. My prayer is that I may ever be 
faithful to the truth. I will write to you again when 
I am ready to start into the work. With greetings of 
the season I remain, your brother in the dear Lord, 



THOMAS BRIDGFORD. 



Kansas. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I take this opportunity 
to drop you a line, to inform you that I feel somewhat 
better; my lungs are not nearly so sore as they 
were, so I hope soon to be able to be out again in the 
work. I feel that I should go to Oklahoma, as I ministered 
to some of our Lord's dear children there before 
I came fully out into the light of present truth; and I 
believe I shall be the means in our Lord's hands to 
seal some of them with the present truth. I have had 
two letters from there the past week, also one from 

in Kansas; they are rejoicing in the truth as 

revealed in the DAWNS. Let me quote from one of these: 

"I have read my WATCH TOWER and MILLENNIAL 
DAWN, VOL. I., and commenced on VOL. II. I am just 
surprised to see the grand truths so plain, and wonder 
that I never saw them before. There has been a large 
book opened, and a flood of light has poured in upon 
this benighted and prejudiced mind, till I can only say, 
it's wonderful; and that does not express it so that 
others can understand it. I wish I had the power to 
tell it to every person so that they could understand it." 

Brother Russell, in regard to the WATCH TOWER 
for 1899, 1 do not want to miss an issue, as it always 
has just that food which I need most. I pray that our 
Lord's choicest blessings may rest on you and all your 
colaborers in the WATCH TOWER office, and I would 
kindly ask you to remember me in your daily prayer 
(as I always do you, night and morning), that I may 
have wisdom and humility enough to show forth his 
death and resurrection. 

Your brother in Christ, FRED. H. ANTHONY. 



R2426 : page 31 

Canada. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I have just to-night 
received the Christmas number of the TOWER, and have 
scanned it through hurriedly, intending to study it tomorrow. 
In renewing my TOWER subscription, I wish 
to write to you more particularly. 

You know well my sentiments towards yourself, 
but on this anniversary of the Savior's birth, a grand 
and happy time, I think it is fitting for me to express 
them once again. For years and years I hungered for 
truth, and longed to know and understand the Bible, 
and nobody gave to me the spiritual food. I searched 

R2427 : page 32 



the Bible for myself, and the more contradictory it 
grew: and the preachers never tried to explain it to me. 

At length God answered my prayers and gave me 
the understanding of the glorious Gospel, and for his 
great goodness in sending me the truth I cannot love 
and serve him as I would; I can only ask him to accept 
such services as I have and to count them perfect 
through the Savior's blood. 

It was through you that this glad tidings came, 
and I know how you must have loved me, for the Lord 
to have used you: "He that desireth the office of a 
bishop desireth a good thing;" and I know that you 
desired it in the real Scriptural way; that is to say, 
you said in your heart, "The Lord's people are hungry 
and thirsty. Lord, I wish to 'serve' them." And 
truly, you have done so. In all my intercourse I have 
never known you otherwise than as you sign yourself, 
—a brother and a servant: and therefore I send my 
heartfelt thanks. 

My feet had well nigh slipped, after I had received 
the truth, for I was growing cold and losing my first 
love, and again your loving words helped me and put 
new life into me, and just lately you have honored me 
by giving me an opportunity to share with you the 
work of feeding the Lord's sheep. It is a grand and 
glorious privilege, and most heartily do I thank God 
and the Lord for giving me this opportunity. 

With regard to the "Good Hopes" I thoroughly 
endorse your words; no need is there to urge those to 
give who know this truth, for it is so satisfying that 
we long to tell it to others and, if we have money, to 
use it in the spreading of the "Good News." God 
willing, I purpose devoting to this the interest accruing 
to me this coming year from the money loaned to 
the Tract Society, and I have every reason to hope I 
shall be able to do so. 

Your brother in the Lord, W. HOPE HAY. 

[The above is from the dear Brother whose donation 
of $10,000 to the Tract Fund was noted in our issue 
of Dec. 15, '96. He has since then deposited with 
us as a loan, at low interest, money which he is not 
certain if he can spare. He is going out now as one 
of the "Pilgrims." May the Lord bless and "water" 
him while he thus serves the "flock!"— EDITOR.] 



Scotland. 
DEAR BROTHER:-We wish you a very bright, 
happy and prosperous new year. Enclosed find order 
for four pounds, three shillings. We think possibly 
your own comforts are not sufficiently attended to, and 
we think you should take two pounds of enclosed for 
your own special wants. It is a small thing for us, the 
recipients of so many spiritual blessings by God's goodness 
through you, to repay you with carnal things. 



The Lord himself will abundantly reward you. May 
you never fail or be discouraged, till all the will of the 
Lord has been fully wrought out in you, and by you. 
We know a little of the difficulties of the fight of faith, 
and of enduring hardness as good soldiers of Christ; 
therefore we send our hearty greetings, and deepest 
love and sympathy. 

The TOWERS continually come, laden with blessing. 
We have by means of them, and especially in our 
busy work in worldly affairs, a rich spiritual feast every 
time. The last one, Dec. 1, was particularly interesting 
and blessed. Some of the readers here say that the 
facts recorded are merely to bring out the points of the 
truth, and that we must not think of it as an actual 
reality. We contended, saying, all the facts of the 
case— the train journey, the Presbyterian minister, the 
conversation, his conversion, his resolve to preach the 
fuller Gospel— were all an actual reality, tho written 
up in proper form, for a TOWER article. Could you 
kindly let us know which is the case, and if possible 
who is "B." 

We are still trusting that the Lord will open up 
our way that we may yet get free to distribute the glorious 
truth ere the dark night closes in. We have 
started (a month ago) a "Dawn Circle Bible Class." 

I am yours in our blessed Lord, C. N. HOUSTON. 

REPLY: DEAR BROTHER:-I am always glad to 
hear from you. I congratulate you that the past year 
brought you so many opportunities for serving the 
truth— by holding meetings, by writing articles in defense 
of the truth for the public press, by the using of 
your various little vacations from business in colporteuring 
the DAWN and circulating tracts: and I thank 
God on your behalf that you have the will to thus serve 
both the Chief Shepherd and his sheep. 

I am glad to know that the things pertaining to 
our Lord's cause are so first in your heart, and your 
business so secondary, that you are seeking release 
from the latter in such a way as will permit more and 
more of your time and energy to go to the former. I 
am sure that our Lord is pleased with your efforts to 
do what your hand has found to do; and I feel sure he 
will continue to open the door of opportunity before 
you in proportion as he sees you humble and faithful. 
I trust that the present year may be a very blessed one 
to you and to all of the Lord's faithful. 

I thank you most heartily for the proffered (L.2) 
two pounds sterling for personal use: but as my wants 
are at present well supplied, I am sure you will take 
no offence at my declining it as a personal matter and 
joining with you in making it a part of the heavenly 
treasure by covering it into the Tract Society's funds. 
Your other contributions to this fund are greatly appreciated 
also, dear brother. Your orders have had 
attention. 

Respecting the discussion of The Bible vs. Evolution 



in our Dec. 1, '98, issue: It is an ideal sketch, intended 
as a hint to brethren and sisters respecting good 
opportunities and methods for preaching the truth to 
others when on a journey. Nevertheless, about nineteen-twentieths 
of that dialogue (almost word for word) 
actually occurred on our homeward journey returning 
from the Council Bluffs Convention. "Betha" represents 
the Editor. All articles in the WATCH TOWER 
are editorials, unless otherwise indicated. 
Very truly your brother and servant in the Lord, 
--THE EDITOR. 



page 33 
VOL. XX. FEBRUARY 1, 1899. No. 3. 



CONTENTS. 



"Are Christians Deserting Lower 

New York?" 35 

"A Study of a Remarkable 

Church Situation" 35 

Judgment— Krino, Krisis, Krima 38 

Present Truth in Europe 41 

Is Present Truth Unreasonable? 42 

Poem: Aspirations of a New Convert 44 

"Greater Works than These" 44 

Feeding the Hungry 47 

Special Items: The Date for the 

Memorial Supper, etc 34 

page 34 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 56-60 ARCH STREET, ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, N.Y. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age or accident, or other 
adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, if they 
send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting the 
paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list 
constantly. 



R2429 : page 34 

THE DATE FOR THE MEMORIAL SUPPER. 



IN our last issue we noted that the Hebrew Calendar seemed 
this year to disagree with the original methods of reckoning 
(and we have experienced similar difficulties in the past). Since 
then we have interviewed Rabbi Mayer on this subject. His 
explanation is that the Jews had great difficulty in securing 
uniformity of date for the Passover, because, after the watchers 
had noted the new moon, the fact required to be signalled by 
fires from hill tops, and by messengers sent to various communities, 



etc. Consequently, about fifteen hundred years ago, in 

the fourth century, Hillel's Calendar was adopted, and it has 

been followed since. 

We are to bear in mind two important matters relating to the 
date of the Passover. (1) It was to be after the Spring Equinox 
(yet not too long after), so that the 16th of Nisan, the date 
of our Lord's resurrection, could be provided with a sheaf of 
the first-fruits of the harvest— a type of "Christ, the first-fruits" 
born from the dead. (2) The lamb was to be killed at the full 
of the moon, as representing the fulness of God's favor under 
the Law Covenant, to the Jews, which culminated there, and 
which was followed by the rejection of that nation and their 
waning in accordance with their prayer, "His blood be upon 
us and upon our children." 

The decision regarding the month to be esteemed the first 
month was seemingly left to the Elders of Israel, subject to the 
limitations foregoing; and it appears that they did not always 
wait until the Spring Equinox, and then after that wait for the 
following new moon, to begin counting Nisan. (To have done 
so this year would have been to begin Nisan as late as April 
1 1th.) On the contrary, knowing when to expect the equinox, 
they accepted as the beginning of this first month, the beginning 
of their year, the appearance of the new moon whose full 
would be about the harvest time, and after the equinox. And 
this evidently is the rule which we should follow. 

Following this rule, we find that the full moon after the 
equinox this year will be on March 27th, which therefore should 
be recognized as the 14th of Nisan, the anniversary of our Lord's 
death: and according to Jewish reckoning the 14th would begin 
on Sunday, March 26th, at six o'clock, P.M., the anniversary 
of the Last Supper. From this it will be observed that the 
date given in our last issue was in error, as well as the Jewish 
date, and we are glad to have opportunity of correcting the 
matter thus early. 

Some will doubtless notice that almanacs give the date of the 
new moon as March 1 1th, but if the fourteen days were counted 
from that date it would not bring us to the full of the moon. 
We assume, therefore, that the Jews, instead of accepting the 
dark moon for the new moon, waited until a sufficiency of the 
moon would be visible to the eye, and counted from that date. 
So counting now, the new moon would be expected to be visible 
on the night of the 13th and morning of the 14th of March, 
which would be Nisan 1st. 



R2427 : page 35 
"ARE CHRISTIANS DESERTING LOWER NEW YORK?" 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I send you herewith 

a page taken from the New York Herald, 

Jan. 8th, the principal part of which is devoted to— 



"A STUDY OF A REMARKABLE CHURCH SITUATION 
IN LOWER NEW YORK CITY." 



The array of facts showing a steady and uniform 
surrender of ground by the churches, notwithstanding 
the increase of population, should indeed prove an astounding 
revelation to the "Christians" appealed to. 
And the fact that these matters are promulgated by one 
of the eminent leaders of the New York pulpit, and 
are verified and added to by the Herald's investigations, 
makes the statements well nigh indisputable. 

It seems to me that the "study" of the conditions 
here presented lies not so much in the apparent, surface 
truth presented, namely, that south of 14th street 
the "church" would appear to be doomed to practical 
extinction, as it does in an inquiry into the results 
which may be expected from this moving and movable 
church in its later surroundings. 

The mistake of abandoning this field can and 
may easily be remedied, if the conscience of the powers 
that control the situation be sufficiently deeply pricked. 
But the causes which suggested, and eventually accomplished, 
such sweeping changes are still at work 
in their new abode, and are accomplishing still other 
changes. 

It is to be noted that the new field of these old 
"churches" is to-day the fashionable quarter of the city; 
and of course it is to be expected that these old "churches" 
are called upon to cater to the new requirements. 
Accordingly we are not surprised to learn that one 
such requirement is EXCLUSIVENESS. 

In the old abode, the idea would not have been 
tolerated; but conditions are now changed, and the 
new environment is such, that what before seemed to 
be sinful may now be regarded as an aid to the upholding, 
if not the upbuilding, of the edifice. 

Pursuing this thought, it would be interesting if 
there could be collected, for purposes of comparison, 
the subjects discussed, and texts preached from, in these 
older edifices, in days gone by, and those now made use 
of in the new fields. I am convinced the relation would 
be as startling, almost, as the facts here given. 

When we reflect upon these things, can we wonder 
that our friend, Mr. Moody, in his last evangelizing 
work in New York city, told its ministers and 
people that if Jesus Christ should appear in person 
in one of their "churches," he would be driven out, 
because they would not recognize him! 

Since reading the statement of facts alluded to, 
my attention has been called to another ministerial occurrence, 
which has its bearing on this particular line 
of "study." 

An eminent D.D. of the metropolis, with a big 
church, fat living, well liked, and ostensibly doing a 



good work, is offered a professorship in one of our 

seats of learning. Rumor has it that he wants to accept 

it. Meeting a friend of the aforesaid D.D., I 

took occasion to allude to this call and its probable acceptance. 

"Yes," said this friend, "you know 

is not patterned after the old style preacher; he is a 
club man, something of a sportsman, can take his little 
toddy, and is 'hail, fellow, well met' generally. He is 
very popular, and is beloved by his congregation, 
which is fighting hard against this call. But he has 
literary aspirations, and consequently favors it." Thus 
we see at work the same underlying evil which succeeded 
in driving the "church" out of the down-town 
vineyard. 

R2428 : page 36 

The student of history, noting such potent and 
disturbing events as here stated, discovered to-day in 
New York, sees them to-morrow reflected in London, 
events, tho peculiar to a locality, having at the same 
time a universal significance; he hears the alarm sounded, 
not by the pessimist, but by the brains and conservative 
judgment of the church as it is understood to-day, 
and cannot fail to see the inevitable trend of events. 

Can these conditions be changed? Reason answers, 
about as easily as the heathen are to-day being 
changed or converted. It must be obvious that the 
powers which now obtain are as impotent to work the 
desired change (if indeed it be even desired) in the 
one case as in the other. What a profoundly sad outlook 
must the array of facts, which give rise to these 
and cognate thoughts, produce in this, the closing year 
of the century. 

Sad must they be to the student of events, unless 
indeed he be also a student of God's Word, and can 
discern his times and seasons, and their peculiar events. 
Then what a change! As one season alternates another 
with precise regularity, each doing the work allotted 
to it, so he sees the conditions now prevailing fulfilling 
their purpose, only to give way to still other conditions 
in a later development of God's plan. 

He looks ahead to that future great epoch in the 
history of time, which is to take the place of the present, 
and by faith he realizes some of the changes then 
to be established. Among these changes, he is assured 
that "an highway shall be there, and a way, and it 
shall be called, The way of holiness;" and "the way-faring 
men, tho fools, shall not err therein."— Isa. 35:8. 

As one of those who are quite ready and willing 
to note the signs of the times, tho more especially because 
he is assured by the Word of truth that "weeping 
may endure for a night, but joy cometh in the morning;" 
and confident in the comforting assurance that in 
that day (Millennial morning) pauper "churches" will 
be unknown and unnecessary, because the way of holiness 



shall be open to all, and all shall then know the 
Lord from the least unto the greatest (Jer. 31:34), I 
remain, in the common faith, 

Faithfully yours, JOHN W. ALEXANDER. 

Extracts from the Herald are as follows:— 

"ARE CHRISTIANS DESERTING LOWER NEW YORK?" 



"Dr. Peters says so in a sermon, and the Herald 
here shows that twenty-three churches have been abandoned 
or moved from below Forty-eighth street in the 
last ten years. 

'"The church, instead of adjusting herself practically 
to the changed conditions in civilization in New 
York, moves up town and puts on style. ...A church 
is located with reference to clientele. So much money 
must be paid to support it, and it must locate where 
the rich live, and, as a result, those needing the saving 
influence of the Church most are neglected;'— says 
the Rev. Dr. Madison C. Peters. 

"This is a startling arraignment of the church in 
New York; yet the Rev. Dr. Peters quotes statistics 
which bear out what he says. The church in the Borough 
of Manhattan is moving up town, and the lower 
part of the island is every year becoming more churchless. 
An investigation made by the Herald shows that 
within the last ten years seventeen houses of worship 
have moved up to the less thickly populated parts of 
the city, where the wealthy live, and six churches below 
Fourteenth street have gone out of existence. In 
the region from the Battery to Forty-eighth street 
twenty-three churches have in ten years either moved 
up town or have become extinct, and little has been 
left in their place. 

'"The Christian forces at work below Fourteenth 
street,' to again quote the words of the Rev. Dr. Peters, 
'with a population of 700,000, are not as much 
as they were twenty-five years ago. Altho during 
that time over 200,000 persons have moved in below 
Fourteenth street, twenty churches have moved out. 
One Jewish synagogue and two Catholic churches have 
been added, so that if we count the churches of every 
kind there are seventeen fewer than twenty-five years 
ago.' 

"It will be seen by consulting the table of churches 
which have moved up town that all of them belong to 
Protestant denominations, with the exception of one 
Catholic organization. There have been from time to 
time utterances from various pulpits denouncing the 
lack of fervor shown by the Protestant churches. It 
is not an optimistic view of the work of the church 
among the masses who live in the lower part of the 
city which is drawn from an analysis of the uptown 
movement of the churches. 



"There are many who maintain that the churches 
are doing missionary work in the fields which they 
have left. With the exception of the efficient work of 
Trinity Parish, of the Protestant Episcopal Church, 
and the work of the Catholics, this field in the lower 
part of the city is practically left to the sower of tares. 
...There is no escape from statistics. The majority 
of those who dwell in the lower part of the island are 
churchless. South of Fourteenth street there is one 
church to every 4,732 persons. In that section there 
are districts where there is one saloon to every 111 
persons. 

"In discussing the causes of the movement of the 
churches, Dr. Peters, the pastor of the Bloomington 
Reformed Church, told me that the fashionable churches 
were becoming fashionable clubs. 

'"Let me give you two examples of what I mean,' 
said he. 'A man who belonged to one of the uptown 
churches told me recently that in his church there was 
only one poor man, and "he a Scotchman who could 
not be snubbed into leaving." Another man, a member 
of a church of the exclusive uptown kind, told me 
that in his church the pew rents were made so high 
that only a "certain class" could come.'... 

'"Statistics show that in comparison with the 
growth of population here the Presbyterian Church in 
this city has lost eighty per cent, in the last twenty-five 
years. The Methodist Church, supposed to be 

R2428 : page 37 

the most aggressive force in Protestantism, has in the 
last twenty years increased only twenty-five per cent., 
whereas in proportion to the increase of population in 
the borough it should have increased eighty-five per 
cent. The Dutch Reformed Church has in the same 
proportion lost ten per cent. The only Protestant 
church doing anything like holding its own here is the 
Episcopal Church. That is largely owing to the fact 
that much of the enormous wealth of Trinity Corporation 
is used in work among the poor. The census of 
1890 gave the Catholic population of the then city of 
New York as 380,000. If the Catholic Church had 
held her own she should have had 900,000." 



Some one failing to grasp the situation will perhaps 
say or think— "Well, you criticize others, but 
what are you doing in the line of mission-work?" 

We reply that it is not the actions of these "churches" 
that we find fault with, but the inconsistency of 
their actions and professions. These denominations, one 
and all, profess in their published creeds that they exist 
for the very purpose of converting the world; and 
that all not converted by them will suffer a horrible 



eternity: and straightway they leave the world to what 
they say is its fate, to meet for essays, lectures, music 
and social pleasures— as "social clubs,"— called 
"churches." 

Our views of the divine plan for human salvation 
are very different from theirs: and hence the question 
is not, are we following their theories more consistently 
than they follow them? but, are we following 
our own conception of the divine plan consistently? 
—are we practicing what we preach and profess to believe, 
faithfully? We trust that every regular WATCH 
TOWER reader can answer promptly,— I am doing with 
my might what my hand finds to do, in harmony with 
my understanding of the divine will concerning me. 
And if any cannot so answer, promptly, we trust he 
will begin at once such "reasonable service." 

We hold that none are in danger of eternal torment 
—that the very thought of such an unjust punishment 
for sin is in antagonism to God's revealed plan, 
rightly interpreted, utterly repugnant to "the spirit 
of the truth," "the spirit of Christ," "the holy spirit." 

We hold that ignorance neither justifies nor condemns 
—either in New York or Africa or elsewhere; 
but that knowledge alone brings blessings and corresponding 
responsibilities. Nor do we understand that 
all knowledges bring grave responsibilities and are 
savors of life unto life or of death unto death; for but 
one knowledge, one science, is thus made a test in the 
Scriptures— the knowledge of the way, the truth and 
the life; the knowledge of the true God, the God of 
Justice, Wisdom, Love and Power. 

We hold that the masses in down town New York, 
not possessing this knowledge, but being blinded in 
their minds by the "god of this world" (2 Cor. 4:4), 
are not on trial now, as are we who have this knowledge, 
but will have their trial by and by, during the 
Millennial age, at the same time with the "heathen" 
millions of Asia and Africa;— after Satan has been 
"bound" and deceives the peoples no more (Rev. 20:1-4), 
after the Lord and his elect Church have begun 
the reign of righteousness. And we hold the same to 
be true of their polished and wealthy and better educated 

R2429 : page 37 

neighbors who have moved up-town; and who, 
"blinded," mistakenly call themselves "churches." 
We hold that the Lord's Church, the only one to 
which the name ecclesia, body or church, is properly 
applicable, is so insignificant, so unostentatious, and 
comparatively so poor in this world's riches, that it is 
not recognized nor recognizable from the worldly standpoint. 
It is neither man-made nor man-ruled; nor 
are its members enrolled on earth, but in heaven. 
(Heb. 12:23.) Its head and bishop is the Lord, its law 
is his Word: it has but one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism; 



and it is built upon the testimonies of the holy 
apostles and prophets— Jesus Christ himself being its 
chief corner-stone. 

We hold that, while neither the masses of lower 
New York nor the classes of upper New York constitute 
this Church, some in both may be eligible to its 
membership and blessings— "even as many as the Lord 
our God shall call," and no more. And we hold that 
in New York, as elsewhere, many more have been called 
than will be chosen;— because the call being to a very 
high post of service and honor, God has made the way 
to it narrow— so narrow that few find it, and fewer 
still care to walk therein after they have found it; a 
way of self-sacrifice, self-denial. 

In harmony with this our faith and knowledge 
respecting the divine plan, we are neither sitting in 
the seat of the scorners, drawing nigh to God with our 
lips, while our hearts are far from him (rebelling 
against him as monstrously unjust and unloving— as 
blasphemously misrepresented in the creeds of Christendom), 
nor are we excitedly and frantically with 
drums and tambourines and "War Crys" striving to save 
from eternal torment fellow creatures— under a theory 
that God would horribly and unjustly misuse them, 
but for our efforts. 

On the contrary, we are endeavoring to do as 
Jesus and the apostles and the early Church did, before 
the errors ("tares") of false doctrine were planted 
by the great Adversary. We are striving to find those 
who are not wholly blinded by the god of this world; 
—the "called," those who have "ears to hear," among 
the "masses" and among the "classes;" we are seeking 
to find, and to explain to them the way of the Lord 
more perfectly. And whether they hear and obey, or 

R2429 : page 38 

whether they forbear, we doubt not for a moment that all 

the gracious purposes of our all-wise God will be accomplished, 

—that the foreordained number of the "copies 

of his Son" will be completed, and that then these as 

the body of Christ, "the Seed of Abraham," as God's 

glorious Kingdom, shall rule and relieve from blindness 

all mankind and bless and uplift all willing to obediently 

return to God's favor through the great Redeemer. 

Above all we are seeking now, because it is the 
"harvest" time, the time of preparation for the marriage 
of the Lamb, to prepare ourselves, and each the 
other, for that great event which shall complete our 
joy and usher in the world's blessings;— that we may 
be in heart (and as nearly as attainable in the flesh 
also) "without spot or wrinkle or any such thing."— 
Eph. 5:23; Rev. 19:7. 

Additionally, we are sympathetic toward all secondary 
influences of our Light— moral reforms. 



R2430 : page 38 

JUDGMENT--KRINO, KRISIS, KRIMA. 



QUESTION, (a) In the last WATCH TOWER we 

note that you refer to krino as having the 

significance of judgment. Do you refer to its significance 

in Greek? I do not find it rendered "judgment" 

in our Common Version English Bible. 

Answer, (a) Certainly, krino is a Greek word, 
and its significance in that language was what we 
sought to present. The word occurs more times than 
krisis and krima together: it is variously rendered in 
our English common version Bible,— Judge, Conclude, 
Condemn, Decree, Determine, Damned, Ordain, Sentence. 
The thought in every instance is that of judgment 
or trial. This is the word used by our Lord when 
referring to the honor to be given to the apostles, "Ye 
shall sit on twelve thrones judging the twelve tribes of 
Israel." It is the same word used by the Apostle Paul 
when referring to the future work of the Church, saying, 
"Know ye not that the saints shall judge [krino] 
the world? and if the world shall be judged [krino] by 
you, ...know ye not that we shall judge [krino] angels?" 
-Matt. 19:28; Luke 22:30; 1 Cor. 6:2,3. 

Question, (b) Do you consider the definitions of 
krisis, krima and krino, given from Strong's Concordance, 
reliable? 

Answer, (b) Yes. You can convince yourself of 
this fact by noting the uses of these words in the New 
Testament. Any definition at variance with those 
given could not be applied to every text in which these 
words occur. This is the best way to test any definition, 
whoever gives it: test it by the Scriptural usage 
of the word. 

We will give here Liddell and Scott's Greek Lexicon 
definition of these words (our comments in 
brackets):— 

Krima. "A decision, decree, judgment"— in 
New Testament usage, "Condemnation, sentence." 
[This word seems not to contain the thought of trial, 
except in the past. It relates to and signifies sentence.] 

Krisis. "(1) A separating, putting asunder: 
hence a choosing. (2) A deciding, determining, judging, 
judgment." [This word includes the thought of 
trial culminating in a decision that is final, irrevocable. 

Krino. "(1) To separate, part, put asunder; 
hence also to order, arrange. (2) To inquire, search 
into, investigate." [This word is full of the thought 
of trial, or testing, or criticism; but it does not imply 
finality of decision.] 

Indeed, krino is the root word from which krima 



and krisis are derived. (1) Krino relates to probationary 
trials and testings and corrections (now, and 
in the coming age). (2) Krisis points out a decision 
or a time of decision. The Jewish "harvest" was such 
a time of decision or krisis to Fleshly Israel: the present 
"harvest" is a time of decision or krisis to nominal 
Spiritual Israel. And the entire Millennial age will 
be a time of decision or krisis for mankind in general, 
ending the krino or probation of that age with a "harvest" 
time of decision or krisis. (3) Krima relates 
to the final and irrevocable sentence upon evil doers. 
Compare these definitions with the New Testament 
usage of these words and be fully convinced. 

Question, (c) If "the Father judgeth [krino] no 
man, but hath committed all judgment [krisis] unto 
the Son, so that all may honor the Son even as they 
honor the Father," would it not imply that there is 
no judgment of any kind in progress by the Father directly 
during this Gospel age? 

Answer, (c) Yes. 

Question, (d) And if our Lord Jesus has nothing 
whatever to do with the judgment or correction of the 
Church, but must wait and begin his judgment (krisis) 
with the world, and the Millennial age, would it not 
imply that the Gospel Church is not on judgment 
(trial) at all during this Gospel age? And would not 
such a conclusion be an unreasonable one? 

Answer, (d) Yes;— to both questions. The only 
solution to the problem, the only way to harmonize 
these statements of Scripture, was, we believe, offered 
in our last issue. 

We there showed that ALL krisis or decision has 
been committed to the Son, but the Son does not exercise 
that krisis authority until the harvest, the end of 
this age. He then exercises krisis power in respect to 
the Church and the world— rewarding his faithful and 

R2430 : page 39 

bringing a great time of trouble upon the unfaithful of 
the Church and the world. We are already in this 
krisis time— thousands are "falling"— "Who shall be 
able to stand?" The humble, faithful few only, 
"shall never fall, but an entrance shall be ministered 
unto them abundantly, into the everlasting Kingdom 
of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ." Thus says the 
Apostle of this class, "Love has been perfected in us 
that we may have boldness in the day of judgment"— 
krisis.— 1 John 4:17. 

Altho all judgment (decision, krisis) was committed 
to the Son, there is only one text which even implies 
any exercise of krisis judgment (decision) by our 
Lord during this age: and that is the Apostle's statement, 
"Some men's sins are open beforehand, going 
before to judgment [krisis]." (1 Tim. 5:24.) This 
would seem to imply that, altho the Lord's decision respecting 



the majority of the Church will not be manifested 
until the "harvest" of this age, yet there have 
been exceptions to this rule; and the Apostle mentions 
such exceptional cases. (Heb. 6:4-6; 10:26-29.) But 
the casting of many into outer darkness now, because 
of unfaithfulness to the Word of the Lord or its spirit 
of love, is not thus exceptional; for the time of krisis has 
arrived;— yea, and it will mean a final sentence (krima) 
to some; for, as the Apostle declares, "The time is 
come that krima [sentence] must begin with the house 
of God."-l Pet. 4:17. 

But respecting the judgment, criticism or inspection 
represented by the word krino: it does not wait 
for the "harvest," but has been in progress throughout 
this entire age, in the Church. It is practically 
the only kind of judgment that has thus been in operation. 
It was respecting this judgment that our Lord 
Jesus declared, "The Father judgeth [krino] no man." 
(John 5:22.) Who, then, exercises this krino judgment? 
We answer that the krino or trial or probationary 
judgment, as well as the krisis or decision, is committed 
of the Father to the Son. Yea, all power in 
heaven and in earth, as it may relate to mankind, has 
been committed to the Son— the Father rests the entire 
matter in his hands.— Heb. 4:10; John 5:17. 

The Lord gives us his Word, his teaching, as representing 
himself, saying, "Whosoever shall be ashamed 
of me and my words, of him shall the Son of Man be 
ashamed, when he shall come in his own glory." (Luke 9:26.) 
The teaching of the great Teacher and of 
his chosen twelve apostles is to be the kriterion or rule 
of judgment (krino) to his followers, who by their faithfulness 
or unfaithfulness to those teachings may be 
said to judge (krino) themselves. The Apostle thus 
uses the word krino to some whom he addressed, saying, 
"Seeing ye judge [krino] yourselves unworthy of 
eternal life." (Acts 13:46.) Again, to the Church 
the Apostle says, "For if we would judge [dia-krino— 
thoroughly examine, criticise, judge] ourselves, we 
should not be judged [krino]; but being judged [krino] 
by the Lord, we are chastened that we should not 
be condemned with [kata-krino— on trial with] the 
world." (1 Cor. 11:31,32.) Does the Apostle here 
refer to the Heavenly Father under the name Lord, 
or to our Lord Jesus? To the latter unquestionably; 
for his words must be in accord with the words of our 
Lord Jesus, "The Father judgeth [krino] NO MAN." 
This teaches us that in addition to his Word our Lord 
gives a personal supervision or correction or disciplining 
to those who at heart are seeking to walk in his 
footsteps. 

Moreover, the Apostle exercised this kind of judgment 
(krino) in the Church as an Apostle, as a special 
representative of our Lord Jesus, and in his name. 
We read, "I verily, as absent in body, but present in 
spirit, have judged [krino] already, as tho I were present, 



concerning him that hath done this deed." (1 Cor. 5:3-5.) 
He reproves the Church for not judging and 
reproving such persons of their number as were known 
to be living in sin: and he most positively enjoins such 
judgment and that those thus found guilty be no longer 
associated with as "brethren." Then, answering 
a misunderstanding of his previous message— that they 
were to withdraw from evil doers not professing Christ, 
he says (we paraphrase his words),— It is not my business 
to judge (krino) those who are outside the Church 
and name of Christ. My complaint of you is that you 
neglect to judge (krino) those who are within the pale 
of Christian brotherhood. Those outside the Church 
God will judge (krino— in his own time and manner 
—Acts 17:3 1). Expel from your midst evil doers.— 
See 1 Cor. 5:9-13. 

This thought that the Church is in duty bound to 
look after the outward conduct of those it recognizes 
as "brethren," and to (krino, judge) settle points of 
misunderstanding amongst themselves, is clearly set 
forth by the Apostle in his discourse following the 
above reproof. (1 Cor. 6:1-6.) He points out that 
the Lord's people should not think of going to law before 
the courts of the world to settle differences between 
"brethren." Here he uses the word krino (judge, 
examine) and asks if there is not in their midst a single 
person in whose wisdom they could rely, and ironically 
suggests that if they have lost confidence in the 
leaders whom the Lord has "set" in the Church for 
such like purposes, they should at least choose as judges 
the least esteemed in the Church as preferable to a court 
of unbelievers. Thus would he shame them and urge 
that if they had no confidence in each other, they at 
least do not manifest more confidence in outsiders, but 
preferably suffer wrong and injustice, rather than dishonor 

R2431 : page 40 

the Church and her Head, the Lord. But all 

this only proved that they had not been careful to judge 

(krino) and to disfellowship the outwardly impure and 

unrighteous. 

This judging by the Church of its own faithful is 
by virtue of the spirit of the Lord in the Church, as 
the Apostle declared (1 Cor. 5:4); the thought is that 
our Lord is in a church of even two or three met in 
his name, to direct such as seek his guidance. Hence 
we read, "And he gave some apostles, and some prophets, 
...pastors and teachers and evangelists,... for 
the edifying of the body of Christ"— in these chosen 
members of his "body," the Church, the qualities of 
the "Head" were represented. Thus, representatively, 
as well as by his Word, our Lord Jesus has been judging, 
correcting, guiding his Church throughout this 
Gospel age. Take his own statement of this his work 
of judging his body, in his messages to the seven stages 



of his Church, recorded in Rev. 2 and 3. We read,— 

"Remember therefore from whence thou art fallen, 
and repent,. ..else I will come upon thee quickly 
and remove thy candlestick." "Be thou faithful unto 
death, and I will give thee a crown of life." "I have 
a few things against thee;... repent, or else I will 
come unto thee quickly and will fight against thee 
with the sword of my mouth." "To him that overcometh 
will I give to eat of the hidden manna." "I 
have a few things against thee, because thou sufferest 
that woman Jezebel. ...I gave her space to repent. 
...I will cast her. ..into great tribulation,... 
and I will kill her children with death; and all the 
Churches shall know that I am he that searcheth the 
reins and hearts: and I will give unto every one of you 
according to your works.... He that overcometh 
and keepeth my works unto the end, to him will I give 
power over the nations." "I have not found thy works 
perfect before God. ...He that overcometh,... 
I will not blot out his name out of the book of life." 
"These things saith he that hath the key of David, he 
that openeth, and no man shutteth; and shutteth, and 
no man openeth." "Behold I will make them of the 
synagogue of Satan. ..to come and worship before 
thy feet, and to know that I have loved thee. Because 
thou hast kept the word of my patience, I will also 
keep thee from the hour of temptation, which shall 
come upon all the world." "Him that overcometh 
will I make a pillar in the temple of my God." "Because 
thou art lukewarm, and neither cold nor hot, I 
will spew thee out of my mouth." "I counsel thee to 
buy of me gold tried in the fire, that thou mayest be 
rich. ...As many as I love I rebuke and chasten: be 
zealous, therefore, and repent." 

Here we have our Lord's own word for it, that he 
is supervising and correcting his Church now, and that 
as a culmination of this trial (krino) time will come 
final decision (krisis)— rewards and punishments. 

We repeat that the proper thing to do is to harmonize 
these various statements— some of which refer 
to the Heavenly Father as the "Judge of all" and corrector 
of the Church, while others declare that the 
Father judgeth no man, but hath committed all judgment 
unto the Son. Nor is it difficult to harmonize 
these: the Scriptures themselves indicate how both are 
true, pointing out that the Son is the representative 
and honored agent of the Father in the judging (krino) 
or probationary trials of this age and will be also 
his agent and representative in giving (krisis) decisions 
—rewards and tribulations— in the end of this age. 
And with his glorified Church he will give similar 
judgment (krino and krisis) to the world in the Millennial 
age— the world's day of judgment— Acts 17:31. 

So far from this being peculiar or exceptional, it 
is the general rule of Scripture in matters respecting 
the Father and the Son. In the matter of creation, for 



instance, the Heavenly Father is always named as the 
Creator, and yet we are assured that the Only Begotten 
was both the beginning and the ending of the 
Father's direct, personal creation; and that "all things 
were made by him [the Only Begotten] and without 
him was not one thing made that was made." (John 1:3.) 
The matter is explained by the Apostle, saying, 
All things are of the Father, and all things are by 
the Son.-l Cor. 8:6; Col. 1:15-17. 

Take another illustration. In the familiar 23 Psalm 
we read in the original, "Jehovah is my shepherd, 
I shall not want," etc. But do not all realize 
that the Great Shepherd's great Son is our Shepherd 
also? It is the Shepherd-Son that the Apostle Peter 
declares to be "The shepherd and bishop of our souls." 
(1 Pet. 2:25; Heb. 13:20.) It is our Lord himself 
that declares, "I am the Good Shepherd." (John 10:11.) 
Not only so, but our word, "pastor," signifies 
shepherd, as does also the Greek word rendered "bishop" 
in our common version New Testament: and God, the 
Great Shepherd, "set" these in the Church, says the 
Apostle. Again he says that the Good Shepherd, Jesus, 
gave these gifts to his Church. Is there conflict between 
these statements? By no means; they are all 
true and all consistent when viewed from the right 
standpoint: the Head of the under-shepherds is Christ, 
the Good Shepherd, and the Head of the Good Shepherd 
is the Great Shepherd, and the flock is one. The 
key is in the oneness of purpose and of work between 
the Father and the Son— "I and my Father are one." 
But this statement can only be apprehended by becoming 
one with the Father and the Son, in harmony 
with our Lord's prayer.— John 17:21-23. 

Question, (e) You point out the Apostle's injunction 

R2431 : page 41 

that we should judge, krino; but does not our 
Lord use this same word in Matt. 7:1, saying, "Judge 
[krino] not, that ye be not judged [krino]; for with 
what judgment [krima, sentence] ye judge [krino] ye 
shall be judged [krino]?" How shall we harmonize 
these commands of the Lord and the Apostle? 

Answer, (e) The two are in accord: the Apostle 
speaks of the duty of the Church as a Church to judge 
its members on common moralities. In the above expression 
the Lord discountenances criticisms and accusations 
and sentences of one another as individuals. 

Elsewhere the Apostle also discountenanced individual 
judging, accusations, back-bitings, etc., saying, 
"Why dost thou judge [krino] thy brother?... Let 
us not therefore judge [krino] one another any more: 
but judge [krino] this rather, that no man put a stumbling 
block or an occasion to fall in his brother's way." 
-Rom. 14:10,13. 

And our Lord not only approved of judging on 



the part of the Church, but gave explicit directions to 
all its individuals respecting how to avoid judging one 
another and how to submit themselves to the judgment 
of the Church as the body of Christ. 

(1) They were to avoid judging a brother or sister 
guilty of wilful wrong-doing and were to attempt to 
reason the matter out privately, that the one or the 
other might see his error. 

(2) If this proved unavailing, the one feeling himself 
aggrieved (yet still not judging his brother wilfully 
guilty) is to call in two or three brethren to hear 

both sides of the controversy. (As the Apostle suggests, 

those called in should be "wise"— 1 Cor. 6:5; 

—such as both the accuser and the accused would recognize, 

and whose judgment they would respect and 

follow.) 

(3) If these brethren, called on to act as judges, 

and his own choice of "wise" brethren, give their verdict 

against the accuser, that should settle the matter: 

the accuser should recognize his error. Not to do so 

would imply that he was not seeking to ascertain the 

truth, but that he had judged his brother personally, 

the very thing that both the Lord and the Apostle 

warn us against. If the accuser be not able to see 

matters fully in the same light as his "brethren," he 

should nevertheless accept their decision and trust and 

pray to the Lord that he would be guided into clearer 

views. But should the brethren, called in to judge, 

agree with the accuser, the accused of course should 

yield,— especially if he had acknowledged the judges 

to be "wise." The violator of the judgment of such 

"wise" brethren (if the matter were considered of sufficient 

importance) was to be charged and the cause 

heard before the Church— whose decision was to be 

final; and disregard of its decision implied excommunication. 

-Matt. 18:15-35. 

We have examined this question somewhat in detail, 
because fearful that something in our last issue 
might have seemed to sanction personal judging. The 
Lord, however, does recognize his Church and does 
promise to act through it and to give his judgment 
thus to those who seek it, promising in this very connection 
that, Where two or three are gathered in his 
name, he is in their midst. The great difficulty with 
many is their lack of faith; they do not believe the 
Lord's Word, nor trust to his providences, but want 
to take matters into their own hands. And this is particularly 
the case with those who are in the wrong. 



R2432:page41 

PRESENT TRUTH IN EUROPE. 



WE have heretofore mentioned the fact that the 

Lord has raised up efficient servants of present 

truth who are colaboring in Germany, Switzerland, 

France, Austria, Sweden, Norway and Denmark. The 

success of the work in these fields for 1898 is more encouraging 

than in any previous year;— as we should 

of course expect. Particulars did not arrive in season 

to be itemized in our annual report in the Dec. 15th 

TOWER: and even now that they are at hand, they are 

difficult to harmonize and unify— matters which will 

be duly rectified for 1899. 

We have already mentioned the earnestness and 
devotion of Brother Weber who has charge of the 
French work, Sister M. Giesecke, our representative 
in Germany, and Brother Winter, colaborer in Denmark. 
These have been in the harness for now several 
years, and the Lord's blessing upon their efforts has 
stirred up other colaborers in this "harvest;" so that 
during 1898 many hands served the truth in circulating 
tracts and DAWNS personally and by mail. Nor 
were these content merely to circulate the truth— they 
also shared the financial burden generously, contributing 
according to their abilities; and that without solicitation 
—prompted by their love of the truth and by 
its spirit. 

The German and French works are closely identified 
because Switzerland and Belgium are common 
fields where both languages are spoken. The reports 
show that nearly one thousand volumes were disposed 
of (900 DAWNS and 100 booklets); about 15,000 tracts 
circulated free; and many thousand sample copies of 
the German WATCH TOWER. 

We feel confident that 1899 will be a favorable 
year in Europe, as several who have found the truth 
recently seem to be persons of ability who are zealous 
to serve it to others. One is a Salvation Army Captain 

R2432 : page 42 

in Sweden, another is a sister in France who has been 
for some years a mission worker, another is a sister of 
influence in Austria, besides quite a number in Switzerland 
and Germany— an editor, a minister, several 
school-teachers and merchants. 

The Lord's blessing be with these efforts, as well 
as upon the still larger work going on in the English 
tongue! And, by the way, the work in Great Britain 
is a work in Europe also, and larger up to the present 
time than any other there. We pray that it also may 
be greatly blessed and prospered of the Lord, and that 
his noble servants there may have large measures of 
the spirit of the truth. We recognize no national or 
tongue distinctions among those who have become new 
creatures in Christ: this "holy nation" is indeed a peculiar 
people, gathered out of all nations so completely 



that henceforth they know each other not by their 
mother tongue nor by the place of natural birth, but 
solely and only by the tie of Christian love which binds 
their hearts and hopes and aims in one. 



R2432 : page 42 

IS PRESENT TRUTH UNREASONABLE? 



THE pastor of a Baptist church writes us, saying in 
substance that he sees much in the teachings of 
the WATCH TOWER to commend; and that in general its 
reasonings on the Scriptures are logical, its applications 
of Scripture found to harmonize well with the context. 
He would be convinced of the entire position, but for 
one thing— the smallness of the movement. He says 
that he knows of no other publications than those from 
this office that present these views which we denominate 
"present truth," asks if he is mistaken in this, and 
whether it is not unreasonable to believe that so important 
truths should be committed of the Lord to so narrow, 
so comparatively insignificant, a channel. Admitting 
that the Scriptures teach that at his second coming 
the Lord will not find the faith general on the earth, but 
that on the contrary the Apostle declares that the close 
of this age will witness an increase of headiness, pride, 
disobedience to parents, unthankfulness, unholiness, 
etc., and declares that evil men and seducers shall wax 
worse and worse, he wants to know how to harmonize 
these things with the progress of philanthropy, gentleness, 
etc., in the world to-day. 

Answer (a): We cannot deny the fact that ZION'S 
WATCH TOWER AND HERALD OF CHRIST'S PRESENCE is the 
only publication in the world teaching that we are now 
in the harvest of this Gospel age, that the Master is 
present harvesting the wheat, that it soon will be garnered, 
and shine forth in the Millennial Kingdom 
(Matt. 13:43), and that after the Lord has thus set up 
and glorified his "jewels" in kingdom power, the blessing 
of restitution will begin for the world of mankind 
in general. This, however, is no argument against the 
truthfulness of our position, which must be tested solely 
by the Scriptures. 

And we are here reminded of our Lord's words at 
the first advent "harvest"— the type of the present 
"harvest,"— "Judge not according to the appearance, 
but judge righteous judgment." (John 7:24.) The 
"Doctors of Divinity" of that time not only ignored 
our Lord's teachings, but opposed him and said all 
manner of evil against him and his work, falsely, and 
even accused him of being possessed of the prince of 
devils; and they warned, cajoled and hoodwinked the 



common people who heard him gladly, until they cried 
for his blood. But none of those things hindered that 
"harvest" work to the extent of preventing it. Likewise 
the present "harvest" work will go right along to 
completion, regardless of who shall attempt to hinder 
or make light of it. 

It should not be forgotten that, as set forth in our 
September issue (reissued as an Extra on Nov. 7th), 
the Lord's purpose at the present time is not to arouse 
and startle and inform the world, but, on the contrary, 
to have the day of his presence come as a thief in the 
night— stealthily, quietly, unobservedly— in the which 
he will test and gather his jewels, preparatory to letting 
loose upon the world his corrective chastisements, retributions, 
and vengeance upon evil deeds and evil doers. 

But you are mistaken, dear brother, in saying that 
ours is the only voice raised on behalf of the "present 
truth." On the contrary, all who hear the joyful news 
of heavenly grace are privileged to join in the proclamation 
of these "good tidings of great joy which shall 
be to all people." And we assure you that all who receive 
this "new song" into good and honest hearts are 
prompt to give utterance to it; and are singing it daily, 
as they find opportunity, to those who have ears to hear. 
But, as the Scriptures point out, no man is able to learn 
to sing that song clearly and harmoniously except such 
as are "taught of God"— only such as have been called 
to the high calling, and have accepted the call, and are 
in the way of obedience. Whoever leaves the way of 
humble faith and consecrated obedience, loses his power 
to sing "the song of Moses and the Lamb" harmoniously, 
properly.— Rev. 14:3. 

You will be glad, we are sure, to know that with 
those of "this way" all who hear the message are preachers 
of it. We recognize no "clergy" and "laity" classes; 
for all who are in the true Church of God are, as 
the Apostle expresses the matter, "priests," members 
of the Royal Priesthood, of which our Lord is the Head 
or Chief Priest. Asked not long ago, "How many ministers 

R2432 : page 43 

are of your way of thinking?" we replied, to the 
astonishment of the questioner, that there are about ten 
thousand, who are preaching every day to the best of 
their ability. Then we explained that from our standpoint, 
the Scriptural standpoint, every member of the 
Body of Christ is anointed of the spirit, and is fully 
commissioned to make known the good tidings to everyone 
who has an ear to hear. Some have talents for 
public speaking, others find a field for usefulness as 
preachers in colporteuring the truth, and still others for 
private conversation and private circulation of the good 
tidings in printed form. 

The effect of the combined effort of these ministers 
of the truth is that the sound thereof is extending to 



the utmost parts of the earth. Not all, however, are 

able to clearly discern the sound now, and we believe 

that it is intended for only such as have "ears to hear," 

to whom alone it will be a special blessing in the present 

time. We look forward with pleasure, however, to the 

time promised in the Scriptures, when all "the deaf 

ears shall be unstopped," and all "the blind eyes shall 

be opened," and when, as a consequence, the true knowledge 

of the Lord shall fill the whole earth, as the waters 

cover the great deep— the sea.— Isa. 35:5; 11:9. 

Answer (b): We are living to-day under a glare 
of light, such as the world never before enjoyed. We 
are not, therefore, to expect the grossness of the past; 
but while there is a polished veneer upon the world in 
general to-day, such as it never had the opportunity of 
having before, this only gives a corresponding amount 
of responsibility, from the divine standpoint. Where 
much is given much will be required. The Scriptures 
assure us that the only proper course for those who have 
the enlightenment, which we enjoy, is a recognition of 
our own imperfections, and of the Lord's standard of 
righteousness, and an acceptance of the salvation which 
he has provided in Christ, and a thorough change of 
heart, will, sentiment,— from sin to righteousness. 

R2433 : page 43 

True, the numbers in Christendom, who now outwardly 
observe rules of propriety and decency are larger 
than ever before; but we doubt if the proportion of the truly 
consecrated, the "saints," is greater. We have frequent 
evidences, too, that the veneer of the present time is 
very thin, and that the old nature, unconverted, is underneath. 
For instance, this was shown a year or so 
ago, at the notable French Charity Bazaar, when the fire 
occurred, and when so many who were esteemed to be 
thoroughly polished socially gave evidence of fierceness 
and brutality worthy of the Dark Ages. A similar evidence 
that mankind, as a whole, are practically unchanged 
at heart, was furnished in the savagery displayed 
at the time of the disaster to the steamer La 
Bourgogne. Nor have we reason to question that in all 
civilized lands the spirit of discontent which prevails 
would, under favorable conditions, show up as horribly 
as in the "Reign of Terror" of the French Revolution. 
Indeed, the latter is set before us in the Scriptures as a 
picture or illustration of the conditions which will prevail 
throughout the entire civilized world, and in the 
midst of which the torch of civilization will for a short 
time be utterly extinguished. For further evidences 
along this line we refer you to MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. IV. 

As an illustration of modern cruelty of thought take 
the following from the pen of a man of learning, a highly 
esteemed French gentleman— M. Rochefort. Assailing 
his political opponents, the judges in the Dreyfus 
case, he said:— 



"To smear them over with pitch, and make live 
torches of them, as Nero did with the Christians, would 
be somewhat of an antiquated amusement. An idea 
has occurred to me of a punishment which might give 
satisfaction even to the most exasperated. The members 
of the Court of Cassation having been previously 
drawn up in single file, an executioner duly trained to 
the work should cut off their eyelids, so as to leave the 
eyeballs denuded. Then spiders of the most venomous 
kind should be enclosed in nutshells, applied to the 
eyeballs, and properly fastened behind the culprit's 
heads. These spiders in a famished condition could 
not be expected to be very fastidious, and would slowly 
and gradually feed on the culprit's eyeballs until nothing 
but a ghastly cavity remained. This done, these 
hideous blind men should be chained up to a pillory 
erected before that Palais de Justice where their crime 
has been perpetrated, and on their chests a placard 
should be affixed, bearing these words: Thus does 
France punish the traitors who attempt to sell her to 
the enemy.'" 

If the veneered and polished can think such 
thoughts and use such language, what may we not expect 
of the ignorant and uncouth when frenzied and in 
despair, in the coming anarchy! 

Answer (c): It is not for us to judge the hearts 
of others, and we shall not attempt to do so, but we believe 
that the Lord has arranged his truth so that it will 
do the judging. Our Lord voiced this sentiment, saying, 
"My words shall judge you in the last day"— the 
Millennial Day. This judgment of the last day is already 
upon us, and, as the Apostle Peter declared, so 
we find it, "Judgment must begin at the house of God," 
—the Gospel Church, nominal and real. The fact that 
the Scribes and Pharisees and Doctors of the Law of to-day 
do not accept the message and evidences of the 
second presence of our Lord, so far from being contrary 
to the teaching of the Lord's Word, is in perfect accord 
therewith. Has he not said to us that not many great, 
mighty or wise, according to the course of this world, 
will be worthy of a place in his Kingdom? And do not 
all the great ones of to-day, to whom you refer, claim 
to be great and wise, according to the course and judgment 
of this world? 

R2433 : page 44 

Moreover, our Lord gave us a sample or foreshadowing 
of the present harvest, and what we may expect 
here: it was furnished in the Jewish nation and its harvest 
at his first advent. Present conditions exactly correspond 
to that prototype: there as here it was inquired, 
Have any of the Pharisees and Doctors of the Law believed 
on him? The answer was then, as now, No. Of 
course the mass of the people then followed their leaders, 
and so also it will be now. Of that time our Lord 



said that the leaders were blind leaders of the blind, and 
that all would fall into the ditch, and it was so: the 
Jewish nation as a whole was overthrown in the time 
of trouble with which their age ended, and their house 
was left wholly desolate. So we expect it to be here: the 
masses of "Christendom" will follow their blind teachers, 
blind guides, and have a confidence in them worthy 
of a better previous record, and will eventually be greatly 
surprised when the "little flock," the Lord's Jewels, 
have been gathered, and the time of trouble breaks forth 
which will engulf all present institutions,— social, financial, 
political, religious, and prepare the way for the fulfilment 
of our Redeemer's prayer, "Thy Kingdom come, 
thy will be done on earth as it is done in heaven." 

Answer (d): If you want to be guided aright, 
dear brother, you must not look to human authorities, 
but to the Chief Shepherd himself, who declared, "My 
sheep hear my voice, and they follow [obey] me." We 
do not set ourself as a leader of the Lord's sheep, and 
we neither ask nor expect any to follow us as their 
leader. We seek merely to be, so far as the Shepherd 
may be pleased to use us, his mouthpiece, to call attention 
to the Shepherd, and to the way in which he is 
leading. None should follow us, except as they discern 
that we are following the Master, as saith the Apostle. 
-1 Pet. 5:3; Phil. 3:17. 



R2436 : page 44 

ASPIRATIONS OF A NEW CONVERT. 



I wish I were as pure, as fair to view, 
As yonder blossom, sparkling with the dew; 
But then I could not wear my snowy dress, 
The Savior's gift— his robe of righteousness. 

I wish I were like mountains, towering high, 
Strong and majestic, piercing cloud and sky; 
But then I could not feel my weakness thrill 
With strength to do my blessed Master's will. 

I wish my life were placid as yon lake, 
Unmoved by storms that o'er the ocean break; 
But could I realize such rest and peace 
As when the Master bids my troubles cease? 

Lord, all my wishes, all my heart's desires 
Find consummation when the world retires, 
And Thou before my raptured gaze dost stand, 
In perfectness complete, a pattern grand. 

Ah! would I were, my blessed Lord, like thee! 



Then should my heart thy fragrant garden be! 
Then should my prayers past mountain tops ascend, 
My peace be fathomless, my joy attained. 

For Thee leapt high the sacrificial fire, 
Let it of me my cleansed parts require! 
Into Thy nostrils let the incense rise, 
A token of accepted sacrifice! 

-R. B. HENNINGES. 



R2433 : page 44 

"GREATER WORKS THAN THESE." 
--FEB. 12-JOHN 5:17-27.- 

"This is indeed the Christ, the Savior of the world."— John 4:42. 

JESUS was again in Judea, probably attending the 
Feast of the Passover, as was his custom,— these 
annual gatherings constituting the very best opportunities 
for reaching the devout Jews from all parts of the 
Holy Land, and from surrounding countries. 

Our Lord, in his quiet Sabbath walk about Jerusalem, 
came to the Pool of Bethesda, which had a wonderful 
reputation for its healing qualities, on account 
of which its porches and sheds were crowded with sick 
people with divers ailments, waiting to take advantage 
of what was considered to be a miraculous action in its 
waters. What is to-day known as the "Pool of the 
Virgin" is supposed to be the one formerly known as 
the Pool of Bethesda, and a peculiar movement in the 
waters of the Pool of the Virgin is well known. Travelers 
whose word is reliable declare that they have 
seen this spring rise twelve inches in five minutes, 
and then subside about as quickly. There are other 
springs which have this same intermitting peculiarity. 
One of these is at Kissingen, Germany. Its flow is accompanied 
with an escape of gas, and its water is reputed 
to be more valuable at the time of its movements, 
and probably because surcharged with gas. 

The intermittent movement of the water of the 
Bethesda Pool is referred to in vs. 7 of this chapter, but 
the explanation about the angel troubling the waters, 
etc., contained in the last seven words of the third verse, 
and all of the fourth verse, is omitted from the 
oldest Greek MSS. (the Sinaitic and Vatican). There 
was probably nothing whatever miraculous connected 
with the spring, but some peculiarity of the channel, 

R2433 : page 45 

which caused the water from one compartment to syphon 
out into the other at intervals; or possibly the action was 



caused by gas. The healings experienced were quite 
probably what to-day would be termed mind cures, a 
beneficial action of the mind and will upon the physical 
organism. 

We do not know that the Lord made any movement 
toward the general healing of the multitude who 
were waiting for the movement of the Pool, and hoping 
for relief; nor do we know that he extended his beneficence 
to any, except the one whose healing is the subject 
of this lesson, who was more helpless than the 
majority, and whose case was apparently hopeless, in 
that it was chronic, of thirty-eight years standing. Nor 
could the impotent one have had much ground for hope 
at the Pool, for, as he himself explained, others less 
feeble than himself availed themselves of the fountain 
before he could reach it. It was to this heart-sick and 
weary one, hopeless and helpless, that the Lord addressed 
himself, "Wilt thou be made whole?" He 
readily answered that he was anxious to be made whole, 
and our Lord did not even wait for him to manifest a 
previous faith in his power, but allowed the man's faith 
to be testified by his obedience: and exercising the faith, 
astonished and bewildered, he obeyed, taking up his 
couch, not even knowing his benefactor. 

So it is with the greater miracles performed by our 
Lord throughout this Gospel age— some of the weakest 
and most hopelessly powerless for good are morally 
healed, strengthened, renewed, transformed, through 
the operation of faith and obedience. Yet such cases are 
but few compared to the world of mankind, similarly 
or even less diseased with sin, who are all eventually 

R2434 : page 45 

(during the Millennium) to be made acquainted with 
the Great Physician. 

This miracle brought upon Jesus the opposition of 
the Pharisees, who, because of a wrong attitude of 
heart, mistook the real object and purpose of the Sabbath 
day, and tacking on to the divine command traditions 
of the elders, had made of it a mere outward form, 
robbing it of its true thought. We are not to consider 
that our Lord performed so many of his miracles on the 
Sabbath, apparently in preference to other days, as signifying 
any disrespect to the day, nor as signifying a 
desire to provoke the Pharisees. Rather, we may suppose 
that the performance of the notable miracles on 
this day was largely in order to thus point out the great 
Seventh Day Sabbath, the Millennial Day, the seventh 
thousand year period of earth's history, when the anti-typical 
and far greater miracles and blessings will come 
to mankind. "These things [miracles] did Jesus, and 
manifested forth [beforehand] his [coming] glory."— 
John 2:11. 

The conduct of the Jews, in wishing to kill one 
who, according to their own testimony, had done nothing 



amiss, but had done much good, simply because he 
differently interpreted the Law, and disregarded the 
"traditions of the elders," is a parallel to the opposition 
which is sometimes manifested by present-day 
Christians— sectarians of the strictest sort. They might 
not indeed seek literally to kill the one who would do 
violence to their theories and traditions, but many of 
them would have very little hesitancy in assassinating 
his character, if thereby they could defend the falsities 
of their systems. 

Our Lord's reply respecting his authority angered 
them the more: not because he declared himself to be 
Jehovah, the Father, as many seem to think, but because 
he declared himself to be the Son of Jehovah, 
who had been given a work to do by the Father. Nor 
did the Jews misunderstand him in this; their anger 
was because, in claiming to be the Son of God, he was 
claiming an honor and place so much higher than themselves 
—a place which implied a closeness of relationship 
and of nature to Jehovah, a claim which they considered 
blasphemous. The successors of the Pharisees 
in our day go far beyond our Lord's claims, and claim 
for him what he never claimed for himself; viz., that he 
is the Father, and that he always has been the Father 
as well as the Son, and that the two are one in person, 
and not merely two persons of one harmonious mind, 
purpose, sentiment, will. These take great offence at 
any of the Lord's "brethren" of to-day who claim to 
be sons of God, and who apply that term in its Scriptural 
force and significance. As is well known to many, 
a prominent Doctor of Divinity and Professor in a theological 
seminary in Ohio has published a scurrilous 
review of MILLENNIAL DAWN, the chief point of which 
is the holding up to ridicule the hope of the Church's 
"high calling," therein set forth, based upon and supported 
by the exceeding great and precious promises given 
to us in the Scriptures, the intention of which, the 
Apostle declares to be, "that we might become partakers 
of the divine nature."— 2 Pet. 1:4. 

The declaration that "the Son can do nothing of 
himself," if it were not backed up as it is by a score of 
other testimonies from the same interested and inspired 
Teacher, is a contradiction to the common thought of 
Trinitarians, that the Son is the Father: it is in direct 
conflict with the statement of the catechism, that they 
are "equal in power and in glory." Nevertheless the 
Father "loveth [filio— has affection for] the Son," and 
as a consequence of this affection has shown, is showing, 
and will show forth through him greater marvels, 
greater wonders. And our Lord Jesus has promised us 
that, as the Elder Brother (of the Gospel house of sons), 
whatsoever the Father shall make known to him he in 
turn will make known to us. This is brought forcibly 

R2434 : page 46 



to our attention in the Book of Revelation, which expressly 

declares that it is— "The Revelation of Jesus 

Christ, which God gave unto him, to show unto his servants 

things which must shortly come to pass." (John 15:15; 

Rev. 1:1.) Our Elder Brother, our Bridegroom, 

our Captain, has promised further, that in due time we 

also shall share with him in doing greater works than 

any which he performed at his first advent.— John 14:12. 

Amongst the greater works the Lord mentions the 
quickening of the dead— claiming that, as the Father 
has the power to raise the dead, so also this power is 
granted to the Son. Nor should we suppose that our 
Lord, in this statement, referred to the awakening of 
Lazarus, and the son of the widow of Nain, and the 
daughter of Jairus. These at most were awakenings, 
and not, in the full sense of the word, resurrections— 
these individuals were not lifted up completely out of 
death into the perfection of life. Rather, we may suppose 
that our Lord was looking down into the future— 
to the resurrection of the Church in glory, honor and 
immortality, and to the subsequent resurrection (under 
trial or judgment) of the world during the Millennial 
age. 

This thought is borne out by the statement of vs. 22, 
that all judgment has been transferred to the Son. 
The resurrection life is to be the reward of those who 
will successfully pass the judgment. The first resurrection 
will be the reward of those who are "overcomers" 
in the trial in progress during this Gospel age, under 
the conditions of the high calling, and its narrow 
way to glory, honor and immortality. The Church is 
on judgment, on trial, under the terms of this high 
calling, now, during this Gospel age. The Lord will 
also judge the world of mankind redeemed by his own 
sacrifice,— during the Millennial age: and in that judgment 
of the world he has promised to associate with 
himself the Bride class, whose judgment trial is now in 
progress. (1 Cor. 6:2.) Those of the world of mankind, 
awakened and brought to trial during the Millennial 
age, who shall develop characters in harmony with 
righteousness, and fully acceptable to the Judge, shall 
attain to full resurrection, and enter life, complete and 
everlasting, at the close of the Millennial age— at the 
close of their day of trial, while the residue will be cut 
off in the Second Death. 

That this judgment of the world did not begin at 
our Lord's first advent, we have his own testimony: "I 
came not to judge the world." (John 12:47.) And 
again, his declaration, "My Word shall judge you in 
the last day"— the last thousand-year day of the seven, 
the Millennial Day. It is in full harmony with this 
that the Apostle declares, "God hath appointed a day 
[period— epoch] in which he will judge the world in 
righteousness by that man whom he hath ordained"— 
the Christ, Head and body. -John 12:48; Acts 17:31; 
1 Cor. 6:2. 



In harmony with this, also, is the statement in vs. 17 
and Heb. 4:4,10. God rested from his work of 
creation when man became a transgressor, and instead 
of proceeding with the work, he abandoned it, placing 
a curse upon it,— a penalty of death upon his chief 
handiwork. But altho he abandoned the matter, in 
one sense of the word, he did not abandon it in his 
purpose, but intended and foretold that he would raise 
up a seed of the woman which should eventually crush 
the Evil One, delivering the race from his power— implying 
incidentally the revocation of the death penalty, 
a resurrection. Our Lord Jesus was in person the 
promised Seed of the woman, but, as we have already 
seen, the divine plan included also the Church, "members 
of his body." The sufferings of Christ, Head and 
body, are mentioned in the promise of Eden, as the 
bruising of the heel by the serpent. This has been in 
progress throughout the Gospel age; Jesus was crucified 
by the forces of evil, yielding himself up a sin offering; 
and the members of his Body are suffering with him, 
"filling up that which is behind of the afflictions of 
Christ."-Col. 1:24. 

Soon the time will come when this great Seed, the 
Christ, shall be fully glorified, all the members sharing 
in the glory of the Head: and then, as the Apostle declares, 
"The God of peace shall bruise Satan under 
your feet shortly." (Rom. 16:20.) And it is this great 
Deliverer, whose Head and Lord has redeemed the 
world with his own precious blood, that the Father 
has appointed to be the Judge of the redeemed race, 
when it shall be on trial during the Millennial age, 
while Satan is bound. The work of the Son will not 
be complete until all evil has been thoroughly subjugated, 
which will be at the close of the Millennial age. 
He will reclaim, by a knowledge of the truth, and chastisements 
and corrections in righteousness, so many as 
are willing, and the residue shall be destroyed from 
among the people. (Acts 3:23.) And when he shall 
thus have put down all opposing authority, rule and 
power, the Apostle assures us, he will deliver up the 
Kingdom to God even the Father. Thus the Father 
worked previously to man's fall, and has committed 
the work of reconciliation of man to the Son, and also 
the judgment of the race, and will receive it back again 
under divine jurisdiction, when, through the Son as his 
agent, he shall have made all things new.— 1 Cor. 15:24; 
Rev. 21:5. 

It is therefore a great mistake to say, as some do, 
"Jesus is our Judge, like the Father," for our Lord's 
own words assure us that the Father judgeth no man, 
having "committed all judgment unto the Son." The 
judgment of the Church, in progress during this Gospel 

R2435 : page 47 

age, is referred to in vs. 24: those who now hear and 



believe and obey to the extent of their ability have everlasting 
life guaranteed to them, as a result of thus 
favorably passing the present judgment or trial. These 
are assured that they will not need to come into the 
general judgment of the world during the Millennial 
age, because they pass from death unto life as the result 
of the judgment of this age. The word "condemnation," 
in this verse, signifies judgment, and is so rendered 
in the Revised Version.— Compare 1 Cor. 11:32. 

In vs. 25 the general judgment of mankind during 
the Millennial age is specially referred to, when all the 
dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God, be brought 
to a knowledge of the truth (1 Tim. 2:4), and when 
they that hear (obey that knowledge) shall live: shall 
be rescued not only from the tomb but also from all 
the imperfections, mental, moral and physical, which 
have come upon the world through sin— be raised up 
to perfection of life. The fact that this judgment work 
begins with a little flock during this Gospel age is suggested 
by the expression that the hour for the dead to 
hear the voice of the Son of Man has already commenced, 
"now is." The whole world, from the divine 
standpoint, is spoken of as dead, because it is already 
nine-tenths dead and under sentence of death to the 
full. It was from this standpoint that our Lord said to 
one, "Let the dead bury their dead." 

Our Lord realized that his hearers could not appreciate 
the possibility of his doing so great a work as 
a man, and hence he makes the explanation that the 
Father, who has life inherent (immortality), hath given 
(promised) the Son the same inherent life (immortality), 
as well as given commandment (authorization) 
that he, the Son of Man, to whom the work was committed, 
as declared in the prophets, should execute 
judgment— the divine will. And it is in view of this 
high honor conferred upon the Son by the Father that 
we are told (vs. 23), "that all may honor the Son even 
as they honor the Father." (Revised Version.) The 
explanation of this statement follows, and shows that 
the honor to the Son is as the Father's appointed representative 
and agent in the great work, saying, "He 
that honoreth not the Son honoreth not the Father 
which sent him." 



R2435 : page 47 

FEEDING THE HUNGRY. 

-FEB. 19.-JOHN 6:1-14.- 

"I am the bread of life."— John 6:35. 

"AFTER these things," says John; and various 
connected incidents show that it was nearly 



a year after the miracle and discourse of our last lesson. 
It is well understood that the Gospel of John does not 
claim to be a full record of our Lord's sayings and doings. 
It would appear to have been written after the 
other Gospels. John evidently recollected matters which, 
in whole or in part, had been overlooked by the others, 
and his Gospel sets forth some very interesting incidents 
and prayers and discourses, whose omission would have 
been a serious loss to us. Thus we see how God operates 
in various ways to accomplish his purpose. He 
could have miraculously used any one of the Evangelists 
to give the full and detailed account, but he chose 
rather to allow each to state himself in his own manner, 
and to supply the details in four narratives, in 
preference to one. 

This very arrangement, indeed, has led to a greater 
search of the Scriptures, and has thus brought the various 
details more pointedly to the attention of the 
Lord's people. We are to remember, however, that, 
altho a liberty was allowed, the matter was nevertheless 
under divine care and supervision, to the intent 
that the records should not err in their statement. Our 
Lord's promise we may rely upon, viz., that whatsoever 
the apostles bound or loosed on earth, is bound or loosed 
in heaven, so completely were they under divine direction 
and protection against deception and misstatement. 

News had just reached our Lord and his disciples 
that John the Baptist had been beheaded, and "when 
Jesus heard of it he departed thence by ship into a 
desert place apart." (Matt. 14:13.) Our Lord withdrew, 
probably in part to have an opportunity for private 
meditation and conference with his disciples, who 
undoubtedly would be greatly agitated by this news, 
and needed his calming influence and assurance that 
Herod could have no power over him or them except 
such as might be permitted of the Father. The wilderness 
place to which they went was just outside the 
boundary of Herod's dominion, near Bethsaida. And 
the fact that our Lord's conference with his disciples 
had a pacifying and strengthening effect is evidenced by 
their return that same night to Galilee, Herod's 
territory. 

It was while they were thus quietly aside, on the 
mountain slopes on the north-eastern shore of the Sea 
of Galilee, that they beheld "a great company coming 
toward them." The largeness of the company is accounted 
for by the fact that it was near the time of the 
Feast of the Passover, and according to custom large 
numbers of the religiously inclined were on their pilgrimage 
to Jerusalem. 

From the other Gospels we learn that the day was 
spent in healing the sick of the multitude, and preaching 
to them the things pertaining to the Kingdom of 

R2435 : page 48 



God, and that it was toward evening that they were 
miraculously fed on five barley loaves and two small 
fishes,— and had twelve baskets of fragments remaining. 
(Matt. 14: 15; Mark 6:34; Luke 9: 11.) It is remarkable 
that the Gospels do not parade our Lord's 
generosity and kindness, but content themselves with 
recording the simple facts: yet these facts give ample 
testimony to those who have eyes to see, showing them 
in him "the glory of the only begotten of the Father, 
full of grace and truth." Here, for instance, we note 
the fact that he specially sought rest and privacy with 
his disciples, yet when he saw the multitude he was 
"moved with compassion toward them:" he could not 
refrain from giving them his vitality in curing their ailments, 
and pouring in the oil and wine of truth, and 
satisfying their hungers and thirstings of heart with the 
good promises of the Kingdom, and finally providing 
them natural food. And such will be the spirit of all 
the Lord's followers, in proportion as they have learned 
of him, and become partakers of the spirit of his holiness. 
Their delight will be, not in self-gratification, 
but chiefly in "doing good unto all men as they have 
opportunity, especially to the household of faith." "So 
shall all men know that ye are my disciples, if ye love 
one another."— Gal. 6:10; John 13:35. 

John's narrative, in connection with those of the 
other Evangelists, shows us that our Lord counseled 
with the apostles respecting what should be done with 
the multitude, and that their general advice was that 
they be sent away, that they might find lodging and 
victuals in the nearest villages. The people themselves 
seem to have been so entranced with the good tidings 
that they entirely forgot their own necessities. Our 
Lord specially addressed Philip, respecting the matter, 
because his home was in the neighboring city of 
Bethsaida. 

The general conclusion of all the apostles was that 
the feeding of such a multitude was beyond any reasonable 
hope of theirs. And it must have been with 
bewilderment that they obeyed the Lord's direction to 
seat the people in orderly companies, and proceeded to 
distribute their scanty supply. All had sufficient to 
satisfy their hunger, and the fragments that remained, 
gathered into the haversacks (mistranslated baskets) in 
which the twelve apostles carried their provisions, were 
a good supply for their future necessities. Thus did 
our Lord additionally teach economy, frugality. The 
disciples and the multitude would be very likely to 
draw the inference that, where there was such power 
to create and to multiply, there would be no necessity 
for frugality. The course pursued by our Lord is a 
valuable lesson for our time also. It implies that those 
who receive of the Lord's bounty should be none the 
less appreciative of it, and careful in its use. According 
to the divine arrangement, it would seem to be the 
proper thing that wilful waste, sooner or later, brings 



corresponding woful want. 

The Lord's people should be careful to avoid wasting, 
in earthly food and temporal matters, not because 
of selfishness, and a desire to hold and accumulate, 
but, as the Apostle explains, "that ye may have to 
give"— that thus we may have opportunity to be imitators 
of our Heavenly Father, who is continually giving 
to the needy, some of his blessings being bestowed 
alike upon the worthy and unworthy. (Eph. 4:28.) 
The same principle applies to some extent in spiritual 
matters. We may partake of our spiritual blessings to 
our full satisfaction, and with thankfulness; but we are 
not to waste spiritual privileges because they are God's 
free gifts. Rather are we to prize every spiritual morsel 
and to gather up in store for future needs of ourselves 
and others. The memory is our "basket," our 
haversack, and divine provision is so bountiful that 
every disciple may gather his basket full. 

The same generous heart which had compassion 
upon the multitudes, declaring that they were as sheep 
having no shepherd, and following blind guides, and 
about to fall with them into the ditch of Israel's 
great calamity, and who taught them, healed them and 
fed them, is the same yesterday, to-day and forever. 
We may know, therefore, that he is to-day looking with 

R2436 : page 48 

sympathetic compassion upon the multitudes of so-called 
"Christendom." He sees that the great doctors of 
finance, of sociology and of theology, tho thoroughly 
blind and disputing with each other respecting the 
way, are nevertheless leading the people on to the great 
time of trouble that is nearing. He beholds the multitudes, 
dissatisfied with the husks of human tradition 
and philosophy, hungering and thirsting after righteousness 
(truth), yet blinded from seeing it, by prejudice 
and superstition, and led of error by priestcraft and 
human subserviency. He sees the dark night of trouble 
approaching, but before sending the people away he 
instructs all who are his disciples to supply them with 
something to eat— with spiritual food, with truths pertaining 
to the Kingdom, which will afford them some 
strength and some encouragement during the dark hour 
of that "time of trouble such as never was since there 
was a nation." 

The Lord has already made provision sufficient in 
quantity and variety, under his blessing; and he bids 
each of his specially consecrated ones to have faith, 
and to go forth in the distributing of the food, trusting 
the result to him. Brethren and sisters, let us be energetic 
in handing forth the bread of life, the "meat in 
due season," to the multitude,— to whoever is hungry 
enough to desire to partake. Those who thus distribute 
will find in the end— their own vessels full. 



page 49 
VOL. XX. FEBRUARY 15, 1899. No. 4. 



CONTENTS. 



The Memorial Supper 51 

At the Feast of Tabernacles 52 

"Ye shall be Free Indeed" 55 

"Whereas I was Blind, Now I See" 59 

Orientalism, Mormonism, Theosophy 59 

Is All Sickness of the Devil? 59 

Christian Science Misbeliefs 61 

The Good Shepherd— The Christ 63 

Special Items:— Address Tags on Your 
Tower Wrapper; Notify Us Respecting 
Memorial Celebration; 
March 1st & 15th Issues— "Tabernacle 
Shadows of Better Sacrifices" 50 

page 50 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 56-60 ARCH STREET, ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, N.Y. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS: 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age or accident, or other 
adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, if they 
send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting the 
paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list 
constantly. 



ADDRESS TAGS ON YOUR TOWER WRAPPER. 

These show the time to which your subscription is paid. Thus 
Jun9 signifies that you are paid to July, 1899; DecO signifies that 
you are paid to January, 1901. These are changed every two 
months and are in the nature of receipts for moneys received on 
WATCH TOWER account. 



R2442 : page 50 

NOTIFY US RESPECTING MEMORIAL CELEBRATION. 

Will all the little groups appoint some one of their number 
to notify us the next day respecting, (1) The interest manifested; 
(2) If a blessing were enjoyed; (3) The number in attendance. 
Only a few words are necessary, and postal cards will suffice. 
We are interested in having such reports complete as possible, 
and thank you all now, in advance, for them. 



page 50 

ALLEGHENY CHURCH MEETINGS. 

Preaching and divine worship every Sunday afternoon in 
Bible House chapel, No. 56 Arch street, at 3 P.M. 

Cottage meetings for prayer and testimony on Wednesday 
evenings; and Dawn Circles for Bible Study on Thursday, Friday 
and Saturday evenings— various localities, Pittsburg and 
vicinity-inquire at WATCH TOWER office. 



MARCH 1ST AND 15TH ISSUES OF THIS JOURNAL 

-WILL BE A NEW EDITION OF- 
"TABERNACLE SHADOWS OF BETTER SACRIFICES" 

(IN PAMPHLET FORM FOR CONVENIENCE). 
NEXT ISSUE IN USUAL FORM WILL BE APRIL 1ST. 



R2436 : page 51 

THE MEMORIAL SUPPER. 



HOW sacred the memories which gather around 

the anniversary of our Lord's death! It 

calls to mind the Father's love as exhibited in the entire 

plan of salvation, the center of which was the gift 

of his son as our Redeemer. It calls specially to our 

thoughts him who gave himself a ransom— a corresponding 

price— for all. Then faith comes still nearer 

to him who "suffered, the just for the unjust," and 

with grateful, overflowing hearts and with tear-dimmed 

eyes we whisper, My Savior! My Redeemer! My Lord 

and Master! "He loved me, and gave himself for 

me." Ah, yes!— 

"Sweet the moments, rich in blessing, 
Which before the cross I spend: 

Life and joy and peace possessing 



From my best and truest Friend." 

How blessed the thought that he cares to have us 
think of him and call him ours;— he so great— "far 
above angels" and every title that is named, next to 
the Father himself,— and we so insignificant, so imperfect, 
so unworthy of such a friendship. And yet, 
to think that "he is not ashamed to call us brethren;" 
and that he is pleased to have us memorialize his death; 
and that he gave us the bread to emblemize his broken 
flesh, and the wine to emblemize his shed blood,— the 
one to represent the human rights and privileges purchased 
for all, and of which all may partake, the other 
to represent the life he gave which secured everlasting 
life for all who will accept it! 

How delightful, too, to count, as he and the Jews 
did, the days and the hours, even until finally, "the 
hour being come," he sat down with his disciples to 
celebrate the death of the typical Paschal lamb, and to 
consider the deliverance of Israel's firstborn from the 
great destruction which came upon Egypt, and the 
subsequent deliverance accomplished through those 
firstborn ones for all the typical Israel of God. 

How precious to look beyond the type which was 
commemorated, and to hear the Master, as he took new 
emblems say, "This [celebrating of the Passover] do 
[henceforth] in remembrance of me!" Ah yes! in 
the crucified One we can now see "The Lamb of God 
which taketh away the sin of the world." "Christ 
our passover [lamb] is sacrificed for us, therefore let 
us keep the feast;" for as oft as we do this we do show 
forth our Lord's death until he come again— until, his 
Kingdom having come, we shall be permitted to drink 
with him the new wine (the new life and joy) in the 
Kingdom.-Matt. 26:29; 1 Cor. 5:7,8; 11:26. 

But we are not only privileged to enjoy the favors 
of our Lord's sacrifice (by partaking of its merit and 
its consequent advantages; viz., justification and restitution 
rights and privileges by faith, as redeemed), but 
more than this: we are invited to share with our 
Master in the sacrifice and in its glorious reward. He 
says to us, Whoever is in sympathy with my work and 
its results— whoever would share my Kingdom and 
join in its work of blessing the world— let him also be 
broken with me, and let him join me in drinking the 
cup of self-denial, unto death. To all such he says, 
"Drink ye all of it." The Apostle confirms this 
thought, saying: "The cup of blessing which we bless, 
is it not the communion [fellowship] in the blood [death] 
of Christ? The bread [loaf] which we break is it not 
the communion [common-union] in the body of Christ? 
For we being many [members of Christ's body] are one 
loaf and one body; for we are all partakers of that one 
loaf."-lCor. 10:16,17. 

Gladly, dear Lord, we eat (appropriate to our 
necessities) the merit of thy pure human nature sacrificed 
for us— for our justification. Gladly, too, we 



will partake of the cup of suffering with thee, realizing 
it to be a blessed privilege to suffer with thee, that 

R2436 : page 52 

in due time we may also reign with thee;— to be dead 
with thee, that in the everlasting future we may live 
with thee and be like thee and share thy love and thy 
glory as thy bride. Oh! that we may be faithful, not 
only in the performance of the symbol, but also of the 
reality. Blessed Lord, we hear thy word saying, "Ye 
shall indeed drink of my cup and be baptized with my 
baptism." Lord, we are not of ourselves able thus to 
sacrifice; but thy grace is sufficient for us, for we 
are wholly thine, now and forever. 

Oh! what a thought; that if faithful in the present 
privilege of drinking of his cup and being broken 
with our Lord as his body, we with him will soon be 
that "Church of the first-born ones whose names are 
written in heaven," and as such shall constitute the 
Royal Priesthood, which, under our great High Priest, 
will lead out of the Egyptian bondage and slavery 
all those slaves of Sin whose groanings and prayers 
for deliverance have entered the ears of the Lord of 
Sabaoth. 

These will be some of the thoughts which will 
constrain numbers of the Lord's people all over the 
world to meet in little groups (and sometimes quite 
alone with Jesus) on the evening of March 26th, next, 
after six o'clock, to celebrate on its anniversary the 
most notable event in the history of the Universe of 
God. (We prefer to get the date of this anniversary 
memorial as exact as possible; tho we do not understand 
that it would seriously matter if we had not the exact 
day: it is the event and not the day that we celebrate. 
Nevertheless, a uniform annual date is desirable.) 

Eat and drink, O beloved, says the Bridegroom to 
his spouse. (Sol. Song 5:1.) Let us eat and drink reverently, 

R2437 : page 52 

devotedly, thoughtfully, prayerfully, tearfully 
perhaps, as we each think of our Redeemer's love and 
sacrifice, and pledge ourselves afresh to be dead with 
him. Meet with any who recognize him as their ransom, 
and who are pleased to do this in remembrance of 
him— or else do it alone. 

Let your heart be so full of the reality that forms 
and ceremonies will generally be forgotten, except 
such as are needed for decency and order. Prepare 
beforehand some sort of "fruit of the vine." Our preference 
is for stewed-raisin juice or unfermented grape 
juice: and for bread either Jewish unleavened bread or 
plain water-crackers, which are about the same in substance 
—flour, water and salt, without leaven. Leaven 
being a symbol of sin or corruption, yeast-raised bread 



is not an appropriate symbol of our Lord, the "undefiled 
and separate from sinners." 

The Church at Allegheny will meet at "Bible 
House" chapel, Arch street, at 7 P.M. of the day named. 
All who trust in the substitutionary sacrifice finished 
at Calvary, and who are fully consecrated to the Redeemer's 
service, and who can make it convenient to 
meet with us, will be made very welcome. Some who 
profess that their wills are fully immersed into the will 
of Christ, desire to symbolize their baptism; and an 
opportunity will be afforded after the 3 P.M. services. 

On the subject of Baptism see your TOWER for 
June 15, '93. For further particulars concerning the 
Memorial Supper, see March 1st, '98 TOWER. 



R2437 : page 52 

AT THE FEAST OF TABERNACLES. 

FEBRUARY 26. --JOHN 7:14,28-37. 

"If any man thirst, let him come unto me and drink." 

AS A RESULT of the miraculous feeding of the 
five thousand, noted in our last lesson, 
the multitude pronounced our Lord a great prophet, 
and proposed to take him by force to make him king. 
He, however, knew that such was not the Father's 
program; that, on the contrary, he was to fulfil a mission 
of contradiction of sinners, which would end in 
death, and that the Kingdom to which he was heir 
could only thus be attained— that the Kingdom promised 
him was not of this world, not of the present 
order and arrangement, but of a new dispensation. 
Our Lord therefore sent his disciples away by boat, 
while he himself withdrew to the mountain, subsequently 
meeting his disciples, walking on the water. 

Six months more of preaching and teaching in 
Galilee, without any apparent effort to take advantage 
of the popular interest in his miracles, to forward his 
cause as a king, began to tell upon his brethren— his 
kinsfolk— who began to lose confidence, for their interest 
all along had been rather of pride than of faith. 
Now the time to go up to Jerusalem to celebrate the 
Feast of Tabernacles having come, they noticed that 
Jesus was making no special preparations to attend. 
They were anxious that his power should be put to 
the test— Either do something, and make yourself great 
in the eyes of the whole world, or give the whole 
matter up and admit that your claims to Messiahship 
are fraudulent— was their attitude. Hence they said, 
Why do you not go up to the feast? Any person who 
makes such claims as you put forth should not make 
them in secret, but should seek the largest opportunities 



for publicity. You tell us that you have eternal 

life, and that you are able to give it to others, but apparently 

you are afraid to risk your life: "For neither 

did his brethren believe on him." 

Our Lord's answer pointed out that it was very 
different with them than with him— they might go at 
any time, but he was under certain restrictions. They 

R2437 : page 53 

had not drawn upon them the murderous animosity of 
the most influential and powerful class of the nation. 
He had done this, by faithfulness to the truth which 
he came to the world to serve. While it is true that 
"Jesus did not walk in Jewry (Judea) because the Jews 
sought to kill him," yet this evidently was not for any 
fear of death, but because he realized that "his hour 
was not yet come." He felt it, therefore, to be his 
duty to cooperate to the extent of his ability with what 
he knew respecting the Father's plan, and not to ignore 
that plan so as to require a special miracle for his 
deliverance, that the divine plan might not be 
frustrated. 

There are lessons here for all who are seeking to 
walk in the Master's footsteps:— 

(1) If we are finding no opposition in the world 

it is because we have not been faithful to our Father's 

Word, and to our appointed mission in connection with 

it,— not been about the Father's business: for our 

Master declared that it would be with us, his followers, 

as with himself— not being of the world the world 

would hate us, would say all manner of evil against us 

falsely, and think that those who persecuted us did 

God service. The positive declaration is, "Yea, and 

all that will live godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer persecution. 

(2 Tim. 3:12.) We are still in this time 

of persecution; the great Adversary is not yet bound, 

and if we are entirely free from such opposition it is 

a sure indication that we are not living up to our privileges 

in godliness— not following closely enough in the 

footsteps of Jesus to incite the animosity of the Adversary 

and his blinded servants. 

(2) We are to remember that the special opponents 
of our Master were not the unbelieving world, 

but were the unbelieving, unfaithful professors of holiness 

and of complete devotion to the divine law. So 

with us, our special opponents and defamers and persecutors 

are to be looked for inside and not outside the 

pale of the nominal Christian church. 

(3) We may profit by our Lord's example in not 
needlessly and unwisely placing ourselves in positions 

of jeopardy, expecting the Lord to miraculously intervene 
for our preservation. Like our Lord, however, 
we are not under any consideration to deny the truth, 
nor to forsake a duty for the preservation of our lives. 
We see that when the most wise and appropriate time 



came our Lord went to the Feast, and spoke fearlessly 

and boldly. So our caution in the protection of life, 

etc., is not to be the result of fear and lack of confidence 

in divine providence, nor lack of courage to do 

our duty, but merely the caution and prudence which 

desires to cooperate as far as possible with the divine 

will. 

Our Lord knew the disposition of the Pharisees to 
kill him. He knew also that they would hesitate a 
great deal more to make any attempt against him on 
the occasion of these Feasts, when Jerusalem was full 
of visitors, thousands of whom would be from Galilee 
and more or less his friends and the friends of his disciples, 
who were also Galileans. He may have known, 
too, of some arrangements among the rulers to apprehend 
him at the beginning of the feast, during the 
commotion incident to the arrival of pilgrims. At all 
events, acting upon his own superior knowledge of the 
situation, he deferred his going until after the multitudes 
had gone, and then went in a quiet manner, 
avoiding teaching, miracles, etc. 

In the midst of the feast-week he appeared in the 
Temple, teaching the people. His enemies had sought 
him previously, and were rather surprised that he had 
not come as usual, but now they beheld him teaching 
publicly and boldly; but they refrained from laying 
hands on him, because they feared the people— they 
feared that too large a proportion would have at least 
a sympathy for his teachings, recognizing that he 
"taught them as one having authority," with positiveness, 
and not with uncertainty, as themselves. The 
fact that many of the multitude were favorably impressed, 
and inquired amongst themselves whether or 
not they could expect any greater miracles from Messiah 
at his coming than those which Jesus had already 
performed, and the fact also that he was teaching publicly, 
and the rulers did not interfere with him, led 
some to inquire, "Do the rulers really acknowledge that 
this is the Messiah?" 

Thus the rulers saw that their timidity was really 
advancing the cause which they hated, and they sent 
officers to take him; but apparently these felt that they 
must hear some rebellious, anarchistic or blasphemous 
utterances from his lips or they would not be justified 
in the eyes of the people in making the arrest, and so 
they waited, to watch him. They were charmed with 
"the gracious words which proceeded out of his 
mouth," and returned without him, saying, "Never 
man spake like this man." Then Nicodemus, in his 
heart believing Jesus to be a teacher, sent from God, 
tho doubtful of his being the Messiah, raised his voice, 
being a member of the Sanhedrin, and expostulated, 
defending the officers, and exclaiming, "Doth our law 
judge any man before it hear him and know what he 
doeth?" Even this plea for justice was met with the 
sarcastic remark, "Art thou also of Galilee?" And 



the meeting disbanded, angry because they were foiled 
in their murderous attempt. 

This should be true as far as possible with all of 
the Lord's footstep followers: their speech should be 
with grace, with moderation, the overflow of hearts 
full of loving sympathy for the truth and all who love 

R2438 : page 54 

and seek it. Their words should always be well within 
the limits of reason and righteousness, and strictly in 
conformity to the Word of the Lord. And their manner, 
their conduct, as living epistles, should harmonize 
with this, so that even their enemies would marvel, 
and take knowledge of them that they had been with 
Jesus and learned of him. 

Having in mind the murderous designs of his enemies, 
and that thus it behooveth the Son of Man to 
suffer and to rise from the dead, and knowing that the 
end of his pilgrimage was only about six months distant, 
our Lord said, I will be with you but a little while, 
"and then I go unto him that sent me." Then, taking 
into account the predicted troubles to come upon 
Israel, expounded to his Apostles subsequently (Matt. 24) 
and that they would endure much before he would 
offer himself to them again as the Messiah at the second 
advent, he added, "Ye shall seek me, and shall not find 
me." The Jews have been seeking the Messiah during 
the eighteen centuries of trouble experienced since 
that time, for, as the Apostle declares, "the rest were 
blinded," except the remnant which received the Lord 
at his first advent— "the day of their visitation." So 
our Lord declared to them subsequently, "Ye shall 
see me no more until that day when ye shall say, Blessed 
is he that cometh in the name of the Lord." The 
prophet tells us that they shall then look upon him 
whom they have pierced, and mourn for him as an 
only beloved son, and that then the Lord will pour upon 
them the spirit of prayer and supplication, their 
blindness being then turned away.— Rom. 11:27-32. 

When our Lord declared that they could not follow 
him to the place to which he was going, the people 
speculated whether or not he meant that as he had 
shown himself willing to preach to the lowest classes 
of Israel (publicans and sinners), he might now purpose 
to leave Palestine entirely, and go to the "dispersed 
amongst the Gentiles," the scattered Jews 
amongst the Greeks,— speaking the Greek language 
and not the Syrian, the language of the Jews in Palestine. 
Here we see afresh the error of the so-called 
"Anglo-Israelites," who have a theory about "lost" (?) 
tribes of Israel. The scattered Jews were not considered 
lost in our Lord's time, evidently, and this 
statement of the multitude is in full accord with the 
statement of the Apostle, when he speaks of "the twelve 
tribes scattered abroad." The only sense in which 



these tribes are lost is that they have become so thoroughly 
combined and amalgamated that all tribal distinctions 
are lost, and very few Jews in the world to-day 
have the slightest idea of which tribe their ancestors 
belonged to. 

Our Lord's remark, "Thither ye cannot come," 
is worthy of consideration from another standpoint. 
He did not mean that he was about to establish a 
kingdom, and that they could not get into the kingdom, 
but he did mean that he was going to heaven, 
and that they could not come to heaven. This is evident 
from his further statement, "Ye are from beneath, 
I am from above: ye are of this world; I am not of 
this world. I have said, therefore, unto you that ye 
shall die in your sins."— John 8:21-29. 

But the poor, disbelieving Jews are not the only 
ones who cannot go to heaven. The Scriptures clearly 
indicate that Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, and all the 
holy prophets, have not gone there. (See Acts 2:34; 
Heb. 11:39,40.) Moreover, this same declaration 
was repeated by the Lord to his believing followers, 
saying "Yet a little while I am with you. Ye shall 
seek me: and I said unto the Jews, Whither I go you 
cannot come; so now I say to you." (John 13:33.) 
It is because the believers of the past as well as the 
believers of the present age could not go to our Lord, 
that all of them who were rightly instructed from his 
Word looked earnestly for his return, his second advent, 
his coming in glory and kingdom power, according 
to his promise, "I will come again and receive you 
unto myself, that where I am ye may be also."— 
John 14:3. 

Many have lost sight of the hope set before us in 
the Gospel, and have accepted instead a hope that has 
no foundation, except like the errors of fleshly Israel, 
in "the traditions of the elders"— the hope that when 
they die they will not be dead, but more alive than 
ever: a hope that is as contrary to reason as to the 
Word of God, in which it finds not one solitary word 
of support. "But he that hath this hope in him [the 
hope of the second coming of the Lord to make up his 
jewels, to receive his faithful ones to himself] purifieth 
himself even as he is pure." There is no greater 
incentive to faithfulness than this, the true Gospel 
hope. 

The last day of the Feast of Tabernacles was the 
eighth day, for it lasted in all for that period. The 
seven days of the feast were devoted to sacrificing, 
seventy bullocks being burned upon the altar, and understood 
to be sacrificed on behalf of the whole world, 
but the eighth day was specially a Jewish day, and was 
the most joyous day of this joyful thanksgiving feast. 
Describing it, Geikie says:— 

"The whole week was full of excitement, the great 
altar smoking with whole burnt offerings of oxen, 
lambs and rams, besides the solemnity of the morning 



and evening sacrifice, the Sabbath sacrifice, and countless 
private voluntary sacrifices and offerings of all kinds. 
Every available spot inside Jerusalem, and in the hollows, 
and on the slopes around it (which, by legal fiction, 
were counted holy ground) was covered with huts 
or tabernacles of wattled or interplaited twigs, set off by 

R2438 : page 55 

branches of trees, fronds of palms, and all kinds of 
ornamental greenery." 

But the last day of the feast, called the great day, 
the day of special rejoicing, had one peculiar feature 
—its Water-offering, and it was on this day, and probably 
in connection with the pouring out of this libation, 
that, taking it for a text, our Lord lifted up his 
voice, saying, "If any man thirst let him come unto 
me and drink." He is here presenting himself as the 
giver of the water of life, as in the more private discourse 
to the woman of Samaria. He is the fountain 
of life, the fountain of truth, the fountain of refreshment, 
to all who accept him. In every human heart 
there are thirstings, longing desires, and all who have 
sought to satisfy these desires from earthly fountains 
of fame or pleasure or wealth have found that they do 
not satisfy; but those who have received the water of 
life, the truth, the grace of God in Christ, have received 
the only satisfying portion. Lord, ever more 
give us of this water. 

An able writer, Edersheim, gives us a very interesting 
account of the last day of the Feast of Tabernacles, 
the great day, as follows:— 

"Let us suppose ourselves in the number of worshipers 
who, on 'the last, the great day of the feast,' 
are leaving their 'booths' at daybreak to take part in 
the service. The pilgrims are all in festive array. In 
his right hand each carries a branch consisting of a 
myrtle or willow branch tied together with a palm 
branch (Lev. 23:40). In his left hand he carries a 
bough of the so-called Paradise apple, a species of 
citron. Thus armed, the festive multitude would divide 
into three bands. One of these, to the sound of 
music, started in a procession from the temple. It followed 
a priest who bore a golden pitcher, capable of 
holding three log (rather more than two pints). They 
proceeded to the fountain of Siloam, in the valley south 
of the temple. Here the priest filled from this fountain 
the golden pitcher, and brought it back into the court 
of the temple, amid the shouts of the multitude, and 
the sound of cymbals and trumpets. The rejoicing 
was so great that the rabbis used to say that he who 
had never been present at this ceremony, and at the 
other similar ceremonies by which this feast was distinguished, 
did not know what rejoicing meant. The 
return was so timed that they should arrive just as 
they were laying the pieces of the sacrifice on the great 



altar of burnt offering, toward the close of the ordinary 
morning sacrifice service. The water from the golden 
pitcher was poured upon the altar. Immediately the 
great 'Hallel,' consisting of Psa. 113-118, was chanted 
antiphonally, or rather with responses, to the accompaniment 
of the flute. At the close of this festive 
morning service there was a pause in the services while 
the priests prepared to offer the special sacrifices for 
the day. At this moment there arose, so loud as to 
be heard throughout the temple, the voice of Jesus. 
He interrupted not the services, for they had for the 
moment ceased; he interpreted, and he fulfilled them." 



R2438 : page 55 

"YE SHALL BE FREE INDEED." 

--MARCH 5.-JOHN 8:12,31-36.- 

"If the Son therefore shall make you free, 
ye shall be free indeed."— John 8:36. 

OUR Lord's discourses of this lesson are presumed 
to have been delivered on the day following the 
eighth or great day of the Feast of Tabernacles, referred 
to in our last lesson: this conclusion is based upon the 
statement of the first verse of this chapter and the 
last verse of the seventh chapter. It appears that, altho 
the eighth was the last day of the Feast proper, another 
day was kept to a certain degree, the people being 
loth to relinquish the joys of the season. Another view 
is that this was a part of the discourse of the eighth day. 

It is said that during this festival there were two 
great lights near the porch of the Temple, where Jesus 
discoursed (the Court of the Women— the portion of 
the Temple structure open to women as well as to men). 
These lights or candelabra, ornamented and gilded, 
were about seventy-five feet high, and threw a great 

R2439 : page 55 

light over the city, extraordinary for that period. It 
is presumed that this may have given Jesus the text 
for a discourse on the light of the world: but it is possible 
that our Lord took occasion to make this observation 
at the time of the performance of a certain ceremony 
by the Jews, described by Buxdorf as follows: 

The ninth day, or day after the expiration of the 
eighth, which belonged to the "Feast of Tabernacles," 
is a solemn day likewise, and is called, "The Feast of 
Joy for the Law;" because on that day the last section 
of the Law was read, the rest having been read weekly 
during the course of the preceding Sabbaths. On 
this ninth day the custom of the Jews was to take all 



the books of the Law out of the chest, and to put a 
candle into it, in allusion to Prov. 6:23, and more 
particularly to Psa. 119:105.— Synag. Jud., c. xxii. 

This act, symbolically considered, would imply, 
first, that the Law was a light, and secondly, that ultimately 
the Jewish Law would be superseded by the 
True Light— the Gospel of the grace of God in Jesus 
Christ our Lord. 

Either this last, or the two great lamps, or both 
of them, were quite a sufficient suggestion and illustration 
of the lesson which our Lord designed to inculcate. 
The thought of the one is that the world is 
in darkness, and needs the Light of Life, and that he 
who walks in the light will not stumble. The thought 
or suggestion of the other is equally comprehensible, 
implying that ultimately the vail of ignorance shall be 
removed, and the spirit of the truth shall be discerned, 

R2439 : page 56 

and thus Jesus, as the True Light, shall lighten every 
man that cometh into the world, respecting the divine 
character and law, and the conditions upon which eternal 
life may be enjoyed. 

Another suggestion is that, as this Feast of Tabernacles 
represented the period of Israel's sojourn in 
the wilderness, en route to Canaan, the great light to 
be followed would probably refer to the pillar of fire 
and cloud, which led Israel during the wilderness journey 
as a great light, and which was to their enemies 
who pursued them a cloud of great darkness. This 
thought is in full accord with the others, for we realize 
that spiritual Israel is journeying toward the heavenly 
Canaan, through the wilderness of sin, and that 
our Lord and his teachings are a light and a guide to 
his people— to the entire household of faith, but especially 
to those who are vigilant and attentive to the 
heavenly counsel. 

That relationship to Christ is not a matter which, 
being put on in the instant of consecration, can never 
be dissolved, is clearly shown by the statement of vss. 31 and 32. 
Therein our Lord sets forth that discipleship 
is the thing that is entered into by those who accept 
him as the Savior and the privileges and blessings 
obtainable only through him. And discipleship, as 
here shown, does not signify mastery: on the contrary, 
it signifies that the one who becomes a disciple is, until 
perfect, a novice, who becomes a disciple in order 
that under the Master's instructions he may come, 
morally and intellectually, to the full stature of manhood 
in Christ. A great mistake is made on this point, 
not only by worldly people, who expect perfection in 
all who have named the name of Christ, but also by 
Christians themselves, who vainly imagine that a fulness 
of consecration to the Lord should produce in them 
instantaneous perfection: some vainly and sinfully 



claiming that they are without sin, and thereby give 
the inference that they have no need of a Savior, a 
Mediator, and his merit, to cover their blemishes of 
omission and commission. 

The correct thought to get is the one which is 
clearly set forth in our Lord's Word; viz., that sinners 
are not called to discipleship, but are called to repentance 
and faith in the Redeemer for the forgiveness of 
their sins (justification): but this is all to the intent 
that as justified persons they may, by a full consecration 
to the Lord, become his disciples,— pupils in the 
school of Christ. 

Why do we enter this school? What lessons are 
we to learn in it? And for what reasons do we seek 
to learn these lessons, and consecrate ourselves to 
their study? 

The incentive to enter the school of Christ is the 
heavenly Father's invitation to justified believers who 
approach his throne of grace by the new and living 
way— Christ: to such he extends a "high calling," 
inviting such to become "sons of God; and if children, 
then heirs, heirs of God and joint-heirs with Jesus 
Christ our Lord, if so be that we suffer with him, that 
we may be also glorified together." 

This school of Christ may be considered a school 
of self-denial, of self-sacrifice, prompted by love and 
maintained by devotion. The great Teacher of this 
school, appointed by the Father to instruct those who 
shall be accepted as his "brethren," was himself educated 
in the same school, under the Father's inspection 
and direction— "He learned obedience by the 
things which he suffered; and being made perfect [acceptable 
to the high station to which he was called— 
the divine nature] he became the author of eternal 
salvation unto all them that obey him."— Heb. 5:8. 

It was necessary that the "Only Begotten of the 
Father, full of grace and truth," should be tried in all 
points like as we are— that his obedience to the Father's 
will at any cost should be fully proved and demonstrated, 
as well as his love for his neighbor, humanity, 
whom by the Father's arrangement he came to redeem 
and to uplift. Much more, it is necessary that we who 
belong to this fallen but redeemed race, having been 
called to joint-heirship with him, should receive instruction 
and disciplining in this school which the 
Father has provided for those invited to be his sons, 
—partakers of the divine nature,— to the intent that 
we may fully put on the spirit of Christ, which received 
the Father's unstinted approval. Indeed, we 
have the plain declaration to the effect that we are all 
called according to a predestination on God's part that 
we might become copies of his Son, and thus be "meet 
for the inheritance of the saints in light," as joint-heirs 
in the Kingdom. 

From this we see that in joining the Lord, through 
faith and consecration, we are not proclaiming ourselves 



graduates and heirs, but are proclaiming ourselves 
students, disciples, who desire to be prepared to 
inherit "the things which God hath in reservation for 
them that love him." If this thought be kept in mind, 
as the divine teaching on this subject, it will help to 
prevent our discouragement with ourselves when we 
find that unavoidably we do those things which we 
ought not to have done, and leave undone those things 
which we ought to have done, and that in our flesh 
dwells no perfection.— 1 Cor. 2:9; Rom. 7:25. 

Moreover, we are to remember that it is not the flesh 
that has entered the school of Christ, and is under his instructions 
and preparation for the Kingdom,— for flesh 
and blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of God. (1 Cor. 15:50.) 
Our acceptance of the divine call to spirit nature 
meant the renouncement of the earthly nature in 

R2439 : page 57 

every sense of the word, and meant our begetting as 

new creatures— "sons of God." It is the "new creature," 

the new mind, the new will, that is in the school 

of Christ, and that is to be perfected— to be brought 

into full accord with the divine will— to become a copy 

or likeness of the Lord. We will never succeed in getting 

our flesh into absolute harmony with the divine 

law, because of its imperfections, inherited and otherwise. 

And he who is looking for perfection of his 

flesh, and who is resting his faith therein, must of necessity 

have a poor hope of ever attaining to the likeness 

of Christ— of ever becoming one of the predestinated 

class— "a copy of his Son."— Rom. 8:29. 

It is unnecessary that we should point out that 
the new mind, in proportion as it develops in likeness 
to the mind of Christ, will relax no efforts to keep the 
body under, with its motions of sin— to keep the will 
of the flesh dead. Surely, no spirit-begotten son of 
God could allow sin to reign in his mortal body: should 
sin to any degree control him, it will not be willingly, 
and hence could be but momentarily— until the new 
mind, the new creature, seeing the uprising of the 
flesh, would conquer it, obtaining the promised grace 
and help in every time of need, from the heavenly 
store-house of grace,— Christ. 

This thought, rightly entertained, will help true 
disciples to appreciate their own position, and not to 
be utterly cast down if overtaken in a fault of the 
flesh, so long as they realize that their hearts are not 
in sympathy with the sin and unrighteousness, but on 
the contrary in full sympathy with the principles and 
instructions of our Teacher, and longing to be pleasing 
and acceptable in his sight. And this correct 
thought will also help all such to exercise fervency of 
love amongst themselves, toward the "brethren," who 
similarly are disciples, pupils in this school,— new 
creatures, not according to the flesh, but according to 



the spirit of their minds. If, therefore, each shall see 
blemishes in the flesh of the "brethren," disapproved 
and striven against, each should remember that the 
evil which he sees is that of his brother's enemy 
and not the evils of the brother himself, the "new 
creature;"— if so be that he gives us the assurance 
that his heart, his will, is in harmony with the Lord 
and his law of Love; and that he is daily seeking to 
learn the lessons taught in this school of Christ; and 
seeking to fight a successful warfare against the weaknesses 
of the flesh. 

This is Scripturally termed walking in the light, 
and not stumbling about in the darkness— understanding 
and acting upon and in harmony with the divine 
arrangement— viewing matters as God views them, 
and as he presents them in the Word of his grace. We 
need not, however, expect the worldly-minded to be 
willing or able to view the Lord's consecrated people 
in this light— of love, of charity, of patience, of long 
suffering, of brotherly kindness. On the contrary our 
Adversary, "the god of this world," points out to them 
the hypocrite, who uses the name of Christ and the 

R2440 : page 57 

law of Love as a cloak of maliciousness, selfishness, 
etc., and this Adversary continually seeks to misrepresent 
the terms and conditions of the school of Christ, 
not only to the world and to the hypocritical professors, 
but also and especially to the true disciples, whom 
he would fain discourage and turn back from the right 
way— persuading them, contrary to the Word of the 
Lord, that they are being judged according to the 
flesh, and not according to the spirit, the new mind. 

"Disciples indeed" are those who will finish their 
course in this school of Christ and graduate and become 
joint-heirs with their Lord, and ultimately be 
associates with him in teaching and blessing all the 
families of the earth. But joining the school does not 
bring these results necessarily; as our Lord indicated, 
it is only by continuing in the school, continuing under 
his direction, under the direction of his Word of truth, 
faithfully and perseveringly, that the grand object of 
this school shall be attained. Nevertheless, at each 
step of the journey it may be our privilege to see that 
we are making progress— that we are coming to know 
more and more of the truth, and that it is more and 
more making us free. We are not to expect an instantaneous 
knowledge nor an instantaneous freedom. 

The general effect of the light of the truth, of 
which the Word of God is the lamp, is to break the 
shackles of superstition and to make people independent, 
but these effects are of questionable profit to those 
who are not disciples in the school of Christ. To others, 
freedom and light of knowledge are apt to bring 
nearly as much bane as blessing, leading often to arrogance, 



self-conceit, unkindness, boastfulness, combativeness, 
dissatisfaction and general unhappiness. 
These evil results come upon those who are made free 
in some respects only, and left bound in other respects: 
and this is the general and growing condition of the 
civilized world to-day, including the majority in the 
nominal Church. 

But the true disciples, heeding the Word of the 
great Teacher, and continuing in all things to be his 
pupils, are not only set free from superstitions and ignorance, 
but also from the service of Sin; and receive 
instead a correct appreciation of their own natural 
weaknesses and blemishes, and of the divine mind— 
the truth. In consequence, their freedom is one which 
blesses instead of injuring them; one which brings humility 
instead of pride and boastfulness; one which 
brings patience instead of anger; one which brings 
generosity and benevolence instead of spitefulness and 
selfishness; one which brings joy and peace instead of 

R2440 : page 58 

discontent and bitterness of spirit. Truly, the Son 
alone can make us free indeed. 

And yet, be it remembered, our freedom is not a 
freedom of the flesh, but a freedom of the heart, the 
mind, the will, the new nature. And this freedom is 
necessarily incomplete so long as we have this treasure 
in an earthen vessel— so long as the new creature must 
use the imperfect body of the flesh as its instrument 
and exponent. These "brethren" of Christ, "sons of 
the highest," will be free in the absolute sense only 
when they attain their share in the first resurrection, 
—"I shall be satisfied when I awake in thy likeness." 

Our Lord points out that those who commit sin 
are the servants of Sin, and are not free. The Apostle 
declares, "He that committeth sin is of the devil," 
and yet declares that, "If we say we have no sin we 
deceive ourselves, and the truth is not in us." (1 John 3:8; 
1:8.) How, then, shall we reconcile these opposing 
statements and understand the Scripture which declares, 
"Being made free from sin, ye became the servants 
of righteousness?"— Rom. 6:18. 

We answer that the Scriptures ascribe no sin to 
the new mind, and no perfection in righteousness to 
our fallen flesh: both of these facts must be kept in 
mind in studying this subject. The "new creature" 
begotten of God (whose flesh is reckoned dead) and 
which is represented by the new mind, CANNOT SIN, 
because in its very essence as the "seed" or germ, implanted 
by the truth, "the spirit of the truth," it is 
opposed to sin. (James 1:18.) This new creature is 
so fully in accord with righteousness, so fully imbued 
with the spirit of the Lord, the spirit of holiness, that 
it delights in holiness, and not in sin; and this must 
be the case so long as this begotten or holy spirit condition 



continues. He that is begotten* of God sinneth 
not (willingly— does not approve of nor take pleasure 
in sin), because his seed remaineth in him,— the holy 
seed of the truth, the spirit of the truth, with which 
he was begotten, and "that wicked one toucheth him 
not."-l John 3:9; 5:18. 

So long as the heart (the mind, the will) is holy, 
in harmony with God and with righteousness,— that is 
to say, so long as the seed of our begetting, the spirit 
of the truth, the spirit of holiness, continues in us,— the 
new mind cannot approve of sin, but must and will be 
its opponent. Even tho many of the battles fought 
are with the members of our own fallen and weak human 
nature, their appetites and desires, we nevertheless, 
as "new creatures," are separate and distinct 
from the flesh and the weaknesses and imperfections 
of the flesh are not imputed to the new creature in 
Christ Jesus, but are reckoned as covered, hidden under 
the merits of our Lord's redemptive sacrifice. 

Thus, altho our flesh, through weaknesses of the 
fall, and through evil besetments, may never come up 
to the standard of the divine law, notwithstanding all 
our efforts to bring it into subjection to the same, nevertheless 
we, as "new creatures," have the Scriptural 
assurance that "the righteousness of the law is fulfilled 
in us ["new creatures"] who are walking not 
after the flesh [but resisting day by day its seductive 
influences to the best of our ability, and seeking divine 
aid] but after the spirit [we are walking,— not up to 
the spirit probably, but following day by day, to the 
intent that eventually we shall, by the grace and help 
of our great Teacher, arrive at the glorious condition 
of character as "new creatures" which even the Heavenly 
Father can accept as copies of his dear Son]."— 
Rom. 8:4. 

On the contrary, if any who had thus become 
"new creatures" should engage in sin willingly, heartily, 
and live according to the flesh, it is a sure sign 
that the seed of truth wherewith he was begotten has 
perished: for so long as this seed remaineth in him, he 
cannot sin willingly.— 1 John 3:9. 

Those who are slaves of sin, who have not been 
made free indeed and received into sonship, may sometimes 
be used for a time, under present conditions, as 
servants of the divine plan, in the accomplishment of 
the plan of the ages; as, for instance, God sometimes 
overrules and uses the wrath of man and Satan's opposition; 
but God has made no provision for the everlasting 
continuance of sin and those who are its slaves. 
Ultimately the only ones who shall be privileged to 
exist at all will be sons of God. Not to be misunderstood 
here, let us remember that there are sons of 
two ages:— 

(1) The sons of this Gospel age, begotten of the 
Father to joint-heirship with Jesus Christ, our Lord, 
as his "brethren," otherwise called the Bride of the 



First-begotten, who has inherited all things. "Now 
are we [thus] the sons of God." This house of sons, 
begotten to the spirit nature, will soon be complete, 
and never have further additions to its members; but 
we are to remember that— 

(2) Another house of sons is shortly to be started. 
For the declaration is that our Lord Jesus shall become 
a Father, a Life-giver, to the world— to whosoever 
will accept this gift of God under the terms of the New 
Covenant during the Millennium. Those will be the 
sons of the after resurrection, while the Church are 
to be sons of the first resurrection, the first-born ones. 
The Apostle, referring to these sons of Christ who will 
be begotten during the Millennial age, and be born to 
full sonship at its close, declares that they also shall 
be delivered "from the bondage of corruption [death] 
into the glorious liberty of the sons of God"— freedom 
from sin, death, sighing, crying, pain, etc. They will 
inherit these, the common privileges of all the sons of 
God, and in addition the earthly heritage, the "purchased 
possession," secured for mankind by the great 
sin-offering.— Rom. 8:21-23. 

The restitution class of earth will thus be sons of 
Christ, who bought their life and who will give afresh 
to them that which was lost in Adam and which he 
redeemed at the cost of his own life. But this will not 
imply that such will not eventually own Jehovah as 
their Father also and be owned by him as his sons. 
On the contrary, the typical custom in Israel on this 
point makes this all plain. For instance, all Israelites 
were known as children of Abraham, children of Israel 
and children of Jacob. 

But the central thought we would impress is that 
all who shall be recognized by God as sons at any time 
must be freed from the incubus of sin by the Only Begotten 
Son of God, the Mediator,— and such only are 
free indeed. 



*Gennao here signifies begotten, and refers to the beginning 
and not the completion of our "change" of nature.— See also Revised 
Version, and the Emphatic Diaglott. 



R2440 : page 59 

"WHEREAS I WAS BLIND, NOW I SEE." 

-MARCH 12.-JOHN 9:1-11.— 

EVERY traveler in eastern countries is sure to be 
impressed by the fact that blindness is much 
more common there than in Europe and America. 
Tabulated information on this subject, in Encyclopedia 



Americana, shows that in 1870 the proportion of blind 
in America was one in 1900 population; in Europe the 
proportion was larger; viz., 1 in 1094; while in China 
the average was 1 in 400 population. According to no 
less an authority than Dr. Geikie, Egypt has one blind 
person to every 100 of population. Palestine lying near 
to Egypt, and having conditions very similar, especially 
amongst the lower classes, may be supposed to have 
had at least half as many; viz., the terribly large proportion 
of 1 in every 200 of population. 
Canon Tristram, writing on the subject, says:— 
"Blindness is common in Palestine to a degree which 
we in western lands can scarcely realize. There is probably 
no country in the world, except Egypt, where this 
affliction is so prevalent. At Gaza, for instance, it is 
said that one-third of the population have lost one or 
both eyes; and from my own observation in that city I 
should unhesitatingly say that the statement is not exaggerated. 
But amongst these cases it is difficult to 
find any born blind." 

This blindness is in great measure the result of the 
scarcity of water, and the neglect of children whose eyes 
are in consequence attacked by the flies. The miracle 
brought to our attention in this lesson differs from the 
five other instances of the healing of the blind by our 
Lord, mentioned in the Scriptures, in that this man 
was born blind. In our Lord's time the science of surgery 
had not advanced so far as at present, and consequently, 
as herein stated by the one healed, the cure 
was a marvel, the like of which had never been heard 
of. Even yet we believe that there are only five cases 
on record of successful operations upon those born blind. 
Our Lord's cure of such blindness, with the simple prescription 
used, would therefore be a remarkable miracle 
to-day, and much more so was it in that day. 

ORIENTALISM, MORMONISM, THEOSOPHY. 



The question of the disciples, whether it was this 
man's sin or the sin of his parents that caused him to 
be born blind, implies either an extreme simplicity on 
their part, not to see that the man could not have sinned 
before his birth, or quite possibly it implied that some 
of the absurd notions of the far East— of India— had 
reached the Jews: one of these was and still is that each 
child born into the world had a previous existence, in 
which it had done either good or evil, the rewards or 
punishments of which were represented in the conditions 
of the present life. This absurdity is being revived, 
even in Christian lands, by so-called Theosophists, 
and by two bodies of people known as "Mormons," 
in the United States. It is scarcely necessary 
to point out that such a theory finds no support whatever 
in any statement of the Scriptures. Quite to the 



contrary, it is most emphatically contradicted by the 
Scriptures, which declare man's creation to have been a 
direct creation from God— not a reincarnation of some 
being which had previously existed. This thought is 
consistently maintained throughout the Bible, in that 
we are distinctly told that the child receives its life from 
its father, and inherits good or evil according to his 
course of life, and not according to any course of life 
of its own in a previous condition or in another world. 
Thus the Lord declares that he visits the iniquities of 
the fathers upon the children to the third and fourth 
generation, and shows mercy unto thousands of them 
that love him and keep his commandments.— Exod. 20:5; 
Deut. 5:9. 

This heredity, we see, comes in the natural order 
of things. The tendency of sin is not only to break 
down the moral character, but also to vitiate and impair 
the physical system, while godliness, altho it cannot 
repair and make good the impairments of sin, can check 
these, and hold them measurably in restraint. The 
Scriptures again contradict this thought, in the declaration, 
"By one man's disobedience sin entered into the 
world, and death as a result of sin, and thus death 
passed upon all men because [thus] all men became 
sinners"— by heredity. And if by heredity then not 
as Theosophy, Mormonism and Orientalism declare;— 
not in consequence of some previous existence and sin 
on the part of the child. 

The whole matter is squared by the doctrine of the 
ransom, as all may readily see: for if our present blemishes, 
with which we are born into this world, were the 
results of sins committed in some previous condition 
of existence, the death of our Lord Jesus could not 
cancel them, and the doctrine of a ransom would be 
disproved. The doctrine of the ransom is unchangeably 
linked to the doctrine that Adam was a perfect human 
being in his creation, and that it was his sin and 
condemnation that passed to all of his posterity, through 
the channel of natural birth. The ransom ("corresponding 
price") given by our Lord Jesus, was a man's life 
for a man's life: that, "as by a man came death, by a 
man also should come the resurrection of the dead." 
Our Lord's ransom sacrifice, being the complete and corresponding 
price and offset to father Adam's sin, was 
constituted thereby an offset to all the results of his 
sin as they appear in his posterity— and thus we all 
were redeemed by the one sacrifice of Christ, the just 
for the unjust. 

IS ALL SICKNESS OF THE DEVIL? 



An increasingly large number of Christian people 
—including those who refuse medicines— are reaching 
the conclusion that all sickness is the direct result of 



sin and the work of the devil; and therefore that godly 
living will prevent sickness: and that in the event of 
sickness, if it be a punishment for sin, medicines should 
not be used, but, on the contrary, prayer should be 
made to God for the forgiveness of sin for which sickness 
is a punishment, and that the cure of the disease 
should be expected as a reward of repentance and faith 
exercised. 

We wonder how these Christian friends view this 
lesson. Like the disciples, they evidently would conclude 
that a man born blind must have been so born on 
account of sin— if not his own sin, the sins of his parents 
—for they account for all disease from this standpoint. 
Unfortunately they feel so satisfied with their 
conclusions on the subject that they do not inquire of 
the Lord, as did the apostles. And they do not hear 

R2440 : page 60 

his answer here given— that it was neither sin on the 
part of the man, nor on the part of his parents, which 
occasioned his blindness. 

If they were students of the Word they would note 
also the numerous statements of Scripture which clearly 
point out that calamities are not always punishments 
for sins: for instance, our Lord's declaration respecting 
the Galileans whose blood was mingled with the sacrifices, 
and those upon whom the tower of Siloam fell 
and slew them. (Luke 13:1-5.) Our Lord distinctly 
declares that these calamities did not indicate that the 
sufferers were sinners above other men. Likewise, in 
the case of the sickness and death of Lazarus. Our 
Lord declares, not that it was because of sin on the 
part of Lazarus, but that it was permitted in order to 
be for the glory of God. So in this lesson he declares 
that the fact that the man was born blind was not on 
account of sin, but on the contrary, "that the works of 
God should be made manifest in him." 

We are not denying that sin frequently brings sickness; 
on the contrary, we affirm this, and confirm this 
view with our Lord's words to some of those whom he 
healed, "Go, sin no more, lest a worse thing come upon 
thee." There is a great difference, however, between 
claiming that all sickness is of sin and the devil, and 
admitting that much of it is produced or intensified by 
sin. We go even further than this, and admit that in 
a general way all the blemishes of the present time may 
be indirectly traced to our great Adversary, Satan. For 
had it not been for his fall, and for the temptations 
which he presented to our first parents, we may suppose 
that there would have been no sin in the world; consequently 
no imperfection, no sighing, no crying, no dying. 
But it is thoroughly wrong to credit to Satan's 
power all the difficulties which we experience. We are 
glad indeed that he is limited and restrained; because 
under the weaknesses with which we are born we find 



quite sufficient of evil disposition and weakness received 
by heredity, and operating, not only between 
parent and child, but between neighbor and neighbor. 
We may be glad indeed that Satan's power to deceive 
is not permitted to vitiate our minds contrary to our 
wills, and not permitted to break down our wills, except 
as we give them over to sympathy and contact 
with evil things. We may be glad also that sickness 
and death working in man are not wholly subject to the 
prince of darkness, for altho the Scriptures declare that 
Satan's power is deathward, they also show us that he 
does not have this power unlimitedly, but can exercise 
it only under restraints and restrictions. This is most 
clearly indicated to us in the case of Job and his family. 
Rather, the Scriptures teach that Satan's power 
or influence is the result of the Adamic death operating 
in mankind and rendering all amenable to Satan's devices 
and deceptions.— Heb. 2:14. 

And, by the way, Job's case is another illustration 
of sickness and calamities of various kinds which were 
not the punishments of sin; for have we not Job's own 
testimony of his love for God, his confidence in him, 
and his faithful reliance upon him? "Tho he slay me, 
yet will I trust in him!" And more, we have the 
Lord's testimony to the same effect, in favor of his 
servant Job, and in reproof of his friends who wrongly 
represented that his sickness and calamities were punishments 
for sin. 

We conclude, then, upon Scriptural grounds, that 
not all sickness is in the nature of sin penalties, but 
that some sicknesses are as penalties. Hence, when 
the Christian shall find himself overtaken with sickness 
or other disasters, he should first of all inquire of himself, 
before the Lord, whether or not his difficulties are 
the result of— 

(1) A direct violation of the laws of his reason, 

as, for instance, indiscretion in eating, gratification of 
the appetite in respect to food which he knows is not 
suited to his physical conditions: or violation of recognized 
principles of conduct, as, for instance, the endorsing 
of a note, contrary to the instructions of the 
Lord's Word (Prov. 6:1), which has brought disaster 
to many. If he does not find his troubles to be the result 
of personal indiscretion he should look— 

(2) To see whether or not sin lies at his door; whether 

or not he has been living inconsistently, and might properly 

recognize his sickness or trouble as a punishment 

for his sin, his inconsistency. If he finds it to be so, 

he should of course immediately rectify the wrong to the 

extent of his ability, and seek forgiveness, mercy, at 

the throne of the heavenly grace, and expect that after 

suffering some chastisements he will be released. 

(3) Should he fail to find a cause for his difficulties 
in either of the foregoing, he should consider that 
quite possibly his difficulty, whatever its nature, was 
one of the ordinary casualties of life from which God 



does not wholly forefend his children— desiring them 
to walk by faith and not by sight: such casualties are 
necessary, that we may be very sympathetic with the 
world's troubles. 

(4) In some instances, as in Job's case and the 
case before us in this lesson, troubles may ultimately 

be found to have been permitted by the Lord, to be channels 
of mercy and blessing, if rightly received, as in 
these cases. 

(5) In all troubles, whether for discipline or for instruction 
in righteousness and the development of character, 

the children of God (and we are not considering 
others now) should forthwith begin to seek the blessing 
which they may be sure God has in store for them 
when he permits adversities. And this should not hinder 
their use of any means for relief upon which they 
can conscientiously ask the divine blessing: on the same 
principle that we labor for and eat the daily bread for 
which we pray, and which is none the less of divine 
provision. 

The work of God made manifest in this blind man 
was not merely in the miracle performed upon his natural 
eyes. It extended beyond this, and testified to 
the beholders the power of God, operating in Messiah. 
And it extended still further, in the case of the man 
who was healed: leading to the opening of the eyes of 
his understanding, it inducted him into discipleship 
to Christ. Had he not been born blind, had he not 
passed through just the experiences through which he 
did pass, how can we judge that he would have been 
in a better condition of heart to receive the Messiah 
than the educated Pharisees, who, with good natural 
sight, were thoroughly blinded respecting Messiah, his 
teachings and his work, so that they crucified him? 

And so it is in many instances with many who become 
the Lord's people. Looking back they can clearly 
see that things which at the time seemed to be adversities, 

R2440 : page 61 

disappointments, troubles, disadvantages, hardships, 
were really great blessings, in that they led to the 
opening of the eyes of their understanding,— were really 
providences and blessings in disguise. Those who 
do so realize the divine care, looking back, can praise 
the way God has led them day by day. 

CHRISTIAN SCIENCE MISBELIEFS. 



Amongst the various false doctrines of to-day none 
appears more inconsistent from the standpoint of science 
and Christianity than the system which brazenly and 
defiantly and in perversion of truth and conscience 
unites these two words as its name. It would be amusing, 



we may be sure, to hear one of the devotees of this 
theory explain this Scripture. For, notwithstanding 
the fact that their entire system is in opposition to the 
Scriptures, they make a cloak, a pretense, of believing 
the Scriptures, and of using them in support of their 
theory— chiefly with novices. We may be sure that 
they would attempt to twist and juggle it in some manner, 
and get it so far away from the truth and the subject 
as to at least confuse many people, who have very 
little knowledge of the Bible, and shallow powers of 
reasoning, especially those "who have not their senses 
exercised by reason of use," in connection with Scriptural 
subjects.— Heb. 5:14. 

Their theory is that there is no such thing as blindness, 
that it is simply a mistaken thought, a misbelief: 
since the parents of the blind man could not have misbelieved 
that their child would be born blind, the child 
itself, we presume they would say, got this misimpression 
before its birth. And then we have the inconsistency 
increased, for every one of intelligence knows that 
the infant at birth has no thought, correct or incorrect, 
on any subject. The fallacy of this theory is likewise 
proved, in the case of those born deaf and dumb. But 
argument and reason have no more force with "Christian 
Scientists" than have the Scriptures. Their infatuation 
with their delusion is so great that they are fully 
prepared to wrest facts, reason and Scripture— and then 
in perversion of all truth and consistency they call this 
"Christian Science." 

We are not contending with them respecting their 
use of the word "Science," for the most stupid should 
be able to see that there is nothing scientific in connection 
with their theory: but we do contend respecting 
their use of the word "Christian," because many do 
not recognize that they have not the slightest right to 
the use of this term. Our contention is that a Christian 
Scientist of full development cannot be a Christian, in 
any Scriptural sense of the word. 

(1) A Christian is one who believes in God the 
Father, and our Lord Jesus Christ, whom he hath sent 
to be a propitiation for our sins, our Redeemer and ultimately 
the Deliverer of all those who obey him. But 
Christian Science denies the very existence of God, 
claiming to believe merely in a principle of Good. To 
whatever extent a man has a good principle the God-quality 
is in him, say they; and to whatever extent a 
horse or a dog may have the good principles, to that 
extent these are Gods, and to be loved, etc., accordingly. 
Denying the Father, they of course deny also the Son 
whom he sent: and altho they acknowledge Jesus, it is 
not with a Christian acknowledgment. On the contrary, 
they hold that he was merely a member of the 
Adamic family, and that his preeminence above others 
was in respect to his character and teachings. And they 
claim that while in these respects he stood higher than 
other men of his day, yet he but feebly grasped at certain 



principles or truths which are to-day brought to 
the world by her distinguished highness, "Mrs. Dr. 
Eddy," who thus poses as being greater than Jesus, as 
an elephant is greater than a mouse; tho there be certain 
resemblances. 

(2) A Christian is one who believes in Christ as a 
Savior from sin as well as from its consequences;— 
death and its concomitants of pain, etc. But Christian 
Scientists deny that there is any sin, and deny also 
that there are any consequences of sin; hence, logically, 
they deny the ransom, for how could there be a ransom 
for sinners if none are sinners. Thus do they deny 
and ignore the very foundation of Christian faith, without 
which no one is a Christian— Scripturally. 

The absurdities of Christian Science commend 
themselves only to those who are either Scripturally ignorant 
or mentally weak; and their chief attractions 
are therefore— 

(1) The fact that they put on, as a garment of light, 
gentleness and kindness of word and manner. That 
these do not grow out of hearts thoroughly converted 

to the Lord, and begotten of his spirit of love is manifest: 
for altho kindness and patience and gentleness are 
manifested, the true essence of these is lacking, namely, 
love. Instead of manifesting love to be the mainspring 
of their meekness, patience, gentleness, they 
manifest ambition and money-love as their inspiring 
motives— so far as we are able to judge the tree by its 
fruits. So far as we are able to learn, their efforts to 
promulgate their views are confined to those who are 
able and willing to pay for the instruction good round 
prices; and so far as we are able to discern, their care 
of the sick shows a love of money and love of fame; 
and hence very few of the poor of this world have 
been injured by the doctrines of Christian Science, or 
cured of disease by its treatment. 

(2) The cure of disease without medicine, and 
sometimes almost miraculously, is in the nature of 
things calculated to attract and interest the "groaning 
creation"— just as the advertisements of patent medicines 
attract them. We unhesitatingly assert our conviction, 
that this power, manifested through Christian 
Scientists, is not of God, but of the Adversary, directly 
or indirectly. He no doubt directs his servants into the 
use of channels and means of which humanity in general, 
and even many learned physicians, are comparatively 
ignorant— channels of human nature which 

possibly in the future may be used by the Lord 

during times of restitution of all things. Our justification 

in ascribing their cures to an evil source, instead 

of to a good source, lies in the fact that they utterly repudiate 

the principles of Christianity, and we may be 

sure God would not cooperate to assist with his power 

those who deny his very existence, and who make void 

the gospel of the redemption through the blood of Christ. 

The miracle-working power in them we believe to be 



the same as the miracle-working power in Spiritism and 
in Orientalism, and in the charms of other Occultists— 
namely, Satanic power. 

R2440 : page 62 

If it be asked, How could Satan be interested in 
doing a good work? we answer: he does no such work 
amongst those who are thoroughly and stupidly ignorant: 
he is doing these works merely in the most civilized 
lands, and especially amongst the most enlightened 
of the people in the various denominations of Christendom. 
The Adversary thus assumes the garment of an 
angel of light and mercy, not to lead to the Light of the 
world— not to lead to the cross of Christ— not to lead 
to the Bible— but to lead away from these, to another 
hope of salvation, and to another teacher: to deceive, 
if it were possible, the very elect. And be it remembered 
that our Lord's words indicate that when matters 
come to this condition, where Satan will cast out 
Satan and heal disease, it is a marked evidence that his 
throne is tottering to its fall— that, so to speak, this is 
the last extremity of the Adversary's efforts to deceive. 



The Lord's method of giving sight to the blind 
man, we may reasonably suppose, was parabolic— that 
is to say, it contains a lesson under a figure. Since our 
Lord did not explain the significance of his action in 
making a clay ointment out of the dust with his spittle, 
and anointing the man's eyes with this, and sending 
him to wash them and to receive sight at the Pool of 
Siloam, we may each exercise our mental powers in 
thinking of what these different things would signify. 
But we are limited in our speculations, nevertheless, 
and may not run wild, but must restrain ourselves 
within the limits of plain statements of the Word of 
God respecting his plan of salvation. 

In harmony with these plain statements we may 
interpret our Lord's symbolical act thus: The blind 
man would fitly represent the world of mankind in 
general, who during the present life are mentally blind 
—who cannot now see the goodness, mercy and love of 
God as these may be recognized by others who are now 
able to see them. His being born blind would harmonize 
with this thought, for the blindness that is upon the 
world is to a large extent at least a matter of heredity. 
His blindness does not represent a blindness on the part 
of those who have once seen God's grace, represented 
in his Word and plan, and who have then become blind 
thereto, and who would represent the class mentioned 
by the Apostle as having once been enlightened, and 
who subsequently lose that enlightenment. (Heb. 6:4-6.) 
If then the blind man represents the blind world 
(who do not see, in the sense that the Church sees, of 



whom the Lord said, "Blessed are your eyes for they 

see") the time of the healing of such blindness is in the 

Millennial age, as Scripturally pointed out, when "All 

the blind eyes shall be opened, and the deaf ears unstopped." 

(Isa. 35:5.) And this agrees with the conditions 

of our Lord's miracle, because we are informed 

that this miracle took place on the Sabbath or seventh 

day, which corresponds to and typifies the Millennial 

Day, the seventh-thousand year period. 

Our Lord's words, nevertheless, seem to indicate 
that some part of this symbolical picture relates to the 
present age, for he said, "I must work the works of him 
that sent me while it is day: the night cometh wherein 
no man can work." In this statement the word "day" 
would seem to belong to the present time, and to be illustrated 
in the making of clay with our Lord's spittle, 
and the anointing of the blind man's eyes. The washing 
of his eyes and the cure would seem to belong to 
the next age, the Millennial age. The Lord's spittle, 
the secretions of his mouth, might represent the truth 
as fitly as would the words of his mouth— it is another 
figure, but seemingly of the same force and meaning. 
He uttered the truth, brought it in contact with the dust 
of the earth— not in contact with all the dust of the 
earth, but with a limited portion, an elect or select portion, 
—and of this he made the anointing clay. The 
Scriptures do inform us, in harmony with this, that the 
Word of God's grace, delivered through and by our 
Lord Jesus, is designed in the present age to act upon 
a small fragment of humanity, and to consecrate them 
and make them meet for the Master's use in the blessing 
of the world, in the anointing of the eyes of the 
blind. From this standpoint of view the making of 
the clay would represent the formation of the elect 
Church for the blessing of the poor, blind world. And 
quite possibly not only is this work of making the clay 
now in progress, but perhaps some portion of the anointing 
work is now being done, as is intimated by the 
Scripture which declares that the Gospel must first be 
preached for a witness in all the world before the end of 
this age. The world must be witnessed to during this 
age, but the world will not have the eyes of its understanding 
opened during this age: it must wait until the 
great washing time of the Millennial age, of which the 
Scriptures declare, "In that day there shall be a fountain 
opened to the house of David for sin and for uncleanness." 
(Zech. 13:1.) In full agreement with this 
is the significance of the word Siloam. It signifies "The 
sending forth," or "The fountain." 

The Pharisees objected to the Lord's goodness, because 
forsooth it infracted some of their hypercritical 
dogmas and traditions. This is interesting, as showing 
to what extent religious forms and ceremonies may bind 
and blind intelligent and reverential people. And this 
should be a lesson to all the intelligent and reverent, 
leading them to great care in judging righteous judgment, 



according to the standard of the divine Word, 

and not according to their prejudices and revered creeds 

and the traditions of the fathers. 

Still another lesson may be found in the fact that 
the man who confessed our Lord Jesus, and who stood 
up in bold defence of righteousness, was greatly blessed, 
in that after he had thus demonstrated his loyalty to 
principle, and had suffered as a result excommunication 
from the Church— then the Lord found him. Thus his 
faithfulness under trials and difficulties, and his willingness 
to suffer the loss of earthly fellowship and honor 
amongst men, led directly to a still greater blessing, 
even direct fellowship and communion with the Lord 
himself. How many are there whose mental eyes have 
been opened to the truth, who have been so loyal to the 
Lord and so appreciative of his goodness as to be faithful 
in declaring the facts? How many of these have 
found that such faithfulness means separation from the 
synagogue, from the church nominal? How many of 
these have feared to lose prestige and influence, through 
confessing the light of present truth? But all who have 
followed the noble course of thankfulness, loyalty and 
obedience to God, have found that such obedience, 
while it led to a loss of fellowship in the nominal 
church, led also to a greater fellowship and communion, 
and a more intimate acquaintance with the Lord himself. 



R2441 : page 63 

THE GOOD SHEPHERD-THE CHRIST. 

-MARCH 19. -JOHN 10:1-16.— 

"I am the good Shepherd: the good Shepherd 
giveth his life for the sheep."— John 10:11. 

THE Evangelist first presented Christ to our attention 

as "the beginning of the creation of God," 

"made flesh," that he might be the Light of the 

world: afterward, under his presentation, we considered 

him as the Feeder of the hungry; then as the Giver of 

the water of life to the thirsty; next as the Healer of 

human woes, and the Supplier of human needs, spiritual 

as well as temporal; next as the Opener of the 

eyes of our understanding. In the lesson now before 

us he presents Christ's mission from another standpoint 

—as the Good Shepherd. 

This parable probably followed closely the closing 
incident of our last lesson, in which we saw the reverend 
Doctors of the Law incensed at the man whose 
eyes had been opened, so that they cast him out of the 
synagogue, because he confessed Jesus as the channel 
of divine favor. It was doubtless as a reproof to such 
false shepherding that our Lord spoke this parable. 



The very ones who should have been helping the poor 
scattered sheep of Israel to recognize the true Shepherd, 
and to come unto him and become inheritors with them 
of the long-promised Kingdom, were seeking to prevent 
the Lord's sheep from recognizing the Shepherd— seeking 
to hinder men from entering the Kingdom which 
they themselves also refused to enter.— Matt. 23:13. 

The illustration of the Lord as a Shepherd, and 
his people as sheep, is common to the Scriptures, and 
very fitly represents their close confidential relationship, 
but it is a figure that is quite contrary to the spirit of 
the world. The "natural man" sees little in the figure 
to admire, and when he expresses his sentiments he 
would rather represent himself to others and have them 
regard him as a wolf, a lion, a tiger, or some other ferocious 
creature, which they would best not stir up, lest 
he devour them. We find this characteristic well borne 
out in the emblems of heraldry; the escutcheons of the 
great are emblazoned with figures representing beasts of 
prey, birds of prey, and nondescripts, blending various 
natures— but all of them ferocious, snarling, howling, 
screeching, or otherwise implying fierceness and intimidation 
of foes. But when God would represent the emblems 
of his royal family, his Only Begotten Son is 
called The Lamb of God, and all his people are styled 
his sheep,— symbols of meekness, gentleness, harmlessness. 
"Jehovah is my Shepherd" is properly represented 
as their sentiment— Psa. 23. 

Sheep-raising in Palestine, and more or less throughout 
that vicinity, was carried on quite extensively, and 
yet very differently from present methods of Europe 
and America. The owner of the flock or his son usually 
did the shepherding, or sometimes an employee who 
was given an interest in the increase of the flock— as, 
for instance, Jacob, with his father-in-law Laban. Under 
the circumstances it is not surprising that the relationship 
between the sheep and their shepherds was 
very different from now— much more confidential. The 
shepherd was acquainted with his sheep and loved them, 
not merely as so much wealth and merchandise, but as 
friends, companions, with whom he conversed, and 
whose welfare he defended. Travelers tell us that the 
peculiarities of this parable are fully illustrated in eastern 
countries, even to this day; that a shepherd will 
know every individual sheep in his flock, and have a 
name for it, and that the sheep know their shepherd, 
and discern readily the sound of his voice, and cannot be 
deceived. Some tell us how they have experimented and 
proved these peculiar statements of the parable: one 
asked the shepherd to call some particular sheep by 
name, to see whether or not it would come to him; the 
shepherd called one that was far off, and it immediately 
lifted its head, looked toward him, and when the 
call was repeated started, and wending its way, in and 
out through the flock, came to his feet, where he patted 
its head in reward for its obedience. Thinking this possibly 



a solitary instance, requests were made for repetitions 
of the test, with similar results. Another traveller 
imitated the shepherd's voice, and called the sheep, 
but they paid no attention. Thinking that it was because 
he had not on the shepherd's garments, to test 
the matter, he and the shepherd changed raiment, but 
still the sheep would not heed the voice of the stranger; 
but when the shepherd spoke to them, even tho clothed 
in the garments of the stranger, they knew his voice 
and at once responded. 

Our Lord used these facts, well known to his hearers, 
to illustrate his relationship to the Lord's people, 
as their Shepherd, the Son of the Great Shepherd; and 
he pointed out that all who were truly of his flock 
would hear his voice, would not be deceived by the 
Adversary, tho he should disguise himself in garments 
of light, to deceive, if it were possible, the very elect. 
The important thing, then, is that we should become 
true members of the Lord's flock, intimately acquainted 
with him, and familiar with his word, his voice- 
disciples indeed. He is seeking no others than these 
for his present flock. Nor has he at the present time 
two flocks, one of them hearing and obeying his voice, 
and the other heedless of his words. He declares, "My 
sheep hear my voice; I know them, and they follow 
me." Those who are not following the Lord, in obedience 
to his voice, expressed in word and example, 
are not of his flock; they are not being led to the green 
pastures and still waters of present truth; their table is 
not furnished in the presence of their foes, nor are they 
in the way marked out by the divine goodness and mercy, 
to dwell in the house of the Lord forever.— Psa. 23. 

Jehovah God established a typical Kingdom or 
sheepfold, and accepted the nation of Israel as his 
sheep, but as a nation they were wayward sheep and 
knew him not. Nevertheless, with a Law Covenant he 
fenced them in. They desired a king, a ruler, a caretaker, 
a governor, and God let them have their wish; 
but none of these was the true shepherd, neither did any 
bring the sheep into desirable conditions. And when 
these were finally done away, various others presented 
themselves as the Messiah, falsely claiming the right 
to lead Israel— false Messiahs. These, as our Lord declares, 
were thieves and robbers, who sought the control 
of the sheep, not from interest in the sheep, but 
from selfish motives, for self-aggrandizement and exaltation. 
These attempted to lead out the Lord's people, 
not by the door, but by climbing up other ways: by 
climbing over the Law, or by digging under it, they 
would reach the sheep and become leaders; and altogether 
in various ways a large proportion of Israel had 
been led astray out of the fold, some to idolatry, and 
some simply to wander in the wilderness. 

At our Lord's first advent this was the condition of 
things: God's covenant with Israel was standing as a 
wall around that nation, but its door was barred by justice, 



R2441 : page 64 

as represented in the Mosaic Law— Israel's Covenant. 

There could be no proper ingress or egress; all 

were prisoners of the Law,— shut up unto that hope 

which should afterward be revealed, namely, Christ the 

Door or "way" of life. Meanwhile, tho the door was 

guarded zealously by the scribes and Pharisees, the fact 

was entirely neglected that thieves and robbers, Satan's 

servants, were at work plundering the sheepfold.— John 10:1,2,7,9; 

Gal. 3:24; John 14:6; Zech. 9:9-12. 

Nor could our Lord Jesus rightfully open the fold 
and take charge of the sheep, except at the cost of his 
own life. This was the purpose of the Father, the Great 
Shepherd, and with this in view he shut up the sheep 
under the Law, to the intent that they would need to 
be redeemed by his Son (the appointed Shepherd), from 
under the dominion of the Law, before they could be 
made free with the liberty wherewith Christ makes free 
his people. And this was the first work that the Good 
Shepherd did for the sheep; the laying down of his life 
began at the beginning of his ministry, when he made 
a full consecration of himself even unto death, and 
symbolized this in baptism. It was in view of this sacrifice 
which he had already devoted, and was even then 
offering, and which was finished subsequently at Calvary, 
that our Redeemer announced himself as the Good 
Shepherd who giveth his life for the sheep. 

The Apostle declares that our Lord's death redeemed 
Israel from under the curse (sentence) of the 
Law— but it not only satisfied the Law, "the porter," so 
that he opened the sheepfold, but it gave to the true 
Shepherd the ownership and control of the sheep, that 
he might lead them out to green pastures, and that they 
might go out and in with perfect freedom, as his sheep, 
following him. Our Lord testified, however, that many 
true sheep had gotten out of the fold, and were lost in 
the wilderness of sin. His ministry was a call to these 
as well as to those who remained in the fold,— to the 
publicans and sinners as well as to those who were endeavoring 
to live near to God. 

Thus the true Shepherd showed his interest in all 
his true sheep, including the lame, the weak, the 
starved. He called sinners to repentance, and the true 
sheep, realizing their shortcomings under the Law, responded 
and came to him as the Shepherd and Bishop 
of their souls. But inasmuch as many of the flock had 
wandered far from the position of true sheep, so that there 
were not enough who heard his voice, to complete the 
elect number of his flock, this Good Shepherd has, during 
this Gospel age, lifted up his voice (speaking through 
the members of his Body), and has called sheep from 
amongst the Gentiles; and a sufficient number to complete 
the original predestination will eventually respond. 

The call of this present time is not a general one, 



but, as this Scripture declares, "he calleth his own sheep 
by name,"— it is therefore a special call. "The Lord 
knoweth them that are his." They manifest relationship 

R2442 : page 64 

to him as his flock by their obedience to his 
call— by following him. The flock which is now being 
called, and which eventually will make its calling and 
election sure, the Scriptures inform us will be only "a 
little flock," and the fold provided for these is a special 
one; viz., the Kingdom.— Luke 12:32. 

Throughout this Gospel age the Lord has been 
caring for this class; he has specially led and fed and 
blessed them, notwithstanding that to the appearance of 
others they have passed through severe trials, disciplines, 
sufferings. Yea, as our Shepherd himself declared, 
whosoever lives godly suffers persecution. But 
we are to remember that this is a peculiar trial time, 
for a peculiar and elect flock. We are to remember, also, 
the Shepherd's declaration that he has other sheep 
which are not of this fold— not provided for in the calling 
to the Kingdom. These other sheep are still astray 
in the wilderness of sin, but the Millennial Day is near 
at hand, in which the Lord will gather all his scattered 
sheep, all who would seek and love righteousness and 
harmony with God under favorable conditions,— that 
they may all be brought into accord with him and be his 
flock. The Good Shepherd gave his life a ransom for all 
his sheep— not merely for the "little flock" of this age, 
the "heirs of the Kingdom." Christ's larger flock will 
be gathered after the Kingdom is set up.— Matt. 25:31,32. 

A part of the key to this parable, as it is also the 
key to many other features of the divine plan, is found 
in the fact that the sheep of the "little flock," now being 
called and selected to joint-heirship in the Kingdom, 
are to be sacrificed: as the Shepherd, the King's Son, 
himself was sacrificed as the Lamb of God, and not 
only opened the door to those who are shut up under 
the Law, but by the same sacrifice also redeemed the 
whole world of mankind, amongst which are the "other 
sheep" that he is yet to seek, so the sheep of the "little 
flock," now being called, are all to suffer with Christ— 
with the Lamb of God,— are all to be "living sacrifices, 
holy, acceptable to God, and their reasonable service." 
(Rom. 12:1.) As the Apostle elsewhere declares, "Hereby 
we know love, because he laid down his life on our 
behalf: and we ought also to lay down our lives for the 
brethren," for the fellow-sheep.— 1 John 3:16— Diaglott. 

From this standpoint it will be seen that, as our 
Lord was the Father's Lamb, and the sin-offering for 
the world, so we who are of Jesus' flock are to fill up 
that which is behind of the afflictions of Christ, in the 
interest of his Body, which is the Church. (Eph. 1:22.) 
And other Scriptures show us that all of the flock thus 
faithful, in following the Shepherd even "unto death," 



are counted as members of the Body of the Shepherd. 
Thus the entire Gospel age has been the period of suffering 
with Christ, of dying daily, of laying down our 
lives for the brethren; and not until this sacrifice is complete 
in the close of this age will the New Covenant be 
thrown open in the largest sense of the word to the 
world of mankind in general, and the great Shepherd 
be complete— Head and Body. Then the spirit and the 
Bride will say, Come, and whosoever will may come.— 
whereas now, "No man can come except the Father 
draw him," and in all a "little flock." 

The spirit of the great Chief (or Head) Shepherd 
of the flock is to be in all those now being called to association 
with him in the Kingdom. As the Good Shepherd 
lays down his life for the flock, so all of these will 
lay down their lives in the service of the truth. As the 
Good Shepherd was not indifferent to the necessities of 
the sheep, caring simply for himself, and how much 
he could get out of the sheep, so it will be with those 
who have his spirit— their service of the Body of Christ 
will not be for filthy lucre's sake, nor for honor among 
men, nor for earthly gain, in any sense of the word; 
but for the love of God, the love of the truth, the love 
of the flock. 

page 64 



S.S. LESSON, MARCH 26TH-QUARTERLY REVIEW. 



S.S. LESSON, APRIL 2ND-THE AWAKENING OF LAZARUS. 

For general comments see our issue of Aug. 15, '95. 



page 65 

VOL. XX. MARCH 1 & 15, 1899. No. 5 & 6. 



Tabernacle Shadows of the Better 
Sacrifices (In Bookform) 



page 65 

VOL. XX. APRIL 1, 1899. No. 7. 



CONTENTS. 



Blessing God and Cursing Men 67 

Christians Who Curse Men with 

Their Tongue 68 

Poem: "Lo, I Am with Thee!" 76 

"A Bottle of Spikenard, Very Costly" 76 

"I Have Given You an Example" 78 

Tabernacle Shadows 66 

The Memorial Supper at Allegheny 66 

page 66 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
--ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 56-60 ARCH STREET, ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, N.Y. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS: 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age or accident, or other 
adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, if they 
send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting the 
paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list 
constantly. 



TABERNACLE SHADOWS OF THE BETTER SACRIFICES. 

AS announced in our Feb. 15th issue, the March issues were 
in pamphlet form. We regret, however, that it was considerably 
delayed— our Pittsburg printers and binders being 
very busy at present. However, we now have an abundant 
supply besides filling all back orders. The price for extra copies 
is 10 cents each. WATCH TOWER subscribers are supplied by 
the dozen at wholesale rates to permit a wider circulation— 
50 cents per dozen, postage paid by us. 



R2447 : page 66 

THE MEMORIAL SUPPER AT ALLEGHENY. 



Our journal is just ready for press, but we hold it to say,— 
that the Memorial service here on March 26th was one of the 
most refreshing ever celebrated by us. We felt that the Lord 
poured out a blessing upon our uplifted hearts, while they 
burned with fervent love for our dear Redeemer and for all his 
"brethren"— who were remembered in our prayers feelingly: 
we knew, too, that we had the love and prayers of many of the 
Lord's "little flock" in every quarter of the world. Fourteen 
witnessed to their consecration by symbolic baptism in the afternoon; 
and in the evening about two hundred and fifty partook 
of the emblems of our Lord's broken body and shed blood and 
pledged themselves afresh to follow in his footsteps and "lay 
down our lives for the brethren." 



page 66 

ADDRESS TAGS ON YOUR TOWER WRAPPER. 

These show the time to which your subscription is paid. Thus 
Jun9 signifies that you are paid to and including June, 1899; DecO 
signifies that you are paid to and including December, 1900. 
These are changed every two months and are in the nature of 
receipts for moneys received on WATCH TOWER account. 



R2442 : page 67 

BLESSING GOD AND CURSING MEN. 



"But the tongue can no man tame: it is an unruly evil, full of deadly 
poison. Therewith bless we God, even the Father, and therewith curse 
we men which are made after the similitude of God. Out of the 
same mouth proceedeth blessing and cursing. My brethren, 
these things ought not so to be."— James 3:8-10. 

THESE words of the inspired Apostle are addressed 
to the "brethren"— not to the world. Indeed, 
the entire Epistle is addressed to the Church: the fact 
that in opening it James addresses "the twelve tribes 
which are scattered abroad," is not to the contrary of 
this. We are to remember that to the twelve tribes of 
Israel, the natural seed of Abraham, pertained originally 
the great promise of God made to Abraham. By 
natural heredity, then, God's offer or proposition to 
bless the world belonged to fleshly Israel, as the divine 
instruments, if they would comply with the divine 
conditions. But one of the divine conditions was that 
they should have the faith of Abraham, and should not 
be considered the promised seed of Abraham without 
that faith, since Abraham was to be the Father of the 
Faithful. Our Lord and the apostles, in the New 



Testament, set forth clearly how and why natural Israel, 
as a nation, was broken off from inheritance under 
that covenant: the Apostle representing the promise 
as an olive root, describes all Israelites as branches, 
growing up out of that root, and tells us that many of 
the natural branches were broken off, the vast majority, 
and that only a remnant at the first advent were 
found possessed of the faith of Abraham, and accepted 
by our Lord as members of the new house of sons.— 
John 1:12. 

The Apostle further explains that the rejection of 
the unbelieving of natural Israel left the way open to 
engraft in the place of the broken-off branches some 
from amongst the Gentiles, possessed of the faith of 
Abraham. And this, we see, has been the work of 
this Gospel age,— grafting into the original root of 
promise believers from amongst the Gentiles, who were 
once without God and having no hope in the world, 
strangers from the commonwealth of Israel, but are 
now brought nigh, united with Christ, and through 
him united with the Abrahamic root of promise, and 
inheritors of all its richness and fatness.— Eph. 2:12,13; 
Rom. 11. 

Thus we see that these spiritual Israelites become 
the Israelites indeed, from the divine standpoint, the 
actual inheritors of the Abrahamic promise: altho we 
see also yet to be fulfilled certain gracious earthly 
promises to the natural seed of Abraham, they nevertheless 
have missed, have lost, as a nation, as a people, 
the great prize: as the Apostle declares, "Israel 
hath not obtained that which he seeketh for: but the 
election hath obtained it, and the rest were blinded." 
-Rom. 11:7. 

So then the "twelve tribes" of Israel had promises 
made to them which apply not merely to themselves, 
but also and specially to Spiritual Israel, whom they 
typified; while the original election or predestination 
of God, respecting the Abrahamic seed, that it should 
be 144,000, or 12,000 from each tribe, still stands; and 
consequently that each one accepted from amongst the 
Gentiles, and engrafted into this root of Abrahamic 
promise, is counted as taking the place of one of these 
broken-off branches of the various tribes. By the time 
the Gospel age shall have finished its work, a Spiritual 
Israel will have been found— "a royal priesthood, a 
holy nation, a peculiar people,"— showing forth the 
praises of him who called them out of darkness into 
his marvelous light— neither one more nor one less 

R2443 : page 67 

than the original, elect, predetermined number,— a 
natural Israelite having been "broken off" for each one 
from the Gentiles "grafted in." The Church is thus 
referred to in Revelation 7:3-8: and the sealing of the 



R2443 : page 68 

Church is spoken of as being so many from each of 
the tribes, with the intimation that all of these will 
have been "sealed in their foreheads" before the great 
time of trouble shall come upon the world. 

So, then, the Epistle of James is to be understood 
as addressed to these true Israelites, engrafted into the 
root of promise, and taking the place of the natural 
Israelites. And to this agree the words of the Apostle 
Paul, "They are not all Israel which are of Israel." 
(Rom. 9:6,7.) And again, "He is not a Jew which 
is a Jew outwardly, neither is that circumcision which 
is outward in the flesh: but he is a Jew which is one 
inwardly, and circumcision is that of the heart." 
(Rom. 2:28,29.) And again, the words of our Lord 
in addressing his Church: "I know the blasphemy of 
them which say they are Jews, and are not, but are of 
the synagogue of Satan."— Rev. 2:9; 3:9. 

Our Lord recognized this same distinction between 
natural and true Israelites: when receiving Nathaniel 
he declared, "Behold, an Israelite indeed." These 
two Israels, of the flesh and of the spirit, were typified 
in Isaac and Ishmael, and again, as the Apostle declares, 
in Jacob and Esau. (Rom. 9:8-13,22-33.) In 
each case the inheritor of the promise was the younger 
brother; as illustrating that Spiritual Israel would be 
developed after natural Israel, and take its place as 
heir of the chief blessings mentioned in the Abrahamic 
Covenant. However, we are to remember that a blessing 
was granted also in each case to the elder brother, 
in the types; and so it is in the antitypes,— while God has 
appointed Christ to be the heir of all things, and has 
called the Church as his Bride, to be his joint-heir in 
all things, he has nevertheless provided that blessing 
shall flow from these to the earthly seed, and in turn 
through the latter to all the families of the earth.— 
Rom. 11:26-33. 

Having thus definitely determined that the holy 
spirit, through the Apostle, is addressing the Church, 
let us consider the astounding statement of our text, 
and seek to ascertain in what sense it should be understood; 
resolving that, should we find that in any sense 
or degree it applies to us individually, we will assuredly 
quickly respond to the spirit's teaching, and correct 
so evil a condition. 

BLESSING GOD WITH THE TONGUE. 



We may readily see how the Apostle means that 
God's people bless or praise his name with their tongues. 
They do so in prayer; they do so in their hymns of 
praise; they do so in declaring his truth, and in witnessing 
to his providences on their behalf. In a word, 



we bless God with our tongues by showing forth his 
praises, who called us out of darkness into his marvelous 
light. 

CHRISTIANS WHO CURSE MEN WITH THEIR TONGUES. 



But in what sense does the Apostle mean that 
Spiritual Israelites curse men with their tongues?— and 
that so commonly, so generally prevalent as to require 
public reproof? Surely no Christian curses his fellowman 
by oaths and profane swearing! But are there not 
other ways in which our tongues may be a curse and an 
injury to fellow-men? We are to remember that the 
meaning of our English word "curse" has somewhat 
altered in common usage within the last century, having 
very generally lost the sense of injury and assumed 
wholly the sense of swearing, profanity. In the Greek 
language different words are used when referring to 
a cursing oath (viz., anathema, and anathematiso, used 
ten times in the New Testament), and when referring 
to a spoken condemnation as a blight or curse (viz., 
katara and kataraomai, which signify condemnation, 
—to speak against, to speak evil of, to injure). The 
latter is the word used by the Apostle James: hence 
his language really is— With the same tongue wherewith 
we praise and honor God, we do injury to fellow-men, 
by evil-speaking, slandering, etc. Thus our Lord, 
using the same word, said, "Bless them that curse 
[speak evil of] you." The Apostle Paul, using the 
same word, admonishes God's people to "Bless and 
curse not"— speak favorably of others, but do not 
speak injuriously of them. Again, we are told that 
our Lord cursed (the same Greek word) the figtree, 
saying, "Let no fruit grow on thee henceforth"— he 
injured it, he made a declaration unfavorable to its future 
development. Thus also the Apostle declares that 
the Jews under the Law were under a curse— not that 
the Law was evil, but that, because of imperfections 
of the flesh, the Israelites came under the condemnation 
(curse) of the Law. He declares also that "Christ 
hath redeemed us [formerly Jews] from the curse 
[condemnation] of the Law, being made a curse for 
us"— having suffered for us the full condemnation or 
blight which the Law imposed upon the transgressor. 
(Gal. 3:10-13.) He illustrated the same thought in 
connection with the word "curse," when he declares 
that garden land which had been overgrown with thorns 
and briars is "nigh unto cursing"— not ready for profanity, 
but for condemnation, as unfit for tillage, until 
burned over and its weeds exterminated.— Matt. 5:44; 
Rom. 12:14; Mark 11:21; Heb. 6:8. 

Having thus before our minds the real word, and 
its signification as used by the Apostle, we see that 
while curse is a proper enough translation of the original, 



the whole difficulty is that present-day common 
usage and common education have largely hidden from 
sight this signification of the word. (Similarly the 
word evil has lost its original breadth of meaning, and 

R2443 : page 69 

is almost invariably considered to signify immorality, 
badness, wickedness; whereas in its breadth of meaning 
it may be used to refer to anything that is undesirable, 
not good, such as calamities, etc.) 

Looking at the Apostle's statement from this 
stand-point, we see clearly that his charge is applicable 
to Christian people of to-day to an alarming extent. 
How many there are who do injury with their tongues 
to their fellow-creatures, who use the same tongue in 
offering praise to God. We know of no evil to which 
God's consecrated people are more exposed than to 
this one. With many it is as natural to gossip as to 
breathe: they do it unconsciously. We have even 
known people who took cognizance of the Scriptural 
injunction against slander and evil-speaking, who were 
so utterly confused on the subject, and so unaware of 
their own conduct, that they would declare their horror 
of speaking a slander in the very same breath in 
which they utter slanders. We mention this in proof 
that this evil is so ingrained in fallen human nature 
as to elude the notice of the new nature sometimes for 
years— and thus escapes the correction in righteousness 
which the Lord's Word directs, and which all 
who are truly the Lord's people desire. 

Many are the peculiar subterfuges which the fallen 
nature will use, in its attempt to stifle the voice of 
conscience and yet maintain the use of this channel of 
evil,— long after it has been driven from evil practices 
which are less common, less popular, more generally 
recognized as sinful. 

(1) It will say, I mean no harm to anybody; but I 
must have something to talk about, and nothing would 
be so interesting to friends and neighbors as something 
which has more or less of a gossipy flavor (scandal) 
connected with it. But is evil-speaking, slander, any 
the more proper on this account for the children of the 
light? By no means. Hence it is that the Scriptures 
instruct us, "Let your conversation be such as becometh 
saints;" "Let your speech be with grace, seasoned 
with salt, that ye may know how ye ought to answer 
every man;" "Let no corrupt communication proceed 
out of your mouth, but that which is good, to the use 
of edifying,— that it may minister grace unto the hearers." 
-Phil. 1:27; Col. 4:6; Eph. 4:29. 

But the scandal-monger, however refined his methods 
and words, well knows that so far from the scandal 
ministering grace to the hearer, it ministers evil;— that 
the hearer is impelled by the forces of his fallen human 
nature to go quickly and tell the scandal further, to 



others;— true or false, he knows not and heeds not: it 
has kindled in his heart a flame of carnal sentiment 
which issues from his lips to "set on fire the course of 
nature" in others, similarly weak through the fall. The 
fallen nature feasts and revels in just such things, feeling 
the more liberty to do so because they delude themselves 
that thus they are moralizing— preaching against 
sin, and that in thus discussing and impliedly denouncing 
the said-to-be transgressions of another, they are 
mentioning matters abhorrent to their righteous souls. 
Alas! poor, weak, fallen humanity's reasonings are 
seriously defective when the Lord's counsels in righteousness 
are ignored. 

As for the point that there would be little else to 
talk about if scandals were thoroughly eliminated from 
Christian conversation, and were all to abide strictly 
by the Apostle's injunction, "Speak evil of no man," 
we answer: Is there not a wide scope for conversation 
amongst Christian people, on the subject of the riches 
of God's grace in Christ Jesus our Lord, expressed in 
the exceeding great and precious promises of the divine 
Word? In these things we have indeed that which 
not only ministers grace to the hearer, but which adds 
also to the grace of the speaker. It showers blessing 
on every hand, so far as the "new creature" is concerned, 
and assists in deadening the old nature with 
its evil desires, tastes, appetites. 

This is what the Apostle had in mind, evidently, 
when he said that the Lord's people should "show 
forth the praises of him who called us out of darkness 
into his marvelous light." And a heart filled with the 

R2444 : page 69 

spirit of love, the spirit of God, the spirit of the truth, 
and overflowing with the same at the mouth will be 
sure to overflow that which is within, for, "Out of the 
abundance of the heart the mouth speaketh." An evil 
mouth, therefore, a mouth which does injury to others, 
either to fellow-members of "the body of Christ" 
or to those that are without, indicates an evil hearts- 
implies that the heart is not pure. "Blessed are the 
pure in heart, for they shall see God."— 1 Pet. 2:9; 
Matt. 12:34; 5:8. 

(2) Another excuse for gossip about other men's 
matters is offered by others, who say: I can talk about 
religious matters to those who are religiously inclined, 
but when I am with worldly people, or with professors 
of religion who take no interest in religious themes, I 
must be agreeable and accommodating, and must at least 
hear their gossip and news; and if I do not share in 
such conversation I would be considered very peculiar, 
and my company would not be desired. Yes, we answer; 
but this is to be one of the peculiarities of the 
"saints:" they are not only to be different from the 
world, but different also from the nominal professors 



of religion. Their religion is not merely to be on the 
surface, and on one day of the week, and under a certain 
suit of clothes; but is to be of the heart, related 
to all the affairs of life, for every day and every moment. 
To follow strictly the divine injunction will indeed 
separate you from some who are now your friends 

R2444 : page 70 

and who love such evil things,— forbidden us who 
have become sons of God and who have received of his 
spirit of sonship, the spirit of Love. 

And that the Lord understood and meant this is 
evident from the fact that he foretold to us that the 
way of discipleship would be a "narrow way." If, 
therefore, your failure to be an entertaining visitor, 
neighbor, friend, is because of your fidelity as a "new 
creature" to the law of Christ, Love— which "worketh 
no ill to his neighbor," either in word or deed,— then 
indeed you have cause for rejoicing, because you are 
suffering a little, experiencing a loss, for Christ's sake, 
for righteousness' sake. The loss may at first seem 
heavy, but if you endure it for Christ's sake, in obedience 
to his righteous law of Love, you will soon be 
able to say with the Apostle that such losses are "light 
afflictions," not worthy to be compared with the offsetting 
blessings.-Phil. 3:7,8; 2 Cor. 4:17. 

Your cause for rejoicing is that you have the 
Lord's promise that such suffering shall work out for 
your good. Companionship with those who are not 
seeking to walk according to the mind of the spirit, 
but according to the common "course of this world," 
is injurious to the saints, to those who are seeking to 
walk in harmony with the new mind. They are far 
better off without such worldly companions and friends, 
and in proportion as they are separated from these 
will they find closer fellowship with the Lord himself 
and with his Word, and with all who are true members 
of his Body, and under the direction of his spirit. 
It is in harmony with this that the Scriptures declare, 
in so many words, that the friendship of this world 
signifies enmity against God. (Jas. 4:4.) God has 
purposely placed the matter in such a position that his 
people must take their choice, and lose either the divine 
friendship and fellowship, or the worldly friendship 
and fellowship; because those things which the 
Lord loves are distasteful to the worldly, and those 
things which the worldly love, evil deeds and evil 
thoughts, evil-speaking, are an abomination in the 
sight of the Lord, and those who love and practice 
such things lose his fellowship— they are not of his 
spirit. "If any man have not the spirit of Christ, he 
is none of his."— Rom. 8:9. 

(3) Another way by which some otherwise good 
Christian people avoid this question, and justify themselves 
in this common fault of humanity, is by confining 



themselves (as they think) to the truth: tho how 

frequently their gossip-loving natures pervert their 

judgments and lead them to accept as truth things respecting 

which they have little or no knowledge, they 

never know. Nor are such anxious to know more, after 

they have circulated a slander with their stamp of verity 

on it: to find it untrue would prove them "false witnesses" 

and put them to trouble to correct the lie; the 

pride of the natural mind objects and refuses to believe 

the truth under such circumstances. Thus one evil 

leads to another. 

Such will say,— Oh, I never tell anything for 
truth until I positively know it to be true— of my own 
observation, my own personal knowledge. Anything 
that I do not know of myself to be true I am always 
careful to so state, and say, I have heard thus and so, 
or, I am told thus and so; I do not vouch for the truth 
of it myself. Thus I am sure that I always avoid 
speaking evil of anyone. Perhaps there is no more 
common delusion on this subject than is thus expressed. 
The depraved taste hedges itself behind conscience, 
and declares that it is always right to speak the truth, 
and hence God cannot have meant that speaking the 
truth would be slander, but that in condemning evil 
speaking and slander, as works of the flesh and the 
devil, he must have meant the speaking of that which 
is false, untrue. 

This is a great mistake: a slander is equally a 
slander, whether it is true or whether it is false, and 
is so regarded, not only in the law of God, but also in 
the laws of civilized men. True, in human law, if a 
suit were brought for slander, if it were proven that the 
charges made by the slanderer had some basis of fact, 
that would probably be considered by the Court and 
jury an extenuating circumstance, and would probably 
very much reduce the amount of the verdict for damages. 
A slander is anything which is uttered with the 
intention of injury to another, whether true or false, 
and the laws of men agree with the law of God, that 
such injury to another is wrong. 

In other words, divine and human laws agree that 
a first wrong does not justify a second wrong. Human 
law says, If a wrong has been committed, the Courts 
are open to the injured one to seek redress or the punishment 
of the evil doer; but the injured one shall not 
be permitted to take the remedy into his own hands, 
either by making an assault with physical force nor by 
the use of the more subtle weapon, the tongue, to assassinate 
his character with the poisoned stiletto of 
envy and malice. True, many slanderers are never 
prosecuted; true also, the newspapers of the United 
States have sometimes escaped heavy damages for libelous 
slander by the plea that they did not publish 
the defamations as of malice, but simply as news, 
which, they claimed, properly belonged to the public 
as in the cases of politicians who were seeking the franchises 



of the people for positions of public trust. Then 
again, public men knowing that much of the false 
statements by the opposition press will be properly 
credited as falsehoods, consider it good policy to let 
any ordinary slanders go unchallenged in the Courts. 

R2444 : page 71 

The effect is a gradual growth of slander among the 
people— sure to work evil to themselves and to their 
institutions;— for government officers and courts and 
everybody of influence coming under such slanders 
(generally, we believe, untrue) lose their influence for 
good over the lower classes, who are thus being helped 
along to greater lawlessness day by day, and preparing 
for the period of anarchy which the Scriptures tell us 
is near at hand. 

But the Law of God, the Law of Christ, goes much 
further and deeper into such matters, naturally, than 
do the laws of men; for it deals not with men, but with 
the "new creatures in Christ Jesus"— transformed by 
the renewing of their minds, and under special New 
Covenant relationship, and bound by the law of that 
New Covenant— Love— which "worketh no ill to his 
neighbor," under any circumstances, under any provocation: 
which on the contrary returns "good for 
evil"— "blessing for cursing." 

The Law of the New Covenant, Love, commands 
silence to all who acknowledge that law and the Law-Giver, 
saying, "Speak evil of no man." (Titus 3:2.) 
It goes further than this and declares against evil 
thoughts, evil suspicions, evil surmisings, against 
neighbors. It declares that love filling our hearts will 
not only hinder evil conduct and injurious words, but 
will prevent evil thoughts: "Love thinketh no evil,"— 
can only be convinced of evil by indisputable proofs. 
Indeed, to impress this subject and its importance in 
his sight, the Great Teacher declares to the pupils in 
his school— With what judgment ye judge others, I 
will judge you. (Matt. 7:1.) And again he tells them 
to pray to the Father— "Forgive us our trespasses, as 
we forgive those who trespass against us." (Matt. 6:12.) 
Again he declares, If at heart ye treasure up resentment 
against others, the Heavenly Father will not 
forgive you. (Matt. 18:35.) Ah! indeed, a Christian 
after the Lord's pattern, a graduate of the school of 
Christ and prepared to teach others, is one who not 
only outwardly, but inwardly also, is clean— separated, 
washed by the water of divine instruction, from the 
meanness, the filthiness of the flesh. He is no longer 
the slave of sin, controlled by the desires and weaknesses 
of his fallen flesh and its spirit of the world, 
bearing fruits unto unrighteousness,— anger, malice, 
hatred, strife, slander, evil-speaking. (Col. 3:8; 1 Pet. 2:1,2.) 
From his high standpoint of appreciation of 
the divine law, the advanced Christian sees that in the 



Lord's sight hatred is murder, slander is assassination, 
and the destruction of a neighbor's good name is robbery 
and rapine. And any of these things done in the 
Church, among the professed people of God, is doubly 
evil— the assassination and robbery of a brother.— Compare 
1 John 3:15 and Matt. 5:21,22. 

To utter a defamatory or injurious remark against 
another, and then to add, "I do not know whether it 
is true or not," is to show that the speaker is exercised 

R2445 : page 71 

by an evil spirit and not by the spirit of Christ, the 

spirit of love;— he wishes to injure or curse his fellow-creature, 

is anxious to do so. He would feel restrained 

to some extent from telling what he knew to be absolutely 

untrue, but he delights to speak evil, and glad 

to know of evil that he may roll it as a sweet morsel 

over his tongue, and hence speaks of even those scandals 

which he does not know to be true, and attempts to 

excuse himself with such an apology as the above. Verily, 

it is with force that the Scriptures declare that the 

natural heart is deceitful above all things and desperately 

wicked. Those who thus speak, and thus attempt 

to justify their misconduct, have either never entered 

the school of Christ, or are as yet only in the infant-class, 

and do not know that theirs is the spirit of murder, 

and not the spirit of brotherly-love. Oh! that all 

true Christians might learn the scope of this law of 

Love, in its relationship not only to God, but also to 

fellow-men; what a bridling of tongues it would mean, 

what a carefulness of speech! As David said, "I will 

take heed to my ways, that I sin not with my tongue." 

And he who watches his tongue is putting a detective 

upon his deceitful heart and can the better know it and 

master it, for "out of the abundance of the heart the 

mouth speaketh."-Jer. 17:9; Psa. 39:1; Matt. 12:34. 

The only exception to this rule, "Speak evil of 
no man," would come in where we might know of an 
absolute necessity for making known an evil— where 
the relating of the evil would be contrary to our heart's 
wishes, and only mentioned because of necessity— because 
of love for others who, if not informed, might be 
injured. For instance, the law of the land demands 
that, if we know of murder having been committed, it 
shall not be considered slander, but on the contrary be 
considered duty, to make known to the proper officers 
of the law the facts (not suspicions) which have come 
under our observation. Likewise, if we knew of some 
weakness in a brother or sister, and realized that they 
were about to be placed in a dangerous position, because 
of some other brother or sister not knowing of 
that weakness, it might become our duty to make 
known, either to the individual or congregation liable 
to be injured, so much of our knowledge of facts (not 
suspicions) as might be necessary to guard them against 



injury through the weakness mentioned. But this 
would not be speaking evil, but, on the contrary, would 
be speaking with a good motive, with the intention of 
preserving the one party from extraordinary temptation, 
and of preserving the other party from injury. 
And before anything should be said on the subject we 
should most positively satisfy our own consciences that 

R2445 : page 72 

our motive in speaking is a good one, and not an evil 
one, that we are about to use our tongue to bless, and 
not to injure. And even then, prompted by the spirit 
of love and kindness toward the weak brother, as well 
as toward the others, we should avoid mentioning one 
solitary item that would not be necessary to the object 
in view. 

But some will object to limiting this liberty to 
cases of positive knowledge, and urge that absolute 
knowledge generally being small little could be said. 
We answer that this is in line with the Divine law,— 
"Love thy neighbor as thyself." You would not want 
your neighbor to use brain and tongue in evil surmises 
and slanders against you; and you should not do so to 
him. The law of the land does not demand that you 
should tell one word more than you know (of personal 
knowledge) against your neighbor— it does not ask 
your suspicions and evil surmisings. And on the contrary, 
the law of the Lord commands that all under 
the New Covenant shall not utter one solitary suspicion 
against a neighbor: and that if suspicion beyond 
knowledge is forced upon the mind by associated circumstances, 
the new mind shall promptly, with its native 
benevolence, counterbalance the suspicions by suggestions 
of the possibility of misinformation or misinterpretation 
and always give the apparently guilty the 
benefit of the doubt. 

Another will object,— Oh! I could never waste so 
much time in getting at facts. Life is too short! Why, 
I would have no time at all left for my own business, 
if I carefully hunted up the facts so as always to speak 
from knowledge and never from hearsay! 

Just so! and the lesson to you should be to follow 
the Scriptural rule— "Speak evil of no man." 

(1) Because you have not the time to get at the 
facts, and quite probably also lack the ability to judge 
impartially, if you had all the facts before you. 

(2) Because, if you have the spirit of Christ, love, 
dwelling in you richly, you will prefer to tell no one the 
facts, even if you have the chain of evidence complete: 
you will loathe the matter the more in proportion as 
the known facts are unfavorable. What, then, must 

be the condition of those who have itching ears for 
scandals and of those whose tongues delight in scandal 
as a sweet morsel, and are anxious to scatter an evil 
report of which they have no knowledge— only prejudiced 



hearsay? The most generous view possible of 
such is that they have little of the spirit of Christ;— 
that they are deficient in brotherly love and have never 
truly learned "the golden rule." 

The Apostle inquires, "Doth a fountain send forth 
at the same opening bitter water and sweet?" The 
form of his question implies the answer, No; it is either 
good water only or brackish water only. He evidently 
wishes to suggest that we apply the same rule to 
our hearts and mouths: How is it possible if our hearts 
have been renewed that our mouths utter loving sweetness 
to God and bitter acrimony, envy, hatred, strife, 
towards or respecting our fellow-men? 

There is but one way of understanding this, and 
accounting for it Scripturally. It is expressed by the 
Apostle Paul (2 Cor. 4:7): "We have this treasure 
[the new heart— the new nature] in an earthen vessel." 
Not that Christians are of two natures, for that 
thought is contrary to the science of the Bible. No 
mixture of natures can be recognized, hence it was 
that our human natures were first justified through 
faith and a renouncement of sin, and secondly were 
consecrated or sacrificed to death, that instead we 
might have spiritual natures and become "new creatures 
in Christ Jesus." The new creature, however, 
is as yet only in embryo, only the new mind which 
dwells in and proposes to regulate and govern the mortal 
bodies, which are reckoned dead so far as the will 
of the flesh is concerned. 

Hence, every Christian may properly use the language 
of the Apostle, and speak of and think of himself 
and of other Christians from two different standpoints 
—the new mind (the new creature) reckoned 
alive and given control, and the old mind (the old 
creature) reckoned dead, and deposed from control. 
But as the new mind is only living a reckoned existence 
by faith, so the old mind is only dead in a reckoned 
sense through faith. And as the Apostle declares, 
these two are contrary the one to the other. There 
cannot be spiritual progress if the reign is divided. 
Hence, the new mind which is to us the "treasure," 
begotten of the spirit of the Lord, through the word 
of truth, is to keep the old or natural mind, will, or 
disposition, tastes and appetites, dead; that the new 
mind may thoroughly and completely control and exercise 
these mortal bodies, in works and words and 
thoughts in harmony with the new mind, in harmony 
with the new law of love, in harmony with the spirit 
of righteousness and truth. 

When, therefore, our mouths are speaking forth 
heart-felt praise to God, who hath blessed us, lifted 
our feet from the horrible pit, and the miry clay, and 
placed us upon the Rock, Christ Jesus, and has put 
a new song into our mouth, our praise implies that the 
new mind is controlling at such a time, that the treasure 
in the new heart is overflowing in the mortal body, 



and going forth through the lips to the praise and edification, 

the comfort and encouragement, of those who 

hear. Thus the fountain in our heart is sending forth 

sweet waters, carrying with them life, blessing, refreshment. 

But when our tongues speak evil of any, 

whether it be true or false, it implies that the new nature 

R2445 : page 73 

is, temporarily at least, overcome by the old nature; 
it implies that another fountain is now operating 
and using the tongue, the mouth, in issuing forth the 
words of malice or hatred or envy or strife or reproach 
or evil speaking of any kind,— cursing or injuring others 
in any degree, great or small. This implies that 
the old nature, the old will, the will of the flesh, is not 
being kept under, as the Apostle Paul expresses it,— 
kept dead, kept buried, kept out of sight: there is 
either a truce between the new mind and the old mind, 
by which the two use the mortal body between them, 
sometimes for good and sometimes for evil, or a stupor 
and lethargy has come over the new mind, which is 
taken advantage of by the mind of the flesh. Such a 
condition therefore implies slow spiritual development 
or retrogression— falling away on the part of the "new 
creature." All such should remember, as the Apostle 
Paul declares, "The time past of our lives sufficeth us 
to have wrought the will of the Gentiles," and again 
he says, "Yield not your members as instruments of 
unrighteousness; but yield yourselves unto God, as 
those that are alive from the dead, and your members 
as instruments of righteousness unto God."— 1 Pet. 4:3; 
Rom. 6:13. 

From this point of view we may console ourselves 
if in looking backward, we perceive that in our own 
cases from the same mouth has proceeded praise to 
God and injury and defamation and slander and evil-speaking 
and malice and hatred and strife, or any of 
these, toward our fellow-creatures. It does not, therefore, 
prove that our hearts were not truly justified, 
and sanctified by the holy spirit of adoption;— it does 
not prove that we are not sons of God and partakers 
of his spirit. It does prove, however, that we are in 

R2446 : page 73 

a sadly improper condition— spiritually sick and in 
need of taking a purgative, as the Apostle expresses 
it, saying, "Purge out, therefore, the old leaven [malice, 
etc.], that ye may be a new [unadulterated, pure] 
lump" or loaf,— proper representatives of the Body of 
ChrisL-1 Cor. 5:7. 

We may know assuredly that, until the "new 
creature" gains a thorough victory over the will of the 
flesh, we will not be winners of the great prize which 
is promised only "to him that overcometh." The overcoming. 



however, will be not in the perfecting of the 

flesh, but in the perfecting of the heart,— the will, the 

intentions. As for the blemishes of the flesh, some of 

them, undoubtedly, despite every effort on our part to 

eradicate them, will continue with us so long as we are 

in the flesh. The perfection which is to be hoped for, 

and aimed at and expected and gained by the overcomers, 

is the perfection of the will, heart, intentions. 

"Blessed are the pure in heart; they shall see God." 

Moreover, our physical weaknesses and defects not 

only vary in kind but in intensity. Some are by nature 

more inclined to gentleness, kindness, etc.; others, 

until accepted of Christ, may have very uncouth, 

coarse, rude, rough earthen vessels: and while the influence 

of the treasure within, the "new mind," will 

be sure in any case to exercise a modifying and transforming 

effect upon the earthen vessel, we cannot expect 

as much of a change in some as in others. We cannot 

expect as complete a correction in righteousness in the 

outward man where coarseness, rudeness, unkindness 

are, so to speak, bred in the bone and fibre, as we 

might expect in one born to fine sensibilities. 

While recognizing this difference of "earthen vessels," 
we of course must use our best endeavors each to 
correct his own. We are to remember that our relationship 
to one another in the Body of Christ is not 
according to the flesh, but according to the spirit; 
hence, as the Apostle declares, we know one another 
no longer according to the flesh, with its weaknesses, 
imperfections and ungainly and ungraceful natural 
tendencies. We know each other only according to 
the spirit, according to the intentions, according to the 
heart,— as "new creatures," not as old creatures. 
(2 Cor. 5:16.) This will lead us to be very pitiful of 
one another's imperfections of the flesh, so long as we 
have the assurance that the flesh does not represent 
our brother's real self, his mind, his will. We are, 
therefore, to be gentle toward all, kindly affectioned 
one toward another, so that so far from desiring to 
wound one another, or to injure one another, or to devour 
one another with our tongues, we shall sympathize 
with each other, do each other good, and by 
words of grace and comfort, or of admonition and reproof 
spoken in love, may build one another up in the 
most holy faith— in the likeness of our Lord and 
Master. 

Proceeding with this subject, the Apostle points 
out that there are two kinds of wisdom, a heavenly 
and an earthly, and that all of the Lord's people should 
discern these, and should see to it that theirs is the 
heavenly. The Apostle's intimation is that there may 
be some with the Church, who may have counted 
themselves in the Church, who may have associated 
themselves with the Church from worldlywise motives 
—some who have caught sight of the fact that there is 
a reasonableness and a wisdom in the teachings of the 



Scriptures, which they admire and which they can turn 

perhaps to their own advantage. These, he implies, 

will be inclined to be heady and to make a show of 

their wisdom, and to be "puffed up" by it, and while outwardly 

acknowledging the propriety of the Christian 

graces, brotherly-kindness, gentleness, meekness, patience, 

love, they have in their hearts bitter envyings 

and strife— strife to have name and fame— envying 

R2446 : page 74 

those who may seem to them to have more of these. 

These, the Apostle intimates, will find it difficult, 
yea, impossible, to avoid cursing (speaking evil of, injuring) 
the brethren. It will be so natural to them to 
do so that they cannot avoid it, because they have not 
pure hearts— they have not regenerated hearts. If their 
hearts ever were regenerated, they have returned like 
the sow to wallowing in the mire— like the dog to his 
vomit. The Apostle's advice to such as find that they 
have in their hearts envious and bitter feelings, is that 
they have no cause to glory or to boast, but on the 
contrary should acknowledge that, having these evil 
conditions in the heart, they are not Christians at all, 
and they should cease to lie against the truth— cease 
to act fraudulently, hypocritically— cease to continue 
to claim to have renewed hearts, sanctified in Christ 
Jesus. 

He tells such plainly that their wisdom, their 
knowledge, is not of God, is not of the holy spirit,— 
"This wisdom descendeth not from above, but is earthly, 
sensual, devilish; for, where envy and strife are, 
there is confusion and every evil work [to be anticipated]." 
-Jas. 3:15,16. 

It seems evident that, altho the Apostle's denunciation 
applies to any professing to be Israelites indeed, 
he nevertheless is specially aiming his remarks at those 
who profess to be teachers in the Church, to have wisdom 
to a considerable degree. And his words remind 
us of the words of the Apostle Paul, when speaking of 
the various gifts distributed to the Church, he seemingly 
points out the dangers of those of large knowledge, 
and as an illustration of this principle which 
James presents, he says:— 

Tho I could speak with the tongues of men and of 
angels, and have not Love, it would imply that I had 
become as a sounding brass or a tinkling cymbal, making 
a noise indeed, but having no feeling respecting 
the matter myself,— I have neither part nor lot with 
those who possess the spirit of Christ. Altho I have 
the gift of prophecy, and understand all mysteries and 
all knowledge, and tho I have all faith, and have not 
Love, I am nothing; and tho I bestow all my goods 
to feed the poor, and give my body to be burned, and 
have not Love, it profiteth me nothing.— 1 Cor. 13:1-8. 

Thus the Apostle points out distinctly that knowledge 



and oratory are not the most vital tests, but that 
Love permeating the heart and extending out through 
all the course of life, and actuating and operating our 
mortal bodies, is the real test— the real proof of our 
divine relationship. He points out that those who had 
received gifts of God before they had come into a proper 
relationship to God might become sounding brass 
and tinkling cymbals, and thus become "nothing," if 
they lose the love, if they lose the spirit of Christ; for 
"if any man have not the spirit of Christ, he is none 
of his." 

It is well for the Lord's people to take particular note 
of these divine instructions from two of the chiefest of 
the Apostles, and to remember that valuable tho they 
be, neither oratory nor knowledge are to be considered 
amongst the "brethren" as sure proofs of their being 
in the right way, nor that their influence might not be 
injurious instead of helpful. The leading characteristic 
to be looked for in everyone accepted as a servant 
of the Church, to minister in holy things, should be 
first of all the spirit of love. We do not mean to say 
that knowledge and ability should be entirely ignored, 
but we do mean to say that these should be considered 
of secondary and not of primary importance, as is always 
the tendency. Look out from among yourselves 
holy men, full of the holy spirit, that they may have 
the charge of the spiritual interests of the different 
companies of the Lord's people. And for a divine explanation 
of how this holy spirit will manifest itself, 
of the qualities therefore that are to be looked for in 
the servants of the Church, see 1 Cor. 13:4-8; also 
1 Pet. 1:22,23; 2 Pet. 1:1-13. For their own good, as 
well as for the good of the Church, all who, having 
other qualifications, give evidence of being puffed up 
and of desiring to lord it over God's heritage, the 
Church, or who manifest envy, strife, bitterness, evil-speaking 
—these should be passed by, as giving evidence 
of having the wrong spirit that cometh not 
from above, but is earthly, sensual, devilish. They 
are unsafe teachers, and are likely to do more harm 
than good, with whatever knowledge they may 
possess. 

Continuing, the Apostle leaves no doubt respecting 
his meaning, for he distinctly outlines the course 
and fruitage of heavenly wisdom, saying,— "The wisdom 
that is from above is first pure"— (truthful, honest, 
sincere, not put on, not used as a garment of light 
to deceive and to cover up selfishness, malice, hatred, 
strife; it makes no compromises with sin, impurity, in 
any shape or form.) It is "peaceable." (So far from 
being a quarrelsome, bickering disposition, the "new 
mind" desires peace— it will contend earnestly for the 
faith once delivered unto the saints, but it will not 
contend simply from a love of contention, a love of 
strife; on the contrary, the new mind is peaceably inclined, 
would prefer, so far as possible, to yield a non-essential 



point in a controversy; it loves its opponents 

and sympathizes with their difficulties.) It is "gentle" 

(not rude nor coarse, not rough, in action or 

word or tone; and if the earthen vessel through which 

it speaks have these rudenesses by nature ingrained, 

the "new nature" regrets them, strives against them, 

and seeks to conquer them; and where they do injury 

R2446 : page 75 

to others is ready, willing, glad to apologize, and to 
remove the smart). It is "easy to be entreated" 
(easy of approach, not haughty, not disdainful, not 
hard or cruel; yet it is firm on matters of principle- 
principles cannot be bended or modified; they belong 
to God. But while affirming the principles, this spirit 
of wisdom points out its own willingness to moderation, 
by acknowledging any good features in its opponent, 
and by pointing out the reason why no modification 
is possible in relation to divine laws and principles). 
It is "full of mercy and good fruits." (It delights 
in all things prompted by love and kindness; it 
takes pleasure in doing for others; it takes pleasure, 
not only in showing mercy to dumb animals under its 

R2447 : page 75 

care, but it especially delights in mercy in dealing with 
brethren in respect to their faults. It is merciful also 
in the family,— not over-exacting, but generous, kind, 
benevolent. It is generous also with opponents, and 
those who are contentious,— not wishing to push a 
victory, even for the truth, to such a point as would 
be injurious, hurtful, unmerciful to the antagonist.) 
It is "without partiality." (It loves the good, the 
true, where these are found; and opposes the untrue, 
the impure and the unholy, whether found amongst 
friends or enemies. Its justice is of the strictest kind, 
tempered with mercy; it will not approve a fault in a 
brother, because he is a brother, but would reprove 
the same with gentleness and meekness, remembering 
the liability of all to the assaults of the world, the flesh 
and the devil. It will not fail to see a virtue in an 
enemy, nor hesitate to acknowledge it. Truth is its 
standard, not prejudice, notpartyism, not sectarianism.) 
It is "without hypocrisy." (It is thoroughly 
candid; it needs not to feign love, because it is love; 
it needs not to put on a kindly exterior and to smother 
feelings of wrath and envy and strife, for it is without 
envy, without strife. Such works of the flesh and of 
the devil have, by the grace of God, been seen to be 
earthly, sensual, devilish, and have been repudiated, 
and the heart has been justified, cleansed, sanctified 
to God, renewed in thought, intention, will, and is 
now full of the treasure of the holy spirit.) 
With these thoughts before our minds, let us all, 



dear readers, more earnestly than ever, guard against 
the old nature, and its insidious attempts to gain control 
over our tongues. Let us, more and more, seek 
to appreciate, in ourselves and in others, this heavenly 
wisdom, whose operation is so forcefully presented by 
the Apostle. The more important our members, the 
more influential, the more earnestly ought we to strive 
to keep them in full subjection to the Lord, as his 
servants. Our feet are useful members, consecrated 
to the Lord; we may use them in many errands of 
mercy, to the glory of his name and to the profit of 
his people. Our hands are likewise useful, if thoroughly 
consecrated to the Lord's service. Our ears 
are also useful in his service, to hear for him, to refuse 
to hear the evil, and thus to approve evil, and to set a 
good example to others. Our eyes are a great blessing 
from the Lord, and they also are to be kept from evil, 
from the lust of the eye and the pride of life, and are 
to be instruments or servants of righteousness, in seeing 
the good, in appreciating the good, and in assisting the 
good, and in helping us to know the will of our God. 

But of all our members the most influential is the 
tongue. The tongue's influence exceeds that of all our 
other members combined: to control it, therefore, in 
the Lord's service, is the most important work of the 
Lord's people in respect to their mortal bodies and the 
service of these rendered to the Lord. A few words 
of love, kindness, helpfulness,— how often have such 
changed the entire course of a human life!— nay; how 
much they have had to do with moulding the destiny 
of nations! And how often have evil words, unkind 
words, slanderous words, done gross injustice, assassinated 
reputations, etc.!— or, as the Apostle declares, 
"set on fire the course of nature"— awakening passions, 
strifes, enmities, at first unthought of. No wonder 
he declares such tongues "set on fire of Gehenna" 
—the Second Death! 

The public servants of the Church are to some extent 
specially its "tongues," and what an influence they 
wield for good or for evil, in the blessing and upbuilding 
of the Lord's people, or for their injury— cursing! 
How necessary that all the tongue-servants of the 
Lord's Body be such, and such only, as are of his spirit! 
Their influence not only extends to those who are in 
the Church, but in considerable measure they are 
mouthpieces heard outside. And the same principle 
applies to every individual member of the Church, in 
his use of his member, his tongue. He may use it 
wisely or unwisely, with heavenly wisdom or with 
earthly wisdom. He may use it for strife, and tearing 
down the faith and character of the brethren, in overthrowing 
love and confidence, or he may use it in 
building up these graces of the spirit. How many 
have proved the truth of the Apostle's words, that the 
tongue has great possibilities, either for defiling the 
whole body, the Church, and setting on fire the course 



of nature, by stirring up the evil poisons and propensities 
of the fallen nature! How few amongst the 
Lord's people have conquered the tongue to the extent 
of bringing it into subjection to the will of God, that 
they may minister good, and only good, to all with 
whom they come in contact! Let us, dearly beloved, 
be fully resolved that by divine grace (promised to assist 
us) the present year shall witness great progress 
in our control of this most important member of our 

R2447 : page 76 

bodies, bringing the same into full subjection and obedience 
and service to the King of kings and Lord of 
lords— to him who hath called us out of darkness into 
his marvelous light. 



R2450 : page 76 

"LO, I AM WITH THEE!" 



The "Lord of the harvest" be near thee, 
To comfort, and strengthen, and aid; 

His "presence" be with thee to cheer thee, 
In sickness, and sorrow, and shade! 

May he lead thee to heights of ambition: 

To service for great and for small; 
The "fire" of the Christ-life within thee, 

Consuming the sacrifice all. —J. W. WATTS. 



R2447 : page 76 

"A BOTTLE OF SPIKENARD, VERY COSTLY." 

-APRIL 9. -JOHN 12:1-11.- 

"She hath done what she could."— Mark 14:8. 

THE last week of our Lord's earthly ministry was 
a busy one. The sixth day previous to the Passover 
was the Jewish Sabbath, which ended at six o'clock 
in the evening, and it is possible that it was at that 
time that our Lord and his disciples were entertained 
by Martha and Mary at "the house of Simon the leper" 
—probably their father: Lazarus, their brother, whose 
recovery from death was noted in the previous lesson, 
was also one of the table-guests. 

Our Lord knew that the time of his death was near 
at hand, and he had given intimations of this to his 



beloved disciples, but they were so accustomed to having 

him say wonderful things beyond the power of their 

comprehension that they probably failed to realize their 

closeness to the great tragedy of Calvary. This need 

not surprise us when we remember the Scriptural declaration 

that our Lord spake in parables and dark sayings 

—"and without a parable spake he not unto the 

people:" for instance, his declaration, "Destroy this 

temple, and in three days I will raise it up." And 

again, "I am the living bread which came down from 

heaven; if any man shall eat of this bread he shall live 

forever." And again, "Except ye eat the flesh of the 

Son of man, and drink his blood, ye have no life in 

you." (John 2:19; 6:51,53.) Having in mind such 

unusual language, the apostles would be entirely excusable 

in doubting the proper meaning to be attached to 

our Lord's declaration, "The Son of man must be lifted 

up," and other similar expressions foretelling his death. 

Before coming to the consideration of the Bethany 
supper and the anointing on that Sabbath evening, let 
us have before our minds the incidents of the days following 
it, that we may be able to appreciate our Lord's 
declaration that the anointing with the spikenard was 
preparatory to his burial. The next morning (the first 
day of the week, now usually called Sunday), having 
sent after the ass, our Lord rode upon it to Jerusalem. 
The people, recognizing the wonderful miracle wrought 
upon Lazarus, congregated and hailed him as Messiah, 
the Son of David, fulfilling the prophecy of Zechariah (9:9), 
and strewed clothing and palm branches in the 
way; (hence this is generally known as Palm Sunday). 
It was on this occasion that our Lord wept over Jerusalem, 
and declared, "Your house is left unto you desolate." 
-Matt. 23:38. 

It is supposed that it was on the second day (Monday) 
that our Lord scourged the money-changers out of 
the Temple, and taught the people there; and we gather 
from the narrative that it was in his journey on this 
day that he pronounced the curse upon "the barren fig 
tree," supposed to represent the Jewish nation— barren 
of fruit, and therefore rejected. It would appear that 
the third day (Tuesday) was again spent teaching in 
the Temple, answering questions, etc., and that evening, 
as they returned again to Bethany, he discoursed 
with his disciples respecting the great events near at 
hand. The fourth day (Wednesday) apparently was 
spent quietly at Bethany, and on the fifth day (Thursday) 
the disciples made ready the Passover supper 
which was eaten after six o'clock that evening— the beginning 
of the sixth day (Friday) according to Jewish 
reckoning— the 14th of Nisan. The Gethsemane experiences 
followed that night and the trial before Pilate 
the next morning, and the crucifixion later. 

R2448 : page 76 



Now we come back to witness the hospitalities extended 
to our Lord six days before the crucifixion, at 
the house of Simon the leper, the home of Martha and 
Mary and Lazarus. We are to remember that our Lord 
was a visitor in those parts, his home, to the extent 
that he ever had one, being in Galilee, and the most of 
his time spent there. "He would not walk in Jewry, 
because the Jews sought to kill him." (John 7:1.) But 
now the time for his sacrifice had come, and in harmony 
therewith he came amongst his enemies,— altho it 
was known that prominent Jews sought to kill him and 
also sought the death of Lazarus, who was a living witness 
to his Messianic power. 

We may suppose that this was no ordinary supper, 
but in the nature of a feast or banquet in our Lord's 
honor. Nevertheless, one incident connected with it 
so outshone all its other features that the narrator mentions 
it alone— the anointing of our Lord with the 

R2448 : page 77 

"spikenard ointment, very costly." Our Lord himself 
declared, "Wheresoever this gospel shall be preached 
throughout the whole world, this also which this woman 
hath done shall be spoken of for a memorial of her." 
(Mark 14:9.) It is entirely proper, therefore, that we 
should examine with some particularity the details of 
this service so highly esteemed by the Master. 

Prof. Shaff says, "By the 'ointment' we are to understand 
rather a liquid perfume than what we commonly 
know as ointment." The alabaster box was rather in 
the shape of a flask or vase, and the breaking of the 
box (Mark 14:3) signifies the opening of its tyings and 
seals by which the precious odors were confined. Judas' 
words of dissatisfaction furnish us a clue respecting 
the costliness of this perfume, for he says that it 
"might have been sold for three hundred denarii." A 
denarius, translated "penny" in vs. 5, is represented as 
being the average daily wages at that time— "a penny 
[denarius] a day." (Matt. 20:2.) If we compare these 
values with present money values, counting farm labor 
at fifty cents a day (which is certainly a moderate valuation), 
the three hundred denarii would be the equivalent 
in wages of one hundred and fifty dollars of our 
money. Thus we see that the perfume was indeed 
"very costly." There was nearly a pint of the perfume, 
a Roman pound being twelve ounces. Nor need we 
question the possibility of perfumes being so expensive, 
for even to-day we have a counterpart in value in the 
attar of roses made in the far East. It is claimed that 
four hundred thousand full-grown roses are used to 
produce one ounce of this perfume, which, in its purity, 
sells as high as one hundred dollars an ounce, or twelve 
hundred dollars for the quantity used by Mary in anointing 
our Lord. It is said that Nero was the first of the 
Emperors to indulge in the use of costly perfumes for 



his anointing; but one much more worthy of tribute, 
homage and anointing with a sweet perfume was the 
"Prince of the kings of the earth," whom Mary had 
the honor to anoint. 

Judas was first to object to this as a waste— the 
difficulty with him being that he loved the Lord too 
little and money too much. The amount that love is 
willing to expend for others is, to some extent at least, 
a measure of the love. Another Evangelist informs us 
that several of the disciples, under the influence of 
Judas' words, took the same view of the matter, and 
spoke disapprovingly of Mary's action. The Apostle 
John, however, takes this opportunity to throw a little 
sidelight upon the character of Judas— more than is apparent 
in the common translation of vs. 6. His declaration 
is, "Now he said this, not because he cared for the 
poor, but because he was a thief, and had the box, and 
stole what things were deposited in it."— Diaglott. 

Our Lord's words, "Let her alone!" are in the nature 
of a severe reproof to those whose sentiments of 
love had no other measure than that of money. It was 
indeed true that there were plenty of poor, and there 
would still be plenty of poor, and plenty of opportunities 
to minister to them; but the opportunity to specially 
honor the Lord, and to pour upon him the fragrant 
odors so beautifully expressive of Mary's love and devotion, 
would not be for long, and our Lord declares 
that the circumstances fully justified the costly expenditure. 
He shows himself out of sympathy with the 
sentiments which balance themselves too accurately 
with money values. Moreover, we may esteem that 
in many instances like the one here recorded the persons 
who are so careful lest money should be spent except 
for the poor are often like Judas, so avaricious that 
whatever money gets into their possession very little of 
it gets to the poor. 

On the contrary, it is the deep, loving, benevolent 
hearts, like that of Mary, which delight in costly sacrifices 
at times, which also are likely to be deeply sympathetic 
and helpful to the physically poor. And in 
our ministrations to others we are not to forget that 
money is not the only thing of which people are sorely 
in need— some need love and sympathy, who do not 
need money. Our Lord was one of these: his own heart, 
full of love, found comparatively little companionship 
in the more or less sordid minds of even the noblest of 
the fallen race represented amongst his apostles. In 
Mary he seemed to find the depth of love and devotion 
which was to him an odor of sweet incense, of refreshment, 
of reinvigoration, a tonic: and Mary apparently 
appreciated, more than did others, the lengths and 
breadths and heights and depths of the Master's character; 
she not only delighted to sit at his feet to learn 
of him, but now delighted, at a great cost, to give him 
some manifestation of her devotion, her love. 

She poured the perfume first upon our Lord's head 



(Mark 14:3), the usual custom, and then the remainder 

she poured upon his feet. But the Apostle John, 

in recording the matter, seems to have forgotten entirely 

the anointing of our Lord's head, so deeply was he 

impressed with the still more expressive devotion manifested 

in the anointing of the feet and the wiping of 

them with the hairs of her head. It is indeed a picture 

of love— a devotion well worthy of being told as a memorial. 

Some one has said,— 

"She took 'woman's chief ornament' and devoted 
it to wiping the travel-stained feet of her Teacher; she devoted 
the best she had to even the least honorable service 
for him. It was the strongest possible expression of 
her love and devotion. She gave her choicest treasures 
in the most self-devoted manner. She was bashful and 
retiring, and could not speak her feelings, and therefore 
she expressed them in this manner." 

We are not surprised to learn that the whole house 

R2448 : page 78 

was filled with the odor; and we doubt not that the odor 
remained for a long time: but far more precious than 
that was the sweet odor of Mary's heart-affections which 
the Lord accepted and will never forget, and the sweet 
odor of her devotion which has come down through 
the centuries to us, bringing blessing to all true hearts 
who have honored her service and desired to emulate 
her conduct. 

It is not our privilege to come into personal contact 
with our dear Redeemer, but we have, nevertheless, 
many opportunities for doing that which to some extent 
will correspond to Mary's act— it is our privilege to 
anoint the Lord's "brethren" with the sweet perfume of 
love, sympathy, joy and peace, and the more costly 
this may be as respects our self-denials, the more precious 
it will be in the estimation of our Elder Brother, 
who declared that in proportion as we do or do not unto 
his brethren, we do or do not unto him. (Matt. 25:40,45.) 
Moreover, he represents these "brethren" in a 
figure as "members of his body;" and from this standpoint 
we see that, while it is not our privilege to pour 
the perfume upon the Head of the body, now highly 
exalted far above angels, principalities and powers, and 
every name that is named— next to the Father,— it is 
our privilege to pour the perfume upon the feet of 
Christ— the last living members of his Church of this 
Gospel age. 

We know not to what extent the closing years of 
this Gospel age may correspond to the closing days of 
our Lord's ministry— we know not how similar may be 
the experiences of the "feet" of the body of Christ to 
the experiences of the Head of the body; we do know, 
however, that in any event it is our blessed privilege to 
comfort one another, to encourage one another, to sustain 
one another, in the trials incident to our "filling 



up that which is behind of the afflictions of Christ." 
(Col. 1:24.) And to whatever extent we would improve 
these opportunities, as did Mary, we must first 
appreciate them as she did. 

Nothing in this suggestion is intended to imply any 
neglect of the members of our natural families "according 
to the flesh:" attentions to these are proper always, 
and are generally so understood, and should more and 
more be appreciated and used in proportion as the Lord's 
people receive freely and fully of his spirit of love,— 
kindness, gentleness, patience, long-suffering. But we 
emphasize that which the Scriptures emphasize, namely, 
that our interest and efforts are not to be confined to 
those of fleshly tie, but, on the contrary, are to be "especially 
to the household of faith." (Gal. 6:10.) There 
will be other and future opportunities of doing good to 
mankind in general, but the opportunity for serving 
"the body of Christ" is limited to the present age. 

Apropos of this propriety of doing good to others 
—expressing our love by our conduct as well as by our 
words, to the members of our families as well as to the 
members of the body of Christ, we quote the words of 
another,— 

"The sweetest perfume that the home circle ever 
knows arises from deeds of loving service which its 
members do for each other. The sweetest perfumes of 
our homes do not arise from elegant furniture, soft carpets, 
elegant pictures, or luxurious viands. Many a 
home, having all these, is pervaded by an atmosphere 

R2449 : page 78 

as tasteless and odorless as bouquets of waxen flowers." 

Another has said,— 

"If my friends have alabaster boxes full of fragrant 
perfume of sympathy and affection laid away, which 
they intend to break over my body, I would rather they 
would bring them out in my weary and troubled hours, 
and open them, that I might be refreshed and cheered 
with them while I need them. ...I would rather have 
a plain coffin without a flower, a funeral without a eulogy, 
than a life without the sweetness of love and sympathy.... 
Flowers on the coffin cast no fragrance backward 
on the weary road." 



R2449 : page 78 

"I HAVE GIVEN YOU AN EXAMPLE." 

-APRIL 16. -JOHN 13:1-17.- 

OUR Lord's ministry was about ended. He had 

met with his twelve chosen disciples to celebrate 

the Passover supper, declaring, "I have greatly desired 



to eat this passover with you before I suffer." (Luke 22:15.) 

The passover lamb which they were to eat 

typified our Lord himself, and the eating of it by his 

disciples represented how believers of the Gospel age 

were to feed upon Christ in their hearts, and by faith 

appropriate to themselves the blessings secured to them 

through his death, "For even Christ our Passover [Lamb] 

is sacrificed for us; therefore let us keep the feast." (1 Cor. 5:7,8.) 

But, inasmuch as Jesus was the antitypical 

Lamb, it was appropriate that the type should be discontinued; 

and hence it was that our Lord, following 

this last typical Supper, instituted the Memorial Supper 

of unleavened bread and fruit of the vine as representing 

the antitype— his broken body and shed blood. 

According to the Jewish custom the Passover supper 
was celebrated by families, and the twelve apostles, 
specially chosen by our Lord and giving their allegiance 
to him as their Head, constituted the nucleus of the family 
of God— whose hearts and hopes and aims were one— for 
"ye are all called in one hope of your calling" (Eph. 4:4). 
Judas was not excluded, altho our Lord evidently knew 
beforehand that it was he who would betray him. This 
furnishes us the lesson that, as followers of Christ, we 
should not judge one another's hearts, nor surmise evil. 
After the evil of the heart has manifested itself in words 

R2449 : page 79 

or deeds is quite time enough to separate ourselves from 
others who profess the Lord's name and desire to fellowship 
with us. True, the evil begins in the heart, 
before the outward act, but we should always hope that 
the brethren may gain the victory, and should seek to 
do nothing to stumble any, but everything to help 
them to overcome the influence of the Adversary, and 
the weaknesses of their own flesh. 

John does not give a particular account of the 
Passover supper, but seems merely to bring in certain 
valuable features and lessons connected therewith, 
omitted by the other Evangelists. His declaration is 
that our Lord knew beforehand that he had reached the 
end of his earthly career, and was specially solicitous 
of improving the closing hours with his particular, 
chosen friends and companions, by inculcating some 
good lessons. "He loved them to the end"— completely, 
fully: his own sharp trials, present and approaching, 
did not distract him, nor absorb his attention. He 
was, as heretofore, still thinking of and endeavoring to 
bless others. Nor need we suppose that this love for 
the twelve applied to them exclusively; rather, that he 
viewed the twelve as the representatives of "them also 
which should believe on him through their word"— as 
he expressed the matter in his prayer to the Father. 
With this view in mind we can realize that what our 
Lord said and did to the apostles was intended to be 
applicable and instructive to all who are his since then. 



-John 17:20. 

From Luke's account it would appear that on this 
occasion there was a strife amongst the apostles, a contention, 
respecting which of them should be esteemed 
greatest. (Luke 22:24-31.) This strife may not have 
been solely one of selfishness, in the evil sense of the 
word, but partially prompted by love for the Master- 
it may have been in respect to their several positions at 
the table, the coveted position possibly being closeness 
to our Lord's person. We remember how James and 
John had made request that they might be on the right 
and on the left of our Lord in the Kingdom, and we remember 
that in connection with this narrative it is declared 
that John was next to our Lord, and leaned upon 
his bosom. 

Quite possibly this dispute respecting greatness 
arose in part from the fact that they were not in this 
instance treated as guests, but merely had the upper 
room put at their disposal; having no host, no provision 
was thereby made for the usual washing of the feet, 
and it was neglected. The matter of feet-washing in 
eastern countries, when sandals were worn, was not 
merely a compliment, but a necessity, the heat of the 
climate, the openness of the sandals, and the dust of 
the roads, making it almost indispensable to comfort 
that the feet be bathed on arriving at the house after a 
journey. Apparently this question of who of the twelve 
was greatest, and of which should perform the menial 
service of feet-washing for the others, had developed 
the fact that none of them were anxious to take the 
servant's position. 

Apparently our Lord permitted them to thus disagree, 
without settling their dispute, without appointing 
any of their number to the menial service. He allowed 
them to think the matter over— time to relent and reconsider, 
and they even proceeded to eat the supper, 
contrary to custom, with unwashed feet. 

Then it was that Jesus arose from the supper, laid 
aside his outer garment, and attaching a towel to the 
girdle of his under-garments, took a basin and a ewer 
for the water, and began to pour the water and wash 
the feet of his disciples. It was not the custom of the 
East to pour the water into the basin and put the foot 
into the water, but to pour the water upon the foot being 
washed; thus each had clean water, and little was 
wasted— for water is much more scarce and precious 
there than with us. We are to remember also that in 
the East at that time tables and chairs such as we use 
were not in vogue. On the contrary, the tables were 
low and shaped somewhat like a horseshoe, and those 
who sat really reclined, lying upon the table, with the 
left elbow resting upon a pillow or divan, their heads 
toward the inside of the horseshoe, where there was a 
space provided for the food, and also a space for a servant 
to enter and place the food. Thus it will be seen 
that the feet extended backward, and could quite easily 



be reached without disturbing those who were eating. 

Our Lord very evidently had already washed the 
feet of several of the disciples before he came in turn 
to Peter. Seemingly none of them offered objection, 
altho no doubt the thought of their own contentions 
upon this subject, and unwillingness to serve one another, 
brought them blushes of shame and confusion of face. 
But when it came to Peter's turn, he protested. It 
would never do, he thought, to permit our Lord to perform 
so menial a service. He asks, "Lord, dost Thou 
wash my feet?" But our Lord did not stop to reprimand 
Peter— to give him a thorough "setting down" and 
scolding, as some of his followers might be inclined to 
do under such circumstances: he merely insisted on 
continuing, and treating Peter the same as the others, 
saying that he would explain the matter later, and that 
if he washed him not, he could have no part with him. 

One cannot help admiring the noble traits in Peter's 
conduct, even tho with the same breath we be forced to 
acknowledge some of his weaknesses, and herein all the 
Lord's followers find a lesson of encouragement, for tho 
they find weaknesses and imperfections, if they find 
also the heart-loyalty to the Lord which was in Peter, 
they may continue to have courage and hope to press 

R2449 : page 80 

on as he did, from victory to victory, and at last to have 
the prize, the reward of faithfulness. 

When Peter learned that there was more meaning 
to the washing of the feet than merely its kindness and 
comfort, and its reproof of the lack of the spirit of humility 
amongst the disciples, he wanted, not only his 
feet, but also his hands and his head washed. Noble, 
thorough-going, whole-hearted, fervent Peter! But our 
Lord explained that this was not necessary, saying, "He 
who has been bathed has no need except to wash his feet, 
but is wholly clean." (Vs. 10— Diaglott.) Public baths 
were in use at that time, but even after having taken a 
general bath, on return to the home it was customary 
to complete the matter by washing the feet; and this 
seems to be the inference of our Lord's remark. The 
apostles had been with our Lord, and under the influence 
of his spirit of love, meekness, gentleness, patience, 
humility, for three years, and had been greatly 
blessed by "the washing of water through the word" 
spoken unto them.— John 15:3; Eph. 5:26. 

There is an intimation in the Lord's words, too, that 
this spirit of pride which had manifested itself among 
them had been inspired to some extent by their treasurer, 
Judas,— as evil communications always are corrupting. 
(1 Cor. 13:33.) This final lesson from their great Teacher 
was a very impressive one upon the eleven, whose hearts 
probably were in the right condition to receive the reproof 
and the lesson, but upon Judas, altho his feet 
also were washed, the effect evidently was not favorable. 



R2450 : page 80 

The spirit of evil which had entered into him before 

the supper— the desire to obtain money, and the proposition 

to obtain it by betraying the Lord, evidently continued 

with him, and instead of being moved aright by 

our Lord's humility and service, he was the more moved 

in the opposite direction— to think little of him. So it 

is with all who have professed the Lord's name in every 

time. Those instructions, examples and experiences, 

which are working out blessing and proving beneficial 

to some, are proving injurious to others. The Gospel, 

in its every phase, is either "a savor of life unto life, 

or of death unto death." As it was God's goodness 

and mercy that hardened Pharaoh's heart, so it was the 

love and humility of Jesus that hardened Judas' heart, 

and these principles are still at work, and may be witnessed 

in the harvest siftings to-day.— 2 Cor. 2:16; 

Exod. 7:13. 

After accomplishing the work of washing the feet 
of all, our Lord resumed his outer garment and reclined 
again at the supper (this was the Passover Supper— the 
Memorial Supper of bread and wine being instituted afterward). 
Our Lord now improved his opportunity and 
explained to them the meaning of what he had done. 
He pointed out to them that this menial service did not 
signify that he was not the Lord and Master, but did 
signify that as Lord and Master he was not unwilling 
to serve the lesser members of Jehovah's family, and 
to minister to their comfort, even in the most menial 
service; and that they should not have been unwilling, 
but glad, to have rendered such service one to another. 

The example which our Lord set was not so much 
in the kind of service (feet-washing), as in the fact of 
service. Nothing in this example, as we understand it, 
was in the nature of a ceremony to be performed by the 
Lord's people, annually, weekly, monthly, or at any 
other time; but the principle of his service constituted the 
example, and is to be observed amongst his followers at 
all times— they are to love one another and to serve one 
another, and to consider no service too menial to be 
performed for each other's comfort and good. 

Those who have interpreted this to signify a ceremony 
similar to the symbolical ceremony of the Memorial 
Supper and the symbolical ceremony of Baptism, 
are, we think, in error. There seems to be nothing 
symbolical in it. It is merely an illustration of the 
principle of humility which is to attach to every affair 
of life. If any of the Lord's people need washing, or 
need any other assistance of a menial character, their 
brethren should gladly and joyfully serve them; and 
whoever possesses the spirit of the Lord will surely 
render such service; but to insist, as some do, that each 
of the Lord's people should first wash his own feet and 
have them clean, and then that each should wash one 



another's feet ceremoniously, is contrary to his example 
which he instructs us to follow. The example was a 
service, and not an inconvenience and ceremony. 

Once a year, on the day before "Good Friday," 
the pope washes the feet of twelve aged paupers who 
are brought from the streets and duly prepared by a 
preliminary washing in private. The pope's ceremonious 
washing is done in the presence of many notables. 
A similar ceremony is performed annually by Emperor 
Joseph of Austro-Hungary. Neither of these ceremonies, 
however, is, to our understanding, according to 
our Lord's example, but contrary to it— likewise the 
ceremonious washing performed by some denominations 
of Christians. 

All who are truly the Lord's followers should heed 
carefully and follow exactly the true example of the 
Master's spirit of meekness, humility and service to 
the members of his body. The whole thought is contained 
in his words, "The servant is not greater than 
his Lord, neither he that is sent greater than he that 
sent him. If ye know these things [if you appreciate 
these principles applicable to all the affairs of life], 
happy are ye if ye do them [if you live according to 
this rule, loving and serving one another]."— Vss. 16,17. 

Feelings of emulation, strife and vain-glory seem 
to specially beset any of the Lord's people who are possessed 
of any degree of talent or ability or honorable 
situation in life, and especially those who are in influential 
places in the Church; and while these, therefore, 
need to be specially on guard against this besetment of 
the flesh, it should not be forgotten that, as some one 
has said, "There is a pride that looks up with envy, as 
well as a pride that looks down with scorn." The Lord's 
followers are to remember that pride in any person, in 
any station, respecting any matter, is highly reprehensible 
in God's sight and displeasing to him. "The Lord 
resisteth the proud, but showeth his favor to the humble." 
Hence, all who would abide in the Lord's love 
have need to be very careful along this line— to keep 
very humble, very lowly in conduct, and particularly 
in mind.— Jas. 4:6; 1 Pet. 5:5. 



page 8 1 
VOL. XX. APRIL 15, 1899. No. 8. 



CONTENTS. 



Views from the Watch Tower 83 

Testing of "Christendom" 83 



Biblical Criticism among Methodists 84 

"My Steps Had Well-Nigh 

Slipped" 86 

"I Am the Way, the Truth and the Life" 88 

"He Shall Give You Another 

Comforter" 91 

Volunteers Wanted! 93 

The Memorial Widely Celebrated 95 

Will My Name Be Blotted Out? 82 

page 82 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
--ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 56-60 ARCH STREET, ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, N.Y. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS: 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age or accident, or other 
adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, if they 
send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting the 
paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list 
constantly. 



R2455 : page 82 

WILL MY NAME BE BLOTTED OUT? 



If any name, written in the Lamb's book of life, is blotted 
out, whose fault will it be? Not the Lord's, surely; for he is 
not only willing, but anxious, for us to continue in his fellowship. 

Similarly, if your name be dropped from the lists of ZION'S 
WATCH TOWER, remember that it will not be of our intention or 
desire. Every provision has been made that all of the Lord's 
people who desire its helping hand along the narrow way to life 
may have it— for a dollar a year, if they are able to pay, or free, 
on request, if unable to pay. 

Many of "the Lord's poor" deny themselves the visits of the 
TOWER for various reasons; some, because they "do not wish to 
go into debt." They overlook the fact that they are already 
in debt to the Lord, and that the WATCH TOWER is the Lord's, 
and is held as a trust or stewardship for him,— for his people. 

Others "have a little proper pride," as they would say, and 
do not desire "charity." It seems to us that any pride which 
would lead us to starve ourselves spiritually would hardly be a 
little nor a proper pride, but a very improper pride which would 
be very offensive in the sight of our Lord. Possibly this is your 
test: possibly the Lord has reduced you to humble you, and, 



if not humbled by his disciplines, you will be rejected. Remember 
the Apostle's words, "God resisteth [is opposed to] the 
proud, but giveth grace [favor] unto the humble." Let us, then, 
humble ourselves under the mighty hand of God, that we may 
have his grace more abundantly.— James 4:6; 1 Pet. 5:6. 

Others will say,— I am not so poor that I cannot afford to pay 
the small price, but just at present I cannot spare the money. 
Very well, send us a postal card, saying, Please continue my 
WATCH TOWER for 1899, and expect remittance later. This will 
be very agreeable to us. And, if later your prospects should 
become still less bright, and you write us to that effect, requesting 
that the debt be cancelled, we will do so most cheerfully. 
Any way, so that we do not lose from our list any who love the 
Lord and his present truth. In times of adversity you specially 
need spiritual helps, that your experiences may be profitable, and 
work out such blessings and graces as will prepare you for an 
inheritance with the saints in light. 

Thus we make the way as clear as possible for all to come to 
the Lord's spiritual table. But we must insist that each one apply 
for himself, yearly— otherwise our list would be made up largely 
of persons who cared little for the truth, and persons removed 
to other localities, and of the dead. 



R2450 : page 83 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 



AS POINTED out in these columns as long ago 

as 1880, "Christendom," since 1878, is 

passing through the sifting and testing of the close or 

"harvest" time of the Gospel age, foretold by the 

apostles: a sifting which is to result in the fall of many 

in nominal Spiritual Israel. "A thousand shall fall 

at thy side, ten thousand at thy right hand,— but it 

shall not come nigh thee [the true saints, the body of 

Christ], only with thine eyes [enlightened by the spirit 

of the truth] shalt thou behold the reward of the unfaithful." 

-Psa. 91:7,8. 

The Prophet describes the testings of this evil day, 
or day of falling. Its "pestilence" of infidelity he describes 
as operating secretly, hidden, as in the night 
darkness,— spreading spiritual sickness and death 
among the millions who outwardly confess, saying, 
Lord, Lord, while their hearts are far from him. Its 
"arrows" of "bitter words" (Psa. 64:3), slanders and 
misrepresentations of the faithful, he shows will be open 
as at "noonday;"— yet these "arrows" will not harm 
the faithful, for they "shall never fall" (2 Pet. 1:10,11), 
but, glancing off them, all others than the pure in heart 
will be caused to fall. The real enemy, as the Prophet 
shows, is the great Adversary, Satan, the "fowler," 
the ensnarer— his human agents being found amongst 



the deceived ones: and he prefers the most talented 
and influential he can obtain. 

He is finding thousands of these amongst the professed 
ministers of Christ who, seeking honor one of 
another and not solely divine approval, are anxious to 
pose as "advanced thinkers," "higher critics," etc. 
These read, more correctly than do the masses, the 
trend of sentiment, the revolution of religious thought 
from faith in the ransom for sinners paid by the precious 
blood of Christ, to a theory of Evolution and 
self-development. They perceive that a large proportion 
of the "best educated" laymen as well as themselves 
already are Evolutionists and anti-ransomists: 
they are anxious to be considered leaders in thought 
among their flocks, but not anxious to alarm and drive 
off any of the "sheep," and especially are they thoughtful 
of those who have the long golden fleece. 

Cases like that of Prof. Charles A. Briggs of the 
Presbyterian Church, who stated himself so plainly as 
to arouse the laity to demand his trial for "heresy," 
are exceptional and purely accidental— the results of 
miscalculation. Prof. Briggs, finding the Evolution and 
higher criticism ideas so popular amongst the theological 
students, miscalculated the general ripeness and 
readiness of Presbyterianism on this line. He supposed 
that he would be famous in a night— he knew correctly 
the sentiments of his own presbytery and the "upper 
classes" of Presbyterians with whom he came in contact: 
he did not realize that the Presbyterians of the 
"back-woods" were so unprepared to welcome him as 
a new Moses. Others more cautious, not only in Presbyterianism 
but in all denominations, waited to note 
the effect. The public did not applaud Prof. Briggs, 
and hence he was deserted, and in the interest of peace 
became a heretical "scape-goat," and was allowed to 
wander off unhonored into the fold of the Episcopal 
Church and into silence. 

But the heresy which Prof. Briggs expressed too 
soon is growing, spreading everywhere, in all denominations: 
it is being "wisely," secretly, presented by 
ministers and Sunday-School teachers everywhere, and 
if we understand the Scriptures aright, it will not be 

R2451 : page 83 

long until all but the heart-consecrated children of God 
will be poisoned by it. 

But when we say that nearly all will fall— "a 
thousand shall fall at thy side,"— we do not mean that 
they will all fall into open immorality, nor that they 

R2451 : page 84 

will abandon church organizations, nor that the fallen 
ones will even know that they have fallen. On the 
contrary, the fallen ones as usual will think that they 



are rising higher and higher— getting rid of error, etc. 
They will be thoroughly blind to the fact that with 
the errors and superstitions they are getting rid also 
of the truths and the faith which alone constituted 
them Christians in God's sight. This is the sense in 
which Babylon is falling, since 1878, and hence God's 
call, "Come out of her, my people, that ye be not partakers 
of her sins, and that ye receive not of her 
plagues."— Rev. 18:4. 

BIBLICAL CRITICISM AMONG METHODISTS. 



The public was surprised indeed, to read among 
the press dispatches of March 7th, published in the 
leading journals, under startling headlines— 

"THE REV. S. P. CADMAN APPLAUDED, 

WHEN HE READS A PAPER HOLDING THAT THE GOOD 

BOOK CANNOT BE THE RULE OF FAITH. 

HE CALLS ATTENTION TO ITS DISCREPANCIES AND SAYS 

THE CHURCH WILL HAVE TO MAKE A NEW 

RULING ON INSPIRATION." 

It seems that the Methodist ministers of New 
York and vicinity have of late been discussing at their 
Monday gatherings some of the Bible's "errors," as 
viewed by agnostics and "higher critics," 
—That Joshua commanded the sun to stand still. 
—That the Red Sea divided before the Israelites. 
—That Jonah was in the belly of a fish three days. 
—That Aaron's Rod turned into a serpent. 
—That Moses tapped a rock and waters gushed out. 
—That the earth swallowed up Achan and his 
companions. 

—That Shadrach, Meshach and Abed-nego were in the 
furnace unharmed. 

—That God spake to Moses out of a burning bush. 
—That Daniel stayed unhurt in a den of lions. 

On Monday, March 6th, Rev. Cadman read a paper 
affirming, "That the inerrancy and the infallibility of 
the Bible are no longer possible of belief among reasoning 
men." 

About four hundred ministers were present, and 
on the rising of the speaker and the announcement of 
the topic the clerical audience expressed its sympathy 
with their brother in that he was willing to champion 
their views in so bold a statement of it, by hearty applause. 
The gentleman had not finished when the appointed 
time expired and "his auditors were so deeply 
interested in him that they readily voted that he finish. 
When he sat down the preachers loudly applauded the 
discourse," says the press report. 

We quote from the published reports of the discourse 
which we have not seen denied in Methodist 



journals, altho a month has since elapsed:— 

"This bold, portentous utterance— involving the 
most radical departure from accepted tenets of the 
Methodist Church since its very foundation— was made 
before the most representative body of Methodist clergy 
in America. It included the vast majority of the 
preachers of Greater New York. It is the first announcement 
of an impending controversy, which may 
shake the Methodist Church to its very foundation 
stones. 

"The acceptance of Dr. Cadman's proposition, 
heard with respect and applause by the New York 
ministers, is comparable to the adoption of a new constitution 
for the United States. It places the Bible 
on the basis of historical works on other than divine 
subjects: it rejects the authenticity of all parts of Holy 
Scripture which are repugnant to human reason. 

"UNDERMINING THE BASIS OF THEIR FAITH. 

"As Mr. Cadman himself said yesterday, the Bible 
was accepted as the true source of authority and inspiration 
by Martin Luther when he established the 
Protestant Church. Luther made the Scripture the 
base of all faith. It is now proposed to abandon the 
teachings of the early fathers of the Protestant Church. 

"The speaker referred to the Old Testament, half 
of whose pages, he said, were of unknown authorship. 
The New Testament likewise contained contradictions. 
The Bible, the church, the ministry, he said, were 
agencies. The true source of inspiration was neither 
a book, nor a church, nor a ministry, but the living 
Christ himself. 

"The weekly meetings of the Methodist ministers 
take place in the Methodist Book Concern building, on 
Fifth avenue. They are held in secret. The congregations 
have not known anything concerning the discussion 
of this vital change in doctrine. This publication 
will be the first intimation they will have had 
that the faith in which they have been reared is threatened 
with an organic change that will make it no longer 
the faith of Wesley. 

"It also goes without saying that the enunciation 
of this proposition will not tend to heal the differences 
between the Methodist Church North and the Methodist 
Church South, which were rent apart by the civil 
war, for the Southern Church has rejected time and 
time again kindred innovations. 

"But Mr. Cadman insists that, whatever the 
church may decide on the question in the future, it will 
not destroy the belief in the chief and final source of 
Christian inspiration, a belief in Christ, the Son of God. 

"In taking up his subject the preacher stated the 
proposition which he would prove: 

"That the inerrancy and the infallibility of the 
Bible are no longer possible of belief among reasoning 



"THE TWO CRITICISMS. 

"The speaker referred to the great change which 
had taken place in the methods of Bible criticism within 
the last fifty years. There should no longer be any 
confusion between literary criticism and the criticism 

R2451 : page 85 

of inspiration. It had been said in former times by 
authorities of weight that the two criticisms conflicted. 
This was not true. They were not on the same plane. 
Inspiration appealed to the spiritual ear. Literary 
criticism was addressed to an ascertainment of facts 
from a human standpoint. Mr. Cadman illustrated his 
meaning by saying that it was one thing to examine, 
classify and discuss the mechanism of a great organ, 
and another to pass judgment upon the music which 
proceeded from it. No literary criticism could affect 
the divine music breathed into the soul of man by the 
life of Jesus Christ. 

"The Bible, he said, was compiled much as is any 
other book. It was written from the records and witnesses 
of the time. It had been impossible to determine 
the authorship of much of the Old Testament. Half 
of its pages, said Mr. Cadman, were of unknown authorship. 
The same was in a measure true of the New 
Testament. Matthew, Mark, Luke and John differed 
in quoting words said to have been pronounced by 
Christ upon a given occasion. Parallel passages were 
not alike. 

"Mr. Cadman referred to that much-discussed 
question of Christ's reference to the miracle of Jonah 
and the whale. Those who have taken the Old Testament 
in its entirety, believing all and every part of it, 
have based their theology in part upon Christ's reference 
to Jonah, when, in Matthew 12:39,40, he said: 

'"But he answered and said unto them: An evil 
and adulterous generation seeketh after a sign, and 
there shall no sign be given to it but the sign of the 
Prophet Jonas. 

'"For as Jonas was three days and three nights 
in the whale's belly, so shall the Son of man be three 
days and nights in the heart of the earth.'* 

"There had been, the preacher said, a great conflict 
upon this speech of Christ. It had been particularly 
a bone of contention, because as a matter of fact 
Christ did not remain in the earth three days and three 
nights, but two nights and a day. Mr. Cadman said 
that he had settled the matter in his own mind by saying 
that he was willing to suffer from the disease of 
suspended judgment so long as he knew that Christ 
did arise. It would always be impossible to reconcile 
the facts of Christ's burial with the facts of his alleged 



statement, and it would be forever useless to discuss 
whether he had ever said what St. Matthew attributed 
to him, or whether he had lain as St. Matthew quoted 
Christ as saying he would lie. But this should never 
deter Christian men from believing in the Christ and 
in his life. 

"When Luther separated his followers from Papacy 
he had turned from priests and priestly interpretations 
of the Bible to the Book itself. He had placed 
the Bible before mankind as the source and authority 
for inspiration. Mr. Cadman said he regretted that 
these early fathers of Protestantism had not gone 
further and urged as the highest source of inspiration 
Christ himself. 

"The speaker said that the trend of thought among 
the best minds in the Methodist Church during the 
last fifty years had been toward a better knowledge 
and a newer view of Christ himself rather than of the 
Bible. He said that there had been a vast increase in 
the number of the 'Lives of Christ' in the last decade: 
that the energy and force of Christ as the incarnation 
of God was becoming better understood every day. 
He regarded as inevitable a restatement and a rejudgment 
of the church upon the infallibility and inerrancy of 
the Bible. 

"The Bible itself gave authority for a belief that 
God was in the ocean, in the firmament, in the rocks. 
Science's contribution to the knowledge of mankind 
went hand in hand with a belief in God. By this statement 
he did not mean to agree with those philosophers 
who had used the word God as a peg on which to hang 
their vagaries: but nevertheless he believed in the 



*See explanation in our issues of April 1, '97, and March 1, '98. 

R2452 : page 85 

demonstration of God in the seas, in the mountains, 
in the various forms of life on this planet. 

"There were means of salvation outside of and 
beyond and before the Bible was written. That must 
be conceded by every one. The Bible was an agency, 
the church was an agency, the ministry was an agency. 

"The church had dabbled too much in the distant 
streams of theology. It had examined the streams, 
but not the source, which was alone pure. The streams 
had been polluted by conflict and dissension. 

"The ministry had taken up too much time in unraveling 
knots of theology to the neglect of God 
himself. 

"The leading authorities of the church had discussed 
the questions involved in the parables of Christ. 
It had been urged that even if the events named in the 
illustrations the Lord used were not of actual fact, 



that did not destroy their value as moral lessons. So, 
also, it had been urged that if the story of Jonah and 
the whale had been an allegory like Bunyan's 'Pilgrim's 
Progress,' it nevertheless had force and effect, 
for the Prophet Jonah without doubt stood on a very 
high spiritual ground. 

"But whatever position the church took— whether 
it held that the Bible must be accepted, as it stands, 
as the revealed truth, as the Word of God, as compelling 
faith because it was the Word of God, or as a historical 
document, valuable, ineffably valuable, because 
of its real substance— the decision would never 
affect the faith of Christian men in the Holy Trinity— 
in God the Father, the Son and the Holy Ghost." 

With more zeal than discretion the Rev. J. B. 
Gallaway of the Third Presbyterian Church of Paterson, 
N.J., put in an appearance among the Methodist 
ministers the following Monday, apparently to criticize 
Rev. Cadman's position, but he was soon identified 
and his voice drowned by applause for Rev. Cadman, 

R2452 : page 86 

and amid cries of "Put him out!" the gentleman was 
gently hustled out "in a decidedly ruffled condition." 

When the press reports were published, the New 
York M.E. "divines" were astonished that their views 
should be considered extreme— Rev. Cadman no less 
than the others. They had been so united in their 
views that they were surprised that the reporter should 
think them strange. It was another case of honesty 
among preachers to an extent the public cannot yet 
appreciate. But the public of "Christendom" is following 
these leaders rapidly: if only the leaders have 
yet lost faith in the Bible and its doctrine of the ransom, 
the others are rapidly losing this— the saving 
"faith once delivered to the saints."— Jude 3. 

Interviewed by a reporter, Bishop E. G. Andrews, 
who was present during the address, said, "I do not 
care to discuss the question." Bishop Stephen M. 
Merrill, who was not present, said, "I don't want to 
think of it. It will not amount to much anyway. I 
have nothing to say either of Cadman or his nonsense." 
Rev. Cadman himself said of the matter:— 

"I was surprised when I saw the article in the 
Journal. I regard my paper as a conservative statement 
of the trend of modern Methodist theology. The questions 
I have discussed must be settled sooner or later. I 
have no objection, under the circumstances, to the 
publication of my views." 

We are to understand, then, that, bold as these 
words may appear to some, they were not half the 
truth, but a "conservative" statement. And they represent 
the "trend [or tendency] of modern Methodism." 
This is just what we are emphasizing,— the 
movement is going on and on, in the same direction 



with increasing momentum, not only among Methodists, 
but among all classes of Christians who do not 
now receive the sealing in their foreheads.— Rev. 7:3. 



When we remember how nearly our own feet came 
to slipping in this same manner thirty-one years ago, 
it gives us great sympathy for others. At that time, 
confused by the contrary doctrines of Christendom and 
the irreconcilable antagonism of many of its chief 
teachings (in re hell, etc.) to the simplest kind of justice 
and reason and love, the writer concluded, much 
against his will, that he must abandon the Bible as an 
inspired standard: he would regard its writers not as 
knaves, but as well-intentioned tho deceived men. He 
would give most credence to the New Testament writers, 
yet could not regard them as inspired or reliable, 
because they believed the Old Testament prophets to 
have been inspired and quoted their words as inspired. 
He reasoned, as others are doing to-day, that, if the 
New Testament writers had been inspired, they could 
not have been deceived in re the Old Testament writings; 
and that the inspiration of the apostles could not 
have been plenary or direct, but merely an inspiration 
in a secondary sense, as we sometimes use the word, 
when we say that music is inspiring, or that the truth 
is inspiring to all who receive it into honest hearts. 

Exactly like Rev. Cadman, his mind centered 
upon Christ as the great revelation of God to men, 
and he would hold to Christ, even tho he felt that he 
must drop the Bible as a standard. 

But what should he believe respecting Christ? was 
the next question. How could he determine which of 
the apostolic statements were true, and which were their 
"mistakes"? He soon saw that, if he considered himself 
able, qualified to select the wheat and reject the 
chaff of apostolic testimony, he would be obliged to 
consider himself greater than the apostles— more inspired 
than they. Of humble mind, he could not do 
this which many to-day have no hesitancy in doing. 
He looked again at the plain, unvarnished tale of the 
New Testament and noted that the apostles displayed 
no evidences of fanaticism, and that all their reasonings 
and deductions were eminently moderate and logical. 
He noted also their purity of life and of teachings, 
their unselfishness and self-sacrificing zeal, and 
concluded that these matters must be given weight; 
and that such cool, noble, zealous men should not be 
accused either of knavery or fanaticism, when they 
claimed special endowment with power and wisdom for 
their particular work. 

Coming to the consideration of our Lord Jesus, he 
concluded that he was dependent upon these witnesses 
for all that he knew respecting him who "spake as 
never man spake," and that he could not consistently 



accept a part of their testimony as truthful and reject 
another part. Further reflection pointed out that our 
Lord himself, according to these honorable witnesses, 
quoted from the Old Testament in a manner which 
clearly testified his faith in the divine, plenary inspiration 
of the prophets and in the general correctness or 
truthfulness of its merely historical portions:— Jonah 
and the great fish; Noah and the flood; the destruction 
of Sodom and of "Lot's wife," etc. 

The question then was between rejecting all or 
accepting all. Carefully and prayerfully he considered 
the matter and reached the conclusion that he had 
never yet examined the Scriptures purely on the merits 
of their own testimony. He had followed the usual 
custom of judging the Bible in the light of what the 
various creeds of Christendom say it teaches: and yet 
he was aware that these various creeds in many particulars 
directly antagonize each other. He resolved to 
thoroughly investigate the Bible, to see what its theory 
might be, interpreted by itself to a mind stripped of 
all reverence for human tradition, and willing, yea desirous 

R2452 : page 87 

to find in the Scriptures a divine revelation. 

He felt his need of a standard or test of truth; he felt 

that he dare not trust or lean to his own understanding 

—nor yet to the understanding of others, on questions 

so wholly beyond human knowledge and experience. 

He felt, moreover, that it is but reasonable that 

we should expect that God, having wise, just and loving 

plans and purposes respecting mankind, should 

make some revelation thereof, that would be reasonable 

and understandable to those in harmony with him and 

desirous of knowing and doing his will, however hidden 

and obscure from others. 

The results of these investigations are well known 
to WATCH TOWER readers, and are set forth in the 
volumes of the MILLENNIAL DAWN series. We found 
that for centuries various sects and parties had split 
up the Bible doctrines amongst them, blending them 
with more or less of human speculation and error; and 
that the misplacement of the truth frequently made of 
it gross error. We found the important doctrine of 
justification by faith and not by works had been clearly 
enunciated by Luther and more recently by many Christians; 
that divine justice and power and wisdom were 
carefully guarded tho not clearly discerned by Presbyterians; 
that Methodists appreciated and extolled the 
love and sympathy of God; that Adventists held the 
precious doctrine of the Lord's return; that Baptists 
amongst other points held the doctrine of baptism symbolically 
correctly, even tho they had lost sight of the 
real baptism; that some Universalists had long held 
vaguely some thoughts respecting "restitution." And 
so, nearly all denominations gave evidence that their 



founders had been feeling after truth: but quite evidently 
the great Adversary had fought against them 
and had wrongly divided the Word of God which he 
could not wholly destroy. 

Our work since has been to bring together these 
long scattered fragments of truth and present them to 
the Lord's people— not as new, not as our own, but as 
the Lord's. So far from desiring to make something 
new, we are most careful to avoid both in letter and 
spirit either taking from or adding to the Word of the 
Lord; for we are fully convinced that "the Word of 
God is sufficient," "that the man of God may be perfect, 
thoroughly furnished unto all good works."— 
2 Tim. 3:17. 

What blessings, what riches of grace, have come 
to us and to others of the household of faith through 
this bringing together of the jewels of divine truth so 
long scattered amongst various denominations and misset 

R2453 : page 87 

in tarnished human theories! What harmony, what 
beauty, what refreshment we now have in that which 
before was insipid, incongruous and distracting! How 
firm a foundation we now have for faith, hope and love! 
What a contrast to our former vague hopes, dim faith 
or credulity, and cold love— three-fourths fear! 

But as we claim that what we present is not our 
own, not new, but "The Old Theology"— so old that 
it had been lost sight of for centuries— we must disclaim 
any credit even for the finding and rearrangement of 
the jewels of truth. "It is the Lord's doing, and it is 
marvelous in our eyes." The writer wholly disclaims 
superior ability or qualification for the reorganization 
of the truth in its present solidarity. As the time had 
come for the bringing together of the scattered thoughts 
of past centuries in the marvelous inventions of our 
day,— so the time had come for the bringing together 
of the fragmentary hopes and promises of God's Word 
scattered through Christendom. To deny that the 
Lord has simply "poured out" this harvest time blessing 
of "present truth" in his own due time and in his 
own way, would be as wrong as to claim it as of our 
own invention. "Poured out" exactly expresses the 
truth on this point too, for he neither "burned the 
midnight oil," nor racked his brain, nor otherwise 
forged the chain of truth with heavy sledge blows of 
human reason on the anvil of knowledge. On the contrary, 
it came gradually, silently, as comes the morning 
dawn: the only effort necessary was to keep awake 
and face in the right direction. And the greatest aid 
in so doing was the effort put forth to awaken others 
of the "household of faith" and point them to the 
light and in turn to urge upon them the necessity for 
serving also, if they would overcome the lethargic 
"spirit of the world," and be ready to go in to the 



marriage of the Lamb. 

To deny that the "marvelous light" of present 
truth is of the Lord's providence as truly as was the 
light of the Jewish "harvest," and the lesser light of 
the period of "The Great Reformation," would be to 
deny that we are in the "harvest" of this age, in which 
the Lord specially promised his people just such refreshment 
—"meat in due season," "things new and 
old"— set forth afresh under his own supervision. 

In view of the fact that we are in the testing time, 
when (in the Church) every man's faith and works 
are to be tested "so as by fire" (1 Cor. 3:15); in view 
of the fact that we are now in "the evil day" when 
the question is not so much, Who shall fall? but, "Who 
shall be able to stand?" (Rev. 6:17) what shall we 
conclude respecting the conditions on which one may 
"never fall," but have an abundant entrance to the 
Kingdom now near at hand?— 2 Pet. 1:11. 

Several conditions are laid down in the Scriptures. 

(1) All of the "brethren" will be awakened in 

season to put on "the whole armor of God" as in contrast 
with the small pieces of the armor worn by various 
denominations in the past— "in the night." Whoever 

R2453 : page 88 

shall be left asleep and in darkness and thus 
not prepared to "stand" in this evil day, will thereby 
make it evident, whatever his professions, that God 
who readeth the heart did not find him worthy of the 
light of present truth. "Light is sown for the righteous, 
gladness for the upright in heart."— Psa. 97:11. 

(2) All once awakened must be sufficiently appreciative 
of the "marvelous light" to rejoice greatly 

therein. They must also take heed, lest they become 

overcharged and spiritually drowsy by "the cares of this 

life," etc.; and must use energy in putting on the 

whole armor of God— not only the "helmet" to protect 

the intellect from the "fiery darts" of Evolution 

and agnosticism, but also the "breastplate" of righteousness 

to protect the heart, and the "shield" of faith 

for use on all occasions as necessity demands; and besides 

these they must have the "sword" of the truth, 

the Word of the Lord— grasping it by the handle and 

not by the blade, that they may defend themselves and 

others in this conflict with the powers of darkness, with 

which this age ends. Lastly they must prepare for 

the rough pathway by putting on the "sandals" of 

full consecration to the Lord, even unto death.— 

Eph. 6:11-17. 

(3) All such soldiers of the cross will be fiercely 
assaulted by the Adversary, and, to be able to stand, 
must "contend earnestly for the faith once delivered 
to the saints." 

(4) One of the final and most searching tests of 
these "brethren," and the one under which probably 



the most of those once awakened and armed will fall, 
will be,— love for the brethren. Seemingly many will 
fail at this point and be therefore accounted unworthy 
of an abundant entrance to the Kingdom on this score. 
Whoever has the spirit of love according to the pattern 
(Rom. 8:29), is expected to agree with the Apostle 
Paul's statement,— "Because he laid down his life 
for us, we ought also to lay down our lives for the 
brethren. "~1 John 3:14,16; 1 Pet. 1:22; 3:8. 

This, like all other tests, will be most pointed and 
conspicuous during this time of special privilege and 
special trial in the end of the age. (Rev. 3:10.) Let 
us consider how it will come that we may be the better 
prepared to meet it successfully, (a) It will recognize 
brotherhood neither along the narrow channels of sectarianism, 
nor on the unlimited plane of worldly disregard 
for the divine Word which declares for "the 
brotherhood of man." It will recognize children of 
the Evil One and children of God: and all of the latter 
will be esteemed and loved and served as "brethren" 
—all trusting in the precious blood of Christ for forgiveness, 
and fully consecrated to the Lord's service. 

(b) If such are seen anywhere, in "Babylon" or 

out of her, asleep, fettered and blinded by false doctrines 
and superstitions, by a soldier of the cross who 
has gotten awake and put on the armor, it is his duty, 
as it should be his pleasure, to speed to his relief in 
the wisest and best and quickest manner. Self-ease, 
self-repute nor any other self-ish spirit must hinder 
him; the spirit of love must energize him to do all in 
his power— even to the laying down of his life— for 
the brethren. All who have this spirit must yearn to 
help those in danger of losing their hold upon the Lord 
after the manner of those now blindly leading them 
into unbelief. 

(c) The same spirit of the "Captain" (Heb. 2:10) 
will lead him to so love not only the brethren that are 
still asleep, but if possible still more ready to lay down 
life for the brethren who, like himself, have gotten 
awake and are putting on the armor. He will sympathize 
with their trials by the way and assist them 

to put on the sandals and to adjust every piece 
of the armor. Should any be specially weak and liable 
to stumble he will not despise him, nor revile him, 
even as the elder brother, the Captain, would not do 
so. On the contrary, he will be the more watchful and 
helpful toward the weaker even tho he most enjoy himself 
in the company of the stronger. This is not the 
time for the strong to gather by themselves for mutual 
admiration and enjoyment;— that will come later on to 
all such who so love the brethren as to lay down their 
lives on their behalf. These will hear the Master say, 
"Well done, good and faithful servant: enter into the 
joys of thy Lord." 



Only in the light of present truth is the Bible explainable 
to reason. In its light we see that certain 
books are inspired directly, others, historical, needed 
not inspiration, but merely supervision of the Lord, 
that the truths appropriate for each age might be so 
stated as to be understood by the consecrated class, 
the "brethren," under the guidance of the spirit in 
due time. 

Only from the inside can the great plan of God be 
seen and appreciated, and only the "brethren" are admitted 
to this inside view. "If any man will do his 
[the Father's] will, he shall know of the doctrine."— 
John 7:17. 



R2453 : page 88 

"I AM THE WAY, THE TRUTH AND THE LIFE." 

-APRIL 23-JOHN 14:1-14.- 

AFTER washing the disciples' feet, and after the 
sop had been given to Judas, and he had gone 
out; and after telling the disciples that they all would 
be offended that night because of him, and answering 
Peter that he would deny him thrice before the cock 
crew, we may well suppose that the hearts of the eleven 
were heavy, disturbed, troubled with fearful forebodings. 
Had they indeed been deluded, or had they misunderstood 
the Master when he told them that he was 
the Messiah, the heir of the Kingdom, and that they 
should sit with him in his throne? How could they 
interpret his language, seeing that only five days before 
he had received the hosannas of the multitude as the 
Son of David, the King of Israel, when riding on the 
ass? What could it mean that the Master was now 
"exceeding sorrowful" and spoke of betrayal, and of 
their dispersion and of his own death? 
It was in answer to these their troubled thoughts 

R2453 : page 89 

that our Lord spoke to them the beautiful words of 
comfort and consolation recorded in the 14th, 15th, 
16th and 17th chapters of John's Gospel, beginning— 
"Let not your hearts be troubled: ye believe in God, 
believe also in me." 

The apostles were already consecrated to God as 
his servants, before they came in contact with Jesus; 
they already believed in God, trusted in him, were Israelites 
indeed without guile. This is testified to further 
by our Lord's prayer, in which he says, "Thine they 
were, and thou gavest them me." The trouble in their 
hearts was not in respect to the foundations of their 



R2454 : page 89 

hopes, for these were all established. They not only 
knew and trusted God, but knew and trusted also the 
promises of God respecting the Kingdom and the blessing 
that should come to all the families of the earth 
through it. The whole question before their minds was 
respecting Jesus:— Was he indeed the Messiah, or had 
they built some false expectations upon his wonderful 
words and deeds? How should they understand it if 
now, after three and a half years of ministry he should 
die at the hands of his enemies, instead of establishing 
his Kingdom and subduing all things to himself, as 
they had expected? He had said that he was going 
away, and that whither he went they could not come. 
How could they understand these matters, and harmonize 
them? 

They had not yet learned the meaning of the words 
which early in his ministry our Lord had addressed to 
Nicodemus— "Except a man be born again, he cannot 
see the Kingdom of God;"— "Except a man be born of 
water and of spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of 
God." (John 3:3,5.) But these were spiritual truths, 
and could not be appreciated until Pentecost would bring 
them the anointing of the holy spirit, and permit them 
to "comprehend with all saints the lengths and breadths 
and heights and depths" of the divine plan. But they 
did need some comfort, and the Master proceeded to 
give them the best and the strongest spiritual food, instruction, 
that they were able to receive. He had many 
things to tell them, but they could not bear them then, 
could not understand them, until the anointing of the 
holy spirit would prepare their hearts. 

Our Lord began by reviving in them their faith in 
the Father and in his plan, saying, Ye believe in God, 
—believe also in me: recognize the fact that all of the 
Father's plan will be accomplished, and inasmuch as 
you have seen my loyalty to the Father in word and in 
deed, and inasmuch as you have seen the Father's 
power unto good works manifested in me, let faith's 
anchor hold; continue to trust me, continue to have confidence, 
and you shall have a blessing; wait for the development 
of the divine plan, and it will more than 
satisfy your highest expectations. You are perplexed 
because I said that I am going away— going to the 
Father, but let me explain to you that my going is in 
your interest: I go to prepare a place for you in my 
Father's house of many apartments; and as surely as 
I do this I will come again and receive you unto myself, 
that we may henceforth be together forever. 

Thus, in a few words, the Master declared the work 
of the Gospel age, pointing to his second advent and 
the glorification of the Church at the end of the age. 
He did not here stop to give them detailed explanations 
of the trials of faith and of patience through which 



they must pass; this he had done on other occasions, 
warning and cautioning them (Matt. 24); now their 
hearts were troubled, and he would merely console them 
with the assurance that his going away was necessary, 
that his second coming would be certain, and that the 
gathering of all to everlasting fellowship with him in 
the mansions prepared was assured. 

The Father's House is really the Universe, and 
figuratively speaking heaven is his throne, the earth his 
footstool. Divine providence has made abundant arrangement 
for the everlasting blessedness of all the sons 
of God. In the divine arrangement a provision had 
been made for man when in harmony with God, before 
the fall, but by reason of sin all of man's rights to a 
place in the everlasting abode of the just had been forfeited, 
and at the time of our dear Redeemer's discourse 
he was in the world for the very purpose of redeeming 
man and all his forfeited rights and possessions. (Luke 19:10; 
Eph. 1:14.) The purchase had not yet been 
completed— our Lord intended to finish the arrangements 
therefor within a few hours at Calvary. But 
this would cost the sacrifice of himself— the full surrender 
of the man Christ Jesus as a man, and he could 
be with them no longer as a man. The hope was that 
by his obedience to the divine will he should not only 
redeem Adam and his race by the sacrifice of himself, 
the man Christ Jesus, but that he would be raised from 
death to a new nature on a higher plane— the divine 
nature. Thus it was necessary that he should go away 
from them as the man Christ Jesus, and that they should 
see him no more as the man, but that in due time, at 
his second coming, they also should be "changed" 
from human conditions to spirit conditions, and "be 
like him and see him as he is."— 1 John 3:2. 

It was necessary, also, that, after laying down his 
life, he should ascend to the Father and present his 
sacrifice as on man's behalf— as man's ransom— and 
this he did: the Pentecostal blessing was the divine attestation 
that the sacrifice for sins was accepted of the 
Father on man's behalf, and that hence the resulting 
blessing came forth upon all who accepted Jesus as their 
Redeemer. 

The interim between our Lord's death and his 

R2454 : page 90 

second advent is not long from any standpoint of 

faith. (1) It is not long from God's standpoint, for, 

as the Apostle Peter declares, "A thousand years are as 

one day" with the Lord. (2 Pet. 3:8.) (2) It is not 

long from the standpoint of true believers, for to none 

of them is the average of life and waiting above fifty 

years. We are not to take the longest and most incongruous 

view of this period— not to feel as tho we had 

been living for eighteen hundred years in waiting expectancy: 

"Sufficient unto the day is the evil thereof," 



and sufficient to each individual is his own share in the 
trials, polishing and preparations for the coming of the 
Bridegroom to receive him unto himself. While it is 
an affair of the Church as a whole in one sense of the 
word, it is an individual affair in the most important 
sense of the word to each of the Lord's followers. 

"And whither I go ye know, and the way ye know." 
For three years our Lord had been making himself 
known to his disciples, and also making them acquainted 
with the Father's character; and hence, when he 
now informed them that he was going home to the 
Father, they were to feel that they knew the Father 
better than ever, and could better than ever appreciate 
such a home of righteousness and true happiness as he 
would provide and maintain. Moreover, their experience 
with the Lord, and under his instructions and 
leading, had made them acquainted with the way to 
God, even tho they did not recognize it as such. Hence 
our Lord's declaration, "I am the Way, the Truth and 
the Life— no man cometh to the Father but by me." 

Our Lord was the "Way" in that only through his 
sacrifice, the "ransom," imputing his merit to sinners, 
could they be made acceptable to the Father or be received 
back again into fellowship with him. He was the 
"Truth" in the sense that only through his words, his 
instructions, his guidance, could there be any hope of 
coming into harmony with the spirit of God, the spirit 
of truth. He was the "Life" in that all the race 
was dead, under divine sentence— had forfeited the 
rights of life— and none could come again into life conditions 
except through him— through the life which he 
gave for ours. Thus he is our Ransom, or Way; our 
Teacher or Instructor in righteousness, in the truth, 
and our Life-giver;— "Neither is their salvation in any 
other." "No man cometh unto the Father but by me" 
—no man need hope for any place in any of the mansions 
of the Father's house by any other way, by any 
other truth, by any other life.— Acts 4:12; John 14:6. 

And so also Christ will be the Way, the Truth and 
the Life to the world of mankind in the Millennial age. 
And as the Lord, by his sacrifice and offering, opened 
for the Gospel Church, his bride, an abode in the heavenly 
division of God's mansion, or house, so by the 
same sacrifice he redeemed and will restore and give to 
mankind (to as many as obey him— Acts 3:23) a home 
in the earthly divisions of the Father's house, which 
will then again become a Paradise of God. 

Much as the apostles esteemed the Master, it was 
difficult for them to grasp the thought of his perfection 
—that he was the very image of God in flesh. (1 Tim. 3:16.) 
They had heard him tell, and indeed knew also 
from the Law, that "God is a spirit"— not flesh, and 
hence not visible. They had heard him declare previously, 
also, "No man hath seen God at any time; the 
only begotten Son,. ..he hath revealed him." (John 1:18.) 
But they had never grasped the thought that 



in seeing Jesus they saw the most that was possible to 

be seen of the divine character— its likeness, its perfect 

image in flesh. It was therefore necessary that the 

Master should call their attention to this fact, saying, 

"He that hath seen me hath seen the Father." He did 

not mean them to understand that he was the Father, 

for this he had distinctly disclaimed repeatedly, telling 

them that the Father was greater, and that the works 

which he did were done by the Father's power. (John 14:28,10.) 

Nor did he mean them to understand that 

in seeing him they had seen an invisible being, as God 

is invisible. He did mean them to understand that in 

seeing his character, his motives, his love, they had 

seen a true expression that most faithfully represented 

the Father in all these particulars. 

He would have them understand the unity subsisting 
between the Father and himself, his will was buried 
into the Father's will, he would have no other; "Not 
my will, but thine, be done." He would have them 
understand that the Father, by his power, by his spirit, 
dwelt in him also, so that his words and works fully 
and completely represented the Father. He declared 
to them that the works which they had witnessed during 
his ministry fully attested this power of the Highest 
resting upon him and operating through him. And 
this seems to have fully satisfied the apostles, and to 
have brought rest to their hearts. 

As a further explanation of the necessity for his 
going to the Father, our Lord declares that as a result 
of his going his followers should do greater works than 
he had done. It may perhaps be proper to think that 
some of these "greater works" will occur after the 

R2455 : page 90 

Kingdom has been established— the great work of awakening 

the world of mankind from the sleep of death 

and restoring the willing and obedient to the full perfection 

of human life. That, truly, will be a greater 

work than our Lord Jesus accomplished at his first advent, 

for then his greatest work was the awakening of 

the sleeping ones without bringing them to the full perfection 

of human nature. 

But in our opinion this is not the only sense in 
which the Lord's followers are to understand that their 

R2455 : page 91 

works shall be greater than those of the Master. The 
Lord's works were on a fleshly plane as a matter of 
necessity. The holy spirit had not yet come— could 
not come until after he had given the ransom price and 
had presented it to the Father, and it had been accepted. 
Consequently, those to whom he ministered 
(even his disciples, not being begotten of the spirit) 
could not be instructed from that standpoint. Their 



ears were heavy as respected earthly things, but in regard 
to heavenly things they could understand nothing; 
for, "The natural man receiveth not the things of the 
spirit of God, neither can he know them, because they 
are spiritually discerned." It is since Pentecost that 
"God hath revealed them [spiritual things] unto us by 
his spirit," which "searcheth all things, yea, the deep 
things of God."-l Cor. 2:10,14; John 3:12. 

In the midst of the house of servants, not yet begotten 
of the spirit— not yet granted the privilege of 
sonship (John 1:12), our Lord could do and teach on 
no higher plane than the earthly, except as he "spoke 
unto the people in parables and dark sayings," which 
in due time the Church would understand, under the 
leading of the holy spirit. It was in consequence of 
this that our Lord's miracles were all physical, and his 
plain understandable teachings were all on a plane appreciable 
by the natural man. 

But when the holy spirit was come, after Pentecost, 
the Lord's people, in his name, and as his representatives, 
began to do greater, more wonderful works than 
those which he himself had performed. Did the Lord 
open the eyes of the blind? His followers were privileged 
to open the eyes of men's understandings. Did 
the Lord heal the physically sick? His disciples were 
permitted to heal the spiritually diseased. Did the 
Lord cure physical leprosy? It was the privilege of his 
followers to heal spiritual leprosy, sin. Did our Lord 
revive the dead? It was the privilege of his followers 
to preach a Gospel by which many "passed from death 
unto life" in a much higher sense. And these privileges 
of these still greater works are yet with the Lord's people. 
Blessed are those who appreciate their great privileges, 
and are about the Father's business with energy, 
with zeal. But those who, having received a talent of 
the Lord, bury it in the earth— in business, in pleasure, 
in society— cannot expect to be received of the Master 
at his second coming, nor to hear him say, "Well done, 
good and faithful servant, enter thou into the joys of 
thy Lord." 

As indicating how fully he would still continue to 
be the active agent of the Father in all things relating 
to the Church, our Lord assures us that such things as 
we ask of the Father he (Jesus) will do for us, that the 
Father may be glorified in the Son. The Father hath 
committed all things into the hands of the Son; nevertheless, 
in everything the Son acknowledges the Father 
and gives glory to his name. 



R2455 : page 91 

"HE SHALL GIVE YOU ANOTHER COMFORTER. 
-APRIL 30. -JOHN 14:15-27.- 



CONTINUING his discourse to his troubled disciples 

at the time of his instituting the Memorial 

of his own death, our Lord not only promised to come 

again and receive them to himself in due time, but additionally 

he promised the Comforter, the Holy Spirit, 

during the interim of his absence. Since he was about 

to lay down the human nature he could no longer be 

with them as the man Christ Jesus— in his resurrection 

he would become again a spirit being like unto the 

Father, and could no more be seen by his disciples than 

the Father could be seen by them, until the time would 

come when the entire Church, complete, would be 

"changed," made "like him" (and like the Father) 

and see him, and be with him, and share his glory. 

His resurrection "change" made necessary either the 

leaving of his disciples alone, without any help or aid 

during the Gospel age, or else that help be granted 

them in some other manner. The few occasions on 

which our Lord appeared to his disciples after his resurrection, 

for a few moments each, were miraculous 

manifestations, simply for the purpose of assuring them 

that he was no longer dead, and that having risen from 

the dead he was no longer controlled by human conditions. 

Hence, as a part of the lesson, the flesh bodies 

in which he manifested himself appeared miraculously 

and disappeared likewise— he came and went as the 

wind.-John 3:8; Luke 24:26,31; Acts 1:3,4. 

The holy spirit would be another Comforter, but 
the comfort would be of the same kind. Indeed, our 
word "comfort" does not properly represent the thought 
of the text, which rather is, to strengthen, to sustain: 
the holy spirit would not be merely a consoler of woes, 
a soother of fears, in the sense of our word comfort, 
but it would quicken their understandings, strengthen 
their zeal, and energize them for doing and enduring 
such things as divine providence might permit to come 
upon them for their correction in righteousness, and in 
order to make them "meet for the inheritance of the 
saints in light." 

The holy spirit or holy influence that should come 
to the Church and abide with it through the age, to 
supervise and direct in the interest of the faithful, was 
to be a representative of both the Father and the Son. 
Indeed, the thought that the holy spirit is the representative 

R2455 : page 92 

of the Lord Jesus with the Church is so strongly 

put that sometimes the Lord himself and his spirit 

or influence are spoken of interchangeably; as for instance, 

when he said to them, "Lo, I am with you alway, 

even unto the end of the age." (Matt. 28:20.) 

And again, "I will not leave you comfortless; I will 

come to you [through the holy spirit]." And again, 

"In that day ye shall know that I am in my Father, 



and ye in me, and I [through the holy spirit] in you, 
...and I will manifest myself to him [through the 
holy spirit]. ...And we [the Father and the Son] will 
come unto him, and make our abode with him [through 
the holy spirit]. "~Vss. 18,20,23. 

Thus it is that those who receive the holy spirit, 
the spirit of the truth, the spirit of love, the spirit of 
the Father, the spirit of Christ, are enabled to see Jesus, 
and have a new life begun in them. (Vs. 19.) They 
see with the eyes of their understanding, and do not 

R2456 : page 92 

walk in darkness. They hear the voice of the Lord, 

saying, "This is the way; walk ye in it." They taste 

the good Word of God, and realize that he is very gracious. 

They feel the love of God shed abroad in their 

hearts, producing in them love for the brethren and all 

the good fruits of the spirit— meekness, gentleness, patience, 

long-suffering, brotherly-kindness, love.— Isa. 30:21; 

1 Pet. 2:3; Rom. 5:5; Col. 3:12,13. 

These experiences, however, are promised conditionally 
—they are not promised to those who have never 
heard of the grace of God, but to those who have heard, 
to "as many as the Lord our God shall call," who, 
hearing his commandments, are moved by responsive 
love to do them. Such have the Father's love, such 
have the love of the Son, and such shall have the fellowship 
both of the Father and the Son through the 
medium or channel of the holy spirit. This is declared 
in the 15th and 16th verses, and again in the 21st, 23d and 24th. 
Not only are faith and obedience of the 
heart necessary, before any can come into the spirit-begotten 
condition, but a continuance and growth in 
faith and in obedience are necessary in order to a continuance 
and growth in the spirit of holiness, or the 
holy spirit, the spirit of fellowship with the Father 
and with the Son. 

It is one thing to have a begetting of the spirit, 
and quite another matter to attain to that condition 
urged by the Apostle, saying, "Be ye filled with the 
spirit." (Eph. 5:18.) The measure of our filling will 
correspond with the measure of our emptying of the 
spirit of selfwill, and filling with the spirit of faith and 
obedience. And altho the obedience cannot do otherwise 
than manifest itself in the daily life, nevertheless 
it is the obedience of the intention, of the will, of the 
heart, that the Lord regards in his consecrated people, 
and not merely the control of the earthen vessel. Hence, 
some whose hearts are thoroughly loyal to the Lord 
may be pleasing to him, while not the most pleasing to 
some of those with whom they come in contact; while 
others, "highly esteemed amongst men" because of 
outward moralities, may be an "abomination" in the 
sight of God, because of coldness or dishonesty of heart. 
(Luke 16:15.) Nevertheless, he that hath the new 



hope in him, and the new spirit, will seek to purify 
himself, not only in his thoughts, but also in his words 
and deeds and all his affairs, inward and outward.— 
1 John 3:3. 

It should not be overlooked that, altho the holy 
spirit, like all other favors, is of the Father, it, like 
all others of his gifts, comes to us through the Son, and 
not by any direct relationship between the Father and 
us. As we saw in our previous lesson that our prayers 
addressed to the Father are to be answered by the Son, 
—"Whatsoever ye shall ask in my name that will I do, 
that the Father may be glorified in the Son: If ye shall 
ask anything in my name I will do it;"— so we see in 
this lesson that the gift of the holy spirit comes to us, 
not because of any direct relationship between the 
Father and us, but at the instance of our Lord Jesus. 
"I will pray the Father, and he shall give you another 
comforter"— at my request and my account the Father 
will do this for you. (Vs. 16.) The same thought is 
again expressed in vs. 26, "The holy spirit whom the 
Father will send in my name." 

The lesson to us here is, that our only standing before 
the Father as yet is a reckoned one— in Christ, as 
members of his body,— our Lord Jesus represents the 
Father to us and represents us to the Father. The comfort 
and strength of the holy spirit imparted to us is 
the Father's, the spirit of truth, all of which emanates 
from the Father: it reaches us not directly, but only 
through our Lord and Head, Jesus. In a word, we have 
no standing whatever with the Father, and will not have 
any, until by his grace, through our Lord Jesus, we 
shall have been "made meet for the inheritance of the 
saints in light," and by the "change" of the first resurrection 
shall be perfected in his likeness, which is the 
divine likeness: then and thereafter, being actually perfect, 
and not merely reckonedly perfect, we may have 
an individual standing with the Father, but not before. 

Hence it is that if any one lose his relationship to 
Christ through the loss of his faith in the precious 
blood, or through the loss of the holy spirit, through 
wilful sin, such an one falls out of the protection, the 
care, the covering of Jesus, the Mediator of the New 
Covenant,— and falls into the hands of the living God, 
—which means a judgment according to facts and 
works; and to all imperfect creatures this means death. 
(Heb. 10:31.) Hence also the exhortation of the 
Scriptures, that we abide in him, that we remain under 

R2456 : page 93 

the blood of sprinkling, that we abide in his love.— 
John 15:4,6,10; 1 John 2:24-29. 

Our Lord pointedly declares that he who does not 
seek to please him by conforming to his instructions, 
thereby manifests that he does not love him. (Vss. 23,24.) 
Surely there can be no better test of love than 



devotion, and no better test of devotion than obedience. 
Our enlightened consciences render hearty assent to the 
Master's words, and with the Apostle we exclaim, "The 
love of Christ constraineth us, for we thus judge that, 
if one died for all, then all were dead, and that he died 
for all, that they who live [justified and begotten to 
newness of life] should henceforth not live unto themselves, 
but unto him who died for us, and rose again." 
-2 Cor. 5:14,15. 

The Master pointed out to us distinctly that in 
keeping his sayings we are not merely pleasing and 
obeying him, but that he is in all this matter the mouthpiece 
of Jehovah, the Father, and consequently that in 
pleasing and obeying him we are pleasing and obeying 
the Father. This much he could tell them while still 
with them, but he had many things that he desired to 
make known to them, and that were necessary for them 
to know, but that they could not receive as yet, because 
the holy spirit had not yet come upon them, and could 
not until after the ransom sacrifice had been made at 
Calvary and offered in the Holy of Holies, after he ascended 
up on high, there to appear in the presence of 
God for us.-John 7:39; Heb. 9:24. 

Our Lord's assurance is that this Comforter or 
strengthener, the holy spirit of the Father, sent on account 
of and at the instance of Jesus our Redeemer, 
Mediator and Head, will be our instructor— using various 
instrumentalities for bringing the instruction to us 
—the Word of truth, the writings of the apostles, and 
the various helps and agencies which the Lord, through 
the holy spirit, has and shall from time to time, as 
needed, provide to his flock. 

How beautiful, how consoling to their troubled 
hearts, and how refreshing to ours, is the legacy of love 
and peace left to us by our dear Redeemer, as expressed 
in the 27th verse! "Peace I leave with you, my peace 
I give unto you; not as the world giveth give I unto you. 
Let not your heart be troubled, neither let it be afraid." 
This peace and joy which surpasseth human understanding, 
was not given to the world, nor is it given to 
the nominal Christian professor, nor to the formalist 
and ritualist, however zealous they may be. It is intended 
for and can be had only by those who receive 
riches of grace through the holy spirit— those who by 
obedience to the truth and its spirit grow up into Christ 
their living Head in all things. Such have peace, deep 
and abiding, and ever increasing proportionately as they 
come to comprehend with all saints through faith and 
obedience the riches of divine grace— the lengths and 
breadths and heights and depths of the love of God. 

This is not worldly peace, not the peace of indifference 
and carelessness, not the peace of sloth, not the 
peace of self-indulgence, not the peace of fatalism; but 
it is the peace of Christ— "my peace." Looking back 
we can see that the Master preserved his peace with 
God under all conditions. It is a peace which implicitly 



trusts to the divine wisdom, love, justice and power, 
a peace which remembers the gracious promise made to 
the Lord's faithful— that nothing shall be any means 
hurt his faithful, and that all things shall work together 
for good to them that love God. This peace can accept 
by faith whatever divine providence permits, and can 
look through its tears with joyful expectancy for the 
ultimate blessings which the Master has promised, and 
of which the present peace and joy are merely foretastes. 



R2456 : page 93 

VOLUNTEERS WANTED! 



"We ought also to lay down our lives 
for the brethren."— 1 John 3:16. 

VOLUNTEERS FOR HOME DUTY-male and female, 
are called for: those who can give about 
two hours every Sunday, and who are willing to give 
these in the Lord's service and as part of their "living 
sacrifice" (Rom. 12:1)— together with the best they 
have of influence, and good personal appearance. The 
service is such as any person in health can render: it 
is an unusual but dignified and very successful preaching 
of the truth, which we will explain hereinafter. 

The necessity for this service is that "brethren" 
are in danger; and love of the brethren and the Elder 
Brother's approval are the incentives to enlistment. 
All, whose eyes of understanding are open, realize in 
harmony with the View of this issue that the leaders 
in religious thought have already lost their anchorage 
—their faith in the precious blood of Christ as the 
ransom price; and that those under their influence are 
tending rapidly in that same direction under the doctrinal 
winds of Evolution and higher criticism. They 
do not cry for help, because they do not realize their 
situation. We must not wait our sacrificing until they 

R2457 : page 93 

request it; even as our Lord did not wait for sinners to 
call him to sacrifice: he gave himself for us, and thus 
should we voluntarily "lay down our lives for the 
brethren." 

There are some faithful brethren enlisted in the 
foreign service, who as colporteurs and pilgrims go 
from city to city. The Lord is blessing these and sending 
more such laborers into his vineyard; but through 
love of the brethren still in Babylon he is stirring us 
up to arrange a plan of work in which many more can 
engage;— those who are anxious to serve as good soldiers 



of the cross, but who cannot leave home and 

family responsibilities, and whose week-day employment 

R2457 : page 94 

leaves little time for special service of the King 
of kings and the exercise of their Ambassadorship. 
(2 Cor. 5:20.) We will explain the plan proposed— 
indeed already tried with excellent success in Allegheny 
and Pittsburg. 

We propose publishing the booklet, "The Bible 
vs. Evolution," in large quantities (indeed, have already 
contracted for over 300,000 copies) for free circulation 
under restricted conditions, as follows: These 
neat, tastefully bound booklets which we sell at five 
cents each or twenty-five cents per dozen for general 
use, will be supplied free to those who will agree to 
distribute them to church-goers on Sunday mornings 
and evenings— one church at a time. The preferable 
plan of operations is for the friends who will so engage 
in each city or village to lay out a program which will 
insure that no congregation be omitted and that none 
be served twice. All large congregations require at 
least two or three for proper rapid service as they come 
out. And generally the effect is better if the distributors 
locate half a block away from the church building 
in each direction in which the people go— or according 
to circumstances. 

Unusual— for God's servants to follow the example 
of the Lord and the apostles and go after the lost 
sheep? Yes, rather unusual— few are ready to lay 
down anything for the brethren, tho many are willing 
to toil day and night for wealth or fame or some other 
selfish consideration. The majority of those who attempt 
to feed the flock even on unclean provender, and 
to mislead then, require goodly clippings of their golden 
fleece for so doing. Hence, some may think of 
these Volunteers as "fools" or "crazy" for giving 
books away free. The black-sheep and the "goats" 
may do some butting and bah-ing, but return them 
good for evil— kind looks for scowls, kind words for 
bitter ones. 

If there be any of the Lord's true sheep among 
them, these will take knowledge of you that your 
methods resemble those of Jesus, and if your manner 
corresponds, they will know that you have learned of 
him. And these are the only ones you really need expect 
to help anyway. And the more genteel your appearance 
and graceful and loving your manner, the more 
will your printed testimony count with your auditors. 

The minister inside the chapel has entertained the 
congregation for half an hour and received from ten 
to fifty dollars for his services, and his congregation 
will soon forget most of what he said. You on the 
outside deliver to each a printed sermon an hour and 
a half long, which can be thought over carefully and 



repeatedly, and which under divine blessing may do 
some more good than all the sermons they ever heard, 
—as many testify. 

You might not be able to get the attention of even 
one congregation in your city, even if you had superior 
ability: but by this ministry you can reach every congregation. 
Do you know any better investment of 
two hours every Sunday, in the interest of the "brethren" 
yet in darkness? Do you know any work that 
would probably glorify the Lord more or bring you 
more of his love and blessing? If you do, you should 
be actively using that better plan and should be wonderfully 
blessed in the service. 

All Volunteers in each city should come together 
at once and lay out the work of their city methodically. 
Then select one of your number as scribe on this 
business to write to us stating the number of Volunteers, 
the number of churches in your city and your 
estimate of the adult attendance, and also the number 
of juniors. For the latter we would furnish tracts, to 
save the more expensive booklets. Letters on this subject 
should be headed "Volunteers" and be on a separate 
sheet of letter paper from your business orders 
and from your letters to the Editor,— tho all may be 
enclosed in same envelope. Care over the Volunteer 
work will be in the hands of an office assistant, tho 
under the Editor's supervision. 

Even our smallest services are sure to be blessed 
and owned by our loving Lord who says,— "He that 
reapeth receiveth wages and gathereth fruit unto eternal 
life."-John4:36. 



R2457 : page 94 

THE MEMORIAL WIDELY CELEBRATED. 



REPORTS already received indicate that the Memorial 

Supper was more generally celebrated 

than ever before— in modern times— probably one-third 

more than last year. We are glad of this: it generally 

indicates good spiritual condition; for those who intelligently 

and conscientiously memorialize the shed blood 

of the New Covenant and our Lord's body broken for 

us are not the ones to fall into the sin of denying that 

the Lord bought them. (2 Pet. 2:1.) And in turn, 

it is those who most heartily realize that they were 

bought with the precious blood who are most constrained 

by the love thus manifested to resist sin and 

additionally to consecrate themselves to be "broken" 

also and to lay down their lives for the brethren. 

We have received up to the present 339 reports of 
meetings, representing 2501 participants (quite a few 



of these neglected mentioning the numbers participating). 

We will not attempt a full tabulation of the 

various reports received,— many of which were from 

solitary ones and little groups of twos or threes. We 

will merely give numbers of some of the principal meeting 

thus far reported, from various States, and a few 

extracts from the letters reporting same:— 

Massachusetts.— Boston, 71; Springfield, 11. 

Rhode Island.— Woonsocket, 8— all French; service 
in French. 

New York.— Bingham ton, 11 (and in vicinity, 8); 
Ballston Spa, 5; Buffalo, 21; Newburgh, 13; Olean, 7; 
Schenectady, 8; Saugerties, 6; Cohoes, 15; Mamaroneck, 
7. New Jersey.— Jersey City, 7. 

Pennsylvania.— Philadelphia, 24; Altoona, 30; 
Scranton, 21; Butler, 13; Rockland, 9; Tyrone, 9; 
Washington, 12; Easton, 7; Laughlintown, 6; Oil City, 
7; Wheeler, 9; Jefferson, 7; Allentown and Bethlehem, 8; 
Allegheny, 250. 

R2457 : page 95 

Delaware.— Wilmington, 7; Washington, D.C.— 12. 

Maryland.— Cumberland, 9; Baltimore, 17; Oakland, 
14. 

Virginia.— Reedy, 12; Manchester, 11; Pleasant 
Grove, 10; Lynchburg, 6; Portsmouth, 7. 

West Virginia.— Mt. Lookout, 25; Wheeling, 14; 
McMechin, 10. 

Ohio.— Felicity, 7; Newark, 7; Cincinnati, 24; 
Toledo, 40; Cleveland, 25; Columbus, 30; Dayton, 14; 
Mansfield, 7; Tiffin, 12; Youngstown, 28; Canton, 17; 
Oxford, 7; Barnhill, New Philadelphia and Dennison 
(one meeting), 25. 

Indiana.— Oriole, 7; Indianapolis, 27; Boonville, 7; 
Fort Wayne, 15. 

Illinois.— Havana, 6; Hegewisch, 11; Belleville, 7; 
Decatur, 11; Kewanee, 6; Atlanta, 10; Chicago (North 
Side), 40; Rockford, 6; Martinsville, 7; Elgin, 19. 

Michigan.— Saginaw, 12; Detroit, 8; Wheeler, 7; 
Kalamazoo, 10; Muskegon, 13; Adrian, 6; Ypsilanti, 11. 

Wisconsin.— Waukesha, 6; Milwaukee, 9. 

Minnesota.— Minneapolis, 15; Northfield, 7. 

Iowa.— Red Oak, 13; Tingley, 9; New Albany, 11; 
Council Bluffs, 23; Atlanta, 7; Indianola, 8; Lawler, 12. 

Nebraska.— Bartlett, 7. N. Dakota.— DeLamere, 
10. S. Dakota.-Verdon, 4; Huron, 14. 

Kansas.— Wichita, 7; Williamsburgh, 6; Atwood, 
6; Peabody, 7; Abilene, 10. 

Missouri.— Kansas City, 8; St. Louis, 28. 

Oklahoma.— Perkins, 7. Kentucky.— Grace, 12. 

Tennessee.— Knoxville, 10; Tullahoma, 5. 

N. Carolina.— Hayne, 24. Georgia.— Atlanta, 6. 

Florida.— Jacksonville, 6. Alabama.— Randolph, 5. 

Mississippi.— McCool, 6. Arkansas.— Darcy, 8. 

Texas.— Dallas, 12; Tyler, 10; Corsicana, 6; Shady 



Grove, 6; Bass, 9; Vineyard, 8; Snow, 20; San Antonio, 
20; Weatherford, 17. 

California.— Norwalk and Downey, 7; Visalia, 12; 
Santa Barbara, 1 1; Alameda, 13; Oakdale, 5; Sacramento, 
10; Ventura, 9; Los Angeles, 61; Los Gatos, 
6; Stockton, 5. 

Oregon.— Phoenix, 10. 

Washington.— Montesano, 6; Seattle, 15; Farmer, 5. 

Canada.— Goderich, 4; Meaford, 5; Dorchester, 
5; Brantford, 22; Niagara Falls, 7; Hamilton, 10; Toronto, 
21; London, 7; (Ontario). Truro, N.S., 8; 
Regina, N.W.T., 7; Rapid City, Man., 10; Brandon, 
Man., 8; Clive, Man., 4; Wharnock, B.C., 5. 

Jamaica.— 20. Switzerland.— Thun, 14. 

R2458 : page 95 

Great Britain.— Glasgow, 16; Stratford, 21; Sheffield, 
4. Denmark.— Copenhagen, 15; Odder, 12. 

As a feature of next year's report we propose that 
the numbers witnessing to full consecration by symbolic 
immersion in water, during the year beginning 
March 26th, be mentioned in connection with the number 
participating at the Memorial Supper. 

All of the following reports will be read with keen 
interest and warm love and sympathy by the "brethren;" 
but we wish to add to your zest in the reading of 
the Jamaica letter, by explaining that our dear Brother 
Clarke is a full-blood Jamaica negro: and we doubt not 
that at least one-half of those who celebrated with him 
are negroes. We rejoice that our God is "no respecter 
of persons: but in every nation he that feareth him and 
worketh righteousness is accepted with him."— 
Acts 10:34,35. 

Brother Clarke was already a Christian when the 
harvest message reached him: he was serving the Lord 
to the best of his knowledge and ability and loved the 
Bible. The American Bible Society made him its 
agent, and he went hither and thither holding up the 
"Lamp." God in due time considered him worthy of 
the light of present truth and poured fresh oil into his 
heart, as well as into his Lamp, through MILLENNIAL 
DAWN. Brother Clarke rejoiced in the truth greatly, 
and enjoyed his work more than ever, because now he 
could not only take the people the Bible as God's jewel 
casket, but he could also take them the "keys," also provided 
by God, by which they could open God's Word 
and understand and appreciate its wonderful harmony 
and beauties as never before. 

But the American Bible Society was not willing to 
have the "keys" go with the jewel casket and informed 
Brother Clarke that he must either drop the DAWN or 
leave their employ. He promptly decided that there 
were already more Bibles circulated than people could 
understand and that the highest service he could render 
to the great Giver of all good was to lay down his 



life in serving the brethren with this "marvelous light" 
which God has now granted all his people who have 
eyes to see it. God bless Brother Clarke! His loyalty 
of heart proves that he has the spirit of the truth. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-A number of us met 
together here yesterday evening to commemorate our 
Lord's death. We began our service at 7:30 P.M., and 
had about twenty present, including two or three Christian 
friends who participated with us. 

Some few were hindered from coming out, and 
others did not care to participate, on the ground that 
it was only to be observed "till he come," not being 
able to see that the Apostle Paul evidently included 
in this expression the complete glorification of every 
member of the kingdom, and that "we which are alive 
and remain unto the coming of the Lord" are to commemorate 
his death, the very basis of our hope, just 
as the saints did who preceded his coming, until we 
receive our change from the human to the spiritual— 
to be with and like our Lord. Blessed hope! 

But in all this we bear and forbear one another in 
love, hoping and praying that each may win the prize 
of joint-heirship with Christ our Lord. 

Those of us who did participate experienced that 
blessedness expressed in the words— 
"Sweet the moments, rich in blessing, 
Which before the cross I spend." 
We meditated upon our Savior's great agony in the 
garden, as he prayed to the Father, when his sweat, as 
it were great drops of blood, fell down to the ground, 
and then we saw him before Pilate, being falsely accused 
of the Chief Priests and Elders, and he answered 
nothing, but "committed himself unto him thatjudgeth 
righteously," and then in our mind's eye we saw 
him as the soldiers took him into the Praetorium and 
put a purple robe upon him and a crown of thorns 
upon his head, and then bowed their knees before him, 
saying in mockery, "Hail, King of the Jews," and he 
endured it all patiently, "who, when he was reviled, 
reviled not again," and "who, for the joy that was set 
before him, endured the cross, despising the shame." 
We then read in 1 Pet. 4:1, that, inasmuch as Christ 

R2458 : page 96 

has suffered for us in the flesh, we are to arm ourselves 
"likewise with the same mind,"— not that we might 
have to experience the same amount of suffering, but 
the thought was with "the same mind," "who, when 
he was reviled, reviled not again; when he suffered he 
threatened not, neither was guile found in his mouth," 
and that thus possessing the "same mind," the "mind 
of Christ," to the end of our course, we would come 



off more than victors through the grace of our Lord 
Jesus Christ. 

We then saw him as he hung upon the cross, 
surrounded by his enemies, wagging their heads 
and saying, "If thou be the Son of God, come down 
from the cross and save thyself! " And lastly, we 
beheld him as his sufferings reached the highest 
point, when the Father's fellowship of spirit was withdrawn 
and he uttered those agonizing words, "My 
God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me?" We 
could see that he was taking the sinner's place, that 
he was to die just as if he were the sinner, and that 
the sinner's place was a separation from God's fellowship 
and subsequently the surrendering up of life itself 
in death, and there in his death we appreciated our 
ransom— the equivalent for all who lost life through 
the disobedience of father Adam. Oh, how my heart 
goes out to him, when I think of what he has done for 
me— 

"Nothing to settle? All has been paid. 

Nothing to anger? Peace has been made. 

Jesus alone is the sinner's resource; 

Peace he has made by the blood of his cross." 
With love from the brethren and myself, I am, 
Yours in our Redeemer, E. J. COWARD,— Texas. 

page 96 



MY DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I write you a few 
lines to acquaint you with the memorial services. I 
received your letter of the 25th and notified the sister 
promptly, but she did not get to any of the meetings. 
We had a lesson on Baptism at Dover Hall, our present 
place of meeting, at 2:30; at 5 we adjourned to the 
Brethren Church building, where three brethren and 
one sister symbolized their burial into Christ's death; 
then we returned to our hall, and after two hours of 
social intercourse we partook of the Lord's supper. I 
neglected to count those present, but I think 24 would 
be about correct. We had a most pleasant time, and 
we trust a profitable one, too. 

Yours in Christ, SMITH WALKER-Philadelphia. 



DEAR BROTHER IN CHRIST:-I am just writing 
you a hurried note to inform you of the blessed time 
we had at the Passover Supper last evening. You will 
doubtless rejoice with us in the increased number— we 
had twenty-one who participated in the Supper, this 
being more than double who joined us last year. 

In the usual afternoon meeting we had 23 or 24, 
about as many as we could get into our little room. 
We read from the TOWER "A Look at the Crucified 



One," taking up many of the touching incidents at the 
supper and in the garden. All seemed deeply interested 
and touched; all seemed thoroughly imbued with 
the responsibility and the necessity of a more thorough 
consecration to the Master's service and love; harmony 
and earnestness prevailed and much depth of feeling, 
as also at the Memorial Supper. Our service in the 
evening commenced with a season of quiet meditation. 
We then read Matt. 26:26-28 and sang Hymn 2; then 
followed a prayer of thanksgiving for the great privilege 
of being able in heart to comply with our Lord's 
command; then a few words upon the responsibility 
we were assuming and also an earnest exhortation for 
the fulfilling of our vows more heartily in the future 
than in the past. We then read 1 Cor. 10:15-17, also 
1 Cor. 11:23-33, and sang Hymn 122. Then before 
breaking bread thanks were offered by Brother Raymond, 
and before participation in the cup thanks were 
offered by dear old Brother Moore, and the meeting 
closed by singing the first Hymn. Much time of quiet, 
silent contemplation and communion with our dear 
Lord was allowed, and we dispersed almost in silence. 
All seemed to realize the deep solemnity of the occasion, 
and there seemed but one heart and one mind in 
desiring to energize for the crown of immortality; every 
heart seemed full to overflowing in love to our blessed 
Redeemer. We did not forget you in our prayers. 
Your brother in our Master's service, 

EBENEZER STOVEL, -Ontario. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I feel thankful to be 
able to inform you that I had the privilege of observing 
the Memorial Supper, alone as usual; I say alone, 
but not lonely, for I had a precious Friend with me 
who never leaves nor forsakes me. He is more than 
all the world to me. I have been cooperating in the 
proposals you made last year to ask the Lord's blessings 
in striving after the spirit of love, and reading 
every other Sunday Matt. 5 and 1 Cor. 13. I sincerely 
believe they have been a great help to me. 

May God bless you, is the prayer of your sister in 
the faith. Pray for me. MARTHA WILSON,-I.T. 



R2458 : page 96 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I make haste to send 
you the report of our little Convention here: the manifestation 
of divine love, the rejoicing;— Oh! the blessing. 
I can scarcely write the things which transpired 
here on the 26th of March. Scoffers who came to scoff 
at us were speechless, and many were compelled to 
join in praising our dear Lord. 



We began at 5 A.M., with prayer and praise, and at 
8 o'clock we marched to the pool prepared by the Bros. 
Davidson a few chains from their home, where three 
hundred people looked on with amazement. A short 
address was given: believers' baptism was set forth to 
the best of our knowledge. Three brethren symbolized 
their consecration "unto death" with their Lord. At 
11 o'clock we had public preaching, when the benefit 
of the "ransom" was set forth to the best of our ability. 
Eighty-five were present at this service. At 2 P.M. 
we had refreshment. Many scoffers were surprised at 
the manifestation of love among us,— so that they 
apologized for being satisfied with both temporal 
and spiritual provisions. Invitation was then given 
to all who are trusting in the merits of the "ransom," 
and fully consecrated, to partake with us in the "cup" 
of suffering. At 6:30, twenty of us drew around the 
Lord's table, with solemnity,— following the suggestions 
given us in the WATCH TOWER. The blessing 
received at this service can hardly be expressed by me, 
in writing. The brethren join in sending their love. 

Yours, in the service of the truth, 

H. P. CLARKE,-Jamaica, W.I. 



page 97 

VOL. XX. MAY 1, 1899. No. 9. 



CONTENTS. 



Views from the Watch Tower 99 

"This Know Also, that in the Last 
Days Perilous Times shall Come" 99 

Outside Corroborations 104 

Governor Rollins' Proclamation 104 

Judge Burke's View 104 

"Awake, O Zion!" 107 

Poem: Forsaken— But Not Forever 108 

"I Am the Vine— Ye are the 

Branches" 108 

Interesting Letters 112 

page 98 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, N.Y. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity or 
adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, if they 
send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting the 
paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list 
continually. 



R2464 : page 98 

VOLUNTEERS IN ALL DIRECTIONS. 



We rejoice in the hearty responses to the article in our last 
issue under the caption "Volunteers Wanted." The friends in 
some of the cities have completed arrangements and began the 
work on April 30th. Others notify us that they are preparing 
and will send full report shortly. The evidences are that "Volunteers" 
are likely to get as much blessing as those whom they 
will serve with the bread of life— "present truth." 

Meantime we are preparing to increase the edition of "Bible 



vs. Evolution" to 500,000 copies. 

In responding to this call please write on separate sheet of 
paper, heading it Volunteers. State number of volunteers and 
number of Protestant Churches, etc. 



page 98 

WHAT SAY THE SCRIPTURES ABOUT HELL? 

This is the title of a pamphlet in which every text of Scripture 
containing the word hell is cited and examined in the light 
of Scripture and reason, together with other Scriptures and parables 
supposed to teach eternal torment. Price 10 cents, postpaid; 
50 cents per doz.; $4.00 per hundred. 



WHAT SAY THE SCRIPTURES ABOUT SPIRITISM? 
--ALSO-- 
WHO ARE THE SPIRITS IN PRISON? AND WHY ARE THEY THERE? 

This booklet is now ready and will be supplied at 10 cents 
each: wholesale rates 50 cents per dozen are open to all TOWER 
readers who may desire to circulate these among their friends. 
In leatherette binding, 25 cents. Prices include postage. 



R2459 : page 99 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 



"IN THE LAST DAYS PERILOUS TIMES. 



"This know, also, that in the last days perilous times shall come, for men 
shall be lovers of their own selves, covetous, boasters, proud, blasphemers, 
disobedient to parents, unthankful, unholy, without natural 
affection, truce-breakers, false accusers, incontinent, fierce, 
despisers of those that are good, traitors, heady, high-minded, 
lovers of pleasure more than lovers of God, having a 
form of godliness, but denying the power thereof: 
from such turn away."— 2 Tim. 3:1-5. 

CLAIMING, as we do, that we are now living in 

the closing days of the Gospel age, it is quite 

proper that we should look about us to see whether or 

not present conditions correspond to the Apostle's inspired 

description of what must be expected in the last 

days of this age. We are not to understand this description 

to relate to the barbarous or half-civilized 



peoples of the end of the age, but to be a description of 

the condition of "Christendom." The Apostle explicitly 

states that he refers to those who have a form 

of godliness— professedly Christians,— for, since the 

Jewish age ended, the only godly form that the Scriptures 

could recognize is Christianity. We see, then, 

that the foregoing delineation represents "Christendom" 

in the close of this age. 

The Apostle does not say that this description 
will apply to the saints in the end of this age: quite to 
the contrary, the implication is that the saints should 
"turn away" or separate themselves from all who thus 
have merely the form of piety. (Vs. 5.) Nor are we 
to expect that the world, possessed of this spirit, will 
recognize its own likeness in the Apostle's words. 
Upon this, as upon other subjects, we are rather to 
expect that, as the Prophet declares, "None of the 
wicked shall understand, but the wise shall understand." 
(Dan. 12:10.) The merely formalistic Christian, 
whose highest ideal of duty is to abstain from 
secular employment on one day of the week, and to go 
to church, is not to be expected to recognize his own 
likeness, and to note its deformities and inconsistencies: 
to do these things would imply such a reformation 
of sentiment as would transfer him from the lists 
of churchianity to the smaller list of true Christianity. 

We should not be understood as saying, or even 
implying, that the world is growing worse in every 
respect day by day. We recognize as a fact that the 
world in many respects is in better condition than it 
has ever been before. The civilized nations to-day are 
better equipped with hospitals, orphanages, asylums, 
etc., than ever before. All these are very directly 
traceable to the influence of Christianity, and are 
neither to be despised nor ignored. We confess with 
great appreciation and admiration that the spirit of our 
Master has, during the past eighteen hundred years, 
so impressed itself upon the world of mankind that the 
barbarities of olden time would no longer be endured, 
the sensibilities of civilized man having reached a degree 
of development which insists upon provision being 
made for the indigent and helpless; and we are very 
glad of all these things. 

At the same time, it should not be forgotten that 
mixed with all of these benevolences is a considerable 
measure of selfishness— they are not all monuments of 
pure disinterested benevolence. True, benevolence has 
had to do with the founding of many of them, but as 
a rule those recently instituted, and much of the support 
for all of them, is drawn from the tax-payer 
through political channels, and the party-spoils system 
has much to do with their maintenance— all feeding at 
such public cribs being expected to render more or less 
of party service. However, whether or not these institutions 
supported at public expense be considered as 



R2459 : page 100 

partially the outgrowth of selfishness, the fact must 
be conceded that public sentiment favors them, and 
hence it must be conceded that the principles laid down 
by the great Teacher eighteen centuries ago have made 
a favorable impression upon civilized peoples. 

But the question before us is not on this point— 
whether or not Christianity has made any impression 
upon the world: the question is, What is the real 
status of those professing to be Christians, now, in the 
end of this age? We answer that, while benevolences 
inculcated in the gospel of Christ have appealed to 
the better sentiments of mankind, and have resulted in 
a general uplift of social conditions throughout so-called 
Christendom, yet this uplift of the world of mankind 
has reacted in some respects against Christianity; for 
in making Christianity popular it has induced multitudes 
to nominally adopt Christianity and a form of 
godliness without appreciating the genuine article or 
experiencing a true conversion of heart. Hence the 
necessity of separating the "wheat" from the "tares," 
the suitable fish from the unsuitable ones in the Gospel 
net, now that the Gospel age is closing.— 
Matt. 13:24-30,36-43,47-50. 

If we ask ourselves the question, What is the 
peculiar characteristic of our day? almost every intelligent 
person could answer, Selfishness. And this is 
the very item which the Apostle puts first in his descriptive 
list: "Men shall be lovers of their own 
selves." We do not mean to say that people are more 
miserly than heretofore; on the contrary, there is probably 
less of this evil; the tendency is rather to extravagance: 
but it is an extravagance born of "love of their 
own selves," love of dress, love of show, love of honor 
and position. All who come in contact with present-day 
business, realize that more than ever before it is a 
battle; not so much a battle for bread as a battle for 
wealth and luxuries. True, business to-day is in some 
respects done along more honorable lines and on a more 
honest basis than every before, yet these are not so much 
signs of a greater honesty on the part of merchants, for 
they are almost compulsory; because business competition 
has materially cut down profits, and the enlarging 
of business much beyond the personal oversight of the 
proprietors has almost compelled one-price arrangements. 
But all persons associated with commercial 
business and manufacturing can attest that the growth 
of business intelligence, the formation of trusts and 
combinations, etc., have given selfishness great power 
to injure and even to destroy financially whatever may 
resist it. 

Covetousness is another of the charges. It is a mistake 
to think of this quality as applicable only to the 
wealthy. It is just as possible for the man with one 
dollar to be covetous as for the millionaire. Covetousness 



is an inordinate desire, whether for wealth or 
luxuries or what-not. Elsewhere the Apostle designates 
covetousness as idolatry, which gives us the 
thought of false worship. (Col. 3:5.) It is not wrong 
for us to seek, in a reasonable, moderate way, for the 
necessities and the comforts of life for ourselves and 
those depending upon us; nor would it be wrong to 
avail ourselves of the opportunities of securing wealth, 
if the same came to us in a reasonable and honorable 
manner, not in conflict with our consecration to the 
Lord. But wherever the love of money or honor or 
luxuries becomes the ruling passion in those who are 
professedly God's people it has usurped God's places- 
such are idolaters. In other words, the covetous person 
is a mammon-worshiper, and as such should realize that 
he has abandoned the proper worship of God; and our 
Lord declared, "Ye cannot serve God and mammon." 
-Matt. 6:24. 

Boasting is the third charge which the Apostle 
brings against nominal Christianity of "the last days." 
Is it not true? Was there ever a time when people 
were so boastful as to-day? Boastfulness is the opposite 
of meekness and humility; boasting accompanies 
pride, which the Lord declares he resists, showing his 
favors to the humble.— James 4:6. 

Pride is the fourth charge, and, thinking of our 
fellow-creatures as generously as possible, we cannot 
deny that the pride of our day is very great, and continually 
increasing. In some it is the pride of wealth, 
in others a sectarian pride, in others a family pride, 
in still others a personal pride. Looking into the 
future, as revealed in the Lord's Word, and seeing 
the time of trouble toward which Christendom is hastening, 
we are reminded of the statement, "Pride goeth 
before destruction, and a haughty spirit before a 
fall."-Prov. 16:18. 

Blasphemy is the fifth charge: but this does 
not necessarily imply that the professed Christians of 
the present day would be profane swearers more than 
others of times past. The word "blasphemy" here 
we understand to be used in its broad sense of slander, 
and the slandering or blasphemy may either be against 
God, or against fellow-creatures. As a matter of fact, 
we find both abounding to-day amongst Christian 
people. God's character is blasphemed by attributing 
to him evil deeds, evil motives and evil purposes toward 
the masses of mankind. Never, more than at 
present, have nominal Christians been inclined to 
charge the Almighty with the authorship of the evils 
that are in the world and which cause the groaning of 
creation. In times past they were willing to acknowledge 
that these evils had come in the line of justice because 
of sin; now many self-complacently claim that 
God's dealings are wholly unjust, and that the unfavorable 

R2460 :page 101 



conditions of the present time are all chargeable 

to him, and are injustices toward man. Moreover, the 

theories which prevail throughout Christendom respecting 

God's provision for the future (that it will be 

an eternity of torment— in literal flames, or, say some, 

"torments of conscience which will be worse") are blasphemies, 

slanders upon God's character and government. 

These are worse slanders than were held during 

the Dark Ages, when it was claimed, as Romanists 

still claim, that the vast majority went for a time only 

to "Purgatory," from which discipline and suffering 

they would ultimately be released. 

Ours is also a day of slander or blasphemy one 
against another, on the part of those who have merely 
the form of godliness. Many who outwardly claim to 
be governed by the law of the New Covenant, Love, 
seem to have a morbid craving to speak evil one of 
another. This the Apostle elsewhere denominates the 
spirit of murder. (1 John 3:15.) This murderous, 
slanderous, or blasphemous tendency is manifest everywhere, 
in the home, in church-gatherings, and in private; 
those who take no pleasure in speaking words of 
kindness, approval and love, hunger and thirst for opportunities 
to speak evil. Nor are they satisfied merely 
to give out their own evil surmisings, based upon 
their own perverted view of their fellows; they love 
such slandering and blasphemy so much that they are 
willing even to accept it at second-hand, and to retail 
it out repeatedly. 

Disobedience to parents is the sixth charge. How 
very marked is this trait to-day! Not merely in the 
younger members of the family, who have not come 
to years of discretion, but also in those who have even 
made an outward profession of religion. False views 
of "liberty" and "rights" seem to disturb the minds 
even of children, and the divinely arranged family order 
seems to be entirely lost sight of with the vast 
majority. 

Unthankfulness is the seventh charge. Thankfulness 
would seem to be one of the least costly of the 
graces: it implies the reception of favors, and is merely 
a proper acknowledgment of them. No one can be 
a true Christian and be unthankful. With the Apostle 
he will soliloquize, "What hast thou that thou didst 
not receive?" (1 Cor. 4:7), and the first response of 
his heart must be gratitude, thankfulness. It is this 
thankfulness which leads on to service, and to sacrifice 
in the Lord's cause as a manifestation of gratitude. 
But with the merely nominal Christian thankfulness 
to God seems scarcely to be thought of. If he be prosperous, 
it is his ability or his "luck;" if not prosperous, 
it is the fault of some one else or his "bad luck." 
Divine providence scarcely enters his mind in connection 
with his affairs. This same unthankfulness extends 
manward, and not infrequently it will be found that 



one's worst enemies, perhaps indeed his only enemies, 
are those whom he has endeavored to serve— those in 
whose interest he has made sacrifices. They do not feel 
thankful; they do not wish to feel under any obligation 
of any kind; they fancy that the one who has done 
them a kindness will consider them under some obligation, 
and gradually they come to have enmitous and 
bitter feelings, instead of gratitude, thankfulness. 

Unholiness is the eighth charge. The ordinary 
Christian professor will freely admit that he is unholy, 
not holy— not fully consecrated to the Lord. Many will 
admit that their only reason for maintaining even an 
outward semblance of Christianity is fear— fear of an 
eternity of torture; and some go so far as to admit that 
if it were not for fear of eternal torment they would 
indulge themselves in all manner of evil. 

Without natural affection is the ninth charge. It 
is not the province of true Christianity to destroy the 
natural affections, but rather to deepen them and to 
lift them to a higher plane. It is therefore to be greatly 
regretted that there are to-day, apparently, evidences 
of the loss of family affection. In the days of the 
Apostle it was considered proper to exhort Christians 
to "love the brethren," but to-day this exhortation 
has comparatively little weight, because of the general 
loss of natural affection. Verily, "A man's foes shall 
be they of his own household." 

Truce-breaking is the tenth charge. The Greek 
word here used signifies not merely a breaker of a 
truce or agreement, but more especially an unwillingness 
to make a truce or to live in harmony, and to 
abandon hostilities. Combativeness seems to be considerably 
on the increase, and not only are people 
willing to have a fracas for slight cause, but controlled 
by this implacable disposition, they are less ready than 
of yore to drop the matter— to forgive and be forgiven. 
Their hearts not having the spirit of love, but the 
spirit of selfishness, are not peace-loving but contention-loving 
Hence, instead of being "easy to be entreated," 
they are the reverse, implacable. 

False accusers is the eleventh charge. This corresponds 
closely to the charge of blasphemy, but seems 
to signify a still more extreme step— a willingness to 
accuse falsely, knowing that the charges or accusations 
are false. This surely indicates a very evil condition 
of heart, and yet we are compelled to admit that it is a 
very prevalent condition to-day. Let a person of strong 
will, whose heart is not under control of grace, become 
your enemy, and following the custom of our time he 
will probably not only misrepresent you in the matters 
of which he has knowledge or hearsay, but not infrequently 
he will deliberately concoct falsehoods. Such 
a course would not seem so strange on the part of the 

R2460 : page 102 



professedly worldly. It has always been so; the natural 
heart has always been full of evil, and ready to 
vilify when it considered itself provoked. The point 
of the Apostle's argument is that these conditions, so 
foreign to the spirit of Christ, the spirit of love, will 
prevail in the end of this age amongst those who profess 
his name and have a form of godliness. 

Incontinency is the twelfth charge. This signifies, 
without self-control, led of passion, rash, impulsive. 
The Apostle's exhortation to the Church, as its 
proper condition, is expressed in the words, "Let your 
moderation be known unto all men"— your self-control. 
(Phil. 4:5.) Keep yourselves well in hand, subject 
and obedient to the will of God, as expressed in 
his Word. But to-day, and especially with the rising 
generation, self-control is little practiced. Some of 
this is chargeable to the spirit of the times in which we 
live, with its false conceptions of liberties and rights, 
and some of it is doubtless attributable to lax training 
under conditions of comparative worldly prosperity. 

Fierceness is the thirteenth charge. This came 
forcibly to our attention a few days ago, as we noticed 
a headline of a dispatch from Manila, saying, "The 
Tenth Pennsylvania Regiment made a fierce charge 
upon the Filipinos, uttering their terrible yell. The 
enemy fled, terrified, in all directions." It used to be 
that the savages pounced upon the civilized, with fierce 
blood-curdling yells, but now it appears that the rising 
generation, representatives of Christendom from one 
of the most civilized states of the world can give so 
fierce a yell, and in every way manifest so much ferocity, 
as to strike terror to the uncivilized. Undoubtedly 
this fierceness explains much of the success of civilized 
men over the uncivilized in recent wars. Civilization, 
the handmaid of religion, has given intelligence and 
courage; but in those not having the power of godliness 
it inspires ferocity instead of love, kindness, gentleness. 

Despisers of those that are good is the fourteenth 
charge. We are to distinguish between goodness from 
the standpoint of the Apostle and the Lord's word in 
general, and goodness from the world's standpoint. 
The world wants a man good enough to be honest, 
temperate, trustworthy, and faithful as a servant or 
contractor; but the world despises the higher forms of 
goodness to which the Apostle refers. The nominal 
Christian despises the "saint," and tries to believe that 
his professions of full consecration to the Lord, and his 
desire to please the Lord in thought and word and deed, 
are simply hypocrisies,— because his own heart is not 
in sympathy with such a condition of consecration, 
with such ideals of goodness, and he does not desire to 
be in the presence of so high a standard. As our Lord 
described the matter, "Everyone that doeth evil hateth 
the light. "-John 3:20. 

Treachery is the fifteenth charge. Because the 
mainspring of the world's efforts in every direction is 



selfishness, therefore treachery is its inevitable adjunct. 
Love desires to be just; love may frequently approve 
of self-sacrifice in the interests of others; but selfishness 
disapproves of benevolences except where some 
self-interest attaches. Hence, the one who might be 
willing to make a contract to-day, and who selfishly 
might be willing to keep that contract so long as he 
believed that it would be to his own advantage to do so, 
would often be willing to break that contract so soon 
as selfishness indicated that it would be to his advantage 
to break it. Persons controlled by the selfish spirit 
here described can never be trusted. Could we think 
of God as being controlled by selfish motives we could 
not trust him, except so long as it would be to his 
interest to fulfill his promises. Only those controlled 
by the reverse spirit of love can be relied upon in times 
of extreme trial. This is set forth as one of the special 
features of the great time of trouble just before us: 
selfishness and distrust will become general and the 
motto will be, "Every man for himself." The prophetic 
declaration shows the loss of confidence, general 
treachery, saying, There shall be no peace to him that 
goeth out nor to him that cometh in; for I have set 
every man's hand against his neighbor.— Zech. 8:10. 

Headiness is the sixteenth charge. How forceful 
this word, as expressing self-will, impetuousness. Do 

R2461 :page 102 

we not see this quality everywhere amongst those who 
have the form of godliness, but who lack its power? 
And we believe that it, as well as these other evils, is 
steadily on the increase. The true Christian is not 
"heady;" on the contrary, his consecration to the Lord 
figuratively decapitated him; he lost his head, renounced 
his own will and self-rule, and submitted himself, 
as a member of the body of Christ, to the absolute control 
of Jesus, the Head of the Church. (Eph. 1:22,23.) 
Such, so long as they abide as members of the true 
body of Christ, cannot be heady, cannot be self-willed. 
It is this very self-will that first of all they reckoned 
dead, in order that they might have the mind or will 
of Christ. To revive the self-will would be to lose the 
mind of Christ. The true Christian therefore, in every 
affair of life,— in respect to its pleasures as well as in 
respect to its burdens and trials,— appeals to his Head 
for direction, to know how and what to do or say- 
yea, to have even the very thoughts of his mind in full 
conformity to the will of God in Christ. 

The "heady" class are continually endeavoring to 
carry out their own wills, and do not submit themselves 
to the will of God. Their headiness continually brings 
them into difficulties, and yet, sometimes, with pride 
and boasting and love of their own selves and fierceness 
and false accusations, they endeavor to have their own 



R2461 :page 103 

heady way, and perhaps even claim, with forms of 
godliness, that such a course is under divine leading. 
How sadly such are deceived! "If any man have not 
the spirit of Christ he is none of his." Wherever 
headiness prevails it is an evidence that such are "not 
holding the head" (Christ). If they have not already 
fallen utterly, their fall is certainly near unless they 
reform.-Col. 2:19; Rom. 8:9. 

High-mindedness is the seventeenth charge. Self-conceit 
is naturally a virtue in the eyes of the class 
which the Apostle describes: and how naturally this 
quality of a large opinion of one's self and one's own talents, 
or of one's favor with God, or what-not, is linked 
with pride, boastfulness and self-love. There is no 
more dangerous form of high-mindedness or self-conceit 
than that which attacks the Christian, and seeks to 
make him think of himself more highly than he ought 
to think. Very many of the Lord's people have been 
ensnared along such lines, and stumbled into all the 
other evils of this category by first of all getting the 
impression that for some reason, or for no reason, 
the Lord had specially taken a fancy to them, and was 
giving them private lessons and information not vouchsafed 
to others of his consecrated ones. How appropriate 
the Apostle's caution along this line, "I say, 
to every man that is among you, not to think of himself 
more highly than he ought to think; but to think soberly, 
according as God hath dealt to every man the 
measure of faith." (Rom. 12:3.) Not only is this 
quality of self-conceit one of the most dangerous to 
Christians, but also it is one of the most dangerous to 
the world, for probably more than one-half of the hopelessly 
insane have lost their reason along this line of 
self-conceit. All true Christians should be specially on 
their guard against this snare of the Adversary. 

Lovers of pleasure more than lovers of God is the 
eighteenth charge. It is natural for every human being 
to prefer to be pleased, to be happy, to have pleasure. 
It is not a sin to love things which minister to our 
pleasure in proper ways. To be a Christian does not 
mean to have no pleasure: but the Christian puts God 
higher than himself, loves God more than he loves 
himself, consecrates himself to God, and consequently 
desires to please God rather than to please himself. 
By such, any pleasure, no matter what, must be sacrificed 
if it come in conflict with his still higher pleasure 
and duty and covenant of service to the Lord. It is 
this that leads the true saints of God to sacrifice: the 
world being out of harmony with God and his will is 
out of harmony also with those who are in harmony 
with God. Hence, as our Lord says, "If the world 
hate you, ye know that it hated me before it hated 
you. If ye were of the world, the world would love 
his own: but because ye are not of the world, but I 



have chosen you out of the world, therefore the world 
hateth you. "--John 15:18,19. 

The contest, then, comes between serving God and 
doing those things which would bring his approval, 
and serving self after the manner of the world, and 
doing those things which would bring its approval. 
The true Christian must invariably decide for the Lord, 
and thus he often crosses the will, the preferences, the 
prejudices or the superstitions of those with whom he 
comes in closest contact in the flesh, and it is in this 
that he is to be an "overcomer" of the world and its 
spirit; and by so doing he is to gain ultimately the approval, 
"Well done, good and faithful servant; enter 
into the joys of thy Lord." "To him that overcometh 
will I grant to sit with me in my throne."— Matt. 25:21; 
Rev. 3:21. 

The class described by the Apostle, the mass of 
Christendom, in the present time are not fully consecrated 
to the Lord, but are lovers of pleasure more than 
lovers of God. In this sense of the word they are 
idolaters, rendering love and service to self above God, 
—covetous of the world's pleasures and honors and 
emoluments of various kinds. Is it difficult for us to 
see this very condition of things all about us, amongst 
those who have merely a form of godliness? No, it is 
not difficult; it is the confessed condition of the vast 
majority. Love of God above love of self is proved 
by our willingness to sacrifice self-loves in order to do 
those things which would meet the Lord's approval. 

Having a form of godliness, but denying the power 
thereof is the nineteenth charge. It does not follow 
that this class, in so many words, denies that there is 
any power to godliness. Rather, we are to understand 
that their course in life denies or repudiates the power 
of God. Outwardly they have a religious form; they 
know that churchianity is popular; they wish to be 
known as identified with some denomination for decency's 
sake, and as an entree to good social and financial 
standing for themselves and their families. But 
that is about all the use they have for Christianity. 
Their life as a whole denies the power of the gospel of 
Christ to control the heart and regulate, direct and 
guide the conduct. 

"From such turn away." True Christians are to 
reprove the false Christians by turning away from them, 
and from their course or walk in life. Whoever has 
the spirit of Christ, the spirit of Love, and is seeking 
to cultivate its grace, and to walk according to its rule, 
will more and more find his path turning away from 
the path of churchianity and general worldliness. As 
they are guided by different spirits or dispositions, so 
they tend to different directions or effort, different loves, 
different sympathies, different experiences. The true 
sheep are to walk in the narrow way, led by the true 

R2461 :page 104 



Shepherd, who has gone before, and who calls us to 

follow him. This means that in this harvest-time in 

a most natural way a separation will be made between 

the "wheat" class and the "tare" class, just as our 

Lord's parable illustrated. Whoever walks in the 

Lord's way will receive the light that is due in this harvest-time, 

and be enlightened thereby and led in the 

footsteps of Jesus. Whoever walks in the evil way, 

described by the Apostle as the prevalent way in the 

end of this age, is following Satan's example. The 

separation of these classes must eventually be thorough 

and complete. Thus the Lord is by present truth and 

its spirit or influence calling to his people to separate 

themselves, to turn away from others who are not really 

his people, who have merely the form of godliness but 

not its power, saying, "Come out of her, my people, 

that ye be not partakers of her sins, and that ye receive 

not of her plagues."— Rev. 18:4. 

OUTSIDE CORROBORATIONS OF THE FOREGOING. 



It would be difficult to imagine a more striking 
corroboration of these facts than is furnished by the 
recent proclamation of a Fast day by the Governor of 
the State of New Hampshire. We quote the paper 
entire, as set forth in the columns of The Boston Herald, 
without endorsing all of its provisions or recommendations, 
as follows:— 

GOVERNOR ROLLINS' PROCLAMATION. 



"Concord, N.H., April 6th, 1899. 

"I hereby appoint Thursday, the 13th day of 
April, as Fast day. 

"This custom was inaugurated at a time when all 
the people of our state placed their trust in the hands 
of a Supreme Being, and believed firmly in the efficacy 
of prayer. A goodly number of our people still hold 
this belief, I am happy to say, and will assemble, as 
their ancestors have for generations, to invoke the 
Deity. The decline of the Christian religion, particularly 
in our rural communities, is a marked feature of 
the times, and steps should be taken to remedy it. 

"No matter what our belief may be in religious 
matters, every good citizen knows that when the restraining 
influences of religion are withdrawn from a 
community, its decay, moral, mental and financial, is 
swift and sure. To me this is one of the strongest evidences 
of the fundamental truth of Christianity. 

"I suggest that, as far as possible, on Fast day 
union meetings be held, made up of all shades of belief, 



including all who are interested in the welfare of 

our state, and that in your prayers and other devotions, 

and in your mutual counsels, you remember and consider 

the problem of the condition of religion in the 

rural communities. 

"There are towns where no church bell sends forth 
its solemn call from January to January; there are villages 
where children grow to manhood unchristened; 
there are communities where the dead are laid away 
without the benison of the name of Christ, and where 

R2462 : page 104 

marriages are solemnized only by justices of the peace. 

"This is a matter worthy of your thoughtful consideration, 
citizens of New Hampshire. It does not 
augur well for the future. You can afford to devote 
one day in the year to your fellow-men— to work and 
thought and prayer for your children and your children's 
children." 



That the Governor of New Hampshire is not greatly 
overstating the situation is evidenced by the following 
clipping from the Boston Traveler of March 8th:— 

"As surely as two and two are four the Boston 
police are incompetent to cope with the rogues, footpads 
and other outlaws infesting this city, and citizens 
fear to walk the streets after nightfall in consequence 
of the prevailing lawlessness. Crime has reached that 
stage that a citizen is not safe on the street or in his 
own home after the shadow of evening has taken possession 
of mother earth." 

A very similar statement was recently made respecting 
lawlessness in St. Louis by one of its leading 
newspapers. 

If we were in the midst of financial depression, 
and if thousands of "out-of-works" were tramping the 
country as a few years ago, such statements would excite 
much less surprise and be much less significant of 
a moral decline such as the Apostle prophetically indicates 
must now be expected. But on the contrary, we 
are in the very midst of "good times"— far better than 
can be reasonably expected to continue long. And with 
the spirit of selfishness described by the Apostle constantly 
increasing, we must expect that each succeeding 
financial depression will manifest increasing lawlessness 
until the final catastrophe of anarchy shall 
crumble present institutions and prepare the way for 
the reign of Immanuel. 

OTHERS SEE IT.-JUDGE BURKE'S VIEW. 



The Governor is not the only person whose eyes 
are open and who feels it his duty to "cry aloud 
and spare not." The Rev. Dr. Buckley, editor of the 
New York Christian Advocate, the leading Methodist 
paper of the world, recently felt called upon to point 
out the decadence of Methodism. And still more recently 
at the session of the Rock River Methodist 
board of examinations the same subject came up and 
was discussed very boldly by Prof. Small and subsequently 
by Judge E. W. Burke, the published report 
of whose speech follows:— 

"SEES DARK SKIES. 



"JUDGE BURKE'S PESSIMISTIC TALK BEFORE 
-METHODISTS. - 
"SOCIAL DISTURBANCE AHEAD. 
"THE JURIST CONTINUES IN THE STRAIN ADOPTED BY 
HIS PREDECESSORS AND GAINS CONGRATULATIONS. 

R2462 : page 105 

"The keynote of the midyear session of the Rock 
River Methodist board of examination, now in session 
at the Englewood First Church, continues to be social 
and religious pessimism. Many of the papers read are 
directly on this subject, and the discussion of the rest 
generally works around to the same point. 

"Tuesday Prof. Small led off in this direction, and 
yesterday Judge E. W. Burke, in a paper on 'The 
Church of the Twentieth Century, From a Layman's 
Standpoint,' went just as far. These sentiments are 
received by the large congregation of ministers and 
others who hear them, not only without protest, but 
with approval. Judge Burke could hardly leave the 
platform for the handshaking and congratulations that 
beset him. 

"Judge Burke dwelt on the tyranny of capital, 
the terrible impending conflict between concentrated 
capital and labor, the decadence of the Methodist 
Church, as depicted by Rev. Dr. Buckley in the New 
York Christian Advocate, and the rumor that the 
wealthy laymen of the church were threatening to 
withhold their contributions unless they were granted 
equal representation in the general conference. 

"Judge Burke spoke in part as follows:— 

'"The whole creation and all the manifestations 
of the spiritual, intellectual and even the physical 
forces are now in a transitional period as never before. 
Even trade and methods of business that have been 
pursuing their customary ways for centuries are paralyzing 
individual effort and puzzling the lawmakers of 
the earth. Storm centers of labor and capital are 
gathering over against each other, threatening the very 



integrity of the industrial firmament of man. The late 
appearances of the hitherto unsuspected intellectual and 
physical forces but add Titans of unknown strength to 
the conflict toward which all the world is consciously 
or unconsciously rushing. He who observes and reflects 
on matters of church and state feels this condition 
in the very pulsing ether, the like of which history 
does not disclose. 

[We do not know that Judge Burke has read the 
WATCH TOWER publications bearing on this subject, 
but thousands of thinking people are now awakening 
to the truth respecting the great "Day of Vengeance" 
which for twenty years we have been pointing out and 
seeking to bring to the attention of the Lord's people. 
The difficulty with many is, that, seeing these approaching 
troubles from the outside, they are losing confidence 
in divine providence, and their hearts are failing 
them for fear, as they look forward to those things 
coming upon the earth. (Matt. 24; Luke 21:26.) On 
the contrary, all who learned of the coming troubles 
from the Lord's Word, before there were outward evidences 
of them, are strengthened in their faith by 
every fresh development— for they by the same Word 
know the object of the troubles and the grand results 
they are outworking.] 

'"No human wisdom can say what mean the great 
and increasing aggregations of capital, now sufficient 
to buy kingdoms. If these shall be arrayed against 
the empty hands of labor, then shall mass collide with 
mass, and who can predict the end thereof? I see no 
commanding spirit of compromise in these approaching 
and threatening avalanches, which seem destined to 
involve the whole social system in universal ruin before 
the young men of this audience become three-score 
and ten years of age. So that the church, as it 
passes into the twentieth century, meets a perfect 
whirlwind of world forces which overwhelm the statesman, 
the philosopher and the historian, and drive 
them back into the cave of Sinai, while the storms 
pass the bounds of known law and rush on to a fate 
that makes the thoughtful tremble. 

[As heretofore pointed out,* these giant trusts of 
our day which threaten the liberties and the very existence 
of the individual laborer, correspond exactly 
to the giant men of renown of Noah's day, on whose 
account the flood came. And as those never arose 
from their watery graves to again harass mankind, so 
the Lord promises that these giants of the present day, 
falling in the great time of trouble impending, will 
never rise again.— Isa. 43:17.] 

"DIFFICULTIES MUST COME. 



"Now, my friends, after much reflection, I do not 



believe it is the specific mission of the church to adjust 
men to the new conditions of life and action, or, 
in a temporal sense, to safety them against the Atlantic 
storms of capital and labor. These storms will be 
terrific, but they must come. They are brewed in the 
selfishness of the human heart, and each succeeding 
one shall prove more destructive than its predecessor, 
until the prince of darkness is chained. I believe the 
new conditions which shall whirl us into the twentieth 
century, uncorrected by the gospel, shall forge unbreakable 
chains for the spirits, minds and bodies of 
men. I know there is a charm in the power of union 
and in the exhibition of strength, but, unless it is a 
union of strength uncemented with selfishness, it will 
crumble by whatsoever law it may have been formed. 

"It may be true that the task -master in these 
modern days attempts to compel men to make brick 
without straw, not to punish men, but to save straw. 
Formerly it was oppression to gratify the passion for 
cruelty, while now it is oppression to gratify the passion 
for gold. Formerly the task -master was a human 
being with whip in hand, but now he stands with the 
inexorable forces of nature in his fist, against which 
no individual in his unaided strength seems able to 
stand. But this modern task -master is destined to fall, 
and the David who shall slay this modern Goliath is 
the church of the twentieth century, not by matching 
force with force, but by using the weapons with which 
Christ has armed his followers. 

[How true this statement, and yet how untrue as 
the Judge meant it! It will not be "Babylon," "Christendom, 
that will smite these giants and all sin and 
selfishness and deliver the world. No; the same Scriptures 
declare that "Babylon," mother and daughters, 
the entire family or system of Churchianity will go 



*MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. IV., page 359. 

R2462 : page 106 

down in the general collapse. Yet it will be the Church 
—the true Church,— the Church glorified, that will 
smite, and deliver the groaning creation. Ah, how true! 
"There standeth one among you whom you know not!" 
The King of kings has come! We are even now in the 
parousia of the Son of Man! Soon the last members 
of his "elect" body, the Church, will be gathered to 
him— glorified and invisible to men,— and then he will 
begin the rule of the iron rod which shall break the 
world's vaunted institutions as potters' vessels. (Rev. 2:27.) 
He declares, I will "gather the nations, that 
I may assemble the kingdoms, to pour upon them mine 
indignation, even all my fierce anger: for all the earth 
shall be devoured with the fire of my jealousy. And 



then will I turn unto the people a pure language, that 
they may all call upon the name of the Lord, to serve 
him with one consent." (Zeph. 3:8,9.) This symbolic 
burning and breaking will be the new missionary 

R2463 : page 106 

method, by which the Church glorified will, in the 
early part of the twentieth century, under and with 
her glorious Head, "bring in everlasting righteousness." 
"When the judgments of the Lord are abroad 
in the earth, the inhabitants of the world will learn 
righteousness." (Isa. 26:9.) Thus, "The glory 
[majesty] of the Lord will be revealed, and all flesh 
shall see it together."— Isa. 40:5.] 

'"I deplore every worldly success of the church, 
whether it be the raising of $20,000,000 with which to 
curse the twentieth century church, or the building of 
many church edifices every time the earth revolves, if 
this success shall in the least lead men to forget the 
springs of true power in the church. We seem to be 
on times when the church may have money enough to 
convert the world: forbid that it be enough to convert 
the church to the world. The church should not 
want one dollar or money except it first be sanctified. 

"MUST NOT BARGAIN WITH THE RICH. 

'"Why, recently I have noticed the threat from 
high sources that, unless the rich laymen of the Methodist 
Church are admitted in equal representation as 
delegates to the next general conference, they will 
withhold the $20,000,000 which the ambition of the 
church seeks for the first years of the coming century. 
Now, much as I favor equal representation in that 
august lawmaking body, may it never be realized, and 
perish the money of the rich, in the language of Peter, 
if it be given, even impliedly, as the consideration 
price of place and power in the church, and not as the 
free-will offering of grateful hearts purchased by the 
blood of Christ. The church, for many reasons, cannot 
pay court to mere wealth or personal prestige. 
The poor do not understand the mission of the church 
when they demand that it feed them and bitterly rail 
because it does not. But they are half right when the 
church recognizes men in the least degree because they 
possess wealth. The great masses of the people stand 
yonder alienated from our churches because the wedge 
of gold is hidden with us. It does the church no good; 
it empties our pews; it frosts our air. 

'"One of the closest observers of church life in 
our land, and one who weighs his words, has written 
this month for his widely read editorial column that 
the moral tone of the church is unsatisfactory, and 
that many societies would be reduced to a few pious 
women, aged persons and unsophisticated youth if the 



discipline enforced in the primitive church, or in the 

earlier days of English and American Methodism, 

were applied; that many official members never participate 

actively in the aggressive spiritual work of the 

church; that this religious and moral condition bodes 

no good; that in eighty-seven cities in the United 

States Methodism is scarcely holding its own, regardless 

of the increase of population and of the fact that 

so many accessions are received by letter from country 

churches. He further states that diverse superficial 

explanations are offered for this humiliating condition, 

but that whatever influence they may have, it is absolutely 

certain that, if the laity and clergy were living 

according to the teachings of the New Testament, it 

could not be so. 

'"When such an alarm as this is sounded with 
the hammer of facts, beware, not of the rocks or the 
sea, but of the dangers on board. But in this very 
alarm lies the hope of safety. It shows that thoughtful 
Christian men are looking deeply into the causes of 
the present condition and that they will be removed. 
This alarm is all the Lord wants, and in answer to 
prayer He will open the windows of heaven and pour 
unnumbered blessings on the church of the twentieth 
century.'" 

It would appear, then, that the Judge after all 
sees that the church nominal of to-day is sadly unprepared 
for the great work he declares is absolutely 
necessary. He is prepared even to admit that, so far 
as Methodism is concerned, it is less prepared (so far 
as personal piety is concerned) than at the opening of 
the nineteenth century. The Judge hopes great things, 
if everybody can be awakened, and if all "tares" or 
nominal Christians (300,000,000) will but act as tho 
they were "wheat" or real Christians. We rejoice 
with the Judge in his own sincerity as witnessed by his 
words (and for aught we know by his acts also) and 
we commend to him a further study of the Word of 
God's grace which is able to make him wise respecting 
the divine plan for vanquishing all the foes of the 
groaning creation and delivering them also from the 
bondage of corruption. But let him lay off sectarian 
spectacles which magnify everything which glorifies 
sectarianism and minimize the grace of our God and 
the power of his might. 

We will submit another testimony, from a high 
source, going to show that Methodism is far from prepared 
for the twentieth century work the Judge points 
out is imperative,— if the world would be rescued from 
the calamity of having its civilization blotted out. 
Nor are Methodists proportionately in poorer spiritual 
condition than other sects, so far as we may be able to 
judge. It just happens that the witnesses at hand are 

R2463 : page 107 



all of that persuasion. There are undoubtedly many 
true, noble, warm hearts in this quarter of Babylon 
who feel pressed in spirit to overcome their sectarian 
pride and in the interest of vital godliness, to "Cry 
aloud and spare not." 

This witness is The Epworth Herald, the leading 
journal among the Methodist "Young People;" it says: 

"A CRISIS. 



"Methodism is in a crucial place. A crisis has 
been reached. We need to run up the danger signal. 
There never has been a time in our eventful history 
when there was so great need for self-examination. 

"Last year the whole denomination was startled 
by the smallness of our numerical increase. This year 
[1898] promises to show no better results. Revivals 
are less frequent and less fruitful. The doctrines 
which emphasize the exceeding sinfulness of sin, the 
certainty of an eternal hell, the necessity of repentance, 
the need of regeneration, and the far-reaching 
importance of a definite spiritual experience are not 
preached in many of our pulpits as faithfully as our 
fathers preached them. The demand for a less heroic 
gospel is widespread. Sinners can sit in our churches 
without feeling much discomfort. Formalism increases. 
The spirit of aggressiveness which so dominated our 
church for a hundred years begins to wane. 

"Multitudes of our people have lost the marks which 
once distinguished us. They have adopted the social 
customs of the world. They patronize the theater. 
They have become familiar with the card-table. The 
sound of dancing echoes through their homes. Wealth 
is worshiped. Social position is accounted the principal 
thing. No wonder that the children of some of our 
most influential families are lost to Methodism. With 
their thoughtless and back-slidden parents they are 
drawn into the whirlpool of social pleasure, and either 
drift out into a line of infidelity or attach themselves 
to some church where worldliness is no bar. 

"Moreover, beneficence does not keep pace with our 
increasing wealth. The fact that it required two long 
years, filled with pitiful pleading, for our great church 
to raise a paltry missionary debt of $186,000 is one of 
the saddest experiences of our denomination. 

"This is not pessimism. It is fact. And the sooner 
we wake up to the peril of the situation the better for 
Methodism to-day and to-morrow. A CRISIS IS HERE. 
A crisis does not necessarily mean disaster. It will 
not if we will only see the danger and escape." 

"AWAKE, O ZION," 



cries the Prophet. (Isa. 52:1.) He who sleeps now, 
not only neglects his duty to the "brethren," but puts 
himself in jeopardy— marks himself as deficient in the 
very spirit of love which the Lord declares all-essential 
in his estimation. We remind our readers again of the 
Call for Volunteers in our last issue. Many responses 
are already at hand, but our hope is that many more 
may share the privilege and blessing of this service. 

INTROSPECTION NEXT IN ORDER. 



Having satisfied ourselves respecting the fulfilment 
of the Apostle's charges against "Christendom" 
and having found his predictions fully corroborated by 
facts well witnessed to, the question arises, Can the 
Lord's truly consecrated people learn any further valuable 
lessons and what are they? 

We have already noted that all such are to "turn 
away" from those who have merely the form of godliness. 
And we have seen that it is both our duty and 
privilege to aid any true "brethren" yet in Babylon to 
attain the light and liberty wherewith Christ makes 
free his true followers. But let us not forget personal 
introspection— to look within our own hearts carefully 
and frequently to make doubly sure that the world's 
spirit of selfishness does not poison us as it poisonously 
manifests itself in others. 

We are to remember always that we have the 
treasure of the new mind, the new spirit, in earthen 
vessels (2 Cor. 4:7), and that these earthen vessels 
are continually surrounded by selfish tendencies and 
examples; and that consequently they must be kept 
well filled with the Spirit of the Lord, the spirit of 
love, that the evil spirit of selfishness does not in any 
of its many forms gain access. 

If in our introspections we find traces of self-love, 
of covetous ambition, of a disposition to boast even of 
good things, or even a little pride— perhaps "spiritual 
pride," as some erroneously describe it, or even a slight 

R2464 : page 107 

tendency to slander (blaspheme), or the least tendency 
to disrespect parents, or any measure of ingratitude 
toward God or men (unthankfulness), or the slightest 
sympathy with false accusations, or any lack of moderation 
(incontinence), or any sympathy with fierce 
speeches or manners, or anything else than fervent love 
for all who are "good," or the slightest suggestion to 
betray a trust or a confidence, or the least tendency to 
self-will and self-consciousness, or any disposition to 
weigh our own wills or pleasure against the Lord's 
will, or the least tendency to mere formalism in worship, 



or the slightest evidence that the power of the 
truth is not in full control of our hearts and lives, it 
should arouse us to energetically seek help from on high 
and to put away the unclean thing which taints our 
sacrifices. 

Nevertheless let no one feel discouraged even tho 
he should find traces of all these evils in his flesh: for 
as the Apostle declares, so we must all find, "In my 
flesh dwells no perfection." (Rom. 7:18.) We are 
however to expect no trace of these evils in our hearts 
—no sympathy, no cooperation with any of these evils. 
As enemies of the Lord, and our enemies because we 
are the Lord's in spirit and in truth, these evils are to 
be hunted and shunned to the best of our ability from 
every nook and corner of our beings. "Be ye holy 
that bear the vessels of the Lord's house." As he who 
has called you is holy, so be ye holy in all things. 

R2464 : page 108 

FORSAKEN-BUT NOT FOREVER. 



"For a small moment have I forsaken thee; but with great mercies will 
I gather thee. In a little wrath I hid my face from thee for a moment: 
but with agelasting kindness will I have mercy on 
thee, saith the Lord thy Redeemer."— Isa. 54:7,8. 

My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken? 

Hear our first parents despairingly cry: 
Had not the tempter their constancy shaken, 

Would they have wandered in exile to die? 
Why, since life's stream was defiled at its fountain, 

Was it not dried, ere the flood ran so deep? 
Why, lest iniquity grow to a mountain, 

Should the first infant be cradled to weep? 

My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken? 

Groaneth the slave as he curses his chain: 
Stung by the lash, and his last loved one taken, 

Doomed to a life of enslavement and pain. 
Long has the despot his tyranny wielded, 

Long robbed his fellow of freedom and home; 
Long have the humble their hard earnings yielded, 

Starving themselves to build turret or dome. 

My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken? 

Hear the fond mother in agony moan; 
Babe on her bosom will presently waken, 

Waken to find that dear guardian flown. 
Merciful God! Who will care for the mourner? 

Who'll guard the orphan from hunger and cold? 
Who'll guide the feet of the youthful sojourner 

Past haunts of vice to the Savior's pure fold? 



My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken? 

Questions my spirit in sorrow's lone hour; 
Terrors and anguish my doubtings awaken, 

Doubts of our Father's compassion and power. 
Louder the thunder-peals answer my wailing, 

Darker the stormcloud casts o'er me its pall; 
Friends cannot comfort, and demons are railing, 

Heaven seems deaf to my piteous call. 

My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken? 

Echoes from Calvary scatter my gloom; 
Veils have been rent, and death's prison-house shaken, 

Answer I find at the dismantled tomb. 
Know thou, O friend, saith the angel that lingers, 

Jesus hath risen a lost world to save; 
Holdeth the issues of life in his fingers, 

Beareth the keys of a powerless grave. 

God unto all men assurance has given, 

Sworn by himself all his creatures to bless; 
Soon will the bonds of corruption be riven, 

Soon comes his Kingdom of righteousness. 
After earth's night dawns a morning of gladness, 

Rainbows of glory shall cover our tears; 
Truth will deliver from error and madness, 

Blessings will crown earth's Millennial years. 

"For as all in Adam die, even so all in Christ shall be restored to life.' 
"Because creation itself also shall be delivered from the bondage of 
corruption, into the glorious liberty of the children 
of God."-l Cor. 15:22; Rom. 8:21; Acts 3:23. 

-G. M. BILLS. 



R2464 : page 108 

"I AM THE VINE- YE ARE THE BRANCHES." 

-MAY7.-JOHN 15:1-11,15.- 

THE Apostle gives this as one of our Lord's discourses 
following the Memorial Supper on the 
last night of his earthly life. It was probably suggested 
by the drinking of the "cup," representing the blood 
of the New Covenant, and may have been uttered after 
Judas had gone out, and before the Lord and the eleven 
went to Gethsemane. Or it may have been suggested 
by the vineyards which they passed on their way to 
Gethsemane. Or possibly it may have been suggested 
by the great golden vine over the door of the golden 
gate of the temple (the "Beautiful Gate"), which Josephus 
says was very large and "had clusters as long 
as a man." Another writer says, "Leaves and buds 
were wrought of gleaming reddish gold, but its clusters 
of yellow gold, and its grape-stones of precious 



stones." The moon being at its full would display this 
vine to good effect. The statement of Chap. 18:1, 
"When Jesus had spoken these words he went forth 
with his disciples," seems to favor the first supposition. 
This view would imply a considerable tarrying in the 
upper room after the Supper was ended, probably to 
near midnight— after our Lord said, "Arise, let us go 
hence."— John 14:31. 

"I am the true vine," institutes a comparison, and 
suggests to the mind a counterfeit or false vine; and 
this reminds us of the fact that our Lord, through this 
same writer, subsequently explained that there would 
be two harvests— a gathering of the fruit of the true 
Vine, and subsequently a gathering of the clusters of 
the "vine of the earth." (Rev. 14:18-20.) If, as we 
shall see, the true Vine represents the true Church, 
then the vine of the earth represents a false Church, an 
untrue, ungenuine one. 

The heavenly Father is the husbandman who planted, 
who owns, who cares for the true Vine, and to him it 
yields its fruit. The word "husbandman" here does 
not signify merely caretaker, but rather the vineyard-owner. 
This is in accordance with all the presentations 
of Scripture: God is therein set forth as the author 
of man's hope, his Savior, through whom alone 
comes the deliverance from sin and death. The fact 
that God accomplishes this through an honored agent 
and representative, his beloved Son, and the further 
fact that he proposes to use an elect Church as a Royal 
Priesthood, under his Son, the appointed Chief Priest, 
does not alter the fact that he himself is the fountain 

R2465 : page 108 

from which proceeds every good and every perfect 
gift.— 1 Cor. 8:6; Jas. 1:17. 

"Every branch in me," should not be understood to 
signify every nominal Christian, every professor, nor 
even those who render a nominal assent to the facts of 
Christianity, and who are in sympathy therewith. 
The "justified" believer is just ready to become a branch 
in the Vine, but his faith, and justification by that 
faith, do not make him a branch. The branches are 
those only who have first taken the step of justification 
through faith, and who subsequently have presented 
themselves to God as living sacrifices, and thus by consecration 

R2465 : page 109 

have been "immersed into Christ: by being 
"immersed into his death." 

This procedure, by which we are inducted into membership 
in Christ (as branches of the Vine), is clearly 
expressed by the Apostle in Rom. 6:3-5. Be it noted 
that we, no more than the Apostle, are here making an 
immersion in water the condition of entry into the body 



of Christ (as our Baptist brethren mistakenly do); but 
we are insisting, as the Apostle insists, that none enter 
the body of Christ except by the immersion of their 
wills into the will of Christ— their consecration to be 
dead with him— a self-surrender as justified human 
beings to death and to be henceforth new creatures in 
Christ Jesus, under and controlled by him, as their 
Head or Guide in all things. 

Amongst those who thus, according to divine arrangement, 
now become branches of the true Vine, there are 
two classes— fruit-bearing branches and non-fruit-bearing 
branches known as "suckers." But both of these 
conditions are developments: every branch begins as a 
very small shoot; every branch develops leaves; every 
branch has the same opportunities for nourishment, sap 
from the main stem, Christ, and from the same root of 
divine purpose and promise. All the branches of the 
Vine have a tendency to spend their strength upon 
themselves— in branch-making rather than in fruit-producing, 
and yet there is a difference. Vine-dressers tell 
us that they can very early discern the fruit-buds on 
the proper branches, and that the suckers lack these 
fruit-buds. 

Just so it is with the Lord's consecrated people; he 
does not expect of them much and fine fruit immediately, 
but he does look for the buds or evidences of effort 
in the direction of fruit-bearing; and these fruit-buds 
will manifest themselves early in those who are 
proper branches of the true Vine. And those who do 
not manifest a desire to bring forth fruitage to the Lord's 
glory, by serving him and his cause, but who on the 
contrary make use of the knowledge and blessings derived 
through union with Christ simply to advance 
themselves before men, and make a fair show in the 
flesh, are counted unworthy of retention, and are cut 
off, taken away— cease to be recognized in any sense of 
the word as branches. They may retain their freshness, 
green leaves, etc., for quite a little time after being 
rejected of the Lord, but it is only a question of time 
until they lose every evidence of fidelity— they wither 
away. Nor does the fact that they were branches avail 
anything after they cease to be branches, for the wood 
of the vine is of no practical value. They are burned, 
destroyed. 

But as even the best branches in the vine, which give 
evidence of fruit-bearing, require pruning, so even the 
most honest and earnest of the Lord's people require 
the Lord's discipline and providential care— otherwise 
they might soon run to woodmaking also, and fail to 
bring forth much fruit. The husbandman's skill recognizes 
how much of the branch and sprout and leaf are 
necessary to the bringing forth and proper maturing of 
the fruit which he seeks, and so our heavenly Father 
knows perfectly the conditions, etc., most favorable to 
us that we may bring forth much good fruit. He sees 
the sprouts of our ambitions in various directions, and 



knows, as we do not, whereunto these might lead us; 

and by his providence nips in the bud many of our 

propositions, deeming it better that the strength and 

energy which we thus intend to put forth should be expended 

rather in other directions— in bringing to maturity 

our good fruits already started and in progress. 

The true child of God whose will has been entirely 
immersed into the will of the Lord is neither offended 
nor discouraged by these prunings. He has learned 
something at least of his own unwisdom, and has confidence 
in the wisdom of the great Husbandman; hence 
when divine providence estops his efforts in some directions 
he takes the thwarting of his plans joyfully, 
assured that the Lord's will and the Lord's way are 
the best, and intended to work out a blessing. 

As the Father's representative, Jesus had been 
keeping the first branches of the Vine. He had purged 
or pruned by his reproofs or counsels, so that now, at 
the close of his three and a half years' ministry, he 
could say, "Now ye are clean through the word [teaching] 
which I have spoken unto you." As he again 
said, in his prayer to the Father, "Those that thou 
gavest me I have kept [as branches, disciples, members], 
and none of them is lost save the son of perdition." 
But henceforth, as the same prayer expressed 
the matter, the pruning and care of the branches would 
not be done by our Lord Jesus in the same manner, 
but through the operation of the holy Spirit— the Spirit 
of the Father and of the Son. 

But it is not sufficient that we be first justified, 
and then sanctified through a consecration to the Lord; 
nor is it sufficient that we get into the body of Christ 
and become branches of the Vine. It is good to be a 
little shoot, it is good to have buds of promise, it is 
good to grow as a branch and put forth tendrils, but 
however large or small the branch may be, however old 
or young, we must remember that the sap which produces 
the fruit can only be obtained by continued union 
with the Vine and its root of promise. If ever separated, 
all hopes must wither. Only as we are in Christ, 
and through him heirs of God, have we part or lot in 
this matter; and only so can we bring forth the fruits 
which the great Husbandman seeks. It would be folly 
for the branch to say, I needed at first to be united with 
Christ the Vine, but now I can stand alone. Whoever 

R2465 :page 110 

stands alone, whoever is separated from the Vine and 
from the other branches, will speedily wither away; 
and whoever abides in the Vine must surely continue 
to have fidelity to the Vine, must be at one with all the 
other true branches of the same Vine. And here we 
see the importance of being in the true Vine and at-one 
with the true branches. 
The wrong thought on this subject of the Vine and 



the branches is frequently expressed by our friends of 
various denominations, who claim that the branches of 
the Vine are the various denominations of Christians. 
This inculcates a serious error, namely, that it is the 
duty of every individual Christian to get into membership 
in one of these branches— as for instance, the Presbyterian 
branch, or the Methodist branch, or the Lutheran 
branch, or the Roman Catholic branch, or the 
Greek Catholic branch. The correct thought, on the 
contrary, is that each individual Christian in consecrating 
himself to the Lord becomes an individual branch 
in the true Vine: and his labors thenceforth should be 
not to bring forth denominational and sectarian fruits, 
but to bring forth the fruits or graces of the spirit of 
God in his own character and life. 

One writer, in pursuing this wrong thought respecting 
the branches, says, "God does not desire to have 
fruitless churches large and prosperous; he lets them 
wither away. The churches that keep nearest to Christ 
will grow the fastest." It should not be difficult for 
any to discern the fallacy of such reasoning. If this 
were the correct view it would imply that the church 
organizations which are the largest in numbers and 
most prosperous in wealth and honor amongst men are 
those which have the most truth and which most directly 
receive the sap of the holy Spirit from the Lord. 
But let us see: amongst Christians this would constitute 
Roman Catholicism the holiest and best and nearest 
to the Lord; Greek Catholicism would claim to be 
second; Methodism third, and so on. Intelligent people 
scarcely need to have the fallacies of such an interpretation 
pointed out. 

But what is incongruous when applied to denominations 
as branches, is thoroughly logical and in harmony 
with the facts when applied to the individual Christian 
and his spiritual life. Those who abide in Christ in faith 
and trust and consecration to his service— to the bringing 
forth of the fruits which are pleasing in the sight 
of the great Husbandman— find themselves in a narrow 
way indeed, often hedged up by providence, and 
their efforts in various directions changed, or rather, 
their intentions thwarted; but they find, as a result of 
all this experience, rightly received, that they are growing 
in grace— in the knowledge and in the love of God, 
the fruits of the spirit.— Rom. 8:28. 

The close union between the Vine and the branches 
is brought to our attention by our Lord's words, "He 
that abideth in me and I in him:" the Vine and its 
branches have such a oneness that wherever we touch 
a branch we touch the Vine itself. It is one Vine composed 
of branches, and so is the body of Christ one 
body, composed of many members. Wherever a member 
or branch of the body of Christ is found, all the 
various characteristics of Christ himself are found— in 
spirit, in intention, as "new creatures." This oneness 
in Christ is the secret of the power and of the fruit-bearing 



and of the acceptableness of the branches with 
the Father, the Husbandman. 

R2466 :page 110 

"Without me ye can do nothing," is a statement 
well worthy of being deeply engraved in the heart of 
every truly consecrated member of the body of Christ. 
But to abide in Christ means to be subject to all the 
will of the great Husbandman, and gladly and meekly 
submit to all the prunings which his wisdom sees best 
to permit. Respecting this necessity for pruning and 
discipline, Trench, the celebrated theologian, has well 
said: 

"It fares exactly so with God and some of his elect 
servants. Men seeing their graces, which so far exceed 
the graces of common men, wonder sometimes why 
they should suffer still, why they seem to be ever falling 
from one trial to another. But he sees in them— 
what no other eye can see— the grace which is capable 
of becoming more gracious still; and in his far-looking 
love for his own, who shall praise him, not for a day, 
but for an eternity, he will not suffer them to stop 
short of the best whereof they are capable. They are 
fruitbearing branches, and just because they are such, 
he prunes them that they may bring forth more fruit." 

Remarking upon the fact that sometimes a vine or 
tree may attempt more fruit than it is capable of bringing 
to perfection, and likening this to Christian experience 
and efforts, another writer (H. L. Hastings) 
suggests:— 

"The best way is to shake the tree, and free it of 
extra fruit. Prune, clip, cut, pluck, and reduce the 
fruit, until it becomes manageable, and until the tree 
can support its burden, and then let every branch be 
loaded with fruit that comes to perfection, but not overloaded 
with fruit which never will reach its full 
development." 

This is a very correct thought, as relates to the fruitage 
of efforts put forth in the Lord's service on behalf of 
others; for many waste their efforts because they do 
not concentrate them sufficiently. 

The talented Apostle Paul gives his testimony as 
to the wisdom of shaking off some of our plans and arrangements 
and efforts for which we have little talent, 
and concentrating our efforts upon those which we can 
best bring to perfection, ripeness, saying, "This one 
thing I do." (Phil. 3:13.) The Apostle's one business 
in life was to be, so far as he was able, acceptable 
to the Lord personally, and to do with his might what 

R2466 : page 1 1 1 

he could to assist others into the same condition. But 
the fruitbearing of works for others we do not understand 
to be the principal thought in this lesson. The 



first thought is that we should have the fruits of the 
Lord's spirit in our own hearts, the graces of the spirit 
well developed. This, however, implies activity and 
self-sacrifice in the Lord's service, for only so by the 
Lord's arrangement can our personal fruits and graces 
be brought to maturity. 

Our Lord gives us an intimation that the growing of 
much fruit is not wholly dependent upon ourselves, 
and that even while we abide in him as fruit-bearing 
branches the quality and quantity of the fruit is to be 
improved by our having proper ideals before our minds, 
and earnestly seeking their realization. Thus he says, 
"If ye abide in me and my words abide in you, ye shall 
ask what ye will and it shall be done unto you." The 
intimation is that the desire and the asking of the 
Father at the throne of the heavenly grace is a means 
by which we may more and more receive of the sap of 
the Vine, the holy Spirit, and be enabled to develop 
the fruits of the Spirit. It will be noticed that nothing 
here implies the seeking or finding of earthly good 
things. These are to be left wholly to the Lord's wisdom 
and providence, and his people, the true branches 
of the Vine, are to desire and to seek for the holy spirit, 
which the Father is more willing to give to them than 
earthly parents are to give good gifts to their children. 
-Luke 11:13. 

Incidentally the Lord here points out the value of 
the Scriptures to his true branches or disciples, when he 
says, "If my words abide in you." It is not only 
necessary and proper that we seek divine grace, but it 
is equally proper that we avail ourselves of the divine 
revelation respecting what is the good and acceptable 
and perfect will of God our Father, the Husbandman 
of the true Vine. Hence it will be found that those 
who bear much fruit and good fruit not only have been 
justified through faith, and sanctified through consecration, 
and thus accepted into membership in the 
true Vine, but that additionally they are seeking to be 
fruit-bearers,— seeking to abide in the Vine, and to 
have all the characteristics of the Vine, seeking grace 
to help in every time of need, and availing themselves 
not only of the sap which flows through the roots, but 
also of the light of truth and grace which shines upon 
them through the Word of the Lord. And only by 
following these conditions can we be fruit-bearers, and 
only by being bearers of fruit can we be the Lord's disciples 
—to the end; for we are to remember that the 
Church of the present time is merely the probationary 
Church, a company of those who have professed loyalty, 
love and obedience. The Lord will bring testing 
to prove the sincerity of their professions, and only 
those who thus prove the sincerity of their professions 
will be accepted as members of the Church glorified, 
symbolized by the golden vine of the Beautiful Gate of 
the Temple. 

Our Lord would have all the true branches realize 



his love, his interest, his care for them, his desire that 
they might make their calling and their election sure by 
compliance with the conditions of membership in the 
Vine: hence he assures them of his love in the strongest 
possible language. He tells them that his love for 
them is of the same kind as the Father's love for him. 
Even with all the various evidences of the truthfulness 
of this statement, corroborated by the "exceeding 
great and precious promises" of the Lord's Word, 
it is far too wonderful for us to fully comprehend. We 
can readily see how and why our Lord Jesus was greatly 
beloved of the Father, and called his well-beloved 
Son, but it astounds us to know that this same love is 
exercised by our Lord in turn toward us. "Behold 
what manner of love the Father hath bestowed upon 
us, that we should be called the sons of God;" for our 
Lord Jesus expressed and fully manifested the Father's 
love.-l John 3:1; John 14:7. 

But then comes a limitation, namely, that this intense 
love is only for the "little flock." True, "God 
so loved the world," and our Lord Jesus loved the 
world also, in the sense of sympathetic love, and a desire 
to do them good. But the love which the Lord is 
here declaring is a different one. It is only for those 
who have made a full consecration to him— indeed, 
that consecration is the secret of his special love. The 
Father loved the only begotten Son because he was full 
of faith and trust and obedience— "unto death, even 
the death of the cross." And likewise this same love 
extends to those justified ones who, filled with the Master's 
spirit, desire to walk in his footsteps, to take up 
their cross and follow him. God's love, of the same 
kind that went out toward our dear Redeemer, goes out 
to all such; and the Redeemer's love goes out to them; 
and the good message comes to them, "All things are 
yours, for ye are Christ's, and Christ is God's." "Who 
shall lay anything to the charge of God's elect? It is 
God that justifieth....It is Christ that died."— 
1 Cor. 3:22,23; Rom. 8:33,34. 

But as this special love is in view of the consecration 
and obedience of this class, so it depends 
upon the continuation of that spirit of consecration and 
obedience. If their loving devotion grow cold, and 
they become filled with self-love and the spirit of the 
world, to that extent they grieve the holy Spirit,— they 
turn from them this special love of the Lord: and hence 
the injunction of our Lord, "Continue ye in my love." 
These words show that it is possible for us to forfeit 
the Lord's love and to become castaways— to fail to 
make sure our calling and election to the exceeding 
great things which God hath in reservation for them 
that love him with this supreme love.— 2 Pet. 1:4-1 1; 
1 Cor. 9:27. 

It is important that we keep in mind that true love 
on our part will manifest itself in obedience, and hence 
that disobedience is an evidence of the loss of love as 



R2466 :page 112 

viewed from the Lord's standpoint; and we must all 
agree that this is a reasonable standpoint of judgment. 
Some may say, How would it be if we disobeyed through 
ignorance? We answer that the Lord has made provision 
against our ignorance: first, he has given us the 
Word of truth, "that the man of God may be perfect 
[perfectly informed], thoroughly furnished unto every 
good work;" and secondly, he has promised to supply 
such helps in the spirit of holiness, and the understanding 
of his Word as will enable us to do those 
things which are pleasing in his sight. (2 Tim. 3:17; 
John 16:13.) Thus, carelessness respecting the Word 
of the Lord is one evidence of the lack of love. Our 
Lord points out that his continuance in the Father's 
love, as the well-beloved Son, with all that this implies, 
was because of his obedience to the Father's will, 
and that following the same line he must require that 
we shall be obedient to him if we would abide in his 
love, share his throne and glory. 
"These things have I spoken unto you that my 

page 112 

joy might be in you, and that your joy might be filled-full." 

R2466 :page 112 

Our Lord's instructions and commandments 

are not intended to terrify us, nor to deprive us of happiness. 

On the contrary, as the most fruitful branches 

well know, obedience to the Lord's words, and the 

privilege thus obtained of abiding in him and his love, 

is the greatest joy— a joy which wholly outweighs all 

the trifling pleasures which the world has to offer. It 

is the joy and peace that passeth all understanding, 

which rules in the heart, and which brings with it the 

promise, the assurance, not only of the life which now 

is, but also of that which is to come. 



page 112 

INTERESTING LETTERS. 



MY DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I desire to make 
humble confession, to as many of the household of 
faith as I may, that I have long been as a sheep going 
astray in that I have laid such stress upon the example 
of our Lord Jesus Christ as to lose sight of, and 
even to disallow, the essentially vital redemptive work 



in his sacrifice unto death. But I have now returned 

unto the Shepherd and Bishop of our souls, who his 

own self bare our sins in his own body on the tree, 

that we, being dead to sins, should live unto righteousness. 

That I have not sinned wilfully, in the 

sense of Heb. 10:26, 1 am conscious of very strong 

two-fold evidence. First, my desire has been earnest 

and continuous to know the truth, to have my will 

conformed to God's will, and— latterly at least— I have 

again sincerely desired this at any cost whatsoever to 

the flesh. Second, in my just concluded reexamination 

of "the whole counsel of God," as contained in 

the Old and New Testaments, and in the light of your 

publications, I have with docile mind and joyous heart 

found myself giving ready and glad assent to the one 

way from death unto life, and from the life human 

(of the called and accepted and faithful few) unto life 

divine— Immortality. 

Some months ago I had an earnest desire to re-read 
"Tabernacle Shadows." I had loaned my copy long 
ago; so long in fact that I had little expectation of recovering 
it, and I thought it might possibly be out of 
print. When I wrote your Society recently for a set 
of the MILLENNIAL DAWN series for the local library, 
I was strongly impelled to inquire about the earlier 
work. But not being in a position to purchase it, I 
refrained. I had not noticed your announcement regarding 
March TOWER, so that when, a few days later, 
I received the very book above all others that I wanted, 
it seemed to me most striking evidence that God had 
put the desire in my heart, and another blessed proof 
(added to almost countless proofs he has given me) of 
his steadfast faithfulness to him who trusteth in Him. 
Nor was this impression lessened, but rather increased, 
when I discovered that every TOWER reader was to 
have a copy. Verily, it is "meat in due season," a 
most rich and timely banquet for the "Royal Priesthood." 
If all who received it read and studied it 
with the same eagerness with which I did, and concluded 
their study of its pages and its Scripture references 
with a like thrill of joyous confidence that they 
"are all parts of one sacrifice," our blessed Redeemer's 
heart, in this day of his parousia, must have rejoiced 
as it can scarcely have done since Pentecost. 

After this study came a careful perusal of the 
four volumes of MILLENNIAL DAWN, drawn in their 
order from the library. The reading consumed many 
days, because of frequent silent meditations and constantly 
recurring references to the Law and to the 
Testimony. I could write much of this experience. 
But suffice it to say that I believe that these volumes 
present the only interpretation of the Holy Scriptures 
extant, that discovers the teachings of those sacred 
books to be at once harmonious and logical, symmetrical 
and complete, scientific and rational, satisfying 
alike the exactions of the intellect and the yearnings 



of the heart, and likewise offering the persistent disciple 
achievement of such exalted glory as to infinitely 
transcend the highest conceivable aspiration of the 
spirit— the new creature. 

This testimony is deliberately, freely and gladly 
given after having been instructed in the strictest 
school of the Pharisees, and after having made diligent 
study for many years of the multitude of systems 
of religion, philosophy and science, ancient and modern, 
oriental and occidental, which essay to solve, or 
prove insoluble, the mysteries of man's origin, nature 
and destiny, life and death. 

Christ, and Christ only— my Lord, my Savior, 
Head, High Priest and King— "hath brought Life and 
Immortality to light," and that only "through the 
Gospel," and "the Scriptures testify of Him." He 
hath indeed left us an example that we (the royal 
priesthood) should follow his steps, but as surely the 
one entrance to that pathway of joint-sacrifice is 
through acceptance by faith of Jesus' obedience unto 
death, in order to render our sacrifices acceptable and 
efficient. 

I rejoice with joy unspeakable in the confidence 
that my crown is still attainable, and in firmness of 
purpose to be faithful unto death that I may receive 
that crown of life. -Phil. 3:7-14. 

Yours in the hope of this calling, 

SAMUEL I. HICKEY,-New Jersey. 



page 113 

Vol. XX. MAY 15, 1899. No. 10. 



CONTENTS. 



The Lord Betrayed 115 

The Great High Priest 

Arraigned 119 

The "Good Confession" before 

Pilate 121 

"He Was Numbered with the 

Transgressors" 126 

Conventions the Coming 

Season 114 

A "Pilgrim" in the West 114 

page 114 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
-ADDRESS TO- 



WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, N.Y. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity or 
adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, if they 
send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting the 
paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list 
continually. 



CONVENTIONS THE COMING SEASON. 



It is urged that we have a Convention of WATCH TOWER friends 
this year in Indianapolis, Ind., during the session of the Epworth 
League in that city in the latter part of July; and another 
in St. Louis, Mo., in October, during the time of the St. Louis 
Exposition. 

It is proposed that these conventions shall last for about three 
days each, and be rather local than general. At the dates chosen 
there will be specially low railroad fares to these cities. 

This is merely a preliminary notice. Particulars later. 



WORK FOR THE UNEMPLOYED. 

Brother C. A. Owen desires that any of the friends out of employment 
be directed to write to him at No. 623 West Michigan 
Ave., Indianapolis, Ind. All such should remember the colporteur 
work also. 



R2472:page 114 

A "PILGRIM" IN THE WEST. 

Friends in Kansas, Missouri, Nebraska and Iowa who desire 
a visit from one of the "Pilgrims" will please report to us at 
once that we may make up the route accordingly. 



page 114 

ALLEGHENY CHURCH MEETINGS. 

Preaching and divine worship every Sunday afternoon in 
Bible House chapel, No. 610 Arch street, at 3 P.M. 



Cottage meetings for prayer and testimony on Wednesday 
evenings; and Dawn Circles for Bible Study on Thursday, Friday 
and Saturday evenings— various localities, Pittsburg and 
vicinity-inquire at WATCH TOWER office. 



R2467 :page 115 

THE LORD BETRAYED. 

MAY 14. -JOHN 18:1-14. 

"He is despised and rejected of men."— Isa. 53:3. 

AFTER the Last Supper, and after his discourse 
to the disciples respecting the Vine and the 
branches, came our Lord's beautiful prayer recorded 
in John's 17th chapter. Then, probably about midnight, 
Jesus, with the eleven, passed outside the gate 
of Jerusalem, crossed the little brook called Cedron, 
and on the farther hill above it entered the olive orchard 
known as the Garden of Gethsemane: perhaps it was a 
public garden, or possibly the property of some one 
friendly to our Lord. What purports to be its site is 
now maintained as a garden, and has been for centuries. 
It is in charge of monks who take pleasure in receiving 
visitors to view it. There are about six or eight very 
large and evidently very old olive trees in this garden 
at the present— they give evidence of being at least one 
thousand years old, but possibly are much older. 

While talking with his disciples and praying for 
them our Lord seemingly was full of good courage: 
while exhorting them that their hearts be not troubled 
evidently his own heart was not cast down. But 
as the little company wended its way to Gethsemane 
we may well suppose that a great weight fell upon our 
dear Redeemer's sensibilities. We can imagine him 
saying, "My soul is exceeding sorrowful, even unto 
death." (Matt. 26:38.) The present visit to Gethsemane, 
therefore, was evidently very different from 
previous visits. Some appreciation of the momentous 
occasion was no doubt inspired in the hearts of the 
Apostles by the Master's dejection, and yet they probably 
but slightly comprehended what was about to 
come to pass. 

Arrived at the Garden, we glean from other Evangelists 
that our Lord left eight of the Apostles near the 
gate, taking Peter, James and John, his closest companions, 
a little farther with him, and cautioning them 
all to watch and pray, because it was an hour of special 
trial. Going a little farther by himself, he communed 
with the Father in secret. His feelings were not and 
could not be shared even by his beloved disciples; they 
could not appreciate the trial through which he was 
passing; they had not yet been begotten of the spirit. 



Thus in his most trying hour Jesus was alone— "Of 
the people there was none with me."— Isa. 63:3. 

It is difficult for the majority, even of Christian 
people, to appreciate the true character of our dear 
Lord's trial, which in this instance so wrought upon his 
nervous system as to produce a bloody sweat. Many 
compare our Lord's course with that of some of his 
martyr followers who have gone forth into death with 
remarkable courage, and in contrasting matters they 
are inclined to wonder why our Lord, who was perfect, 
should have endured so much more a passion of suffering 
than his imperfect followers. To grasp the true 
situation it is necessary that several things be borne 
in mind:— 

(1) For our Lord, who had a perfect right to life, 
to lay it down in death, was a very different matter 
from the laying down of a forfeited and impaired life 
on the part of those who could not hope to keep it long 
anyway. (2) Our race, already nine-tenths dead, has 
but a feeble appreciation of the great value of life— all 
of its experience having been in connection with dying, 
it has come to regard death with equanimity. But not 
so our Lord, the "prince of life," who had been with 
the Father from the beginning, and by whom all things 
were made— he realized life as a very precious boon, 
privilege, enjoyment. To him, therefore, death must 
have been much more terrible than to us who are already 
nine-tenths dead, and correspondingly blunted 
in all of our sensibilities. True he had the Father's 

R2467 :page 116 

assurance that if faithful unto death he should have a 
resurrection, and unquestionably he believed the Father's 
promise— all of his course in life gives abundant 
evidence of his implicit faith in the Father. And yet 
in his case this must have been a crucial trial to faith, 
much more so than with us. As we have only a shred 
of a forfeited life to lay down, so we have on the other 
hand, not only the Father's promise of a future life 
through Christ, but we have the example of the Father's 
power in the resurrection of our dear Redeemer: but 
our Lord Jesus had no such evidence of the divine 
power; he himself, according to the divine promise, was 
to be the "first-born from the dead," a first-fruit unto 
God of his creatures.— Col. 1:18; 1 Cor. 15:20. 

But all this had already been counted, weighed 
and accepted from the very beginning of his ministry. 
He had already informed the disciples that it was necessary 
that he should lay down his life for the sheep, 
and that he was about to do so. (John 10:15.) We 
are not to assume, therefore, when our dear Redeemer 
prayed, "Father, if it be possible let this cup pass from 
me," that he meant if it were possible he might escape 
dying. He well knew, and had already explained to 
the Apostles, that the drawing of the world could not 



take place except he were lifted up as the sin-offering 
—that it was absolutely necessary that he should die 
for our sins and enter into his glory.— John 3:14; 12:32. 

The cup which he prayed might pass from him, if 
possible, we must therefore suppose to have been the 
shame and ignominy of arrest as a law-breaker, a public 
trial and conviction, and subsequent crucifixion as 
a malefactor. It was one thing to die for our sins, as 
men generally die, without special shame or contumely; 
it was another thing that he should die with such extreme 
shame, dishonor and contempt. Quite probably 
in the Father's wisdom this last feature was kept more 
or less hidden from our dear Redeemer until just about 
the time of its accomplishment. And apparently our 
Lord Jesus did not see any absolute necessity for his 
suffering more than the sinner suffered, in order to pay 
man's ransom price. Hence his prayer for a time 
was, "If it be possible, let this cup pass from me." 
The Apostle also notes this distinction, saying, he 
"became obedient unto death," and then adds "even 
the death of the cross."— Phil. 2:8. 

The death of the cross, with its attendant dishonor, 
reproach, etc., so far as we may be able to judge, was 
not necessary as our ransom price, because the penalty 
did not read, In the day that thou eatest thereof thou 
shalt surely die with public reprobation and dishonor 
by crucifixion. Since the penalty was death (Gen. 2:17), 
we may suppose that our Lord's death by any 
means would have fully paid man's ransom price. 
However, the additional features were deemed necessary 
by the Father, and the "cup" did not pass. The 
Father required this extreme of obedience as a test, a 
proof not only to himself but before all his intelligent 
creatures of the absolute loyalty of heart of his "well 
beloved Son," upon whom he designed shortly thereafter 
to confer the great blessing and high exaltation 
of his own divine nature and join t-heirship in his Kingdom. 
And the loyalty of our dear Redeemer was fully 
attested, as the Apostle declares; he "despised the 
shame," that is to say, the shame was as nothing in 
his sight in comparison with the accomplishment of 
the Father's purposes, the pleasing of the Father. 
(Heb. 12:2.) So long as he thought there was a 
possibility of the elimination of the shame feature, he 
was nervously anxious to have it so, if possible; but as 
soon as he realized that this was not the Father's will 
his heart instantly responded, "Not my will but thine 
be done." Decision respecting the Father's will immediately 
brought strength; he was now prepared for 
any experience, "strong in the Lord and in the power 
of his might." 

Meanwhile Judas, who some days before had engaged 
with the high-priest to betray Jesus, and who 
left the upper room immediately after the Supper to 
carry out his nefarious plan, had received of the chief 
priests and Pharisees a band of men, with a person in 



charge as an officer, whose mission it was to arrest 
Jesus in the night and to secure his execution before 
the Passover. We must wholly disagree with the 
common thought that this "band" consisted of an army 
of three to six hundred Roman soldiers. They certainly 
acted very differently from soldiers ordinarily 
under such circumstances. Besides, the record 
by all of the Evangelists is that this band was sent, 
not by Pilate nor by Herod, the Roman representatives, 
but by the chief priests and Pharisees, who we know 
had no command whatever of the Roman garrison. 
To our understanding this band which apprehended 
Jesus was very similar to the one mentioned in 
John 7:32-46. 

It would appear that the Jewish Sanhedrin exercised 
a certain amount of authority in respect to religious 
matters, and were permitted to make arrests, but 
not to execute criminals without the consent of the 
Roman governor. We remember that the apostles 
were arrested on several occasions by such officers of 
the Jews.-See Acts 5:17,18,22,25-40. 

Both Matthew and Mark speak of this aggregation, 
under officers from the chief priests and Pharisees, as 
a "multitude," and our Lord's words indicate that 
they were armed with sticks and swords such as were 
common to the people in general, and he does not 
mention spears, which would probably have been a part 
of the armament of a band of Roman soldiers. This 

R2467 :page 117 

thought is further emphasized by the fact that it was 

R2468 :page 117 

the high priest's servant who evidently made the first 
assault upon Jesus, and received a blow from Peter's 
sword. If Roman soldiers had the matter in charge the 
high priest's servant no doubt would have been less 
officious. 

It is presumed, and apparently on good grounds, 
that this company seeking Jesus, under the guidance of 
Judas, went first to the upper room which our Lord 
and the Apostles had left probably less than an hour 
before. Finding that Jesus and the eleven were gone, 
Judas knew that he would be most likely to find them 
in the Garden of Gethsemane, for "Jesus ofttimes resorted 
thither with his disciples." John's account 
omits the particulars of the betrayal given by the other 
Evangelists: possibly the loving disciple felt so much 
ashamed of the facts that he preferred not to mention 
them. Certainly very few acts of treachery ever paralleled 
this one, and all mankind, even in their perverted 
condition of mind, seem to realize that the position of 
traitor is amongst the most despicable on the calendar, 
and such treachery as that of Judas, against such kindness 



and love and goodness as that of his Master, we 
may be thankful is not so very common. And yet 
there are correspondencies in the experiences of the 
Lord's people, "in perils amongst false brethren." It 
behooves us each to look to it that we permit nothing 
akin to the spirit of Judas to rankle in our hearts. 
Our Lord puts the "members of his body" in such 
matters on a plane with himself, and assures us that 
whoever shall injure one of the least of these his brethren, 
it were better for him that a millstone were hanged 
about his neck and he were drowned in the depth of 
the sea. --Matt. 18:6. 

Of course there will always be a motive, good or 
bad, back of every deed done to the under-members of 
his body as well as to the Head. To find strong motives 
is not to find valid excuses for treacheries. So 
far as our experience and judgment go, the lesson is 
that such treachery from "false brethren" usually has 
its spring in covetousness, lust for influence, power or 
position, and the desire to glorify such unholy ambitions 
cannot fail to corrupt any heart which entertains them. 
As one has said:— 

"Sow a thought, you reap an act; 

Sow an act, you reap a habit; 

Sow a habit, you reap a character; 

Sow a character, you reap a destiny." 
Judas had been doing some of this sowing of 
evil thoughts for a considerable time before his thoughts 
took outward shape in evil acts. He was covetous of 
wealth and of influence; he became the treasurer of the 
little group of disciples, and the intimation of the 
Scriptures is that he purloined to his own private uses 
a portion of the contributions. As usual, his love for 
money increased the more he exercised it, until he was 
willing to betray his Master for thirty pieces of silver 
—equivalent to about twenty dollars of our money, 
tho representing in value of labor a much larger sum. 
It would seem, too, that Judas was looking forward to 
the promised Kingdom, and probably anticipated a high 
position as royal treasurer of that Kingdom. 

It is quite possible, indeed probable, we think, 
that Judas was seriously disappointed in respect to the 
result of his betrayal. Apparently he expected that 
our Lord would deliver himself by miraculous power 
from the hands of his enemies. This is the most charitable 
view we would know how to take of his treacherous 
conduct: it relieves the blackness of the act only a 
very little, however, for he who would be willing to 
despitefully use his best friend, even temporarily, for 
a money consideration, gives evidence of having prostituted 
every good and noble sentiment of his being to 
his love of money. Indeed, the love of honor may 
have had considerable to do with the matter, for he 
may have hoped by bringing about this crisis that our 
Lord would be compelled to set up the long-promised 
Kingdom, or else to own that all his claims and promises 



were fraudulent. 

Judas surely did succeed in expediting matters, 
and in bringing about the installation of the embryo 
Kingdom of God; but not in the manner he expected, 
nor in any degree to his own honor or advantage. 
Thus it must be with those who receive the truth and 
who profess discipleship under it— not in the love of 
the truth, but in the love of honors hoped for, either 
present or future. Let us all who have named the 
name of Christ take heed and watch and pray lest 
there should be in any of us any of the elements of 
this vile character. And let us remember that there 
are various secret ways, as well as the more outward 
ones, in which we may betray the Lord and the 
"brethren." 

The evangelist declares that Jesus knew in advance 
all things that would come upon him. We are 
elsewhere told that while he prayed, "There appeared 
an angel unto him from heaven, strengthening him." 
(Luke 22:43.) This ministry may have consisted in 
informing him of the Father's will in respect to what 
things he should suffer, and how they were to be expected, 
and this knowledge that the matter was settled, 
and the assurance that the Father would overrule 
it all, strengthened his heart and gave him the 
great calmness which we observe in all his subsequent 
course. 

The "band" sent to apprehend him evidently expected 
that they might be obliged to seek for him in 
the shadows of the trees, etc., and hence they were 
provided with torches and lanterns. Unquestionably 

R2468 :page 118 

they were greatly surprised that our Lord, instead of 

fleeing from them, advanced to them, and inquired 

whom they sought. Quite possibly some of those in 

the "band" had previous knowledge of the Lord— of 

his miracles, power over devils, etc., and this may 

have been the reason for their manifestation of weakness 

in retreat and falling to the ground. Or it is 

possible that our Lord exercised over them a superior 

mental power which produced this effect, for the purpose 

of showing that he had full power to resist them 

if he had chosen to use it. 

The same lesson, we believe, is taught by Peter's 
use of the sword upon the high priest's servant. We 
are to remember that one of the Evangelists records 
that our Lord instructed the apostles to take swords 
with them, and that when two were found he said, 
"It is enough." (Luke 22:36,38.) Our Lord had 
no thought of having his disciples war a carnal warfare 
on his behalf, as he subsequently stated, "If my kingdom 
were of this world then would my servants fight, 
that I should not be delivered to the Jews." (John 18:36.) 
The two swords were sufficient to show 



that our Lord's apprehension was not because there 
were no means of defence, nor because of cowardice 
on the part of his disciples, but merely because of his 
submission— knowing that his hour was come, and 
that thus it behooved him to suffer for our sins and to 
enter into his glory.— Luke 24:46. 

After this one manifestation of power, as indicating 
his full ability to cope with that multitude, and 
indeed his power to have more than twelve legions of 
angels to defend him, had he so desired (Matt. 26:53), 
we find our Lord fully submitting himself to capture, 
merely making condition that the disciples might 
go their way. How grand the character which at 
such a moment, under such trying conditions, could so 
fully forget self and feel interested merely in the welfare 
of others! How like what we should expect of Him! 

"That the saying might be fulfilled which he 
spake, Of them which thou gavest me I have lost 
none." We understand the writer to mean that 
here again in the Master's course we find an exemplification 
of his care for his disciples, as enunciated 
in his prayer just before leaving the upper room. 
While the thought of his prayer was chiefly in respect 
to their spiritual interests, that none of them should 
be lost, we do well to notice this as a corroborative illustration 
of our Lord's care of the physical interests 
of all who become his disciples. Not a hair of their 
heads shall fall; nothing shall be permitted to injure 
them— every event and affair of life will be overruled 
for their highest good.— Matt. 6:32,33. 

It was probably when Jesus began to be bound 
that Peter drew his sword in his defence; perhaps he 
remembered the Lord's words of a few hours previous, 
to the effect that his followers would all forsake him, 
and his own promise, "Although all shall be offended, 
yet will not I." (Mark 14:29.) Noble, zealous Peter! 
We love him for his noble expression of sentiment, 
and for his heroic defence of the Master with 
the sword against superior numbers. It is the custom 
of many to decry Peter's action, as another of his rash 
errors. We are to remember, however, that the Apostles 
had not yet received the holy Spirit and therefore 
could not clearly appreciate the fact that the Kingdom 
to which they were called is a spiritual Kingdom. Besides, 
as we have seen, he was merely following the 
Lord's counsel in taking the sword with him, and evidently 
also carrying out the divine purpose in using 
it. We see nothing to blame, everything to commend. 
It was a sign of larger import than Peter and 
the others there realized. 

But having permitted the matter to go thus far, 
our Lord restrained Peter, saying, "Suffer yet thus 
far. Put up thy sword into the sheath; the cup which 
my Father hath given me, shall I not drink it?" And 
so saying he touched his wounded enemy and healed 
him. The disciples were to see, understand, be fully 



assured, that our Lord, in delivering himself to his 
enemies, did it voluntarily, and hence the proceedings 
were so pantomimed as to enforce this lesson. 

How the grace of humility shines out in all the little 
affairs of our dear Redeemer's ministry; even at 
this moment of his surrender to his enemies he does 
not boast that his course is a voluntary one, nor seek 
praise as a martyr! He declares the simple truth, 

R2469 :page 118 

that the Father required this of him as an evidence of 

his personal loyalty to him. He confesses himself a 

servant of God, a son who learned obedience by the 

things which he suffered. "The cup which the Father 

hath given me, shall I not drink it?" Indeed, this 

was the strength of his victory— his will was fully submitted 

to the Father's will, and his faith grasped the 

fact that the Father permitted no unnecessary evils 

to come upon him, but only such as he could and 

would overrule for good. 

There is a valuable lesson here for all who are 
seeking to walk in the footsteps of the great High 
Priest,— for all the Royal Priesthood. We also are 
to remember that so long as we abide in Christ, and 
seek to walk in his footsteps, all the trying experiences 
of life are carefully measured for us by the Lord 
—that he does not pour into our cup of sorrow and 
trial any bitter experiences that are not needful to us, 
and that will not subsequently work out for us a far 
more exceeding and eternal weight of glory. (2 Cor. 4:17.) 
With these assurances, and with the evidences 
of the Father's faithfulness to our glorified 

R2469 :page 119 

Master and Forerunner, we indeed may have strong 
consolation who have fled for refuge to the hope set 
before us in the Gospel.— Heb. 6:18-20. 

The healing of the smitten ear, our Lord's last 
miracle, was most beautifully illustrative of his character 
and teachings. It exemplified his words, "Love 
your enemies, do good to them that persecute you." 
It showed that he was filled with the divine love which 
his teachings inculcated, and that he had no bitterness 
toward those who despitefully used and persecuted him. 

The binding of our Lord seems to have been entirely 
unnecessary, except as the "band" might desire 
to make an exhibition of their prowess to those who 
had sent them. Our Lord seems to have remonstrated 
in respect to this, as per the account given in Mark 14:48,49: 
"Are ye come out as against a thief, with 
swords and with staves, to take me? I was daily with 
you in the Temple, teaching, and ye took me not. 
But the Scriptures must be fulfilled." It was then that 
the eleven forsook him and fled. Judas continuing 



with the band went to the house of Annas the priest, 
who doubtless had bargained with Judas, and no doubt 
it was at this time that the thirty pieces of silver were 
paid over, Judas having now shown a fulfilment of 
the contract. Poor wretched man! The Son of man 
indeed went to death, as it had been written of him, 
but this made none the less horrible the treachery, the 
covetousness and murderous spirit that delivered him 
up to his enemies. So with the members of the body 
of Christ: it must needs be that offences come— it is a 
part of the divine plan that the body of Christ should 
fill up that which is behind of the afflictions of the 
Head (Col. 1:24)— but this makes none the less sinful 
the conduct of those who have to do with such betrayals 
—especially if they be "false brethren" who have 
enjoyed some knowledge of the truth. In every instance, 
however, it will be observed that altho the trials 
worked out blessing for the Lord and will do so also 
for all the faithful who suffer with him, the rewards of 
unrighteousness sought by those who take Judas' course 
never yield them the honors and blessings they coveted, 
and for which they sold themselves to work evil. 



R2469 :page 119 

THE GREAT HIGH PRIEST ARRAIGNED. 

-MAY 21. -JOHN 18:15-27.- 

"He came unto his own, and his own 
received him not."— John 1:11. 

ALTHO it is declared that all the disciples fled, 
John points out that Peter and himself followed 
at a distance. Their deep interest in the Master 
would not permit them to go to their homes; they must 
keep him in sight, and note how things would go with 
him to the very last. They were powerless to assist 
him against such great odds, and in the face of his own 
refusal to be assisted, but they were not powerless to 
love still. John, it seems, was somewhat acquainted 
at the high priest's palace, and readily gained entrance, 
not only for himself but for Peter. 

But these favors and privileges became tests to 
Peter, and led to his denial of the Lord. And so it is with 
some of the Lord's followers of to-day. When they 
are by themselves, or with others of like precious faith, 
they are bold and courageous to confess the Lord and 
to serve him, but if perchance they get into palaces or 
amongst the servants and officers and high priests of 
nominal Christianity they are ashamed of the Master and 
fear to confess him, lest they should be cast out of the 
privileges enjoyed in the society of those who have not 
yet recognized the truth. Far better would it have 



been for poor Peter had he openly declared, "Yes, I 
am one of his disciples, and since I presume that none 
such are wanted here I will go out." How much so 
honorable and proper a course would have reflected to 
his credit in the eyes of all just persons, and how much 
blessing it would have brought to him! 

Peter's failure to take the proper course brought 
him later to a still more trying situation, when a kinsman 
of the man whose ear he had cut off asked him 
point-blank the question, "Did not I see thee in the 
garden with him?" Matters were getting pretty close 
for poor Peter. It was more now than a question of 
leaving the fire and the privileges and honor of the 
high priest's court: it was now a question of his identity 
as the one who had defended Jesus with a sword, and 
hence a question of his own arrest and trial at the same 
tribunal with the Master. One false step leads naturally 
to another; to have now declared for Jesus would 
have been a public testimony that he was a liar, in 
addition to leading to his apprehension, and so Peter 
concluded that in self-defence he must not only repeat 
the lie, and again deny the Master, but to make the 
matter more strong before his accusers he began to 
curse and to swear that he knew not Jesus. 

Poor Peter! Truly, as our Lord told him, Satan 
had desired to have him, to sift him, and surely he 
was being severely sifted at this time. It seems almost 
a miracle that he recovered his balance and repented 
and found forgiveness for his sins. It would seem that 
our Lord's prayer on his behalf operated through his 
previous announcement to Peter of this denial, for after 
he had thus denied, and after he had noticed the cock 
crow, Peter remembered the Lord's words, "The cock 
shall not crow till thou hast denied me thrice." With 
feelings better imagined than they can be described, 
Peter hastily left the High Priest's apartments now of 
his own accord, going out into the shadows of early 
morning, that he might weep bitterly and entreat the 
Lord's forgiveness. 

There is a lesson for us in the fact that Peter's 
failure was along the very line of his strength. He 
was naturally courageous, had boasted of it, and yet 

R2469 : page 120 

failed for lack of courage. "When I am weak then I 
am strong," implies that he who feels himself strong 
is really weak, as in Peter's case. Let us all learn to 
specially guard our supposedly strong points of character, 
remembering that we have a wily foe. We are 
to realize our weakness, our vulnerableness at any point, 
except as we keep watch at every point and rely upon 
the great Captain of our salvation to assist us. 

John does not tell the whole of the story; he omits 
reference to Peter's cursing and swearing. His love 
for Brother Peter evidently influenced him to omit that 



portion of the narrative not absolutely necessary to 
confirm the Lord's prediction. The account of the 
cursing and swearing is given by Mark, whose Gospel 
record is supposed to have been indited by Peter himself, 
Mark being in a large measure Peter's amanuensis. 
-Mark 14:66-72. 

Jesus was examined of the High Priest: that functionary, 
however evil and murderously disposed at 
heart, felt bound to at least preserve the forms of justice, 
altho from the records elsewhere we know that himself 
and his associates amongst the priests and Pharisees 
had already determined that Jesus must be put to death 
because his influence amongst the people was inimical 
to their own;— because his teachings cast theirs into 
the shade and exposed their hollowness, bigotry and 
hypocrisy. Our Lord answered his questions accordingly; 
refusing to make any specific explanations he 
merely referred to his teachings, appealing thus to his 
rights as a Jew. His answer was the perfectly proper 
and legal one; he had been arrested without just cause, 
and the judge was now seeking to find a cause. Our 
Lord merely pointed out that the cause for the arrest 
must be shown to have been something which preceded 
the arrest. 

It is not necessary for us to suppose that the officer 
who struck Jesus with the palm of his hand, and reproved 
him for improper language toward the Chief 
Priest, was intentionally unjust in the matter. Rather 
we may suppose that, influenced by his desire to appear 
zealous in support of the High Priest's position and 
judgment, this accentuated his mental unbalance as a 
fallen man, and led him to imagine evil where there 
was none. This circumstance, however, gives us the 
opportunity for discerning just what our Lord meant 
by his expression in the sermon on the mount, "Whosoever 
shall smite thee on thy right cheek turn to him 
the other also." (Matt. 5:39.) Our Lord did not 
literally turn the other cheek to the man and ask him 
to smite that also, nor did he even receive the smiting 

R2470 : page 120 

in silence. He was not willing that his good conduct 
and proper language should be evil spoken of without 
at least a proper endeavor to correct the matter. Hence 
he asked his smiter to point out wherein he had spoken 
evil, and suggested to him that if he could not point 
out the evil he should acknowledge his wrong in having 
improperly smitten for an evil which could not be 
pointed out. 

In the light of this illustration the Lord's people 
are to understand the command, to turn the other 
cheek, to mean simply that they are not to resist evil 
with evil; rather, they are to receive more evil than 
return it in kind. On the contrary, however, they 
are to resist evil with good; they are to expostulate with 



evil-doers, as the Master did, endeavoring with kindness 
and gentleness to have them see the right and the 
wrong of the questions in dispute. 

It would appear that our Lord's trial by the Jews 
was held before Caiaphas, the acting High Priest, the 
son-in-law of Annas, the proper High Priest according 
to the Jewish law; and the fourteenth verse identifies 
Caiaphas as the one who had previously declared, "It 
is expedient for us that one man should die for the 
people, and that the whole nation perish not.' And 
this spake he not of himself, but being High Priest that 
year he prophesied that Jesus should die for that nation; 
and not for that nation only, but that also he should 
gather together in one the children of God that were 
scattered abroad."— John 11:50-53. 

Here is an illustration of how a great truth may 
be seen from two opposite standpoints. The prophecy 
of Caiaphas was strictly true,— in strict accord with all 
the declarations of the Lord's Word, and was sent 
through one of the channels which the Lord had been 
in the habit of using (the High Priest's office) yet the 
person occupying that office, being out of heart-harmony 
with the Lord, was out of harmony also with the 
various features of the divine plan, and became an 
instigator and cooperator in an evil work, which nevertheless 
was working out in harmony with the divine 
foreknowledge and program. 

There is a lesson in this also for all of the Lord's 
people in respect to every feature of divine truth. It 
is not sufficient that we see certain facts; it is necessary 
also that we be in heart-harmony with the Lord, else 
we might, like Caiaphas, aid in fulfilling the Lord's 
plan but nevertheless taking a wrong position may be 
bringing ourselves, with others, under a curse, while 
still cooperating in the fulfilment of the divine plan. 
Let all who are of the light, and who have received the 
truth, seek more and more to walk in the light and in 
the Master's footsteps, carefully avoiding the evils 
which we see illustrated in the cases of Judas, Peter 
and Caiaphas. 

The trial before the Jews was of three parts:— 

(1) The examination before Annas the legal High 
Priest which was wholly unofficial. He sent Jesus 
bound to Caiaphas the official High Priest of Roman 

R2470 :page 121 

appointment, and as such the President of the Sanhedrin, 
whose court room was probably in the same palace, 
across the corridor, where Peter stood warming himself. 

(2) The preliminary trial before Caiaphas is supposed 
to have been held between two or three o'clock 

on Friday morning— the members of the Sanhedrin or 
Jewish Court having been summoned by messengers as 
soon as Jesus was apprehended. This hearing was 
preliminary in the sense that it examined Jesus and 



formulated and decided upon the charges on which it 
would convict at the formal meeting at dawn, about 
five o'clock. For the Jewish law forbade a trial by 
night— Luke 22:66-71. 

(3) The formal trial before the Sanhedrin at dawn 
was merely a ceremony— a farce. The determination 
to kill Jesus having been reached long before his arrest, 
the matter of his condemnation was rushed through 
for two reasons, (a) The great Jews feared the common 
people would defend Jesus against their trumped 
up charges, which were the only ones even they could 
formulate, (b) The Passover was at hand and they 
wanted him killed before it. Ah! how little did they 
realize that they were being permitted of God to exercise 
the evil desires of their hearts and thus to fulfil 
types and prophecies to the very day. 

A lesson on this for God's people is, that it is not 
sufficient that we go through a form or ceremony of 
justice; nor is it sufficient that we know in advance that 
we cannot circumvent the divine plan or hinder its 
fulfilment. Many will find in the day of reckoning 
and revealing, that they have served God's purposes 
without honor or profit— in a manner that brought upon 
them condemnation instead of approval. Even the 
great Adversary Satan will ultimately find (but not in 
any degree to his credit or blessing) that all his opposition 
to God, to Christ, and to "the brethren," has been 
overruled by divine wisdom and power for good, by 
him who "maketh the wrath of man to praise him." 

It is all-important then, that we have more than 
forms of justice, of righteousness; we must have the 
spirit of righteousness, a love of righteousness,— a sincere 
desire to know and to do God's will, else like as 
the Jews condemned and killed the Just One we might 
with forms of justice condemn and injure his "brethren." 
And to have the desirable condition of love for 
God and for righteousness implies a full consecration 
of heart to the Lord. Thus every examination of the 
subject brings us back to the fact that full consecration 
to the Lord, full self-surrender to his will as revealed 
in his Word, is the only proper and only safe course for 
any to pursue if they would hope to hear the Master's 
words, "Well done good and faithful servant, enter 
thou into the joys of thy Lord." 

It was during the interim between the 3 A.M. examination 
and the 5 A.M. formal conviction of our 
Lord by his influential enemies, that he was subjected 
for two hours to the mockery and insults described by 
three of the Evangelists. (Matt. 26:67,68; Mark 14:65; 
Luke 22:63-65.) These insults were committed 
by the "servants" and well illustrate the fact that low 
minds delight in the misfortunes of those whom they 
realize to be their superiors. These servants manifested 
the same spirit as their masters— the chief priests 
and Pharisees— their methods were ruder because they 
were more ignorant and coarse. The spirit of Christ, 



the spirit of love, on the contrary, whether in the educated 
or in the ignorant, is a spirit of love, of gentleness, 
of sympathy, of kindness. By their fruits both spirits 
may be known. "If any man have not the spirit of 
Christ he is none of his." 



R2470 : page 121 

THE "GOOD CONFESSION" BEFORE PILATE. 

--MAY 28. -JOHN 18:28-40; 1 TIM. 6:13.- 

"I find no fault in him."— John 19:4. 

PILATE, the Roman governor of Judea, had in 

his hands the power of life and death. The 

Jewish Sanhedrin was permitted to govern the country 

in a religious way, according to Jewish law and custom, 

but had no power to order public execution. Apparently 

they did have the power to stone to death for 

blasphemy (the charge on which they condemned Jesus) 

as in the case of Stephen (Acts 7:58); and hence 

we may suppose that they had such a power in respect 

to Jesus, but failed to exercise it lest the people should 

resent the injustice. Moreover, quite possibly they 

realized the wide influence already attained by his 

teachings, and desired to make his execution as public 

and as disgraceful as possible— to the intent that his 

followers might be chagrined and humiliated, as well 

as himself, because few would care to confess themselves 

disciples of one who had been publicly executed 

as a criminal,— condemned by both civil and ecclesiastical 

judges. Thus they hoped to nip in the bud the 

new system of religious teaching, which, if it continued, 

would evidently entirely subvert their own influence 

with the people. Thus unwittingly these evil-doers 

were carrying out the very arrangements foreordained of 

God— and doing so in the full exercise of their own evil 

volition. 

As already noted, the formal condemnation of our 
Lord before the Jewish Sanhedrin occurred at dawn, 
five to six o'clock, and immediately they hurried him 
to Pilate's judgment hall, intent on getting him into 
the hands of the Roman soldiers for execution at the 
earliest possible moment, so that the multitudes might 
realize his case as beyond the power of their intervention. 
Nor had the Jewish rulers any particular reason 
to suspect that Pilate would hesitate at all to order an 
execution. Pilate seems to have had a reputation for 
cruelty. Philo speaks of "his corruption, his acts of 
insolence, his habit of insulting the people, his cruelty, 
his continual murders of people untried and uncondemned, 
and his never-ending and most grievous inhumanity 
at all times— a man of most ferocious passions, 



R2470 : page 122 

very merciless as well as very obstinate." Apparently 
the rulers of the Jews had frequent cause to 
appeal to Pilate to be merciful, and generally without 
effect; they seem to have taken for granted that if any 
prisoner were brought to him with a request for execution 

R2471 :page 122 

he would take pleasure in complying. 

We are reminded of our Lord's words to the Pharisees, 
"Ye outwardly appear righteous unto men, but 
within ye are full of hypocrisy and iniquity," when 
we read that these very persons who murderously were 
scheming for the destruction of the Just One would not 
enter into Pilate's judgment hall, "lest they should be 
defiled," and thus be hindered from celebrating the 
Passover. How wretchedly inconsistent and hypocritical 
they were! They feared that Pilate's judgment hall, 
being under jurisdiction of the Gentiles, might have in 
it some leaven (a symbol of sin), and realized not that 
the real leaven of sin had permeated and thoroughly 
saturated their own hearts— anger, malice, hatred, envy, 
strife. 

What a lesson the Lord's people have here: for we 
are to remember that these heart-corrupted conspirators 
were the professed holiness people of their day and 
church. While it is not in the power of any to-day to 
crucify the Lord and put him to an open shame, it is 
within our power to put to shame, to crucify, his "brethren" 
—the members of his body. And we fear that 
some to-day are doing this with as much self-deception 
as was exercised by these chief priests and Pharisees 
who secured our Lord's crucifixion. True, the Pharisees 
knew not what they did, as Peter says, "I wot that 
through ignorance ye did it, as did also your rulers." 
(Acts 3:17.) And so likewise to-day any who put to 
shame the members of "the body of Christ" probably are 
ignorant of what they do. Nevertheless they put themselves 
under the Lord's sentence, "It were better that 
a mill-stone were hanged about his neck, and he cast 
into the sea." (Luke 17:2.) Let us each therefore beware, 
and keep the heart, out of which are the issues 
of life. 

Had the hearts of those Pharisees been in proper condition, 
full of love of righteousness and truth, and appreciative 
of whatsoever things are true, whatsoever 
things are honest, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever 
things are pure, whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever 
things are of good report, they could not have 
made the mistake of rejecting and crucifying the Lamb 
of God. Similarly, those who have the spirit of love 
for the brethren will be hindered from becoming in 
any manner their persecutors. Only such can properly 



eat of the antitypical Passover. 

The Roman governor, knowing of the peculiar custom 
of the Jews in respect to their Passover time, accommodated 
himself to their theory and had his chair of state 
brought outside the judgment hall to what was known as 
the Place of the Pavement, an elevated platform. Jesus 
was called up on this platform for examination, 
while the Jews standing outside of the unhallowed 
ground made known to Pilate their accusations. They 
evidently expected that the mere presentation of Jesus 
as a prisoner for crucifixion would be sufficient. Apparently 
they had not even expected to be required to 
make an accusation; hence their answer, "If he were 
not a malefactor [evil-doer] we would not have delivered 
him up unto thee." Some have suggested, in harmony 
with the character of Pilate and his probable disrespect 
for the Pharisees, that his question rather was, "What 
accusation do you bring against him?" as tho he 
would give the implication that Jesus rather had ground 
for making accusation against the Pharisees— which of 
course was the case. The hardened Roman no doubt 
had become an expert reader of human character, and 
could readily see that there were no criminal features 
in our Lord's countenance, and many in those of his 
accusers. 

To the surprise of the priests and Pharisees, Pilate 
turned Jesus over again to them, saying in substance, 
This is some petty religious quarrel with which I care 
to have nothing to do; take the prisoner and do with 
him according to your own laws and customs— imprisoning 
him, or causing him to be beaten, or whatever 
you may think proper, according to your law. But, 
thirsting for our Lord's death, his persecutors revealed 
their real condition of heart, saying, "It is not lawful 
for us to put any man to death." 

Hard, cruel, unmerciful tho he was, Pilate realized 
the true situation— that the guilty were pursuing the 
innocent to death. That he might have the better opportunity 
for thinking quietly, and also for hearing 
what Jesus would say in self-defence, Pilate left the 
Jews and called Jesus unto him into the judgment hall, 
where they conversed. There must have been something 
very striking in our Lord's personal appearance 
to have caused Pilate to consider for a moment the rejection 
of the demands of the Jewish Court or Sanhedrin, 
for altho he had full power of life and death it 
was incumbent upon him, as his first duty, to preserve 
the peace and tranquility of his dominion; and this implied 
that in a general way at least he must keep on 
the popular side, especially when the popular side embraced 
the chief men of the province, and particularly 
when those chief men desired the execution of one 
whom they denounced as a disturber of the peace. Pilate's 
position was in many respects a delicate one: he 
must please the government at Rome, and he must 
avoid unnecessary disputes with the local authorities, 



who in the present instance were evidently so determined 
that they would have created a general disturbance 

R2471 :page 123 

rather than that their evil scheme should come 
to naught. The fact is that six years later these people 
did send to the Roman Emperor such complaints 
against Pilate as secured his removal. 

Alone with Jesus, Pilate's question was, "Art thou 
King of the Jews?" The Jews had not made such a 
charge against Jesus; indeed, they were far from wishing 
to acknowledge the Galilean as King of the Jews, 
or as being thus recognized by any number; they had 
thus far merely charged that Jesus was an evil-doer, an 
insurrectionist, whose death was necessary to the peace 
of the nation. It would seem therefore that Pilate had 
previously heard from some quarter about the riding 
of Jesus on the ass, and as being hailed by the people 
as the Son of David a few days previously. That this 
was not part of the accusation of the Jews seems evident 
from our Lord's reply to Pilate, "Sayest thou this 
thing of thyself, or did others tell it thee of me?" Are 
you an interested inquirer after the truth on this subject, 
or are you merely calling up a matter of which 
you have heard? Pilate's reply, "Am I a Jew?" was 
tantamount to saying, What do I know about your Jewish 
hopes and expectations? I am the Roman governor, 
and if you are a king it is your own nation and its 
chief representatives that have delivered you to me. 
What have you done, if you are their king, that makes 
your subjects thus disloyal to you? Apparently there 
is no great danger of your exercising any power against 
the Roman empire; you are meek, gentle, lowly, unresisting 
yourself, and your people are crying out against 
you. King of the Jews, explain this peculiar situation! 

Then Jesus explained that his Kingdom is not of 
this order of things, otherwise he would have servants 
to fight and to defend him, and would not be as at present, 
at the mercy of his enemies; and that his kingdom 
had not yet commenced. Astonished, and perhaps 
with some degree of sympathy for a great ruler under 
such humiliating conditions, Pilate asks, Do you then 
claim that you are a king? Our Lord answers, "Thou 
sayest," that is, Your statement is correct; I am a King. 
"To this end was I born, and for this cause came I into 
the world, that I might bear witness unto the truth. 
Everyone that is of the truth heareth my voice." 

This was the good confession which our Lord witnessed 
before Pontius Pilate, to which the Apostle refers. 
(1 Tim. 6:13.) He confessed his kingship and 
its divine authority. We are not to wonder that Pilate 
was incredulous of our Lord's claims to kingship, and 
that he probably thought him a fanatic. We are rather 
to remember that remarkably few of those who have 
heard of Jesus have recognized the truth of this statement 



that he is a King. How few, even amongst professed 
Christians, recognize the kingly office of our 
Lord! Many who realize that Jesus was indeed the 
Man of Sorrows, acquainted with grief, and some who 
realize that he died for our sins, have never yet seen 
that he purchased not only man but the empire originally 
given to the first Adam. Many can realize our 
Lord in the attitude of Priest who fail to realize that 
he is also to be a King, and that throughout the Millennial 
age he will be a Priest upon his throne, "after 
the order of Melchizedec," his Church and Bride being 
associated with him and sharing in both his priestly 
and his kingly offices. 

The priestly office speaks mercy, forgiveness and 
grace to help; but the kingly office is no less essential 
to the world's salvation— men must be delivered from 
the bondage of sin and death— and must be ruled with 
the iron rod in order to develop them and fit them for 
life everlasting; and all of this work belongs to him 
who redeemed us with his own precious blood. It is 
well that we remember, too, that a very large proportion 
of our Lord's parables related to the Kingdom in 
its various stages— now embryotic, by and by to be set 
up with full power and authority to overthrow evil and 
to bring in everlasting righteousness. 

This Kingdom is to be a Kingdom of truth, of 
righteousness and of love, working well for its subjects, 
and our Lord's mission at the first advent was to lay 
the foundation for that Kingdom by witnessing to the 
truth— the truth that God is both just and loving, and 
is willing to receive back into harmony with himself all 
who love truth and righteousness. It was our Lord's faithfulness 
to the truth that brought upon him the opposition 
of those who were blinded by the Adversary, hence his 
statement that he came to bear witness to the truth is a 
brief statement of his mission. It was his witness to 
the truth that cost him his life, and it was the giving 

R2472 : page 123 

of his life in defence of the truth that constituted the 
redemption price. Similarly all of the Lord's followers 
are to bear witness to the truth— the truth in respect to 
God's character and plan— the features of that plan accomplished 
at the first advent in the redemption of the 
world, and the features of that plan yet to be accomplished 
in the second advent, in the deliverance of the 
world from the bondage of sin and corruption. It is such 
witness to the truth that is to cost all the true followers 
of Jesus their lives in presenting themselves living sacrifices, 
holy and acceptable to God through Christ Jesus. 
Let each one who hopes to be a joint-heir with the Prince 
of Life in the Kingdom witness to the truth— a good 
confession respecting the Kingdom, its foundation and 
ultimate superstructure in glory. 
A very short discourse on such a text was quite 



sufficient for Pilate. He had no desire to enter into a 
theological discussion, which could only reflect unfavorably 
upon his own past record. He broke off the 
conversation suddenly, saying, "What is truth?"— as 

R2472:page 124 

tho he would say, Who is truthful? Where is absolute 
justice to be found, absolute truth, absolute probity? 
And without waiting for an answer he left Jesus in the 
judgment hall, went forth to the Place of the Pavement, 
and addressed the waiting Sanhedrin and their 
multitude of servants and hangers-on, brought with 
them to give evidence of popular clamor. 

Pilate announced his decision, "I find in him no 
fault at all." Then the Jews, fearing that their prey 
was about to escape, began to bethink themselves of 
charges to be formulated. They did not mention the 
charge on which they themselves had convicted Jesus, 
falsely, namely, blasphemy; for this would have been 
no crime whatever in the eyes of the Roman governor. 
Instead, they made three charges, viz., (1) sedition- 
agitation of the people against the existing order of 
things; (2) that he interfered with the collection of 
taxes, teaching the people that it was improper to pay 
tribute-money to a foreign power; and (3) that he made 
claims of being a king.— Luke 23:2. 

But now learning that Jesus' home and principal 
ministry was in Galilee, Pilate thought to relieve himself 
by referring the entire matter to Herod, who had 
charge of the province of Galilee, and who was then at 
Jerusalem, at a palace not far distant. This was the 
Herod who had caused the death of John the Baptist. 
Luke tells us (23:8) that Herod was very glad to see 
Jesus, for having heard much respecting him he hoped 
also to see some miracle performed by him. Herod 
questioned our Lord with many words, but received no 
response whatever, while the chief priests and scribes 
grew the more vehement in their accusations, seeing that 
Jesus denied nothing that they said, and that thus they 
were not called upon for proofs. 

Herod no doubt was piqued as well as disappointed 
by our Lord's conduct, and unable to gain entertainment 
from him as expected, he and his guard took sport 
in mocking the Redeemer's claims of dignity and 
kingship. 

But with a desire to return Pilate's compliment, 
and perhaps with some little touch of remorse of conscience 
in respect to the beheading of John the Baptist, 
Herod disposed of his responsibilities in the case by 
returning our Lord to Pilate. It was after our Lord's 
return to Pilate's judgment hall that the latter, apparently 
as a final effort to appease the Jews, to preserve 
the peace of the country, and yet to let go one whom 
he clearly discerned to be innocent, announced that in 
view of the clamor against Jesus he would cause him 



to be scourged, altho he found no fault in him. He 
evidently hoped that by the infliction of the scourging 
(whipping) and incidental humiliation, that the spirit 
of malice on the part of the accusers would be satisfied, 
and that they would peaceably agree to his release. 
Apparently the scourging was done in some interior 
apartment by the Roman soldiers; and probably with 
the full consent of Pilate a cast-off royal robe and a crown 
of thorns were put upon our Lord. Evidently this 
proceeding would furnish amusement to the unsympathetic 
soldiery, and so much shame and contempt cast 
upon our Lord might at least satisfy his persecutors, if 
it did not awaken sympathy. 

Acting in harmony with this thought, Pilate came 
again before the Jews, and caused our Lord to be led 
forth, weak, exhausted and miserable-looking, from the 
trying experiences of the night, supplemented by the 
painful and weakening influence of the scourging just 
received. With his crown of thorns and soiled purple 
robe he must have been a pitiable sight indeed, and 
yet the noble outlines of his perfect manhood must still 
have been striking, and no doubt suggested the words 
of Pilate which have echoed down the centuries since, 
"Behold the man!" (John 19:5.) Pilate evidently 
was impressed with our Lord's personality; never before 
had he seen so splendid a specimen of the human 
race. He was such an one as any people might have 
been glad to honor as their king. He evidently hoped 
that some impression would be made upon the clamoring 
throng which accused Jesus. But he was mistaken; 
they clamored so much the more, "Crucify him! Crucify 
him!" Meantime Pilate's wife had heard of the 
trial and had sent Pilate word respecting her dream, 
and advice that he have no part in doing injury to this 
just person.— Matt. 27:19. 

Pilate immediately said to the Jews, Take him and 
crucify him, if that is your law. But altho thus assured 
that the Roman governor would not interfere in 
the matter, the Pharisees hesitated about accepting the 
proposition; they much preferred that the crucifixion 
should be in the hands of the Roman governor and his 
soldiers, lest the friends of Jesus and the multitudes 
who had been healed and taught by him should come 
to his assistance and overpower them; hence they 
answered Pilate that according to their law Jesus should 
die, because he made himself the Son of God. They 
perverted the truth in their endeavor to uphold their 
course, for the Law did not prescribe death as a penalty 
for the claim of being the Son of God. Had our Lord 
claimed to be the Father he would have come under the 
terms of the death penalty for blasphemy, but there 
was no such penalty, nor was it blasphemy, to call himself, 
as he did, the Son of God. 

When Pilate heard of this he was the more alarmed. 
The features of Jesus were impressive of themselves, 
but if one possessing such features made the claim of 



relationship to God there certainly was some ground 
for fear. Pilate still withstood the Jewish clamor, and 
sought to release our Lord. Then the Jews, as a last 

R2472 : page 125 

resort, threatened Pilate by implication, crying out, "If 

thou let this man go thou art not Caesar's friend: whosoever 

maketh himself a king speaketh against Caesar." 

They thus intimated that if Pilate frustrated their designs, 

and refused to crucify Jesus as they demanded, 

they would report him to Caesar as an enemy of his empire, 

a succorer of seditious persons, a fosterer of rival 

kings in the empire. Pilate could not stand against 

this argument, and washed his hands in the presence 

of the multitude, saying by this act, as well as in words, 

"I am innocent of the blood of this just person; see ye 

to it." And when the Jews cried out, "His blood be 

upon us and upon our children," Pilate delivered him 

to be crucified.-Matt. 27:24,25. 

We are not of those who condemn Pilate; he was 
a servant of the empire, charged with doing everything 
reasonable to preserve peace in his dominions, and only 
a clearly enlightened and fully consecrated saint could 
have been expected to do more than Pilate did for the 
release of Jesus. Our Lord in no sense intimated guilt 
on the part of Pilate. The responsibility was assumed 
by the Jews, and surely its penalty has rested heavily 
upon them and upon their children for the past eighteen 
centuries, and even yet their cup of anguish is not filled 
to the full. "Jacob's trouble" will be no unimportant 
one in the great time of trouble that is just approaching; 
but we thank God on their behalf that deliverance 
is nigh for them, as well as for all others of the groaning 
creation. How blessed the thought that when they shall 
look upon him whom they pierced, and wail because of 
him, it will not be with tears of hopeless sorrow; for 
the Lord "shall pour upon them the spirit of grace and 
of supplication, and they shall mourn for him as one 
mourneth for his first-born."— Zech. 12:10. 



R2473 : page 125 

"HE WAS NUMBERED WITH THE TRANSGRESSORS." 

-JUNE 4.-JOHN 19:17-30.- 

"The Son of God, who loved me and gave himself for me."— Gal. 2:20. 

CRUCIFIXION was the horrible method of execution 
in olden times for the vilest of criminals 
—its severity being intended to intimidate and deter 
evil-doers, rather than as a gratification of cruel sentiments. 
Farrar says of it:— 



"Death by crucifixion seems to include all that 
pain and death can have of the horrible and ghastly- 
dizziness, cramp, thirst, starvation, sleeplessness, publicity 
of shame, long continuance of torment, horror of 
anticipation, mortification of untended wounds— all 
intensified just up to the point at which they can be endured 
at all, but all stopping just short of the point 
which would give to the sufferer the relief of unconsciousness. 
Such was the death to which Christ was 
doomed." 

As already noted, the envious and murderous chief 
priests and doctors of Judaism desired just such a public 
denunciation of the great Teacher who so fearlessly 
had exposed their hypocrisies and inconsistencies, and 
who was fast making an impression upon the common 
people. For them to have stoned him to death as a 
blasphemer they probably feared would leave him a 
martyr in the eyes of many, while to have him publicly 
executed as a criminal, sentenced by the Sanhedrin 
and executed by the highest civil power in the 
world, would, they hoped, brand Jesus, his teachings 
and his followers, forever with infamy. We may imagine, 
therefore, how their evil hearts exulted, when finally 
they had coerced Pilate into signing the warrant for 
the execution of Jesus. 

According to Mark's account (15:25) the death-warrant 
was signed by Pilate about nine o'clock in the 
morning— the trial of Jesus, and Pilate's various attempts 
to secure his release from his enemies, having 
occupied three hours. At once they started, the two 
robbers bearing their crosses, and Jesus bearing his 
cross, taking the place of Barrabas, who was to have 
been executed, but who was released. It was the custom 
in olden times to compel the convicts to bear the 
instruments of their own torture. Nor were the crosses 
so large and heavy as they are generally illustrated in 
modern paintings. On the contrary, the evidence is 
that the feet of the crucified were usually only twelve 
to eighteen inches from the ground. Altho small, these 
crosses constituted a good burden for a reasonably 
strong man; but our Lord, after passing through his 
Gethsemane experiences and the night of buffeting and 
scourging, and his further scourging by Pilate's orders, 
was sick, exhausted, weak, sore. Apparently even the 
hardened soldiers took pity upon him, and meeting 
Simon the Cyrenian on the way, they compelled him 
to relieve Jesus. 

We know nothing respecting Simon, except that 
Mark relates that he was the father of Alexander and 
Rufus, which gives the suggestion that these, his two 
sons, may subsequently have become the followers of 
Jesus and well known amongst the disciples. In any 
event Simon himself enjoyed a great privilege which 
thousands since have almost envied. How the apostles, 
Peter, James and John and others, must have regretted 
the fearfulness of heart which kept them all at 



a distance, and hindered them from proffering their aid 
to the Master in his trying hour! John, we know, was 
not far off; probably the others were near also; but what 
an opportunity they missed! 

And very similar opportunities are still with us 
all— opportunities to serve the Christ— opportunities 
for serving the members of the body of Christ. As 
everyone who follows the Master's footsteps must needs 
have some Gethsemane experiences, so also each must 
have a taste at least of all the Master's experiences. 
Let us not forget, then, to look about us for opportunities 
for serving the "brethren," the "little ones," the 

R2473 : page 126 

members of the body of Christ. Let each be careful 
not to add to the reproaches that must fall upon all the 
followers of the Lamb, but on the contrary to offer 
words of sympathy, and to help bear each other's 
crosses, difficulties and trials by the way. Thus can 
we best show to our Lord and Head how we would 
have appreciated the opportunity of helping him bear 
his cross on the way to Calvary. 

The place of crucifixion was called Golgotha, the 
Hebrew word signifying a skull, the Latin name for a 
skull being Calvary. This name was given to the locality 
probably because the general contour of the hill, 
which was just outside of Jerusalem, closely resembles 
a skull when viewed at a distance. It was on the way 
to this place, Golgotha, Calvary, that some of the charitable 
women of Jerusalem, according to their general 
custom, offered the condemned ones sour wine mixed 
with bitter myrrh— a draught which had a tendency to 
stupefy the nerves, thus rendering the execution the 
less agonizing. The two robbers quite probably drank 
of the potion, but Mark (15:23) declares that our 
Lord refused it— having learned that his experiences 
were the Father's will, he would do nothing whatever 
to hinder himself from receiving them to the full. 

Probably Mary, the mother of Jesus, Mary Magdalene, 
Mary the mother of James the Less and of 
Joses, the mother of James and John, and Salome, 
the wife of Cleophas (Matt. 27:56; Mark 15:40) 
and others of the friends of Jesus, by this time 
gained courage and mingled with the women who offered 
the wine and myrrh, so that Luke says, "There 
followed him a great company of people, and of women, 
which also bewailed and lamented him. But Jesus 
turning unto them said, Daughters of Jerusalem, weep 
not for me, but weep for yourselves and for your children." 
-Luke 23:27,28. 

Thus, and with other words recorded, our Lord 
foreshadowed the great time of trouble coming upon the 
Jewish nation. By the expression, "If they do these 
things in a green tree, what shall be done in the dry?" 
he implies that, altho the nation of Israel had been 



given up only five days previously, when he exclaimed, 
"Your house is left unto you desolate," if their rulers 
could sanction such injustice and lawlessness while their 
greenness, freshness and religious vitality remained, 
what might be expected in the future, after the religious 
vitality had dried out and the nation as a whole had 
become ready for the great "burning" of their day of 
trouble, which was designed to, and had been prophesied 
should, utterly consume their polity. And how 
literally our Lord's prophecy was fulfilled: Josephus, 
without a thought of corroborating this testimony, tells 
us with explicitness of detail of the terrible sufferings 
which came upon the women and children during the 
great time of trouble which ended with the destruction 
of Jerusalem, A.D. 70. 

When we reflect upon the prophecy, "He was 
numbered with the transgressors" (Isa. 53:12), and 
then consider the terrible persistency with which the 
leading Jews pursued the dear Redeemer to secure his 
execution, it furnishes us fresh evidence of divine foreknowledge 
which, without interfering with the free 
moral agency of any man, is nevertheless working all 
things according to the counsel of God's will. We see 
afresh how God causes the wrath of man to praise him, 
and to testify to his wisdom and foreknowledge. 

It was customary to have four soldiers attend each 
prisoner to execution; foremost went one who bore a 
white board on which was written the crime for which 
the prisoner was to be executed, and which was fastened 
above his head on the cross; then followed three 
soldiers with the hammer and nails, etc., and these all 
were under the command of a captain or centurion. 
The board placed above Jesus, on the cross, declared 
him to be the King of the Jews, and was written in 
three languages— in Hebrew, the language of the country, 
in Greek, because it was the language of the visitors 
and of the educated from all quarters, and in Latin, 
because it was the language of the empire and of the 
soldiers. There is a slight difference in the statements 
of the different Evangelists respecting the words used 
on this tablet, which may be accounted for by supposing 
that the words differed slightly in the different languages, 
and that the Evangelists quoted from the different 
originals. 

Little did Pilate comprehend the great truth which 
he set before the world in the words, "Jesus of Nazareth, 
the King of the Jews." Few yet realize the truth 
of this statement that Jesus is a King; comparatively 
few have yet rendered him allegiance, bowing the knee 
of their hearts in sincerity and truth: and yet so surely 
as the Lord has spoken it, the time is coming when 
every knee shall bow and every tongue shall confess 
him Lord, Master, King, to the glory of God the Father. 
And to this end it shall come to pass that after full 
knowledge of the matter has been given to all, he that 
will not obey this Prophet shall be cut off from among 



the people in the Second Death. (Acts 3:23.) He was 
indeed rejected of the Jews, but nevertheless the full 
elect number for the twelve tribes of Israelites indeed 
shall yet be found, who, as the Seed of Abraham, shall 
accept Messiah as King and, faithfully serving him in the 
present life, and laying down their lives in his service 
and for the brethren, shall be accepted of him as joint-heirs 
in his Kingdom. Since there were not enough of the 
natural Israelites to complete these twelve tribes of Israelites 
indeed, God is completing the number by 
adoptions from amongst the Gentiles during the past 

R2473 : page 127 

eighteen centuries. Ultimately the entire number shall 
be completed.— Rev. 7:4-8. 

The Jewish Doctors of Divinity were willing enough 
to have Jesus condemned as the King of the Jews, but 
were quite unwilling to have this sentence publicly recorded, 
and thus to imply that they had so feared his 
claim and influence as to seek his death. Pilate's refusal 

R2474 : page 127 

to amend the charge was a just one; if there was 
no merit in the claim, why should they have feared 
him, and why should he have been crucified? If there 
was enough merit in the claim to lead to his crucifixion, 
the matter should be plainly stated. 

The division of the spoil was customary at every 
crucifixion, and gave evidence of the indifference and 
hard-heartedness of the soldiers in the presence of suffering. 
The raiment divided consisted of headdress, 
outer robe, girdle and sandals; the garment here called 
a "coat" and "vesture" was an undergarment which 
reached from the neck to the feet. It was evidently of 
fine quality and texture, as indicated by the fact that 
it was woven throughout, seamless. The casting of 
lots for this robe marked the fulfilment of a prophecy 
to which John calls attention. (Psa. 22:18.) The 
seamless robe appears to symbolize the righteousness 
of Christ, which can be appropriated only as a whole; 
it is of one piece, and may not be marred. Whoever 
may get it, gets a most valuable robe, and whoever may 
fail to get it, fails to obtain the righteousness which is 
of God in Christ. But not by lot or accident or chance 
does this robe come to the Lord's people. As the scriptures 
clearly point out, it is obtained only through the 
exercise of faith, and held only by the obedience of 
faith. We might perhaps consider it a symbol of the 
wedding-garment which falls to the lot of one class only, 
a little flock, who through faith and perseverance 
shall inherit the Kingdom as members of the body of 
Christ, covered by his seamless and spotless robe of 
righteousness. 

The Apostle John had grown bolder as the day advanced, 



and while our Lord was crucified he drew near 

and was within speaking distance— quite possibly encouraged 

by seeing "the wife of Cleophas," who is supposed 

to have been a relative. It was a sorrowful gathering 

for these whose hearts went out with sympathy 

for the Master whom they loved but were powerless to 

comfort or relieve. They were weeping and sorrowing 

while others jeered and taunted, saying, "If thou be 

Messiah, come down from the cross"— thinking doubtless 

that our Lord's crucifixion by his enemies was the 

best possible proof that his claim to Messiahship was a 

fraudulent one,— proving that he was an impostor. 

With the members of the body of Christ it has 
been true at times also that the Father has permitted 
experiences to come to them in such manner as might 
imply that they did not have his favor, and were really 
impostors. But as the true disciples had a heart-union 
with the Lord, which outward circumstances and 
misfortunes could not break, a love which adversity 
could not chill, so with all his "brethren," those who 
are in heart-harmony, in oneness of spirit, will be found 
faithful under the most trying circumstances and adversities, 
because they have one spirit, a spirit of love 
for the brethren, by which they are enabled to identify 
one another as members of the one body. 

How it gives us an insight into our Lord's sympathetic 
nature, to find him thinking in the interest of 
others at the very time when he himself is overwhelmed 
in trouble! His own agony did not hinder him from 
thinking of his mother, and making provision for her 
comfort, commending her to the care of the loving disciple 
John. We thus see exemplified in the Master the 
teaching of the Scriptures that each should seek to 
make provision for his own dependent ones and, as the 
Apostle says, "If any provide not for his own, and especially 
for those of his own house, he hath denied the 
faith and is worse than an unbeliever." (1 Tim. 5:8.) 
"The faith" includes thoughts of love, sympathy, interest 
and care for others, especially for them of the household 
of faith. We note the choice of John: it was 
doubtless because, first of all, of his loving tender disposition; 
secondly, his zeal for the Lord and the truth, 
and thirdly, his courage in pressing near to be with his 
dying Master in his closing hours, at the risk of his own 
life. Let us note these characteristics, as being those 
which the Lord approves, that noting them we may 
cultivate them in ourselves, and be granted special opportunities 
for service by this same Master. 

It was about the close of our Lord's agony that he 
said, "I thirst," and this gave opportunity for the fulfilment 
of the prophecy which declared, "They gave 
me vinegar to drink." (Psa. 69:21.) This was not 
the ordinary vinegar, but more properly sour wine, the 
common, cheap drink of the soldiers. The sponge 
filled with the sour wine, and reached up to our Lord's 
mouth on a hyssop branch, served to moisten his lips 



and tongue, and was evidently intended as an act of 
kindness, mercy. 

The different accounts give altogether what are 
known as "The seven words on the cross." 

The first word from the cross: "Father, forgive 
them; they know not what they do." (Luke 23:34.) 
While these words undoubtedly represent truly our 
Lord's sentiments as respected his enemies, nevertheless 
it is proper here to remark that the oldest Greek 
MSS. do not contain these words. 

The second word from the cross: Our Lord's message 
to the robber, "Verily I say to thee to-day,— Thou 
shalt be with me in Paradise."— Luke 23:43. 

R2474 : page 128 

The third word from the cross: "Woman, behold 
thy son!. ..Behold thy mother!" 

The fourth word from the cross: "My God! my God! 
Why hast thou forsaken me?" (Mark 15:34.) Of this 
expression a noted theologian has said, "In the entire 
Bible there is no other sentence so difficult to explain." 
Yet the meaning of this, and the reason for it, are very 
easily seen when once we have the correct view of the 
ransom. From this standpoint we see that the Logos 
became a man, "was made flesh," in order that he by 
the grace of God might taste death for every man. 
(Heb. 2:9.) We see also that the death penalty upon 
father Adam was the one which Jesus must experience 
in order to the satisfaction of Justice and the release of 
Adam and those who came under condemnation in and 
through Adam. As the penalty against Adam was 
death in the fullest and most complete sense, so Christ 
died for our sins, suffering the Just for the unjust, that 
he might release us from the death penalty and make 
possible a resurrection of the dead. As the penalty 
against Adam included his isolation from the Father as 
a condemned rebel, so it was necessary that our Lord 
Jesus, in taking Adam's place, should experience (if 
only for a short time) the full meaning of a sinner's 
separation from God. 

Very mercifully, the Father did not permit this 
feature of Adam's penalty to rest upon our Redeemer 
throughout the entire period of his sacrificial ministry, 
but only at its very close. It was the fact of his communion 
with the Father that permitted Jesus to pass 
through all the trying experiences of that day and the 
preceding night with such great courage, but now, when 
the Father's sustaining grace and fellowship and communion 
of spirit with him were withdrawn, and our 
Redeemer, with all his fine sensibilities, was utterly 
bereft of solace from his dearest friend, it led his breaking 
heart to cry out these words of anguish. Evidently 
it had been hidden from him up to this time that he 
must suffer this phase of the punishment of Adam's 
transgression. 



The fifth word from the cross: "I thirst," we have 
already considered. 

The sixth word from the cross: "It is finished," 
suggests to us that our Lord's earthly mission had been 
accomplished. He came to die, to redeem the death-condemned 
race of Adam, to purchase it with his own 
precious blood, his life. He had consecrated himself 
to this work in harmony with the Father's plan, and 
with his dying breath, expiring, he could say that he 
had finished the work which the Father had given him 
to do. How it rejoices us to know that our dear Redeemer 
did complete the work, that he did not resent 
the taunts of those who said, "If thou be Messiah, 
come down from the cross;" "Save thyself!" We rejoice 
to think that since the great sacrifice has been 
finished (and especially in view of the fact that the 
Heavenly Father subsequently declared that it was 
finished acceptably), we may realize that there is now, 
therefore, no condemnation to them that are in Christ 
Jesus.— Rom. 8:1. 

But altho the sin-offering was finished eighteen 
hundred years ago by the sacrifice of our Lord, the 
Lamb of God, there is another part that is not yet finished; 
but in harmony with the divine plan our Lord 
is waiting for the Church, which is his body, to "fill 
up that which is behind of the afflictions of Christ." 
(Col. 1:24.) And looking all about us, in the light of 
the Lord's Word, we may say that this work is almost 
finished too. Very soon the last member of the body 
of Christ will have suffered with the Head for righteousness' 
sake: then the entire work of sacrifice apportioned 
for this Gospel age, or Day of Atonement, will be ended, 
and the Millennial age of glory and blessing, ruling 
and uplifting, will begin; ushering in for the world 
of mankind the great blessing, the purchase-price of 
which was finished at Calvary. Let each dear follower in 
the Master's footsteps keep patiently and perseveringly 
on in the way of self-denial until his course shall be 
finished— until the Master shall say, It is enough; 
"Well done, good and faithful servant. Thou has 
been faithful over a few things; I will make thee ruler 
over many things: enter thou into the joy of thy Lord." 
-Matt. 25:21. 

The seventh word from the cross: "Father, into 
thy hands I commend my spirit." (Luke 23:46.) 
These our Lord's last words were a quotation from the 
Scriptures. (Psa. 31:5.) In other words, it had already 
been declared of him that thus he would commend 
himself to the Father's grace and truth. Our 
Lord was finishing laying down his human life a ransom 

R2475 : page 128 

for many sinners, but the Father had promised him 
a new life on a higher plane, as a reward for his faith, 
obedience and sacrifice. This new life, or life as a "new 



creature" was reckoned as begun at the time of our 
Lord's baptism when he received the holy Spirit; this 
new life was reckoned as continuing and growing during 
the years of his ministry while he was daily dying 
according to the flesh; the outward man was perishing, 
but the inward new creature was being renewed day by 
day. Now the outward man was about to cease entirely 
—fully surrendered, the sacrifice finished. 

Our Lord's interest in and hope for a future life 
looked forward, in harmony with the Father's promise, 
to the new or resurrection life; the new mind or spirit 
reckoned as begun at the moment of his baptism and 
consecration, having the divine promise of being perfected 
in a resurrection, in a spirit-body suitable for and 
in harmony with the new mind, the new will. But this 
change could not take place instantly: the divine law 
had arranged that not until the third day could he be 
quickened as the new creature of spiritual body. He 
must take this by faith; no one had ever passed this 
way before: yet with full confidence our dear Redeemer 
looked up to the Father, and full of faith declared that 
he committed all of life and all of these blessed hopes 
for the future to the Father's love and to the Father's 
power,— to be provided in harmony with the Father's 
plan and Word. And so must we, as followers in our 
Master's footsteps, look forward with faith, and in our 
dying hour commit all our interests to the keeping of 
him who has manifested his love for us, not only in 
the gift of his Son as our Redeemer, but all our journey 
through,— in his providential care, as well as in the exceeding 
great and precious promises which go before 
us and surround us and give us strength, comfort and 
assurance. 



page 129 

Vol. XX. June 1, 1899. No. 11. 



CONTENTS 



View from the Watch Tower 131 

The Influence of Education in 
Austro-Hungary 131 

"Los Von Rom"— Away from Rome 131 

Poem: A Visit to the Heavenly Court 132 

"Now is Christ Risen from the Dead" 132 

The New Life in Christ 137 

Interesting Letters 143 

Conventions the Coming 

Season 130 

A "Pilgrim" in the West 130 

page 130 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, N.Y. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity or 
adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, if they 
send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting the 
paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list 
continually. 



CONVENTIONS THE COMING SEASON. 



It is urged that we have a Convention of WATCH TOWER friends 
this year in Indianapolis, Ind., during the session of the Epworth 
League in that city in the latter part of July; and another 
in St. Louis, Mo., in October, during the time of the St. Louis 
Exposition. 

It is proposed that these conventions shall last for about three 
days each, and be rather local than general. At the dates chosen 
there will be specially low railroad fares to these cities. 

This is merely a preliminary notice. Particulars later. 



A "PILGRIM" IN THE WEST. 

Friends in Kansas, Missouri, Nebraska and Iowa who desire 
a visit from one of the "Pilgrims" will please report to us at 
once that we may make up the route accordingly. 



WHAT SAY THE SCRIPTURES ABOUT HELL? 

This is the title of a pamphlet in which every text of Scripture 
containing the word hell is cited and examined in the light 
of Scripture and reason, together with other Scriptures and parables 
supposed to teach eternal torment. Price 10 cents, postpaid; 
50 cents per doz.; $4.00 per hundred. 



ALLEGHENY CHURCH MEETINGS. 

Preaching and divine worship every Sunday afternoon in 
Bible House chapel, No. 610 Arch street, at 3 P.M. 

Cottage meetings for prayer and testimony on Wednesday 
evenings; and Dawn Circles for Bible Study on Thursday, Friday 
and Saturday evenings— various localities, Pittsburg and 
vicinity-inquire at WATCH TOWER office. 



R2475 :page 131 

VIEW FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 



AUSTRIA-HUNGARY is called "the dual kingdom," 
but really it represents three distinct 
races:— Germans (Austrians), Czechs (Slavs, Bohemians) 
and Hungarians (Magyars). The Germans occupy 
the northern Austrian provinces nearest to Germany. 
The Slavs are most numerous but have long 
been subservient to the Magyars or real Hungarians, 
who are in the minority as compared with both the 
others. All are Roman Catholics, tho the Slavs have 
quite a sympathy for the Greek Catholics or Church 
of Russia, to which most of their race residing in Russia 
give adherence. 

The progress of education during the last twenty-five 
years has had a great influence upon the subject 
race— the Bohemians, giving them new ideas of their 
"rights," "liberties," etc. This has caused no end 
of trouble to the government, precipitating bitter race-contentions 
in their Parliament, the Germans and 
Hungarians being unwilling to concede the demands of 
the Czechs who are in the majority. Seemingly only the 



loyalty of all to the Emperor has prevented a civil 
war; and serious results are feared in the event of the 
death of the now aged ruler. He is nearly seventy. 

Once the Papacy had so firm a hold that to be a 
Protestant meant death— this being the land of John 
Huss, the martyr; but a change of sentiment came 
gradually with greater enlightenment. The Czechs 
were first to discuss the wisdom of leaving the Church 
of Rome and affiliating themselves with the Greek 
Catholic Church. This led to Roman concessions to 
the Czechs to placate them. This however has gradually 
led to a coolness toward the Church of Rome on 
the part of the Germans, and it is this that specially 
interests us now. 

The German Catholic element looks with admiration 
toward the German Empire to the North and 
West, where German influence is supremely dominant, 
and annexation to these their brethren is earnestly 
craved— leaving the balance of Austria to the Hungarians 
and Bohemians. But Germany has already so 
many Roman Catholics that they trouble her in her 
Reichstag or Parliament as an opposition party, and 
more are not wanted: it was for this reason that Bismarck 
ignored and declined these pro-Catholic provinces 
of Austria when forming the Empire. 

The new move of the Germans of northern Austria 
is to renounce adhesion to the Church of Rome and 
become Protestants, with a view to making themselves 
acceptable to so-styled "Protestant Germany." The 
movement has been in progress only a short time, but 
is spreading rapidly and means some awakening at 
least amongst these people long bounden under priestcraft 
and superstition; later it may mean the disintegration 
of Austria, and points to growing race prejudices 
the world over. 

What influence this may have upon the impending 
"time of trouble" and distress of nations is hard to 
say; but surely it marks decline of despotic Papacy— 
as in France, Italy, Mexico and Spain's colonies. The 
extent of this Austrian movement may be judged from 
the following extracts from foreign newspapers:— 

"LOS VON ROM "-AWAY FROM ROME. 

The Schwaebische Mercur says:— 

"The 'Los von Rom' movement is increasing, especially 
in German Bohemia, where it occasions no 
little worry to the authorities. The Government has 
nowadays no means at hand to prevent this wholesale 
desertion, as the Protestant churches, or rather the 
Evangelical church, has legally the same status with 
the Church of Rome. In Eger 1 100 Catholics have 
joined Protestantism, in Carlsbad 100, and another 
1000 will become Protestants together. Within a short 
time half of German Bohemia will be Protestant." 



R2475 : page 132 

The Tageblatt of Vienna says:— 

"The Germans on the whole will not renounce 
their right to make use of their intellectual powers. 
This the church will not and can not permit. The 
Slavs, as the case of Russia shows, are patterns of submissiveness, 
hence the church prefers that Slavs should 
have all power. For a long time the Slav clergy has 
preached the doctrine that German is synonymous with 
Lutheran. 'Very well,' say now the Germans, 'we 
will become Lutheran to emphasize our nationality. 
Los von Rom!' How much the church is responsible for 
this, the case of Bohemia shows. In the mixed districts 
only 23 priests are German, 262 are Czech. In the purely 
German districts 618 are German and 562 Czech." 

The London Outlook says:— 

"The Pan-Germanic movement is one of the disintegrating 
forces at work upon Austro-Hungary. The 
events of 1871, says one of its leaders, were but a step 
in the right direction, and the movement will not be 
complete, the Altdeutsche Verband will not have 
achieved its aims, until all the members of the Teutonic 
race on the continent of Europe have been welded into 
one state. Not until this is accomplished can Germany 
assert herself with success as a world power." 

The London Saturday Review referring to Baron 
Schonerer, the head of the new movement, says:— 

"His last theatrical stroke of organizing secessions, 
ten thousand at a time, from the Church of Rome, 
while naturally exasperating to his opponents, emphasizes 
his strength beyond previous belief." 

The Roman Catholic Bishop of Linz said, at a recent 
church conference in Austria,— 

"In open meetings and in the press our holy faith is 
attacked in the most violent manner; openly and secretly 
the people are solicited to desert our holy church." 

Herr Wolff, a leader among German Austrians, 
with his entire family, was recently baptized a Protestant; 
and in consequence he is now denounced as "a 
servant of Satan," by the Catholic press, which is extremely 
bitter on the entire subject. 

In a time of such shaking up there should be some 
with ears for the present truth, and any who have the 
opportunity should be prompt to use it in serving the 
King and his "brethren." 



A VISIT TO THE HEAVENLY COURT. 

-INVITATION TO THE SAINTS.- 

Come, dear saints, and let us visit at the court of heavenly grace, 

For Jehovah deigns a welcome to prepare. 
He has bid us leave our earth-cares for the pleasures of his face, 



And recruit in Heav'n's salubrious atmosphere. 

He has spread a "feast of fat things" that will tempt our appetites. 

O the daintiness and richness of his fare! 
He will cheer our drooping spirits with the vintage that delights 

Every honored guest his benefits to share. 

R2476 : page 132 

Let us lay aside our burdens, and our sorrows leave behind, 

While we hasten to that glory-lighted scene; 
Let us purge our hearts of evil, and put on the willing mind, 

Lest our eyes be holden by a veil between. 

Clad in spotless robes of righteousness, by faith received and kept, 

We may safely pass stern Justice' sentry-post; 
While our Guide-book, studied carefully, will make us all adept 

In the customs and requirements of our Host. 

By his grace brought nigh, and joying in his countenance of light, 

We may greet the loving Father face to face; 
We may learn the hidden mysteries of wisdom, love and might, 

Proving the "exceeding riches" of his grace. 

With his signet in our foreheads we may wander leisurely 

Through the palace gardens, by the river Peace; 
We may scale the heights of Happiness, and overlook the sea 

Of Content, whose grateful murmurs never cease. 

We may saunter through the orchards where the Spirit's fruits are ripe, 

Plucking hope and love and kindness as we go; 
And their fine, delicious flavors from our memories shall wipe 

Every trace of bitterness and earthly woe. 

We may change our weariness to vigor and perennial youth, 

At the living fountains near the palace-door; 
And with newborn energy and zeal explore the mines of truth, 

Adding gem on gem of knowledge to our store. 

And the feast of his providing! Who can tell, without a taste, 

What shall charm our palates at that episode? 
Come, dear saints, and visit long and often! Come with seemly haste! 

For the King says "Welcome" to his high abode. — R. B. H. 



R2476 : page 132 

"NOW IS CHRIST RISEN FROM THE DEAD." 

-JUNE 11. -JOHN 20:11-20; 1 COR. 15:20.- 

UNDER divine supervision most elaborate proofs 
are furnished us of the death of Jesus— even 
tho the disciples and friends saw no necessity for this 
particularity, and indeed would have regarded all such 



proofs of his death as so many contradictions of their 
hopes and so many proofs of their disappointment. 
But the death of Christ was an all-important event, 
and hence it was necessary, from the divine standpoint, 
that the proofs respecting it should be indubitable. 
Let us note some of these proofs:— 

(1) His side was pierced with a spear, and from 
the wound flowed blood and water— a positive proof 
that death, dissolution, had taken place.— Jno. 19:34,35. 

(2) The centurion who had charge of the execution 
undoubtedly was a man of large experience in such 
matters,. And the record is that he was convinced of our 
Lord's death, and so reported to Pilate, the governor. 
-Mark 15:39,44,45. 

(3) The corpse was buried in Joseph's new tomb, 
which contained no other corpses, and hence there could 
be no question respecting the body of Christ and its 
burial. 

(4) The chief priests, anxious to prevent any 
spread of the doctrine of Jesus, remembered his words 
respecting his resurrection; and, while they placed no 
confidence in the matter, judging Jesus' disciples by 

R2476 : page 133 

themselves they surmised that they would be tricky 

and attempt to steal away the corpse and to claim the 

resurrection of their Master in harmony with his previous 

declarations. As a precaution against thus they 

requested Pilate to seal the tomb and place a guard of 

Roman soldiers there; but Pilate refused to act officially 

in the matter, nevertheless giving them, as was probably 

customary, the privilege of hiring some of the 

soldiers as watchmen— much the same as anyone to-day 

can employ and pay a policeman for extra service as a 

watchman; thus the Pharisees appointed the watch and 

sealed the stone, and had full cognizance of Jesus' resurrection. 

-Matt. 27:62-66. 

(5) The friends of Jesus were fully convinced of 
his death, and wrapped his body in linen clothes, with 
spices. (John 19:40.) Apparently his declaration that 
he would rise from the dead on the third day was not 
appreciated by his followers until after he had risen. 
Their minds were intent upon the promise of the Kingdom; 
they were amazed at his arrest, conviction and 
crucifixion, and, it would seem, forgot for the time many 
of his precious words. Indeed, we are to remember 

that our Lord's teachings were almost wholly in parables 
and dark sayings, and they may have misinterpreted 
his reference to a resurrection. (Mark 4:13.) After 
his resurrection they remembered his words, and particularly 
after Pentecost— after they had received the 
holy Spirit, which, according to promise, brought to 
their memories the things which he had spoken unto 
them while he was with them.— John 14:26. 
If it were well that the facts respecting our Lord's 



death should be clearly set forth as a part of the Gospel, 

it is well also that all of the Lord's people should 

fully recognize the fact of this death, and the necessity 

of it, and its value as the offset or corresponding price 

for the redemption of Adam, and indirectly the redemption 

of all those who were in Adam when the sentence 

of death came upon him,— all redeemed by the one sacrifice, 

offered once for all. Strange to say, very many 

Christian people speak of our Lord's death and of his 

resurrection, and yet really do not believe in either. 

To believe that our Lord arose from the dead on the 

third day is to believe that he was dead from the time 

of his crucifixion on Friday afternoon until the time of 

his resuscitation or resurrection, early on Sunday morning, 

the first day of the week. And if he "was dead" 

(Rev. 2:8) during that period (parts of three days) 

and did not rise from the dead until the morning of the 

third day, it means that our Lord Jesus was not in any 

sense alive during the interim, a period of about thirty-eight 

hours. It seems strange that it should ne necessary 

to emphasize a pont so emphatically and repeatedly 

set forth in the Scriptures. The necessity is 

twofold:— 

(1) Because, through a false, unscriptural theory, 
many Christian people hold that there is no such thing 
as death;— that what appears to be death is merely a 
transformation to a larger degree of life;— that the real 
being cannot die, and that merely the body dies, and 
that so our Lord Jesus did not die for our sins, but merely 
shed off an outer covering of flesh. 

(2) It is important to the true Christian's faith that 

the fact of our Lord's death be not only fully established 
by the statements of the Scriptures, but that the Christian's 
faith therein be fully and thoroughly grounded; 
because only those who realize that our Lord's death 
was for the time an extinction of his being can realize 
how his death was the payment of father Adam's penalty. 
Father Adam's penalty was death, extinction, 
and this penalty fell by inheritance upon all his posterity; 
"Christ died for our sins"— he suffered the death 
penalty for father Adam (and incidentally for all those 
who had come under the death sentence through Adam's 
transgression). 

Nor should t be understood that the penalty upon 
father Adam was an extinction of life for merely thirty -eight 
hours: it was perpetual, the everlasting extinction 
of life and all the privileges of life he had received 
from his Creator. Our Lord's sacrifice— the death of 
the man Christ Jesus— was an everlasting death also, a 
death which fully off-set the penalty upon father Adam, 
and as Adam's substitute the man Jesus could never be 
released. The release of the man Jesus from the death 
penalty would be as impossible as the release of Adam 
himself without a substitute: for, as man's substitute, 
"the man Christ Jesus" took upon himself the entire 
penalty of Adam's transgression, and must bear to the 



full the death-curse which rested upon Adam and indirectly 
upon his race. Hence, faith grasps firmly the 
thought that our Lord Jesus did not take back man's 
ransom-price— did not take back the sacrifice for sins, 
the human nature— in his resurrection. 

In order that he might offer this, the only proper 
and acceptable ransom for man, our Lord left the glory 
which he had with the Father, left the higher nature, 
and was "made flesh," "that he by the grace of God 
should taste death for every man." (John 1:14; Heb. 2:9.) 
If he could pay man's penalty by remaining 
dead thirty-eight hours, then man could have paid his 
own penalty by remaining dead thirty-eight hours, and 
there would have been no necessity for a sin-offering, a 
ransom-price, to be paid. Indeed, Adam would have 
overpaid his penalty thousands of times. But since 
the penalty was death in the absolute sense, unlimited 
by time; and since this penalty would never permit a 
restoration of life to Adam, therefore it was necessary 
that a ransom should be paid for Adam;— that another 
life should be substituted for Adam's life;— that another, 

R2477 : page 134 

a perfect man, should die and remain dead everlastingly, 
that Adam and the race condemned in him might be 
released from death by a resurrection. 

It was just this work, in harmony with the divine 
plan, that was accomplished by the man Christ Jesus, 
and finished in his death; and according to divine 
promise that ransom-sacrifice will never be abrogated, 
will never be taken back: and consequently all who are 
trusting in the merit of the great sacrifice of atonement 
may have full confidence that there will be a resurrection 
of the dead (of humanity), both of the just and 
the unjust; because Justice has been paid the full price, 
and because God has promised through the Gospel of 
Christ an opportunity for return to everlasting life, 
which shall eventually be offered to every member of 
Adam's race.— 1 Tim. 2:6. 

In view of these facts, how and why do we speak 
of the resurrection of Jesus as essential to man's salvation? 
We answer that neither we nor the Scriptures 
speak of the resurrection of Christ Jesus as a man. s 
his coming to our low estate of manhood was merely 
for the purpose of effecting our ransom, and as the taking 
back of manhood by a resurrection would undo the 
entire work of redemption, it is preposterous to think 
of our Lord's resurrection as a restoration to human 
nature. 

Quite to the contrary, all the evidences of the 
Scriptures, rightly and carefully arranged before our 
minds, show conclusively that our Lord was resurrected 
a spirit-being— not only higher than man, but higher 
also than angels, archangels, principalities and powers, 
a partaker of the divine nature. As such he was indeed 



a "new creature," and not in any sense of the word did 

this imply his taking back our ransom price. The 

Scriptures declare that he was "put to death in the 

flesh, but quickened in the spirit"— a spirit-being and 

the Apostle Paul declares our Lord's resurrection of the Church 

which is his body. (Rom. 6:5.) He declared that we 

with him will constitute the first (chief) resurrection; 

and then he explains our resurrection, and that 

explanation, therefore, must be equally an explanation 

of our Lord's resurrection, for he is the Head, the Firstborn 

from the dead amongst many brethren: and the 

experience of the :brethren" in resurrection will only 

be a duplication of the experiences of their Lord. With 

this in mind, ley us note the Apostle's statement respecting 

the first resurrection and its operation upon 

the Church, assured that the same description, in general 

features at least, apply to our Lords; resurrection. 

He says, "Thus is the resurrection of the dead: It is 

sown in corruption, it is raised in incorruption: it is 

sown in dishonor, it is raised in glory: it is sown in 

weakness, it is raised in power: it is sown a natural 

body, it is raised a spiritual body."— 1 Cor. 15:42-44; 

Phil. 3:10,11. 

From this standpoint, and from no other, can the 
facts related in the Scriptures respecting our Lord's 
resurrection be harmonized with each other and with 
the object for which he came into the world and suffered 
death. 

Our Lord's resurrected being was a direct gift from 
the Father, and not something which our Redeemer 
held over from a previous existence. When he left the glory of 
the spiritual condition and became the man Jesus, he 
had a right to life, under the divine law, because he had 
always fulfilled the conditions of life. In harmony 
with this the Scriptures assure us that his degradation 
from a higher nature to the human nature was not as a 
punishment, but of his own volition; not in obedience to 
a command of the Father, but in obedience to the will of 
the Father. As a man also he had a right to life, because 
the divine law guaranteed life to all who obeyed it; 
hence in no sense of the word was his human life forfeited. 
On the contrary, he gave it, he sacrificed it, he 
offered it, in harmony with the Father's plan, as man's 
ransom-price But there he lost all right to life: that was 
the very thing which he surrendered or "offered" on 
man's behalf. And having surrendered on man's behalf 
his rights to life he had no such rights remaining, 
and consequently could plead no right to a future life 
by a resurrection o that score— he had given his rights 
for Adam and his race. 

But while the rights of our Lord were gone— paid to Justice 
as Adam's ransom, nevertheless the heavenly Father's 
power and right to re-create on a higher plane were in no 
sense of the word abridged. Justice might properly object 
to the re-creation of Jesus as a man, but would have 
no ground whatever for objecting to the creation of a 



new creature— of a nature higher and superior to all 
others of God's creatures— of the divine nature. And 
this is that the Apostle tells us did occur; after describing 
our Lords; humility and obedience to the Father 
unto death, even the death of the cross, the Apostle 
declares, "God hath highly exalted him and given him 
a name which is above very name, that at the name 
of Jesus every knee should bow and every tongue confess 
that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the glory of God the 
Father. "-Phil. 2:9-11. 

While it doth not yet appear what we shall be, 
when we are changed by a share in the first resurrection 
to the same divine nature, and while consequently 
it does not yet appear to us clearly what our Lord is in 
his very high exaltation, we can nevertheless appreciate 
the fact that amongst all who are honored with the title 
of sons of God upon the different planes or natures 
there is a measure of identity. Thus, for instance, our 

R2477 : page 135 

Lord, in his prehuman condition as Michael, the Logos, 
could be transferred to a lower condition, the human, 
and yet could preserve a good recollection and appreciation 
of his previous experiences, and did so, as the 
Scriptures relate. (John 8:58; 17:5,24.) And similarly 
it was possible for the perfect man Jesus, the image 
of God in flesh, to be so duplicated as a still higher 
image of God in the divine nature, "the express image 
of the Father's person," that his identity is absolutely 
assured. The Scriptures clearly indicate that our Lords; 
experiences as a man, and the lessons of patience and 
obedience and sympathy which he then learned, are 
present with him now as experiences, altho no longer 
flesh, but spirit of the highest order. Only from this 
standpoint can we rightly appreciate the various facts 
set forth in this lesson. 

Woman's love and tenderness, specially endearing 
charms of the sex, are well illustrated in this lesson- 
in the coming of Jesus' female friends "very early in 
the morning," "while it was yet dark," and the :dawn." 
They came with no thought of the Lord's resurrection, 
but to embalm his body more elaborately than there 
had been time and opportunity for doing on the evening 
of his burial. They ad bee hindered from coming 
the previous day, because it was the Jewish Sabbath 
(the day now known as Saturday), the seventh day of 
the week. It does not appear that they all came together, 
but rather that Mary Magdalene was the first to 
arrive; but before her arrival there had been an earthquake, 
the keepers were affrighted, and fled to the chief 
priests. (Matt. 28:2,11-15.) Mary's perplexity respecting 
the events connected with the crucifixion was 
evidently intensified by the finding of the stone tolled 
away from the sepulcher, and full of the thought that 
the Lord's enemies were still pursuing him, and had 



even removed his body, she ran with haste to make the 
matter known to Peter and John, saying, "They have 
taken away the Lord out of the sepulcher, and we know 
not where they have laid him." Meantime the other 
women arrived, and sw the two angels, who explained 
to them that Jesus had risen as he had foretold, and 
they also returned to the city to report to the apostles. 
--Luke 24:2-10. 

Peter and John were immediately interested by 
Mary's narrative, and hastened to the sepulcher; John, 
the younger and more active one, arriving there first, 
looked in and saw the place vacant, and the linen 
clothes lying; but Peter, the courageous, coming up, 
was the first to enter the sepulcher. Now they began 
to think of he words which our Lord had spoken respecting 
his resurrection to he third day, and John 
tells us of himself that looking at these evidences "he 
believed"— yet no doubt with much confusion of 
thought at first. The two disciples went to their home, 
but Mary remained at the sepulcher, weeping, and looking 
in she saw what Peter and John had not seen— two 
angels. They were doubtless there when Peter and 
John went into the sepulcher, but as we have heretofore 
seen from the Scriptural testimony, angels are invisible 
to human sight, except as a miracle may be performed. 
Such as a miracle was performed in this instance, 
and the two angels assumed human form and white 
raiment, and asked Mary why she wept. While she 
told them that she was weeping because some one had 
taken away the Lord's corpse, she heard as a footstep near 
her, and turning saw what she took to be the gardener, 
the keeper of Joseph's garden in which this tomb was. 

R2478 : page 135 

She did not recognize him as the Lord, but asked him 
if he had removed the body to tell her where, that she 
might take charge of it— her thought seeming to have 
been that Joseph was unwilling to have his tomb cumbered 
longer, and had therefore ordered that our Lord's 
body be removed, and that probably the gardener had 
attended to the matter. 

It will be noticed in this case, and in the various 
instances of our Lord's appearances after his resurrection, 
that his nearest and dearest friends did not recognize 
him. He appeared in various forms and under 
varying circumstances. He spoke to them only briefly 
on each occasion, and during the forty days of his presence 
from the time of his resurrection to the time of 
his ascension was seen of his disciples only as a few times, 
and all of his conversations together probably did not 
occupy over an hour. These appearances, nevertheless, 
were for the purpose of teaching them very important 
lessons. (1) They were to recognize the fact that he 
was no longer dead, but alive. (2) That he was 
no longer the man Jesus, and subject to human 



limitations as before his crucifixion, but with the same 

loving disposition and characteristics was to as a "new 

creature," not subject to earthly conditions and limitations 

—able, as the angels, to appear and to disappear, 

to go and come like the wind, as he himself had explained 

that all "born of the spirit" in resurrection can 

do.— John 3:8. 

In this view of the matter we are not surprised 
that Mary did not know her Lord until he revealed himself 
by speaking her name in as a familiar manner. Then 
how quickly her faith surmounted every obstacle; with 
as a woman's intuition she stopped not to inquire why 
there were no marks of the mails in his hands and in 
his feet but crying, "Master!" she clasped him by the 
feet with as a fervency that meant, Now that I have found 
you again I will not let go of you! Her love, her devotion, 
her persistence, gained for Mary the great 
honor of being the first to whom the Lord revealed himself 
after his resurrection. She had been forgiven much, 
and she loved much, and our Lord manifested his appreciation 

R2478 : page 136 

of her devotion. Nevertheless, he must tell 

her that she was neglecting a great privilege and as a great 

duty, for under divine providence it had fallen to her 

to be the first to announce to the disciples positively 

that the Lord was alive again. Instead of holding 

the Lord tightly by the feet, and thinking never to leave 

him, she should rather gladly become the servant both 

of the Lord and the apostles, and carry the good tidings. 

And this in substance is what our Lord said to her. 
Our common translation "Touch me not," is faulty: 
the passage should rather be rendered,— Cling not to 
me, but go to my brethren, and say to them that I have 
not ascended to my Father, but that I am to ascend 
to my Father and your Father, to my God and to your 
God. Announce to them the fact of my resurrection, 
and that I will be with them awhile before I go to the 
Father: thus you will do as a work of preparing them for 
my subsequent manifestations. And having the true 
love which manifests itself in obedience, Mary immediately 
undertook the mission assigned her. According 
to Matthew's account (28: 1,9) "the other Mary" 
must have been near by, and have come forward by 
this time, and received as a commission with Mary Magdalene 
to tell the disciples. 

We will not stop to call special attention to the 
words of our Lord, in which he declares that our heavenly 
Father is his heavenly Father, and our God his 
God, for the expression is simple enough for all unprejudiced 
minds. We pass on to notice that the second 
appearance of our Lord was in the afternoon of the 
same day, toward evening, when he overtook two of 
the disciples going to Emmaus, as a suburban village: one 
of these was Cleopas, and the other evidently was Simon 



Peter.-Luke 24:13-32,34. 

The third appearance was in the evening of the 
same day. While Simon and Cleopas (who immediately 
returned to Jerusalem to tell the disciples) were 
relating their experiences Jesus himself appeared in 
their midst. The disciples were nervous from the experiences 
of the preceding days, and were fearful of 
what the rulers of the Jews would do against them as 
the followers of Jesus, and were together in conference, 
"the doors being shut,"— barred and bolted, we may 
reasonably suppose. What could be more astonishing 
to them than that as a stranger should appear in their 
midst? And altho he said, "Peace be unto you," no 
wonder they were affrighted. They thought of this as 
the manifestation of an angel in their midst, for who 
but as a spirit being could appear while the doors were 
shut? They had not yet learned the lesson that our 
Lord, in his resurrection, was a spirit being and no 
longer a human being, and that like the angels he now 
had power to appear and disappear— to assume a human 
body with clothing, etc., and to dissipate the same at 
will. This lesson they must learn, and must needs be 
taught it by practical illustrations. Simon, who had 
been at Emmaus, and who had noted how the Lord 
vanished out of their sight as soon as they recognized 
him, would undoubtedly be prepared, better than the 
others, for this miraculous appearance while the doors 
were shut. He would know that he one who could 
disappear and vanish out of their sight at Emmaus 
would similarly have power to appear in any place. 

Our Lord's interview was not a lengthy one; it was 
a first lesson, and the disciple would get the more 
good of it by reflection after he would leave them. He 
wished them, however, to be at ease in his presence, 
and to now that they were not seeing a spirit being, 
for, as he explained, "a spirit hath not flesh and bones." 
What they saw was not spirit, but matter. This does 
not mean that our Lord was not a spirit being at this 
time, as is clearly set forth by other Scriptures (1 Pet. 3:18; 
2 Cor. 3:17; Phil. 3:21): it merely means what 
it says, namely, that what they saw was not spirit, and 
hence that they had no cause for affright. 

In our Lord's appearance to the Marys and on the 
way to Emmaus there is no suggestion that he appeared 
in a body scarred with the marks of the nails. Can we 
suppose that Mary would have clasped him by the feet 
and not have noticed the great wounds made by the 
nails? Can we suppose that the two gong to Emmaus, 
and looking curiously at their companion, asking hi, 
if he were a stranger to those parts, would to have 
noticed if his hands and his feet had great wounds in 
them? The evidence, therefore, seems conclusive 
that in neither of these manifestations did our Lord 
appear in bodies bearing wounds and thus resembling 
his crucified form. But now, at this third showing 
wishing to emphasize the identity of his risen self with 



the crucified one, he appeared to his followers in a form 
exactly like the one that was crucified, and showed 
them the spearmarks in his side and the nail-prints in 
his hands and feet. And while they still wondered and 
feared that what they saw was merely an apparition, 
he asked them to give him food, and ate some fish and 
honeycomb in their sight— Luke 24:39-43. 

Nothing in this implies of necessity that the flesh 
which they saw was the identical flesh which had hung 
on the cross. On the contrary that flesh, like all other 
flesh, was subject to the laws of nature and could not 
have been brought into the room while the doors were 
shut, nor subsequently caused to vanish out of it. The 
body of flesh which our Lord displayed to the disciples, 
was evidently created, and its clothing as well, in their 
presence, and dissolved when he vanished from their 
sight after the interview. Such powers are beyond 
human comprehension, but quite within the range of 
divine power. 

R2478 : page 137 

What became of the body of flesh that was crucified, 
and that laid in Joseph's tomb, and that disappeared 
therefrom, we are not told, except that the 
Apostle and Prophet declare that, "His flesh saw no 
corruption." (Acts 2:31; Psa. 16:10.) We incline to 
the opinion that the flesh, which was man;'s ransom-price, 
will never see corruption, but that it will be preserved 
by divine power as an everlasting testimony of 
the grace of God and of our Lord Jesus Christ in man's 
redemption, and will thus be a witness and a testimony 
to the divine love throughout eternity. Where God 
may have that body in preservation we know not. He 
who could hide the body of Moses, who was only a type, 
surely could hide the body of his Son— the antitypical 
redemption price.— Jude 9. 

These various appearances of our Lord under peculiar 
circumstances were continued at long intervals 
during the forty days. Apparently he appeared in all 
some four or five times after the appearance above noted, 
which were on the day of his resurrection, and the 
Apostle Paul assures us that at the time he wrote his 
Epistle to the Corinthians over two hundred and fifty 
witnesses of our Lord's resurrection were still living, 
and this epistle was written about twenty-four years 
after the crucifixion. When we remember how close 
a reasoner the Apostle Paul was, and how logical were 
all his conclusions, we may rest assured that he did not 
receive this testimony respecting our Lord's resurrection 
upon any slight evidence, but had full confirmation 
of it. Moreover, he attests as a witness to the resurrection 
himself, saying, "Last of all he was seen of 
me also, as of one born before due time."— 1 Cor. 15:6-8. 

The Apostle Paul did not see Jesus under a vail of 
flesh, as he appeared to the others before the spirit dispensation 



began. To Paul he manifested himself in 

the glory of this spirit being, "shining above the brightness 

of the sun at noonday." The effect, as is well 

R2479 : page 137 

known, was disastrous to the eyes of the Apostle, because, 

altho he saw the Lord as one born before the 

time, yet not having been thus born himself by a resurrection 

change to the newness of nature, the sight was 

a calamity to his flesh. 

It surely is a great relief to us to understand correctly 
respecting our dear Redeemer's resurrection, for 
several reasons:— 

(1) It permits us to see how he arose without taking 
back our ransom price. 

(2) It shows us that, altho, in obedience to the 
Father's arrangement, he willingly and gladly left a 
higher condition in order to be made flesh and to give 
a ransom, nevertheless he has not been permitted to be 
a loser to all eternity by this arrangement— he is not 
hampered by the lower or fleshly organism, but has, in 
his resurrection, attained to the highest form of spirit 
nature, the divine nature. 

(3) It is a comfort to us to know that he does not 
bear now, in glory, the scars of the thorns, the spear 
and the nails; nor any of the evidences of the things 
which he suffered on our behalf: but instead his is an 
"excellent glory"— "the express image of the Father's 
person."— Heb. 1:3. 

(4) It comforts us also to know that the Church, 
the body of Christ, will not to all eternity bear the 
marks of imperfection, the blemishes of sin, nor the 
marks of the wounds endured for righteousness' sake. 
No, the promise to the Church is the same as the promise 
to her Lord, that in the resurrection the Father will 

give (not the body that died, with wounds and imperfections, 
but) "a body as it hath pleased him," a glorious 
body, a likeness of the Lord. "We shall be like 
him, for we shall see him as he is"— not as he was.— 
1 Cor. 15:38; Phil 3:21; 1 John 3:2. 



R2479 : page 137 

THE NEW LIFE IN CHRIST. 

-JUNE 18.-COL. 3:1-15.- 

"Let the peace of God rule in your hearts." 

FOLLOWING our consideration of our Lord's death 
and resurrection, it is appropriate that we apply 
to ourselves the two-fold lesson therein taught:— 
(1) The lesson of man's depravity through the 



fall and his consequent need of a redemption and restitution. 

As we have seen, the death of Christ 

was man's ransom-price, and the resurrection of Christ 

was God's attestation of the acceptableness of the sin-offering 

and preparing of the way for the blessing of 

mankind by raising up to superhuman life, divine glory 

and power, the Redeemer,— constituting him "Lord of 

all," and thus fitting him for the great work of blessing 

Adam and his family in due time— after the establishment 

of his Millennial Kingdom. 

(2) We should note God's purpose to select from 
mankind a "little flock" on whom to confer Kingdom 
power in due time, making them his representatives 
and agents in the work of blessing the world of mankind 
with all the favors secured by the ransom sacrifice. 
The Scriptures show us that this plan or purpose 
of God was foreknown, forearranged, by him before 
the foundation of the world. They show us also that 
in the divine purpose our Lord Jesus was the Head, 
the First, the principal One, the Lord of this little flock, 
and that God's dealings with him and the method by 
which he was prepared for his present high position 
were an illustration of the method by which his Church 
is to be prepared for join t-heirship with him in his 

R2479 : page 138 

Kingdom.-Eph. 1:3,4, 4:15; Col. 1:18; 1 Pet. 1:20. 

It is with this latter feature or lesson that we now 
have to do. In the Scripture under consideration the 
Apostle is addressing, nor mankind in general,— not 
even believers in general,— but a specific class, namely, 
"the saints and faithful brethren in Christ." (Col. 1:2.) 
He is addressing, therefore, those who have 
taken the two steps of grace:— (1) The step of justification 
from Adamic sin and death to reconciliation 
with the Father through faith in the atonement accomplished 
by his dear Son. (2) Having thus been 
justified reckonedly, or by faith, lifted out of the condition 
of sin and condemnation, these, according to 
the Lords; invitation, have consecrated themselves in 
the fullest sense and degree to the Lord for obedience 
and service "even unto death." 

This full consecration of every talent and power 
and opportunity is Scripturally called death— because 
the will has died, self-will has gone, and the Lord's 
will has been accepted in it stead. And since the will 
is the real ego, the real person, the thought is that the 
old ego, will or person has died, and that the new 
creature, having no will of his own, but being wholly 
under subjection to the divine will as expressed in 
Christ, who is the Head of this body, has come into 
control. Let us not lose the thought-picture here conveyed. 
We are not new individuals or persons, for it 
was individually and personally that we ceased to be 
when we gave ourselves over by full consecration to 



the Lord: our new condition is that of members or parts 
of the larger corporation or body of which our Lord 
Jesus is the Head. Whoever has a will of his own is 
properly to be considered an individual; but whoever 
has dropped his own will, and accepted instead of it 
the will of another, has creased or figuratively has died 
as an individual. And this is the picture which the 
Apostle presents in this and in various other presentations 
of this subject. For instance, in 1 Corinthians 12 
the same writer declares that the entire Christ is 
not in the members but in the Head. To whatever 
extent, then, the Lord's people have fully consecrated 
themselves to him as members of the body of Christ, 
they should be in absolute subjection to the will of 
God in Christ; and so far as their own wills are concerned 
they should have none, but in that respect 
should be "dad." 

This is the Apostle's thought in this lesson; but 
he carries it further, saying that as our own wills, ambitions, 
aims and hopes were consecrated and reckoned 
dead, so we should reckon ourselves as members of 
the Christ, risen from the dead: new creatures, possessed 
and controlled buy the new will, the mind of 
Christ. It is this class that the Apostle addresses, and 
from this standpoint that he declares, "If ye then be 
risen with Christ, seek those things which are above, 
where Christ is seated at the right hand of God." 

The thought is that all of this class have, as justified 
earthly beings, desiring and hoping to attain jointheirship 
with Christ in his Kingdom, been taught of 
God and inspired by the exceeding great and precious 
promises of his Word to come to this position of self-consecration. 
We are to note how our Lord Jesus laid 
down his earthly life, and was by the Father exalted 
to a heavenly condition and the right hand of power, 
—as a criterion for our course as followers in his footsteps. 
We are to remember continually that join t-heirship 
with the Lord in that spiritual condition and 
in his heavenly power and Kingdom are the hopes set 
before the Church of this age, and we are to "seek 
those things"— "seek" chiefly the Kingdom of God"— 
seek to make our calling and election sure to participation 
with our Lord in the Kingdom honors and glories 
to which he already has attained as a reward for his 
faithful sacrifice.— Verse 1; Matt. 6:33; Rom. 2:7; 
2 Pet. 1:10. 

The Apostle wishes us to understand how we are 
to "seek" those things. We are not merely to seek 
them in prayer, altho prayer is an excellent aid in the 
seeking. We are to seek them by setting our affections 
on those things, and by lifting our affections 
from earthly things. 

Comparatively few realize to what extent we 
have the forming of our own characters— to what extent 
our minds, our affections, are gardens, in which 
we may plant either the thorns and thistles of sin, or 



plant the merely moral and practical qualities corresponding 
to the useful vegetables, or plant those seeds 
which will produce the fragrant and beautiful flowers 
which more particularly would represent the heavenly 
and spiritual graces. That which a man soweth he 
shall also reap in kind, whether he sow to the flesh 
or to the spirit. Whoever, therefore, seeks for the 
heavenly things, joint-heirship in the Kingdom etc., 
Must plant or set out in his mind, in his affections, 
those qualities and grace which the Lord marks out 
as essential to the development of characters such as 
will be "meet for the inheritance of the saints in light." 
-Col. 1:12. 

Thus the Lord throws upon all those whom he 
calls to this "high calling," this "heavenly calling," 
and who accept the call and covenant thereunder, the 
responsibility of their success or failure in attaining it. 
Through his Word he tells of their own natural 
weaknesses and imperfections, and shows them how 
he has provided a full off-set or counterbalance for 
these imperfections in the merit and sacrifice of the 
Redeemer: he shows them also what re the fruits and 

R2480 : page 139 

graces of the spirit which they must possess, in heart 

at least, if they would be joint-heirs with Christ: he 

shows them also in the Redeemer's life as well as in 

his teachings the copy which all must follow who would 

reach the same glorious station and be his joint-heirs. 

We might look at this matter merely from the standpoint 

of the responsibility which it throws upon us, 

and might well feel over-awed thereby; rather, however, 

we should view it from the standpoint of divine 

grace, and consider what a blessed privilege has been 

granted us, not only of being transformed by the renewing 

of our minds, that we might come more and 

more to know and to strive for the good, acceptable 

and prefect will of God, but in addition to all this God 

has set before us the grandest reward imaginable for 

the doing of that which is merely our duty and reasonable 

service— the doing of that which would bring us 

the largest measure of joy and peace, aside from a future 

reward.— 2 Pet. 1:3,4. 

There is a natural attraction to earthly things for 
all mankind: even tho the earthly things, during the 
reign of evil, be blemished and in many respects distasteful 
to those who have learned to love righteousness 
and hate iniquity, there is nevertheless still a strong 
attraction to the marred and blemished earthly things. 
Like weeds, earthly affections and desires spring spontaneously 
from seeds which come we know not whither. 
The Christian, therefore, who would keep his heart in 
the love of God must not only keep planting out or 
setting his affections on heavenly things, but he must 
keep rooting out the weeds of earthly desire and 



attraction. 

As the Apostle intimates, our new life is not manifest 
to all, nor upon all occasions; it is a life of new 
desire, new aims, new aspirations,— which the world 
can neither see nor fully appreciate, tho it see some outward 
manifestations of the new life in our daily conduct. 
Even the "brethren" may not be able to appreciate 
the progress of the new life in us; and even 
ourselves may at times be somewhat perplexed respecting 
the rapidity and strength of its growth, and we 
may need to look back over weeks or months, or perhaps 
years, in order to determine unquestionably that 
it is growing. Our new life, represented by our endeavors 
to follow the new will of Christ, is hidden thus 
in Christ and in the Father. 

It is in harmony wit this thought that the Apostle 
Paul declared in one place that neither the world 
nor the brethren were capable of judging him— that 
only the Lord, who could read the heart and know all 
the conditions and testings an weaknesses to be striven 
against, could properly judge him. He even declares, 
"Yea, I judge not mine own self." (Rom. 14:4; 1 Cor. 4:3; 
Jas. 4: 12.) It is an excellent plan neither to 
condemn others who claim to be walking conscientiously 
as children of the Lord, nor even to condemn 
ourselves under similar circumstances. We should 
simply press along day by day, doing the best we can 
to cultivate the heavenly graces and to serve our Master, 
leaving all the results with the Lord. He careth 
for us, and so long as our hopes and aims and objects 
of life are centered in the heavenly things, and our lives 
thus hid with Christ in God, we need fear no evil, 
present or future. Fr the Lord, will be with us and 
bless us and keep us from falling and ultimately present 
us blameless. -Psa. 23:4; Jude 24; Col. 1:22. 

This condition of things is to last throughout the 
entire Gospel age, and is to apply to all the members 
of the body of Christ. All are to be dead to the world 
and all are to have their ambitions and hopes or life 
hidden with Christ in God. As the Father has done 
for our Lord, so he wills of or all those who are truly 
untied to him; and the time for bringing these blessings 
to the Church is, the Apostle states, at the 
second coming of the Lord. Then the Lord's people 
will n longer be misunderstood by each other nor by 
the world; then the faithful will all appear with the 
master in glory, and then will begin the work of blessing 
all the families of the earth with a knowledge of 
the truth and with an opportunity for full restitution 
to all that was lost in Adam. 

Having thus set forth the proper course of the 
Church in the line of aspirations, hopes, etc., the Apostle 
turns to the other side of the question, and gives 
us particular and explicit directions how we should 
proceed to carry out our consecration vow of deadness 
to earthly things and life only toward the heavenly 



things. It will be noticed that he does not counsel 
retirement from the world and its busy cares to cloisters, 
monasteries or nunneries, but taking the Lord's 
consecrated people where they may be, he advises respecting 
the methods by which they can best accomplish 
the desired results of mortifying of deadening 
their appetites, desires, etc., which are rooted and 
grounded in their fallen flesh or earthly nature. He 
mentions these besetments, commencing with the more 
gross and ending with the most subtle. 

Fornication was very prevalent in the Apostle's 
day, and he would have the saints recognize this gross, 
prominent evil, and then in connection with it notice 
others which they might be much mor likely to overlook. 
First of these in order is "uncleanness." What 
a searching thought is in that word! It means anything 
that is not pure, not chaste, not holy not clean. 
If a good many of the saints might feel that it was 
useless to mention to them so gross an evil as fornication, 
they would be forced to admit that in their imperfect 
condition they required guarding, counseling, 

R2480 : page 140 

on the score of "uncleanness." This reminds us of 
our Lord's words to the disciples on the night before 
his crucifixion. He said to Peter, when proposing to 
wash his feet, "Ye are clean, but not all." So the 
saints consecrated to the Lord are clean of heart, pure 
of heart; yet they re not all clean— the members which 
touch the earth, their sensibilities and passions which 
come in contact with the defiled human nature, need 
cleansing, need "washing with water through the 
Word." All filth, all uncleanness, every "spot and 
wrinkle," needs attention, and the "precious blood: 
is the antidote for every stain.— Eph. 5:25-27. 

"Inordinate affection" is one of the things mentioned 
as needing attention and correction but the saints: 
this signifies earthly or animal passions. The saints 
are to mortify these, that is, to deaden them— not only 
to seek not to cultivate, not to enliven, not to arouse, 
such passions either in themselves or in others, but on 
the contrary they are to seek to deaden these as well 
as to cultivate the higher and nobler joys and sentiments. 
The deadening or mortifying of these, and 
the self-denial according to the flesh thus implied, is 
a part of the antitypical fasting in which all of the 
Lord's people should seek to engage, each according 
to his zeal, opportunities and possibilities. 

"Evil concupiscence" (or, in more modern language, 
desires for forbidden things) is a step higher in 
the Apostle's list of evil tendencies that should be 
rooted out and mortified, deadened. It is not sufficient 
that we acknowledge sin in its various forms to be 
evil, and that we resolve that we will strive against it 
because it is under the Lord's ban: in addition to this 



we are to root out of our hearts every longing, every 

desire for every thing not thoroughly approved by the 

Lord. Oh, what a cleansing this would mean in the 

hearts and lives, and especially in the thoughts, of 

many who have named the name of Christ! Many who 

fail to note this point, who fail to follow the Apostle's 

admonition, find themselves continually beset by temptations, 

because, while outwardly avoiding gross immoralities, 

they secretly harbor sympathies for things 

condemned,— desiring that they might have them, if 

only they were not forbidden. Under such conditions 

comparatively little progress can be made in the higher 

life. The Apostle would set before us the proper 

course to be pursued, if we would win the great prize, 

—namely, the high standard of bringing the very 

thoughts, wishes, desire, of our hearts into full conformity 

to the perfect will of God: and only those who 

do so are properly making progress, running the race 

set before us in the Gospel.— 2 Cor. 10:5. 

The Apostle concludes his list of things against 
which the "new creature" must war to the death by 
naming covetousness," and declaring it a species of 
idolatry. In other words, if the hearts of the Lord's 
people are running after any earthly thing )even if it 
be not an evil thing of itself_, if they are centering 
their affections upon even good things of an earthly 
kind, and are neglecting to set their affections upon 
the heavenly things, they are failing to run the race 
successfully. This is amongst the most seductive trials 
of the Lord's people. Some will set their affections 
upon a wife or a husband, or upon parents or children, 
or upon a good name before the public, to such an extent 
that when testings come as to whether or not they 
love these more than they love the Lord, their conduct 
proves that they have given to these earthly good things 
a degree of love beyond that they accorded to the 
Lord. 

Frequently the Lord's people do not at the time 
realize that this is the case. They love the Lord, and 
they love their families and friends, and a good name, 
which is to be preferred to great riches; and they do not 
realize that they love the Lord less than they love 
these other things. The Lord, however, will test everyone 
whom he will receive to the high calling along 
just these lines; he declares in advance that whoever 
loves father, mother, children or any other thing more 
than him is not worthy of him— not worthy to be 
counted as a member of the body of the Christ in glory, 
—the overcoming Church. The overcomers must 
all be proven to be such as would sacrifice every other 
thing for the Lord; such as would sacrifice the love 
and fellowship and approval, if necessary, of every 
other being, in order to retain the love and favor of 
the Lord. We believe that this test is coming daily 
closer and closer to the Lord's consecrated people, and 
it behooves everyone of us to remember that this is one 



of the elements of our trial, and to set our affections 
on the heavenly things accordingly, and to mortify or 
deaden all such affections toward earthly beings and 
things as would bring these into competition with our 

R2481 :page 140 

Lord in our affections, service, etc. 

The Apostle sums up this list of evils to be deadened 
by saying that it is in the seeking o these earthly 
things, because of such things growing in their 
hearts, that the Lord's wrath is to come "on the children 
of disobedience." Are they the wicked the worldly, the 
unregenerate? No, none of these; for they are to 
;children" at all. The reference evidently is to those 
who have become children of God by his legitimate arrangement 
of (1) justification and (2) sanctification 
through faith in Christ. He is referring to those who 
are of the class "called to be saints," but who fail to 
make sure their calling and election to jointheirship with 
the Lord, as members of the kingdom "little flock." 
He refers to those who do not properly set their affections 

R2481 :page 141 

on heavenly things, but allow their affections 
to centre chiefly in earthly things. He refers to the 
"great company" who, because of loving father or 
mother, houses or lands, or something else, to such an 
extent that they fail to keep their covenant of sacrifice, 
will be accounted unworthy of a share in the Kingdom, 
and instead will be subjected to the great time of trouble 
-"the day of wrath. "~1 Cor. 3:15; Rev. 7:9-15. 

This does not signify, however, that such persons 
have become exceedingly corrupt in their lives, but 
merely that they are continuing in the course of life 
in which they were before making their covenant to the 
Lord. This is clearly expressed in the seventh verse 
of our lesson. 

Coming down to a particularization of the change 
which should take place in those who have consecrated 
themselves wholly to the Lord, the Apostle enumerates 
certain alterations of disposition which should be attempted, 
and, so far as possible, accomplished; namely, 
the putting away of all the following— anger, wrath, 
malice, evil-speaking, impurity of language, and falsehood 
in its every form. At first thought such correction 
of life might seem to be unnecessary to mention as being 
too coarse and entirely opposed to every true Christian 
principle; but as we scrutinize the matter we find that 
the Apostle has really taken into his list nearly all the 
weaknesses of the flesh which beset those who have' 
become "new creature in Christ' What is more 
common with Christian people than to become angry? 
How many there are who have named the name of 
Christ who have malicious or at least unkind thoughts 



respecting others, and who harbor these, and sometimes 
permit them to influence their conduct! How 
many there are who indulge in evil speaking, that is, 
slander (here translated "blasphemy")! This is often 
done in such a manner as not only to deceive the 
hearer, but also to deceive the speaker as respects his 
real intention in speaking of others discreditably, 
unkindly. 

What a wonderful world this would be if all the 
evil or impure language were avoided! Every Christian 
should see to it that henceforth every word which 
proceeds from his mouth shall be such as will minister 
grace to the hearers— such words as wills only good 
and be edifying. Finally, how much need there is, 
not only of having good intentions in the heart, but 
also of expressing those good intentions truthfully one 
to another— without deception, without hypocrisy. 
But it requires that a heart be very pure and very full 
of love if it would be very truthful, otherwise it would 
lad into trouble continually. If the unloving, ungenerous, 
unkind hearts, full of evil surmising, malice, 
hatred and strife, were to express themselves frankly 
it would add immensely to the trouble of the world. 
The Apostle therefore urges first, the purifying of the 
heart, and then general candor. 

These corrections of life are urged as the reasonable 
and proper outcome of our transformation from the 
Adamic and fallen nature, reckoned dead, to the new 
nature of Christ, of whose "body" we have become 
reckonedly members, controlled and renewed in knowledge 
through our new Head, Christ Jesus. 

And the Apostle then shows that in this new condition, 
as members of the body of Christ, we are to remember 
that previous differences of man are ignored, 
for whoever is accepted of the Lord as a member of 
his body is a fellow-member with every other member 
thus accepted,— whether, according to the flesh, they 
were Greek or Jew, circumcised or uncircumcised, Barbarian 
or Scythian, bondman or freeman; because all 
who come into Christ are reckoned dead to their previous 
condition, and alive to the new conditions which 
are life for all. Thus, a slave being set free is dead 
to his former slavery, and may figuratively be said to 
have started on a new life. Thus also a citizen may 
renounce his allegiance to the land of his birth and 
may swear allegiance to another country, and become 
a citizen of it, and thus be reckoned as dead to the nation 
of which he was a citizen by birth, and to have 
become alive as a citizen of the new nation to which 
he has been adopted. Thus it is with all those who 
re in Christ: they may have been Welshman or Spaniards, 
Britons or Gauls, blacks or whites, Indians or 
Malays, but as soon as they are accepted of the Lord 
as new creature through faith and consecration they 
are to reckon themsevles dead to all their former relationships 
and obligations, and as having come into new 



conditions as citizens of the Heavenly Kingdom, and 
reckonedly heirs of God, joint-heirs with Jesus 
Christ. 

This does not mean, however, that the white man 
will become a black man, nor the black man a white 
man; it does not mean, necessarily, a change of language 
either, nor a revolution in all the tastes and peculiarities 
wherewith one was born; nor does it mean 
a full release, according to the flesh, from obligations 
to the land of our birth, nor imply that we should not 
be subject to the powers that be, except as their demands 
might conflict with the positive commands of 
our King; nor does it imply an ignoring of the differences 
of sex and the proprieties which belong to each 
sex, and which, according to the Scriptures, are to be 
continued and preserved during this age. It does imply, 
however, that in thinking of each other as new 
creatures in Christ Jesus. All are to be considered as on 
a common plane or level— none are to be disesteemed 
as "brethren" because of color, speech or sex. 

With this thought before our minds,— of the oneness 

R2481 :page 142 

and equality of those who have been accepted into 

the body of Christ, the Apostle urges upon out attention 

the necessity, not only of putting off the evil dispositions 

of our fallen flesh, but the necessity also of 

putting on, cultivating, the various graces of the Spirit 

exemplified in our Head, Christ Jesus. He specifies 

these: (1) Bowels of mercies, or, in more modern language, 

compassionate sentiments; a disposition toward 

largeness and generosity of heart toward everybody 

and everything— toward the saints, toward our neighbors 

and friends and relatives, toward our enemies, and 

toward the brute creation. Amplifying, he continues, 

showing that it would imply (2) kindness toward all; 

(3) humbleness of mind, the reverse of boastfulness, 

headiness, arrogance; (4) meekness, or gentleness of 

disposition; (5) long-suffering, or patient endurance 

with the faults and weaknesses of others. It implies 

that we should bear with each other's peculiarities of 

temperament and disposition, freely forgiving one 

another, if there be cause of offence found in each 

other— learning the meanwhile to correct ourslves, as 

we see our own blemishes more or less mirrored in others. 

Ad the standard for all this course of conduct 

is found in the Lord's course toward us, for 

he surely has been generous, kind, forbearing and 

forgiving. 

The Apostle wishes us to notice that he is not attempting 
a reformation of the world along these lines, 
but merely a transformation of those how have entered 
into a special covenant with the Lord, namely, the 
Church: "the elect of God, holy and beloved." Nevertheless, 
all whoa re thus covenanted to the Lord, and 



hope to make their calling and election sure to membership 
in the glorified Church, will not only seek to 
have these fruits of the spirt in their own lives, but 
will seek also to cultivate the same a they may have 
opportunity in their friends and neighbors: above all 
will such seek to exercise such a good influence upon 
their own families— that as their children receive from 
them, as parents, the natural life and the necessary 
instructions and start therein, they may also if possible 
receive from them their start in the new life, 
and the necessary instructions and equipment for 
the same.] 

But the Apostle, as the mouthpiece of the holy 
Spirit, is a thorough instructor: not only does he tell 
us what dis-graces to put off and what graces to put on, 
but viewing the Lord's body arrayed in these glorious 
qualities of heart,— compassion, kindness, humility, 
meekness, patient endurance, forbearance and forgiveness, 
-he adds, "And above all these put on love, 
which is the bond of perfectness." Love is thus pictured 
as the "girdle" which binds and holds in place 
the folds of the robe of Christ's righteousness, with its 
various graces. In other words, the Apostle would 
have us see that forbearance, meekness, patience, etc., 
must not be matters of courtesy merely, or matters of 
policy merely, but however much they might partake 
of these qualities at the beginning, the wearers will 
not be perfected in heart, not be fit of the kingdom, 
until they have reached the place where these various 
graces of their wills, or intentions, are bound to them 
by the cords of love— love for the Lord, love for righteousness, 
love for the "brethren," ad sympathetic 
love for the whole groaning creation. Love is indeed 
the bond of perfectness, the very spirit of the 
Lord. 

How forceful in its place is the last verse of this 
lesson, "And let the peace of God rule in your hearts, 
to the which also ye are called in one body [one corporation, 
one Church— the body of Christ], and be ye 
thankful." Not until God's people have reached some 
measure of what the Apostle has here outlined can 
they know experimentally the blessedness of having 
divine peace rule in their hearts and lives, controlling 
their relationship with every member of the body of 
Christ under the bond of love, and producing more and 
more in them the spirit of gratitude and thankfulness 
to God, for mercies and blessings enjoyed. Ad sch 
gratitude will find its natural and proper outlet in endeavors 
to serve the Lord: endeavors which the Lord 
will be sure to accept form such hearts, reckoned holy 
and acceptable through Christ Jesus, the head and 
Redeemer. 



R2482 : page 143 



INTERESTING LETTERS. 

DEAR BROTHER IN THE LORD:-It is with pleasure 
that I report an increased sign of interest in the 
truth by some more of the Lord's people. Since the 
loss of our dear brother Nicholson (who will doubtless 
be profitable for the truth wherever he may settle 
in the States) we have unmistakably entered a new 
era in our Christian history. At the point of his leaving 
and for a few weeks later the lowest ebb of the 
tide was reached; but at the darkest hour of future 
prospect, a revival of interest set in which has increased 
steadily. Our work is altogether in the interest of the 
"household of faith"— seeking to be used of the Chief 
Reaper in supplying the present truth. The interest 
is marked in the saints who, realizing the great need 
of separation from what tends to compromise with 
Christendom and having a desire to be of the sanctuary 
class, follow the Lord outside the camp. 

Our Dawn Circle (every Tuesday evening) is exceptionally 
successful compared with the past year, 
and the work on Sunday is at last bearing fruit. All 
the helpers are in our midst, and all who speak the 
truth are known to be sound in the faith. Thus we 
are able to avoid the inevitable consequences of the 
warning of Scripture, "Sow not the field with mingled 
seed." As far as lies in our power the truth (unadulterated) 
is proclaimed. 

Some years ago I wrote you upon the seeming discrepancy 
of the 400 and 430 years of the Israelites' sojourning 
and afflictions, and since have come across 
what is a very helpful solution of the matter, and a 
further indication of the reliableness of the Bible dates. 

GENESIS 15:13-18. 

This distinction between affliction and the bondage 
of the Israelites (the former including the latter, but 
not confined to it) throws light upon the difficulty 
which is often experienced respecting the period of 
400 years here mentioned. The actual bondage in 
Egypt was of comparatively short duration (one-half 
of 430 years); but the affliction of the seed of Abraham 
commenced in his son, Isaac. The interval between 
Isaac's birth and the Exodus was 405 years; and if we 
place the predicted affliction of the seed to commence 
in Isaac's 5th year, when he would begin to feel the 
effects of Ishmael's mockery, we then have the afflictions 
enduring 400 years, and including in the last 
period of it the bondage. What is said (Exod. 12:40) 
about the sojourning of the people 430 years before 
the Exodus presents no difficulty in the way of this 
solution, but rather confirms it; because it is evident 
from Gal. 3:17, that this period of 430 years is to be 
reckoned from the giving of the promise to Abraham, 



which was first done 25 years before the birth of Isaac. 
This corresponds exactly, and was the whole period of 
sojourn, including the other two periods, which are 
more actually characterized as, first, the period of affliction, 
and finally, the period of actual slavery. 
I remain, Yours in the Kingdom hope, 
JAMES HAY,-England. 

page 143 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-Inclosed is a draft for 
dollars which I wish to deposit in the Tract Fund 



for its use as a loan. It is the earnings of the past 
two years above my daily necessities. I gathered it 
with the thought of giving the interest for the Tract 
Fund, and later the principal. I do not need it; and, 
judging from the past, I will not need it. The Lord 
has always provided ways and means to enable me to 
earn all things needful in the past, and since he has 
permitted me to come into the wonderful light and 
knowledge of the present truth, I can trust him much 
more fully, for I understand his ways better. I did 
think of donating it entirely, but as I am not quite clear 
in regard to the difference between tempting and trusting, 
I will wait until I have more knowledge; meanwhile 
the Society can use it as its own. It is but little to 
help others into the knowledge of our dear Lord's 
plans, but it is all he has given me, and the only way 
I can find now to serve, outside of sending out tracts. 

Some of the people of the world seem to like to 
hear the truth, and so long as they do, is it not best to 
tell them of God's wonderful provision for all that will 
obey him? I have wondered what was best to do when 
they do not work on what they hear, and yet come 
where they will hear more. They do not seem to be 
worse since they learned that God does not intend to 
roast them forever. Eagerly we look forward to the 
time when the blind eyes and deaf ears shall be opened. 

It is such a wonderful joy to know the Lord's 
ways. I thought when I first read the DAWNS that I 
was full of joy (and so I was: all I could hold), but 
that was three years ago, and I have learned so much 
since of heart culture and head knowledge that my 
heart is singing all the time. When in the M.E. 
Church, I never was at rest; everything seemed mixed 
and hazy. I was never sure of anything, except a desire 
to know the Lord. No one could tell me why it 
was necessary for Christ to die, or how to present my 
body a living sacrifice, or how to keep the first commandment. 
Now an understanding of God's character 
enables me to keep the first commandment; now my 
eyes are opened, and the way seems easy. It is so easy 
that I am fearful that I may lack in some way and be 
blind to it, for I see so many warnings in the Word; 
yet while the Word teaches that the heart is very deceitful, 
I know that I love the Lord and his ways above 



all things. Yours in our dear Redeemer's name, 
MARY SHAFFER,-Pennsylvania. 

DEAR BROTHER:— I am waiting here for the afternoon 

train to D . Five meetings have been held 

here, in the opera house, all of which were unusually 
well attended. Brother Fairbrother advertised the 
meetings most thoroughly, having notices in the papers 
for two weeks, beside having sent 75 or 80 invitation 
cards to persons who purchased DAWNS from Brother 
Kent. The results were very satisfactory— from the 
standpoint of numbers at least. The two largest meetings 
were those of Sunday afternoon and evening. I 
judge that about 100 persons attended the former and 
between 200 and 300 the latter. The Baptist minister 
attended the Saturday evening meeting (when we presented 
the Plan of the Ages) and was so pleased that 
he closed his church Sunday evening, so that himself 
and congregation could go to the opera house to hear 
a discourse on "How God can be just and the justifier 
of him which believeth on Jesus." 

The people took tracts quite freely, and a goodly 
number ordered sample TOWERS. 

With much love, Yours in Christ, FRANK DRAPER. 

MY DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I thank God that 
he offered me the opportunity of reading MILLENNIAL 
DAWN. Never in all my life of Scripture reading have 

page 144 

I found so much comfort and peace. Thanks to his 
holy and righteous name, I do not see as I used to see, 
since I have been led into the glorious light! I love 
God better; I love my fellow man better. No more 
fears are haunting my mind of a life of eternal misery 
in the future. To acknowledge that I have lived a 
long time in total darkness, is but mildly expressing 
my extreme blindness pertaining to God's plan. Now 
the mystery is solved. I have often wondered, and 
asked the question, What will become of those millions 
of souls who have died in innocent ignorance of the 
plan of salvation? and received the answer, My brother, 
they must live forever and ever in a flame of fire, which 
God has prepared for all who do not become Christians 
before they depart out of this life. Oh! to think that 
I ever charged such atrocities to One who has created 
and cared for me, pains my heart sorely. But glorious 
light fell athwart my gloomy pathway, and I read in 
beautiful lines— 

"Good will to men; blest echoes that thrill 

His first-fruits with rapture grand- 
Shall be to all, when, on Zion's hill, 

The Bridegroom and bride shall stand." 
W. M. P. DEVINE,-Ind. Ter. 



R2482 : page 144 

DEAR MR. RUSSELL:-The undersigned, ex-captain 
of the Salvation Army, has recently, on account 
of the light God has sent him through your work, M. 
DAWN, left said organization. 

I have read VOLS. I. and II. twice, and have just 
received VOL. III. God has, through furnishing me 
with this volume, plainly shown his will in regard to 
me; I recognize his voice. Glory be to his name! Even 
before I received the truth I was fully consecrated to 
the Lord's service, and am determined, by God's gracious 
help, to spread further the great light he in his 
wonderful graciousness has counted me worthy to receive. 
Should be very grateful to you for some advice 
on how to act in the matter. Could no doubt get a 
situation in some worldly business, but, as I have said, 
being consecrated to the Lord's service, and believing 
that God has work for me to do, I much prefer to turn 
my talents into the service of our King. 

I am twenty-five years of age, have no worldly 
possessions, can only speak or read Swedish. If you 
so desire, I shall be very glad to go into the colporteur 
work here in Sweden; but if you think I could do more 
good in any other country, I have no objection to go 
anywhere you may suggest. 

Yours, devoted and grateful, 

AUGUST LUNDBORG,-Sweden. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL: -Please find draft for 
One Thousand Dollars, a thank-offering to the Lord 
for his many blessings given to me. Please use it in 
the harvest work, and, if you think best, I would be 
pleased to have you use it to assist in defraying the 
expense of the "Volunteer" service, mentioned in the 
April 15th TOWER. 

Please do not publish my name in the TOWER in 
connection with this. I am thankful that I can help 
a little in this way. 

Your brother in Christ, , Wisconsin. 

[The zeal of the Lord's dear people as "Volunteers" 
in the various departments of the King's service 
is very encouraging. Altho we have appropriated the 
name "Volunteers" specially to the public tract distribution 
now in progress, it is a fact that all who serve 
this harvest message in any capacity are really volunteers. 
The important financial part of the work is all 
volunteered— never begged, never urged, but always, 
as in the above case, done freely "as unto the Lord." 
The "Colporteur" service is similarly done by volunteers: 
and all these efforts are owned and blessed by 
the great Chief Reaper, we are sure. 

The friends will be glad to know that the call for 
"Volunteers" for Sunday work amongst church-goers 
—circulating gratuitously the pamphlet, The Bible vs. 
Evolution— met with prompt and cordial responses from 



every direction. We send portions of each order in its 
turn and not all at once: and yet many orders are waiting 
for the pamphlets from the binderies. We have 
already sent out over 100,000 copies and are pushing 
the matter along as fast as possible: meantime fresh 
"Volunteers" are constantly reporting and the proposed 
half -million booklets may not be near enough; 
but if Providence so indicate, we are ready to issue 
more. The topic is apparently a very timely one, as 
many are in danger of "stumbling" on the subject of 
Evolution. --EDITOR.] 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-You will be pleased 
to have a brief account of our first two Sundays' experience 
in distributing the Bible verses Evolution 
pamphlet. Last Sunday we served six churches, and 
to-day we served five. Six of the brethren and four 
of the sisters in the truth are in the "volunteer" ranks 
at present. We have still over two hundred churches 
to be served. The average distribution to a congregation 
thus far has been about 125 of the pamphlets; 
as we are now working chiefly on the outskirts of the 
city among the smaller churches. 

The common people receive them gladly and often 
with hearty thanks. One lady this evening was so 
favorably impressed by a hasty scanning of its pages 
that she walked back and tendered twenty-five cents 
to the sister who handed it to her, but the money was 
politely declined. 

Another, a gentleman, stepped to the light to examine 

R2483 : page 144 

what it was that had been handed to him. In 
a moment he returned and said, "This is just what I 
have been seeking and did not know where to send 
for it; I am so glad to have it. Had I known you were 
outside to hand out these, I should have taken your 
supply inside and passed them out to our people." 
Others declared that we are certainly accomplishing a 
good work and wished us Godspeed. At one church, 
where we served this morning, the minister's sermon 
was on "Evolution," and he preached against that 
theory; our pamphlets at the door capped the climax. 

I trust our effort will show for itself in the inquiries 
you will receive from here and requests for 
further reading matter along these lines. 

We exercise great care in handing out the pamphlets 
so as not to pass them to any except such as we 
deem worthy of receiving them. We much appreciate 
our privilege of cooperation in spreading the Gospel to 
others. The Lord bless you and all the dear ones engaged 
in the harvest work ! 

Your brother "Volunteer," 

J. A. BOHNET, Washington, D.C. 



MILLENNIAL DAWN 
-THIS IS- 
THE GENERAL TITLE OF A SERIES OF BOOKS BY THE EDITOR OF ZION'S WATCH TOWER 

VOL. 1., The Plan of the Ages, Gives an outline of the divine plan 
revealed in the Bible, relating to man's redemption and restituion: 
358 pages, paper bound 25 cts., in leatherette 35 cents. 

Vol. II., The Time is at Hand, treats of the manner and time of 
the Lord's second coming, considering the Bible testimony on 
this subject: 370 pages, paper bound 25 cts., in leatherete 35 cts. 

Vol. III., Thy Kingdom Come, considers prophecies which 
mark events connected with the "Time of the End," the glorification 
ofthe Church and the establishment of the Millennial 
Kingdom; it also contains a chapter on the great Pyramid, showing 
its corroboration of the dates and other teachings of the 
Bible: 384 pages, paper bound 25 centss, in letherette 35 cents. 

Vol. IV., The Day of Vengeance, shows that the dissolution of 
the present order of things is in progress, and that all the panaceas 
offered are valueless to avert the predicted end. It marks 
in these evetns the fulfilment of prophecy, noting specially our 
Lord's grat prophecy of Matt. 24, and that of Zech. 14:1-9: 
660 pages, paper bound 35 cts., in leatherette 50 cents. 

In cloth binding-VOLS. I.,II.&III. are 50 cents each, plus postage 
10 cents each: VOL. IV., 75 cents, plus postage 12 cents. 

MILLENNIAL DAWN is published in foreign languages as follows: 
In German and in Swedish., VOLS. 11,11. &III In Dano-Norwegian, 
VOLS.I.&II. In French VOL.1 Bound in cloth and paper uniform 
with the English edition; prices the same as above. 
WHOLSALE RATES TO WATCH TOWER SUBSCRIBERS 

Namely, one-half above rates. In the United States and Canada 
add postage on cloth-bound: to foreign countries add postage 
on all editions. 



page 145 
VOL. XX. JUNE 15, 1899. No. 12. 



CONTENTS 



Views from the Watch Tower 147 

Spiritualism Steadily Asserting Itself 147 

Dr. Briggs an Unwelcome Episcopalian 148 

Sowing to the Flesh— In the Churches 149 

"Will a Man Rob God? Yet Ye have 

Robbed Me" 150 

Application to Spiritual Israel 152 



Questions and Answers 155 

"Unto the Uttermost Parts of the 

Earth" 157 

Divine Mercy in Hosea's Prophecy 159 

Convention at Indianapolis in July 146 

page 146 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
--ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, N.Y. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity or 
adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, if they 
send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting the 
paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list 
continually. 



THE INDIANAPOLIS CONVENTION. 

Arrangements are completed for a Convention of believers in 
the Second Coming of the Lord and the Plan of the Ages,— to 
be held at Indianapolis, Ind., July 21st to 23d, as follows:— 

The Railroad fare will be one-half the usual, except from a 
few points which will add $2 to the one fare for round trip. All 
passenger trains run into Union depot, which is about three 
blocks distant from the meeting place of the Convention— 
"Shover's Hall," on Market Street, between Delaware and Alabama 
Avenues. 

Accommodations— good and clean— have been arranged for, 
at the very reasonable rate of ninety-five cents per day, at "Barton's 
Hotel," No. 29 Virginia Ave. Such ZION'S WATCH TOWER 
readers as cannot afford even this modest sum, will be entertained 
free, by the Indianapolis friends, with great pleasure. 
Those who ride to the hotel can take any car leaving the Union 
depot and should ask for "transfer" when they pay their fare. A 
"Reception Committee" will meet all the friends at the Barton 
Hotel— except during convention hours, when it will be at 
Shover's Hall, as above mentioned. 

The following program will be followed closely as practicable: 

Friday, July 21st.— The opening "rally" will be at 10 A.M., 
conducted by Brother C. A. Owen— an opportunity for getting 
generally acquainted. At 3 P.M. the assembly will be addressed 
by the Editor of this Journal from the text— "Looking for the 
blessed hope, even the glorious appearing of our great God and 
Savior, Jesus Christ." (Titus 2:13.) At 7:30 P.M. an address on 
the Ages and Dispensations of the divine plan, illustrated by 
the Chart of the Ages, may be expected. 



Saturday, July 22d.— Testimony Meeting at 8 A.M. Preaching 
at 10:30 A.M. by the Editor of this Journal: subject, "The Law 
of the Spirit of Life in Christ Jesus." (Rom. 8:2.) At 3 P.M. 
a discourse by Bro. M. L. McPhail— "Sanctify them through 
thy Truth." At 7:30 P.M. a discourse from the Chart. 

Sunday, July 23d.-Testimony Meeting 8:30 A.M.; at 10:30 a 
discourse by Bro. M. L. Staples on "The Offence of the Cross;" 
at 3 P.M., "I am not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ," by the 
Editor; at 7:30 P.M., "Preserving the Unity of the Spirit in the 
bonds of peace"— several speakers. 

All who love the Lord, trust in the precious blood and wait 
for his Kingdom, are cordially invited to attend this Convention 
which recognizes only the one Church and her one Lord, 
one faith and one baptism. All such will please address the 
WATCH TOWER SOC'Y as soon as they know definitely that they 
will attend, stating in few words who will be of their party, 
and whether or not they will stop at the hotel. There will be 
an opportunity for symbolizing baptism. 



R2483 : page 147 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 



SPIRITUALISM is steadily asserting itself. 

The Boston Journal of May 28th, reporting 
recent utterances of Rev. M. J. Savage, says:- 

"TALKED WITH WHITTIER. 



"In a quite recent sermon Dr. Savage declared 
that he had talked with the late poet Whittier and 
knew that he, too, believed in the essentials of Spiritualism. 
Longfellow, too, he classified with him, and 
cited his famous line: "There is no death; what seems 
so is transition.' Most of the poets, he thinks, have 
shared the Spiritualist conception of the life beyond 
this one. 

"The other day,' said Dr. Savage, 'the papers 
contained a long account of the belief of Dr. Lyman 
Abbott and of Dr. Hillis, who is his successor. Both 
believe all the essentials that Spiritualists believe, only 
both were very careful to guard themselves against 
believing in such vulgar and foolish things as rappings 
on a table. For the life of me I cannot see what there 
is so foolish and degrading in rapping. If you are in 
one room of a hotel and I am in another, I am not so 
impolite as to go into your room without rapping to 
find out whether you want to see me. If some one 
from the other world is near me and wants to see me, 
is it so dreadful that he should call my attention by 



rapping? I have been asked as to the nature of communications 

from the other side. I've had what purported 

to be hundreds of them, and I say that they are 

pretty much on a level with my daily mail. I get some 

foolish and some malicious communications, and again 

some noble and intelligent ones in my mail every morning. 

So it is with those from the other side. If we 

can get rid of the old idea that the moment a man 

dies he is either a devil or an angel, we will see that 

this is just as it would be likely to be— the communications 

being on a level with things as they are now. 

If I should die here in this pulpit I should not expect 

to be in the next moment more foolish or more wise 

than I am now.'" 

The matter of the faith of Whittier, Longfellow, 
Abbott and Hillis is stated as tho it were exceptional 
among Christians: on the contrary, it is the rule: the 
exception is to find those who deny these propositions 
among clergy or laity. All believe that the dead are 
not dead, but more alive than ever before. All think 
and speak of them as being near to the living and interested 
in their welfare; but only Roman Catholics 
directly invoke their aid in prayer, except Spiritualists 
who go still further and claim to converse with the 
living-dead or dead-living. (Which would be the less 
absurd statement?) 

It should not surprise us, therefore, that Christian 
people, long accustomed to this fallacy (that the dead 
are alive without a resurrection), are stumbling into 
Spiritualism, utterly blind to the fact that its manifestations 
are the work of demons who personate the 
dead to draw attention away from the Scriptural teaching 
that the Christian's hope is— the resurrection of 
the dead at the second coming (presence) of the Redeemer 
when he will exercise his office of Lifegiver. 



Rev. B. E. Austin, D.D., of the Methodist 
Church of Canada was deposed for heresy on June 1st, 
after a trial by Conference at London, Ont. Respecting 
the matter Dr. Austin said to the reporter of 
the Toronto Globe:— 

"If I had elected to leave the Conference in ignorance 
of just where I stood on the subject of Spiritualism, 
I would have been in the church to-day, but, 
as I was charged with teaching it, I thought it only 
fair to defend my own views on it, and against the advice 
of my friends I addressed the Conference. I did 
not wish to be in the church and hold views which 
were contrary to its teachings, and I decided that if the 
church was not broad enough or liberal enough to let 
me in, I wanted to be out of it. While I valued my 
standing in the church, I value my liberty much more. 
I wished a large personal liberty. 



R2483 : page 148 

"My views are the result of years of study and 
investigation. I became interested in the study of 
psychology through teaching it in class work at Alma 
College, and five or six years ago I became convinced, 
not that the current theory regarding Spiritualism was 
correct, but that underneath all the deception and 
artifices practiced throughout the country under the 
name of Spiritualism there was a great deal of natural 
phenomena. As Principal of Alma College I became 
specially interested in investigating mental sciences 
both theoretically and experimentally. I read the 
works of scientists like Sir William Crookes, Alfred 
Russell Wallace, Zollner and others, who have been 
making long and patient researches into this subject, 
and I finally became convinced that telepathy and 
clairvoyance were positive facts, and that there were 
many phenomena that were not explained even by 
them. The question of the origin of these phenomena 
then arose. One theory held by a great many people 
in the church is that it is all deviltry; then there is 
Carpenter's theory of mental cerebration, and the other 
theory that the phenomena are caused by the spirits 
of the dead, or so-called dead. Investigation and study 
convinced me that the last was the only theory to fit 
the case. I was led up gradually to a firm conviction 
in this truth.'" 

As the Doctor declares, the fact that some good 
people cry "deviltry," while teaching doctrinally what 
supports reasonably nearly all the claims of Spiritualism, 
is not enough— should not be enough for reasonable 
minds. Only those who get the Bible teaching on 
death and on Spiritualism are prepared to see conclusively 
that it is demonism.* 

DR. BRIGGS AN UNWELCOME EPISCOPALIAN. 



Dr. Charles Briggs, famous as a leader among 
"Higher Critics" and for his determined endeavor to 
remain a minister of the Presbyterian Church after 
confessing himself out of accord with it, has been received 
into the Episcopal Church: but quite a few 
Episcopalians do not welcome him. Bishop Seymour 
declares himself forcefully on the subject as follows:— 

"I agreed cordially with the Rev. Dr. Briggs in 
his rejection of Calvinism, but I as cordially revolted 
from his trying to remain a Presbyterian minister after 
he had publicly renounced the characteristic teaching 
of Presbyterianism. This shocked my moral sense. 
...This view of the Rev. Dr. Briggs touching Holy 
Scripture may be true. I do not stop to inquire, since 
the truth or falsehood of the Rev. Dr. Briggs' theory 
does not touch the issue. He believes it to be true, 



and avows his belief in oft-repeated publications. This 

is quite enough. With such convictions, I cannot understand 

how any man who accounts himself an honorable 

and upright man can enter the ministry of the 

church. 

"The test is much more than the declaration which 
the candidate signs and the vows and pledges which 
he makes before the altar of his God, and in the most 
solemn and critical hour of his life it confronts him 
and will continue to confront him while he lives, in 
every, or almost every, public service in which he participates. 
The rubbish and debris theory of the Bible 
places the Rev. Dr. Briggs in a most frightful position 
now that he has been ordained. The Bible supplies 
two lessons for morning and evening prayer daily 
throughout the year, and it saturates with its language 
and ideas the offices and services of our Book of Common 
Prayer. There is no branch of the church which 
makes more copious use of Holy Scripture than does 
that one in which the Rev. Dr. Briggs has just been 
ordained a presbyter, at his own earnest request, and 

R2484 : page 148 

in spite of protest and warning for his own sake as well 
as that of others. 

"This Holy Book, as we regard it, is, in the estimation 
of the Rev. Dr. Briggs, a holy book hidden, 
unknown beneath an incrustation, an accumulation of 
myth, fables, legends, stories, and to some extent 
worse material— in a word, dust, debris and rubbish, 
and this dust, debris and rubbish he and all the clergy 
must serve up to the people as the Word of God in the 
public offices of the church. How can any man with 
one spark of religion in him voluntarily place himself 
before God and man in such a position? I confine 
myself to one point, and to one point alone, and I rest 
upon no question taken from its context, but upon a 
fundamental position deliberately taken and publicly 
avowed by the Rev. Dr. Briggs. 

"It is true that the Rev. Dr. Briggs professes love 
and reverence for the Bible, but it is not our Bible, the 
Bible published by our Bible Society and read in our 
churches; it is a hidden Bible, an unknown Bible. The 
kiss of Judas was more conspicuous than the betrayal. 
A general profession of veneration and love does not 
condone repeated stab thrusts which are designed to 
destroy life. 

"It has been said that any church is honored by 
the admission of the Rev. Dr. Briggs into its fold. 
Alas, the Rev. Dr. Briggs may be, and probably is, all 
that his admirers represent him to be, but neither he 
nor any other man, be he saint, confessor or martyr, 
can honor the Church of God. The church can do 
without us, but we cannot do without the church. 

"Again, there are men who seem to be afraid if 



they do not profess sympathy and agreement with this 

higher criticism that they will be regarded as ignoramuses 

or idiots. Let me tell all such persons that 

there is a worse fate than that— it is to be accounted 

a fool by God. 

"In conclusion, I wish to press the point that the 
ordination of the Rev. Dr. Briggs is most of all a moral 
issue, and brings into view Almighty God, with whom 
all who shared in that service must deal, if not now, 
ultimately at the last great day. God may be 'far 
above out of our sight,' and we may say in our hearts: 
'Hush, God will not see.' But this is a sad, fatal mistake. 
God will not be trifled with. He is patient, 
but no man can be guiltless who takes his name in 
vain. 'So, then, every one of us must give account of 
himself to God.' Must, not may, give account of himself, 
not of others, to God, who cannot be deceived, 
not to man, who can be imposed upon and misled." 



*See What Say the Scriptures About Spiritualism?— 10c, or 
loaned free, this office. 

R2484 : page 149 

SOWING TO THE FLESH-IN THE CHURCHES. 



We regret to note the multiplying evidences that 
the nominal churches are more and more losing sight 
of the Scriptural idea of the Church of Christ— that it 
is a company of called-out ones, separated from the 
world and united to each other and to the Lord as 
"members in particular of the body of Christ," whose 
present duty it is to edify one another and to build one 
another up in the most holy faith. The false view, 
that the Church is now to effect a social uplift of the 
world, is largely responsible for this. The remedy for 
the malady is the truth, that the election and education 
of the Church is the duty of the present age except as 
the light shining out from these saintly ones shall "reprove 
the world;" and that the Lord's time for the 
social uplift will be the Millennium, which he will 
bring about in his due time by the exaltation to glory 
and power of the Church, whose election will then be 
complete. In illustration of the misleading influence 
of a false theory note the following, published in the 
Cleveland Plain Dealer of May 30th:- 

"PRIZE FIGHTS IN A CHURCH. 



"New York, May 29.— The idea of special features 



to attract young people to church, which has gone as 
far as dancing classes in several places, has gone a step 
further in the Protestant Episcopal pro-cathedral at 
No. 130 Stanton street, of which the Rev. Dr. Charles 
Briggs is to have charge. 

"Boxing matches and a wrestling bout were introduced 
with the approval of the authorities of the 
pro-cathedral and under the eye of the Rev. Mr. Paddock, 
the vicar, who seemed to enjoy them. The contests 
were held in the basement for the Young Men's 
club, one of the many organizations of the pro-cathedral. 
There was a smoker, music and recitations. 
Then a ring was improvised. 

"At the opening Kid Rowling of Buffalo and Kid 
Floss of Avenue A boxed three tame rounds, and a 
draw was the decision. The boys carried out the custom 
of the ringside, and vociferous cheers, hisses and 
catcalls filled the large room. 

"Then came the real event of the evening. 'Fellows,' 
said Announcer Gambert, 'I now introduce to 
you with great pleasure Dick Wunderlick, ex-champion 
welterweight, and Phil Kelly, the coming welterweight. 
They will box three rounds, and in the last 
introduce their original 'knockout,' which has been 
imitated by many, but successfully copied by none.' 
Three strictly professional rounds followed, and in the 
last round, Kelly delivered the realistic 'knockout' 
blow. 

"The wrestling match was between Mike Zimmer 
and George Burke, the instructor of the gymnasium 
attached to the church. 

"The Rev. Mr. Paddock said that doubtless many 
people would not approve of such amusements in such 
a place, but he said the aim was to hold the young 
men's interest and keep them off the street." 

"I SUPPOSE THEY CALL THAT HERESY." 



Rev. F. W. Gunsaulus, D.D., of Chicago, preaching 
recently, is reported to have said:— 

"The fact that the spirit of holiness and truth 
enters into man with the power of a divine comfort is 
proved as much in the songs of the Wesleys as in the 
Psalms of David. 

"A man must believe that God has vacated his 
throne, and that the ascended Christ has ceased to 
guide human events, and that the holy spirit is dead, 
if he does not feel within his own inspired nature that 
the inspiration with which the soul of Lincoln trembled 
and was yet steadied when he wrote the Emancipation 
Proclamation is greater and diviner than the 
inspiration with which Joshua commanded the massacre 
of a prostrate foe." 

Dr. Gunsaulus said, after the address: "I suppose 



they call that heresy." 

This may have been said in a bombastic spirit, 
with the desire to create a little cheap sensation; or it 
may have been uttered in all sincerity. If the latter, 
it only serves to show how blind are the "Doctors of 
Divinity," selected at good salaries by "orthodoxy" 
to confuse the people and mislead them into the ditch 
of skepticism. 

The gentleman's words, whether so intended or 
not, will give to the average reader the thought: "Dr. 
Gunsaulus believes that Wesley's hymns were as much 
inspired as the Psalms of David, and in the same manner 
and degree." Dr. G. may privately deny any 
such sentiment, but the thousands who read his statement 
in print will be influenced to discredit the inspiration 
of the Scriptures in proportion as they are babes 
in knowledge of God's Word and pin their faith to 
those who are "highly esteemed among men." 

All true Christians partake of the spirit of the 
Lord— the spirit of truth, of gentleness, of patience, 
of kindness, of love: for "if any man have not the spirit 
[disposition] of Christ, he is none of his." The Wesleys, 
we doubt not, had much of this same spirit, and 
we may discern considerable of it in their writings, 
prose as well as verse, with some admixture of what 
we consider error, which cannot have been, as it is not 
now, in agreement with the spirit of truth. But in 
the Psalms of David, written long before Pentecost by 
one who never received "the spirit of adoption," we 
find a totally different inspiration from that which fills 
and guides the Church as its members become emptied 
of "the spirit of the world." 

The Apostle Peter explains the difference exactly, 
saying, "Holy men of old spake and wrote as they 
were moved by the holy spirit"— mechanically— often, 
if not always, without knowing why they wrote what 
they did, or what it signified. The Apostle declares 
this in so many words, saying, that they sought the 

R2484 : page 150 

significance of their own utterances, but were not 
granted an explanation, but were informed that "not 
unto themselves, but unto us, they did minister." 
(1 Pet. 1:12.) How else could we account for the 
prophetic utterances of the Psalms, descriptive of our 
Lord's death and resurrection and of his coming Kingdom 
and of the great time of trouble by which it will 
be introduced? Can we go thus to the writings of the 
Wesleys or others since the apostles? Surely not! 
Hence the blindness of those unable to discriminate, or 
the criminal negligence of those who pose as oracles 
of God and yet would mislead the blind into the ditch. 

Respecting the comparison between Joshua and 
Lincoln: Here again evil is done; the blind are misled 
by the suggestion that the Bible presents Joshua 



as an inspired man. Nothing of the kind is true. 
Joshua was no more a prophet than Lincoln, so far as 
the Scriptures inform us. Both were good men so far 
as we know them: both, so far as we know, were used 
of the Lord in accomplishing his purposes. Lincoln 
was led of divine providence and the exigencies of the 
war to proclaim the liberty of the slaves;— as a war 
measure, to enlist the sympathies of the millions of 
slaves for the Northern cause and to proportionately 

R2485 : page 150 

discourage the Southern cause. God's hand was behind 
Lincoln's course, unquestionably, and he did his part 
courageously and no doubt was brought into that place 
for that purpose and because he was such a man as the 
Lord could use. But it is very doubtful if the honored 
President realized to what extent his Emancipation 
Proclamation was forced by divine providences. 

With Joshua the case was different: he was not 
guided by circumstances and necessities of the war he 
was conducting, but was definitely directed respecting 
what should and what should not be done to the enemy. 
The matter was not left to his choice in any 
sense. Those against whom he fought had already 
been sentenced to destruction; because "the iniquity 
of the Amorites" had come to the full.— Compare 
Gen. 15:16; Lev. 18:24,25; Deut. 9:4-6; 18:12. 

The difficulty with Christian people, in re the destruction 
of the Amorites, lies in their misapprehension 
of the facts and of the future operation of the divine 
plan of the ages. They think of the slain Amorites 
as going to a hell of eternal torment; instead of which 
they went to sheol; of which the Scriptures declare, 
"There is no work, nor device, nor knowledge, nor 
wisdom, in the grave [sheol], whither thou goest." 
(Eccl. 9:10.) They think of Joshua as cutting short 
the probation of the Amorites to all eternity, whereas 
their probation for everlasting life had not begun; nor 
did such a probation for life or death everlasting come 
to anyone until after our Lord had redeemed all from 
the "curse" of Adam's transgression, by the sacrifice 
of himself. 

Evidently the "key of knowledge" by which the 
divine plan may be understood is as thoroughly lost 
to the Doctors of Divinity of our day, as it was to the 
Doctors of the Law at the first advent. (Luke 11:52.) 
The people should know this and should seek the 
"key of knowledge." Seek, and ye shall find! Knock, 
and it shall be opened unto you ! 



R2485 : page 150 

"WILL A MAN ROB GOD? YET YE HAVE ROBBED ME.' 



"Bring ye all the tithes into the store-house, and prove me now herewith, 
saith the Lord of hosts, if I will not open to you the windows of 
heaven and pour you out a blessing that there shall 
not be room enough to receive it."— Mai. 3:8-10. 

THE TITHING system, so far as Israel was concerned, 

had its beginning when they entered 

the Promised Land, after their forty years journey in 

the wilderness. A tithe signifies a tenth; and under 

the divine arrangement made with Israel this was the 

portion of all their increase required to be devoted to 

holy purposes. One-tenth of the increase of their 

flocks, their herds, their seeds, grains, etc., was first 

to be set apart to the Lord's service, as sacred, to be 

used in the maintenance of the priestly tribe, the Levites, 

and for the relief of widows and orphans, and 

other unfortunates. The one-tenth of the family increase 

was also required by the Lord; but this had already 

been provided for in the selection of the tribe of 

Levi and its increase devoted to the Lord's service exclusively, 

as instead of the firstborn of each family. 

The system of taxation in vogue throughout 
Christendom to-day somewhat resembles the tithing 
system, except that it is collected and not left to voluntary 
contribution: and it is assessed on the valuation 
of property, etc., and not wholly on the income. 
It covers the expenses of public schools, relief of the 
poor, improvements of streets, sewers, and general 
government expense. In the United States maintenance 
of religion not being included in taxation is left, 
properly, to the zeal and discretion of the individual: 
it is safe, however, to assume, that the majority of 
people do not contribute largely to religion and charity; 
while others strictly appropriate one-tenth of their 
entire income to these benevolences. 

The effect of this tithing system, had it been carried 
out in the right spirit, would have been, (1) to 
teach the people of Israel generosity, and to inculcate 
in them a realization of their obligations to God, and 
that all that they enjoyed were his bestowments. (2) 
It would have made abundant provision for the maintenance 

R2485 :page 151 

of the priests and Levites, the widows, orphans, 

and unfortunates, and thus would have been a perpetual 

insurance fund of mutual benefit. It not only 

would have provided for the temporal necessities of 

the unfortunate, but also for the educational arrangements, 

which were in the care of the Levites. 

But the Israelites, like all the other branches of 
the human family, were depraved through the fall, 
and had come under the control of the spirit of selfishness, 



the spirit of evil,— to which may be traced every 

impure, ignoble, unholy word, thought and act. Hence 

the Israelites begrudged the giving of so large a proportion 

as one-tenth of all their earnings, and since 

the contribution was left to the conscience of the people, 

and no officers were entrusted with the enforced 

collection of this tithe, by punishment of those who 

failed to contribute it, very soon many ceased to contribute 

altogether, while others gave stintedly and 

grudgingly. But however the people felt that they 

were thus at liberty to curtail the amount of their contributions 

to holy purposes, and however much they 

presumed that they would ultimately be gainers, to 

the extent that they would withhold their tithes, we 

find that they erred; for God himself not only was the 

ruler of that peculiar people, their King (1 Chron. 29:23), 

but he was also the chief executive officer to administer 

the punishments for the violation of his own 

laws. Consequently, in proportion as they attempted 

to defraud the Lord of tithes, in that proportion or a 

greater proportion they were losing, for the Lord sent 

upon them grasshopper plagues, caterpillar plagues, 

and various insects, blights and diseases, which more 

than offset the tithes which they were withholding. 

In all this, and in every instance when thinking 
of Israel and God's dealings with Israel, we should 
remember that they were a special and peculiar nation, 
differently dealt with from all the other nations of the 
earth. (Amos 3:2.) God did not exact from other 
nations a tithe, a tenth, but neither did he promise to 
other nations his special care and bounty and blessing. 
Other nations were left largely subject to the changeable 
conditions in nature, but Israel, as a result of the 
covenant sealed between them and the Lord at Sinai, 
came under special obligations to the Lord, including 
this tithing arrangement, and the Lord came under 
special obligations to them, in that he promised that, 
if they would live up to their engagements, observe 
his laws and statutes, to do them, he would bless them 
in their fields and in their cities, in their flocks, their 
herds, their crops and all. 

Israel, therefore, was to know that God would 
not fail of his part of the covenant, and that if they 
lacked any good thing, any temporal blessing, it must 
be because sin lay at the door; because they had, in 
some sense or degree, violated their part of the Law 
Covenant. Consequently the coming of caterpillars, 
army worms, palmer worms, locusts and grasshoppers 
upon them meant special chastisements from the Lord, 
and were special evidences of divine disapproval toward 
them, while similar things coming upon the 
world of mankind in general meant no such thing. 

In our Lord's day, at the first advent, he called 
attention to the fact that the holiness class of that day 
had gotten into a formalistic condition— that they were 
very exact about their tithes, being careful to tithe the 



very smallest of seeds: mint, anise and cummin. But 

he showed that their hearts were still selfish, and that 

these contributions were not according to the spirit of 

the law, but rather for an outward show, done vain-gloriously: 

that so far from having the spirit of tithing, 

a desire to contribute to the Lord's cause, and to 

the maintenance of the poor, these so-called holiness 

people (the "Pharisees") were quite ready to devour 

the widow's house, taking advantage of her necessities, 

etc., and that their long prayers were, in keeping 

with this wrong condition of heart, merely outward 

display. 

Our text calls attention to this neglect of tithes 
on the part of the Israelites, pointing them to the fact 
that if they had been faithful to the Lord their granaries 
would be full instead of empty; their flocks and 
herds would have been well-favored instead of lean; 
and their general prosperity would have been much 
greater. This is along the line of the Scriptural injunction, 
"There is that scattereth, and yet increaseth: 
and there is that withholdeth more than is meet, 
but it tendeth to poverty." (Prov. 11:24.) In our 
text the Lord calls upon Israel to realize the situation, 
and restore that which they had withholden, and that 
then he would pour them out a great blessing, and 
would "rebuke the devourer," the pests which injured 
their crops. 

SOME APPLICATIONS OF THIS IN NOMINAL SPIRITUAL 
-ISRAEL.- 

Many in Spiritual Israel draw from this Scripture 
the lesson that Spiritual Israelites should faithfully give 
a tenth of all their earnings and profits to the Lord's 
cause. This lesson is preached from pulpits of nearly 
all denominations and emphasized as obligatory upon 
their adherents. Such is the case with the Mormons, 
and as a result millions of dollars flow into their treasury, 
and are used in the propagation of that system of 
religion or irreligion, as each may be pleased to term 
it. We see the same method enforced by the "Seventh 
Day Adventists," with similarly marked results, 
—hundreds of thousands of dollars pour into their 
church treasury, and are used in the dissemination of 

R2486 : page 152 

literature, in the sending forth of evangelists to all 

parts of the world, and in the general propagation of 

their doctrines. We note also a similar tendency in 

the Methodist Episcopal Church. Already it has engrafted 

this feature of "Moses' Law" upon their young 

people of the "Epworth League," those who agree 

sign a pledge, called "God's Tenth— the pledge of 

Jacob," which reads: "Of all that thou shalt give me 

I will surely give a tenth unto thee." 



The printed matter before us, descriptive of this 
tithing system, bears the imprint of the Methodist 
Book Concern— New York and Cincinnati offices. It 
proceeds to outline suggestions respecting the manner 
in which so large a sum should be divided up. It takes 
as a basis of calculation an income of $1.00 a day, or 
$300.00 per year, the one tenth of which, $30.00, it 
appropriates to pastor's salary and various other religious 
benevolences, but says:— 

"Those who are specially interested in some particular 
benevolence are permitted to use a different 
ratio for these benevolences, provided one tenth of the 
income is given. Tithing should be figured from the 
net income, not the net surplus after living expenses 
have been deducted. Many examples are before us, 
where the Lord has proven his promise: 'Bring ye all 
the tithes into the storehouse [etc., our text]'— not 
only rich spiritual blessings, but temporal as well." 
[Italics are ours.] 

We have not learned what measure of success has 
attended this effort, but infer that it is considerable; 
because the denominational papers are now calling attention 
to the fact that Bishop McCabe is starting a 
similar tithing scheme for the older Methodists. Some 
objections are urged against it— that it is going back 
to the Mosaic Law: but the majority apparently do 
not recognize clearly the dividing line between the 
Law Covenant and the New Covenant and are inclined 
to think the movement a proper one, in the direction 
of duty. 

OUR APPLICATION OF THIS TO SPIRITUAL ISRAEL. 



While we believe that such a system may be a 
powerful influence for good or for evil, as respects the 
amount of money collected and disbursed; and while 
we believe also that such systematic giving is a helpful 
discipline to many of those who contribute, increasing 
their interest in the cause to which they give, 
and decreasing their selfishness and worldliness,— nevertheless 
we are not prepared to advocate this system 
amongst the Lord's consecrated people; because we 
find no authority for the tithing system under the New 
Covenant; and we may preach nor advocate neither 
more nor less than the laws our God has spoken unto us. 

To Christians, begotten of the spirit of adoption 
to be sons of God, the Lord speaks not as he speaks to 
servants, saying "Thou shalt" and "Thou shalt not" 
do thus and so. On the contrary he speaks to us as 
a father unto his sons. He communicates to us a 
knowledge of his will and plan, without putting exact 
limitations upon our acts. He merely places us under 
the perfect law of liberty— Love; the law which gives 
us perfect liberty to do all we please in harmony with 



love to God and man. He who loves much may give 

proportionately: he who loves little may give little accordingly. 

Our Lord desires that each should thus 

show forth his own developments in love. But, shall 

we consider that this liberty, which we enjoy as "new 

creatures in Christ Jesus," releases us from all obligations? 

Shall we consider that because the Lord has 

not specified that we must give one-tenth of our incomes, 

as he required of the Jew, under his Law Covenant, 

therefore we are at liberty to give the one-twentieth, 

or the one-fiftieth, or one-hundreth part, or nothing, 

to the Lord's cause? 

Yes, we have just that liberty,— that is to say, 
God will not now withhold from us rain on this account, 
nor will he send pests as punishments as he did 
with the Jews under their covenant. Yet surely all 
who have been begotten of the spirit of adoption, all 
true sons of God, would rather say: If it were proper 
that the Israelite according to the flesh should give 
one-tenth of all his income to benevolent purposes, it 
is much more proper that we, the spiritual seed of 
Abraham, who have been still more highly favored 
than the natural seed, should render some thank-offering 
unto the Lord our God. And what shall we render 
unto the Lord? If the Jew, who had much advantage 
every way over the Gentile, should in all justice 
devote one-tenth of his income to holy things, how 
much more should we devote who, by God's grace, 
have still greater advantages every way— not only 
greater advantages than the Gentiles, the world, but 
greater advantages also than the Jew, the natural Israelite? 
What shall we not render unto the Lord our 
God, for all his benefits toward us? 

The more we consider this matter, the more we 
might properly be perplexed to know where our giving 
should end, we who are the recipients of the manifold 
grace of God— not only of the present life, but 
also of the promises of the life to come— justification 
and its joy and peace, sanctification and its rejoicing 
in hope of a share in divine glory and honor and immortality, 
and all the good things which God hath in 
reservation for them that love him. The more our 
hearts learn to appreciate the blessings of divine favor 
which have been showered upon us, the more do we 
feel not only that a tenth would be too little, but that 

R2486 : page 153 

a half would be too little, and that our all would be 
too little for us to render unto our God. 

Here the Apostle comes to our relief, and offers a 
suggestion, saying, "I beseech you, brethren, by the 
mercies of God [already received] that ye present your 
bodies living sacrifices, holy, acceptable unto God, 
which is your reasonable service." (Rom. 12:1.) Ah 
yes! that comes nearer to our reasonable service than 



anything else we can think of, and yet we realize that 

even such an offering is far too small, and does not at 

all counterbalance divine grace and mercy bestowed 

upon us. Nevertheless, seeing that it is all that we 

can give unto the Lord, we are glad to have the Apostle's 

assurance that, presented in the name and merit 

of our dear Redeemer, God would esteem it holy, and 

would accept the offering. And so, with rejoicing 

hearts, we lay our little all upon the Lord's altar in 

consecration. 

However, let us not forget that the "new creatures" 
were accepted in Christ and adopted to sonship, 
because they presented themselves to God as living sacrifices 
to be wholly his and to do only his will in all 
things. And since he who thus gives himself gives 
his life and his all, it follows that all who made this 
covenant of full consecration thereby agreed to give to 
the Lord more than ten times as much as the Jew agreed 
to in his covenant. So then the obligation of the true 
Spiritual Israelite is the greater, not the lesser, obligation 
of the two, as compared with the Jew. Our 
obligation not only absorbs all the income and profits 
on our capital and labor, but additionally the capital, 
the life, the principal. 

But now the question arises, How shall we present 
ourselves? We have given our all in consecration to 
the Lord; in what way would he have us render it unto 
him? He does not wish us to destroy our lives, 
and thus become dead sacrifices: and if we present ourselves 
living sacrifices, how little there will be to render 
to the Lord! As living beings we have certain 
necessities of our own and obligations toward others 
(we must support our own lives and the lives and happiness 
of those who are immediately under our care, 
in our own families and households): and if we attend 
to these, how little time will be left for special service 
of the Lord. Surely, it requires the largest portion 
of our time and energy to provide the "things needful" 
of the present life; and thus, to our disappointment, 
we find that the all that we had laid upon the altar 
will mean comparatively little by the time that it is 
rendered to the Lord in special services or contributions, 
or efforts on behalf of his cause. What shall 
we do? 

Realizing our perplexity, and how unsatisfactory 
this condition of things would be to those who are of 
a proper condition of heart, the Lord very graciously 
informs us of how he accepts the matter. He tells us 
that he accepts us as living sacrifices, and that this 
which we have fully and completely devoted or consecrated 
to him, and which he has accepted, he returns 
to our care and custody, making us stewards of those 
things which we have devoted— our time, our influence, 
our means, our talents— all. We are to do the best 
we can with these in our Lord's service, and if we do the 
best we can with them, to glorify him, he accepts the 



matter as tho every act and every word and every deed 
were rendered directly in his service, tho the majority 
of these acts and words and deeds may necessarily be 
used by us in attending to our own necessities, and the 
necessities of those depending upon us. How gracious 
is this arrangement by which we may not only render 

R2487 : page 153 

our all to the Lord, but give proper attention also to 

all the obligations of an earthly kind, and that with 

greater blessing, realizing that, whether we eat or 

drink, or whatsoever we do (as stewards of the Lord, 

with an eye single to his service, his glory, his pleasement), 

is accepted of him as done unto him,— as tho it 

were direct service. 

Let us remember also, during this Gospel age the 
Lord is seeking a peculiar people for a peculiar present 
and future service. He seeketh such to worship him 
as worship him in spirit and in truth— from the heart, 
and not of compulsion. Hence the Lord leaves the 
Spiritual Israelite free: he does not shower temporal 
blessings upon those who live up to their covenant, 
more than upon others, nor does he pour out curses, 
blights and troubles upon those who violate their covenant 
more than upon others. He leaves all the "house 
of sons" thus free, in order that each by his own conduct 
may manifest the sincerity or the insincerity of the 
covenant which he made. 

Thus all of the sons of God practically pass judgment 
upon themselves. 

This is illustrated in the parables of the Pounds 
and of the Talents; in these the Master shows talents 
and pounds recognized as his, entrusted to his servants 
during his absence. The servant who had not sufficient 
love for the Master to use what he possessed in his 
service was reproved, and rejected from further stewardship 
as unfaithful, unworthy. So all the sons of 
God under the New Covenant, having presented their 
all to the Lord, are now only stewards of what they 
control— principal and increase. They are given a free 
hand to do with it as they choose: "Ye are not under 
law [as servants], but under grace [liberty— as stewards]." 
But at the reckoning day all unfaithful stewards 
who failed to use their Lord's goods with energy 
in his service— time, talent, influence, as well as money 
—will be rejected, put out of further stewardship. 

R2487 : page 154 

While, therefore, the Spiritual Israelite of this 
Gospel age has a greater liberty than had the natural 
Israelite of the Jewish age, in so far as the express 
commands of the Lord are concerned, we find that, in 
proportion as he possesses the spirit of the Lord, he 
will realize a much greater obligation than his Jewish 



brother, and where this obligation is realized and appreciated, 

it will lead to faithfulness, devotion. As 

with the Jew the Lord did not make the matter of 

tithing obligatory, in the sense of enforcing it, so with 

the Spiritual Israelite he does not attempt to enforce 

his covenant obligation of full consecration, but takes 

note of our courses in life, as indicative of the measure 

of our love and appreciation of his mercies and blessings. 

Yet as God watched over the Israelites, to give 

earthly blessings, bountiful harvests, etc., to those 

who were faithful in tithing themselves, so with Spiritual 

Israel, the Lord watches over us to give us, not 

temporal, but spiritual bounties and fatness in proportion 

as we are faithful in presenting our bodies living 

sacrifices to him. Do we see some stumble and fall 

from the truth, after they have been once enlightened, 

and after they have tasted of the heavenly gift and of 

the powers of the age to come, after they have had 

much advantage every way? Do we see some feeble 

and delicate in spiritual health, and ready to be stumbled 

by the Adversary? If so, we see some who have 

been unfaithful in rendering unto the Lord their God 

that which they have covenanted. Or if they seem to 

have been energetic in his service, and yet are stumbling, 

we may rest assured that it is because their energies 

and efforts were to be seen of men, and were not 

of pure devotion to the Lord. 

It is well, of course, that our criticisms should be 
chiefly turned inward, and that each should question 
himself, rather than others, on so important a subject 
as this. We may not always know who are the Lord's, 
but we may always know that "the Lord knoweth 
them that are his"— the heart-faithful. And we may be 
sure that these shall not stumble, tho they be permitted 
to pass through trials and difficulties which would 
deceive and stumble, if it were possible, the very elect. 
To these the Lord will, with every temptation, present 
also a way of escape; he will succor them because they 
are his. As the Apostle Peter says, "If ye do these 
things [fulfil the royal law of love and devotion to 
God and the neighbor] ye shall never fall; for so an 
entrance shall be ministered unto you abundantly into 
the everlasting Kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus 
Christ. "-2 Pet. 1:10,11. 

"These things," which the Lord's people are 
to do, because they are begotten of his spirit, and 
because they are consecrated to his service, are all 
of them the things of love— the patience of love, 
the meekness of love, the long-suffering of love, 
the brotherly-kindness of love, the gentleness of 
love. These things can abound only in those who 
have been begotten of the spirit of love, and who, on 
this account, are already reckonedly dead (and daily 
dying) to their former selves, and to the selfishness 
which once ruled them, through inherited depravity 
by the fall. 



Let each reader look, of course, to his own condition 
of heart, and judge himself whether or not he is 
rich in the spirit of the Lord, whether or not his soul 
is fat, whether or not he is growing in grace and in 
love, as well as in knowledge. If any, on inspection, 
find such fatness of soul, let him rejoice, yet nevertheless, 
as the Apostle says, "rejoice with fear," lest the 
present condition of divine favor and blessing should 
give place and some earth-born cloud arise to hide the 
heavenly Father from the eyes of faith. And should 
any, upon self-examination, find leanness of soul, spiritual 
poverty, lack of progress, or perhaps a retrogression 
in spiritual matters, let such remember the Apostle's 
words,— "Let us fear, lest a promise being left us 
of entering into [divine] rest, any of us should seem 
to come short of it."— Heb. 4:1. 

Nevertheless, let not such be discouraged, but 
hearken further to the word of the Lord to fleshly Israel, 
in which he says to them, in the words of our 
text, "Bring ye all the tithes into the storehouse... 
and prove me now herewith, saith the Lord of hosts, 
if I will not open unto you the windows of heaven, 
and pour you out a blessing that there shall not be 
room enough to receive it." Let all who desire to find 
blessing in rich and overflowing measure take the Lord 
at his word, and present to him the offerings which 
we have already consecrated, and which are not our 
own, (1) because they were bought with a price, even 
the precious blood of Christ, and (2) because recognizing 
this fact, we solemnly consecrated ourselves to the 
Lord— presented our bodies living sacrifices in his service. 
Let us resolve for the future to bring to the full 
measure of our ability a reasonable service, the rendering 
of time and influence and talent and means to 
the Lord and to his cause, to his service;— that the 
words of our mouths and the meditations of our hearts 
may be pleasing to him: and let us seek that all our 
acts of life may be living epistles, read and known of 
all men, showing forth the praises of him who called 
us out of darkness into his marvelous light. 

And not only so, but let us, in proportion as we 
have been lax or careless in the past, and unfaithful 
to our vows, put forth renewed energy, to compensate, 
so far as possible, for past neglect, "redeeming 
the time," remembering also that "the days are evil" 
—that the times in which we live are unfavorable, 

R2487 : page 155 

that the tendency of our day is towards selfishness and 
worldliness more and more. 

Those whose consecration will be thus revived 
will no longer find themselves more interested in worldly 
riches, and the meat that perisheth, than in spiritual 
riches and the bread of eternal life, but contrariwise 
will seek and find opportunities, not only for 



serving the Lord in their ordinary vocation, but also 
will seek and find special opportunities of service. 
This will include the rendering to the Lord of thanks 
and worship. For in proportion as each becomes earnestly 
desirous of rendering service to the Lord, and of 
keeping his heart in the love of God, he will find it 
desirable, yea, necessary, to seek supplies at the throne 
of grace and the family altar daily, as well as to lift 
up his heart frequently in private to the Lord, in 
thankfulness, or in prayer for help in time of need. 
And likewise, at the close of every day, those who 
have been desirous of pleasing and serving the Lord 
will desire to render their report at the close of the 
day, and to inspect themselves and the efforts which 
they have made, that thus they may stimulate themselves 
in the heavenly race, and renew their vows of 
consecration. Moreover, those who are thus wholly 
consecrated to the Lord, and seek first or chiefly his 
righteousness and a share in his Kingdom, will very 
generally find opportunities for meeting together with 
others of like precious faith, to encourage one another, 
and to build one another up in the most holy faith, 
and so much the more as we see the day drawing on. 



R2488 : page 155 

QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS. 



Question.— (1) To what extent should the Lord's 
people take literally the statement, "Take no thought 
for your life, what ye shall eat or what ye shall drink, 
nor yet for your body, what ye shall put on. Is not 
the life more than meat, and the body more than raiment?" 
-Matt. 6:25-34. 

(2) How much time should the Lord's people 
take from the duties of life for Bible study and in general 
the service of the truth? 

Answer.— (1) The words of our Lord which you 
quote must be interpreted in harmony with other declarations 
of the inspired Word. They must not be interpreted 
so as to conflict with other statements. Other 
Scriptures instruct the Lord's people to labor with 
their hands, that they may have to give to those that 
have need (Eph. 4:28), and this implies forethought 
and provision in the way of laying up of money earned. 
Again, the Scriptures declare, "The children ought 
not to lay up for the parents, but the parents for the 
children" (2 Cor. 12:14)— implying some reasonable 
forethought and provision on the part of the parents 
for those whom they have brought into being. Again, 
the Apostle implies that the Christian who is fervent 
in spirit, serving the Lord, will not be slothful in any 



business (Rom. 12:11), and declares that "If any 
provide not for his own, and especially for those of 
his own house, he hath denied the faith and is worse 
than an unbeliever."— 1 Tim. 5:8. 

Interpreting our Lord's words in harmony with 
these other Scriptures, their sense would be that the 
Christian is not to take anxious care respecting the 
future, in matters beyond his control. He is, however, 
to take thought for every matter that is subject to his 
control. He is to seek to order his life so that it shall 
be useful to himself and to others. He is to remember 
the Scriptural injunction, "Go to the ant, thou sluggard; 
consider her ways and be wise," and is to follow 
the ant's custom of laying up provision in advance of 
necessity. This lesson is taught by all of our Lord's 
providences; for instance, the plowing and the sowing 
are to be done bountifully and in faith, not doubtfully 
and fearfully. So also the cultivation is to be done 
with patience, waiting for the harvest: and when the 
harvest comes the lesson of nature is that the reaper 
shall not merely reap what he wishes to eat, and let 
the next day look out for itself, but that he shall gather 
into barns, making provision for the winter and for 
the next seedtime. Our Lord's remark that the fowls 
of the air do not gather grain into barns, and yet are 
fed, nor do lilies spin, yet are clothed, was not intended 
to teach that his followers should adopt the method 
of the fowls respecting their food, nor expect to be 
clothed as the lilies. It was intended to teach confidence 
in God as our care-taker, and thus permit his 
faithful children to plow and sow in faith, to labor in 
faith, and to reap with faith, to lay up in store with 
faith, and to use with faith; recognizing every good 
gift as of the Lord (through the sun and rain, by plowing 
and reaping), the same who provides for the birds, 
tho in a different manner. The Christian is ever to remember 
that man shall not live by bread alone: that he is 
not wholly dependent upon his own energies; that his 
affairs are in the Lord's hands for supervision, and 
that the promise is, "Trust in the Lord and do good; 
so shalt thou dwell in the land, and verily thou shalt 
be fed." Putting this confidence in God's supervision 
of his affairs, while making a true Christian restful in 
mind, will not make him slovenly, careless or idle in 
doing with his might what his hands find to do, as 
unto the Lord. 

(2) Duties may at times seem to conflict, but they 
do not really do so. A Christian's first duty is his 

R2488 : page 156 

hearty acknowledgment of his Creator and Lord, in 
all his ways. His second duty, if he be a husband and 
father, is toward his wife and children; or if she be a 
wife and mother, it is toward her husband and children. 
In the divine arrangement the husband is made 



the provider of the family, and is not obeying the divine 
law if he neglect this duty— no matter for what 
reason, unless it be disability through sickness. Likewise, 
the wife's first duty is that of care-taker; looking 
after the comfort and encouragement of her husband 
and children along the path of duty. The marriage 
contract, by divine arrangement, comes in as a first 
mortgage upon every husband's time and upon every 
wife's time— the demands of this mortgage must be 
reasonably met before anything can be properly done 
to or for outsiders. 

It is a great privilege for Christians to study the 
Lord's Word, yet a great deal of study is done to no 
purpose. Study which is not put into practice in daily 
life is worse than a waste of time. It is not he that 
merely knoweth the Master's will, but he who patiently 
and perseveringly seeks to do the Master's will, that 
shall be approved and win the crown. Every reasonable 
opportunity should be used by the Lord's people 
to obtain a knowledge of the divine plan— even to the 
extent of sacrificing; but the child of the Lord will be 
particular to see that it is his own conveniences and 
comforts that he is sacrificing, and not chiefly the conveniences 
and comforts of others. The Bible study 
which is done merely at the expense of others is a sign 
of selfishness rather than a sign of a rich indwelling 
of the Lord's spirit of love. 

To make our studies of the divine plan as profitable 
as possible, we should spend as much time daily 
in dispensing the truth to others as we spend in seeking 
to feed ourselves, and Christian experience proves 
the truth of the words of Scripture, "He that watereth 
shall be watered also himself:" so that gradually 
the servant of the Lord will become more and more 
interested in handing forth the truth to others and 
finding that his own growth in knowledge and in grace 
came either in preparing to dispense the truth to others 
or while dispensing it to them. A state of lethargy, 
indolence, etc., respecting the duties of life, and respecting 
opportunities for presenting the truth to others, 
is a sure indication of spiritual poverty. It is well 
that all of the Lord's people keep ever before their 
minds the inspired words, "Not slothful in business, 
fervent [warm, zealous] in spirit, serving the Lord." 

As to the amount of time each can devote, no rule 
can be laid down except that of fervency of spirit. One 
fervent in spirit will be serving others temporally and 
spiritually nearly all the time— with his might, as his 
hand finds to do. 

Question.— Who is the "spoiler" denounced in 
Isa. 33:1— "Woe unto thee that spoilest, and thou 
wast not spoiled"? Do you consider that this verse is 
in any sense applicable to the present time of harvest? 

Answer.— The connections seem to associate this 
with the coming great time of trouble. No doubt when 
the time of trouble is fully on or nearly over it will be 



very easy to distinguish who is referred to by this 
verse. It does not seem easy to distinguish with certainty 
at the present time. 

Question.— Please give a thorough definition of the 
words sheol and hades. 

Answer.— We hope to furnish such a definition in 
the fifth volume of the DAWN series, now in preparation. 

Question.— Do you consider the history of Joseph, 
recorded in Genesis, as typical? 

Answer.— Yes; to our understanding Joseph was 
a type— various features in his history seem to be separate 
and distinct pictures of the experiences of Christ, 
Head and body, (a) Joseph was hated of his brethren, 
beloved by his father; so with Christ, (b) Joseph 
was cast into the pit by his brethren, as Jesus went 
into the pit of death for his brethren, the Jews, (c) 
Joseph's life was sold into servitude to the Egyptians, 
but became ultimately the means of the preservation 
of his entire family, as well as of the Egyptians; so 
Christ gave himself a ransom not only for his brethren 
but also for all mankind; and during the Millennial 
age will furnish "bread of life" to all who famish for 
it. (d) Joseph was sacrificed, sent to prison, because 
of his purity; so our Lord Jesus, "holy, harmless, undefiled," 
was treated as a transgressor, and went into 
the prisonhouse of death, (e) Joseph was delivered 
in due time from the prison, and made the associate 
of the king upon the throne of Egypt; so our Lord 
Jesus was raised up from the prisonhouse of death by 
the glory of the Father, to be set at his right hand in 
the glory of power, on the throne of earth; agent and 
representative of the Great King for the blessing of all 
the families of the earth, typified by the Egyptians. 

Question.— Do you understand from the prophecy 
of Ezekiel 40:40-46, that sacrifices of animals will be 
resumed after the establishment of Christ's Kingdom 
and when Israel is again in Palestine? 

Answer.— The "better sacrifices" of the Gospel 
age having taken place beforehand, we think it unlikely 
that typical sacrifices will be restored. We consider 
it more probable that antitypical sacrifices are 
referred to— the broken and contrite hearts of the people, 
and their consecration to the Lord's service being 
thus represented. However, we are to remember that 
God considered these typical sacrifices of bulls and of 
goats a good method of presenting important truths to 
the attention of fleshly Israel, and we can see that if 
such sacrifices were restored now, they would have 
much more force and meaning to similar classes than 
they had before their antitypes had come. We may 
not, therefore, be sure that the Lord will not adopt 
some such plan as this of instructing the ignorant 
masses of mankind, as preparatory to higher lessons— 
as illustrations of spiritual things. 



R2489 : page 157 
"UNTO THE UTTERMOST PARTS OF THE EARTH." 



MY DEAR SIR AND BROTHER: --Will you allow 
me, in the spirit of love and humility, 
to call your attention to two or three scientific errors 
which have crept into your papers? 

Z.W.T., Mar. 1, '97, p. 74, column 1, says, "the 
healing may be said to have been in a natural way by 
the removal of the injured cornea." If the cornea itself 
were removed, the anterior chamber of the eye 
would be open, and with the consequent exposure of 
the iris, pupil and lens, the eye would inevitably be 
destroyed. The removal of the injury to the cornea, 
in a natural way, would probably be effected by the 
dried exudation from the inflamed structures (scab or 
scale) falling off. 

[The EDITOR acknowledges, freely, that he should 
have added the word portion and thus have said— "by 
the removal of a portion of the injured cornea." 
Thanks for the correction.] 

Z.W.T., June 1, '98, p. 172, column 2, says,— 
"As it was the full of the moon, a solar eclipse could 
have lasted but a few minutes at most." That is an 
unfortunate expression, for at the full of the moon a 
solar eclipse is an impossibility. A solar eclipse is 
only possible at the time of new moon, and owing to 
the varying rates at which the two bodies travel it is 
not possible under the most favorable circumstances 
for a total eclipse to last longer than seven minutes, 
and an average eclipse is two or three minutes only. 
The most favorable circumstances are, (1) The sun at 
greatest distance from the earth, i.e., the earth at 
aphelion; (2) the moon at least distance from the 
earth (at perigee); and (3) the observer must be on 
the central line of totality. 

[We are at a loss to understand how this statement 
crept in and thought to have corrected it in our 
next issue: we concluded not to do so, thinking that 
few of our readers would notice the error, and that 
those who had noticed it would recognize it as a "slip 
of the pen." We should have said— "As it was at 
the full of the moon, a solar eclipse even for a few 
moments was an impossibility."— EDITOR.] 

In Z.W.T., Oct. 15, '95, p. 241, column 1, and 
in tract No. 40, p. 3, line 4, it is stated:— "The heart 
whose valves in turn propelled them to every part of 
the body." The function of the valves is not to propel, 
but to stop, the current of blood. It is the strong 
muscular heart wall itself which, contracting, forces 
the blood out of its cavities into the vessels, and the 
blood pressure thus produced shuts down the valves, 



closing certain orifices, to prevent the backward flow 
of the blood. In sending out this excellent tract I am 
taking the liberty of erasing the two words "whose 
valves" and substituting "which" in their place. 

[Thanks for this correction also: our thought was 
that the heart is a pump with necessary valves. We 
will correct our next edition of Tract No. 40 to read— 
"The heart as a pump in turn propelled them to every 
part of the body. "-EDITOR.] 

I am sure your large heart will easily bear with 
me, as I call your attention to these points, and my 
only reason for doing so is that some readers, I fear, 
may reject your more precious Bible expositions because 
they detect an error in your science. 

[Fortunately, dear Brother, the EDITOR has never 
laid claim to infallibility on scientific or other matters. 
He is on the contrary pleased to have honest criticism 
from any quarter— appreciating it specially when it 
comes from "brethren" and in a brotherly, loving 
spirit. We strive to exercise great care that our every 
utterance may be as the Scriptures direct— "as the 
oracles of God." (1 Pet. 4:11.) The EDITOR can 
scarcely hope that these three are the only errors and 
"slips" of his pen, in the publications of the past twenty 
years, and requests that if you or other readers note 
other errors worthy of correction you will kindly communicate 
them.] 

You may like to see the circular letter, 5,000 of 
which I have had printed, and which I am sending out 
to all missionaries in China, Japan, Corea and Siam. 
I enclose a copy. 

[Our readers are interested in all efforts to serve the Truth 
to others— we therefore print Brother Randle's Circular Letter 
in full.-EDITOR.] 

"There has arisen a witness for God and his Christ, 
an expositor of Bible truth, such as may be safely said 
has not hitherto appeared. 

"The question is, 'Is this man's testimony of God?' 
I believe it is. He claims little, but he teaches much. 
He teaches that the conflicting creeds of Christendom 
are out of harmony with God; and that even some of 
the most cherished doctrines regarded as orthodox, 
are wrong. If what this man writes is true, he is the 
veritable John the Baptist of this age, or at least the 
voice of one crying in witness to the second presence 
(not coming) of the Son of God. 

"If his interpretations are true, he is 'that servant' 
now engaged in 'giving meat in due season to the 
household of faith. '-Matt. 24:45,46. 

"It is of course a very easy thing to see error in 
the teaching of other churches than that to which we 
belong. The Episcopalian sees the Nonconformist as 
astray from the main track of truth, the Baptist recognizes 
the mistakes of Methodism, the Brethren condemn 
both these churches, while the Presbyterians 
regard the last-named as distinctly misled, and so it is 



more or less all round. The greatest difficulty of all 
is to detect one's own errors of Christian doctrine and 
practice. We are (generally speaking) all of us, so 
sure that we have the Scripture interpretation correct, 
and are so confident of our own position, that for one 
to call anything in question is an offence. That branch 
of the Christian church to which we belong is much 
more frequently determined by the accident of our 
natural birth, than by the circumstance of our 
regeneration. 

"Can it be within the bounds of possibility, that 
the views commonly held as orthodox are mistaken 

R2489 : page 158 

ones, just as was the case with Israel at Christ's first 
appearance? Read 'MILLENNIAL DAWN' and see. We 
think the Jews were terribly mistaken to reject Christ 
as they did. Are we quite sure we have got hold of 
the truth just as God means it? Read 'MILLENNIAL 
DAWN' and see. Either the author of DAWN is wrong 
or we are. Of course it is easy,— perhaps all too natural, 
—to rashly conclude the author of DAWN must be 
wrong. Still it would be safer to examine his testimony 
and the Scriptures, to see if these things are so. 

"How every age that has ever lived before us has 
failed to see the hand of God at work at the time; 
and as it was in the days of Noah, so it shall be in the 
days of the coming (presence) of the Son of Man. 

"God gives his evidence in strange ways, emphatically 
not in the way commonly expected. 

"I therefore beg all who are desirous of possessing 
the pure gold of God's truth, to examine what 
this servant of God has written. The most important 
are four volumes of MILLENNIAL DAWN, which show 
the character, circumstances, and time, of the coming 
Kingdom of God. It may be that some will feel inclined 
to lightly toss this aside without much thought 
(as I did myself six years ago). I beg you do not so. 
If you hunger for God's truth, the living bread, at 
least read carefully the first volume of 'MILLENNIAL 
DAWN.'" [Signed.] 

I am also advertising DAWN in local prints, and 
if I may but be used in bringing some others into the 
light and joy of the truth I shall be satisfied. 

I have sold several of the DAWNS to missionaries, 
and this week I received a very encouraging letter 
from one who had bought the first volume a few weeks 
ago, and he now writes:— 

"Please forward me the other three volumes of 
MILLENNIAL DAWN. I have been deeply interested 
in reading the first volume. I am determined by the 
grace of God to go to the bottom of these questions, 
cost what they will. If the DAWN teaching is according 
to God's Word, it will need humility of mind for 
us to confess how thoroughly we have been mistaken 



and to retrace our steps." 

On the contrary many speak against it, and some 
with bitterness, but it is (for the most part) those who 
only hear of it, or only read superficially. But whether 
few or many receive the truth, our strong confidence 
is in God's own purpose regarding his Word, which he 
has clearly stated in Isaiah 55:11. 

My wife and eldest daughter rejoice with me in 
the light of God's truth now shining. We pray for 
you, and your colaborers, and for all who love the 
present truth, that God will graciously preserve us all 
until the manifestation. I am, 

Yours in the love and service of Christ, 

HORACE A. RANDLE, -China. 

P.S.-Poor WONG CHIN FOO (DAWN, VOL. 4, 
p. 253) died suddenly of heart failure at Wei Hai Wei 
on Sept. 13th last. A few weeks before he had visited 
Teng Chaufu where he first heard of and learned Christianity. 
He then remarked to a Baptist missionary 
that "he supposed the most wicked thing he ever did, 
was to write that letter, 'Why Am I a Heathen?' but 
he never supposed that it would cause so great a 
sensation." H. A. R. 

"SEND OUT THY LIGHT AND TRUTH, O LORD!" 



From earliest childhood the EDITOR has had a 
deep interest in the heathen, and naturally a deep interest 
in missionaries. At the early age of seven years 
he expressed to his mother his intention to become a 
missionary, and a little later with other Sunday School 
children contributed his mite to the building of "The 

R2490 : page 158 

Morning Star" missionary boat— abstaining from certain 
table luxuries that he might have the value thereof 
to contribute as his own donation, that had cost him 
something and was not merely his parent's gift. 
This sympathetic love for the heathen has not 
abated in all these years; but under the leadings of the 
Divine Word and providences it took a different turn 
than he had first intended. As the divine plan of salvation 
unfolded to him, he saw clearly that the Lord's 
sympathetic love for the heathen so far from being less 
than his own was greater. He gradually came to see 
that God's plan of salvation as he has purposed it in 
himself, from before the creation of the world, has made 
abundant provision for "every man that cometh into 
the world"— that all should "come to an accurate 
knowledge of the truth"— to a knowledge of him who 
is "the way, the truth and the life" and by whom alone 
access to the Father and restitution to his favor and 
blessing are possible. He came to see, also, that God 



is operating his great plan methodically, and that, as 
there was a "fullness of time" in which our Savior 
should be born, so also there is a "due time" in which 
the knowledge and blessing flowing from his redemptive 
sacrifice shall be made effective to all who will accept 
this favor under the terms of the New Covenant 
sealed with the precious blood.— John 1:9; 1 Tim. 2:4-6; 
Gal. 3:16,29. 

In harmony with this he soon learned from the 
Word that the Church, the "little flock," "the very 
elect," who are to win the "prize of the high calling," 
offered during this Gospel age, are to be but a "first 
fruits unto God and the Lamb." (Rev. 14:4; Jas. 1:18.) 
And the completion of this specially elect Church 
with the close of the present age will therefore be but 
the beginning, and not the ending, of the great plan of 
salvation which God has purposed.— Isa. 55:9-11. 

In a word, he came to see that in God's great 
plan the present Gospel age is merely for the selection 
and education of those whom God purposes to use as 
his ministers, his missionaries to the world in general, 
in the next age, the Millennium. These are to be the 
"royal priesthood," to whom (under Christ the King 
of kings and Priest of priests) shall be committed the 
full control of earth during the "times of restitution 
of all things which God hath spoken by the mouth of 
all his holy prophets since the world began."— Luke 12:32; 
19:12-15; 22:29; Jas. 2:5; 2 Pet. 1:11; Dan. 2:44; 
7:18,22; Matt. 13:43; Rev. 20:4; Acts 3:19-23. 

R2490 : page 159 

From this standpoint it soon became evident to 
him that the duty of the hour is not the uplifting of 
heathendom,— for which work God has specially appointed 
a coming age and is specially preparing teachers, 
who will be granted plenary powers for that work. 
Accordingly, instead of seeking foreign fields of service, 
he sought a more and more intimate knowledge of 
the divine plan from the divine Word— to the intent 
that he might be a coworker with God in his work. 
And the due time for revealing to the Church the divine 
plan respecting its participation with Christ in the 
blessing of all the families of the earth— "the mystery 
hid from past ages and dispensations,"* having come, 
he has been privileged by God's grace to serve this 
"meat in due season" to many of the Lord's people 
far and near.-Eph. 3:3,4,9; 5:32; Col. 1:26,27; 
Rev. 10:7; Matt. 24:45 

Further light upon the Word showed that this 
knowledge is now granted because due, because we 
have reached the period designated by our Lord as the 
"harvest" or closing period of this age.* We most 
firmly believe that this is the "harvest message" which 
as the Lord's sickle is to gather the ripe "wheat" of 
the living Church and that all associated with the promulgation 



of this message are reapers in this harvest, 

colaborers with the great Chief Reaper— our Lord and 

Head. He believes that this message and these messengers 

are figuratively referred to in Matt. 13:39,41, 

as doing a separating work in the Church— gathering 

the jewels, making ready the bride, the Lamb's 

wife, for the "marriage,"— gathering the elect from 

the four winds— from one end of the ecclesiastical 

heavens to the other.*— Matt. 24:31. 

If it be argued that the work is insignificant in 
comparison to the great institutions of Christendom 
surnamed in the Scriptures "Babylon," we reply: It 
is God's usual method to choose the weak things, and 
the things that are despised; that it may be the more 
manifest that not the arm and spirit of man have accomplished 
the results, but the arm and spirit of Jehovah 
—our Lord Jesus and the "spirit of the truth." It 
may be argued, also, that less than sixteen years of the 
"harvest" period remain and that the Scriptural indications 
are that all of the elect will have been found 
and "changed" probably four years before the harvest 
ends— before the climax of the great time of trouble. 
We answer, Yes; but each year puts the present truth 
into more concrete form and increases opportunities 
(financially and otherwise) for reaching all who 
have "an ear to hear" (Matt. 13:43); and each year 
under divine Providence brings the ears of the consecrated 
—the Watchers, the Jewels— into better condition 
to hear the Lord's message.— Rev. 18:4-8. 

Here, for instance, are the missionaries in far off 
China and Japan having this "harvest" message served 
to them by a dear brother in their midst. We have 
no idea that all missionaries have the true missionary 
spirit; but undoubtedly some of them have: and all 
such having ears to hear will surely hear, and be gathered 
by the truth out of sectarian bondage and the 
slavery of error and fear into the blessed liberty of the 
spirit of the Lord, the spirit of the truth, the spirit of 
Love; and into the closer oneness with our great Head 
which accompanies a knowledge of the truth to the faithful. 
May the Lord richly bless dear Brother Randle's efforts 
to serve the truth to others— more than compensating 
him for his consequent trials and self-sacrifices. 

Nor have we been idle as respects foreign missionaries, 
for during the past year we sent out large 
numbers of TOWERS and tracts to English speaking 
missionaries in all parts of the world. 

And as it relates to "foreign missions," but of 
another kind, we here mention that the past year has 
witnessed considerable progress of the truth in Great 
Britain, Germany, Switzerland, Sweden and Denmark, 
and an entrance has been effected into France 
and Norway. We hope for additional coworkers 
(Colporteurs) in all these foreign fields as well as here 
in the home field, which thus far seems to yield the 
largest returns of "wheat"— under divine providence, 



previously gathered here from every nation under 

heaven. All of the Lord's people filled with his spirit 

must be engaged in this work in some manner. (Jer. 20:9,10.) 

And "he that reapeth [using his abilities 

and opportunities] receiveth wages and gathereth fruit 

unto life eternal." (John 4:36.) Therefore, let each 

one who has tasted of this grace of God be forward to 

avail himself to his utmost in using his privilege of 

being a colaborer with his Lord. 



*See MILLENNIAL DAWN for Scriptural proofs. 



R2490 : page 159 

DIVINE MERCY IN HOSEA'S PROPHECY. 

--JULY 2.--HOS. 14:1-9.- 

"Come, let us return unto the Lord."— Hos. 6:1. 

FOR THE next six months the International Lessons 
are in the Old Testament, and begin with 
the closing words of Hosea's prophecy. 

To appreciate the lesson it is necessary that we 
have at least a general understanding of the time and 
circumstances under which the prophecy was given. 
Hosea was a resident and prophet in the kingdom of 
Israel— the ten-tribe kingdom— during a part of the 
period in which Isaiah was prophesying in the kingdom 
of Judah— the two-tribe kingdom. We recall in our 
lessons of last year (Sept. 4) the death-bed of Elisha, 
and his instructions to Joash, the king of the ten-tribe 
kingdom, to smite upon the ground, and his explanation 
that the smiting of the ground three times with 
the arrows by Joash represented three victories which 
he would gain over Syria, effecting the full deliverance 
of Israel from Syrian control. Those promised victories 
were gained, and for a time Israel made great strides 
nationally, extending its borders to very nearly the area 
of territory controlled by David and Solomon (Judah 
excepted). This condition of things was favored by 
dissensions in Egypt and in Assyria, the greater nations 
near. The Lord manifested his favor to Israel in token 
of the measurable reformation begun by Joash by giving 

R2490 : page 160 

bountiful harvests also, so that the land became 
very wealthy and prosperous from the large crops, as 
well as from the spoils taken in war. 

But these prosperities, which were in full accord 
with the covenant God had made with Israel at Sinai 



(Deut. 28:1-14), instead of leading the people back 
to God and to full obedience to their covenant, seem to 
have had before long a very different effect. Soon they 
forgot that the prosperities were the results of divine 
favor, and, in the language of Scripture, the nation 
"went whoring after other gods." Undoubtedly one 
thing which especially made the false religions attractive 
was the fact that their worship and ceremonies gave 
loose reign to licentiousness, and even gave a certain 
sanctity to it. Thus their great prosperity led Israel 
into idolatry and into general licentiousness and corruption, 
worse, probably, than at any other period of 
their history, and this led to their utter rejection by 

R2491 :page 160 

the Lord, delivering them to the Assyrians, who took 
the entire nation captive. 

Hosea's prophesying was at the time of Israel's 
depravity, just preceding their captivity. Through the 
Prophet the Lord appeals to Israel, pointing out his 
loving tender care for them from the very beginning of 
their history as a nation, pointing out their backsliding 
attitude, their falseness to him— picturing them as a 
false wife and God himself as a most merciful husband. 

It would appear that the Lord permitted Hosea to 
have certain very trying experiences in domestic troubles, 
with a view to impressing upon his mind the 
Lord's view of Israel, his spouse. The Prophet, in the 
very opening of his book, declares that the word of the 
Lord first came unto him in connection with his domestic 
trials. The Prophet had married, seemingly by 
divine providence, an attractive girl, named Gomer, 
whom he dearly loved, and who at the time of their 
marriage was quite probably true and worthy of his 
affection— or it is possible to understand from the account 
that the Prophet, loving her, hoped to fully reclaim 
her,— but, infected with the general immorality 
of the time, she proved unfaithful, so that only her 
first child was recognized by the Prophet. The names 
given to the succeeding two show that the Prophet did 
not acknowledge them. Dr. George Adam Smith remarks: 
"Hosea does not claim the second child, and in 
the name of this little lass, Lo-ruhamah, 'She that never 
knew a father's love,' orphan, not by death, but by her 
mother's sin, we find proof of the Prophet's awakening 
to the tragedy of his home. Nor does he own the 
third child, named Lo-ammi, 'Not my people.' That 
could also mean, 'No kin of mine.' Once at least, but 
probably oftener, Hosea had forgiven the woman, and 
until the sixth year she stayed in his house. Then 
either he put her from him, or she went her own way. 
She sold herself for money, and finally drifted, like all 
of her class, into slavery." 

The Prophet's sympathy went out to his wife to 
the extent that he redeemed her from slavery, as recorded. 



(3:1-3.) These severe experiences through 

which the Prophet passed seemed to be preparing him 

to voice the Lord's sentiments of tender compassion to 

Israel, his espoused one, who so frequently and persistently 

went after other gods. If the prophecy of Hosea 

be read from this standpoint its tender compassionate 

appeals will be appreciated as from no other. 

Our lesson is the conclusion of the matter. First, 
the Prophet is represented as addressing the people: 
"O Israel, return unto the Lord thy God, for thou hast 
fallen by thine iniquity; take with you words and turn to 
Jehovah"— words of contrition, promises of reformation. 

Then Israel is represented as speaking in a repentant 
attitude, saying: "Say unto him [the Lord], take 
away all iniquity and receive us graciously: so shall we 
render the calves of our lips. Assher shall not save us; 
we will not ride upon horses, neither will we say any 
more to the work of our hands, Ye are our gods: for in 
thee the fatherless find mercy." 

This is the attitude of heart in which all "Israelites 
indeed" throughout this Gospel age are returning 
to the Lord;— not those alone who are Israelites according 
to the flesh, but those also who are called to fill up 
the elect number from every nation under heaven; to 
become members of the holy nation, the peculiar people, 
by becoming the Bride, the Lamb's wife. The 
Lord has indeed graciously received them, and has put 
away their iniquity— through the blood of the cross. 

The Lord's answer is recorded in vss. 4-6, saying, 
"I will heal their backsliding, I will love them freely 
[unmeritedly], for my anger is turned away from him. 
[Spiritual Israel is not received of Jehovah as a woman, 
but as a man, of which Christ Jesus our Lord is Head 
and his Church the members of his body, accepted in 
the Beloved.] I will be as the dew [refreshment] unto 
Israel; he shall grow [thrive] as the lily [whose growth 
in Palestine is remarkable], and cast forth his roots as 
Lebanon [the trees of Mt. Lebanon had very sturdy 
roots]. His branches shall spread, and his beauty 
shall be as an olive [everlasting], and his fragrance as 
Lebanon." Thus does the Lord picture the development 
and establishment of his true Israel, the Christ. 

Then follows a picture of the blessings of the Millennial 
reign of Spiritual Israel as God's Kingdom; the 
revival and restitution of Israel and of all the nations 
is symbolically pictured, saying: 

"They that dwell under his shadow shall return 
[have restitution]; they shall revive as the corn and 
flourish as a vine, and the fragrance thereof shall be as 
the wine of Lebanon. Ephraim [one of the names 
given to the ten-tribe kingdom, and also symbolically 
used sometimes in referring to nominal churchianity] 
shall say, What have I to do any more with idols? I 
have heard him [the great Prophet— Acts 3:22] and 
observed [obeyed] him; I am like a green fir tree [an 
evergreen tree,— symbolically representative of the possession 



of everlasting life]. From [in] me is thy fruit 
found;"— the fruits of the spirit. 

In conclusion, attention is called to the fact that 
not by earthly wisdom and intelligence can these predictions 
be comprehended. They shall be understood 
only by those who are taught of the Lord with the true 
wisdom which cometh down from above: as the Prophet 
declares, "The [truly] wise shall understand, but none 
of the wicked shall understand."— Dan. 12:10. 

We give the translation of this last verse from 
Leeser, as follows: "Who is wise that he may understand 
these things? intelligent, that he may know 
them? For righteous are the ways of the Lord, and 
the just shall walk in them [understand them], but 
the transgressors will stumble through them [misapprehend 
them]." 



page 161 

Vol. XX. JULY 1, 1899. No. 13. 



CONTENTS. 



"The Bishop of London on 

'Getting On'" 163 

Daniel in Babylon 165 

In the Fiery Furnace 168 

Weighed in the Balances 172 

Interesting Letters 175 

Attendants at Indianapolis Convention 

Should Secure Quarters 162 

page 162 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
--ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, N.Y. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity or 
adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, if they 
send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting the 
paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list 
continually. 



WILL YOU ATTEND THE INDIANAPOLIS CONVENTION? 

-NOTIFICATIONS- 
SHOULD BE RECEIVED PROMPTLY TO SECURE ACCOMMODATIONS. THE 
CITY WILL BE CROWDED WrTH EPWORTH LEAGUERS. 

Arrangements are completed for a Convention of believers in 
the Second Coming of the Lord and the Plan of the Ages,— to 
be held at Indianapolis, Ind., July 21st to 23d, as follows:— 

The Railroad fare will be one-half the usual, except from a 
few points which will add $2 to the one fare for round trip. All 
passenger trains run into Union depot, which is about three 
blocks distant from the meeting place of the Convention— 
"Shover's Hall," on Market Street, between Delaware and Alabama 
Avenues. 

Accommodations— good and clean— have been arranged for, 



at the very reasonable rate of ninety-five cents per day, at "Barton's 
Hotel," No. 29 Virginia Ave. Such ZION'S WATCH TOWER 
readers as cannot afford even this modest sum, will be entertained 
free, by the Indianapolis friends, with great pleasure. 
Those who ride to the hotel can take any car leaving the Union 
depot and should ask for "transfer" when they pay their fare. A 
"Reception Committee" will meet all the friends at the Barton 
Hotel— except during convention hours, when it will be at 
Shover's Hall, as above mentioned. 

The following program will be followed closely as practicable: 

Friday, July 21st.— The opening "rally" will be at 10 A.M., 
conducted by Brother C. A. Owen— an opportunity for getting 
generally acquainted. At 3 P.M. the assembly will be addressed 
by the Editor of this Journal from the text— "Looking for the 
blessed hope, even the glorious appearing of our great God and 
Savior, Jesus Christ." (Titus 2:13.) At 7:30 P.M. an address on 
the Ages and Dispensations of the divine plan, illustrated by 
the Chart of the Ages, may be expected. 

Saturday, July 22d.— Testimony Meeting at 8 A.M. Preaching 
at 10:30 A.M. by the Editor of this Journal: subject, "The Law 
of the Spirit of Life in Christ Jesus." (Rom. 8:2.) At 3 P.M. 
a discourse by Bro. M. L. McPhail— "Sanctify them through 
thy Truth." At 7:30 P.M. a discourse from the Chart. 

Sunday, July 23d. -Testimony Meeting 8:30 A.M.; at 10:30 a 
discourse by Bro. M. L. Staples on "The Offence of the Cross;" 
at 3 P.M., "I am not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ," by the 
Editor; at 7:30 P.M., "Preserving the Unity of the Spirit in the 
bonds of peace"— several speakers. 

All who love the Lord, trust in the precious blood and wait 
for his Kingdom, are cordially invited to attend this Convention 
which recognizes only the one Church and her one Lord, 
one faith and one baptism. All such will please address the 
WATCH TOWER SOC'Y as soon as they know definitely that they 
will attend, stating in few words who will be of their party, 
and whether or not they will stop at the hotel. There will be 
an opportunity for symbolizing baptism. 



R2491 :page 163 
"THE BISHOP OF LONDON ON 'GETTING ON.'" 



"THE Bishop of London possesses a mind of unusual 

interest, and everything that he says is 

worth paying attention to, whether we agree with it 

or not. In addressing the pupils of the Philological 

School the other day, he took as the subject of his remarks, 

'Success in Life.' Considering his own career, 

one might expect that he would justify, and possibly 

glorify, success, for few men of our generation have 

risen more rapidly and achieved such brilliant success 

as he. But the Bishop did not take that line of thought 

at all, and we are glad that he did not. Enough and 



too much has been written for boys as to the way in 
which they may regard the world as their oyster to 
open at their will. Strength, instead of purity, of will 
has too often been represented as the most desirable of 
attainments. Now we do not doubt for one moment 
that this element of great will-power is an important 
element in the building up of character. Without it 
nothing can be achieved that is worth achieving. But 
mere strength of will may, and often is, accompanied 
by the worst traits in human character. We need not 
accept all the deductions of Schopenhauer to agree with 
him that what he calls the 'will to live' is a root of all 
the crime, sensuality, and base unsatisfied longings 
which make up the carnal side of human nature. 

"It is true that Nature itself implants this forceful 
'will to live' in every one of us, and that without 
it the human race would soon cease to exist when confronted 
with the terrific forces of the material universe. 
It is true that great and beneficent discoveries are due 
to the persistence of this intense will in us. It is even 
further true that many noble qualities, and no little of 
the social and the humanizing elements in life, are intimately 
connected with a powerful will. Many of the 
great human scourges of the race have, unconsciously 
and unintentionally, done immense good for mankind 
through the possession of this vast overflowing energy. 
'There shall be no Alps,' said Napoleon in his selfish 
desire to conquer Italy, and the result was the wonderful 
roads which connected Northern and Southern 
Europe. If ever there was an example on a colossal 
human scale of the 'will to live,' it was embodied in 
Peter the Great, an awful and drunken barbarian; but 
see what he did for Russia. In this world, whose ultimate 
problems we do not pretend to solve, the 'will 
to live,' with all its potential consequences, is a great 
fact without which the human race would gradually 
die out. 

"Now the successful man, in the ordinary sense 
of the word, is he who develops in himself in an abnormal 
degree this 'will to live.' We in the Western 
world scarcely recognize that this 'will to live' carried 
to great lengths is not only not universal among mankind, 
but is rather exceptional in its operations. It is 
the brute inheritance, at least on one side, against 
which some of the great religions of the world have 
contended, and contended with success. The East as 
a whole finds in the quiescence of the will, in its passive 
submission to a vast and supreme Power, the solution 
of the problem of life. Even among Western 
peoples the average man lives with content amid the 

R2492 : page 163 

'petty murmur of his bourg' rather than contends for 
the great material prizes of life, or what are supposed 
to be such. It is well that this is so, for if every one 



were fired by the ambition of a successful general, 
or politician, or merchant, the competition among men 
would be so terrible that, from another point of view, 
annihilation would be the lot of humanity. Men would 
not be able to stand the strain, nor would Nature afford 
the mass of them the opportunity for attaining, 
or even seriously striving for, the object of their ambition. 
Earth would become a hell, and this green 

R2492 : page 164 

globe would witness tragedies compared with which 

the most awful in history would dwindle into insignificance. 

Most men are, happily for themselves and 

for their fellows, contented, like the Apostle, with 

food and raiment, and taking the world as a whole, they 

live the lives of decent and faithful fathers, sons, husbands, 

and friends. Ambition is the mark of a comparative 

few, and what are called the prizes of life are 

contended for by an insignificant minority. 

"We say that this is well, and the Bishop of London 
is evidently in agreement with our position, for he 
does not think that success in life usually develops the 
best qualities among men. It is indeed true, as Wordsworth 
said, that it is dangerous to look on tyrants with 
a dazzled eye, and one might add that it is not quite 
safe for most men to take as their models those who 
are generally estimated to be successful men. There 
can be, as the Bishop said, no absolute rule as to what 
one should do to gain success. One may spend one's 
life in the most praiseworthy diligence, and yet die 
poor, unknown, and be accounted by the world as a 
failure, tho happily the world's coarse judgments do 
not constitute the final court of appeal. One may master 
all science, one may be a great thinker, and yet 
pass away from these noises of earth unrecognized, 
and even laughed at, by one's fellow-men. 

"It has been reserved for few great men to attain 
renown in their own lifetime. They have been hated 
and ridiculed, while the shallow charlatan has won the 
success of his age. This is, indeed, such a truism, 
that one does not need to dwell on the fact. If we are 
to measure character, genius and worth by the standard 
of success, we should have to say that the great 
men of the world have been among the least successful 
men. What does seem to us to ensure success is 
some overplus of human energy with which a man is 
born, and which cannot be created in him afterwards, 
and which is directed towards the attainment of objects 
that can be best appreciated by the average man. 
There is a general demand in the world at any given 
time for a kind of mechanical talent rising at times to 
genius, but of a variety which can be estimated by 
common people, and which can apply itself to objects 
of general desire. He who possesses this kind of overplus 
of human energy is the successful man, because 



he holds a monopoly of what all desire and of what all 
can appreciate. To him all the world's a stage, and 
all the men and women merely players, and he soon 
finds out that he can play the best game of them all 
in some particular line. 

"In a world such as ours, how far is it wise to encourage 
that kind of talent? Religion, as we have 
said, over most of the Eastern world has persuaded 
countless millions of people that this kind of success 
is not worth while. Buddhism and Brahminism have 
indoctrinated a large proportion of the human race with 
a positive contempt for the kind of existence which 
alone seems worth having for a member of the New 
York Stock Exchange. Indeed, if we contemplate the 
two varieties of mankind from a spiritual, instead of a 
physical, point of view, we might be led to doubt 
whether the human race had a common origin. There 
seems absolutely nothing in common between the two 
types. 

"On the one hand, we see the action dictated by 
the strong will, by the 'will to live' endowed with keen 
intelligence and a rather low standard of aspiration. 
On the other side, we see a being who is striving— 
for what? For the cessation of all will, for the attainment, 
not of material commodities, not even of mental 
good, but of entire peace and calm, and to him all the 
efforts of human life in our busy civilization seem entirely 
purposeless and even absurd. Are we to take 
the extreme Oriental view, or must we accept the 
standard of the strong will as believed in and acted 
upon by the busy men of our busy world? If the latter 
is a true theory of life, then we must accept the successful 
man as our hero, even tho we cannot teach our 
youths how to imitate his example. 

"We think there is a mean between these extremes, 
as there is between most extremes. We cannot 
annihilate 'the will to live,' because existence itself 
on our planet depends upon its mysterious operation. 
Neither can we desire the larger development of the 
'will to live,' the will carried to an abnormal point, as 
in a very great general or financier, among average 
men. All that we want among average men, as Hegel 
said, is that they should be good men in all the fundamental 
relations of life. If they happen to achieve 
that reward which, as Coleridge says, so rarely comes 
to merit, well and good. 

"But it is well that most men should not go out 
of their way to seek rewards. So long as they are 
standing on the ground of right, they are safe; but the 
moment they quit that point of moral vantage for the 
perilous peaks of human ambition, they are usually 
lost. They must not, then, put forth the abnormal 
'will to live,' but neither must they crush that will 
without which human life would be empty of all positive 
content. No, what is really needed among men 
is a pure will, a will cleansed of all that degrades life 



while prolonging it and extending its relations. This 
was the best Greek idea, it is also the Christian idea, 
which comes to men, not as taking away the real content 
of life, but as giving life more abundantly; but 
life which can control those fiery courses of the soul 
instead of leaving them to their own ungoverned sway. 
On the whole, therefore, we say with the Bishop that 
success in life is a dubious object of desire, since it is 
connected inextricably with so much that wars against 
the soul. But we must not, as the Germans say, throw 
away the baby along with the bath. We must accept 
the will, but we must give to it that direction and noble 
purpose which render it truly free." 
—London Spectator. 



R2492 : page 165 

DANIEL IN BABYLON. 

JULY 9.-DANIEL 1:8-21. 

"Daniel purposed in his heart that he would not defile himself.' 

DANIEL is set before us in the Scriptures as one 
whom the Lord loved. His standing with the 
Almighty is strikingly presented through the Prophet 
Ezekiel, where the Lord, speaking of the sureness of 
his judgments about to come upon the land of Judah, 
said, "Tho these three men, Noah, Daniel and Job, 
were in it, they should deliver but their own souls by 
their righteousness." (Ezek. 14:14.) These words 
were spoken by Ezekiel shortly before the desolation of 
Jerusalem, while Daniel was in Babylon, where he had 
risen to a position of great prominence; and his fame 
no doubt had reached his home. 

Daniel was carried captive with Jehoiachim, king 
of Judah, and many of the nobility of the land of Israel, 
eighteen years before the final captivity in the 
days of Zedekiah, when the land was left desolate without 
an inhabitant, and the seventy years of desolation 
began. Daniel was fourteen years old when carried 
captive to Babylon, and consequently lived to the extreme 
age of over one hundred years.— Dan. 1:21. 

The Book of Daniel is one of those against which 
the "higher critics" expend special energy, some being 
inclined to call it a fiction, while others declare it 
to be a history of the period of Antiochus Epiphanes 
(over three hundred years after Daniel's death) and 
that it was written by some unknown writer who attached 
Daniel's name as a disguise. Modern science 
and the higher critics are very much opposed to anything 
in the nature of positive prophecy— anything 
claiming to be of direct divine inspiration, and in any 
sense of the word attempting to foretell the future. The 



Book of Daniel is preeminently marked with these 
characteristics, and hence it, more than any other book 
of the Old Testament, has the reprobation of these 
gentlemen. But the Lord forewarned us, through the 
Apostle and the Prophet, of these wise men, whose wisdom 
would become a trap and a snare unto them, so 
that "the wisdom of their wise men shall perish, and 
the understanding of their prudent men shall be hid 
[obscured]. "-Isa. 29:14; 1 Cor. 1:26-29. 

Our Lord also pointed out that these things are hidden 
from the wise and prudent and revealed unto babes 
—made clear to those who make no boast of wisdom 
according to the course of this world. (Matt. 11:25.) 
How true to facts we find this to be! While many of 
the great and learned are stumbling themselves into 
higher criticism and other forms of infidelity, the Lord's 
"little ones," meek, humble, teachable from the Father's 
Word, are being instructed, and are growing in 

R2493 : page 165 

grace and in the knowledge of the truth. 

To those who have clearly in mind the presentations 
and interpretations of Daniel's prophecies as presented 
in MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOLS. I., II. and III., there 
is no need for elaborate arguments to prove that this 
wonderful Book of Daniel is not a fiction, but more 
wonderful by far than any fiction that could have been 
written. And to them it will be useless to declare it a 
history of events which transpired 167 B.C. and falsely 
set forth as a prophecy by Daniel; for they see fulfilments, 
past, present and to come, far larger and grander 
and more wonderful than anything which occurred at 
the date named— they see in these fulfilments unmistakable 
evidence of superhuman intelligence, and that, 
as Daniel declared, the most high God therein revealed 
the secrets of his plan still future. 

Our lesson proper finds Daniel with others of the 
Jewish captives in Babylon, where, according to custom, 
the king had made choice of a number of the most 
promising of the captive youths to pass a three-years' 
course of education in the sciences, Babylon being 
at this time the center of learning. The object in 
this was no doubt two-fold: the Babylonian monarch 
thus attempted to associate with his empire the learning 
and skill of the world, and to promote a friendly 
feeling as between Babylon and the various countries 
over which it held sway, that foreign nations might 
feel the greater interest in Babylon as the center of the 
world-empire, and be the more contented with the laws 
and regulations which proceeded therefrom, knowing 
that some of their own nation stood before the king as 
his counsellors or secretaries— magicians, astrologers 
and wise men, as they were then called. 

The choice of the four young Israelites was no 
doubt a subject of divine providence, and from their 



names we may infer that they were all children of religious 

parents, the compounds of their names so signifying, 

as follows: Daniel, "God is my Judge;" Hananiah, 

"God is gracious;" Mishael, "This is as God;" 

Azariah, "God is a helper." Thus did the Lord, overthrowing 

a nation for its wickedness, make special provision, 

even in its captivity, for those of that nation 

who were faithful to him. In choosing these four Jews 

for the Babylonian college course the prince of the 

eunuchs, according to custom, gave them new names, 

to break their identity with their native homes and to 

establish an identity with the kingdom of Babylon; 

hence he named them Belteshazzar, Shadrach, Meshach 

and Abed-nego. 

From the first Daniel seems to have been the specially 
favored of these favored four— he was favored of 
the Lord in that, while all four were specially blessed, 
his portion included visions and revelations; he was 
specially favored by the prince of the eunuchs who 
had these youths in charge, as we read, "Now God had 
brought Daniel into favor and tender love with the 
prince of the eunuchs" (vs. 9). We are not to understand 

R2493 : page 166 

that this favor both with God and man was something 
wholly outside of Daniel himself; on the contrary, 
it is proper for us to infer that by birth (heredity) and 
by natural training of godly parents Daniel had a noble, 
amiable, winsome character, which not only prepared 
him the better to be the Lord's mouthpiece, but which 
also made him moderate, discreet and amiable toward 
all with whom he had to do. 

What a lesson is here, not only for young people, 
but also for parents! How necessary it is that those 
who seek divine service shall endeavor to attain to 
characteristics pleasing to God! And if any find themselves 
wholly without friends, how proper it is that 
they should suspect that some measure of the fault lies 
in themselves; and how proper it would be that all such 
should seek to cultivate amiability and suavity at the 
expense of everything except principle! Only Ishmael 
was to have the experience of every man's hand against 
him, and his hand against every man, and those who 
have Ishmael's experience have need to fear that they 
have Ishmael's disposition, and should forthwith diligently 
seek grace at the throne of mercy whereby to 
overcome ungainly qualities and idiosyncrasies. 

It is only when we are hated because of our loyalty 
to the truth (directly or indirectly) that we are to 
take satisfaction therein, or to think that we are suffering 
for righteousness' sake. As the Apostle points out, 
some suffer as evil-doers and as busy-bodies in other 
men's matters, or because of ungentleness, uncouthness, 
or lack of the wisdom of moderation, which the 
Lord's Word counsels. (1 Pet. 4:15; Phil. 4:5; Jas. 1:5.) We 



are not to forget, however, that rudeness, which is an 
element of selfishness, may be more quickly dispelled 
from the heart than from the life, and all should take 
encouragement from the thought that God, and his people 
who view matters from his standpoint, judge the 
sons of God not according to the flesh, but according 
to the spirit or intention of their minds, their hearts, 
and have patience with the weaknesses of the flesh, 
where there are evidences that the new mind is endeavoring 
to bring the flesh under its control. 

Of these four Jewish companions, Daniel seems 
from the first to have been leader, and his leading seems 
to have been in the right direction. In a new land, 
under new conditions, a shallow character would be 
likely to be thoroughly spoiled. First, the fact of being 
chosen, even in the probationary sense, to be of the 
king's council was certainly a great honor; and the tendency 
to a shallow mind would have been toward vanity, 
bombast, pride, haughtiness, etc., qualities which 
would have hindered real progress in the school, and 
thus would have made him less likely to be the king's 
ultimate choice as counsellor: but still more important, 
it would have separated between him and God, for 
God resisteth the proud and showeth his favor to the 
humble.- 1 Pet. 5:5. 

Daniel might have said to himself, as some would 
have said,— I am now far from the land of Israel; I am 
identified with the Babylonish court, and I therefore 
may profitably forget and neglect the laws of God, and 
consider them as having been applicable to me only in 
my own country, and that here, far from the land of 
promise, I may do in all particulars as the better Babylonians 
do. But, on the contrary, Daniel very wisely 
resolved in his heart that, since his nation had been 
cut off from the Land of Promise because of disobedience 
to God, he would be ever careful to do those 
things which would be pleasing to the Almighty: and, 
as we shall see, he soon found a place for his new 
resolutions. 

The portion of food provided for these college 
students by the king's command was good— far better, 
probably, than they had been used to previously;— nor 
was Daniel's mental objection to it instigated by self-denial, 
but wholly by religious duty. The Israelites, 
under their Law Covenant, were forbidden to eat certain 
articles of food in common use amongst other nations, 
for instance, swine's flesh, rabbit flesh, eels, oysters, 
etc., and indeed all flesh that was not killed by being 
allowed to bleed to death: for the Law specially forbade 
the use of blood under any circumstances or conditions. 
The food of the king's household was not prepared 
along these lines, and the young Hebrew perceived that 
he could not hope for any change in these respects, 
and he was too wise to even find fault with them. 
He saw rightly enough that the divine Law that was 
upon him as a Jew did not apply to Gentiles, and he 



made no efforts to interfere with the general 
arrangements. 

Daniel's request, therefore, was a very simple one, 
viz., that he be permitted to have a very plain and inexpensive 
diet, called "pulse," which no doubt was 
prepared as a part of the general household meal. If 
the request could be granted, no one would be specially 
inconvenienced, and yet Daniel would thus preserve 
himself from "defilement" under the terms of the Jewish 
Law. It would appear that Daniel's companions, 
influenced by his decision, joined with him in this request. 
The prince of the eunuchs, while desirous of 
favoring Daniel, feared his own position if, as he surmised, 
this simple diet would prove insufficient for the 
boys, and lead to a breakdown of their health during 
the period of study. But finally it was arranged with 
the melzar (or butler) that the matter of diet should 
be tested for ten days. 

Here Daniel's faith in God showed itself. He was 
confident that, even tho such a diet might not be the 
most desirable in every respect, yet, inasmuch as it was 

R2493 : page 167 

the only course open to them whereby they could preserve 

themselves from violation of the divine Law, 

therefore God would specially supervene to the extent 

necessary, and in this, it seems, he was not disappointed. 

There is a lesson for all of the Lord's people here. 

It is our duty not only to study the Lord's will, but 

also to consider well the circumstances and the conditions 

which surround us, and to seek to adopt such a 

moderate course in life as would first of all have divine 

approval, and secondly, cause as little trouble, inconvenience 

and displeasure to others as possible, and then 

to confidently rely upon the Lord's supervising wisdom 

and providence. 

When we read, "As for these four youths, God 
gave them knowledge and skill in all learning and wisdom; 
and Daniel had understanding in all visions and 
dreams," we are not to understand that this skill and 
learning was wholly miraculous, like the understanding 
in visions and dreams, which was to Daniel only. 
Rather, we are to judge that under what we might term 
natural laws four boys who had enough character to 
undertake such a course of self-denial for righteousness' 
sake would have also courage and strength of 
character in respect to all their affairs and studies. We 
are to surmise that their determination in this matter 
of their food, that they would rather deny themselves 
than violate God's Law, would mean to them a mental 
and moral discipline which would be helpful in all the 

R2494 : page 167 

affairs of life. 



And there is a lesson in this for every Christian. 
Many are inclined to think of the little things of life 
as being unimportant, but everyone who attains to any 
proficiency in any department of life surely learns that 
his attainments were in considerable degree the result 
of determined will-power, and that it is well-nigh impossible 
to be strong in will-power in respect to important 
things if lax and pliable in respect to things in general, 
even tho less important. Habit is a wonderful 
power, either for good or evil, and the boy or girl, the 
man or woman, who has not learned self-control in respect 
to little things, indeed all things, cannot expect 
to be able to exercise self-control upon the greatest and 
most important affairs merely. 

In other words, applying this matter to Christians, 
we might say that he who wants to be an "overcomer" 
at all, must make the attempt all along the line on every 
point, great or small, where conscience and principle 
call for it. It is he who is faithful in things that are 
least who may be expected to be found faithful also in 
things that are greater: and this evidently is the Lord's 
view of this matter. From the Lord's standpoint, all 
of the affairs of this present life are little in comparison 
with the future things. Hence he is calling for "overcomers" 
whose general faithfulness to principle, even 
in small things, will give evidence of the disposition, 
the character, to which may be entrusted the great responsibilities 
of the Kingdom glory, honor and immortality. 
-Luke 16:10; Matt. 25:23. 

At the end of the three years' college course, when 
Daniel was seventeen, came the examination before the 
king, and as should have been expected, Daniel and 
his companions, faithful to the Lord, seeking first his 
will, were found to be far in advance of their companions, 
and were accepted to the king's council. We might 
draw a lesson here, without in any sense of the word 
intimating that it was typified, for we do not so think. 
We might say that there is a certain correspondence as 
between the position of Daniel and his associates and 
the position occupied by all those who have been called 
of the Father to joint-heirship in the Kingdom, with 
Jesus Christ our Lord. Not all who are called, nor all 
who undertake the course of training, have the promise 
of acceptance: on the contrary, many are called, few 
will be chosen. But the character of those who will 
be chosen in many respects corresponds to that of Daniel 
and his companions. All are not leading spirits, as 
was Daniel, nor are all given to visions and revelations 
and interpretations, as was he; but all will have the 
same spirit of devotion to principles of righteousness, 
which devotion will be tested under divine providence, 
step by step, through the narrow way, as they seek to 
walk in the footsteps of him who set us an example— 
our Daniel, our Leader, our Lord Jesus. Let all, then, 
who have named the name of Christ, depart from 
iniquity, let all such be faithful: "Dare to be a 



Daniel." 

Another thought is that clean spiritual provender 
is important to the Lord's flock, and that those who 
have come to a knowledge of the truth should abstain 
from all food that is defiled. If this shall seem to restrict 
the bill of spiritual fare, and the opportunities 
for mingling with the Babylonians at their table, it will 
have its compensating advantages nevertheless, for the 
Lord will bless to the spiritual good of his faithful ones 
even the plainest of spiritual blessings and opportunities. 
Let a test be made, after the manner of Daniel 
and his companions, and see whether or not those who 
feed upon the clean provender of the Lord's Word, and 
who reject the more sumptuous arrangement and defiled 
food of Babylon will not be fairer of countenance 
spiritually, even after a short test. But let us not suppose 
that anything would be gained by simply abstaining 
from the Babylonian portion and starving themselves 
spiritually. Whoever abstains from the popular 
and defiled supply must seek and use the simple and 
undefiled food which the Lord in his providence supplies, 
otherwise their last state of spiritual starvation 
will be worse than the first. 



R2494 : page 168 

IN THE FIERY FURNACE. 

--JULY 16. -DAN. 3:14-28.- 

"Our God, whom we serve, is able to deliver us." 

PROBABLY twenty years elapsed after Daniel 

and his companions reached Babylon in captivity 

before the scenes of this lesson were enacted. 

Meantime Daniel had been raised to a very high position 

in the empire, as king's counsellor, while his three 

companions had been made magistrates in the provinces 

of Babylon. We know that their prosperity did not 

tend to make them careless of their duties and responsibilities 

toward God, for otherwise they would not have 

been able to stand the severe test recounted in this lesson, 

and which proved a great blessing to them because 

of their fidelity to the Lord. 

King Nebuchadnezzar just before this had won 
some great victories over surrounding nations— Egypt, 
Syria, etc.— as he had previously done with Judah, 
and as the Lord had predicted in the dream which 
Daniel had interpreted for the King, which showed the 
Babylonian Empire as the golden head of earthly dominion. 
His great success no doubt had tended to 
feelings of pride and a desire for display. Yet these 
were probably not the only motives which led to the 
program of the great festival in honor of his victories, 



and the erection of the great image which all were commanded 

to worship. Nebuchadnezzar's thought evidently 

was to unify his empire, and as a step in this 

direction he desired to unify the religious views and 

worship of the various peoples under his sway. In 

this his example was frequently followed subsequently, 

for all rulers have seemed to grasp the thought that 

man's mental organization is such that obedience can 

be best and most lastingly secured through the acquiescence 

of the religious organs of his mind. In other 

words, since man is a religious animal, no government 

of him can be secure and permanent which does not 

have, directly or indirectly, the support of his veneration. 

Hence it was that Nebuchadnezzar and others 

endeavored to associate the Creator and the king together 

in men's minds, that venerating the One they 

should respect and serve the other as his representative. 

It was no doubt with a view to thus unifying the 
religious sentiments of his empire that this great feast 
was arranged, of which the very center of attraction 
was the great image which Nebuchadnezzar the king 
had set up. This image, with its pedestal, was ninety 
feet high and nine feet wide. It was of gold, probably 
either made hollow or on a base of clay cement. It 
was located in the Plain of Dura, about the center of 
the walled enclosure twenty-four miles square, known 
as the city of Babylon. As it is a level country, and 
as the structures were comparatively low, the image 
could probably be seen from every part of the great 
city. 

The appointed time for the festival having come, 
leading representatives, judges, treasurers, governors, 
sheriffs, etc., from all the divisions of the empire, clad 
in the gorgeous garments of the East, were present. A 
great band had been prepared, composed of all the 
musical instruments popular at that period, and the 
command of the king had gone forth that when the 
musicians should play upon their instruments all the 
vast concourse of people, representatives of his whole 
empire, facing the image which he had set up, should 
fall down and worship it, and thus indicate their loyalty, 
not only to King Nebuchadnezzar, but also to his 
gods who had given him the wonderful victories which 
they were celebrating. 

As magistrates of the empire, Shadrach, Meshach 
and Abed-nego were necessarily in the great throng, 
tho it is quite probable that they, representing different 
departments, may have been at a distance from each 
other, each surrounded by his secretaries, assistants, 
servants, etc. Undoubtedly the object of the festival 
was clearly discerned by these intelligent men, and the 
question arose before their minds respecting their duty 
to God and the conflict of this with the probable requirements 
of the king. It was a crucial test for them, 
for they knew that the king's powers were autocratic, 
and that to cross his will meant death in some form. 



Nevertheless, they decided that they must be true to 
God, whatever the cost. It might be that their refusal 
to prostrate themselves before the image would pass 
entirely unnoticed by others, or it might be that, even 
if noticed, the incident might never reach the ears of 
the king, but such circumstances could make no change 
in the matter of their duty; whatever others might do, 
they must not bow the knee to any but the true God. 
Daniel is omitted from mention here, possibly because, 
occupying a different position as one of the king's personal 
staff and household, his conduct would not come 
so directly in contrast with the general conduct. 
Finally, the hour of trial came, when the great 
king of Babylon was recognized not only as civil but 
also as religious ruler, and the image which he had set 
up was worshiped by the various representatives of his 
empire— except Shadrach, Meshach and Abed-nego. 
Their neglect to bow was quickly brought to the attention 
of the king, for no doubt these, like all good men, 
had their enemies: some enemies through jealousy and 

R2495 : page 168 

rivalry for the king's favor; other enemies because, 
perhaps, they had been interrupted or hindered in dishonest 
practices and contracts with the government. 
The matter seems to have astounded the king, and 
hence his inquiry, Is it true, can it be true? Surely, 
no sane men would be so foolhardy as to oppose my 
decree, and that in my very presence, and upon such 
a fete-day as this? Not waiting an answer as respects 

R2495 : page 169 

matters of the past, the king voluntarily proposed 
for them a fresh test of loyalty and submission, 
nothing doubting but what, now that the matter had 
come to his attention, they would be moved by fear, 
not only in respect to their degradation from office, but 
by the danger of death in the fiery furnace, to render 
prompt obedience. 

Perhaps the king's mind shot a glance backward 
fifteen years, to the time when the God of the Hebrews, 
through Daniel, had told and interpreted his dream, a 
matter which none of the other gods of his wise men 
could do; and as tho he had this in mind, and wishing 
to impress the matter upon these three Hebrews who 
had dared to challenge his power, he made the boast, 
"Who is that God that shall deliver you out of my 
hands?" In his arrogance of mind and under the 
flush of his mighty victories over the greatest nations 
and mightiest kings, Nebuchadnezzar felt prepared to 
have a contest even with the unseen and to him unknown 
invisible powers. He would not be backed 
down in his own capital city; he would demonstrate 
his power to inflict a penalty, regardless of what any 



of the gods might do in retaliation. He would show 
that he, at all events, had the power in the present 
time, and in this respect at least was more powerful 
than any of the gods of whom he had knowledge. 

The answer of the three Hebrews was a wise one; 
seeing from the king's mood that the discussion of the 
subject would be useless, they did not attempt to retaliate 
by threatening him with divine vengeance; 
neither did they attempt to convert the king to Judaism, 
knowing well that the provisions of the Jewish 
covenant were not for Gentiles. They simply responded 
that they were not anxious to avail themselves of 
the opportunity to argue the matter with the king. 
They assured him of their full confidence that their 
God was able to deliver them from the fiery furnace, 
and out of the hand or power of even the greatest king 
of the earth; but they answered, While our God is thus 
all-powerful we are not by any means certain that he 
will deliver us; nevertheless, "O king, be it known unto 
thee that we will not serve thy gods nor worship the 
golden image which thou hast set up." 

Angered that his great festal day should be thus 
marred by even the slightest opposition to his will, the 
king did not wait to give another opportunity wherein 
the Hebrews might relent. He saw that it was useless, 
that they were men of character and determination, 
and he resolved that he would make an example of 
them before all the people. The form of his visage or his 
countenance changed toward these men; whereas once 
he had admired them, as amongst his ablest counsellors 
and magistrates, and an honor to his empire, now 
he hated them, as opponents whose course, if not interrupted, 
might introduce disorder into his empire, 
and lead to more or less sedition, if copied by others. 
In his rage he commanded that the furnace be heated 
seven times, or to its utmost capacity. The furnace, 
already heated for the occasion, may have been the one 
used in melting the gold for the image, and must have 
been of immense size. 

Probably as a mark of his great authority, and to 
show that even the very greatest of his subjects were 
subordinate to his supreme authority, the king commanded 
that these three recalcitrant officials be cast into 
the fiery furnace by prominent officers of his army 
—no doubt to teach a lesson respecting the power of 
the army, and the willingness of its chief representatives 
to serve the king, as against everybody else. 

The Hebrews, bound in their official garb, were 
evidently cast into the furnace from the top, because it 
is stated that they fell down bound, while the heat was 
so intense that it even killed those who cast them into 
the furnace, possibly by the inhalation of the flames, 
which might kill them instantly. 

The king seemed to be having matters his own 
way, as usual; even the mighty God of the Hebrews 
had not delivered these men from his power. And yet 



the king was solicitous and eyed the furnace, and to his 
surprise beheld those who had been cast into the furnace 
bound, walking about free in the flames— seemingly 
uninjured. More than this, he saw a fourth person 
there, of most remarkable appearance, which caused 
the king to think and speak of him as one of the gods. 
No wonder he was astonished; he was evidently contending 
with a God of whose powers he had been 
ignorant. 

Nebuchadnezzar showed himself to be a man of 
broad mind— in his acceptance to the Babylonian college 
of the brightest youths out of all the peoples taken 
captive; in his readiness to acknowledge the God of 
Daniel, when he had received the evidences of his power; 
so now, realizing that he had made a great mistake 
in attempting the destruction of three of his most eminent 
magistrates, and that he was thus defying the 

great God, Nebuchadnezzar was prompt to make acknowledgement, 
and approached the furnace, calling out, 
"Ye servants of the most high God, come forth and 
come hither." In the presence of the king's courtiers 
they came forth, and all beheld them that the fire had 
done them no injury, not even having singed their 
clothes or their hair. This was indeed a stupendous 
miracle, and doubtless was valuable in its influence, 
not only upon the Gentiles, but also upon the Hebrews 
residing throughout Babylon, who would thus hear of 
the power of Jehovah in delivering those faithful to 
him. Whether this had a bearing on the subject or 
not, we know well that, while idolatry had been one of 

R2495 : page 170 

the chief sins of the Israelites before this captivity, 
there was comparatively little of idolatry in its crude 
forms in that nation afterward. 

Nebuchadnezzar's acknowledgement of the God of 
the Hebrews, who sent his messenger and delivered his 
servants that trusted in him, is very simple and very 
beautiful. He rejoiced in the noble character of these 
men, and at once made a decree "that every people, 
nation and language which speak anything amiss against 
the God of Shadrach, Meshach and Abed-nego shall be 
cut in pieces, and their houses shall be a dung-hill; because 
there is no other god that can deliver after this 
sort." And furthermore, he promoted these faithful 
men to still higher positions, for they had still more of 
his confidence respecting their integrity. Men who 
would thus hazard their lives for conscience' sake could 
be trusted in the most important positions. 

It is not necessary that we determine this incident 
to have been a type and look for correspondencies to 
its every feature. Without so determining, the Lord's 
people may readily find in it many valuable lessons 
and suggestions. Not all of God's people are in such 
prominent positions as were these Hebrews; and not 



many have testings of exactly the same kind as were 
theirs, with a literal fiery furnace before their eyes. 
Nevertheless, there are trials before the Lord's people 
to-day that are fully as severe. Who will not agree 
that questions respecting a public acknowledgement of 
an idol and thus a public disavowal of the true God 
would be a point more quickly and more easily decided 
by nearly everyone than some of the subtle temptations 
of our day? For instance, various idols are set up all 
over Christendom, each of which, it is claimed, represents 
the true God, and each of which demands worship 
in honor and substance. 

Babylon the literal was in ruins long before the 
Apostle John on the Isle of Patmos was shown in prophetic 
vision the mystic or symbolic Babylon "which 
reigneth over the kings of the earth" to-day. The provinces 
of Babylon to-day are the various civilized nations 
—really "kingdoms of this world;" but deluded 
into calling themselves and thinking themselves kingdoms 
of Christ— "Christendom." And parallels to the 
king and the image are also presented in Revelation— 
they are religious systems symbolically described as 
"the beast and his image."— Rev. 13:15-18. 

Without at present examining the symbols in detail 
we note the fact that worship of this symbolic beast 
and his image are to be the great test or trial upon professing 
Christians in every province of symbolic Babylon 
in the end of this age: indeed, the testing is even 
now in progress. And we have the same inspired record 
as authority for the statement that only those who refuse 
to render worship to those powerfully influential religious 
systems (symbolized by "the beast and his image) 
will be counted by the Lord as "overcomers" and be 
made his joint-heirs as members of his elect Church. 
-See Rev. 20:4. 

As already pointed out, the "beast" represents not 
Roman Catholics (the people) but the Roman Catholic 
system, as an institution: and the image represents not 
Protestants (the people) but the consolidation of Protestant 
systems, as an institution. We have pointed out* 
that the first step in the formation of this symbolic 
image of Papacy was taken in A.D. 1846 in the organization 
of the Evangelical Alliance, and that the second 
step must come shortly in an active living cooperation 
of Protestants as one system; and that this infusion of 
life will result from the Episcopal Church or Church 
of England joining or affiliating with other Protestants 
under some general arrangement similar to the Evangelical 
Alliance. 

R2496 : page 170 

While the severest testings will follow the giving 
of life to the consolidated image, in the near future, 
the testing has already commenced with many, for 
"Churchianity" is more and more demanding reverence 



and support, and those who absolutely refuse to worship 
its images are already exposed to fiery trials;— 
social ostracism and financial boycotts. Prominent 
amongst these is the Roman Catholic idol; that church 
sets itself as the representative of God, and demands 
worship, obedience and contribution to its funds. It is 
one of the most popular as well as one of the most 
arbitrary of idols. The Greek Catholic Church is 
another idol: the Anglican is another; and the Lutheran, 
Methodist, Presbyterian, etc., etc., all similarly 
demand worship, obedience and revenue. They have 
"pooled their issues," to a certain extent, so as not to 
war upon each other's devotees, but they unite in warfare 
against all who do not bow the knee to some such idol 
(who reverence and worship only the Almighty God, 
and recognize his only begotten Son as the only Head 
and Lord of the true Church, whose names are only 
written in heaven— not on earthly rolls of membership.) 
-SeeHeb. 12:23. 

All who refuse to worship before any of these images 
are threatened with a fiery furnace of persecution, 
and the threat is generally carried out as thoroughly as 
circumstances will permit. In the "dark ages," when 
Papacy had a monopoly of the "church" business, it 
meant torture and the stake, as well as social ostracism. 
To-day, under a higher enlightenment, and especially 
because of competition for worshipers, matters are not 
carried to the same extreme, thank God! Yet in many 
instances there are evidences that the same spirit prevails, 
merely restrained by changed circumstances and 
lack of power. Still, as many are witnesses, there are 

R2495 : page 170 



*MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. III., p. 119. 

R2496 :page 171 

methods of torture which serve to intimidate many who 
would scorn to bow the knee to a literal visible idol. 
Thousands to-day are worshiping at the various shrines 
of Christendom who in their hearts long to be free from 
the sectarian bondage of fear— who fain would serve 
the Lord God only, had they the courage. And there 
are some the world over who, with a courage not less 
than that of Shadrach, Meshach and Abed-nego, declare 
publicly that the Lord God alone shall have the 
worship and the service which they can render. None, 
perhaps, know better than the writer the various fiery 
experiences to which these faithful few are exposed- 
boycotted socially, boycotted in business, slandered in 
every conceivable manner, and often by those of whom 
they had least expected it, who, according to the Lord's 
declaration, say "all manner of evil against them falsely.' 



-Matt. 5:11,12. 

But with these, as with the three Hebrews of our 
lesson, the chief trial is in connection with their faith; 
after they have taken a firm stand for the Lord and his 
truth they may indeed be bound and have their liberties 
of speech and of effort restrained, and they may 
indeed be cast into the fiery furnace, but nothing more 
than these things can be done to them. As soon as 
they have demonstrated their fidelity to God to this extent, 
their trials and troubles are turned into blessings 
and joys. As the form of the Son of God was seen 
with the Hebrews in the fiery furnace, so unseen, the 
Lord is present with those who trust him and who, because 
of faithfulness to him and to his Word, come 
into tribulation. How beautifully this is expressed in 
the familiar hymn, 

"When through fiery trials thy pathway shall lie, 
My grace all sufficient shall be thy supply; 
The flame shall not hurt thee, I only design 
Thy dross to consume, and thy gold to refine." 

And sometimes even the worldly can realize that 
the Lord's people in the furnace of affliction are receiving 
a blessing, and sometimes thus our Heavenly Father's 
name is glorified in the world, as in Nebuchadnezzar's 
experience. Sometimes the Lord's people who 
are bound, restrained of liberty to proclaim the truth, 
find, as did those Hebrews, that the fire burns the cords 
and sets them free, and really gives them larger opportunities 
to testify to the glory of our God than they 
could have had by any other course. 

The Lord's providences vary, and it is not for his 
people to decide when shall come remarkable deliverances, 
and when they shall apparently be left entirely 
to the will of their enemies without any manifestation 
of divine favor on their behalf. Note, for instance, 
the fact that, while the Lord interposed to deliver these 
three Hebrews from the fiery furnace, he did not interpose 
to prevent the beheading of John the Baptist, altho 
of the latter it is specifically declared, "There hath 
not arisen a greater prophet than John the Baptist." 
We remember that, while Peter was delivered from 
prison by the angel of the Lord, James was not delivered, 
but was beheaded. We remember also that Paul's 
life was miraculously preserved on several occasions, 
and that the Apostle John, according to tradition, was 
once cast into a cauldron of boiling oil, but escaped 
uninjured, while on other occasions dire disaster came 
upon the Lord's faithful ones, and that quickly, as in 
the case of Stephen, who was stoned. 

It is not, therefore, for us to predetermine what 
shall be the divine providence in respect to ourselves; 
we are to note the point of right and duty and to follow 
it regardless of consequences, trusting implicitly 
in the Lord. This lesson is most beautifully set forth 



in the language of the three Hebrews, who declared to 

King Nebuchadnezzar that their God was entirely capable 

of delivering them from his power, but that, 

whether he chose to do so or not, they would not violate 

their conscience. It is just such characters that the 

Lord is seeking for, and it is in order to their development 

and testing that multiform evil is now permitted 

to have sway. 

While such testings have been in progress to a considerable 
extent throughout this entire Gospel age, the 
Scriptures clearly indicate to us that in some special 
sense all of the Lord's people will be tested in the 
"harvest" or closing time of this age. Our Lord speaks 
of it, likening our Christian faith to a house, and represents 
the trials in the end of this age as a great storm 
which will beat upon every house, with the result that 
all that are founded upon the rock will stand, and all 
founded upon the sand will collapse. The Apostle 
Peter speaks of this trial-time, saying, "Think it not 
strange concerning the fiery trial which shall try you, 
as tho some strange thing happened unto you." (1 Pet. 4:12.) 
We are to expect a testing in the end of this 
age, just as there was a testing of the Jewish nominal 
church in the end of its age. As in that testing there 
was a thorough, complete separating of the "wheat" 
from the "chaff," so here the separating will be complete 
between the "wheat" and the "tares," as our 
Lord declares. (Matt. 13:24-30.) Throughout the age 
the "wheat" and the "tares," by divine arrangement, 
have been permitted to grow side by side; but in the 
"harvest" the separation must occur, that the "wheat" 
may be "garnered," received to the Kingdom. 

The Apostle Paul, also, speaks of this time of fiery 
trial, and, likening the faith and works of a zealous 
Christian to a house built of gold, silver and precious 
stones, he declares that the fire of this day, in the end 
of this age, shall try every man's work of what sort it 
is, and shall consume all but the genuine faith and 
character structures. (1 Cor. 3:11-15.) But we are to 

R2496 : page 172 

remember that such loyal characters grow not suddenly, 
in a few hours or days— mushroom-like,— but are 
progressive developments, fine-grained and strong like 
the olive-tree. 

Looking back, we cannot doubt that the step of 
self-denial recorded in our previous lesson,— taken for 
conscience' sake by the Hebrews,— had much to do 
with the development in them of the staunch characters 
illustrated in this lesson. Likewise we who have 
become "new creatures," reckonedly, in Christ, know 
that we are to be tested (if our testing has not already 
commenced), and should realize that only as we 
practice self-denials in the little things of life, and mortify 
(deaden) the natural cravings of our flesh in respect 



to food, clothing, conduct, etc., will we become 
strong spiritually and be able to "overcome." 

Many deal slackly with themselves in respect to 
little violations of their consecration vow, saying,— 
"What's the use" of such carefulness and so different 
a life from that of the world in general? Ah! there is 
great use in it, for victories in little things prepare for 
greater victories and make them possible: and on the 
contrary, surrender to the will of the flesh in the little 
things means sure defeat in the warfare as a whole. 
Let us remember the maxim laid down by our Great 
Teacher— that he that is faithful in the things that are 
least will be faithful also in the things which are great. 
And this is the operation of a law, whose operations 
may be discerned in all the affairs of life. 

Our Lord expresses the same thought, saying,— 
To him that hath (used) shall be given (more), and 
from him that hath not (used) shall be taken away that 
which he hath. If we start on a Christian life ever so 
weak in the flesh and weak in spirit, we will find that 
faithfulness in the little things will bring increasing 
strength in the Lord and in the power of his might. 
But it is in vain that we pray, "Lord, Lord," and hope 
for great victories and the "crown of rejoicing," if we 
fail to do our best to conquer in the little affairs of daily 
life. In other words, our testing is in progress from 
the moment of our consecration, and the little trials are 
but preparations for greater ones which, when faithfully 
attained, we will be able to reckon with the Apostle 
as light afflictions which are but for a moment, and 
which are working out for us a far more exceeding and 
eternal weight of glory.— 2 Cor. 4:17. 

The answer of the Hebrews to Nebuchadnezzar,— 
"Our God whom we serve," is worthy of note. They 

R2497 : page 172 

not only acknowledged God and worshiped him, but 

they additionally served him, according as they had opportunity. 

And so it will be found to-day: those who 

have the necessary strength of character to refuse to worship 

human institutions and thereby to "suffer the loss 

of all things," counting them but as loss and dross, 

that they may win Christ and be found finally complete 

in him, as members of his glorified body, and joint-heirs 

in his Kingdom, not only practice self-denials, 

but gladly serve and confess the Lord in their daily 

life. Rightly appreciated, a profession of love for the 

Lord would always be a profession of service to his 

cause. Whoever is not rendering some service to our 

King in the present time of multiplied opportunities 

has at very most the "lukewarm" love that is offensive 

to the Master. -Rev. 2:4; 3:16. 

Let us resolve, dear brethren, as did the three 
Hebrews of this lesson, that we will worship and serve 
only the Lord our God— that we will neither worship 



nor serve sectarianism, in any of its many forms, nor 
mammon, with its many enticements and rewards, nor 
fame, nor friends, nor self. God "seeketh such to worship 
him as worship him in spirit and in truth," is the 
declaration of our Lord and Head.— John 4:23,24. 



R2497 : page 172 

WEIGHED IN THE BALANCES. 

JULY 23.-DAN. 5:17-31. 

"God is the Judge."— Psa. 75:7. 

NEBUCHADNEZZAR'S kingdom, altho very 

prosperous, and wealthy by the gathering 

of the spoils of centuries from the great surrounding 

nations, was of short duration. Secular history mentions 

the father of Nebuchadnezzar as the founder of 

new Babylonia, and quite a number of Bible students 

have thus been misled to reckon the "Times of the 

Gentiles" as beginning before Nebuchadnezzar's time 

in the days of Nabopolasser. But while it is doubtless 

true that that monarch was prominently identified 

with the organization of Babylonia, the "Times of the 

Gentiles" could not have begun in his day, because 

God still had his own typical Kingdom in the earth, 

as represented by the Jews— down until Zedekiah's 

captivity to Nebuchadnezzar, 606 B.C. We should remember 

that the "Times of the Gentiles" merely 

means the times or years in which the world's affairs 

are delivered over to Gentile supremacy, between the 

time of the removal of God's typical kingdom and the 

time of the establishment of the Millennial Kingdom 

October, 1914.* This Bible view of the matter is 

further confirmed by the fact that the ruins of Babylon 

show the name of Nebuchadnezzar on the bricks of the 

principal palaces, and thus give evidence that it was 

under his administration that the empire reached its 



*See MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. I. Chap. 13; VOL. II., Chap. 4. 

R2497 : page 173 

zenith, or became, in the language of the dream, the 
golden head of the image, which represented Gentile 
dominion.— Dan. 2:38. 

Secular history seems to give the name of Nabonidus, 
as king of Babylon, at the time of its fall, but 
the Scriptures make no mention of this name, giving 
us instead Belshazzar, denominating him the son of 
Nebuchadnezzar. Two explanations are possible: Belshazzar 



may have been the son of Nabonidus and the 
grandson of Nebuchadnezzar, or Nabonidus may have 
been his original name, and Belshazzar a name adopted 
when he assumed the office of king; or reversely, 
Belshazzar may have been his original name, and the 
one by which Daniel and the people at home would 
speak of him, while Nabonidus may have been the 
name he assumed officially as king. At all events the 
name that appears on the tablets is Nabonidus, while 
the name which Daniel gives repeatedly is Belshazzar, 
a name of the same signification as that given to Daniel, 
who was called Belteshazzar, both words signifying 
"Favored of God." We can safely hold to the 
Scriptural account, assured that time will justify our 
confidence in this, as it has done in other matters. 

At the time of our lesson, Babylon, the capital city 
of Babylonia, was the most wonderful city in the 
world. The following observations respecting it are 
from the pens of others. "Nebuchadnezzar converted 
his capital, Babylon, into one of the most magnificent 
and beautiful cities of antiquity." "Herodotus, who 
visited it about B.C. 450 [nearly a century after the 
date covered by our lesson], while its walls and buildings 
were still perfect, describes it as forming a square 
of nearly fourteen miles on each side." "The walls 
surrounding the city, according to Herodotus, were 
three hundred feet high and eighty feet broad. A 
hundred gates, with their great posts, leaves and sills 
of brass, and their bars of iron, permitted entrance to 
the city." "Such a city was never seen before, and 
was the work of Nebuchadnezzar. The bricks marked 
with his name, and the inscriptions which he wrote, 
being hidden in the ruins, have now come forth from 
their grave as witnesses to the truth of God's Word." 
"In those days Babylon was the metropolis of the 
world, the center of commerce, art and wisdom." 
"The great plain on which it lay, a Paradise of fertility 
and cultivation, was intersected by countless 
canals, both small and great, serving alike for irrigation 
and navigation." "Babylon was a university 
city. The wealth of the world poured into the coffers 
of the Babylonian merchants." 

Such wealth and prosperity were likely to beget 
luxurious ease on the part of the Babylonians, as they 
also excited the cupidity and ambition of enemies. 
Accordingly, the Medes and Persians had consolidated; 
and their army under Cyrus for several months had 
been besieging Babylon, whose citizens, however, felt 
quite secure behind their immense walls, and amply 
provisioned for a longer siege than it was supposed 
any army could enforce. So great was the confidence 
of the king of Babylon in the strength of his capital 
that he made a great feast to a thousand of his lords. 

This feast would seem to have been in the nature 
of a boast in the greatness of Babylon; and as tho to 
emphasize his power and to remind his nobles and 



lords of how none of the gods of the surrounding nations 
had been able to deliver their peoples out of the 
hand of Nebuchadnezzar, Belshazzar had called for the 
vessels of gold and silver brought from the Jewish 
Temple, and these were profaned by drinking therefrom 
to the honor of Bel, the god of Babylon. 

In the midst of the revelry of the feast, the king, 
his counsellors and lords were astonished to see a part 
of a hand writing certain fiery letters upon the wall 
of the palace. The revelry ceased, a hush of fear came 
over all; the flush of confidence upon the king's face 
gave place to one of terror; he trembled and called for 
the advice of the wise men to interpret the wonderful 
message, but they were unable to explain the matter 
satisfactorily. Even if they had deciphered the letters 
and words, they had no interpretation to offer, because 
from their standpoint any other meaning than the true 
meaning would have been more reasonable; nothing 
would have seemed further from the truth to Babylon's 
wise men than the message which these miraculously 
written words conveyed. The king was greatly disappointed, 
but his mother came to his assistance, informing 
him of Daniel, who had given to his father, 
Nebuchadnezzar, an interpretation of a dream, when 
all the wise men of Babylon had failed, and accordingly 
Daniel was sent for. 

The aged Prophet, at this time about ninety years 
of age, as an officer of the kingdom doubtless resided 
in one of the palace buildings near by, and in response 
to the king's command he stood before them. The 
king, realizing the importance of the message, manifested 
his anxiety by offering, first to the astrologers, 
and now to Daniel, a great reward for the interpretation 
—to be robed in royal purple, with a royal golden 
chain as insignia of rank, and to be third in dignity 
and power in the empire. The first thing in the lesson 
which strikes us is the nobility of God's servant, 
in renouncing all claim to these gifts as a reward for 
the service of interpreting God's message. "Let thy 
gifts be to thyself, and give thy rewards to another; 
yet I will read the writing unto the king, and make 
known the interpretation." 

We may stop here long enough to take a valuable 
lesson, to the effect that all who would be the mouth-pieces 

R2497 : page 174 

of the Lord, and speak forth his Word, should, 
like Daniel, do so without stipulation of compensation. 
Only from this standpoint can any hope to be entirely 
free and untrammeled in speaking words of truth and 
soberness which may be very distasteful to those who 
inquire the mind of the Lord. Had Daniel thanked 
the king for the promised gifts, and thus accepted 
them as a reward for his service, he would have felt 
obligated to the king to such an extent that it might 



have warped his judgment, or have weakened his expression 

of the Lord's message. And the king in 

turn would have felt that, having paid for the information, 

it should be a smooth, favorable message. 

And just so it is with some of the Lord's true servants 

in mystic Babylon. They have the opportunity presented 

to speak the Lord's Word; yet many of them 

are handicapped by reason of having received honors 

and robes, and are more or less inclined to hide and 

R2498 : page 174 

cover the message now due to Babylon in this its Laodicean 
epoch. They are bound by the chain of gold 
around their necks.— Rev. 3:14-22. 

The aged Prophet displayed gentleness as well as 
fearlessness in the delivery of his message. It was 
stated as kindly as the truth would permit, but the 
truth was not withheld by reason of fear. He recounted 
to the king his father's exaltation to power, and 
ascribed it not to the god of Babylon, but to the God 
of Israel. He reminded him of how pride had been 
his father's downfall, resulting in his degradation to 
bestial conditions for seven times (seven years— corresponding 
to the seven times, i.e., 2520 years, of 
Gentile domination). He reminded Belshazzar of how 
in the end his father had acknowledged the God of 
heaven as the real ruler amongst men, and then he 
charged home to the king that instead of profiting by 
this experience, of which he well knew, he had lifted 
up his heart to pride, had ignored the only true God, 
and had even brought what he knew were the sacred 
vessels of Jehovah's service, to profane them in the 
worship and glorification of idols— "gods of silver, 
gold, brass, iron, wood and stone, which see not nor 
hear nor know." He pointed out to the king that he 
had thus dishonored and defied "the God in whose 
hand [power] thy breath is [the God of all life-Acts 17:28,29], 
and whose are all thy ways [who has full 
power to control your course]." This true God he 
had not glorified, but dishonored. 

By thus kindly but plainly showing the king the 
truth, the Prophet prepared the way for the exposition 
of the fateful words— "Mene, Mene, Tekel, 
Upharsin." Mene was repeated twice, probably for 
the sake of emphasis— Numbered! Numbered!— the 
limit of the time of your dominion has expired. Tekel 
—short weight, lacking. Peres signifies divided, and 
its plural form, Upharsin, gives the thought of broken 
or crushed into pieces— destroyed. Nothing in the 
word peres signifies Medes and Persians, but the 
Prophet knew from the interpretation of Nebuchadnezzar's 
vision that the Babylonian dominion would be 
followed by the Medo-Persian kingdom, and he also 
knew that the Medes and Persians were already besieging 
the city. 



So far from being offended with the plain words 
of the Prophet, Belshazzar seems to have felt their 
truth, and gave command that the honors already 
promised should be bestowed upon Daniel. But meantime 
other matters were transpiring in his capital, of 
which the king and his lords were unaware, so that 
the fulfilment of the doom written upon the palace 
wall was close at hand. 

While the Babylonians were feasting and reveling 
in fancied security, Cyrus, the general of the united 
forces of the Medes and Persians, having studied up 
a plan of attack, had already caused a great ditch to 
be dug above the city, to divert the waters of the River 
Euphrates into a new channel. This river flowed 
through the center of Babylon diagonally, and was 
protected by enormous gates of brass, which were supposed 
to be equally as impregnable as the three-hundred-foot 
wall. Indeed, it would appear that the Babylonians 
had never a fear of attack from the river, 
and had left it comparatively unguarded; consequently, 
when Cyrus had diverted the stream into the new 
channel he found little difficulty in marching his troops 
under the brass gates into the city, so that at the very 
time the revelry was progressing in Belshazzar's palace 
the soldiers of Cyrus were taking possession of the 
entire city, and very shortly after Daniel's interpretation 
of the writing the troops reached the palace, 
Belshazzar was slain, and the new empire of Medo-Persia 
was inaugurated— "without fighting," as the 
tablets declare. Thus did great Babylon fall suddenly 
—"in one hour." 

The thoughtful Bible student must of necessity 
have always in view the many correspondencies which 
the Scriptures institute between literal Babylon and 
mystic Babylon, and when studying the account of 
the fall of literal Babylon his attention is naturally 
drawn also to the foretold fall of mystic Babylon in 
the end of this age. Indeed, he must be comparatively 
blind who cannot see that the wonderful prophecies 
which speak of the fall of Babylon (Isa. 14:22; Jer. 50 
and 51) were not wholly fulfilled by Cyrus the 
Persian. The fall of literal Babylon, while it was sudden, 
and while it made a great commotion amongst the 
nations, lacks much of filling to the full the prophetic 
picture. Much of the prophecy still waits for fulfilment 
in mystic or symbolic Babylon to-day; and this 

R2498 : page 175 

fact is abundantly supported by the prophecies of the 
Book of Revelation, written centuries after the fall of 
literal Babylon, which unmistakably refer to symbolic 
Babylon, and use language almost identical with that 
of Jeremiah. -See Rev. 16:19-18:24. 

It will be noticed, further, that, as literal Babylon 
sat upon the literal River Euphrates, so mystic Babylon 



is said to sit upon the waters, peoples. It should 
be noticed, also, that as the literal city was captured 
by the diversion of the literal waters, so symbolic 
Babylon is to fall by reason of the diversion of the 
symbolic Euphrates, which in Rev. 16:12, it is foretold, 
shall be "dried up— that the way of the kings of 
the East might be prepared." 

The kings of the East, or kings from the sunrising, 
are, we understand, the kings of Christ's Kingdom, 
who are also priests— the body of Christ, the 
Royal Priesthood. "Thou hast made us unto our God 
kings and priests, and we shall reign on the earth." 
From this standpoint of view, Cyrus and his army, 
overthrowing literal Babylon, was a figure or illustration 
of Messiah, King of kings and Lord of lords, 
who with his faithful will shortly overthrow mystic 
Babylon, and take possession of the world in the name 
of Jehovah, to establish the Kingdom for which he 
taught us to pray, "Our Father. ..,thy Kingdom 
come, thy will be done on earth as it is done in heaven." 

This likeness of Cyrus to Messiah is not merely 
in the particulars noted. It should be remembered 
that the name, Cyrus, signifies "the sun," and that 
thus in his name he reminds us of the prophecy of 
Christ,— "The Sun of Righteousness shall arise with 
healing in his beams." Moreover, there were sundry 
very remarkable prophecies respecting Cyrus, made 
long before he had come into prominence. Through 
the Prophet Isaiah (44:28) the Lord speaks of Cyrus 
as his shepherd, who would lead back Israel, and again 
(45:1-14) he calls him his anointed, saying, "Thus 
saith the Lord to his anointed, to Cyrus, whose right 
hand I have holden to subdue nations before him; and 
I will loose the loins of kings, to open before him the 
two-leaved gates, and the gates shall not be shut; I 
will go before thee, and make the crooked places 
straight; I will break in pieces the gates of brass and cut 
in sunder the bars of iron; and I will give thee the 
treasures of darkness and hidden riches of secret places, 
that thou mayest know that I, Jehovah, which call 
thee by thy name, am the God of Israel. For Jacob 
my servant's sake, and Israel mine elect, I have even 
called thee by name; I have surnamed thee, tho thou 
hast not known me." In this prophecy Cyrus is evidently 
indicated, and yet just as evidently a greater 
than he is indirectly referred to, viz., the Prince of the 
kings of the earth, who in Revelation is shown as drying 
up the symbolic Euphrates and destroying symbolic 
Babylon, and delivering spiritual Israel. And 
the time for the fulfilment of the symbol is clearly 
indicated, by the drying up of the Euphrates under 
the sixth vial of the "Day of Wrath:" and the fall of 
Babylon under the seventh vial, resulting in the liberty 
of all of God's people from the thraldom, through 
false doctrine, which has been upon them for lo, these 
many years, is portrayed as resulting. 



Babylon literal fell because, when tried in the 
balances by the Lord, she was found wanting: mystic 
Babylon falls for a similar reason. Literal Babylon 
never was Israel, but the Israelites were for a time 
swallowed up in Babylon; likewise, mystic Babylon 
never was spiritual Israel, tho for a long time spiritual 
Israel has been in captivity to mystic Babylon. As 
the same Cyrus who overthrew literal Babylon made 
the proclamation which permitted literal Israel to return 
from captivity, so it is the King of kings who, 
upon taking his great power as earth's new King will 
set free all of the Lord's people— and in advance he 
sends the message to those who have ears to hear, 
saying, "Babylon the great is fallen, is fallen, and is 
become the habitation of demons and the hold of every 
foul spirit, and a cage of every unclean and hateful 
bird.... Come out of her, my people, that ye be not 
partakers of her sins, and that ye receive not of her 
plagues."— Rev. 18:2-4. 

The great feast which preceded the fall of Babylon 
would seem to correspond well with the great denominational 
union expected soon, and the season of 
rejoicing which will accompany it. The gold and silver 
vessels of the Lord's house which were profaned 
may fitly represent not only the precious truths of divine 
revelation, but also the Lord's consecrated people 
—the golden vessels representing the "little flock," 
and the more numerous silver vessels representing the 
"great company." What may be the character of the 
defilement and injury of these is of course problematical, 
but in any case we remember that those consecrated 
vessels were all highly honored, and restored 
to the Temple by Cyrus, and likewise we know that 
not only the truths of divine revelation will all be 
cared for by our Lord, but also that all that are his 
shall be glorified in the spiritual Temple which he will 
rear shortly. 



page 175 

INTERESTING LETTERS. 



MY DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-Your kind favor 
of the 9th received, and the announcement of Brother 
McPhail's visit is much appreciated by all the friends 
here in Philadelphia. Your letter was read and discussed 
at our meeting, and we decided to have an all-day 
meeting on Sunday, the 9th of July, with intermissions 
for lunch; and evening meetings on Friday and 
Saturday; all to be held at our usual meeting-place, 
Dover Hall, Marshall and Susquehanna aves. Please 
tell Bro. McPhail to come to my house on his arrival 



at Philadelphia. 

I am glad to be able to say that all our meetings 
are smooth and harmonious: so much so as to be a little 
different from what we might Scripturally expect: 

page 176 

but perhaps this is for a pleasant alternation to the 

ruggedness of the past few years. I take this opportunity 

of thanking you for the rich semi-monthly 

feasts of which we are the recipients from our present 

Lord through your agency; and I hope I may lay the 

lessons well to heart and never lose sight of the responsibility 

which accompanies the knowledge of the 

truth, but always realize that this is my day of judgment 

and try to be faithful to my consecration to his will. 

I enclose a clipping which is strikingly corroborative 
of the Laodicean period of the nominal church, 
and yet this gentleman will in all probability refuse to 
be enlightened from God's Word on the strange inconsistencies 
of which he complains. 

Sr. Walker unites in love to yourself and all those 
associated with you in "the work of the Lord." 

Yours in Christ, SMITH WALKER-Philadelphia. 

DEAR BROTHER:-Last Sunday I gathered up the 
rest of my Bible vs. Evolution pamphlets, slipped tracts 
into each one, left dinner to cook itself and went down 
to the Baptist church to make a beginning of distribution. 
The 500,000 pamphlets weighed on me, and I 
felt uneasy at doing so little toward the work. It was 
Children's Day, and services were prolonged, so I stood 
for half an hour, with what patience and fortitude I 
could, beset by inducements to give it up for that day, 
and nearly breaking down, when I heard the children 
in a responsive exercise saying, "Shall doubtless come 
again with rejoicing, bringing his sheaves with him." 
Had no difficulty in waiting after that, and disposed 
of the pamphlets to the first ones who came down the 
stairs. All but one were kindly received; one woman 
passed by with her head up, but it did not disturb me. 
I hurried home, to find things all right, my absence had 
caused no trouble, and I am not sure it was known. 
The Lord was merciful; for this had seemed to me an 
impossible thing for me to do, but while I was waiting 
I felt that I must not let anything prevent my 
carrying out what I had planned to do, or perhaps I 
could never have attempted it again. The obstacles 
have been so many and great; but when it seemed that 
I was a little willing to be prevented, then I felt I 
must overcome at any cost, or grieve the spirit. 

I have been letting no day pass without at the 
very least three witness-bearings to the truth of the 
Kingdom, and am greatly pleased when the number 
rises to seven or more, as it sometimes does. Generally, 
when I make opportunities in the morning, the 



Lord sends me others later in the day. If evening 
comes before I have given any testimony, I am unhappy 
and do not think I could rest, if I did not mail 
before retiring at least three missionary envelopes with 
tracts. It gets to be meat and drink to do the Lord's 
will. I am glad there are so many ways of serving. 
I want to say "Any service, anywhere;" and think it 
has been good for me that I had not money to put into 
the harvest-work lately, for it has compelled me to 
give tracts as something I still could do, and from 
which I felt I had no right to shrink. It has been a 
valuable training, undoubtedly, in addition. 

The Lord's peace is with me richly to-day. I have 
felt conscious of the presence of the heavenly Caretaker 
and, as it seemed, of the kindly down-looking 
of hosts of happy saints. I have felt almost ready to 
put away every fear at last. I belong to Christ, and 
I rejoice to find that God is true. His Word shall 
abide. That same Jesus whom I have seen slighted 
and decried and explained away and talked down and 
forgotten, by the people for whom he gave his very 
breath in unappreciated love,— he shall surprise them 
with goodness in power shortly. "Every knee" and 
"every tongue" ! I praise his name! My health is 
better of late, maybe since my immersion. That seemed 
a relief to my mind. 

The June 1st TOWER is very excellent and helpful. 
And also The Wonderful Story, very prettily finished 
and illustrated. 

Wishing you all things good in the Lord's service, 

Your sister in him, 

ALICE L. DARLINGTON, -Pennsylvania. 

MY DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I have just closed 
a meeting in Madison Co. which was the most interesting 
held there in a long time. I preached for them 
three days, and at the close of the meeting baptized 
five. I tried an hour and a half to explain the significance 
and beauty of the symbol, and I hope they understood 
what they were doing. 

Appointments are being arranged for me to make 
another trip to Santa Anna in July, and I hope to be 
able to fill them. If I go I want to hold meetings in 
Milano, Goldthwaite and Mullen. 

Oh how I do thank the dear Lord that he has seen 
fit to use me, yes, even me, in the service of the truth 
and those who love it! I do esteem it a grand privilege 
to be accounted worthy of a place in the harvest 
of this age. I think of the apostles who, when they 
were whipped for preaching Jesus, departed rejoicing 
that they were counted worthy to receive stripes for 
his name. 

My poor heart leaps for joy when I think of seventeen 
years ago in comparison with the present. 
Then I stood (so far as I then knew or know yet) almost 
alone, and in the ministry entirely alone. Now 



I look at the pile of good letters on my table from interested 

ones in different parts of Texas, and I read 

them with wet eyes and cheeks, as my heart rejoices 

to discern "the same mind" in the writers as I follow 

the lines of their letters. 

We are glad that we have been "able to stand" 
in these seventeen years of trial, and to-day thank 
God our lamp is burning, and we have oil in our vessel. 
We have borne reproaches, our name has been 
cast out as evil, we have been slanderously reported 
and persecuted; but we rejoice, knowing that it was 
for "his sake." Again, how light these afflictions 
were compared with his peace! Oh this blessed peace! 
"Thou wilt keep him in perfect peace, whose mind is 
stayed on thee." 

Oh how we feast, as we come to the table prepared 
for us in the presence of our enemies! His grace has 
been sufficient for us at all times. I think and rejoice 
over these things. God bless you! Let us look up; 
our redemption draweth nigh. Yes, we can say of 
each other, "whom having not seen we love." I seem 
to have known you since April, '83. 

My love goes out to, and my prayers up for, all 
who love our dear Lord. Yours, in the Lord's service, 
SAM. WILLIAMS.-Texas. 



page 177 
VOL. XX. JULY 15, 1899. No. 14. 



CONTENTS. 



View from the Watch Tower 179 

"The Powers of the Heavens 

Shall be Shaken" 179 

Preparing a Substitute for the 

Bible 180 

Poem: Press toward the Mark 181 

Questions and Answers 181 

Daniel in the Den of Lions 182 

The New Heart 186 

The Vision of Dry Bones 190 

Interesting Letters 192 

Attendants at Indianapolis Convention 

Should Secure Quarters 178 

page 178 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
--ADDRESS TO- 



WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, N.Y. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity or 
adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, if they 
send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting the 
paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list 
continually. 



WILL YOU ATTEND THE INDIANAPOLIS CONVENTION? 

-NOTIFICATIONS- 
SHOULD BE RECEIVED PROMPTLY TO SECURE ACCOMMODATIONS. THE 
CITY WILL BE CROWDED WrTH EPWORTH LEAGUERS. 

Arrangements are completed for a Convention of believers in 
the Second Coming of the Lord and the Plan of the Ages,— to 
be held at Indianapolis, Ind., July 21st to 23d, as follows:— 

The Railroad fare will be one-half the usual, except from a 
few points which will add $2 to the one fare for round trip. All 
passenger trains run into Union Depot, which is about seven 
blocks distant from the meeting place of the Convention— 
"Shover's Hall," on Market Street, between Alabama and New 
Jersey streets. 

Accommodations— good and clean— have been arranged for, 
at the very reasonable rate of ninety-five cents per day, at "Barton's 
Hotel," No. 29 Virginia Ave. Such ZION'S WATCH TOWER 
readers as cannot afford even this modest sum, will be entertained 
free, by the Indianapolis friends, with great pleasure. 
Those who ride to the hotel can take any car leaving the Union 
depot and should ask for "transfer" when they pay their fare. A 
"Reception Committee" will meet all the friends at the Barton 
Hotel— except during convention hours, when it will be at 
Shover's Hall, as above mentioned. 

The following program will be followed closely as practicable: 

Friday, July 21st.— The opening "rally" will be at 10 A.M., 
conducted by Brother C. A. Owen— an opportunity for getting 
generally acquainted. At 3 P.M. the assembly will be addressed 
by the Editor of this Journal from the text— "Looking for the 
blessed hope, even the glorious appearing of our great God and 
Savior, Jesus Christ." (Titus 2:13.) At 7:30 P.M. an address on 
the Ages and Dispensations of the divine plan, illustrated by 
the Chart of the Ages, may be expected. 

Saturday, July 22d.— Testimony Meeting at 8 A.M. Preaching 
at 10:30 A.M. by the Editor of this Journal: subject, "The Law 
of the Spirit of Life in Christ Jesus." (Rom. 8:2.) At 3 P.M. 
a discourse by Bro. M. L. McPhail— "Sanctify them through 
thy Truth." At 7:30 P.M. a Chart discourse by Bro. O. A. Koetitz. 

Sunday, July 23d. -Testimony Meeting 8:30 A.M.; at 10:30 a 



discourse by Bro. M. L. Staples on "The Offence of the Cross;" 
at 3 P.M., "I am not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ," by the 
Editor; at 7:30 P.M., "Preserving the Unity of the Spirit in the 
bonds of peace"— several speakers. 

All who love the Lord, trust in the precious blood and wait 
for his Kingdom, are cordially invited to attend this Convention 
which recognizes only the one Church and her one Lord, 
one faith and one baptism. All such will please address the 
WATCH TOWER SOCIETY as soon as they know definitely that they 
will attend, stating in few words who will be of their party, 
and whether or not they will stop at the hotel. 

An opportunity will be afforded for symbolizing baptism. 



R2499 : page 179 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 



"THE POWERS of the heavens shall be shaken," 

said our Lord: and all whose eyes are open 

can see the great shaking now in progress in the symbolic 

ecclesiastical "heavens" of the present time. 

How its stars are falling!* 

Rev. Burt Estes Howard, formerly of the First 
Presbyterian Church of Cleveland, Ohio, but latterly 
of the First Presbyterian Church of Los Angeles, Cal., 
and now resigned with the intention of becoming a 
professor at Stanford University (the richest university 
in the world), declares his present position of disbelief 
as follows:— 

"Do I believe in the inspiration of the Bible, in 
the resurrection of Jesus, and in the virginity of Mary? 
No, I cannot say that I do. 

"My ideas have changed regarding nearly all of 
the generally accepted religious tenets. My beliefs 
have not changed suddenly, but in the slow course of 
the last half dozen years. Simple faith in the Scriptures 
has given way to an irresistible belief in what is 
called higher criticism in religious thought. 

"I believe that Christ was born of woman, like 
the rest of us. 

"But I regard these matters as non-essential. 
The necessity of believing them is not apparent to me. 
I know there are many honest preachers who think 
they believe these dogmas. 

"The old Testament is largely an historical work. 
There can be no question as to the Bible's power for 
elevating and uplifting humanity. But one does not 
have necessarily to believe in the miracles to feel and 
profit by this power. 

"My whole aim in preaching has been to stimulate 
my people to the truest practical life. The good 
life is not necessarily the religious life." 



SECULAR JOURNALS TO THE RESCUE. 



As there were Gentiles who exhibited great faith 
in our Lord at his first advent, while the scribes and 
Pharisees and Doctors of the Jews disbelieved and 
scoffed, so now it is gratifying to note the zeal of a 
few secular journals in the defense of the Bible, while 
so many of the professed ministers of the Gospel are 
repudiating it. Discussing the trend of the high ones 
in the church nominal, toward infidelity,— called 
"higher criticism," evolution, etc.,— The Atlanta 
Constitution says:— 

"The manifestations of unbelief in the pulpit have 
become so frequent and so notorious that a well-conducted 
newspaper cannot fail to take note, if only as 
a part of the phenomena of the time. Those of our 
readers who have access only to a few of the newspapers 
of the day would be astonished if we had room 
in these columns to present even one-half of the manifestations 
of unbelief that have become visible as the 
result of the encouragement and support which Dr. 
Briggs and his views have received. 

"Already various pulpit imitators of Dr. Briggs 
are boldly avowing the conclusions to which the higher 
criticism leads. For instance, here is a professor in 
the Chicago Theological Seminary declaring that it is 
not necessary for Christians to believe in the miraculous 
birth of Christ; that such belief is not necessarily 
a part of the Christian creed. This professor takes 
the ground that the statements of the apostles on this 
matter are not revelations at all. Commenting on the 
Savior's words in the seventeenth chapter of John, 
this Chicago professor of theology calmly remarks:— 
'This is scarcely the utterance of one who was conscious 
of being the Messiah sent from God, but the 
preexistence which is involved is ideal.' 

"We need not say that The Constitution prints 
this shameful, scandalous and blasphemous statement, 
not to horrify decent men and women, but to show 
how accurate were its predictions with respect to the 



*MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. IV., Chap. 12. 

R2499 : page 180 

purport and tendency of the higher criticism. Its 

whole aim is to tear down and undo, to uproot and 

destroy, the faith that has served the purposes of Christendom 

for nearly nineteen hundred years. Since we 

have quoted the sacrilegious teachings of a professor 

in the Chicago Theological Seminary, we cannot do 



better than to quote the remarks of Dr. Adams, editor 
of The Advance. 'The Congregationalists may put up 
with loose views on the atonement, but you may rest 
assured [he was talking to a reporter] that they will 
never endure a man who denies the miraculous birth 
and the preexistence in heaven of Jesus Christ.' 

"Apparently these are the words of an indignant 
man, and yet how far is the journey from 'loose views 
on the atonement' to a denial of the miraculous birth 
and the preexistence of the Savior? 

"The pretentiousness of the higher criticism could 
not be more powerfully set forth than its claim to be 
'scientific' No word in our English vocabulary has 
come to have a cheaper or a more insignificant meaning. 
It has been tossed to and fro between theorists 
and cranks until its primary significance has been lost 
and it stands for any wild or absurd conclusion that 
the disordered mind of man is capable of conceiving. 

"Let it be understood that there is no objection 
anywhere to earnest and orderly investigations into 
the history and evolution of the books of the Bible. 
So long as such investigations are set on foot by men 
well enough equipped for the purpose and are not undertaken 
for the purpose of proving a theory already 
conceived, they are well enough. Let it be understood, 
also, that there is no claim among Christians anywhere 
that the translations of the Bible are free from error, 
or that the letterpress is inerrant; these are the work 
of man, and man's work is necessarily defective at 
some point or other. 

"The claim that is made, and the claim that The 
Constitution upholds, is that the books of the Bible, of 
the Old as well as the New Testament, are divinely inspired; 
that to prove one or a dozen to be myths or fables 
is to tear down the whole scheme of salvation; and 
that the promise and the fulfilment are so intimately 
connected in the scheme of salvation that to prove one 
false is to prove the other a fraud. This is shown by 
comparing the conclusions of Dr. Briggs with the declarations 
of Dr. George H. Gilbert, the theological 
professor at Chicago. Dr. Briggs says that the Bible 
is made up of myths, fables, fairy tales, poems and 
fictitious narratives. The Chicago man is sure that 
the world is to be saved, if saved at all, by an Eastern 
philosopher who was not a Messiah but a gifted idealist. 
This is the logical conclusion of Briggism, and 
this is why Robert Ingersoll regards Briggs as a modern 
hero. 

"Dr. Briggs and those who are hurrying his doctrines 
to their logical conclusions have nothing to offer 
in the place of the Bible they are destroying; no hope 
to hold out to those whose faith they are trying to undermine. 
In place of our Lord and Savior of whom 
the prophets tell, and to whom the apostles bear witness, 
they do not even offer us Mahomet, nor Brahma, 
nor Confucius. What then? Why, so far as the higher 



criticism is concerned, we have no choice but between 
Robert Ingersoll and the devil!" 

WHAT LEARNED COLLEGE PROFESSORS ARE PREPARING 
AS A SUBSTITUTE FOR THE BIBLE. 



While Satan's arts are beguiling some from faith 
in the Bible, he realizes the need of a substitute, and 
is rapidly pushing forward his "seducing spirits and 
doctrines of devils." (1 Tim. 4:1.) Theosophy, 
Christian Science (falsely so-called) and Spiritism are 
being advanced and exploited in various ways, through 
influential channels. Recently the New York and 
Boston journals of largest circulation have printed columns 
of matter, profusely illustrated, detailing the tests 
applied to Spiritism by Prof. Hodgson, representative 
of the English Society for Psychical research, Prof. 
James Hyslop of Columbia College, and Prof. James of 
Harvard College. We extract as follows:— 

"NOTED SCIENTIST OF COLUMBIA 

SAYS HE COULD NOT HAVE BEEN DECEIVED. 

"HIS PROOF OF IMMORTALITY. 

'"I have had in all seventeen sittings with Mrs. 
Piper,' said Dr. Hyslop. 'She had no possible means 
of knowing who I am. In not a single incident did 
she tell me facts connected only with my own memory. 
They were common as well with the memory of persons 
now dead. 

'"Now that this was not fraud is proved by this 
statement of Prof. James, of Harvard, in the Psychological 
Review: "Dr. Hodgson considers that the hypothesis 
of fraud cannot be seriously entertained." I 
agree with him throroughly and absolutely.' 

"WILL TELL ALL IN A YEAR. 

'"I shall be ready to lay my case completely before 
the world in just about a year. By that time I hope 
to organize a body of scientific men to examine my 
facts, and to get enough money to endow a fund to 
break down the frauds bound to spring up.' 

"Prof. Hyslop is generally regarded by his associates 
in the faculty at Columbia as a sound-minded, 
painstaking and an especially keen scientific man. 

"BUTLER'S FAITH IN HYSLOP. 

"Prof. Nicholas Murray Butler, Dean of the Faculty 
of Philosophy and an expert psychologist, yesterday 
expressed the greatest confidence in Prof. Hyslop. 

'"The fact,' said he, 'that he has gone at the 
matter in the most extreme spirit of skepticism, and 



is supported in his research by such men as Dr. James, 
of Harvard, and Dr. Hodgson, of Boston, leads me to 
believe that he would not make any statement not well 

R2500 : page 180 

grounded on scientific facts. 

"The field he has investigated is one that cannot 
be ignored. These occurrences need explanation, and 
that is what Dr. Hyslop is doing for them.' 

"Dr. Franz, an assistant in the Department of 
Psychology, also asserted the trustworthiness of Prof. 
Hyslop's opinions." 

Alas! poor Babylon, her lords and her teachers, 
in whom she has trusted, are leading on to the ditch 
of Infidelity, and fulfilling our Lord's prediction,— 

R2500 :page 181 

"When the Son of Man cometh, shall he find the faith 
on the earth?" He will evidently find only a "little 
flock" walking in the light of his Word. 

How opportune seems the booklet— What say the 
Scriptures about Spiritualism?* All friends of the truth 
should have some of these on hand to loan— as helping 
hands to assist our "brethren" to escape this snare 
of the Adversary. 



■'Supplied at fifty cents per doz.; 10 cents each. 



PRESS TOWARD THE MARK! 



"Forgetting those things which are behind, and reaching 
forth unto those things which are before."— Phil. 3:13. 

Tho disappointments, keenly felt, 

Have traced care on thy brow; 
Tho hopes have perished that have caused 

Thy heart in grief to bow; 
Tho friends have failed thee whom thou loved, 

And foes with wicked dart 
Have drawn the cruel bow of scorn 

To pierce thy breaking heart: 

Be vigilant, be strong, be true, 
And quit thee like a man; 

Be diligent God's will to know- 
Submissive to his plan; 

Heed not the counseling of men, 
E'en tho in love 'tis given. 



(Shortsighted it is apt to be, 

And lead thee far from Heaven.) 

But ready be to follow Christ, 

Wherever he may lead; 
To voice of stranger hearken not, 

But to his voice give heed. 
Through evil or through good report 

Undaunted follow on; 
Your feet will never find a path, 

But there your Lord has gone. 

And what if men may look askance 

And sneer and laugh and scorn? 
You'll never feel a pang of pain, 

But that your Lord has borne; 
The trials of this present life 

Are not to be compared 
To glory we shall share with him, 

Whose sufferings we have shared. 

-HATTIE HENDERSON. 



R2500 :page 181 

QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS. 



QUESTION. Please give for the benefit of others 
as well as myself brief explanations of the 
following Scriptures:-Matt. 10:10; 1 Cor. 9:7-14; 
1 Thes. 2:6; Gal. 6:6; 2 Thes. 3:8-10. 
Answer. We reply to your questions as follows: 
Matt. 10:10.— This instruction was to the twelve 
apostles sent forth to announce the Kingdom. It was 
not a general instruction for all time, but particular to 
the occasion. It is not applicable to the present time. 
The object in sending them forth in this dependent 
manner was largely at least to teach the apostles the 
lesson of the Lord's full ability to care for them under 
all circumstances and conditions, and they learned the 
lesson. Subsequently the apostles acted very differently; 
the Apostle Paul, for instance, making tents, 
etc., and their change of course was under the Lord's 
direction.— See Luke 22:35,36. 

1 Cor. 9:7-18.— We understand the Apostle here 
to teach that it is the privilege of the Church to support 
those who are giving their entire time to the ministry 
of the Gospel, as was the Apostle Paul, and as 
some are doing now. But this does not seem to us to 
imply that all the elders in all the churches were supported 
without doing any manual labor themselves. 
So far as we have any knowledge of the matter, the 
elders generally, as the Apostle expresses it, took the 



oversight of the local congregations, not for filthy 
lucre's sake, but of a ready mind— of a desire to serve 
the flock. -1 Pet. 5:2. 

The Apostle's case, and that of others who 
did a like service, was different, and yet he did not 
demand support, and if it was not voluntarily rendered, 
he made tents, or otherwise labored with his 
hands, understanding that to be the will of God concerning 
his course— that he should not make request 
for support or any carnal things. This he explains in 
the very verses under consideration.— See vss. 15-18. 

It would seem to be a feature of the divine law that 
whoever has received a spiritual blessing must make 
some sacrifice of an earthly kind, and thus show his 
appreciation of the spiritual favor received of the Lord, 
if he would grow in grace, knowledge and love. While 
therefore we deprecate everything akin to money-begging, 
and carefully avoid it in our columns, we do believe 
most sincerely that those who will receive the 
greatest blessing at the Lord's hands are those who 
are using their means in the spread of the truth— to 
the extent of their ability, if that be only two mites, 
as in the case of the poor widow. The salvation purchased 
at the high cost of our dear Redeemer's life is 
offered free, and the Lord refuses to permit any to pay 
for it, but he does not refuse to permit us to testify 
our love and appreciation of his grace by little self-denials. 
On the contrary, he appreciates these, and 
causes his face to shine and his spiritual blessings to 
fall upon those who take delight in devoting themselves 

R2500 : page 182 

and their substance to his service and the service 
of his cause, the service of his people. On the contrary, 
those who have never learned the blessedness of 
giving are informed that "The Lord loveth a cheerful 
giver:" and those who have not the love which leads 
them to respond with gratitude have not the condition 
of heart which the Lord loves, will not grow in grace 
and, because of the cultivation of the spirit of selfishness, 
instead of the spirit of benevolence, such are apt 
to grow cold, indifferent, and to fail to make their calling 
and election sure. "The liberal soul shall be made 
fat."-Prov. 11:25. 

1 Thes. 2:6.— This is in harmony with the foregoing. 
In justice the Apostle might have said to those 
to whom he had brought the glad tidings:— You owe 
to me, as the servant of God, more than you will ever 
be able to pay in the present life, and it is as little as 
you can do to care for my temporal necessities to the 
extent of your ability. But the Gospel message is not 
given along the lines of justice, but along the lines of 
love and compassion, and hence the Apostle was careful 
not to mention these things when with the Church 
(tho after he had gone from them he thought it his 



duty to write as we have seen, to the Church at Corinth, 
setting forth the facts). When with the Lord's 
people he neither coveted their silver and gold, nor 
asked for it or their praise, but was gentle and loving, 
"even as a nurse cherisheth her children: being 
so affectionately desirous of you, we were willing to 
have imparted unto you, not the gospel of God only, 
but also our own souls, because ye were dear unto us, 
for ye remember, brethren, our labor and travail; for 
laboring night and day, because we would not be 
chargeable to any of you, we preached unto you the 
gospel of God."— Vss. 7-9. 

Gal. 6:6.— This injunction, "Let him that is 
taught in the Word communicate unto him that teacheth 
in all good things," might properly be understood 
to mean that the taught were to support the teachers; 
and yet just as reasonably we might understand it to 
mean that those receiving instruction should not fear 
to communicate to the better instructed teaching-brother 
any thought that they might have respecting 
the Lord's word of grace. Nothing in the connection 
would seem to imply of necessity that it meant to communicate 
in carnal things: the good things with equal 
propriety might be considered good spiritual things. 
However, even if it were clear that this referred to 
temporal good things, we are to bear in mind that the 
Apostle did not impress this upon the Church on his 
own behalf, for he was not with them at this time. 
Very evidently he never spoke in such a strain when 
with the Church, and when his words might be understood 
to mean a personal appeal for money, for charity, 
for support. 

2 Thes. 3:8-10.— "Neither did we eat any man's 
bread for naught; but wrought with labor and travail 
night and day, that we might not be chargeable to 
any of you; not because we have not power [authority, 
as the appointed apostles of the Lord, to demand support], 
but to make ourselves an ensample unto you to 
follow us. For even when we were with you this we 
commanded you, that if any should not work, neither 
should he eat." 

R2501 :page 182 

It would appear from this that it was never the 
Apostle's thought, nor the meaning of any of the types 
or instructions of the Word of God, that a clergy class 
should be created or should create itself, and abstain 
from work and insist upon being supported in comparative 
idleness. Any such interpretation would 
evidently be contrary to the example of the Apostle, 
as above stated. 

It may be sometimes difficult to draw the line on 
questions of this kind, which have two sides. The 
only safe way is to seek the mind of the Lord, and on 
the one hand to cultivate generosity and restrain selfishness, 



and on the other hand to give needed assistance 
to ministers of the truth, without doing anything to 
encourage them in idleness, which is a foe both to 
truth and to grace. 



R2501 :page 182 

DANIEL IN THE DEN OF LIONS. 

JULY 30.--DAN. 6:10-23. 

"The Lord is thy keeper."— Psa. 121:5. 

NOTHING gives us a higher opinion of the kings 

of ancient times, their willingness to recognize 

character and merit wherever it might be found, 

than does the record furnished in the Book of Daniel. 

If we were surprised at Nebuchadnezzar's impartial 

treatment of his captives, in the selection of Daniel 

and his companions, and their education and advancement 

in the kingdom; if we were surprised that the 

king so greatly honored Daniel for the interpretation 

of a dream; if we were surprised that, when convinced 

that Shadrach, Meshach and Abed-nego were servants 

of the true God, Nebuchanezzar gave them still higher 

positions in the empire; and if we were surprised that 

Belshazzar took no offence at Daniel's interpretation 

of the writing on the wall, but highly honored and rewarded 

him for his faithful, plain, outspoken words, 

—we are still more surprised to find that King Darius 

of the Medes and Persians, so far from destroying all 

the rulers of Babylon, including Daniel, apparently 

spared all except the king alive, and gave Daniel a 

R2501 :page 183 

very high position in the empire. We may reasonably 
assume that, altho God's providence was in the matter 
of Daniel's preferment, nevertheless there was 
some creditable generosity in those heathen kings, as 
well as some natural ability and good quality manifested 
by the Prophet Daniel. 

As one of the three presidents of the empire, and 
having charge over a hundred and twenty of its provinces, 
Daniel stood in the way of many who sought 
office, and, as a man of unimpeachable character, no 
doubt he stood in the way of many schemes for the 
plundering of the treasury; for such public plundering 
and dishonesty, said to be very general throughout 
Eastern countries to-day, was probably so then to a 
large extent. For these selfish reasons, Daniel was 
sure to have a host of secret enemies, who sought his 
downfall. From the narrative we might suppose that 
these enemies, many of whom would be prominent in 



official life, had watched in vain to find any real cause 
of complaint, and that they finally concluded that, if 
fault would be found at all, it must be on account of 
his religion. 

How this reminds us of the Apostle's testimony, 
"All that will live godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer 
persecution," and again, our Lord's words, "If ye 
were of the world, the world would love his own, but 
because ye are not of the world, but I have chosen you 
out of the world, therefore the world hateth you ! " 
(2 Tim. 3:12; John 15:19.) Even where there are 
no selfish motives to impel the persecution, there is 
ever present the distinction between "light" and 
"darkness:" and the fact noticed by all is mentioned 
by our Lord,— that all who are themselves of the darkness 
hate the light and all who walk in the light. 
(John 3:19-21.) Some one has truly said, "Whosoever 
does well and is faithful and true, while others 
are dishonest and false, must expect to be opposed and 
hated. Every effort will be made to injure his character, 
to drag him into the mire, and to make it appear 
that he is no better than those who assail 
him. Envy is sharper than a serpent's tooth, and 
deadlier than the poison of asps." 

Shakespeare has truly said:— 

"Be thou as chaste as ice, as pure as snow, 
Thou shalt not escape calumny." 

"That thou art blamed shall not be thy defect; 
For slander's mark was ever yet the fair; 
So thou be good, slander doth yet approve 
Thy worth the greater." 

Sometimes we speak of the snares that are laid 
for the feet of God's servants as fixed by Satan, their 
great Adversary, and this may be so, at least by supervision, 
and yet apparently there are some so fully 
imbued with the spirit of their "father, the devil," 
that his nefarious schemes and plots seem to come 
quite naturally to them. And thus it was with Daniel's 
enemies, who sought his ruin. Very skilfully they 
counseled with the king respecting the necessity that 
the people should recognize him as a god, and urged 
this as essential to the enforcement of obedience to the 
king's commands amongst his new subjects. The 
theory of the empire was that the king's person was 
specially possessed by Ormuzd, the deity of the empire, 
that his word was therefore representatively the word 
of that god, and that therefore all of his decrees were infallible 
and inviolable, even by himself. Taking advantage 
of this law of the Medes and Persians, that no 
decree could be altered or abrogated, these plotters 
succeeded in having the king set apart thirty days in 
which it should be a crime to offer a petition or worship 
to any other person or god save to Darius himself. 



We are not to suppose that the king had so false 
an idea of his own personal consequence, nor that 
these his officers entertained the view that he was an 
infallible god: rather, it was a matter which they suggested 
as a piece of statecraft, a fraud upon the people, 
justified, in their perverted judgments, by the 
greater peace and security from the prevalence of such 
a superstitious reverence for the king and his laws. 
The false reasoning was of the Jesuitical sort, which 
says, An evil or a falsehood is justified if beneficial 
results are hoped for;— the same false principle which 
operates in the minds of many intelligent preachers 
who, while thoroughly disbelieving in the doctrine of 
eternal torment themselves, countenance and encourage, 
or at least do not discourage, a belief in the falsehood 
on the part of their hearers; hoping that the 
prevalent superstition on the subject may prove a restraint 
upon the masses. 

Having obtained the king's signature to the new 
law, the conspirators exulted in the thought that 
Daniel at last was in their grasp, and already practically 
destroyed. They seem to have known the man's 
character so well as not to doubt that he would be 
faithful to his religious convictions, and thus furnish 
them all the opportunity desired for his apprehension. 
And it was so. After the matter was proclaimed as 
law, as having had the king's signet, Daniel worshiped 
as before, kneeling three times a day before the Lord 
in prayer, thanksgiving and supplication— with his 
windows open toward Jerusalem, his expectations 
bright with hope in the Lord's promises, and especially 
with the thought that now the seventy years of 
Jerusalem's desolation were about fulfilled, and that 
very soon Cyrus, according to the prophecy, would 
become king, and send back the covenanted people to 
the land of promise. 

We are not informed why Daniel had adopted a 

R2501 :page 184 

habit of private worship in so public a manner as to 
be generally known to the people— a manner so different 
from that which the Lord commended to the 
household of faith of this Gospel age, saying, "When 
thou prayest, enter into thy closet [secret apartment], 
and when thou hast shut thy door, pray to the Father 
which is in secret." (Matt. 6:6.) Quite probably the 
custom of Babylon was such as to make Daniel's more 
open course the reasonable and proper one. Possibly 
all worship was more or less public or visible, and for 
Daniel to have worshiped in secret might have been 
misunderstood to mean that he did not worship at all; 
while to worship as he did, not before an idol, but 
with his face toward Jerusalem, the typical city of 
God, the great King, and its Temple, the typical habitation 
of God, the great King, would be his standing 



confession of God before the various nationalities of 
Babylon, including his own people, the Jews, who 
would need just such an illustration of faithfulness to 
the true God and separation from idolatry. 

Daniel was not satisfied to merely close his eyes 
in prayer after he had retired to rest, as do many people 
living under the greater light of this Gospel age, 
and under greater privileges and opportunities and 
grander promises. He had a great God who was 
worthy of reverence and worship, and he was great 
enough as a man to appreciate that it was a privilege 
to have intercourse and fellowship with his Creator. 
He was not only not ashamed to bow the knee 
to the Almighty, but was unwilling to assume a less 
humble position before God than he and others assumed 
toward earthly kings. Our judgment is that 
it is impossible for any Christian to maintain a proper 
consistent walk in life, and to build up such a character 
and faith structure as are represented by the Apostle 
as composed of "gold, silver and precious stones," 
without prayer;— more than this, without regularity 
in prayer;— we would almost be inclined to say, without 
kneeling in prayer: and we believe that the experiences 

R2502:page 184 

and testimonies of the truest and best of the 
Lord's people who have ever lived will corroborate 
this. 

One of the points of the Adversary's attack, surest 
to have a baneful influence, is along this line. 
When the Lord's people become overcharged with the 
cares of this life, instead of realizing their danger and 
seeking the help of the Lord to order the affairs of life 
differently, the suggestion comes that they are too 
weary to pray, or that another time will be more favorable: 
or perhaps they are so fully engrossed that 
reverence and acknowledgment to the Lord, from 
whom cometh every good and perfect gift, is entirely 
forgotten: or perhaps sin lieth at the door, and they 
seek not to think of the Lord, and therefore avoid the 
throne of grace: or perhaps coldness has come in from 
some other cause, and the Lord seems afar off, and 
prayer becomes a mere formality and is by and by 
abandoned. The child of God who is in a proper condition 
of heart-harmony will desire to commune with 
his Creator,— not only to hear his Word, but also to 
offer thanksgiving and worship; as surely as he will 
desire natural food and drink for the sustenance of his 
natural body. Whoever has not this experience should 
seek it; and, according to our Lord's promise, he that 
seeketh findeth, and to him that knocketh it shall be 
opened. 

According to a preconcerted arrangement, the 
conspirators assembled themselves at the proper time 
to be witnesses of Daniel's devotion to the true God, 



and then proceeded to the king to announce that the 
first one to disobey his decree, and therefore to come 
under its punishment, was the aged, honored and 
trusted President of a hundred and twenty provinces 
of the empire, Daniel. The king was sorely displeased 
with himself: evidently he had not thought of Daniel, 
and of the possibility of such results following his decree. 
He had been advised to make it, it had seemed 
to flatter him, he had yielded to the urgent representations 
of the supposedly well-intentioned and wise men; 
and now he discerned that he had been deliberately 
led into a trap for the very purpose of destroying his 
most valued counselor, of whom, evidently, he had 
not thought to ask advice before signing the decree. 

The king sought every possible way to make void 
the decree or to excuse Daniel from its penalty; but 
the conspirators were close at hand with arguments to 
prove that such a course would be contrary to the 
usages of the nation, would mean the undermining of 
the authority of the king and the loss of confidence in 
his decrees by the people; and he found no escape from 
his dilemma: his counselors even seemed to threaten 
the stability of his throne themselves, assuring him 
that "no decree may be changed." Finally the king 
commanded that Daniel be brought and cast into the 
den of lions; expressing to Daniel, however, the hope, 
"May thy God, whom thou servest continually, deliver 
thee." The exemplary conduct of Daniel, previously 
and at this time, had its effect upon the king, 
as expressed by the word, "continually." He had confidence 
that God was with Daniel, and that the God 
whom Daniel so sincerely worshiped and so intelligently 
trusted, must be more powerful than all other gods. 
Such should be the lesson of every Christian life, one 
which would testify not only to his own character and 
faithfulness to God, but one also which would testify 
to the good character and faithfulness of the God whom 
he worships. 

The conspirators were bent on having matters 

R2502 : page 185 

thoroughly accomplished, and hence the stone (which 
covered the den and was probably fastened to its place 
with an iron bar) was doubly sealed with wax, to prove 
that it was not tampered with— one seal was the king's 
the other that of the lords of the empire, who were 
amongst the conspirators, so that there might be no 
subsequent alteration of the conditions or delivery of 
Daniel during the night. If the lions were not very 
hungry at the moment Daniel was first cast in, it was 
reckoned that they would certainly become so before 
morning. How the hearts of these evil men longed 
for the death of a good man, who had done them no 
injury— except as his life may have been a living epistle, 
contradictory to theirs, or as he may have thwarted 



some of their efforts to do evil ! 

It is very much to the king's honor that we read 
that he was so troubled in mind that he could not 
sleep, but spent the night fasting, and very early in 
the morning made haste to the den to see whether or 
not Daniel's God had delivered him. So amongst the 
friends and neighbors of a true Christian are some who 
know and appreciate God only as they know and appreciate 
the Christian character. 

The king's words, as he approached the den, were 
a wonderful tribute to Daniel's faithfulness as a servant 
of God. "Is thy God whom thou servest continually 
able to deliver thee from the lions?" The king 
here associated, and that properly, Daniel's faithful 
service to God with his hope respecting God's faithfulness 
to Daniel. And this reminds us of the words 
of the Apostle (1 John 3:22), "And whatsoever we 
ask we receive of him, because we keep his commandments, 
and do those things that are pleasing in his 
sight."— Compare John 8:29. 

The heart of Darius was glad as he heard Daniel's 
voice saluting him, assuring him of his safety; and he 
at once caused him to be delivered from the den. 
Daniel expressed one reason for the Lord's deliverance, 
in the words, "Before him innocency was found in 
me— as also before thee, O king, have I done no hurt." 
We note the fact that haughtiness and bravado are 
wholly lacking in the prophet's announcement of the 
great favor of God manifested on his behalf. There 
is a lesson here which many of the Lord's people need 
to learn; namely, that, having done their part, they 
are not to boast of it, nor to parade their sanctity, nor 
to speak exultingly of the results, as tho they were 
of their own achievement, but are simply, like Daniel, 
to give the glory to God. 

The expression, "God hath sent his angel, and 
hath shut the lions' mouths," need not be understood 
literally to signify that an angel was personally present 
and literally prevented the lions from opening their 
mouths; for tho such a course would be entirely possible, 
we are to understand the term, angel, in a general 
way to signify any power or agency which God 
might employ, and the expression, "shutting of the 
lions' mouths," would simply signify that they had 
been restrained from doing violence to Daniel. Nor 
would we question that an angel of the Lord could 
have been with Daniel, and kept him company in the 
den, if such were the will of God; but the presence or 
absence of an angel was not essential to the divine 
protection granted. 

Not many of the Lord's people are cast into dens 
of literal lions, and yet at times quite a good many of 
them have had experiences which strongly resemble 
this— as for instance, the Apostle Paul, in recounting 
his experiences, mentions perils of waters, perils of 
robbers, perils by his own countrymen, perils by the 



heathen, perils in the city, perils in the wilderness, 

perils in the sea, and caps the climax in the specification 

of "perils amongst false brethren." (2 Cor. 1 1:26.) 

It is possible for human mouths to do us more harm 

than the mouths of brute beasts; the Apostle James 

points this out when he says: "Behold, how small a 

fire enkindles a great forest! And the tongue is a fire 

in the world of unrighteousness. The tongue is established 

among our members as the one which defiles 

the whole body and sets on fire the course of life, and 

it is enkindled of Gehenna; for every species, both of 

wild beasts and of birds and of reptiles and of sea-creatures, 

is tamable and has been tamed by the human 

race; but the tongue of men no man is able to subdue. 

It is an irrestrainable evil, full of death-producing 

poison."— James 3:6-8. 

As God's providence was over Daniel, permitting 
him to come under the power of natural wild beasts, 
and making this a test of his fidelity to God and to 
principles of righteousness, so the Lord's providence 
sometimes permits his faithful ones to be exposed to 
the venom and malice and hate and misrepresentation 
and slander of human tongues, far more vicious and 
far more terrible every way than the wild beasts of 
the jungle, which can harm but for a moment. Nevertheless, 
as the Lord was able to deliver Daniel, he is 
not less able to send his angel (his providences) to 
shut the mouths of those who would do injury to his 
people. They may gnash upon them with their teeth, 
as the lions may have been permitted to do to Daniel, 
to test his faith in the Lord; yet we are to remember 
that all things are subject to him with whom we have 
to do, and whose service we have entered through 
vows of consecration. 

In some instances it may please the Lord to grant 
a wonderful deliverance, as in the case of Daniel, while 
in other instances the providential dealings may result 
otherwise, as for instance in Stephen's case: his plain 

R2502 : page 186 

but kind statement of the truth to his Jewish brethren 
"cut them to the heart," and "they gnashed on him 
with their teeth, and cried out with a loud voice and 
stopped their ears, and ran upon him with one accord 
and cast him out of the city, and stoned him. ...And 
he kneeled down and cried with a loud voice, Lord, 
lay not this sin to their charge." But even in such a 
case the victory was with the Lord's servant, of whom 
we read, "But he, being full of the holy spirit, looked 
up steadfastly into heaven, and saw the glory of God." 
And the record further is that Stephen, in the midst 
of such persecution, had the peace of God which passeth 
all understanding, to such an extent that his face 
was "as the face of an angel"— serene, calm, unperturbed. 
-Acts 6:15; 7:54-60. 



The Scriptural record is that after Daniel's deliverance 
King Darius caused all the conspirators to be 
cast into the den of lions, and that thus they were all 
destroyed. Josephus adds something from tradition, 

R2503 : page 186 

to the effect that, when Daniel was delivered the conspirators 

claimed that his preservation was due to the 

fact that some one had fed the lions before he was cast 

into the den, and that the king undertook to demonstrate 

the matter by having the lions liberally fed, and 

then casting into the den those who had conspired 

against Daniel, who were speedily devoured. 

This reminds us of how Haman was hanged upon 
the very gallows he had prepared for Mordecai. The 
Psalmist seems to speak of it as a principle associated 
with the divine government, that those who dig pits 
for others are likely to fall therein themselves. (Psa. 7:15,16; 
9:15,16.) And who has not observed that 
those who gnash upon others with the tongue of scandal 
and falsehood, envy and malice, are likely in the 
end to be injured by the very falsehood and bitter 
words wherewith they seek to injure others? There 
is a law of retribution at work, in accordance with 
which a recompense of evil is dealt out to all evil-doers, 
either in the present life or in the life to come. 



R2503 : page 186 

THE NEW HEART. 

AUG. 6.--EZEK. 36:25-36. 

"A new heart also will I give you." 

EZEKIEL wrote the words of our lesson in Babylon. 
They are not to be esteemed as merely the 
exhortations of a preacher, altho they do partake of 
this quality: they are more than this— a prophecy by 
the Lord respecting his future favors toward Israel. 
The context preceding reviews Israel's situation— the 
people in a foreign land, and their own Land of 
Promise a desolate wilderness because of their sinful 
neglect of their great King Jehovah, and of their covenant 
promises as his adopted people. While the Prophet's 
words declare a future recovery, not only as possible, 
but as sure to be accomplished, they nevertheless 
indicate certain changed conditions as necessary to 
such a recovery: it would not only be necessary for 
them to abandon idolatry, but they must obtain a new 
heart, a new mind, a new disposition, favorable to God 
and righteousness, ere such an abandonment of idolatry 
and sin would be permanent. 



The Prophet does not here declare the time at 
which this new heart would be given to the people. 
He merely points out to them the necessity for such a 
new heart and the blessings of the Lord that would result 
from such a harmony with him; and tells them, "I 
will yet for this be inquired of by the house of Israel, 
to do it for them."— Vs. 37. 

As a matter of fact, this new condition of heart 
was not attained by Israel on their release by Cyrus 
from the captivity in Babylon. Altho only a limited 
number, who had a respect for God and who trusted in 
the promises made to the fathers, had sufficient interest 
in the Holy Land to avail themselves of the proclamation 
made by Cyrus and to return to Palestine, and 
altho we might say that by means of this captivity the 
Lord had sifted out of Israel the idolatrous and unfaithful 
majority, we still cannot say that those who 
returned with Ezra and Nehemiah enjoyed the new 
heart condition which the Lord stipulated through the 
Prophet was essential to a full reception of his favor. 

While, so far as we know, gross forms of idolatry 
never prevailed in Israel after the return from captivity 
in Babylon, we nevertheless know that the more refined 
forms of idolatry continually existed amongst 
them, as amongst other civilized nations who do not 
bow to wood and stone, gold and silver— an idolatry of 
wealth, an idolatry of self, an idolatry of Judaism, 
prevailed amongst them, and they never attained the 
condition specified in this lesson. They did not get 
the new heart and right spirit; they did not get rid of 
the stony heart; they did not walk in the Lord's statutes 
and judgments, nor do them; they did not dwell 
in the land, but were cast out of it because of the stony 
character of their hearts, in the rejection and crucifixion 
of Messiah; and they who were called God's people 
were cast off, and are not called his people now; and 
they have not been prospered, but have been in fiery 
trials in the midst of their enemies, scattered amongst 
all nations from then until the present time. Nor have 
they yet loathed themselves, their iniquities and their 
abominations, nor been ashamed and confounded; nor 
is the desolate land tilled, and as the garden of Eden. 
Quite the contrary of all this is the truth. 

What shall we say, then? Was Ezekiel a false 

R2503 : page 187 

Prophet, or has God failed of accomplishing his good 
purposes toward Israel because of the weakness of their 
flesh and the hardness of their hearts? God forbid! 
On the contrary, we are to understand that the prophecy 
of this lesson belongs to a future time— to the Millennial 
Day; and that whatever signs there are at the 
present time of the return of divine favor toward fleshly 
Israel and toward the Land of Promise are evidences 
that the time for the fulfilment of this prophecy is near 



at hand. 

In corroboration of this position we cite Romans 1 1:25-32. 
Here the Apostle Paul shows that Israel 
after the flesh, not having zealously inquired for the 
new heart and the right spirit, not having sought it of 
the Lord, was unprepared in heart to receive Messiah, 
and instead with wicked hands crucified him. The 
Apostle shows us that, as a result, only a remnant was 
gathered out of Israel to be of the "bride" class, and 
that the nation as a whole stumbled into blindness, 
darkness, for a time determined of the Father— until 
the election to the "bride" class should be completed 
from among the Gentiles. Then, the Apostle assures 
us, Israel's blindness shall be turned away; they shall 
all be saved from that blindness. "For this is my covenant 
unto them, when I shall take away their sins." 

It is this covenant of the Lord to Israel to take 
away their sins and to give them new hearts and right 
dispositions that is referred to in our lesson, and we 
look for the fulfilment with longing anticipation— realizing, 
as the Apostle points out, that Israel's recovery 
from blindness will mean nothing less than life from 
the dead; for if that nation, after crucifying Messiah, 
and being blind to the fulfilment of the prophecies 
made to their fathers, shall finally be awakened to see 
the Lord, and look upon him whom they have pierced, 
and shall have the spirit of prayer and of supplication 
poured upon them by the Lord's providential dealing, 
it will be a miracle similar to the causing of a dead 
person to live. And if God's mercy will thus be extended 
toward those who sinned most egregiously, and 
who crucified his Son, it will mean also the extending 
of divine mercy to all the families of the earth, according 
to the statement of the various promises. 

More than this, the fulfilment of God's promise 
mentioned by the Apostle, "So all Israel shall be saved 
[recovered from blindness]" will not mean merely a 
figurative awakening of the dead: it will mean also a 
literal awakening of the dead; because many of "all 
Israel," millions of them, have gone down into actual 
death, and before they could be made the recipients of 
the favors of this promise, they must be awakened from 
the sleep of death. And likewise also the promises to 
the remainder of mankind are similarly brought before 
the eye of faith by such faithfulness toward Israel; 
for instance, the promise that all the families of the 
earth shall be blessed through the Seed of Abraham 
must include not only those who will be living at the 
time of Messiah's second advent and the establishment 
of his Millennial Kingdom, but must include also all 
that are in the graves, "who shall hear the voice of the 
Son of Man and come forth" to a trial for life, secured 
by the great ransom sacrifice. 

The sprinkling of clean water would seem to signify 
the application of the truth: and this perhaps had 
some fulfilment in those who returned from the Babylonian 



captivity— it was the truth, the influence of the 
promises made to the fathers, that affected the hearts 
of those who were disposed to return— in all only a 
remnant of fifty-five thousand out of seven millions. 
The influence of these promises served to separate them 
from their previous filthiness of idolatry. Had they 
earnestly gone forward seeking to realize the lengths 
and breadths of the divine will, they might have been 
ready in due time, at the first advent of our Lord, to 
have received the new heart; but they did not do so, 
hence that feature of the promise (not failing on account 
of their failure) carries forward more than eighteen 
hundred years, and becomes applicable at the second 
advent. Meantime a new nation, a holy nation, a royal 
priesthood, a peculiar people, is sought and found by 
the Lord to be the spiritual Seed of Abraham and to 
obtain the greatest blessings— the heavenly.— Rom. 9:30-33; 
11:26-32. 

But we will look down into the future and see what 
the fulfilment of this prophecy will mean to fleshly 
Israel, to whom it was made, and to whom it still pertains, 
because, as the Apostle declares, the gifts and 
callings of God are things of which he does not repent. 

We are not to understand that the removal of the 
stony heart and the giving of the new heart of flesh 
will be an instantaneous work or a miraculous work. 
The Apostle explains the method by which the Lord 
will do this great thing for Israel, saying, "The deliverer 
shall come out of Zion [the Church of this Gospel 
age] and shall turn away ungodliness from Jacob; for 

R2504 : page 187 

this is my covenant with them [Jacob, fleshly Israel]." 

God has appointed a day for thus blessing Israel and 

ultimately blessing all the families of the earth— it is 

a thousand-year day, the Millennial day, but in it Israel's 

opportunity will come first. Israel is probably 

as much, and probably no more, affected with the stony 

heart condition than other nations. A hard or stony 

heart represents a selfish condition of mind and sentiment. 

This hardening process is a result of the fall, 

and through heredity and practice affects all of Adam's 

posterity. The stony heart condition is one of self-will 

as opposed to divine will; of self-gratification as opposed 

to righteousness; a love of self which hinders the 

R2504 : page 188 

love of God with all the heart, mind, soul and strength, 
and a love of the neighbor as oneself. The stony 
heart condition means "me," "my," "mine," "right 
if I can, wrong if I must." 

The breaking up of this stony heart condition, 
other Scriptures show us, will be accomplished to a 
considerable degree by the trouble (political, ecclesiastical, 



financial and social) which will come upon the 

whole world in the "day of wrath," which is just before 

us; and this is particularly emphasized in the 

Scriptures as also being "the day of Jacob's trouble,— 

but he shall be saved out of it." (Jer. 30:7.) All men 

will come to appreciate better than they now do or ever 

have done in the past that the law of selfishness under 

which the whole world has been operating for this long 

time is an unjust law, and one which must ultimately 

work injury to all. Indeed, the great time of trouble will 

itself be the grand display of the ultimate tendencies 

of selfishness with all the brakes and restraints removed. 

It will speedily work the utter wreck of the highest development 

of human civilization. Apparently, natural 

Israel will be the first amongst the nations who will 

pass through this experience to learn the lesson, and 

to begin to seek after the new heart, renewed in righteousness 

and true submission to divine instruction. 

The breaking of the stony hearts will come through 
the afflictions of the "day of wrath," but the transformation 
of those hearts into hearts of flesh will be more 
gradual. It will be accomplished by instructions in righteousness; 
for the glorified Church, with Christ its Head, 
will be the great Prophet or Teacher of mankind, and fleshly 
Israel (their past experiences in many respects serving 
as a preparation) will speedily become associates in 
the reformation work. Indeed, all mankind then coming 
into harmony with the Kingdom will be counted as 
Israelites— children of the true Israel of God— Christ. 
All such will be counted as "children of Abraham," 
who as a type of God is the "father of the faithful" 
with one Seed (the heavenly, Christ and the Church) 
as the stars of heaven, and another (faithful fleshly 
Israelites from all peoples, kindreds and tongues) as 
the sand by the sea-shore.— Gen. 22:17. 

The promise of "hearts of flesh" or restored human 
perfection shows out strongly in contrast with the 
Lord's provision for the Church of this Gospel age, which 
is not to receive human perfection, desirable as that 
will be, but instead are to become every whit new creatures 
in Christ Jesus: begotten of the spirit through the 
Word of truth, they will be in the resurrection born of 
the spirit to perfect spiritual conditions. The Lord's 
provision for the world of mankind, described as 
"hearts of flesh," conveys the thought of restitution, 
the image and likeness of God, to tender, gentle, sympathetic 
human or earthly conditions, very good, very 
acceptable to the Creator. Adam's disobedience resulted 
in the hardening of his heart in sin and selfishness, 
during the centuries of his degradation, outcast 
from divine favor as an alien, stranger, foreigner 
and enemy of God. 

God's proposition to give them "a heart of flesh" 
signifies, therefore, the bringing of fleshly Israel back 
to the original condition proper to perfect manhood; 
and the method by which this softening and restitution 



of the heart sentiments shall be accomplished will involve 
a new will, a new mind, a new disposition, called 
in the text "a new spirit." This must really come 
first, before the new heart condition can be attained, 
and the new spirit, the new disposition, will be induced 
by the new view of matters which will then be clearly 
set before Israel and the world. 

The difficulty at the present time is that Satan, the 
god of this world, deceives mankind into viewing evil 
things as desirable, and good things as undesirable: he 
puts light for darkness, darkness for light; and as the 
Scriptures declare, the whole world is at present blinded 
and deceived by him. (2 Cor. 4:4; Rev. 20:3.) 
When in due time the Lord's Anointed shall take the 
Kingdom authority, purchased with his own precious 
blood, it will be for the very purpose of scattering the 
darkness with which "the prince of darkness" has 
blinded mankind. And not only is the new King designated 
the true Light, but his Kingdom also is styled 
the Kingdom of sunshine, when it is declared, "The 
Sun of Righteousness shall arise with healing in his 
beams. "--Mai. 4:2. 

It should not be necessary to offer argument, either 
from facts or Scripture, to show that this Sun of Righteousness 
did not arise at the first advent, nor during 
"the dark ages," and that even at the second coming 
of the King there will be a night-time, and he will 
come "as a thief in the night" for his bride. (1 Thes. 5:2.) 
Nor should it be necessary to prove that throughout 
the entire Gospel age the world has walked in darkness, 
while the Lord's people have only walked in the 
light by reason of having his Word as a lamp to their 
feet, a lantern to their footsteps. (Psa. 119:105.) The 
promise held out before the Church, and before fleshly 
Israel, and before the world, is— "The morning cometh;" 
and the additional assurance is given to the 
Church, Zion, that "The Lord shall help her early in 
the morning." (Isa. 21:12; Psa. 46:5.) Her deliverance 
shall come first, and then she "shall shine forth 
as the sun in the Kingdom of the Father." (Matt. 13:43.) 
Then will come the blessing upon fleshly Israel 
and the message to her, "Arise, shine, for thy light is 
come, and the glory of the Lord is risen upon thee!" 
and ultimately this light of the New Jerusalem, reflected 
from the earthly Jerusalem, shall enlighten all the 

R2504 : page 189 

families of the earth, with the light of the knowledge 
of God, in Jesus Christ our Lord. 

The promise that the Lord would put his spirit 
within them, and cause them to walk in his statutes 
and keep his decrees and do them, is in full accord with 
the foregoing. This does not refer to Spiritual Israel, 
altho Spiritual Israel has a somewhat similar experience 
in advance, as we shall shortly show. This putting of 



the Lord's spirit, the spirit of righteousness, the spirit 
of truth, the spirit of love, upon fleshly Israel (and 
similarly upon all the families of the earth), is abundantly 
stated in the Scriptures to be distinctly separate 
from the pouring out of the Pentecostal blessing upon 
the Church, the "little flock," the bride of Christ, during 
this age, and before the Sun of Righteousness arises, 
of which Sun of Righteousness these shall form a 
part. 

For instance, note the prophecy by Joel (2:28,29) 
that this promise of the holy spirit is of two parts. One 
outpouring of God's spirit upon his servants and handmaidens 
("new creatures in Christ") has already had its 
fulfilment throughout this Gospel age: the other promise, 
that God would pour out his spirit upon all flesh, 
still awaits fulfilment, and will be accomplished after 
the overcoming Church has been glorified and the blessing 
of all the families of the earth has begun. The 
matter is covered slightly from the attention of the 
ordinary reader by reason of the outpouring upon the 
Church being mentioned last. 

This same outpouring of the holy spirit upon 
fleshly Israel is referred to by the Prophet Zechariah, 
and directly applied to the end of this age. In connection 
with telling how the Lord would at his second 
advent make himself known to Israel, and that they 
should look upon him whom they pierced, and mourn 
for him, the explicit statement is, "I will pour upon 
the house of David and upon the inhabitants of Jerusalem 
the spirit of grace and of supplication."— 
Zech. 12:10. 

The spirit of the Lord, the holy spirit, is the spirit 
of the truth, and when the truth shall be made known 
to Israel and mankind, with that truth will go its spirit, 
its influence, its power to correct the heart and life, 
and to bring it into accord with God. For then, in the 
light of the truth, many will see God's character and 
plan in Christ as "the desire of all nations," and the 
great King himself as the one "altogether lovely." 
And the positive declaration is that all who will not 
hear (obey) that great Teacher— Prophet, Priest and 
King— shall be cut off from amongst his people in the 
Second Death. -Acts 3:23. 

In connection with these transformations of heart 
and will, will come the blessing which the Lord promised 
upon the earth. It shall yield its increase; the 
wilderness shall blossom as the rose, and the whole 
earth shall become a Paradise of God. The beginning 
of these blessings will be with Israel, and thus all the 
Gentiles shall have not only the lessons of the Scriptures 
for their instruction in righteousness, but also the 
illustration of divine providence operating on behalf of 
those who are influenced by the truth and its spirit. 
Thus will be fulfilled the declaration, "This land that 
was desolate is become like the garden of Eden."— 
Ezek. 36:35. 



While the Scriptures keep distinctly separate the 
nation of fleshly Israel and the new nation, Spiritual 
Israel, nevertheless, under divine providence, fleshly 
Israel was in many respects made a lesson, a type, an 
illustration, for Spiritual Israel; so that the Apostle 
could declare that many of the things done for fleshly 
Israel were shadows of better things coming afterward 
for Spiritual Israel. Yet these are shadows only to 

R2505 : page 189 

those who discern them, and are profitable only to those 
who avail themselves of them.— Heb. 8:5. 

The Scriptures point out to us that the new heart 
condition is essential also to Spiritual Israel; that all 
who would be in harmony with the Lord must first get 
free from idols, and be separated to the Lord God; and 
that then they must inquire of the Lord that he may 
do for them the good things of his promise— working 
in them both to will and to do of his good pleasure. 
As the death of Christ was the turning point of fleshly 
Israel (Dives), and led them into blindness and trouble, 
so also it was the turning point or beginning of favor 
to Spiritual Israel (Lazarus carried to Abraham's bosom) 
—the poor, the humble, acknowledging themselves to 
be sinners, were freely cleansed through the merits of 
Christ's sacrifice and made acceptable as the children of 
Abraham. This class, from the day of Pentecost to 
the present, have presented themselves in turn, fully 
and unreservedly to the Lord; to have his will, his spirit, 
renewed in them, and such have indeed received a newness 
of spirit, a newness of heart. But the new heart 
is not with them a heart of flesh, for they are begotten 
unto the high calling, to be children and heirs of God, 
joined in heirship with Jesus Christ their Lord— to partake 
of the divine nature, which already is reckoned as 
being begun in them through the begetting by the spirit 
of adoption. It is for these to remember that in order 
to develop in the spirit they must walk in the spirit, in 
the Lord's footsteps, observing to the best of their 
ability the law of the spirit of life in Christ Jesus;— 
that thus they may be transformed by the renewing of 
their minds (wills) and be enabled to prove the good, 
the perfect, the acceptable will of God; and thus faithfully 
doing, to be ultimately received of him into all 
the exceeding glories promised to the new creatures in 
Christ, and to be joint-heirs with him in the great work 
of blessing Israel and the world through the Millennial 
Kingdom. -Rom. 12:2; 8:17. 



R2505 : page 190 

THE VISION OF DRY BONES. 



AUG. 13.--EZEK. 37:1-14. 

"I will put my spirit within you."— Ezek. 36:27. 

THE SCRIPTURE of this lesson is frequently 

more or less of a confusion to the Lord's people, 

even after they have learned with considerable clearness 

what the Apostle Paul so positively declares— 

that the body sown in corruption, planted in death, is 

not the body which shall be in the resurrection; that 

the bones, sinews and flesh which go to corruption 

have nothing whatever to do with the resurrection 

body, which the Lord will provide. In examining 

this subject heretofore we have seen that the Apostle's 

statement is not only backed by his inspiration, but 

also that it is reasonable, logical: that one atom of 

matter is no more valuable or necessary than another 

in the great work of restitution which shall be accomplished 

in the world's resurrection. We have seen 

that the human body in corruption becomes food for 

plant life, producing apples, acorns, etc., which in 

turn become food for man and the lower animals, so 

that the atoms of matter composing a human body are 

continually changing, and in centuries would pass 

through many changes. We have seen, too, that this 

process of change progresses while we still live, so that 

science declares that a complete change in the human 

organism is effected every seven years. The atoms of 

matter which compose a man's body at the moment of 

his death are no more precious, valuable or necessary 

to the future body than were the atoms sloughed off 

through the natural channels during previous years. 

The important thing, the thing which God has promised 

shall have a resurrection, is the being, the soul: 

that in the resurrection God will give it a body as 

pleaseth him— to each kind of seed his own kind of 

body— to the natural man a natural, human body, 

through restitution; to the new creature in Christ a 

new spiritual body, according to divine promise. 

The passage of Scripture under consideration was 
addressed by the Lord through the Prophet to fleshly 
Israel, then in captivity in Babylon. The dry bones 
represented the Israelites themselves. As a people 
they had lost heart, lost hope, and said, "Our strength 
is dried, and our hope is lost, we are cut off from our 
parts"— from all tribal and national union. If they 
looked at their present condition, they were strangers 
in a strange land, foreigners, without opportunity for 
patriotic feelings; if they looked backward, and remembered 
divine intervention on their behalf, their 
deliverance from Egypt, their favor as a nation under 
David and Solomon, etc., they could think of these 
only as bygones, lost blessings and opportunities; if 
they looked forward, they could see no possible hope 
of their ever again becoming a nation; and as for all 
the great expectations which they had once entertained 



respecting their nation, as God's favored people, and 
the heir of the promises made to Abraham, that they 
should rule and bless all the families of the earth— 
these hopes were dead, they were gone, they could 
have nothing of this kind in the future. The condition 
of Israel, scattered throughout Babylonia, was indeed 
well illustrated by the dry bones of the vision. 

The hand (power) of the Lord was upon Ezekiel, 
causing him to see this vision— he was not literally 
transported to any literal valley of dry bones. In the 
vision he was caused to pass amongst the dry bones, 
that he might get a full view of the situation, as they 
lay strewn all over the valley, very dry. Then the 
Lord's explanation comes, that these dry bones are, or 
represent, the whole house of Israel. They did not 
represent merely the two tribes which went last into 
captivity, nor merely the ten tribes which went earlier, 
but the whole house of Israel, the twelve tribes. They 
were no longer to be considered as two distinct nations, 
as they had considered themselves for the preceding 
four hundred years. They were to understand that 
in divine providence they were henceforth a reunited 
nation, and the reunion is pictured in this same chapter 
(vss. 15-22) by the miraculous uniting of two 
sticks into one in the hand of the Prophet. 

And it was so: from the time Cyrus gave his decree 
that all the children of Israel should go free, and 
might return, if they chose, to their own land, the division 
into two nations was no longer recognized. The 
people that returned, tho chiefly of the tribe of Judah, 
represented all of the various tribes who had faith in 
the Lord's promises, and desired to return to Palestine. 
The name, Israel, was applied to the returned and restored 
people, not only for the more than five centuries 
preceding our Lord's first advent, but also they were 
so recognized by our Lord in all of his ministry, and 
by the apostles in all of their writings, which constitute 
the New Testament. There are no ten lost tribes 
which some well-meaning but deluded people continually 
refer to, and seem to rest their hopes in, as instead 
of the hope set before us in the Gospel. 

The Lord propounds the question, Is it possible 
that any vitality could ever come into these dry bones? 
—Is there hope for the scattered people of Israel who 
not only in heart but in voice said, We are scattered, 
and no longer a homogeneous people, we are mixed and 
blended with our captors, who are heathen, in business, 
social and marriage relationships— there is no 
hope of a restored nation of Israel? 

The Prophet, with quick confidence in the Almighty, 
refers the question back to God, as suggesting 
that any hope there could possibly be of a reorganization 
of Israel must come from God— could be looked 
for from no other quarter. 

The Lord directed Ezekiel to prophesy, that is, to 
declare the divine message, and the divine message 



was a foretelling of the things which would, under 

divine providence, come to pass. The message to be 

declared was that God had the power and would exercise 

it, by which these who were dead, and dried as 

respected their national hopes, would be gradually revived, 

would gradually become one homogeneous people, 

a nation in their own land. It would not be done 

suddenly, but gradually, and that through attention 

to the divine message, which the Prophet was delivering. 

First the dried and hopeless ones would come 

together, then they would begin to unite one to the 

other, and gradually assume a national existence, and 

finally would be infused with the spirit of the Lord, 

as the breath or energy of national life, begotten of 

faith in the promises, and would stand again a nation. 

The people's hopes, which were thus dead, were 
represented by the Lord as buried in the various provinces 
of Babylonia, and hence this figure is combined 
with the figure of the dry bones, and the Lord sends 
the message, "Behold, O my people, I will open your 

R2505 :page 191 

graves, and cause you to come out of your graves and 
bring you into the land of Israel, and ye shall know 
that I am the Lord." As a further part of this symbolic 
picture the Prophet is in vision shown the process 
by which the dry bones would be gathered, reorganized 
and revivified. He says there was "a noise 
and a shaking." The Revised Version, apparently with 
propriety, renders this, "thunder and an earthquake." 
Following this demonstration the bones came together. 
Undoubtedly one thing which contributed to Israel's 
despair was the mightiness of the empire which 
had taken them captive. Babylonia at that time was 
the most gigantic empire ever known amongst men. 
Her overthrow seemed impossible, and escape from 
her power not to be thought of. The thunder and 
great earthquake of the figure doubtless represented 
the commotions incident to the fall of Babylon and the 

R2506 :page 191 

transfer of the empire to the Medes and Persians. As 
a result of this the hopes of Israel in the divine promises 
began to revive, and shortly they were delivered. 

While recognizing this primary fulfilment of the 
prophecy, we are not to forget the secondary fulfilment 
on a much larger scale, which is in progress at the 
present time. The withered hopes of Israel, scattered 
throughout the provinces of Babylonia, cut off from 
their parts, from one another, from tribal union and 
from national cohesion, was only a foreshadowing of 
the more general scattering of that nation among all 
the nations of the civilized world (mystic Babylon) 
during this Gospel age. With the vast majority all 



hopes of the fulfilment of the Abrahamic promise had 
died, had withered away, and had no more vitality 
than a dry bone. But now, in the end of this Gospel 
age, the due time has come for these dry bones, scattered 
all over mystic Babylon, to be gathered part to 
part, rehabilitated and revivified with hope in the 
promises made to the fathers. The great noise is the 
"seventh trumpet," which has begun to sound; the 
earthquake is the coming great revolution in which 
mystic Babylon will fall before the great Prince whom 
Cyrus in a measure prefigured. Meantime, as we look 
at the dry bones of Israel, we perceive that they already 
are in movement, that they are already drawing 
near one to another, and organizing as "Zionists," 
with a view to national reorganization and a return to 
the land of promise. Probably the hopes of the Israelites 
began to revive as soon as they learned that the 
army of Cyrus had begun the conquest of Babylon, 
and so now the hopes of Israel are reviving as they 
witness the march of events, and realize that a great 
day of trouble is coming upon the nations of Christendom. 
Their hopes will more and more go out toward 
Palestine and national reorganization, as the troubles 
of the day of wrath draw near. 

A lesson might also be drawn from this Scripture 
for Spiritual Israelites. We are to remember that 
Spiritual Israel also was permitted to go down into 
Babylon— to be swallowed up of worldliness, as represented 
in our Lord's parable of the wheat-field, choked 
by the "tares." The field has really become a tare-field, 
altho nominally called a wheat-field, because the 
promises are to the "wheat." For centuries the "Gospel 
of the Kingdom," which our Lord declared was 
the good seed which he sowed (Matt. 13:37-42), has 
been lost sight of, and Kingdom hopes have lost their 
vitality, and the many promises of the Scriptures, relating 
to the Kingdom of God, joint-heirship with 
Christ and a future blessing of the world, have become 
dead hopes, dead promises; and so far as these 
promises are concerned Spiritual Israel has been cut 
off from its parts and mixed with the Babylonians, 
and has become interested in the hopes of Babylon 
rather than in the kingdom of God, in which all the 
original hopes and promises centered and flourished. 

But now, in the end of this age, the time has come 
for God to call his people out of Babylon, and the voice 
of a greater than Cyrus is heard by those who have 
ears to hear, saying, "Babylon is fallen, is fallen!... 
Come out of her, my people, that ye be not partakers 
of her sins, and that ye receive not of her plagues." 
(Rev. 18:2-4.) In connection with this message there 
is a commotion amongst the dry bones, amongst those 
who are Israelites indeed, whose hopes in the Kingdom 
had perished, and the Kingdom hopes are revived 
and the promises of God as related thereto are becoming 
more distinct. Nevertheless, we are not to expect 



that the "tare" class, the Babylonians, are represented 
in the movement of the dry bones, but merely the 
truly consecrated Israelites indeed. The Babylonians 
would be interested on the other side of the question 
—interested in perpetuating the greatness of Babylon, 
and in continuing the bondage of the true Israelites. 

Nor do the Kingdom hopes relate merely to the 
living. The organization of the Lord's faithful will 
not only include the gathering of the living, but also 
the gathering of all the members of the body of Christ, 
for "the dead in Christ shall rise first, and [then] we 
which are alive and remain shall be caught away together 
with them, to a meeting of the Lord in the air" 
—in spiritual power. So many as are able to do so 
should apply to themselves this feature of this lesson 
and exert themselves to be of those who shall now 
shortly be organized as the "Body of Christ," "the Seed 
of Abraham," the Kingdom of God, to bless the world. 



R2506 :page 191 

INTERESTING LETTERS. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I thank God earnestly 
and reverently for the DAWNS and TOWERS, and 
that my understanding has been opened to receive and 
see the truth. When the "key" is applied, how beautifully 
the Scriptures open and reveal God's wonderful 
plan. In the June number of the TOWER you speak 
of dispensing truth to others, that in feeding we are 
fed. I know that to be true, and have verified it on 
more than one occasion. Will you please send some 
free tracts to be given out in a Dawn Circle for Bible 
Study that I am trying to get started in a neighboring 
town. 

I often wonder, Brother Russell, if you can read 
thoughts. Several times when I have been studying 
over certain points and could not quite determine 
what was right, the next WATCH TOWER would 
have a full explanation of the very subject I had been 
studying. Is it the holy spirit that impresses your 

R2506 : page 192 

mind with the truth that puzzles others? It seems so. 
May the Lord bless the recent effort made here and 
your labors wherever they may be! 

Yours in the fellowship of Christ, 

J. M. S , Ohio. 

[REPLY. -The EDITOR does not possess the gift 
of mind-reading, but our present Lord does, and undoubtedly 
in this "harvest" time, specially, he is 



watching over the interests of all those who are truly 
his. He knows exactly what kind of provender his 
"sheep" need, and according to promise provides 
"meat in due season for the household of faith." 

Very many have made similar observations respecting 
the opportuneness of certain expositions 
which have appeared in the WATCH TOWER. We can 
only account for such repeated coincidences by acknowledging 
the Lord's knowledge and providential 
care, and we rejoice in the thought that he does take 
supervision of our humble efforts, to direct them and 
bless them in his service. Nevertheless, we are far 
from claiming any direct or plenary inspiration. We 
believe, however, that there are many ways in which 
the Lord can guide those who are anxious to serve 
him, without directly inspiring or in any manner interfering 
with their free agency. A careful examination 
of the subject leads us to the conclusion that the 
Lord providentially shapes our course so as to give us 
such personal experiences in life as will bring us to 
his Word for comfort and instruction in righteousness; 
and thus he permits us to sympathize with the experiences 
and questionings of his people, and then to 
present to them at appropriate times the lessons drawn 
from our own experiences, backed by the instructions 
and comfort of the Scriptures.— EDITOR.] 

DEAR BROTHER:-In reading Isaiah, 2d chapter, 
which seems to refer especially to the present time, I 
notice that in vs. 16 we are informed of the judgment 
of the Lord on the ships of Tarshish, "And over all 
the ships of Tarshish." If I am correctly informed, 
Tarshish refers to Spain and especially to the city of 
Cadiz and the south-west part of Spain. The wonderful 
events that have occurred during the last year, 
resulting in the utter destruction of so many Spanish 
warships and with such slight injury to the American 
ships has suggested the thought that possibly these 
events may be a fulfilment. 

Respectfully submitted, C. C. KELLY,-Ohio. 

[We present the foregoing, because the application 
made seems to fit remarkably well to the general 
context. It will be noticed that the theme of the 
prophet concerns the last days, and the establishment 
of the Lord's Kingdom, etc. (See vss. 2,3.) Vss. 19-22 
seem to refer to the great time of trouble just before 
us, and frequently referred to throughout the Scriptures 
as the Day of Vengeance.— EDITOR.] 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I owe you more, I 
fear, than I will ever be able to repay for your many 
kind acts from time to time aside from a servant of the 
truth whom I love seemingly dearer than ever. But 
to say that my whole soul goes out in thankful appreciation 
for the brotherly interest you have manifested 
in my sufferings in overcoming the tobacco habit, 
seems to me, dear Brother, only mildly to express my 
feelings on this point. When I requested Bro. S 



to lay my case before you for counsel and advice, which 
I knew you so well able to give from the standpoint 
of the Lord's word, I felt determined to "resist the 
devil" in his operations through the flesh in my 
case, if I conquered only through death. I am yet as 
fully determined, the Lord helping me. 

The WATCH TOWERS of recent issue are appreciated 
as much as ever. How my heart went out to 
those dear brethren in New York when I read the 
article, "Think It Not Strange." Surely, Satan is 
getting desperate in his oppositions. In the Methodist 
Recorder, published at Pittsburg, in their last week's 
issue, I have been told by a neighbor, appears an article 
by Rev. Daniel B. Turney, A.M., attacking the 
truth contained in the booklet, What Say the Scriptures 
about Hell? From what my friend tells me it 

R2507 : page 192 

must be one of the boldest misrepresentations the representatives 

of the Lord and his truth have yet suffered 

from such "high places." I sent the above named 

Mr. Turney one of the booklets referred to some time 

ago as a reply to some of his unscriptural writings concerning 

the "Immortal essence of man," and I suppose 

this is the reward we and all who love the Lord 

can joyfully receive. (Matt. 5:11,12.) I trust you 

will be furnished with a copy of the above named 

publication. 

I am glad to inform you that the interest here is 
growing, and we are having interesting times at 
our meetings every Sunday evening. How it rejoices 
our hearts to see the truth prosper, even tho the "increase" 
may be small comparatively. But, dear Brother, 
it is very evident that our influence for the truth's 
prosperity is nearly over; it seems that the time has 
almost come when they will not endure sound doctrine; 
but may we be enabled to understand and rejoice 
in the typical words of John the Baptist, "I must decrease." 
May we, dear Brother, be enabled to suffer 
joyfully and under all circumstances to preserve the 
unity of the spirit in the bonds of love and peace. I 
am getting much benefit from the Sunday readings 
suggested some time ago. 

Greetings to all the brethren. Yours in love, 
J. M. G ,-Indiana. 

[REPLY.— Respecting the decrease of the work: 
from our broader view-point it seems as tho much work 
is yet to be accomplished; indeed, every month shows 
an increase for the past three years, and during the 
last year specially. The people are getting awake and 
groping about for truth, and now is the time to lend 
a helping hand to keep them from stumbling into Infidelity, 
Spiritism, Christian Science, Evolution, etc. 
The chief opponents of the truth are the "ministers," 
the very ones who are undermining faith in Christ as 



a Savior from sin and death by teaching an Evolution 
salvation. Quite likely their opposition will become 
much more pronounced, and they may, in some form 
or many forms, "crucify" the members of the body of 
Christ: but this will furnish opportunities for attesting 
our love for the Lord's brethren. In view of our Lord's 
example and the Apostle's words, we should gladly let 
our light shine and render every other assistance, even 
tho it test our willingness to "lay down our lives for 
the brethren" (1 John 3:16).-EDITOR.] 



page 193 
VOL. XX. AUGUST 1, 1899. No. 15. 



CONTENTS. 



The Indianapolis Convention 195 

The River of Salvation 196 

Returning from Captivity 198 

Who May be Coworkers 200 

Despise Not the Day of Small 

Things 204 

Questions and Answers 205 

Interesting Letters 207 

The At-One-Ment 

Between God and Man 

(Millennial Dawn, Volume V.) 194 

page 194 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
--ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, N.Y. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity or 
adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, if they 
send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting the 
paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list 
continually. 



R2507 : page 194 



THE AT-ONE-MENT 
BETWEEN 
GOD AND MAN. 



MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. V. 



We have pleasure in announcing that Volume V. of MILLENNIAL 
DAWN series is now on the press. It will (D.V.) be sent to 



all paid up subscribers to ZION'S WATCH TOWER (including those 

who have requested credit for the year, and those who are receiving 

it free as the Lord's poor)— as September 1st and 15th, 

and October 1st and 15th issues of this journal. There will be 

no other issues for the four dates named. If you do not receive 

a copy before Sept. 30th it will not be our fault. If your account 

differs from ours be sure to let us know all particulars. Notice 

the tag on the wrapper. Jun.9 means that your subscription 

is settled for only to and including June, 1899— that you are in 

arrears. Dec. 9 means that your subscription is settled for, up 

to the end of the year and should be renewed in December 

page 194 

or written about. 

R2507 : page 194 

This volume will, we believe, furnish an abundance of spiritual 
food for the two months (September and October). It 
should be thoroughly masticated, that it may be well digested 
and give strength to head and heart and hand. It is our prayer 
and hope that it may be a great blessing to the readers of this 
journal; and that through them as fellow servants of our one 
Lord and Master it may honor him and bless many. 



R2508 : page 195 

INDIANAPOLIS CONVENTION ECHOES. 



OUR RECENT "Believer's Convention" was 
certainly a success— so voted by all who were 
in attendance, so far as we have heard. It was a 
spiritual feast of fat things, for which we render thanks 
to the Giver of all good. Our present Lord seemed to 
gird himself and serve us with "meat in due season," 
and with the "wine" of his own spirit of love and devotion. 
It was good to be there. The attendance was 
about 250, of whom about 200 were visitors from 
twenty states of the Union, including Massachusetts 
on the East and Washington on the West, Texas on 
the South and North Dakotah and Minnesota on the 
North. 

The announced program was carried out with but 
slight modifications. Brother Owen, the leader of the 
Indianapolis meetings, conducted the opening "rally" 
so successfully that every one felt at home forthwith 
and well acquainted; indeed, there were quite a number 
of street and train recognitions without previous 
acquaintance or introductions— each seemed to recognize 
the spirit of love: as our Lord declared, "By this 
shall all men know that ye are my disciples, if ye have 



love one for another." 

Brother Owen's assurances that the Indianapolis 
Church most cordially welcomed us all was abundantly 
attested by the careful provisions and kind attentions 
shown to all— the poorer as well as the financially 
comfortable, and the blacks as well as the whites: 
for there were four or five deeply and intelligently interested 
colored brethren in attendance. 

R2509 : page 195 

According to our custom no collections were taken 
up, either publicly or privately: indeed, the only semblance 
of a dispute during the three days' meetings was 
occasioned by some of the visiting brethren insisting 
with the Reception Committee that they be permitted 
to share some of the general expenses; while the latter 
insisted that they had everything provided for, and 
that the visitors had sufficient journey expenses. We 
mention this to illustrate the general spirit of the 
Convention— the spirit of love and benevolence— so 
much in contrast with experiences we have all had in 
"Babylon." 

One novelty of this Convention which differentiated 
it, so far as we recall, from all others, was the 
attendance of two who had previously been spirit-mediums, 
but who now rejoice in the better knowledge 
of the truth. One of these declared in the Testimony 
Meeting that he had been a medium for fourteen 
years, but thanked God for deliverance through the 
reading of What Say the Scriptures About Spiritism? 

It was remarked by some that while the managers of 
the Epworth League Convention had a Bishop present to 
discuss "The Life of Lincoln," and an ex-Confederate 
General to discuss "The Closing Days of the Confederacy," 
our Convention, in almost continuous session 
from 8 A.M. to 10 P.M., had no time for social questions, 
and knew nothing but Jesus Christ, and him 
crucified, and the blessed hopes which center in the 
great transaction of Calvary. 

One of the most impressive services was the baptism 
on Saturday afternoon in the Central Christian 
Church, kindly put at our disposal for two hours and a 
half. Forty-two symbolized their immersion into Christ's 
death, by immersion into water— twenty-two brethren 
and twenty sisters (two of the former colored). The 
youngest seemed about twenty-five and the oldest 
about seventy years old. It was a service long to be 
remembered, and brought a blessing to those who 
witnessed it as well as to the participants. Our prayer 
is that the convention as a whole may have buried us 
all more completely and more deeply into death with 
Christ, and that walking in newness of life now we 
may all be prepared to share with him in "his resurrection" 
—"the first resurrection." 



R2507 : page 196 

THE RIVER OF SALVATION. 

AUG. 20.-EZEK. 47:1-12. 

"Whosoever will, let him take the water of life freely."— Rev. 22:17. 

MANY OF the particulars connected with this 
vision described by Ezekiel are so circumstantial 
to the land of Israel as to give considerable 
ground for belief that it will have a literal fulfilment 
in the future; and in connection with the vision is shown 
a new division of the land of Canaan amongst the 
twelve tribes. But whatever literal fulfilment the vision 
may have, we may be positive that it is to have a grand 
fulfilment as a symbol, for the life-giving river here 
brought to our attention is undoubtedly the same one 
described six hundred years later, by John the Revelator, 
and referred to in our Golden Text. 

Referring to the description of the river starting 
from the Temple, Prof. Davidson says, "The natural 
fact upon which this conception rests is this, that there 
was a fountain connected with the Temple hill, the 
waters of which fell into the valley east of the city, 
and made their way toward the sea." So far as we may 
know, this fountain never was of any considerable size, 
and never would be, without more or less of a miracle, 
for at present the entire country is arid, except in the 
rainy season. From this fountain the Valley of Kedron 
leads directly to the Dead Sea, which, as is well known, 
has no connection with the ocean waters, either on the 
surface or subterraneously, and is 1308 feet below the 
sea level. 

However, there are evidences that at one time the 
Dead Sea was on a level with the ocean, and if by earthquake 
or otherwise the connection between it and the 
ocean waters were re-established it would rise to its old 
level, which would make of it an inland sea 150 miles 
long, and five to ten miles wide. And such a filling up 
of its basin would have a marked effect, not only upon 
the humidity of the atmosphere in its vicinity, but also 
upon the water-springs of lower Palestine. The natural 
result would be, not only that the Dead Sea would be 
sweetened of its brackishness, and become like the 
ocean, but also that the springs in the vicinity of Jerusalem 
would be greatly enlarged so as to produce some 
such river as this described in the prophecy, and these 
springs in that now parched desert country would cause 
its vegetation to prosper. It is worthy of note that this 
valley now occupied by the Dead Sea was once most 
fertile,— before the destruction of Sodom and Gomorrah. 
We read, "Lot lifted up his eyes, and beheld all 
the plain of Jordan, that it was well watered everywhere, 



before the Lord destroyed Sodom and Gomorrah, 

—even as the garden of the Lord." (Gen. 13:10.) 

And the restitution of this country to a Paradisiac condition 

is what the Prophet Ezekiel describes, if his 

language be given a literal interpretation at all— and 

this it seems to demand, as well as the symbolic 

interpretation. 

There are many who seek to apply this prophetic 
vision as a symbol to the present time, and claim that 
this river of salvation has been flowing through the 
world from the days of Ezekiel until now;— especially 
during this Gospel age. These interpreters claim that 
the depth of the water up to the ankles would represent 
a date when Christians numbered fifty millions; the 
depth of the water up to the knees a period when 
Christians numbered a hundred millions; a depth of 
water up to the loins a date when Christians numbered 
two hundred millions; and a river that could not be 
waded, representing the present time, when the population 
of Christendom is estimated at four hundred and 
fifteen millions. But can we agree with this interpretation? 
Is it reasonable, is it Scriptural? 

(1) We answer, No; it is not a reasonable interpretation, 
for, if we may judge of the Christians so-called 

in the past by those so-called in the present, we 
must conclude that the river is far from pure, "clear as 
crystal:" indeed, all will agree that if nine-tenths of 
those who name the name of Christ, but who deny him 
in their daily lives, were to withdraw from all profession, 
the Christian Church would be greatly blessed by 
their withdrawal and the influence of the Church and 
the light from it would be increased many-fold. Bishop 
Foster, of the Methodist Episcopal Church, sized up 
the situation well when comparing the professed church 
to a sheep-fold, he pronounced the vast majority "black, 
ring-streaked and speckled." We all are confident that 
only a comparatively little flock are of the class mentioned 
by the Lord as being reckonedly washed whiter 
than snow, through his grace and truth. 

(2) It is not a Scriptural view. The Scriptures 

declare that God's grace at the present time is not comparable 

to a river, but in our Lord's words, "It shall 

be in him [each believer] a well of water springing up 

R2508 : page 196 

into everlasting life." (John 4:14.) And those Christians 
in whom God's grace is a fountain of life and refreshment 
are comparatively few. They are those who 
have been "begotten of the spirit of truth" through 
the Word of truth. They are the "sanctified in Christ 
Jesus;" they are the "little flock," to the faithful of 
whom it is the Father's good pleasure to give the 
Kingdom. 

No Scripture anywhere suggests that the water of 
eternal life is now free; nor that all are now called to 



drink of it. Our Lord Jesus himself declared the contrary 
of this, saying, "No man can come to me except 
the Father which hath sent me draw him." (John 6:44.) 
The drawing or calling of God through a knowledge of 
his grace is only unto those who have ears to hear, 
amongst those to whom the call is addressed; and the 
call has been specially sent to and has specially reached 

R2508 : page 197 

only comparatively few of the earth's fifteen hundred 
millions,— chiefly the inhabitants of Europe and America. 
And of this comparatively small number to whom 
the Word of the Lord has been sent, and of the still 
smaller number who have had "ears to hear" that call, 
only a still smaller number are chosen, as we read, 
"Many are called, but few chosen." (Matt. 20:16.) 
Not many are called, in proportion to the whole, but 
many are called in proportion to the number chosen, 
the few, the elect. 

Returning to the Prophet's vision, we note that the 
waters flowed out from the house of the Lord, from 
the Temple, and that wherever they went they brought 
vitality and refreshment, healing, restitution life— even 
to the Dead Sea. This to our understanding is a picture 
of the grace of God during the Millennial age, 
when from the Church, the house of God, the Temple, 
"the habitation of God through the spirit" (Eph. 2:22), 
the stream of the water of life, healing, restoring, 
rejuvenating, shall flow to all the families of the earth, 
whose condition is represented by the wilderness eastward 
of Jerusalem. The result will be the blessing 
and restitution of all the living families of the earth 
willing to receive the blessing. And it means more: 
for the Dead Sea fitly represents the vast multitude of 
mankind which has gone into the tomb, and the water 
of life shall reach even these, and bring to them also 
awakening from death, opportunities of restitution. 

That the fulfilment of this vision could not be a 
thing of the past nor of the present is evident when we 
remember that the house of God, the Temple, the 
Church, is not yet completed— that the present is the 
time in which the Lord is fitting the "living stones" 
for the Temple,— is chiseling, fitting and polishing 
each for the place to which he is called. The present 
Gospel age was typified in the building of Solomon's 
Temple, by the period of preparation of the materials, 
after which we are informed that the whole house came 
together quickly, each stone fitting to its place and 
each timber to its position, and that without the sound 
of a hammer or any tool of iron. So with the "living 
stones," as the Apostle Peter calls the Church. (1 Pet. 2:5.) 
These are "builded together for a habitation of 
God through the spirit," and the building will not be 
completed until the last of these fitted and polished 
stones is laid in its position. Then the glory of the Lord 



shall fill the house,— the Church will be glorified. Then 
will have come the time represented in this vision, 
when the stream of the water of life, truth and grace 
shall flow from the glorified Temple. 

As there is no completed Temple yet, so there is 
no river yet; but when the Temple is completed, when 
the various members of the body of Christ are brought 
together and united in glory, honor and immortality to 
the Head of the Church, then from this united and 
glorified company of God's elect shall flow the symbolic 
river of water of life, clear as crystal. In each 
member of this Temple class, in each of these "living 
stones," already is a well-spring of truth and grace, 
and when these many well-springs shall have thus been 
united to the great Head and Fountain, the result naturally 
will be a stream of good proportions,— a river. 
To this coming time of blessing of the world our Lord 
refers, saying, "He that believeth on me, as the Scripture 
hath said, out of his belly shall flow rivers of living 
water." (John 7:38.) In order to be of this class 
in whom the great river of water of life will take its 
start, it is necessary, first, that the believer shall now 
come unto Jesus and drink of him, the great Fountain 
of life; and it will be as a result of this partaking of 
the great Fountain that all of the elect Church shall 
become minor well-springs and fountains in due time. 

Turning to the description of this same symbolic 
river, furnished us in the Book of Revelation (chapter 22), 
we find abundant evidences that it does not refer 
to the present time, but to the Millennial age. For 
instance, it is symbolically pictured as having trees of 
life on either side, whose leaves are for the healing of 
the nations— not for the healing of the Church, which 
at this time is the glorified Temple from which this 
river proceeds— and this healing of the nations signifies, 
as plainly as a symbolic picture could indicate it, 
restitution,— the healing of the woes of the groaning 
creation, its sin and sickness and imperfection. 

We notice also that the proclamation which will 
then be made will not be restricted, as at the present 
time, to "even as many as the Lord our God shall call." 
(Acts 2:39.) It will not be to an "elect" class; it will 
no longer be said, "No man can come unto me, except 
the Father draw him." The call at that time will be 
general— to every creature— "Whosoever will, let him 
take the water of life freely." We notice further 
that that broad invitation is extended by God through 
the holy spirit and the glorified Church, as it is written, 
"The spirit and the bride say, Come!" We notice 
further that this expression, "the bride," unquestionably 
places this call in the future, because, altho the 
elect Church of this Gospel age is called out from the 
world to become the bride of Christ, she does not become 
such, does not enter that exalted station, until 
in the end of the age she is perfected in glory and in 
the likeness of her Lord. Then will come "the marriage 



of the Lamb:" and not until after the marriage 
will there be a bride; and not until after the bride has 
thus been accepted as such can "the spirit and the 
bride say, Come!" to the nations— the Gentiles. 

This same glorious City (Kingdom), the glorified 
New Jerusalem, the Church, and the river of the water 

R2508 : page 198 

of life gushing forth therefrom, are brought to our attention 
in Psalm 46: "There is a river, the rivulets of 
which shall spring from the City of God, the holy place 
of the tabernacle of the Most High. God is in the 
midst of her; she shall not be moved. God shall help 
her early in the morning." The connections here also 
show that these rivulets are not to be expected to flow 
out as a river, until the Millennial morning, and the 
context refers particularly to the time of trouble with 
which the present age shall end and the Millennial 
morning shall be introduced. 

Those whom the Lord our God has called, and 
who, in obedience to that call, have come to Jesus, the 
Fountain of life, and through him have tasted that the 
Lord is gracious, should let the Word and grace of God 
dwell in them richly and abound, making them neither 
barren nor unfruitful in the knowledge of the Lord and 
in his service. It is for these to seek enlargement in 
the grace of God, that as well-springs they may be 
deeper and wider and more and more filled to overflowing 
with that grace and truth which came by Jesus 
Christ. It is for these to see to it, each for himself, 
that he has not received the grace of God in vain, and 
that this well-spring does not become choked with the 
rubbish of this present evil world, its aims, its hopes, 
its ambitions, its pride, its desires of the flesh;— that 
thus, under divine providence and supervision, we may 
be made meet for the inheritance of the saints in light, 
and have fellowship with our glorious Lord and Head 
in the sending forth of the river of salvation unto the 
ends of the earth in "due time;"— the river of the 
water of life, clear as crystal, to whosoever will of all 
the families of the earth. -2 Pet. 1:4-11; 2 Cor. 6:1; 
Col. 1:12; 1 John 1:3. 



R2509 : page 198 

RETURNING FROM CAPTIVITY. 

AUGUST 27. -EZRA 1:1-11. 

"The Lord hath done great things for us, 
whereof we are glad."— Psa. 126:3. 

THE BOOKS of Ezra and Nehemiah are not prophetical, 



but historical; they take up the history 
of Israel where it was laid down by the scribes who 
wrote the Books of Chronicles. Ezra, the writer of the 
book bearing his name, was a scribe or educated man, 
whose genealogy is traced back through the priesthood 
to Aaron. (Ezra 1-6.) Ezra was not amongst those 
who went up first to Jerusalem under the proclamation 
of Cyrus: indeed, he was probably not born until a 
considerable time after that notable event. 

The record of the first six chapters of Ezra covers 
a period of twenty years; and then an interval of about 
fifty years transpired before the events recorded in the 
seventh chapter— Ezra's commission under King Artaxerxes 
of Persia to go up to Jerusalem and establish 
the worship of God. The history of the return from 
captivity, and the experiences of the people and their 
difficulties in connection with the rebuilding of the 
Temple, Ezra probably got from the records of the 
scribes at Jerusalem. 

The Book of Second Chronicles closes with the 
declaration that the king of the Chaldeans, Nebuchadnezzar, 
carried away the treasures of Jerusalem, broke 
down its walls, burned its palaces, and carried its people 
captive to Babylon, and then declares that this 
desolation of the land and the city was in fulfilment of 
prophecy, the word of the Lord by Jeremiah, that the 
land should lie desolate and keep a Sabbath of rest 
seventy years. It also declares that this seventy years' 
desolation was brought to an end by the decree of Cyrus 
in the first year of his reign. Thus has the Lord clearly 
marked the beginning of the seventy years and their 
end; yet we find that chronologists in general reject this 
plain statement of the Scriptures, and begin to count 
the seventy years at a much earlier date than the destruction 
of the city (for we are to remember that there 
were three distinct captivities at about that time).* 

It seems to be no easy matter to determine the 
chronological order of Medo-Persia. Cyrus is called the 
Persian, and Darius is called the Median, and whether 
they reigned jointly for a time seems difficult to determine. 
It would appear that Cyrus was in some respects 
the chief, yet that Darius was the representative of 
authority in Babylon for a time, and that upon his 
death Cyrus became sole emperor. Daniel most positively 
declares that Darius the Median succeeded to Belshazzar's 
kingdom (Dan. 5:31; 6:28), and this was before 
even Daniel had thought to search the prophecy 
of Jeremiah and to calculate the date when the seventy 
years desolation would end, and to pray for the preparation 
of Israel for the promised deliverance when it 
should come. (Dan. 9:1-16.) Chronologists in general 
fall into error here in attempting to fit together the conflicting 
and disconnected scraps of secular history covering 
this period: they overlook the bridge over that 
period furnished by the Lord's testimony that the 
"seventy years' desolation" began with the close of Zedekiah's 



reign and ended with the first year of Cyrus,— 
a well established date, B.C. 536. 

We are not told by what agencies the Lord operated 
when he "stirred up" the heart of Cyrus to fulfil 
his will, in letting go the captives, and hence we are at 
liberty to surmise on the subject. We presume it likely 
that, as Daniel was speedily made a high officer in the 
kingdom, he had access to King Cyrus, and quite probably 



*See MILLENIAL DAWN, VOL. II., Chap. 2. 

R2509 : page 199 

called his attention to the Scriptural predictions 
which marked him as the divine agent, even referring 
to him by name.-Isa. 44:26,28; 45:1-5; Jer. 25:1-12; 
29:10. 

It is quite possible, also, that the Lord used other 
means in stirring up the heart of Cyrus: possibly he 
reflected that by such a course he would firmly establish 
himself in the good will of the Israelites, who 
numbered millions amongst his new subjects, and comparatively 
few of whom he might feel sure would avail 
themselves of his generous offer of liberty to return to 
their native land. It would appear that this was the 
custom of Cyrus in respect to the religions of all the 
various peoples whom he conquered. Nebuchadnezzar 
had thought to unify the people by bringing to their 
minds one god, and compelling worship to him. Cyrus 
seems to have followed an opposite rule, and sought to 
make himself popular with his subjects of various religious 
inclinations by doing something to the honor of 
every prominent god whose devotees he conquered. 
Thus he posed as a general deliverer of the people and 
as the servant of all the gods. 

Moreover, he may have had in mind the fact that 
Egypt was a country of great fertility, and that it would 
be of great convenience to have Jerusalem as a friendly 
way-station between his capital and Egypt, so that in 
case of war he would have friendly representatives at 
Jerusalem to spy upon the enemies and to render assistance 
to his forces. Possibly some of these, or possibly 
all of these, were the considerations by which the 
Lord stirred up the spirit or will of Cyrus to make the 
proclamation of liberty to the captives of Israel. 

It was not an expulsion of the Israelites from the 
province of Babylon, for evidently as a people they 
were highly esteemed of their neighbors. The proclamation 
merely gave liberty to those who desired that 
they might return to Palestine, with the king's approval: 
and that those who remained might not feel that 
the king would be offended if they gave of their substance 
to help the enterprise, the proclamation made 
special mention of the fact that such cooperation would 



be pleasing to the king. 

We may readily suppose that the majority of those 
who thought upon the Lord and who trusted in the 
promises made to the fathers, which centered in the 
Holy Land and the Holy City, were poor, for it seems 
that in every case poverty is more favorable to religious 
faithfulness and zeal than wealth; and yet that there 
were some both wealthy and zealous is abundantly testified 
to by the liberal contributions made by the captives 
themselves for the rebuilding of the Temple. The 
vast majority, however, were evidently well pleased 
with their foreign home, in which some of them had 
been living for seventy years, some for seventy-eight 
years, and some for eighty-nine years (those carried 
away captive at the same time as Daniel), while many 
of them were born in Babylonia. Many had intermarried 
with their neighbors, many were immersed in business 
projects, and many perhaps felt themselves too old for 
such an undertaking. Thus did the Lord sift them, 
that he might gather back to the Land of Promise such 
only as had a fervent zeal for the Lord and full trust 
in his promises. 

The sifting of Israel began in the separation of the 
two tribes from the ten tribes, for the rapid spread of 
idolatry in the ten tribes gradually drew those faithful 
to Jehovah to the two-tribe kingdom, whose king was 
of the line which the Lord had promised to bless. Subsequently, 
when the two tribes also had grievously gone 
into idolatry, the Lord carried them all captive to 

R2510 :page 199 

Babylon, and now he stirred up Cyrus to make a proclamation 

for volunteers to return to the Land of Promise. 

The Lord, we may be sure, did not wish the return of 

any except those who had reverence for him and faith 

in his promises. We may therefore conclude that the 

company which did return, numbering in all not quite 

fifty thousand, was composed of the very choicest of 

all Israel out of all the tribes, the tribes of Judah, 

Benjamin and Levi being most prominently represented 

amongst these returning ones, as most of the faithful 

ones for several centuries had been found in their tribes. 

It should be noticed, however, in reading Ezra's account 

of the return from captivity, that the division of 

the nation of Israel was no longer recognized after the 

return— they are invariably spoken of as "all the people 

of Israel," and the sacrifices offered were for "the 

twelve tribes of Israel," and these statements are repeated 

over and over again. The ten tribes were no 

more "lost" than were the great body of those carried 

captive from Judah lost when they neglected to return 

under the proclamation of Cyrus. 

The chief men of Judah and Benjamin and the 
priests and Levites took the lead in the matter of accepting 
the provisions of King Cyrus' decree, and we 



read concerning the others that they were "those whose 

spirit God had raised to go up to build the house of 

the Lord which is in Jerusalem." In what way the 

Lord raised their spirit or disposition we are not informed. 

We may suppose, however, that those whose 

hearts burned with faith in the divine promises to Israel 

and with zeal to be and to do what would be acceptable 

in God's sight, would be awakened, quickened, 

by the decree of Cyrus, which was of God's instigation. 

Moreover, the Lord may have providentially 

directed other matters not here particularized, in channels 

favorable to the return of those who had confidence 

in him and faith in his promises. The fact that many 

of these returning ones were of the poorer class is implied 

R2510 : page 200 

by the statement that many of their neighbors 

"strengthened their hands" with presents of money, 

goods, beasts and other valuables. Such offers would 

be a great encouragement and would probably be considered 

as the leadings of divine providence in the direction 

of the return by such as were looking for providential 

leadings. Furthermore, the generosity of 

Cyrus was manifested in his sending back the precious 

vessels of the Temple, which must have been of immense 

value. The larger vessels are enumerated, in 

all 2499. These, with the smaller articles not specified, 

amounted in all to 5400, as stated in verse 11. 

Sheshbazzar (otherwise called Zerubbabel, which 
means, "Born in Babylon"), who was of the royal 
family of David and Solomon, was appointed the governor 
of the colony, which was nevertheless subject to 
the Persian empire and its successors,— the kingdom 
authority, removed from Zedekiah at the beginning of 
the seventy years' desolation, never being restored to 
the present time— as was foretold by the Lord through 
the Prophet, saying, "I will overturn, overturn, overturn 
it: and it shall be no more, until he come whose 
right it is; and I will give it him"— Messiah, at his 
second advent.— Ezek. 21:27; Luke 21:24. 

We have already seen that natural Israel's captivity 
in Babylon is Scripturally represented as a figure of 
the captivity of Spiritual Israel in mystic Babylon; and 
that the deliverance by Cyrus was to some extent a 
representation of the deliverance of Spiritual Israelites 
from mystic Babylon by Christ; that the fall of Babylon 
before Cyrus was figurative of the fall of "Babylon the 
Great," and that the message, "Mene, Mene, Tekel, 
Upharsin," applied not only to literal Babylon, but 
also now applies to mystic Babylon. In view of 
these things it is but proper that we should consider 
Israel's return from Babylon as to some extent representing 
the deliverance of the zealous of Spiritual Israel 
from mystic Babylon— a work now in progress. 
"Come out of her, my people, that ye be not partakers 



of her sins, and that ye receive not of her plagues."— 
Rev. 18:4. 

But now, as then, comparatively few, even of the 
consecrated class, are willing to undertake the trials 
and difficulties incident to the leaving of the settled 
affairs, comfortable quarters, contracts, engagements, 
etc., entered into in Babylon. The only ones disposed 
to risk the hardships and to go forth into the desert, 
leaving the strong walls and protection of sectarianism, 
are those who have great confidence in God and great 
respect for the promises made to the Seed of Abraham. 
The call to return to the old paths, and to rebuild the 
Temple of the Lord, and to replace therein the vessels 
of gold and silver (the precious truths of the divine 
Word— setting them in order as at first) is appreciated 
by the few only; yet these are encouraged by the Lord's 
providences, by the riches bestowed upon them from 
every quarter— not riches of an earthly kind, but of a 
spiritual sort,— precious truths, valuable lessons and 
experiences, providential leadings, etc. These encourage 
such as are of faithful heart to go forward and by 
obedience to become heirs of those glorious things that 
God has promised to them that love him. 

As all the bitter experiences through which Israel 
passed were, under providential guidance, used to sift, 
separate, purge and purify the proper class to be ultimately 
brought back into the Land of Promise as the 
heirs of the kingdom, so the experiences through which 
the Lord's people have passed during the "dark ages" 
in captivity to Babylon, no less than through recent 
experiences, all tend to show us the necessity for separation 
from the world and its spirit, all lead us to appreciate 
more than ever the divine arrangements by 
which the Lord is making ready for himself and his 
service a peculiar people, zealous for the Kingdom, 
zealous for the Lord's Word, and zealous for all good 
works. -Tit. 2:14; 1 Pet. 2:9. 

It is not for those who rejoice in the Lord's promises 
and leadings to be sad, and to leave Babylon with 
regrets ("Remember Lot's wife!"), but full of joy in 
the Lord and hope in his good promises; saying in the 
language of our Golden Text,— "The Lord hath done 
great things for us, whereof we are glad." Those not 
thus stirred in spirit may as well stay in Babylon, as they 
would only prove snares and stumbling blocks to others. 



R2510 : page 200 

WHO MAY BE COWORKERS. 
SEPT. 3. -EZRA 3:10 TO 4:5. 
"The temple of God is holy, which temple ye are."— 1 Cor. 3:17. 



ABOUT FOUR months must have been required 

for the return of the captives from Babylon to 

Palestine, for later Ezra, with a smaller company, required 

that length of time. (Ezra 7:9.) Arriving at 

their destination about July or August, probably the 

first steps were to provide at least temporary homes 

amid the ruins of Jerusalem and the small towns in that 

vicinity. But as it was a religious motive which prompted 

their return— faith in God and his promises— we 

find, as we might reasonably expect, that very speedily 

after their arrival the public worship of Jehovah was 

begun— probably about the beginning of their "new 

year," October.— Verse 6. 

Evidently the Lord's hand was with them, and it 
was of his providential guidance that their first work, 
in connection with the restoration of the Temple and 

R2510 : page 201 

its divinely appointed services, was the building of the 
altar. This will at once appeal to the intelligent Christian 
as an illustration of the truth so forcefully set 
forth in the Scriptures, that all approach to God, all 
reconciliation, all at-one-ment with him, must be by 
and through the great sacrifice for sins which Israel's 
altar typically represented. Vain are all the approaches 
to God which recognize not as their basis the sin-offering 
which God himself provided— the "ransom for 
all."— 1 Tim. 2:6. 

The site of the Temple was Mount Moriah, and 
one of the most prominent spots on that mount is supposed 
to have been the site of the altar. This place 
selected for the altar, under divine guidance, is believed 
to have been the same spot upon which Abraham offered 
his son, Isaac, the type of Christ, and received 
him again as from the dead in a figure, the Lord providing 
as his representative, upon the same spot, the 
ram caught in a neighboring thicket— Gen. 22:3-13; 
Heb. 11:17-19. 

It is supposed that this same spot was subsequently 
the threshing-floor of Araunah, where David offered 
the acceptable sacrifice to the Lord which stayed the 
plague. (2 Sam. 24:21-25.) The Mosque of Omar 
now occupies the site of the ancient Temple built by 
Solomon; and the Mohammedans, who have great respect 
for the holy places, have left the site of the ancient 
altar exposed to view, protecting it with a railing. 
The visitor may there see to-day the very spot on which 
thousands of typical sin-offerings were sacrificed, the 
base of the various altars which were erected from time 
to time. It is of solid rock, and has a rather distinct 
groove or trench about it, which probably conducted 
the blood of the slain animals to what seems to be a 
natural drain or sewer by which the blood flowed in 
the direction of the Valley of Jehoshaphat— the valley 
of graves. 



As we viewed this historic rock some years ago, 
and thought of the thousands of beasts slain there as 
types of the great ransom sacrifice, and noted the natural 
passageway by which the blood was carried off, 
our thoughts reverted to the Lamb of God, the great 

R2511 : page 201 

sacrifice for sins, and how the life which he laid down 
became a fountain or stream of life, not only for the 
dead of Israel, but all who died in Adam. The flow 
of blood toward the valley of graves seems to speak 
symbolically of life for the dead, secured through our 
dear Redeemer's sacrifice. But we remember that not 
only the bullock of the sin-offering was slain at this 
altar, but as well the goat of the sin-offering was slain 
there: not only the blood of the typical bullock, but 
also the blood of the typical goat, then, must have 
passed through that natural channel or drain; and this 
reminds us of how the Church, as members of the body 
of Christ, are during this age filling up that which is 
behind of the afflictions of Christ, sacrificing even unto 
death— for we know that, as the bullock represented 
the great High Priest, our Lord, so the goat represented 
the under-priests, the Church which is his body.* 
(Col. 1:24; Rom. 8:17.) And, as we have already 
seen, all the members of the body of Christ, the 
Church, must finish their course and lay down their 
lives, before the great work of this Atonement Day, 
the Gospel age, will be accomplished, and the healing 
and life-giving stream reaches the dead world with blessings 
and opportunities of eternal life. 

The beginning of the offering of sacrifices in connection 
with the Feast of Tabernacles, at the beginning 
of their "new year" (in the seventh month of their 
civil year), was a time of special rejoicing with the Israelites 
—it was always the most joyous season, but on 
this occasion the return from Babylon and recent evidences 
of returning divine favor added to its joys. And 
immediately the work of repairing the Temple was decided 
upon. They had brought certain gifts from the 
Israelites still remaining in Babylonia, and these were 
added to from the means of those who had returned, 
and the sum thus accumulated gives good evidence of 
the zeal of all concerned. As nearly as we may be able 
to judge, the total value of the gold and silver donated 
would amount to about $400,000. (Ezra 2:68,69.) It 
would appear that this sum was of three parts of about 
equal proportions, one-third contributed by those who 
remained in Babylonia, one-third by the few wealthy 
of the returned Israelites, and one-third contributed 
by the mass of the people, about $3 each.— 
Nehemiah 7:71,72. 

We have never considered it proper to solicit money 
for the Lord's cause, after the common custom; and 
yet we are thoroughly convinced that there is a great 



blessing in giving, and that those who do not learn to 
give deprive themselves of a great spiritual grace, 
and endanger their spiritual prosperity, if not their 
spiritual life itself. But the giving, to be acceptable in 
the Lord's sight, must be voluntary— free-will offerings 
—"not of constraint." Accordingly, it is our 
judgment that money raised by the various begging devices 
in the name of our Lord is offensive, unacceptable 
to him, and does not bring his blessing either upon 
the givers or the work accomplished. "The Lord loveth 
a cheerful [willing] giver." He seeketh such to 
worship him as worship and serve in spirit and in truth. 
-2 Cor. 9:7; John 4:23,24. 

Full of zeal for the Lord's cause, the people celebrated 
the corner-stone laying of the new Temple with 
great eclat. One of the special features of their worship 
was praise, and we think it safe to say that singing the 



*See Tabernacle Shadows of Better Sacrifices. 

R2511 : page 202 

Lord's praise has been amongst the greatest blessings 
and privileges of worship enjoyed by the largest number 
of the Lord's people throughout this Gospel age 
also. The power to praise God in song has been conferred 
upon man only of all earthly creatures, and how 
appropriate that he should use this power to praise the 
King of kings! 

If those Israelites, the house of servants, returning 
from their bondage, and remembering the covenant 
promises of God to them, had cause for singing and 
shouting Jehovah's praise, much more have we, who 
belong to the house of sons, great cause to tell abroad 
the great things which the Lord hath done for us. We 
were all servants of sin once, under the bondage of sin, 
ignorance, superstition and death, but God, through 
the great Cyrus, has permitted us to go free. Appropriately, 
therefore, our first step should be to recognize 
the sacrifice of the altar, and then to offer praise to him 
who hath called us out of darkness into his marvelous 
light, for "He hath put a new song into our mouths, 
even the loving kindness of our God." 

The Apostle assures us that, however appropriate, 
inspiring and refreshing are the songs of our lips, still 
more appropriate and still more appreciated of the Lord 
are our heart-songs, the joy and rejoicing of the new 
nature— "singing and making melody in our hearts 
unto the Lord." (Eph. 5:19.) And this joy and singing 
in the heart, this heart-thankfulness to the giver of 
all good, necessarily finds expression, not only in 
Christian carols, but also in all the acts and words of 
life— all of which constitute the hymn of praise and 
thanksgiving continually ascending before God from 



his people. 

"My life flows on in endless song, 

Above earth's lamentation; 
I catch the sweet not far-off hymn 

That hails a new creation. 
Through all the tumult and the strife 

I hear the music ringing; 
It finds an echo in my soul; 

How can I keep from singing!" 
We read, "They sang one to another in praising 
and giving thanks to the Lord, saying, For he is good, 
for his mercy endureth forever toward Israel." (Rev. 
Ver.) This is considered by some to be an indication 
of the Lord's will respecting Christian worship— that 
it should be done by choirs instead of by the congregation, 
and that it should be in the nature of solos and 
choruses. There can be no doubt whatever that selected 
and trained choirs can render better music than can 
the general average of Christians. Nor can we doubt that 
this would be particularly true of the time mentioned 
in our lesson, when musical and other education was 
very deficient, and when the most that the majority of 
people could do was to "make a joyful noise unto the 
Lord." But two things in this connection should be 
kept in mind:— 

(1) That so far as the Christian Church is concerned, 
the Lord has left her entirely without restrictions 

in such matters— to praise the Lord with heart 
and voice, according to her love and zeal and judgment. 
It is not, therefore, for one to judge another respecting 
the use of his love, zeal and judgment in offering the 
Lord worship in songs of praise, whether with instrumental 
accompaniment or without: it is for each individual 
and each church to exercise the liberty which 
the Lord has granted. However, we do urge that all 
remember that it is not the excellence of our music 
that will make it acceptable to our Lord. For we 
may well suppose that the harmonies of the heavenly 
choirs quite outmeasure the best efforts of earthly 
choirs, and hence could not hope that the Lord will 
receive our songs of praise because of their intrinsic 
merit. Their acceptance at all will be because they 
are expressions of the heart sentiments; and this being 
true all who have heart sentiments of thankfulness and 
gratitude should be encouraged to make "a joyful noise 
unto the Lord," as acceptable and pleasing to him 
through the merit of our Redeemer. 
"Let all his children sing 

Glad songs of praise to God! 
The children of the heavenly King 

Should tell their joys abroad." 

(2) It should be remembered that fleshly Israel 

was typical, and that their priests and Levites, selected 
for the offering of sacrifice and for the offering of praise, 
typified the Church, the "royal priesthood," and household 
of faith. We are to remember, too, that their 



songs of praise typified the songs and melodies of our 
hearts. From this standpoint we see that the setting 
apart of a special choir of Levites for praise would not 
be in any sense of the word a sanction or command for 
the selection of trained choirs, separate and distinct 
from the congregation of the Lord's people: indeed, it 
would quite contradict the common practice of hiring 
unbelievers to do church singing. None can offer acceptable 
praise to God except those who are of the 
priestly tribe,— "the household of faith." 

Amongst those who were present at the laying of 
the foundation stone at the rebuilding of the Temple 
were some who probably as small children could dimly 
recollect the glorious Temple of Solomon, and who now, 
returning from seventy years' captivity, were eighty or 
more years old. These wept as they contrasted the 
glorious things of the past with the small beginnings 
before them. Doubtless there was a great contrast, and 
yet quite probably distance and childhood's eyes lent 
an enchanted glory to their recollection of the former 
things. But their cries were drowned with the rejoicing 
of hope, and this was well. So with Christians 

R2511 : page 203 

who have gotten free from Babylon, and who are seeking 

by the Lord's grace to build their faith again on the 

old foundation laid by Christ and the apostles at the 

beginning of this age— they are apt to think backward 

to the blessings and privileges of the early Church, and 

to weep and sigh for those by-gone blessings. It is well 

that we should highly esteem the favors of God manifested 

in the primitive Church, its simplicity of worship 

and purity of faith and apostolic privileges, to the 

intent that these may stand before our minds as ideals 

in the work of reconstructing our faith and hope and 

love upon the old foundation; but it would be quite improper 

for us to give way to weeping at such moments; 

R2512: page 203 

rather should the necessities and exigencies of our time 
lead us to energy and the thought of divine favor in 
our deliverance from Babylon, lead us to rejoice and to 
sing the new song which the Lord has put into our 
mouths, even his loving kindness. 

"The people of the land" were of mixed nationality, 
placed as colonists in that portion of the country 
of Palestine previously occupied by the ten tribes. 
This colonizing of mixed peoples was in pursuance of 
the general policy of the Assyrian and Chaldean empires, 
of removing captives from their native soil to new 
homes, thus breaking the ties of the fatherland, destroying 
patriotic feelings, that by these means the sympathies 
and interests of the people might be the more readily 
attracted to and united with the one central government 



at Babylon. 

These "people of the land" (subsequently known 
as Samaritans) were disposed to be friendly to the returned 
Israelites, and proffered their aid in the building 
of the Temple, but their assistance was refused, 
the Israelites realizing that if these "strangers" were 
permitted to share in the work of constructing the 
Temple they could with propriety claim a share also in 
the character of the worship which would be established 
therein, and they foresaw that it would open the door 
to laxity in religious matters, and perhaps to the old 
idolatry, on account of which the Lord had so severely 
chastised them. Their course in this matter has been 
freely criticised as "narrow" and ungenerous, by those 
who have not rightly appreciated the situation. We are 
to remember that God's covenants were exclusively to 
the seed of Abraham, and not to other peoples, who 
were known as Gentiles. 

As an illustration of this exclusiveness, and a proof 
of its propriety, we note the fact that our Lord did not 
preach to others than the seed of Abraham, saying to 
his disciples, "Go not into the way of the Gentiles, 
and into any city of the Samaritans enter ye not; but 
go rather to the lost sheep of the house of Israel." 
And of himself he said, "I am not sent but unto the 
lost sheep of the house of Israel."— Matt. 10:5; 15:24. 

It would be well for those of Spiritual Israel who 
are now returning from captivity in the various provinces 
of "Babylon the Great" to remember this lesson. 
They find mixed peoples ready to express more or less 
of sympathy with them, and to offer more or less of cooperation 
in the reestablishment of the true worship of 
God in its primitive simplicity. The natural inclination 
would be to accept such proffered assistance, and 
to call every such assistant a "brother," and to accept 
and use not only the labor but the gold proffered, regardless 
of the fact that it comes not from true Israelites. 
Indeed, the general tendency of our time is not 
only to be willing to accept the money and other aid of 
worldly people in the Lord's service, but to beg for it, 
and to scheme to get it by every device conceivable,— 
fairs, suppers, subscriptions, collections, etc., etc. The 
tendency in every case must be to bring in a foreign 
and unsanctified influence, and to do great injury to 
the true Israelites. This indeed may be said to be one 
of the chief troubles with nominal Protestantism to-day. 
Zion is full of "strange children," and their 
voice and influence predominate in the business affairs 
of the churches, in the doctrines, etc., etc. The true 
Israelites in comparison are but as a little flock of 
sheep amongst many goats and some wolves. 

When "the people of the land" found that their 
money and services were not acceptable, and that they 
could have neither part nor lot in the construction of 
the Lord's house, it offended them and made them 
enemies; and from that time onward they persistently 



opposed the work of the Israelites. So it will be with 
Spiritual Israel; those who conscientiously live separate 
from the world in spiritual matters, and recognize as 
brethren in Christ only those who confess to circumcision 
of the heart and adoption into God's family, will 
find themselves opposed by moralists, liberalists and 
higher critics, as well as by the masses, who hate the 
light, because it condemns their darkness— doctrinal 
and otherwise. Nevertheless, this is the only good and 
safe course to pursue. Better far is it that only true 
Israelites should be recognized as brethren, and thus 
the wheat be separated from the tares. 

Some one has well said:— "The Christian in the 
world is like a ship in the ocean. The ship is safe in 
the ocean so long as the ocean is not in the ship." One 
of the great difficulties with Christianity to-day is that 
it has admitted the strangers, the "people of the land," 
and recognized them as Christians. It does injury, not 
only to the Christians, by lowering their standards (for 
the average will be considered the standard), but it also 
injures the "strangers," by causing many of them to 
believe themselves thoroughly safe, and needing no conversion, 
because they are outwardly respectable, and 
perhaps frequently attendants at public worship. It 

R2512: page 204 

lowers the standard of doctrine also, because the minister 

who realizes that at least three-fourths of his congregation 

would be repelled by the presentation of 

strong meat of truth, withholds the same, and permits 

those who need the strong meat, and could appreciate 

and use it to advantage, to grow weak, to starve. Furthermore, 

the worldly spirit and the fuller treasury 

have attracted "strangers" into the professed ministry 

of the Gospel, many of whom know not the Lord, 

neither his Word, and who consequently are thoroughly 

unprepared to feed the true sheep, were they ever so 

well disposed. 

The lesson in connection with the building of the 
Temple, the Lord's Church, "which temple ye are," 
is that worldly persons, worldly methods and worldly 
aid and wisdom are to be rejected. As all the living 
stones are to be polished, fitted and prepared under the 
eye and direction of the great master-builder, the Lord, 
so all the servants, all the ministers of the truth, engaging 
in this work, are to be, so far as we have to do 
with the matter, such only as manifest a circumcision 
of heart, and thus show themselves to be Israelites indeed. 
Much and serious has been the injury done to 
the Lord's cause by the selection of workmen whose 
chief recommendation has been that they had some 
ability as public speakers, a good address. Rather let 
us remember that none may engage in this work as 
true Israelites unless they be in full accord with the 
Master-builder, and by their ability in rightly dividing 



the Word of truth show themselves to be workmen that 
need not to be ashamed.— 1 Pet. 2:5,9; 1 Cor. 3:17; 
2 Tim. 2:15. 



R2512: page 204 

DESPISE NOT THE DAY OF SMALL THINGS. 

--ZECH. 4:10.- 

MANY, AS they note the mighty opposition 

to present truth, and the comparatively 

few who have ears to hear it, and hearts to obey it, 

are inclined to discouragement. They are in danger of 

despising their God-given opportunities as a "day 

of small things," and hence of letting slip valuable opportunities 

for service to God and his people. For such 

the Lord sends a message, saying,— "Strengthen ye 

the weak hands and confirm [make firm] the feeble 

knees. Say to the timid of heart, Be strong, fear not: 

Behold your God! Vengeance cometh! the recompense 

of God. He will come and save you. Then the eyes 

of the blind shall be opened and the ears of the deaf 

unstopped."— Isa. 35:3-5. 

Think of the possibilities, remembering that now 
as in Elijah's day there are probably more than seven 
thousand Israelites indeed who have not bowed the 
knee to Baal. But consider the possibilities within 
reach of the twenty thousand readers of ZION'S WATCH 
TOWER as follows:- 

If each one will interest another one this year, it 
will mean 40,000 in 1900. 

If all have similar zeal and success it would mean 
80,000 in 1901; and 160,000 in 1902; and 320,000 in 
1903; and 640,000 in 1904; and 1,280,000 in 1905. 

But suppose that only one in ten of the readers 
are fully consecrated— their all upon the Lord's altar 
as "living sacrifices, holy, acceptable to God" and 
doing "their reasonable service,"— how then would 
it show? Thus:— 

At present 2,000; in 1900 it would show 4,000; 
in 1901 it would show 8,000; in 1902 it would show 
16,000; in 1903 it would show 32,000; in 1904 it would 
show 64,000; in 1905 it would show 128,000. 

But the average should be more than this. Each 
of the consecrated, watching and praying and improving 
every opportunity, and permitting no day to pass 
without some special witness for the Lord and his 
truth either by word or pen, should expect to reach 
more than one each year. If they have not averaged 
better than this in the past, they should seek and pray 
for more opportunities and especially for more wisdom 
to see and to use their opportunities. Let us all make 
sure that the Master at last can say of us as he said of 



one of old,— "She hath done what she could."— 
Mark 14:8. 

Never before were there so many possibilities of 
serving the truth— God's provision for his people. 

(1) All the interested may have ZION'S WATCH 
TOWER regularly free if they cannot afford the moderate 
subscription price, and will write us to that effect: or 
they may have it on credit, if they prefer it so; and if 
they can never pay and will write us to this effect, the 
debt will be cancelled. 

(2) All TOWER readers are supplied, free, all 
the tracts they can use— for enclosing in their letters, 

R2513 : page 204 

for distribution on railway trains, at conventions, etc. 
Millions of tracts are thus circulated annually. 

(3) For those who can devote their time to colporteuring 
the DAWNS and booklets every reasonable 
arrangement is made; and about fifty brethren and 
sisters are giving their time and strength in this 

way. 

(4) For others who cannot thus "minister," the 
Lord has opened a new department of "Volunteers" 
for Sunday service in the free circulation of the "meat 
in due season" represented in the booklet, The Bible 

vs. Evolution. Many have taken hold of this opportunity, 
and at present we are unable to meet the demand 
as promptly as we would like. We know not 

R2513 : page 205 

what results the reaping will show, but are sure that 
the "reapers" are being blest and strengthened by 
their service. 

(5) Opportunity to secure the DAWNS, etc., at 
extremely low rates for loaning to neighbors and 
friends. 

Evidences multiply that all those facilities for 
service are at a most opportune time: when the fall of 
Babylon from steadfastness on even the first principles 
of the doctrines of Christ is awakening the Lord's 
people and calling them to come out of her; and when 
they need the helping hands of true "brethren" to 
guide them into the light of truth now shining. For 
we firmly believe that all in Babylon must come out 
of her, if they would be of the Bride class; and that 
none of the "brethren" who will be amongst the 
"overcomers" will be left in "darkness."— See 1 Thes. 5:2-5; 
Rev. 3:18-22; 13:14-16; 20:4. 

"Lord, increase our faith!" If we believe that 
we are in the "harvest" time of this age, and that the 
"harvest" work is in progress, and we participators 
in it, let us believe also that the great Chief Reaper is 
thoroughly able to use us as well as to bless us in his 
service; and let none look at clouds and discouragements, 



but let each do with his might what his hands 
find to do, with the eye of faith "looking unto Jesus," 
our Captain, and determined that, whether or not he 
shall be able to bring many unto the Kingdom, the 
King shall at least have evidence of his love and zeal 
and effort so to do. 



R2513 : page 205 

QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS. 



Question.— Are not present conditions less favorable 
to the performance of the injunctions of Eph. 4:28, 
and 2 Cor. 12: 15, than were the conditions at the 
time the Apostle wrote? Is not the labor market 
more glutted now than then? 

Answer.— No doubt circumstances and conditions 
varied in the Apostle's day as they do now, but we 
have no reason from history to suppose that the average 
working man of that time was more favorably situated 
in wages, opportunities for labor, etc., than at 
present. Indeed, it is very doubtful if labor was at 
any time in the past as well housed, as well clothed, 
and generally comfortable, as at the present time. 
This does not mean that we consider the laboring class 
too well cared for at the present time— nor that we 
think their condition all that could be desired. Gladly 
would we improve, if we could, the general conditions 
of labor. It is well, however, that we should not 
cultivate in ourselves or in each other a spirit of discontent, 
which can do no good, but is likely to work 
injury; and to this end it is well that we should not 
deceive ourselves or others into thinking our load unendurable 
or harder than that of other days, when it 
is really better by a very great deal. 

Question.— In a family of seven, when all the incomes 
foot up an average of $ 1 per day for working 
days, how would it be possible, after providing food, 
clothing, rent and fuel, to put by anything or to give 
away anything? 

Answer.— If you mean that the total income of 
seven persons is only $ 1 a day, $6 a week, we admit 
that it is small, and that it would require extraordinary 
economy to "provide things decent." But permit 
a kindly suggestion, dear brother, that there should 
be no family of seven persons at the present time unable 
to earn more than $6 per week— unless through 
some accident, some misfortune. A man who cannot 
earn more than a dollar a day ought to consider very 
earnestly the question whether or not he could afford 
to get married, and assume the responsibilities of a 
father, and any woman asked to become a wife should 



give earnest thought to the financial side of the problem 

before accepting such an invitation. Circumstances 

and prospects may have been more favorable 

at the time of marriage, but so soon as such circumstances 

became unfavorable the propagation of a family, 

for which only an unsatisfactory provision could 

be made, should not have continued— continence, self-denial, 

should be practiced by Christians under such 

circumstances, and be considered not merely a "virtue," 

but a "duty." Nor should they unduly bemoan 

their lot, but on the contrary remember what the 

Scriptures so clearly set forth— that the heavenly Father 

knoweth what things his children have need of. By 

cheerfully seeking to conform to the proper necessities 

of the case, and accepting such as divine providences 

in the case of the consecrated, a great blessing 

may result, for, as the Apostle declares, "All things 

work together for good to them that love God— to the 

called ones according to his purpose." 

Question.— Under such circumstances, how is the 
father to follow the Scriptural injunction to lay up for 
his children? Did Mary make provision for her son 
Jesus? Did not the son make provision for the parent? 

Answer.— "How just are God's commands, 
How wise his precepts are!" 

Scriptural injunctions we may understand to be 
applicable only so far as it is possible for us to follow 
them. If we find it impossible to lay by anything, we 
may consider ourselves excused from this provision or 
advice. But our effort should be to follow the Scriptural 
injunction, if it should only be to lay aside one 

R2513 : page 206 

or two or five cents out of each day's earnings. The 

Lord should at least see our effort to follow his instructions, 

and we would surely have a blessing in such 

endeavors. 

We do not understand the Apostle to mean that 
aged parents should slave themselves to provide for 
grown and healthy children. While the offspring are 
children their future welfare should be provided for 
by reasonable education, etc., and when such children 
are grown, they should take pleasure in caring for 
their aged parents. Mary was probably at least fifty-five 
years of age when Jesus, having evidently cared 
for her himself, committed her at his death to the care 
of John. And the Apostle shows that his thoughts 
on the subject were in full harmony with this, for, 
when speaking of widows, he says, "If any widow 
have children or nephews, let them learn first to show 
piety at home [by caring for their dependent relatives], 
and to requite their parents: for this is good and acceptable 
before God."— 1 Tim. 5:4. 

Question.— Is there not in the Scriptures quoted 
a cold business tone, indicating that man's wisdom 



had more to do with them than the spirit of the Lord, 
who so tenderly spoke of the Father's care and love, 
and who must have known to what straits many of his 
people would be brought in taking up his cross and 
following on, and the separation from worldly ways 
and means of obtaining a living— clubs, labor unions, 
church unions, etc., in harmony with the injunction, 
"Come out from among them and be ye separate"? 

Answer.— No, dear brother; we are to consider 
that the same holy spirit guided in all the writings of 
the apostles, and that God's Word is not yea and nay. 
Surely no Scripture writer more prominently or more 
fully set forth the Lord's love and care for his people, 
and the necessity for full separation from the world, 
than did the Apostle Paul who wrote the Scriptures 
which you criticise. 

On the other hand, we are to realize that the circumstances 
in which we are placed have not come to 
us by accident, but, according to the Scriptures, have 
come to us under direct supervision of God,— if we are 
his consecrated people. Consequently, instead of repining, 
rebelling and bemoaning, we are to accept the 
Lord's provision as being the best for us, as "new 
creatures," according to his divine wisdom. We are 
to seek to do as nearly as he has directed us as lies 
within our power, and the remainder entirely beyond 
our power we should take to the Lord in prayer, asking 
increase of wisdom, increase of grace, increase of 
strength, to know and to do his will more and more 
perfectly for the future, and whatever may have been 
our errors in the past, our loving Father has made 
abundant provision in Christ for our forgiveness and 
aid. And doubtless God's reason for permitting some 
of our experiences is that we may learn just such lessons 
necessary to the shaping and moulding of our 
characters into most perfect harmony with the divine 
pattern, our Lord Jesus. 

Question.— In the Old Testament we read, "Trust 
in the Lord and do good, and verily thou shalt be fed." 
I would like to know whether or not this and similar 
Old Testament expressions are applicable to the called-out 
ones of this Gospel age, or were they merely applicable 
to the Jewish age, when, according to the 
Law Covenant, God gave temporal rewards for 
obedience? 

Answer.— As heretofore pointed out, the promises 
to fleshly Israel were temporal and, as you suggest, 
guaranteed temporal prosperity as a reward for obedience. 
But are the promises to the Lord's faithful ones 
of this Gospel age smaller or less precious, because 
they do not guarantee riches and friends and freedom 
from blight and drouth? May we not realize that the 
promises made to us are much more comprehensive, 

R2514: page 206 



having the promise of the life which now is, and also 
of that which is to come? (1 Tim. 4:8.) Is it not still 
true, and most abundantly emphasized in the New 
Testament, that "No good thing will he withhold from 
them that walk uprightly"? If all things work together 
for good to them that love God, we may be sure 
that if riches or ease or luxury are withheld from us, 
they are withheld for our blessing, and may rejoice in 
such evidences of the divine care. Is it not in the New 
Testament that the Apostle declares, "Godliness with 
contentment is great gain"? and must not therefore 
contentment be a possible thing to those who will live 
godly in this present time, even tho they suffer persecution, 
and even tho they be not so prosperous in temporal 
matters as some others? 

The lesson of faith, dear brother, is an important 
one for all to learn and, if we are slow in learning it, 
we will probably be kept under the necessary experiences 
that much the longer— because the Father loveth 
us and seeketh in us this good quality. Faith will not 
look at any of the divine arrangements as unkind or 
cold, but will see in them all, and in all of life's experiences, 
the very blessing most needed, and can sing, 
"Content, whatever lot I see, 
Since 'tis my God that leadeth me." 

Question.— Please consider, briefly, the following 
Scriptures additional to those recently sent you:— 
Phil. 4:10,15-17; 1 Cor. 4:14; 2 Cor. 11:8,9; Luke 6:38; 
2 Cor. 10:11. 

Answer.— These Scriptures seem to be along the 
same lines as those considered in our last issue, to 
which we again refer all readers. We consider them 
in order. 

(1) Phil. 4:10,15-17:-This Scripture indicates 
that the Apostle, who was giving his entire time to 
the ministry of the Gospel, labored at tent-making or 
other secular business only when such a course was 
made necessary in providing things honest in the sight 
of all men— and rather than be burdensome to any, 
or even to request assistance. The Apostle here recognizes 
as the Lord's judgment that any laborer is 
worthy of his keep, unless he has missed his calling, 
or is incapacitated. The Apostle did not mistake his 
calling, and if the Church recognized him as a servant 
called of the Lord and being used effectively in the 

R2514: page 207 

ministry of reconciliation, it then became their privilege 
to cooperate with him in that ministry by supplying 
his temporal needs. And in the case of the 
Church at Philippi it would appear from the Apostle's 
testimony that they had appreciated and used their 
opportunities properly and repeatedly. All are not 
talented for public service of the truth, and whenever 
one is discovered by the brethren to have special gifts 



and talents and zeal for the ministry he should be encouraged 

in that direction, and the others less qualified 

in these respects should take pleasure in assisting 

such an one, and thus they would be reckoned as having 

a share with him in the fruit of their combined labors. 

In the Apostle's case there was no room to doubt 
that his ministry was owned and accepted of the Lord, 
and that he was an apostle— one specially sent forth, 
and whose services were specially guided by the 
Master; and that his entire time was given to the work 
and was needed for the work. 

(2) 1 Cor. 4:14:— The context preceding shows 

that the Apostle felt considerably hurt that the Church 
at Corinth, which he himself had established through 
the preaching of the gospel, had been quickly turned 
aside by false teachers, who had denied Paul's apostleship. 
The Church at Corinth had seemingly flourished 
financially and socially, and suffered little persecution. 
They were correspondingly unable to rightly 
sympathize with the Apostle in his active ministry of 
the truth, and the many hazardous incidents connected 
therewith. In the context he addresses them rather 
ironically, saying, "We are fools for Christ's sake, 
but ye are wise in Christ; we are weak, but ye are 
strong; ye are honorable, but we are despised,... 
and labor, working with our hands." In the 14th verse 
the Apostle assures his readers that he is not so 
writing in order to cause them pain and shame, but to 
awaken them to a proper appreciation of the true situation, 
to the intent that they might be to a larger 
extent co-laborers with him— sharers in the sufferings 
of Christ, that in due time also they might have share 
in the glory to follow. 

(3) 2 Cor. 11:8,9:— These verses show us that 

the Apostle was careful to avoid the money question 

in his preaching. He never so much as asked assistance 

from the Corinthians while he was with them; 

not that he would have refused to accept assistance if 

it had been tendered, nor that he considered that it 

would have been any less than their duty and privilege 

to have assisted him, but that he had confidence that 

the Lord would supply his necessities in the best way, 

and was willing rather to present the Word of God 

without charge, to the intent that his ministry should 

be the more impressive, as an exhibition of the fact 

that he sought not their money but their highest welfare. 

He assured them of this by letter afterward, 

explaining to them that others had been more careful 

to look after his necessities than they, and had a corresponding 

blessing. The Apostle wrote of the matter 

subsequently, not because he desired a gift, but 

because he realized that whoever receives the truth 

into a good and honest heart and is really benefited 

by it must partake of its spirit of generosity, and do 

his share in forwarding the truth, else he will go backward 

and lose some of the blessing and light already 



received. 

(4) Luke 6:38:— This verse represents the general 
principle of divine dealing— "The Lord loveth a 
cheerful giver," and causes his smile and blessing to 
rest upon such, whereas those who receive the Lord's 
favor and fail to be exercised by the spirit of benevolence, 
receive correspondingly less of spiritual blessing. 

(5) 2 Cor. 10:11:— This does not signify that 

if the Apostle wrote them respecting benevolence in 
money matters he would also preach to them upon 
this subject. His own expressions clearly indicate 
that he did not follow this course, and that his writing 
upon the subject of money-giving was from a 
standpoint wholly separate from any solicitations on 
his own account. The context shows that he was reproving 
some one in the Church who had been walking 
according to the flesh and not according to the 
spirit, and his declaration here is that he would speak 
in the same denunciatory manner if he were present 
with them. 



R2515 : page 207 

INTERESTING LETTERS. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-At last I managed to 
get to London to see the brethren, being hindered from 
an earlier visit. Brother Guard very kindly provided 
for me whilst there. I found in London both that 
which cheered and that which made me sad. It may 
be said that there are three classes; (1) the scattered 
ones, whom I found generally lacking in interest; 
(2) a company who meet regularly in the north 
of London, and who reside chiefly in the West and 
North. Brother Sheward, as far as I could judge, is 
the main-stay of this meeting, which is now getting 
beyond things we understand; and (3) a meeting in 
Stratford, East London, which meets in Bro. Guard's 
home and is in full sympathy with the TOWERS and 
DAWNS. It was with these all my meetings were held. 
I went on the 8th of June and held meetings the 
same day, Thursday, Friday and Saturday evenings, 
Sunday afternoon and evening, and again on Tuesday. 

R2514: page 207 

The day-time I spent looking up the odd ones, and 
hard work it was. London is such a big place, and 
some districts ten or more miles apart. I called upon 
our dear Brother Hart and spent some little time with 
him, besides seeing him three times at our meetings. 
Bro. Guard is another dear brother, to all appearances 



sincerely desirous of pleasing God. He is rather stern 
in countenance, but very kindly in disposition, and I 
believe he does his best for the brethren. We had a 
good time together. Our meetings were attended by 
forty or more people, all apparently deeply interested. 
I found their meetings had been, to my mind, rather 
too open, inasmuch as they allow interruption at any 
time; indeed, they had taken the form of conversation 
more than not. As brother Guard has some ability, I 
counseled him to develop the idea of worship more 
than they had, and let questions be asked and answered 
afterwards if need be. Or, in many cases it would be 
altogether preferable that a newly interested one should 
be allowed private opportunity rather than a whole 

R2514: page 208 

company should be kept waiting whilst every old 
question is again threshed out. 

There is, as you have often said, a tendency, when 
one is freed from Babylon's bondage, to swing to the 
other extreme not only in doctrine but ceremonies, and 
some forget the prime object of meeting together- 
worship. I am thankful to God for Bro. Guard and 
the dear brethren with him. 

There was much to encourage one. One feels 
more than repaid by the hearty words "God bless you!" 
The brethren generally seemed helped and encouraged 
by my visit. Perhaps some of this was due to the form 
of worship we had. I judged the brethren were needing 
exhortation, and by the grace of God I was enabled 
to encourage them. 

I was unable to get but a short time with Brother 
Sheward, but I was satisfied with even that. He was 
courteous,— one could expect that,— but he is developing 
a cynical trait of character, I am sorry to say. 
"I suppose you have some difference with Brother R., 
Brother Sheward?" "Well, yes! a little theoretically, 
but practically nil." This I found to be quite in 
error, for the practical difference is as between light 
and darkness. He could not define his position. On 
my saying it was negative, he admitted that was so. 
He denies the "high calling;" does not know what to 
hope for; neither does he know his position as touching 
the world, thinking there is probably the same 
hope for it as for us now. I pointed out to him how 
that his philosophy left a vacuum; which he also admitted. 
His chief claim is that none have understood 
or been "begotten of the spirit" since the apostles' 
days, that Bro. R. has made a brave attempt at the 
elucidation of the mystery, but has failed. "Bro. R. 
has done a great work and is now exhausted, nothing 
more need be expected from him." Presumably we 
are to look to Bro. Sheward (seeing he is not exhausted) 
for any further developments of truth(?). 

I should say that Bro. Sheward's theory of a 



spirit-begotten condition is "an ability to ring up Peter, 
for instance, and ask his statement as to an interpretation, 
etc." So we are to come to Spiritism by a 
new route. What assured him chiefly was that all the 
company meeting with him were agreed. As I asked 
for some Scripture for this or that statement, he admitted 
he could not prove, but claimed that I must 
disprove. There was not much opportunity for that, 
he was so busy telling me of his beliefs. Well! I came 
away quite sad, but assured, nothing could be done 
while he was in the same mind. To me it is another 

R2515 : page 208 

case of "the wisdom of this age." What a need for 

those who have responsibilities to guard themselves 

well! I did not seek opportunities of interviewing the 

members of his flock. He invited me to stay over 

Sunday and listen to them when they had a better opportunity 

of telling me, but I declined. 

It seems as if the truth received into any other 
than "good ground" (sincere hearts) creates an insatiable 
desire for new things; and if nothing new be 
forthcoming, something must be invented. 

I will write again shortly after I have given the 
brethren in Liverpool a call. With kindest good wishes 
in the Lord, I am, dear brother, 

Yours in the Lord, JESSE HEMERY,-England. 

page 208 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-Your esteemed favor 
of the 28th was joyfully received, because you say in 
it you expect to be able to send to us again Brother 
Draper about Oct. 1st. I feel especially pleased over 
the prospect, and I have good reasons to believe others 
feel the same. He seems to possess the faculty of 
stirring up, and waking up, those who have the harness 
on, as well as comforting and strengthening those 
that are feeble and halting to press on and entirely 
forsake the old way which in almost every case is more 
or less the way of Babylon. I have great reasons to 
rejoice and be glad and thankful every day for God's 
loving kindness which, when seen in its purity and 
grandeur, more than offsets the tribulations, trials and 
sorrows that surround us on all sides. But it makes 
me greatly ashamed of the complaining spirit that has 
heretofore often possessed me. I greatly desire to be 
separate from every defiling thing and to be clean in 
thought and desire as well as in person; and I freely 
acknowledge that your writings have opened to my 
view the precious, loving character of the Almighty, 
and of our dear Master, as no other light ever did, and 
have greatly encouraged me to accept the invitation 
to freely partake of the bountiful feast of fat things, 
so wonderfully brought to our view by your pen. Oh 



how gladly and thankfully I partake of them, and 

what a longing desire it has created in me to do something 

useful in return for these great benefits! 

I will enclose a small remittance to you, not small 
when compared with my income, but small compared 
to what I would like to make it. Desiring for your 
complete success as heir with Christ to the Kingdom, 
and with Christian love to all the Church, I am, 

Your brother in Him, A. B. PERINE,— Kansas. 

BELOVED BROTHER IN CHRIST:-It is after 11 P.M., 
but I must drop you a note before retiring, in reference 
to the meetings of Brother McPhail, the last one 
of which was held in Philadelphia this evening. To 
say we have been blessed is putting it too mildly. I 
believe we will all be better men and women in the 
Lord for what we have received of our heavenly Father 
through the instrumentality of this dear brother. He 
addressed one meeting Friday, two Saturday, and 
three to-day, and all the meetings were well attended, 
especially to-day's. Friends were here from Wilmington, 
West Chester, Chadd's Ford, Lansdale, Doylestown, 
Newport, Camden and Scranton. 

During the entire series of meetings a beautiful 
spirit of love was in evidence. Everyone seemed to 
enter heartily into the spirit of the discourse, which 
can truly be said to have been in the demonstration of 
the spirit and in power. I believe I can safely say 
that the past three days have been the most momentous 
in the experience of the brethren in this city. 
We feel very thankful, dear Brother, that when Bro. 
McPhail's route was laid out the brethren in Philadelphia 
were remembered. 

The Lord has blest us greatly of late, and I think 
the Philadelphia Church is in an excellent condition 
spiritually— there is love, unity, and peace, as well as 
a deepening confidence in God's ability to make all 
things work together for our good. Excuse the haste 
in which this is written. With Christian love to you, 

Yours, BENJAMIN H. BARTON, -Philadelphia. 



page 209 

Vol. XX. AUGUST 15, 1899. No. 16. 

SEPTEMBER & OCTOBER ISSUES 
Will Be Millennial Dawn, Volume V. 



CONTENTS. 



Views from the Watch Tower 211 

The Peace Conference Failure 211 



Presbyterianism in Scotland 212 

Conventions— Boston and St. Louis 212 

Poem: The Only Begotten 213 

"Unto the Pure all Things are Pure" 214 

Some Antidotes for Heart Impurity 215 

"Give to Every Man that Asketh" 217 

"I, if I be Lifted up, will Draw all Men" 218 

Encouraging the Temple Builders 219 

"My Grace is Sufficient for Thee" 221 

An Interesting Letter 224 

page 210 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, N.Y. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity or 
adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, if they 
send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting the 
paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list 
continually. 



THE AT-ONE-MENT 
BETWEEN 
GOD AND MAN. 



MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. V. 



We have pleasure in announcing that Volume V. of MILLENNIAL 
DAWN series is now on the press. It will (D.V.) be sent to 
all paid up subscribers to ZION'S WATCH TOWER (including those 
who have requested credit for the year, and those who are receiving 
it free as the Lord's poor)— as September 1st and 15th, 
and October 1st and 15th issues of this journal. There will be 
no other issues for the four dates named. If you do not receive 
a copy before Sept. 30th it will not be our fault. If your account 
differs from ours be sure to let us know all particulars. Notice 
the tag on the wrapper. Jun. 9 means that your subscription 
is settled for only to and including June, 1899— that you are in 
arrears. Dec. 9 means that your subscription is settled for, up 



to the end of the year and should be renewed in December 
or written about. 

This volume will, we believe, furnish an abundance of spiritual 
food for the two months (September and October). It 
should be thoroughly masticated, that it may be well digested 
and give strength to head and heart and hand. It is our prayer 
and hope that it may be a great blessing to the readers of this 
journal; and that through them as fellow servants of our one 
Lord and Master it may honor him and bless many. 



R2515 : page 211 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 



THE PEACE CONFERENCE FAILURE. 



CZAR NICHOLAS II. was no doubt greatly disappointed 

with the barren result of his recent 

Peace Conference. Called specially to induce a general 

disarmament on the part of civilized nations and 

for the institution of national courts of arbitration, 

the convention may be said to have failed utterly, in 

that the question of disarmament was totally rejected 

by Germany and therefore of necessity by her neighbors. 

The German emperor evidently realized that 

the disbandment of his great army would not only 

leave him with less power, but would throw another 

million able-bodied men upon Germany's labor market 

seeking employment, further depressing wages and 

precipitating a panic and anarchy. He did the wisest 

thing for the present: but no human wisdom can long 

avert the impending time of trouble when there shall 

be no hire for man nor hire for beast, and no peace to 

him that goeth out nor to him that cometh in, because 

every man's hand shall be against (in competition 

with) his neighbor. (Zech. 8:10.) The growth of intelligence 

is being fostered by the schooling connected 

with these standing armies, and labor-saving machinery 

is fast bringing these to the place where their increased 

intelligence will make them the more discontented 

and the less willing to step backward into serfdom 

at the command of giant Trusts. 

Of the twenty-seven nations represented at the 
Conference, sixteen agreed to favor and to seek to promote 
arbitration in settlement of national disputes, and 
about as many agreed to certain modifications of cruelties 
of war, which they evidently do not hope are 
ended. How evident it is that not humanity and not 
councils, but God who shall "speak peace to the 
Gentiles [the nations]."— Zech. 9:10. 



And his voice commanding "Peace" will be in a 
very different tone from what is generally expected. 
—In tones that will shake not only the earth [social 
structure] but also the heavens [the ecclesiastical 
structure], he shall, by that awful time of anarchy 
when all the selfish passions of mankind shall be let 
loose, say— "Be still and know that I am God. I 
will be exalted among the Gentiles, I will be exalted 
in the earth. "-Psa. 46:8-10. 

"KNOWLEDGE SHALL BE INCREASED"-AND "THERE 
SHALL BE A TIME OF TROUBLE SUCH AS WAS 
NOT SINCE THERE WAS A NATION." 



Another illustration of the fact that the impending 
trouble is being hastened and not hindered by education, 
comes to our knowledge. The security of the 
past was due, less to the fact that men were better in 
olden times than now, than to the fact that general 
intelligence being less men did not so well know how 
to do evil. A general increase of knowledge not accompanied 
by a conversion to righteousness and subjugation 
to the law of Love is dangerous at the present 
time. The time for such general enlightenment 
will come safely when the Kingdom of the Lord has 
been established and when its iron rule will hold in 
check the evilly-disposed, and teach them lessons of 
swift retribution. 

The illustration of this subject is again in Russia, 
where, as noted a short time ago, the privileges of 
high-school and college education were greatly restricted 
by government authority. Now we clip the 
following respecting the unrest of the educated classes 
in Russia from the London Spectator:— 

"The signs of unrest in Russia multiply. Apart 
from the local insurrections caused by the prevailing 

R2515 : page 212 

scarcity, which in some places, notably Kazan, are 
serious, there are the artisan troubles which we noticed 
last week; and now the University students are in 
mutiny. Their real grievance is the brutality with 
which every expression of their feelings is suppressed 
by the Cossack police, who strike them with their 
whips, arrest, and otherwise maltreat them. The 
students have combined to protest against this treatment, 
and between their strikes and expulsions thirty 
thousand young men have left the universities, whose 
doors are closed in St. Petersburg, Moscow, Kieff, 
Kharkoff, Odessa, Kazan, Tomsk and Warsaw. The 
female students will, it is stated, follow the example 
of the men, and are much more dangerous, as they at 
once become revolutionaries. Indeed, there would 



seem from some documents published to be small revolutionary 

parties embedded in the movement. As 

each student has many families interested in his success, 

the matter is a serious one for the government, 

which once again finds itself in collision with the whole 

educated class. Nothing will, or can, happen in Russia 

until the military class is discontented, or the Empire 

finds a reforming Czar, but no government likes to 

feel itself hated by the class, from which, after all, it 

must draw all its own agents. There is, however, no 

remedy to be perceived, except through the Emperor, 

and Nicholas II., tho he wishes thoroughly well to his 

people, has no strength of initiative." 

PRESBYTERIANISM IN SCOTLAND. 



The claim is often set forth that Presbyterianism 
is drifting from its ancient moorings: and we regard 
this as having both a favorable and unfavorable aspect. 
It is favorable to the intelligence and heart of 
these people to find increasingly large numbers of 
them unwilling to admit the unreasonable side of the 
doctrine of election— that God predestinated the torture 
of hundreds of millions of his creatures before 
their creation and made provision for it by the creation 
of a vast torture-chamber called "hell" and the 
preparation of vast quantities of fuel for their torture. 
It is unfavorable when we find them drifting toward 
infidelity— the rejection of Christ's redemptive work 
and the gospel set forth in the Bible— under the influence 
of a Higher Criticism and Evolution doctrine. 
And it appears that this movement is not confined to 
this country. An evidently well informed writer in 
the N.Y. Tribune says of this progress in Scotland,— 

"Professor Briggs would not have been molested 
in the church founded by John Knox. On the contrary, 
he would have found in it scholars and thinkers 
like-minded with himself. Open-mindedness is the 
characteristic of the Scottish church. Implicitly, if 
not explicitly, truth is the first article of its creed, 
and all the other dogmatic articles of its creed are interpreted 
in the light of the truth. It is true the biblical 
scholars and theologians of Scotland are more 
conservative than those of Germany. But, for all 
that, some of them would have as hard a time in the 
American Presbyterian church as Professor Briggs 
had. Nor is that all. A ritualistic tendency has 
grown up in the Scottish church that has for its object 
the restoration of some liturgical and ceremonial features 
that were discarded at the Reformation. This 
movement meets with a sympathetic response from 
the people in the larger towns, and bids fair to revolutionize 
the church. Only in the remote country 
districts will one find the typical Presbyterians of the 



old days, and as they die there are none to take their 
places. Thus, in spite of its strong government and 
its uncompromising creed, Scottish Presbyterianism 
finds itself moving along in the stream of tendency. 

R2516 : page 212 

"But most remarkable of all is the drift away 
from the severe conception of life and religion that 
characterized the Scottish reformers. During the last 
few years there has been a noteworthy change of sentiment 
in regard to the observance of the Sabbath. 
Not long ago Principal Story, the Moderator of the 
General Assembly of the Scottish church, preached a 
sermon on Sabbath observance in Edinburgh. In this 
sermon he made a strong plea for a less rigid observance 
of the day, and especially for the opening of 
clubs, public gardens, museums, art galleries and 
libraries." 

If all the "old fashioned" Christians are dying 
out of the Presbyterian Church and few or none of 
this class now being developed, and if this church is 
a fair sample of all churches, what can we expect? 
Just what the Master implied when speaking of the 
present time he said, "When the Son of Man cometh 
shall he find the faith on the earth?"— Luke 18:8. 

It is the errors in the creeds of all churches that 
are causing the overthrow of the truths which they 
all hold, and which the errors discredit. Let all who 
have the true light now shining be zealous to lend a 
helping hand to these dear brethren— especially to the 
"old fashioned" ones. 



R2516 : page 212 

BELIEVERS' CONVENTIONS-BOSTON AND ST. LOUIS. 



TWO MORE Believers' Conventions are called 
under the auspices of the WATCH TOWER BIBLE 
AND TRACT SOCIETY, as follows:- 

At Boston, Mass., commencing Friday, Sept. 22d, 
at ten o'clock A.M., and lasting three days. 

At St. Louis, Mo., commencing Friday, Oct. 6th, 
at ten o'clock A.M., and lasting three days. 

At this writing we are unable to give full particulars 
respecting the program and speakers, except that 
the Editor of this journal will probably speak each 
afternoon, and that Pilgrim McPhail is expected to 
take part in the Boston Convention, while Pilgrims 
Draper, Willis and Ransom may be expected at St. 
Louis. The hours for meetings will be the same for 
both conventions; viz., 



Friday, 10 A.M., opening "rally" led by representatives 

R2516 : page 213 

of the home churches whose guests we will 
be, and who promise us a warm welcome. At 2 P.M., 
a Testimony Meeting. At 3 P.M., a discourse. At 7 
P.M., a Testimony Meeting. At 8 P.M., a discourse. 

Saturday, 9 A.M., a Testimony Meeting; at 10:30 
A.M., a discourse; at 2:30 P.M., a discourse on Baptism, 
its import and its symbol,— with opportunities offered 
for its symbolization by any who may so desire. At 
7 P.M., a Praise Meeting; at 7:45 P.M., a discourse illustrated 
by a large Chart of the Ages. 

Sunday, at 9 A.M., a Prayer and Testimony Meeting; 
at 10:30 A.M., a discourse illustrated by the Chart 
of the Ages; at 2 P.M., Praise Service; at 3 P.M., a discourse; 
at 7:30 P.M., several speakers, subject, Preserving 
the Unity of the Spirit in the Bonds of Peace. 

All Christians who trust in the precious blood of 
Christ for justification are cordially invited to convene 
with us for the study of our Father's Word;— 
and especially such of these as have made or desire 
to make full consecration of their justified selves to 
the service of the Father through the merit and mediation 
of our Redeemer-King. 

RAILROAD RATES, ETC. 



The Boston Convention is timed so as to give us 
the advantage of the "Congregational Convention," 
held at the same time. Special tickets should be inquired 
for at once, that the Railroad agents may have 
them on hand at proper time. These special tickets 
will cost full fare going; and will have an agreement 
attached, pledging the Ry. to sell a return ticket for 
one-third of full fare for return journey. Thus the 
round trip rates will be two-thirds of the usual. Get 
full particulars of your ticket agent. 

The St. Louis Convention is timed to take advantage 
of the low rates granted to the "St. Louis Fair," 
viz., one fare for the round trip. These tickets will 
be on sale Oct. 2d to 7th and will be good for return 
until Oct. 10th. Remember that our Convention date 
there is 6th to 8th. 

ACCOMMODATIONS, ETC. 

Good, comfortable, clean accommodations will be 
arranged for at the rate of one dollar per day— board 
and lodging,— two in a bed (fifty cents extra where 
separate bed is insisted on). WATCH TOWER subscribers 
too poor to pay these moderate charges will 
be provided for, if they will request entertainment as 



"the Lord's poor." 
DECIDE AT ONCE AND, IF COMING, NOTIFY US. 

This will be the only notification of these Conventions, 
as there will be no other issue of this journal in 
this form until Nov. 1, the special issue (DAWN, VOL. 
V.) taking the place of the Sept. and Oct. issues. 

Therefore, decide as quickly as possible whether 
or not you will attend either of these Conventions. If 
your decision is to go, write to the Watch Tower Office, 
heading your letter with the word Convention. 
Tell us how many there will be of your party— males 
and females— and whether you desire us to secure $1. 
a day accommodations for you, or whether you desire 
provision as the Lord's poor, as above. Also state by 
what railway you will come and, if possible, the hour 
of your arrival. So far as possible there will be a Reception 
Committee to take charge of all comers at trains; 
and they may be known by their displaying a copy of 
MILLENNIAL DAWN or the WATCH TOWER. But more 
than this, your letter will be so answered as to give 
you full information how to find the lodging and meeting 
places. 

Dear Brethren and Sisters, let all who attend these 
Conventions go to them full of earnest desire to get 
good, and so far as possible to do good to others;— full 
of the spirit of loving devotion and prayer. All such 
will surely experience a great blessing— a feast of fat 
things, in fellowship with our Lord and his brethren. 



R2519 : page 213 

THE ONLY BEGOTTEN. 



From far in the great aions of eternity, 
From space unlimited, unmeasured by the steps 
Of worlds, from silence broken only by the voice 
Of him, the Self-Existent One, whose skilful word 
Created him,* came forth the glorious Son of God. 

(O sacred moment! which with shaded eyes we dare 
With holy boldness to approach; not with a vain 
Desire to see and know what God has hid, but drawn 
Thereto by that blest Spirit which in reverence 
Delights to search the deep and precious things revealed. +) 

O glad Beginning of Creation's early morn! 
O glorious Finish of Creation's noon and night! 
O blessed Son, begotten of the Father's speech, 
Thou Only Well-belov'd, in whom all fulness dwells! 
Silence and space alone were found to worship thee! 



But deep within the counsels of th' Eternal One 

Lay countless hosts whose praise should celebrate the Son; 

And to the Son was giv'n prerogative++ to call 

Them to existence, in abodes of him prepared, 

And crown with happiness each creature in its sphere. 

Rich in insignias of his high rank, he still 

Delighted in the emblems of humility; 

And wore upon his heart the gem obedience, 

And clothed his arm with zeal, his feet with haste, to do 

The holy will of Him who loved and cherished him. 



*Rev. 3:14. +1 Cor. 2:10. ++John 1:3. 

R2519 : page 214 

And now reigns silence, solemn, still, as that which on 
His natal day received him; for the angels watch, 
With awe constrained, while he divests himself of all 
His wealth and glory, and becomes a babe; then loud 
Hosannas sing, "On earth be peace, good will to men!" 

And lovingly they watch him as the perfect man's 
Estate he magnifies with like obedience, 
Unflinching loyalty and firm humility; 
Till, daunted not by Calv'ry's cross and shame, he gives 
His life— a ransom for a helpless, dying race. 

That awful day the darkened sun and quaking earth 
Creation's anguish voiced; but One yet reigned supreme, 
Who loved him with the power of infinity, 
And in His master-hand the mighty issues held— 
The matchless Son had won the title to a throne! 

What throne? Could all the boundless universe produce 
A worthy coronet for his escutcheon which 
Nor honor, glory, shame nor death could mar? Behold, 
The heav'nly myriads worship, while the Father crowns 
The risen Son— divine,* immortal,+ Lord of all.++ 

O hail, Immanuel! Prince of life and glory, hail! 
Let earth with heaven unite in adoration, praise, 
Thanksgiving to thy God, whose attributes thou hast 
Exalted, and to thee, whose love and sacrifice 
Constrain a race redeemed to endless gratitude! 
-R. B. HENNINGES. 



*Heb. l:3-Diaglott. +John 5:26. ++Rom. 14:9. 



R2516 : page 214 

"UNTO THE PURE ALL THINGS ARE PURE.' 



"Unto the pure all things are pure: but unto them that are defiled and 
unfaithful nothing is pure; but both their mind and conscience are 
defiled: they profess to have known God, but by their works they 
renounce him, being abominable and disobedient, and to 
every good work worthless."— Tit. 1:15,16. 

NOT SINNERS, not the worldly, are thus spoken 
of by the Apostle, but those who have enjoyed 
the truth, and who have enjoyed at least the 
first step in heart-purification, namely, justification; 
and whose hearts have become defiled through a failure 
to maintain in them the law of love as the ruling 
principle. Instead of being filled with love, selfishness, 
with its defilement, has been received back as 
the ruling principle of the heart. Such have the spirit 
of the world, and sometimes exercise it with a much 
greater degree of animosity than the world exhibits. 
They are specially ready, as the Apostle intimates, to 
impugn the conduct and motives of others: being selfish 
themselves, they attribute selfishness to everyone 
else: being impure themselves, they attribute impurity 
to others: having lost the spirit of love which thinketh 
no evil, their hearts rapidly fill up with selfish, 
envious, uncharitable, ungodly, unkind sentiments, 
toward those who are true, sincere and noble. 

We have known such to go even to the extreme 
of impugning the motives of the great Jehovah and 
our Lord Jesus Christ. Unable to think of love and 
benevolence as motives for conduct, and accustomed 
in their own hearts to think merely of selfishness and 
personal aggrandizement as motives, they view the 
divine course from this standpoint, and esteem that 
God was moved by pride to recover man from sin and 
death, or by vanity, to show what he could do. They 
claim that our Lord Jesus was moved by selfish motives, 
of self-gratification, honor, increase of power, 
in becoming our Redeemer. They think of the loyalty 
of the angels from a selfish standpoint, as in hope 
of advancement, or in fear of punishment. Who can 
bring a clean thought out of an unclean heart? Who 
can expect benevolence, generous feelings, sentiments 
or words, except hypocritically, from a heart in which 
selfishness has the control? Who would expect generous 
considerations in a mind full of envy and 
self-seeking? 

The Apostle suggests of such that not only their 
minds become corrupted, but also their conscience; so 
that they will do evil, speak evil, think evil, and yet 
their consciences do not reprove them; because their consciences 
and minds work in harmony, and, as the Scriptures 



declare, they become blinded, self-deceived. What 
a terrible condition this is, and how careful all of the 
Lord's people should be, not only to have pure hearts, 
pure minds, but also to keep their consciences very 
tender, in close accord with the word of the Lord. 
This condition can only be maintained by judging 
ourselves, and that strictly and frequently, by the 
standard which God has given us, his law of Love. 

R2517 : page 214 

"I want the first approach to feel 

Of pride or fond desire; 
To catch the wandering of my will, 

And quench the kindling fire." 
As the Apostle points out, those whose minds become 
impure, poisoned by ambition or pride or selfishness, 
the spirit of evil, profess to have known God 
they are apt to profess as loudly as ever, sometimes, 
indeed, becoming boastful of how much they know of 
God, and of his Word, and of how wise they are as 
respects its interpretation. Not by boasting or professions, 
therefore, can we always judge who are of 
the pure minds and of good consciences, and in full 
harmony with the Lord. Rather by their fruits we 
shall know them, as the Master said— by their works, 
as the Apostle here points out. If any profess to know 
God, and yet by their works renounce him, we are 
fully justified in questioning whether or not they may 
not be self-deceived, whether or not their consciences, 

R2517 : page 215 

as well as their minds, may not have become defiled. 

To renounce the Lord in our works, does not necessarily 
mean a resort to murder, robbery, licentiousness, 
etc. It means rather, in the beginning at least, 
that from the hitherto good fountain of a cleansed or 
renewed heart or will, from which issued purity, truth, 
sweetness, kindness, encouragement and refreshment 
for all who drank of its waters, in the home and family 
and neighborhood and amongst the Lord's people, 
would issue instead bitter waters, producing bitter 
feelings, watering and nourishing roots of bitterness, 
stirring up malice, envy, hatred, strife, etc. No wonder 
the Apostle says of such that they are abominable! 
All who have the spirit of the Lord must abominate 
the spirit of evil, however surprised and grieved 
they may be to find it issuing from one who previously 
gave forth sweetness, love, kindness, good works. 

As the Master declared, if the professedly sweet 
fountain sends forth bitter waters, we may know that 
there is something wrong, something defiling, in the 
fountain, and are not to deceive ourselves respecting 
its waters, and to partake of its bitterness. 

Commenting along the same line the Apostle James 



declares, "If any man among you seemeth to be religious 

and bridleth not his tongue, that man's religion 

is vain." Because the tongue is the index of the 

heart, because "out of the fullness of the heart the 

mouth speaketh," therefore the unbridled tongue 

speaking selfishly, enviously, bitterly, boastfully, slanderously, 

proves that the heart from whose fullness 

these overflow is unsanctified, unholy, grievously lacking 

of the spirit of Christ,— hence, whatever religion 

it may have attained is thus far vain, as that heart 

is not saved nor in a salvable condition. No wonder 

the Apostle comments in our text, that such are "disobedient:" 

only by disobedience to the law of the New 

Covenant, Love, could anyone reach such a condition 

of heart and conscience defilement, after he had been 

purified through faith in the precious blood, and consecrated 

to the Lord. 

The final statement of our text is that such an 
one, having lost the spirit of the truth, and having obtained 
instead a spirit of bitterness, rancor, evil, having 
a poisoned or defiled mind and conscience, is "to 
every good work worthless." No matter what work 
such an one might undertake to do, it would surely 
be spoiled, because the spirit of evil, the spirit of pride, 
the spirit of selfishness, the spirit of malice and envy, 
are so violently in opposition to every feature of righteousness 
and goodness and truth and love, that there 
can be no peace, no cooperation between them. And 
this reminds us of our Lord's words, to the effect that 
those who are his people and who have his spirit, are 
"the salt of the earth,"— preservative, so long as they 
have this spirit; but, as he suggests, if the salt lose 
its saltness— if the Christian lose those peculiar features 
of the spirit of Christ which constitute him different 
from the world, separate from the world, and a 
salting or preservative quality in the world— if he 
should lose these, what?— he would be worthless as 
bad salt, "to every good work worthless."— Tit. 1:16. 

What course should be pursued by those who find 
themselves possessed of impure minds,— minds inclined 
to surmise evil rather than good, envious minds, selfish, 
resentful, bitter, unforgiving, minds which love 
only those that love and flatter them? Is there any 
hope for these? Would God not utterly reject such? 

God is very pitiful; and it was while all were thus 
"in the very gall of bitterness and bonds of iniquity" 
that he provided for our redemption. There is hope 
for all such who see their defilement and who desire 
to be cleansed. 

"His blood can make the foulest clean; 
His blood avails for me." 

But true repentance means both contrition and 
reformation: and for help in the latter we must go to 
the Great Physician who alone can cure such moral 
sickness; and of whom it is written, "Who healeth all 
thy diseases." All of his sanctified ones, it is safe to 



say, were at one time more or less diseased thus, and 
proportionately "worthless" for his service. True, it 
is worse for those who were once cleansed, if they 
"like the sow return to the wallowing in the mire" of 
sin,— but still there is hope, if the Good Physician's 
medicine be taken persistently the same as at first. 
The danger is that the conscience, becoming defiled, 
will so pervert the judgment that bitterness is esteemed 
to be sweetness, and envy and malice to be justice and 
duty, and the "mire" of sin to be beauty of holiness. 
Then only is the case practically a hopeless one. 

SOME OF THE GOOD PHYSICIAN'S ANTIDOTES FOR 
HEART IMPURITY. 



The Good Physician has pointed out antidotes 
for soul-poisoning,— medicines which if properly taken 
according to directions will sweeten the bitter heart. 
Instead of envy it will produce love; instead of malice 
and hatred and strife, love and concord; instead 
of evil-speaking and backbiting and scandal-mongering 
it will produce the love which thinketh no evil 
and which worketh no ill to his neighbor; which suffereth 
long and is kind, which vaunteth not itself, is 
not puffed up, which never faileth and which is the 
spirit of the Lord and the law of the spirit of life 
in Christ Jesus. Let us all take these medicines, for 
they are good not only for the violently sick, but for 
the convalescing and the well. The following are some 
of the prescriptions:— 

R2517 : page 216 

(1) "He that hath this hope in him purifieth 
himself even as he [the Lord] is pure."— 1 John 3:3. 

The hope mentioned is that we have been adopted 
as sons of God, with the promise that if faithful we 
shall be like him and see him as he is and share his 
glory. As our minds and hearts expand with this 
hope and we begin to measure its lengths and breadths, 
its heights and depths, it surely does set before us the 
Heavenly Father's love and the Redeemer's love in 
rainbow colors and we more and more love the Father 
and the Son because they first loved us. The divine 
form of love becomes more and more our ideal; and 
as we seek to reciprocate it and to copy it, the cleansing 
and purifying of our hearts follows: for looking 
into the perfect law of liberty— Love— we become 
more and more ashamed of all the meanness and selfishness 
which the fall brought to us. And, once seen 
in their true light as works of the flesh and of the 
devil, all anger, malice, wrath, envy, strife, evil-speaking, 
evil-surmising, backbiting and slander become 
more and more repulsive to us. And finally when we 



see that such as to any degree sympathize with these 
evil qualities are unfit for the Kingdom and to every 
good work worthless, we flee from these evils of the 
soul as from deadly contagion. Our hearts (wills, 
intentions) become pure at once and we set a guard 
not only upon our lips but also upon our thoughts— 
that the words of our mouths and the meditations of 
our hearts may be acceptable to the Lord. 

(2) "Who gave himself for us, that he might 
redeem us from all iniquity, and purify unto himself 

a peculiar people zealous of good works."— Titus 2:14. 

We might theorize much and very correctly upon 
how and when and by whom we were redeemed; but 
this all would avail little if we forgot why we were 
redeemed. The redemption was not merely a redemption 
from the power of the grave;— it was chiefly 
"from all iniquity." And the Lord is not merely 
seeking a peculiar people, but specially a people peculiarly 
cleansed, purified. This medicine will surely 
serve to purge us from iniquity if we are anxious to 
make our calling and election sure. 

(3) "Pursue righteousness, fidelity, love, peace, 
with all who call upon the Lord with a pure heart." 
—2 Tim. 2:22. 

We not only need to start right, but also to pursue 
a right course. We may not follow unrighteousness 
even for a moment; whatever it may cost, justice and 
righteousness must be followed. But here a difficulty 
arises with some: they do not know how to judge 
righteous judgment. They are too apt to judge according 
to rumor or appearances, or to accept the 
judgment of scribes and Pharisees, as did the multitude 
which cried, "Crucify him! His blood be upon 
us and upon our children." Had they followed righteousness 
they would have seen the Lord's character 
in his good works as well as in his wonderful words 
of life: they would have seen that so far from being a 
blasphemer he was "holy, harmless, separate from 
sinners:" they would have seen that his accusers were 
moved by envy and hatred. 

And it is just as necessary as ever to follow the 
Lord's injunction, "Judge righteous judgment," and 
whoever neglects it brings down "blood" upon his 

R2518 : page 216 

own head and becomes a sharer in the penalty due to 
false accusers. For as the Lord was treated so will 
his "brethren" be treated. And the more pure our 
hearts the less will they be affected by slanders and 
backbitings and evil-speakings, and the more will we 
realize that those who have bitter hearts from which 
arise bitter words are impure fountains in which is 
the gall of bitterness and not the sweetness of love. 

Next comes fidelity, that is, faithfulness. The Lord 
declares his own fidelity or faithfulness and declares 



himself a friend that sticketh closer than a brother. 
And even the worldly recognize fidelity as a grace: 
and by such it is often given first place; for many 
would commit theft or perjury through fidelity to a 
friend. But notice that God's Word puts righteousness 
first. Fidelity, love and peace can only be exercised 
in harmony with righteousness; but unrighteousness 
not being proven against a brother, our fidelity 
and love and peace toward him must continue, and 
indeed must increase in proportion as envy and slander 
and all the fiery darts of the Wicked One assail 
him "without a cause." This valuable prescription 
will help to keep our hearts free from the poison and 
bitterness of roots of bitterness which the Adversary 
keeps busily planting. 

Justice is purity of heart,— freedom from injustice. 

Righteousness is purity of heart,— freedom from 
unrighteousness. 

Love is purity of heart,— freedom from selfishness. 

(4) "Seeing ye have purified your souls in obeying 
the truth through the spirit [the spirit of the 
truth] unto unfeigned love of the brethren, see that 
ye love one another with a pure heart, fervently."— 
1 Pet. 1:22. 

This medicine is for those who have used the other 
prescriptions and gotten clean. It points out that the 
purity came not merely through hearing the truth, nor 
through believing the truth, but through obeying it. 
And not merely a formal obedience in outward ceremony 
and custom and polished manner, but through 
obedience to the spirit of the truth— its real import. 
All this brought you to the point where the love of the 
"brethren" of Christ was unfeigned, genuine. At first 
you treated all with courtesy, or at least without impoliteness; 

R2518 : page 217 

but many of them you did not like, much 
less did you love them: they were poor, or shabby, or 
ignorant, or peculiar. But obeying the spirit of the 
truth you recognized that all who trust in the precious 
blood and are consecrated to the dear Redeemer and 
seeking to follow his leadings are "brethren," regardless 
of race or color or education or poverty or homeliness. 
You reached the point where your heart is so 
free from envy and pride and selfishness, and so full 
of the spirit of the Master, that you can honestly say, 
I love all the "brethren" with a love that is sincere 
and not at all feigned. 

Now having gotten thus far along in the good 
way, the Lord through the Apostle tells us what next 
—that we may preserve our hearts pure,— "See that 
ye love one another with a pure heart fervently [intensely]." 
Ah, yes, the pure heart must not be forgotten, 
else it might be but a step from pure love into 
a snare of the Adversary, carnal love. But the pure 



love is not to be cold and indifferent: it is to be so 
warm and so strong that we would be willing to "lay 
down our lives for the brethren."— 1 John 3:16. 

With such a love as this burning as incense to 
God upon the altar of our hearts there will be no room 
there for any selfish, envious thoughts or words or 
deeds. Oh how blessed would all the gatherings of 
the "brethren" be, if such a spirit pervaded all of 
them! Can we doubt that, if it held sway in one-half 
or one-third or even one-fourth, it would speedily exercise 
a gracious influence upon all— for righteousness 
and fidelity and love and peace, and against envy, 
strife, malice, slanders and backbitings? 

Let all the "brethren" more and more take these 
medicines which tend to sanctify and prepare us for 
the Master's service, here and hereafter. 



R2518 : page 217 

QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS. 



HOW CAN WE "GIVE TO EVERY MAN THAT ASKETH"? 



QUESTION.— What is the meaning of our Lord's 
words in Luke 6:30, "Give to every man 
that asketh"? 

Answer.— Our Lord's discourse, of which this is 
a part, is given more fully, more completely, in Matt. 5:40-44. 
From Matthew's account it would appear 
that our Lord meant that when we are brought under 
compulsion, legally, we are to submit gracefully, and 
not to harbor resentment or grudgings. For instance, 
he says, "If any man sue thee at the law, and take away 
thy coat [by legal process], do not refuse him the 
cloak also." It does not follow that we are to allow 
him to take coat and cloak, etc., without the process 
of law-suit and compulsion. But whether we think the 
legal decision a just or an unjust one, we, as the Lord's 
disciples, are to be so law-abiding that we will offer 
not the slightest resistance to the enforcement of the 
legal decision, tho it take from us everything. 

We should interpret Matt. 5:42, and Luke 6:30 
in harmony with the foregoing, and assume that the 
asking means a demand, a compulsion. As for instance, 
if a highway robber were to "ask" or demand your 
money (as was much more customary in olden times 
than now, under present police regulations), surrender 
it without a fight. That this is the proper view is 
proven by the preceding statement, "If any man sue 
thee at the law, and take away thy coat," etc. If the 



coat were to be given freely for the asking, the injunction 
respecting the law-suit to obtain it would be 
meaningless. 

The succeeding statement is in harmony also, 
"From him that would borrow of thee turn not thou 
away." Here the attitude of the borrower stands out 
in contrast with the attitude of the highway robber, 
who demands absolute possession. The Lord's followers 
are to be generously inclined toward all men, 
anxious to "do good and lend," and to use hospitality 
without selfishly hoping for return favors. If so situated 
that an enemy could demand of us our goods, 
we are to submit; but if so situated that we can resist 
legally, we are to resist any unjust demands, and compel 
a suit at law. If the suit at law shall go against 
us, we are to submit gracefully and heartily. The 
teachings of this verse seem to be that the Lord's people 
are to seek to be generous, peaceable and law-abiding 
under all circumstances and conditions. 

WAS THE GOSPEL PREACHED IN ALL THE WORLD 
IN PAUL'S DAY? 

Question.— Please harmonize Matt. 24:14 and 
Col. 1:23, with your teachings. 

Answer.— The statement of Matt. 24:14 does 
not imply that the whole world will receive the gospel 
and be converted by it, before the end of the Gospel 
age. Quite to the contrary, it expressly states that 
the preaching is to be for "a witness to the nations." 
From the form of your question, it would appear that 
you consider Col. 1:6 to mean that the gospel had 
already been preached to all the world in the Apostle 
Paul's day. If this be your thought, it is evidently 
quite incorrect, because, if the gospel had already 
been preached to every nation at that time, the end of 
the Gospel age should have come at that time, as our 
Lord declared, and the Millennial Kingdom should 
have been set up and Satan been bound eighteen centuries 
ago. Besides, as we look over all the world to-day, 

R2518 : page 218 

we know that neither now nor at any time in the 
past has the gospel converted all the world: the most 
we can say to-day is that now, finally, the gospel has 
been preached as a witness to every nation— the Bible, 
which is the gospel message, has been translated into 
all the national tongues of the world, and thus every 
nation (through some representatives) has been made 
acquainted with the letter of God's message, at least; 
and this is in full agreement with our position that we 
are now in the "harvest" time or end of this gospel 
age, and in the dawning of the Millennium. 

In respect to Col. 1:23, we will suppose that you 
refer to the clause which says, "The gospel which ye 



have heard, and which was preached to every creature 
which is under heaven." To assume, as you evidently 
do, that this implies that the gospel was already 
preached to every creature under heaven in the Apostle's 
day, and hence that there would be no need of a 
presentation of Christ to any in the future, because all 
have had a full and fair opportunity of knowing of the 
grace of God in the present life, is a most unreasonable 
interpretation of the Apostle's words. We submit 
to you that his meaning is as follows:— 

God's grace for over two thousand years was restricted 
to Abraham and his seed,— the one nation of 
Israel; and was not sent to any other nation under 
heaven. (Amos 3:2.) And even when the gospel 
"began to be preached by our Lord," it was restricted 
to the same "lost sheep of the house of Israel" 
(Matt. 15:24): it was not until Israel had stumbled 
through unbelief, and been rejected of God (Matt. 23:37,38), 
and after our Lord Jesus had "tasted death 
for every man," "for the sins of the whole world," and 
had risen from the dead, "Lord of all," that he authorized 
the preaching of the gospel to others than the 
Jews— to the Gentiles. His message was, "Go ye and 
teach all nations," etc. In harmony with this the 
Apostle tells us in Col. 1:23 that the gospel which 
we have heard is open to every human creature under 
heaven— there is no longer any restriction of it to the 
Jews. The difficulty in the translation is in the word 

R2519 : page 218 

to: the proper thought would be better conveyed by 
the word for. The Greek word here is en, and altho 
its strict meaning is in, yet it is frequently used in the 
sense of for, being so translated six times in the New 
Testament. Instances: "If ye be reproached for the 
name of Christ." (1 Pet. 4:14.) "Well reported of 
for good works." (1 Tim. 5:10.) "Think they shall 
be heard for their much speaking" (Matt. 6:7), etc. 

"I, IF I BE LIFTED UP, WILL DRAW ALL MEN." 



Question.— What is meant by "lifted up" in our 
Lord's expression, "I, if I be lifted up, will draw all 
men unto me"? 

Answer.— The primary thought undoubtedly is 
our Lord's crucifixion— his lifting up on the cross, as 
the great sin-offering on behalf of "the sins of the 
whole world." It is as a result or consequence of this 
sacrifice that all the blessings which God has purposed 
and promised shall eventually come to our race. Until 
the atonement for our sin had been made, nothing 
permanent could be done for man's release; for the 
sentence upon him was a death sentence. Our Lord's 



lifting up was as the antitype of the brazen serpent 
which Moses lifted up in the wilderness, looking to 
which the Israelites, bitten by the fiery serpents, were 
healed,— in type of how the world of mankind, bitten 
by sin, poisoned and dying, may have life through the 
exercise of faith in the Redeemer, based upon his great 
sacrifice— his lifting up as our redemption price. 

A secondary thought connected with this passage 
would be that our Lord's obedience in laying down 
his life as our sin-offering led directly to his own exaltation 
to power and great glory, as the Apostle has 
stated it, "Wherefore God hath highly exalted him, 
and given him a name that is above every name, that 
at the name of Jesus every knee should bow, ...and 
that every tongue should confess that Jesus Christ is 
Lord, to the glory of God the Father."— Phil. 2:10,11. 

It is by reason of our Lord's lifting up, in both of 
these senses, that the blessing is to come to the world. 
His lifting up as the sin-offering was our purchase-price; 
his lifting up in exaltation as our great Prophet, 
Priest and King, is equally necessary to the drawing 
of the world of mankind, and the resultant blessing 
upon all who yield to the drawing influence. 

While considering this passage, it is well to have 
a proper thought in mind respecting the drawing. 
That our Lord is not drawing all men to himself at the 
present time is evident to every one: moreover, the 
Scriptures assure us that he is not drawing men at the 
present time: on the contrary, his own words are that 
during the present age the Father does all the drawing: 
"No man cometh unto me, except the Father 
which sent me draw him." The drawing by the Son 
will not begin until the drawing by the Father has accomplished 
its intended purpose. That purpose, as 
Scripturally expressed, is "to take out of them a people 
for his name"— to gather out of the world an elect 
Church as a bride for his Son, to bear the name of 
Christ, to be his Bride and joint-heir, "members in 
particular of his body." 

When the election of this Gospel age shall have 
accomplished this purpose, and the Church shall have 
been glorified, Bride and Bridegroom made one, then 
will begin the time in which the Son will "draw all 
men," the world of mankind, as the Father has been 
drawing the Church during this age. In this work of 

R2519 : page 219 

drawing all men, the Church will be associated with 
the Lord as "members of his body," of which he is 
"the head over all, God blessed forever." 

It has required this entire Gospel age to lift up, 
first the Head, and afterward the members of his body, 
joint-sacrificers with him. When all the sufferings of 
Christ are ended, and the last member of the body 
has finished his course in death, then, through the 



power of the first resurrection (which began with our 
Lord, and will finish with the change of the last member 
of his body) the entire Church will be lifted up in 
the secondary sense, of exaltation, and then will begin 
the work of drawing the world— pointing all to the 
great sin-offering finished at Calvary. 

That our Lord meant by this expression, "lifted 
up," more than his own crucifixion is evident from 
his words, "When ye have lifted up the Son of Man, 
then shall ye know that I am he." The Jews do not 
yet know Christ as the Messiah: and this is an additional 
proof that his words include the lifting up, the 
crucifying, of all the members of his body— the Church. 

The drawing does not mean, as some have erroneously 
supposed, a compulsory forcing of mankind. 
Some Universalists have used this passage as tho it 
supported their contention; but rightly understood it 
is quite to the contrary. It intimates that the Lord 
will exert a drawing and helpful influence upon all 
men, but nevertheless leave their own wills free to act; 
for he seeketh such to worship him as worship him in 
spirit and in truth. In proof that the word, "drawing," 
as used in the Scriptural sense, does not signify 
compulsion, note well the fact that the Father's drawing 
during this Gospel age has not been compulsory: 
it has consisted of enlightenment and help and opportunities 
which may be either accepted or resisted by 
all who experience the drawing. Thus we are distinctly 
told concerning this calling and drawing that "Many 
are called, but few chosen;" because few make their 
calling and election sure by obedience to the terms of 
the call. So, too, it will be during the Millennial age; 
the light, the opportunities, the general influence of 
that time, will be so favorable, that "all shall come to 
a knowledge of the truth" (1 Tim. 2:4; Isa. 1 1:9) and 
to opportunities of harmony with God. And it shall 
come to pass that the soul who will not hear (obey) 
that Prophet, Priest and King, then in power, shall 
be cut off from amongst his people— in the Second 
Death. -Acts 3:23. 



R2520 : page 219 

ENCOURAGING THE TEMPLE BUILDERS. 

SEPT. 10.-HAG. 2:1-9. 

"Be strong, all ye people of the land, saith 
the Lord, and work, for I am with you." 

HAGGAI'S prophecy dates from a period fifteen 
years after the return of Israel from Babylonian 
captivity. In our last lesson we saw the corner-stone 
of the Temple laid with much rejoicing and 



hope, but it would appear that the builders soon became 
discouraged, and practically gave up the work. 
We are to remember that the work of reconstructing 
their homes, gardens, etc., would be considerable, and 
would keep them very busy for years. Besides, a new 
ruler of the Medo-Persian empire had succeeded Cyrus, 
viz., Cambyses, and he with his hordes of soldiery 
had passed through Palestine en route for Egypt, 
which he conquered, and doubtless both going and returning 
the large number of poorly disciplined soldiers 
did considerable looting, and thus discouraged 
the hopes of those who so confidently looked for a 
return of national prosperity. 

But apparently a considerable portion of the difficulty 
lay in a lukewarmness toward religion. The 
people, it would seem, had provided themselves with 
comfortable houses, gardens, etc., while the Temple, 
the Lord's house, lay desolate. This is implied in the 
Prophet's words. (Haggai 1:4-6.) Haggai not only 
came as a reprover of the people's neglect, but also as 
an encourager to a reformation in this matter. He 
pointed out to them that their crops were small, and 
prosperity was lacking, because they had neglected to 
honor the Lord with their substance. We remember 
that this was the Lord's covenant with Israel as a nation 
—that they should have temporal prosperities as 
a reward for faithfulness to the Lord, and temporal 
adversities as a punishment for neglect of their religious 
obligations. Hence the Prophet's words would 
be recognized by the people as in full accord with the 
Lord's predictions through Moses. (Deut. 28:1-42.) 
And the appeal seems to have had the desired effect. 
The people began to realize that in neglecting the 
Lord's cause, and merely caring for their own temporalities, 
they had not only dishonored God, but 
had also justly hindered their own temporal prosperity. 
In consequence, a revival of religious interest 
followed, and the Temple reconstruction began again. 

Many have failed to note the distinct difference 
between God's covenant with fleshly Israel and his 
covenant with Spiritual Israel, and therefore are inclined 
to apply the above reasoning to Christian people 
of the present time, and to say that if anyone is 
not prosperous financially and socially it is an indication 
of his lack of religion and of divine disfavor. But 
the very reverse of this is frequently true now. If we 
see an individual, or a company of individuals, very 
prosperous in temporal things, experience would lead 

R2520 : page 220 

us to question whether or not the prosperous ones 
were living as near to God as when they were less 
prosperous, and whether or not their prosperity might 
imply extra danger from "the cares of this life and 
the deceitfulness of riches."— Mark 4:19. 



True, riches do not in every case indicate worldliness. 
Apparently the Lord occasionally finds some 
earnest and faithful children to whom he can entrust 
a stewardship of riches for the furtherance of his 
cause, without injury; but observation shows that 
such instances are rare, and that as a rule not many 
great, not many rich, not many wise, not many learned, 
hath God chosen, but the poor of this world, rich 
in faith, to be heirs of the Kingdom.— 1 Cor. 1:27. 

If it be inquired, then, Wherein is the parallelism 
which we should expect to find between God's dealings 
with fleshly Israel under the Law Covenant, and 
his dealings with Spiritual Israel under the New Covenant? 
we answer, The parallelism is there, but on a 
higher plane. The Spiritual Israelite who is faithful 
to God will grow rich spiritually in deed and in truth, 
but if unfaithful to God he will grow poor spiritually 
in deed and in truth. And those who are poor in temporal 
things may be rich in spiritual things, but in 
any case will find that "godliness with contentment is 
great gain"— true riches. 

The date of Haggai's prophecy is given as the 
second year of the reign of Darius (1:1), but this 
Darius was not the one who succeeded Belshazzar, 
but Hystaspes, who succeeded Cambyses. 

Haggai's message, as presented in the first chapter, 
had evidently aroused an interest in religion, as 
intended; and so we find that the second chapter, of 
which our lesson is a part, is in the nature of an exhortation 
and encouragement to "the people of the 
land." And by the way, this expression, which fifteen 
years before was considered applicable to the foreigners 
residing in Palestine, is now applied to the 
returned exiles; they were henceforth the people of the 
land,— God's people in the Land of Promise. The 
encouragement, extended to the governor, the chief 
priest, and the people in general, was an exhortation 
to be strong in the Lord and in the power of his might; 
and the basis of the encouragement was in the declaration, 
"I am with you, saith the Lord of hosts." 

It is a mistake to suppose that God's people always 
need a berating. It is well to remember the 
weaknesses and discouragements with which all contend, 
and to administer the oil and wine of consolation 
and encouragement. We are to remember that 
when the Lord's people are weak in confidence in 
themselves is the most hopeful time to cultivate in 
themselves and each other a spirit of reliance upon the 
Lord and confidence in him. Fain would we say to 
the Lord's spiritual children these words of the Prophet, 
"Be strong, saith the Lord, and work, for I am 
with you." 

It is when the Lord's people begin to feel that the 
Lord is afar off, and that they are depending on themselves 
or on each other, and when they realize their 
weaknesses, that discouragement is apt to creep in— 



especially upon those who, having returned from mystic 
Babylon, are seeking to build again the spiritual 
Temple, the Church, the Temple of the living God. 
There are many temptations to these to attend to 
earthly affairs, to build their own reputations and 
earthly prosperity, and to neglect the great work for 
which ostensibly they came out of Babylon. Let all 
such take courage from the Word of the Lord, through 
Haggai, "I am with you; be strong and work." To 
those who have no interest in the work the message 
respecting the Lord's presence will be undesirable; 
but it encourages and strengthens the truly devoted 
who are merely discouraged by the fightings without 
and within. 

The Lord, through the Prophet, called the attention 
of the Israelites to the fact that he had made a 
covenant with them after they had come out of Egypt, 
assuring them of his willingness to perform it; and 
that his spirit, his power, his energy, was in their 
midst to guide, to overrule and to bless, and on this 
account they should not fear nor be discouraged. And 
if that Law Covenant, given at the hands of Moses, 
and ratified with the blood of bulls and of goats, was 
a cause of encouragement to fleshly Israel, much more 
should Spiritual Israel remember the New Covenant, 
and its new Mediator, who ever liveth to make intercession 
for us, and to regard our welfare at the throne 
of the heavenly grace; and the precious blood by 
which this New Covenant was ratified. Spiritual Israel 
may well say, I will not fear; for if God so loved 
us while we were yet sinners, much more now that we 
are accepted in the beloved are we the special objects 
of divine care and grace. 

The message of vss. 6-9 was doubtless considerable 
of a riddle to the Israelites who heard it. It seemed 
an extravagant statement; indeed, it was so, if applied 
to the house which they were seeking to reconstruct. 
But the holy spirit, through the Apostle, shows us 
that this prophecy did not relate wholly nor even specially 
to the literal Temple at Jerusalem, but to the 
symbolic Temple, the Temple of God, "which temple 
are ye"— the Church of the living God, whose names 
are written in heaven. This Gospel Church is the 
"latter house" or Temple, Spiritual Israel, as the 
former house was natural Israel, represented in the 
natural Jerusalem and its Temple. Ours is the New 
Jerusalem and our Temple is being built by the new 

R2520 : page 221 

Master-builder himself, as it is written, "Ye are his 
workmanship." (Eph. 2:10.) The Apostle shows 
us that Christ Jesus himself is the great Corner-Stone 
of this house of sons, and that all of the faithful followers 
of Christ are being shaped, fitted, polished, prepared, 
as "living stones," for places in this an ti typical Temple, 



whose builder and maker is God.— 1 Pet. 2:7; 
Heb. 11:10. 

It is only when we get a glimpse through the 
New Testament of the glory, honor and immortality 
which shall attach to the great spiritual Temple now 
under construction, and realize by faith the "glory 
that shall be revealed in us," in God's due time, that 
we can realize even slightly the significance of the 
words of the Prophet, "The glory of this latter house 
shall be greater than of the former, saith the Lord of 
hosts: and in this place will I give peace." 

The peace and joy and blessing which the world 
needs and craves cannot come, will not come, until 
this latter house of the Lord's building shall be completed 
and filled with his glory— until the elect Church, 
whose Head is Christ Jesus, shall be given the Kingdom, 
the dominion of earth— then a King shall reign 
in righteousness and princes shall execute judgment, 
the knowledge of the Lord shall fill the whole earth, 
and none shall need to say to his neighbor, Know 
thou the Lord, and great shall be the peace of that 
Millennial day, when the Prince of Peace shall reign. 
-Luke 12:32; Rev. 5:10; Isa. 11:9; 32:1; 54:13. 

R2521 : page 221 

This prophecy respecting the shaking of the heavens 
and the earth is quoted in Heb. 12:26, and we 
there have an inspired comment upon it, showing that 
it will be fulfilled in the end of this Gospel age, and 
that it is a symbolic shaking and signifies the removal 
of everything that is unstable, transitory, imperfect, 
—in the great time of trouble with which this age will 
end and the Millennial age be ushered in. The Apostle 
assures us that the expression, "Yet once more," signifies 
a finality; that there will never more be requirement 
for shaking, for revolution, for changes, because 
with this great shaking, this great change, will be 
ushered in that perfection of the new order of things 
which cannot be shaken— the Kingdom of God 
conditions. 

The shaking of all nations is here, as everywhere, 
associated with the glory of the Temple: in other 
words, the Scriptures show that the time of great 
trouble upon the world, in which all the Kingdoms of 
this world and its various institutions, religious, political, 
social, shall fall, will be the very time when 
God's Kingdom, God's Church, shall be "set up" in 
power and great glory; to be his agency in blessing 
the world. And not only here but elsewhere we are 
assured that when this shall take place the Desire of 
all nations shall come. 

All peoples have been looking with more or less 
earnestness and sincerity for a just and good government, 
however blindly they may have sought it, because 
the prince of this world has blinded the minds 



of them that believe not through the weakness of their 
judgment and the selfishness of their hearts. But 
when the vail shall be taken away, and the blind shall 
see out of their obscurity, and God's Kingdom shall 
have come and established peace and good will amongst 
men, and when the knowledge of the Lord shall have 
been caused to fill the earth, and when the evil-doers 
shall have been cut off from life, in the Second Death, 
verily then the Desire of all nations will have come, 
and the desire of the Creator will have come too,— for 
God's will shall yet be done on earth as it is done in 
heaven, as prophesied in our Lord's prayer.— 
Matt. 6:10. 

Silver and gold, in the restoration of the Temple, 
seem to have been lacking; hence the Lord's declaration 
that all the gold and all the silver are his. In the 
antitypical Temple construction, it at times appears as 
tho the silver of divine truth were lacking, and the 
gold of the divine character insufficient, but all who 
have confidence in the Lord may rely upon his assurance 
that he has all things needful for the accomplishment 
of his purposes— "the Lord knoweth them 
that are his," therefore, in the language of the text, 
let us all be strong, and work, for God is with us; we 
are merely co-workers together with him. He will 
surely accomplish the great work he has promised; 
the spiritual Temple shall be built: but our individual 
blessing in connection with it will be in proportion as 
we have been strong in the Lord and full of faith and 
full of zeal, co-workers together with him. "I am 
with you,. ..work!" 



R2521 : page 221 

"MY GRACE IS SUFFICIENT FOR THEE." 

SEPT. 17.-ZECH. 4:1-14. 

"Not by might nor by power, but by my spirit, saith the Lord of hosts. 

ZECHARIAH the Prophet was a priest as well, 
and was a young man at the time of his return 
under the governor, Zerubbabel, from the Babylonian 
captivity. As a prophet he was the successor 
of Haggai, who was now old, and his career as such 
began in the second year of Darius Hystaspes, and 
continued about two years. It was part of his mission 
to encourage Zerubbabel and all who labored in the 
construction of the Temple, and who were beset by 
innumerable oppositions, difficulties, etc.— Neh. 12:4-7; 
Zech. 1:1; Ezra 5:1; 6:14; 7:1. 
There are two general views respecting this and 

R2521 : page 222 



all prophecies; one of these, the one favored by the 
"higher critics," is that the prophets of the Old Testament 
Scriptures were men of high moral attainment 
and faith in God's promises, who realized in advance 
of others and more keenly the true situation of things, 
and of their own volition, prompted by their own 
faith and zeal, exhorted the people, in parables that 
would be helpful, instructive, encouraging, etc. The 
other view is that God had the faith in his own promises 
and arrangements, and that he miraculously operated 
upon certain chosen persons, so that "holy men 
of old spake as they were moved by the holy spirit" 
—things which were not their own thoughts, but 
which encouraged themselves and inspired their own 
faith and zeal, as well as the faith and zeal of all about 
them. This view of the prophets and their prophecies 
gives the glory to God, and makes of the words of the 
prophets messages from God, and hence authoritative 
and reliable, while the fervent utterances of the very 
best men could not be considered reliable; but, as we 
all know, are frequently faulty, because of the fallibility 
of their authors. The Apostle Peter asserts 
this last view of the matter, and contradicts the former 
one.-l Pet. 1:10-12. 

Any other view than the latter would make the 
prophecies valueless as prophecies to the Church of 
to-day. It is not until we realize that the prophecies, 
altho having some force and application to the times 
in which they were written, have a special force and 
application to us, as the antitypical Israel, and to the 
building of the antitypical Temple, that we get the 
true force, value and beauty of these prophecies— a 
force and meaning that is entirely lost to those who 
take the higher criticism view, and reduce the prophets 
of olden times to the level of street-corner preachers, 
who expressed truth in crude forms and figures, 
blended with considerable of untruth and human 
misjudgment. 

Altogether the Lord gave the Prophet Zechariah 
seven different visions; and the fifth of the series is 
the subject of this lesson. It showed a large golden 
candlestick, or, as we would say, lampstand, with a 
large central bowl, and seven branches therefrom, 
each of which terminated in a lamp. The prophet, 
no doubt, was somewhat familiar with such a lamp, 
since it in many particulars corresponded to the one 
made by divine direction, and kept in the holy apartment 
of the Tabernacle, and later of the Temple. The 
Prophet knew that this lamp represented in some manner 
divine favor, enlightenment and blessing as connected 
with the promises made to Israel. But the 
lampstand of the vision had a peculiarity all its own, 
for the Prophet beheld also two olive trees connected 
with it by golden pipes. (Vs. 12.) Thus the Lord indicated 
that the supply of oil for Israel's candlestick 



and the supply of Israel's light was an inexhaustible 
one. 

No doubt the Prophet himself, and those in that 
day who heard his prophecy, drew from this vision a 
considerable amount of blessing and encouragement. 
To them it would speak of the Lord's continued favor 
with them, notwithstanding the persecutions and difficulties 
on every hand. Quite probably they interpreted 
these two olive trees to represent in some manner 
the kingly and the priestly offices in Israel, which 
offices were now represented by Zerubbabel, the governor, 
and Joshua, the high priest, God's special representatives 
in the work of restoring Israel. No doubt 
the Lord wished those to whom Zechariah prophesied 
to get just such encouragement, and arranged that 
these two leaders of the people should be types of the 
Royal Priest— Christ Jesus. 

Nevertheless, we believe that there is a much 
higher significance to the vision than this, for we find, 
not only the golden candlestick, but also the two olive 
trees, mentioned six hundred years later, in our Lord's 
revelation given to the Apostle John on the Isle of 
Patmos: and this is conclusive proof that the vision 
was more than merely a parable by Zechariah, and 
farther reaching than merely the encouragement of 
the builders of the typical Temple. We will not here 
enter into the subject in detail, but merely call attention 
to the fact that the seven lamps or candlesticks 
shown in united form to the Prophet are shown 
as separate and distinct in the Book of Revelation, 
where each of the seven Churches, or the seven epochs 
of the history of the Church, is represented by a separate 
candlestick, or lamp.— Rev. 1:12,20; 2:5; 11:4. 

The message sent to Zerubbabel, the governor, no 
doubt carried with it the intended blessing and encouragement 
to that officer, and was in full accord 
with the candlestick vision. He was to learn, and all 
the people with him, that the success of their work 
was not by the might, influence and favor of the Persian 
monarch to whom they were subject, nor by the 
power and numbers and ability of themselves, as laborers 
and defenders of their cause against their nearby 
neighbors, the Samaritans. They were to learn that 
the success of their efforts should be attributed to God, 
whose holy spirit, power, influence, would guide and 
control the affairs of that nation, and accomplish in 
his own time and way the gracious things which he 
had promised them. 

"Who art thou, O great mountain? Before Zerubbabel 
thou shalt become a plain." 

This probably referred to the mountain of difficulty 
which stood in the way of the Lord's work, and 
which had for some time prevented its completion, and 

R2522 : page 223 



at the present moment was a serious menace. The 
Lord's assurance, through the Prophet, was that the 
Temple should be completed, shall be finished; and not 
only so, but that Zerubbabel, who had laid the foundation 
stone, should also have the honor and privilege 
of completing it with the head-stone or cap-stone, and 
that when completed there would be great rejoicing 
and appreciation of the work, acclamations of "Grace, 
grace, unto it!" In harmony with this, Israel was 
exhorted, "Despise not the day of small things"— 
small beginnings, feeble efforts, discouraging conditions, 
etc.,— but to consider Zerubbabel the master-builder, 
the plummet-user, and to recognize the Lord's 
wisdom and power with him. 

But the language used in this connection is entirely 
too strong to be applied solely to the insignificant 
little temple built by Zerubbabel and his associates. 
As we have seen that the former part of this vision 
applied to fleshly Israel only typically, so we see that 
this part also applies to Israel, and to Zerubbabel and 
to Joshua only typically. 

Looking for the antitype, we find it in Spiritual 
Israel, the spiritual Temple, which God is building. 
In Zerubbabel and Joshua we find the kingly and 
priestly offices of our Lord Jesus represented in two 
parts— the word Joshua in the Hebrew signifies Savior, 
and in the Greek is Jesus, and the name Zerubbabel, 
as we have already seen, signifies Born in Babylon. 
The particular time typified would be the present time, 
when God's people are returning from Babylon, and 
when the work of Temple-reconstruction is in progress. 

Our Lord Jesus himself laid the foundation of the 
spiritual Temple, and he himself will complete it as its 
top-stone, and it shall be acclaimed glorious, not only 
by men, but by angels, in God's due time. The work 
is in his hand, and altho from outward appearances at 
the present time there may seem to be discouragements, 
and little progress may seem to have been 
made, yet his servants should be of good courage and 
should remember that their victory is to come, not 
through human might, popularity and influence, nor 
by their own power, but by the Lord's spirit. The 
possession of his faith and his spirit will give us the 
victory over the world, the flesh and the Adversary, 
and make us more than conquerors through him who 
loved us and bought us with his own precious blood. 
Our struggles, our efforts, our building, are all on a 
discouragingly small and insignificant scale, but we 
see not and build not the real Temple, the living 
stones. We see each other according to the flesh, to 
some extent, despite our efforts to know no man 
after the flesh, and to recognize each other only as 
new creatures in Christ. We look more or less, however 
unintentionally, at the things that are seen, 
which are temporal and imperfect. We think more or 
less of the work of construction from the standpoint 



of numbers, influence, outward polish, etc. Instead, 
we should be looking unto Jesus, the author of our 
faith, who laid the foundation-stone, and who is to be 
the finisher of it, and is the cap, the climax, of his 
great and wonderful work, the new creation in glory. 
-Heb. 12:2. 

The "great mountain" of the present is the great 
kingdom of the Evil One, which has the appearance 
of being immovable, but which now speedily, in the 
great time of trouble and "shaking," shall pass away, 
leaving a plain, a highway of holiness on which whosoever 
wills of the world of mankind may return by 
restitution to full harmony with God under the great 
Prophet, Priest and King. 

The antitypical Temple will be complete when 
the power of the most high, represented by the oil of 
the candlestick, the holy spirit, shall rear up the living 
Temple in resurrection power (from the dead) in 
the likeness of our Lord, in glory, honor and immortality. 
Then the glory of the Lord will fill the spiritual 
Temple! Then will be the shoutings, "Grace, 
grace, unto it!" Then will begin the great work of 
blessing all the families of the earth, and the blessing 
shall flow from this spiritual Temple, a river of water 
of life, clear as crystal,— as seen in our lesson of 
August 20. 

From this standpoint only, as applicable to the 
antitypical Zerubbabel, can we understand the reference 
to the "seven eyes" of the Lord which run to and 
fro through the whole earth. We can see that the 
eyes of the Lord (his perfect and much diversified 
wisdom) are necessary to be exercised throughout the 
whole world in connection with the work of preparing 
the living stones and rearing up the antitypical Temple 
in the hands of the antitypical Zerubbabel, but we 
could not see how divine wisdom would be necessary 
in all parts of the earth to take supervision of the 
building of the little typical temple by the typical 
Zerubbabel. 

No one can rightly appreciate the hopes and ambitions 
aroused in the minds of the Jewish nation by 
the Lord through the holy prophets, except as he realizes 
the fact that Spiritual Israel has taken the place 
in large measure of natural Israel, whose branches 
were broken off, that we who were of the Gentiles 
might be grafted in and become heirs of the chiefest, 
the heavenly, the spiritual features of those promises. 
Nevertheless, we are to remember that there are also 
earthly features of those promises, which the Apostle 
assures us are still sure, and reserved for the natural 
seed of Abraham, and through the latter to extend to 
all the families of the earth, that whosoever will may 
become of the earthly seed of Abraham: for Abraham's 
seed is to be of two parts— "as the stars of heaven" 
and "as the sand of the seashore."— Rom. 11:26-33; 
Gen. 22:17. 



SEPT. 24TH.--REVIEW. 



page 223 

Golden Text— "The angel of the Lord encampeth 
round about them that fear him, and delivereth 
them."-Psa. 34:7. 



R2522 : page 224 

AN INTERESTING LETTER. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I thought I would 
drop you a few lines as to my experience in my recently 
begun work as a colporteur. In company with Brothers 
Richardson and Barbour I came to Washington, Pa., 
a nice town of about 20,000 population. For the most 
part its people are very intelligent and independent. 
I found DAWNS and tracts in many of the houses, and 
a strong feeling of suspicion as well as of opposition 
against both. For this the ministers of the place are 
evidently responsible; the most of them had never 
read what they blindly oppose. Thus they are guilty 
of expressing judgment in advance of knowledge! 

The WATCH TOWER readers have just distributed 
The Bible vs. the Evolution Theory. In a majority of 
the houses at which I called I found that excellent 
booklet, and upon inquiry learned that nearly all who 
had it had read it with benefit, and some were loud 
in their praise of such "a good and timely tract." On 
the strength of this tract many gave me their orders 
for DAWNS, saying that "the author of such a tract 
would certainly produce a readable and profitable 
book." One old "brother" said he "knew something 
heavier was coming." He gave me his order for the 
books that he might learn more of the truth. 

One of the ministers of the city was very industriously 
engaged in misrepresenting the DAWN, going 
about from house to house counseling his flock not to 
read the book, but to exercise the same caution concerning 
it as they would relative to a dose of poison. He 
told some of them that if they had any faith at all the 
book would eclipse it with the darkness of unbelief. 
That if they had the least hope, they would be deprived 
of it should they read the DAWN! This "shepherd" 
and I came near forming acquaintance; he was 
always one door ahead of me! The first house I saw 
him come out of I went into. The "lady of the house" 
recognized me as if by instinct. "Good morning," 



I said. "Good morning, Sir; you are the man that's 

around with that book, MILLENNIAL DAWN?" "Yes; 

and I will be only too glad to call your attention to 

the book for just a few moments." "Oh, no! our 

minister was just here and told me not to read the 

book, nor receive you into my house, nor bid you God-speed, 

for your book was full of infidelity, and neither 

you nor the book believed in God, heaven or hell." 

I replied, "Sister, I am confident the minister never 
read the book,— does not know what it contains, and 
am sure he is entirely wrong, for the book treats on 
all these subjects; and, besides, if you will read it, 
you will find as much hell taught as you could 
wish." "Oh, well, if that is the kind of a book it is 
you may bring it to me," said she. I thanked her, 
and in leaving the house was just in time to see the 
good minister emerging from another house. 

I made my way to this residence and was received 
with a way-below-zero air, and at once told that "We 
do not want the book, and would not give it house-room." 
The minister, she said, had told her not to 
read the book, and that was enough for her! I said, 
"Lady, do you do everything your minister tells you 
to do?" She said, "No, not everything." I said, "If 
he would tell you to put your head in the fire, would 
you do that?" "No," said she. Then with true 
womanly curiosity she inquired: "What's in the book, 
anyway? It must be a funny book, everybody has so 
much to say about it." This opened the way, and 
after rehearsing some of the leading points she said: 
"If it's a book like that you may bring it, for I have 
often wondered what was to become of the heathen, 
anyway!" I recorded her order, and in leaving was 
just in time to catch a glimpse of my adversary leaving 
another house. I was soon in the presence of the 
"lady of the house," who at once advised me that I 
was wasting time at her house with the book; that 
when she wanted to read Ingersoll she would procure 
his works! I said, "Now, lady, why don't you want 

R2523 : page 224 

my book? I am sure it contains heart-satisfying and 
mind-catching explanations of the very things you wish 
to know about, and concerning which you have inquired 
of your minister and others many times, only to 
be left in the dark. You have, I am sure, been all 
your life querying respecting how the death of your 
Redeemer and the love and justice of God can and will 
affect the heathen. How and what will be the general 
judgment? When and how God's Kingdom will 
come and his will be done on earth as it is in heaven? 
Why God has permitted evil so wide an influence? etc. 
You have never found satisfactory answers to these 
questions, but can have them now in the MILLENNIAL 
DAWN. Besides, a lady of your intelligence should 



read for herself, as I am sure you do." "Well," said 
she, "bring me the first volume, and if it holds out, I 
will have the rest." I thanked her, adding, "I am 
confident you will have all the books. You do not 
look like a woman who will abide having her reading 
matter selected for her. The book may cut the corners 
of your creed, but"—. "I don't care anything about 
the creed, I never read the creed! I don't know it. 
Bring me all the books! How much are they?" she 
interrupted. 

It is strange how little mental and moral independence 
some people have! Yet, there are instances 
where some go to extremes with what they do possess. 
For instance, in this town of Washington is a beautiful 
college building filled with the young of both 
sexes. The learned "Doctor" who presides over the 
institution, told Brother Barbour, who was presenting 
the claims of DAWN, that when he was a young man 
the question of the second coming of Christ troubled 
him very much. But as he grew in years and wisdom 
(?) the question did not bother him any more, 
and said: "I have absolutely no interest in the question 
of the second coming of Christ, and do not wish 
anything to do with the question." "No, young 
man, I don't want your book." 

Altho I have been a minister of the gospel for 
nearly a quarter of a century and thought I knew 
something about matters and things, yet I realize that 
much of that service, tho rendered in all good conscience, 
seems to have been worse than wasted, for 
evidently my conceptions of the character and work of 
God were to a considerable extent decidedly wrong. 
Now with more correct and enlightened views of the 
lengths and breadths, and heights and depths of the 
justice, wisdom, love and power of our Heavenly 
Father, I am glad to avail myself of this new ministry 
which enables me to leave from sixteen to fifty printed 
sermons with the truth-hungry with whom I meet. 

Praying the blessing of our Heavenly Father upon 
you, dear brother, and that you may be spared to us 
and to his service unto the end, I am, 

Yours in his service, C. W. COOPER. 



page 209 



SEPTEMBER & OCTOBER ISSUES 
Will Be Millennial Dawn, Volume V. 



page 209 



SEPTEMBER & OCTOBER ISSUES 
Will Be Millennial Dawn, Volume V. 



page 224 
Vol. XX. NOVEMBER 1, 1899. No. 21. 



CONTENTS. 



The Volunteer Work 226 

The Boston and St. Louis Conventions 227 

Which is the True Gospel? 228 

The Gospel According to Catholicism 228 

The Gospel Presented by Calvinism 229 

The Arminian View of the Gospel 230 

Nehemiah's Consecration and Prayer 233 

Nehemiah's Faith and Works 236 

Interesting Letters 239 

page 226 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
--ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, N.Y. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity or 
adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, if they 
send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting the 
paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list 
continually. 



R2523 : page 226 

THE VOLUNTEER WORK 

In our issue of April 15 the offer was made that wherever the 
friends of present truth would volunteer to serve the Lord and 
his brethren by distributing the booklet, The Bible vs. the Evolution 
Theory, to the Church people of their cities and towns 
the same (a 5 cent pamphlet) would be supplied free. 

The motive behind this large expenditure is the hope of reaching 
some of the Israelites indeed, in Babylon; and we know of 
no better method of serving the truth to such that is open to 
the majority of those who have pledged themselves living sacrifices 
to lay down their lives for the brethren.— 1 John 3:16 

Brothers and Sisters in all parts of our land and in Great 
Britain promptly responded; and as a result we are only now 



getting ahead of the home demand, and preparing a large shipment 
for England. Now the Transvaal war excitement makes 
it advisable to postpone the distribution in England; and hence 
we inquire for more volunteers at home, who can be promptly 
supplied: our British brethren can be supplied later from those 
now on the press. 

The dear "volunteers" who have already engaged in this service 
report great blessings upon their own hearts in this little service 
for our King and his "brethren." Some, having finished the 
work in their own cities, are reaching out into adjacent towns. 
Some have been led to study the truth because of their appreciation 
of the faithfulness to principle exhibited by these 
"volunteers." 

The volunteers of each town should act in unison, as much 
as possible. Make out your list of Protestant churches in your 
place, and estimate the probable attendance (not membership): 
then appoint one of your number your scribe to report to us the 
number of churches and the number of booklets you can judiciously 
use. All want some part in this "harvest" work. The 
Master says, "He that reapeth receiveth wages [blessings, now] 
and gathereth fruit unto everlasting life." 



R2523 : page 227 

THE BOSTON AND ST. LOUIS CONVENTIONS. 



BLESSED seasons of spiritual refreshing both 
of our conventions proved to be. We have 
every reason to believe that the Lord not only used 
them as channels of blessing to the "brethren" already 
interested, but also to others who came with friends 
or through curiosity. Under the Lord's providence 
the daily press of both cities gave us liberal notices 
which reached some of the Lord's hungry sheep. 

The WATCH TOWER announcement styled these 
"Believers' Conventions,"— as signifying believers in 
God's Word at this time, when so many professed 
Christians are falling into disbelief through the influence 
of the Evolution theory, "higher criticism," infidelity, 
etc. And the word "believers" is widely known 
as signifying adherents to the doctrine of the Second 
Coming of our Lord. We are "believers" and 
hope always to be such, but let us beware of thinking 
of or using this as a distinctive or sectarian name— to 
distinguish and separate us from other Christian believers. 
We do not want to be separated from other 
believers, but to continue to love and cherish and fully 
fellowship all who with us trust in the sure Word of 
God, even tho they do not yet see eye to eye with us 
on all points respecting that Word's teachings. 

The announced programs were pretty generally 
carried out: at Boston addresses were delivered by 



Bros. Thorne and Graham of the Boston company, 
Bro. Alexander of the Yonkers, N.Y., company, Bro. 
Barton of the Philadelphia company, Bro. Weber of 
Maryland, Bro. Lewis of Cohoes, N.Y., Pilgrim Bro. 
McPhail of the Chicago company (who also conducted 
the musical features) and by the Editor of this journal. 
And in the testimony meetings all had good opportunity 
of which very many availed themselves. 
Visitors about 100; attendance on Sunday about 250. 
Many strengthened; all refreshed; and so far as we 
know none disappointed and turned empty away. 

St. Louis had a larger territory to draw from, being 
more central, and the number of visitors was about 
200, and the Sunday attendance about 400. Amongst 
the speakers were Bro. Dann of the St. Louis company 
(who also conducted the musical program), Bro. 
Moffatt of Florida, Bro. Henninges of Allegheny, Bro. 
Owen of Indianapolis, Bro. Weber of Maryland, Pilgrim 
Bros. Willis and Draper, and a number of others. 
Your servant, the Editor of this journal, was obliged 
in obedience to the wishes of the friends, to occupy 

R2524 : page 227 

very much more than his proportion of the time at 
both conventions;— especially at the last one. 

In both Conventions the spirit of love and fellowship 
prevailed; and if even one jar occurred or one 
discordant note sounded, we did not learn of it. The 
local churches had given careful attention to every detail 
of arrangement for the visiting "brethren"— including 
the free entertainment of those who needed 
such provision. Their reception committees in both 
instances were tireless in their loving endeavors to 
make all comfortable. May the Lord abundantly reward 
them each and all ! 

At Boston, symbolic baptism was administered to 
twenty-three, at the hands of Bro. Woodworth. At 
St. Louis forty-one (21 males and 20 females), at 
the hands of Bro. Henninges. Bro. Dann informs us 
that as a result of the Convention they have an increase 
of about 30 in attendance, and that several more 
desire to confess Christ in symbolic baptism. The 
meetings have been forced to move to the more spacious 
quarters at Nineteenth and Morgan streets. 

R2524 : page 228 

As usual, the money question was kept out of notice. 
One dear brother came to us, saying, "Brother 
Russell, I wanted to contribute something toward the 
expenses of this convention, but they will not accept 
it. I want to get even on the matter somehow, so 
you must accept it for the Tract Fund." Another 
dear brother sent ten dollars by mail, saying that he 
could not attend, but wanted a share in the good work 



and would be glad to help meet the expenses of some 
of the poor in attendance. Indeed, several have since 
sent "Convention Thank Offerings" to the Tract Fund. 
"Praise God from whom all blessings flow." 



R2524 : page 228 

WHICH IS THE TRUE GOSPEL? 



From the St. Louis Republic, Oct. 9, 1899. 



Sermon delivered before the St. Louis Convention of Believers in 
the Second Advent, by Pastor C. T. Russell of Allegheny, Pa. 
at the "Tabernacle," cor. Nineteenth 
and Morgan streets, St. Louis, Mo. 
Sunday afternoon, October 8, 1899. 

THE SPEAKER took for his text the words 
of the Apostle, "I am not ashamed of the gospel 
of Christ, for it is the power of God unto salvation 
to every one that believeth."— Rom. 1:16. 

The speaker declared his desire to present a 
true gospel sermon, yet he reflected that this expression, 
"gospel sermon," had become so perverted that 
many Christian people might expect to hear the very 
reverse in some respects of what he would have to say 
on this subject. By common consent a gospel sermon 
has come to be understood to signify the shaking of 
the congregation, and indeed of nearly all mankind, 
over an imaginary abyss of everlasting torture, with 
the effort to intimidate them thereby to a thorough 
reformation of life in hope of thereby escaping an awful 
eternity. True, this gospel of damnation is not so 
generally preached as it once was, because the more 
enlightened minds of cultured people repudiate it as a 
fetish of the past. But it is still to be heard in country 
places, occasionally in a city pulpit and at a camp-meeting, 
and at the street meetings of the Salvation 
Army and at their barracks. The speaker did not 
wish for a moment to criticise the honesty of intention 
of those who thus preach. He was not speaking in 
criticism of persons but of doctrines, when he declared 
such preaching to be as far from the Gospel as the east 
is from the west, as he hoped to show before finishing 
his discourse. 

Before proceeding to present the true Gospel of 
the Scriptures he considered it only proper that he and 
his audience should first hear from the general mass of 
Christian people on this subject. "After eighteen 
centuries of theological study and Christian development 



in thought, what does Christianity present to 

the world to-day as the Gospel of Christ?" The speaker 

begged his hearers to remember that if any remarks 

should be dropped which might be construed as not 

complimentary to any of the creeds of leading denominations, 

no uncomplimentary remarks would be made 

respecting fellow-Christians themselves, for he desired 

to respect every true Christian and his conscientious 

convictions. But in demonstration of the truth he 

found it necessary to hold up some of the published 

creeds of Christendom, and to show their inconsistencies 

in the light of the Scriptures and in the light of 

the intelligent consciences of those who subscribed to 

these creeds, some of whom doubtless had never realized 

fully to what they had committed themselves 

when they affirmed these creeds to be truthful representations 

of their Christian faiths. Everything that 

the speaker would say would be said in the kindest of 

spirit and with the best of intention to lift up the light 

of truth and to draw the hearts of all the Lord's people 

to him, and to put to shame only those elements 

of darkness and falsity which are contrary to the 

Scriptures, contrary to sanctified common sense, contrary 

to all that is holy and just and true. And he 

expected to make his remarks so moderate that not a 

solitary intelligent Christian within the sound of his 

voice could take the slightest exception. 

page 228 

There might be said to be three distinct statements 
of the Gospel— leaving out those of smaller denominations. 
(1) We have the Gospel according to 
Roman Catholicism. (2) The Gospel according to 
Calvinism. (3) The Gospel according to Arminianism. 
Calvinism represents the central thought of the 
great denominations known as Baptists, Presbyterians 
and Congregationalists. Arminianism represents the 
thought of the Methodist family in its various branches, 
and of Free-will Baptists. However, there are 
many affiliated with Calvinistic churches who really 
entertain the Arminian doctrine. So we may say that 
Protestantism is about equally divided between Calvinism 
and Arminianism. Let us examine these three 
Gospels, which represent nominally nearly two hundred 
millions of the civilized world, called 
"Christendom." 

THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ROMAN CATHOLICISM. 



The Gospel according to Roman Catholicism is 
that all men fell into sin and under sentence of eternal 
torment: that Christ accomplished a redemptive 
work which, supplemented by the sacrifice of the mass, 



and by prayers and penances, permits all believers 
(Roman Catholics) to escape that eternal torment, 
which will be the sure portion of all heretics, regardless 
of their good works or morals. As for its own 
people, it holds that even its highest officials, including 
Bishops and Popes, go to Purgatory for refinement, 
purification from sin and to be prepared for heaven. 
It claims that some will spend only a short time in 
Purgatory, assisted out of it by the merit of prayers, 
masses, etc., on their behalf by their friends after 
death. But their expectation is that ultimately Purgatory 
will be no more, its thousands of millions being 

page 229 

prepared for a better and happier condition. But according 

to all the great theologians of Papacy, and 

according to all the papal bulls, all Protestants, all rejecters 

of Papacy's teachings, will suffer endless torment. 

This is the Roman Catholic Gospel, fairly 

presented as we understand it. It does not seem to 

us to be very good news, very good tidings, even to 

those who get the very best it has to offer, and it 

certainly would be very bad tidings to all out of harmony 

with Papacy. 

Let us next look at the great Protestant doctrine 
represented in the word Calvinism— the doctrine of 
the election of the Church and the reprobation of all 
others. 

THE GOSPEL PRESENTED BY CALVINISM. 



Calvinism claims that faith in Christ is essential 
to salvation and it admits that faith comes by hearing 
and hearing by the Word of God. Calvinism requires 
more than a mere knowledge of Christ and belief 
in him as a man. It requires at least some 
manifestation toward righteousness of life before any 
could be recognized as being of the elect Church. 
Consequently, according to Calvinism, the elect Church 
could not include the heathen of the present time and 
all the way back through the past, who have never 
heard of the only name given under heaven or amongst 
men whereby we must be saved. Stretched to its very 
broadest, Calvinism could not include more than one 
in twenty of earth's fifty thousand millions that are 
estimated to have lived from Adam's day until the 
present time. In other words, according to the broadest 
possible estimate of this view, more than forty-seven 
thousand millions of humanity were "passed by" 
as non-elect in the divine plan. And what does this 
mean? It means, according to Calvinism, that God, 
who knew the end from the beginning, before creating 
this world and mankind upon it, determined that 



he would "pass by" and not elect those forty-seven 
thousand millions of his creatures to life and happiness, 
but would predestinate them to an eternity of 
torture, and that carrying out this diabolical plan, he 
prepared a great place large enough to hold forty-seven 
thousand millions, and fuel sufficient to produce the 
necessary combustion there to all eternity— did all this 
with a full appreciation of all the facts and circumstances 
of the case. 

Moreover, we remember the statement of Calvinism 
which many of us learned in our youth, to the effect 
that God's favor toward the elect is not because of 
any worthiness on their part, nor because of any works 
which they had done, but "of his own sovereign grace" 
he saves them from the horrible conditions which he 
has predestinated shall be upon the others. Now if 
the salvation of the elect is not because of their works 
or worthiness, but because of God's sovereign grace 
only, the simplest mind can see that God might without 
any violation of principle have extended that sovereign 
grace to others— to all, since it was not because 
of worthiness nor because of works, but merely of his 
own volition that any are saved,— according to 
Calvinism. 

The celebrated Jonathan Edwards, when preaching 
upon this subject in New England years ago, after 
picturing the awful torment of the non-elect was asked 
the question, Would not the thought of the anguish 
of the lost mar the bliss of God's people in glory? 
His answer in substance was, No; you will be so 
changed that such matters will not affect you; you 
will look over the battlements of heaven and see in 
torment your neighbors and friends, yea, your own 
parents and children, brothers and sisters, and turning 
round will praise God the louder because his justice 
is made manifest. 

Now, my dear friends, I do not charge any who 
are here present with having so false a view of the 
divine character and plan as this. Indeed, I am glad 
to note that our Calvinistic friends in general are repudiating 
this doctrine, realizing that there is in it a 
serious lack, not only as respects divine love, but also 
as respects divine justice. I was glad some years ago 
to note that some of our dear friends were so moved 
by higher and nobler conceptions of the Almighty 
that they wished to rid themselves of any part in so 
blasphemous a statement respecting his character and 
his plan. I was sorry, however, that when the matter 
of "the revision of the Presbyterian standards" was 
taken up it was found that only a minority was in 
favor of revision, and I was still more sorry to note 
that that minority of intelligent, godly people was 
willing to continue to confess to such a horrible misstatement 
of their true views— willing, shall I say, to 
continue to "blaspheme that holy name" because a 
majority of their brethren were unwilling that such 



blasphemous misrepresentations should be 
discontinued. 

I am glad to believe that if this matter were 
brought to the intelligent attention of Presbyterians 
in general, a large majority would be found willing, 
nay, anxious, to undo the wrong and to make such 
reparation as would be within their power, by way of 
honoring the great Jehovah and attesting their appreciation 
of his love and his justice, as well as of his wisdom 
and of his power. This is just the point: Calvinism, 
in its anxiety to establish the wisdom and power 
of God, his foreknowledge and his ability to carry out 
his plan, has conceived of a plan which is far from the 
correct one, lacking both injustice and in love. 

It may be argued that love is a grace and that its 
exercise is not incumbent upon Jehovah; that all that 
could be asked or expected of him would be simple 
justice, and some might be ready to claim that God's 
dealings with these forty-seven thousand millions 
whom he "passed by" was in strict accord with justice; 
but this we deny. We claim that having the 
power to create mankind would not justify their creation 
if the creator saw that the result would be the everlasting 
torture of a single creature. Justice would 
say that power is not to be exercised to the injury of 
another, and that to exercise the creative power under 
such foreknown conditions would be injustice. And 
wisdom attuned to justice would say, Better a thousand 
times never to have created anybody than to have 
created one being to suffer unjustly eternally. 

This statement, dear friends, is a fair, impartial 
statement of the Gospel according to our beloved 
brother John Calvin and those who subscribe to the 
Westminster Confession, and their allies. This surely 

page 230 

is not the gospel of which the Apostle Paul said, 
"I am not ashamed of the gospel of Christ." Paul 
would assuredly have been ashamed of such a gospel, 
and so are all true Christians, who have the true spirit 
of love and justice,— none more so, perhaps, than those 
who unfortunately, through circumstances of birth, 
etc., and hitherto without realizing what it meant, have 
been lending their names and influence to this great 
blasphemy against the divine character. 

THE ARMINIAN VIEW OF THE GOSPEL. 



Let us now examine the Arminian view. This 
view is growingly popular. Its message or gospel is, 
God is love— he loves you; he loves everybody; he is 
doing all that he can to save everybody; if you are 
lost it will not be God's fault, but your own. On the 



surface, at least, this theory seems much more loving 

and much more just than the one already examined, 

but before we go far we will also find it very defective, 

very far from either a reasonable or a Scriptural 

gospel. We will find it inconsistent with its own 

statement— illogical. For instance, while it sounds 

nice theoretically to say that God is doing all that he 

can do to save the whole world at the present time, 

everybody knows that that is not true; that on the 

contrary you or I or any other intelligent human being, 

if possessed of the one-thousandth part of the divine 

power and wisdom could speedily accomplish the evangelization 

of the whole world. Nor will it do to say 

that God has committed himself to a certain mode of 

procedure through his Church, and that if the Church 

fails to contribute with sufficient liberality both money 

and evangelists the heathen will not hear of "the only 

name given under heaven or amongst men whereby 

we must be saved," but will go to eternal torment, 

etc. It will not do to say that God is doing all that 

he can do and is hampered by the lack of interest in 

the church; because his wisdom and foreknowledge 

foresaw all these conditions as they are, and he could 

not justly be excused from the real responsibility of 

the matter, since he is the Creator, and in him is vested 

the all-power as well as the all-wisdom. Such a 

claim as this would be tantamount to saying that God 

has erred in wisdom when he thought to leave the conversion 

of the world to the Church, seeing that the 

Church has not accomplished this. Such a claim 

would be merely excusing God from doing all that he 

can do, instead of showing that he is doing all that 

he can do. 

But let us look more critically into this matter. 
If this view we are criticising is correct, if God is doing 
all that he can do to save the world, and if he has 
been doing this during all the past ages, then without 
question the world's conversion is a hopeless thing, 
and we can never expect to see better results than at 
present. This theory presupposes a race or battle between 
the Almighty and Satan, each seeking to capture 
the human family, and to the discredit of the theory 
it shows Satan the victor thus far. Starting out 
with one pair, both on the Lord's side, the first 1656 
years ended with a flood in which the whole world of 
mankind was blotted out because of wickedness, 
and only eight persons reckoned sufficiently righteous 
to be preserved. Starting again with those eight 
persons counted sufficiently righteous for preservation, 
we find that there are in the world to-day fifteen hundred 
millions, and that out of that whole number there 
are about one hundred millions nominal Roman Catholics 
and one hundred millions nominal Protestants, 
and a very much smaller number of true "saints of 
God." What would be the lesson from this if the Arminian 
theory be correct, that God is doing all he can 



do to save the world? The lesson would be that with 
all his good intentions of love and mercy our God is 
thoroughly incapable of the work he undertook to do. 
And if these are the results in six thousand years, 
what could we hope for in the future? How many 
hundreds of millions of years would it be before the 
whole world would be converted? We answer that 
according to statistics it would never be, for statistics 
show that the natural increase of population throughout 
the world is far, far beyond the proportion of even 
nominal conversions from heathendom. Indeed, according 
to some good reckonings the percentage of 
Christians every year is decreasing, the births of 
heathen lands so far outnumbering the births of Christian 
lands— even counting all the children born in 
Christendom as Christians. 

Is any Christian, in view of these facts, prepared 
to claim that our God has been doing all that he can 
do for the conversion of the world? If so, that Christian 
may as well write upon his hopes at once the 
word "Ichabod." If we saw that the Calvinistic view 
magnifies the wisdom and power of God at the expense 
of his justice, we find on the other hand that the 
Arminian view magnifies the love of God at the expense 
of his character for wisdom and power. The 
true gospel must show the divine Wisdom and Power 
in full accord with his Justice and Love. 

But, my dear friends, we may as well now as at any 
time concede that there is comparatively little difference 
in the outcome of these two popular Protestant 
Gospels— the difference is merely a theoretical one respecting 
how the results are to be reached. The results 
themselves are the same in both cases— the eternal 
doom and torment of over forty-seven thousand 
millions of human creatures. For our Arminian friends 
agree that there is no salvation aside from faith in 
Christ, the only name given; and they admit also that 
of those who believe in Christ only the sanctified are 
of the real Church; and their gospel is also that only 
the real Church is to be saved and that all others are 
to be eternally and most horribly tormented;— some 
claim in literal flames, others say by the torments and 
gnawings of conscience and remorse, which they proceed 
to say will be worse than the literal flames,— 
and we respond, if worse, so much worse for the argument. 
All will surely agree as respects these two 
theories or gospels held out to the world by Protestant 
Christendom that it would make no difference to 
the poor tormented creatures of the forty-seven thousand 
millions, whether they got into that awful state of 
hopeless woe by divine predestination and lack of love 
and justice, or by divine incapacity and lack of foreknowledge 
and proper arrangements. We believe that 
no true Christian will be ready after examining the 
subject thus far to say that he approves either of these 



page 23 1 

theories, and that he is not ashamed of both of them. 

Now let us proceed to examine what is the true 
Gospel, presented to us in the Word of God— the 
Gospel of which the Apostle was not ashamed. 

The word "gospel" itself should be the clue— should 
save the intelligent Christian from being misled by the 
various theories that are propounded under this label. 
The word "gospel," as is well known, signifies "good 
tidings," "good news," and we want to say here that 
if any one thinks it good news that one out of a thousand 
of the human family is to be saved and the remaining 
999 to be eternally tormented, he is either 
not a Christian at all, or is decidedly undeveloped in 
Christian character, in mercy, in love, in justice. In 
our opinion he is at most only a "babe in Christ" who 
has need first of the milk of the Word and subsequently 
of the "strong meat" thereof, that he may grow up 
into Christ in all things, and be able to comprehend 
with all saints the lengths and breadths and heights 
and depths of the love of God which passeth all 
understanding. 

When occasionally we come across some one who 
gives evidence of being a Christian, and who still entertains 
such horribly blasphemous views respecting 
the heavenly Father's character, we feel like quoting 
to him the Lord's words through the Prophet, "My 
ways are not as your ways, nor my thoughts as your 
thoughts, for as the heavens are higher than the earth 
so are my ways higher than your ways and my plans 
higher than your plans." (Isa. 55:8,9.) And part of 
our object in this discourse, dear friends, is to have 
those, whose eyes are anointed of the Lord that they 
may see spiritual things, discern some of the Lord's 
higher ways and higher plans which he presents to us 
in his Word under the name gospel— good tidings. 

The Apostle tells us that God preached the gospel 
beforehand to Abraham, "beforehand" signifying 
before it was due to begin; for the gospel did not begin 
with Abraham, but with our Lord Jesus Christ, 
as the Apostle again declares, "This salvation began 
to be declared by our Lord and was confirmed unto us 
by them that heard him." (Heb. 2:3.) All that ever 
went before our Lord's preaching was not the gospel, 
but merely types and promises which foreshadowed it. 
Let us notice next what the Apostle says was this forestatement 
of the gospel to Abraham: he says that it 
was couched in the words, "In thee shall all nations 
be blessed." (Gal. 3:16,29.) Notice this carefully: 
it does not say, In thy seed shall one out of a 
thousand out of the families of the earth be blessed, 
and the remainder all be doomed to an indescribably 
horrible eternity, but the whole gospel is a gospel of 
blessing, applicable to all the families of the earth- 
through Christ, the true seed of Abraham. 



When our Lord Jesus was born into the world, 
the heavenly Father sent a message respecting him, 
and the angels who bore that message declared that it 
was a gospel message. Let us hearken that we may 
note what they say about the eternal torment of the 
vast majority of our race. They said to the shepherds, 
"Behold we bring you good tidings [gospel] 
of great joy, which shall be unto all people." (Luke 2:10.) 
Let it be distinctly noted that the gospel of 
the angels, like the gospel communicated to Abraham, 
contains no reference to the damnation and eternal 
misery of any of the Lord's creatures, and consequently 
our friends of the Salvation Army and others, 
who in ignorance preach damnation and call it the 
gospel, are doing so in utter violation of the meaning 
of the word and of all the uses of that word throughout 
the Scriptures. However well they may mean, 
they are certainly in this committing a wrong, a grievous 
wrong, and we long to see the light of the knowledge 
of the goodness of God shine into their hearts 
and relieve them of this blindness which comes not 
from God nor from his Word, but from the prince of 
darkness.— 2 Cor. 4:4. 

It will require all of the Millennial age (which is 
to follow this gospel age in which we live) to bless 
all the families of the earth with the joyful knowledge 
of divine grace in Christ. Just so surely as the forty-seven 
thousand millions went down into death without 
hearing of the Savior, without coming to a clear 
knowledge of the truth, without the good tidings of 
great joy reaching their ears,— just so surely must 
they all come forth from the grave that this very gospel 
message of "good tidings" may be declared to 
them, and that they may be tested thereby and either 
be accepted to eternal life or destroyed, as unworthy 
of life, in the Second Death. We say just so surely, for 
three reasons: (1) The announcement of the gospel 
to Abraham says, "In thy seed shall all the families 
of the earth be blessed," and all of these forty-seven 
thousand millions belong to this very class specified, 
the families of the earth— and they have not yet been 
blessed with this knowledge of the only name wherein 
is the blessing. (2) The same is true of the message 
by the angels,— the good tidings of great joy is 
for all people, and these forty-seven thousand millions 
of humanity are surely the great bulk of all people. 
(3) We are sure that this testimony must be given to 
them in the future, because the Scriptural declaration 
is that "Christ died for the ungodly," "he tasted 
death for every man," and as a consequence every 
man must have an opportunity granted him for the 
purpose of benefiting by that death, and of availing 
himself of the privilege of opportunity to have eternal 
life which was secured by our Lord's ransom 
sacrifice. 

But some one would perhaps say, Christ died only 



for the sins of the Church and not for the sins of the 
world, and consequently the sins of the world cannot 
be forgiven them. We answer, No; the Scriptural 
declaration most positively is not only that "Jesus 
Christ by the grace of God tasted death for every man," 
"to be testified in due time," but additionally the 
Apostle says, "He is a propitiation [satisfaction] for 
our [the Church's] sins, and not for ours only, but 
also for the sins of the whole world." (1 John 2:2.) 
What could be plainer than this? If the price for the 
sins of the whole world has been paid to Justice, we 
may rest well assured that Justice will furnish opportunity 
through the Redeemer whereby all these whose 
sins were atoned for may come to a knowledge of 
Christ, and to an opportunity of accepting divine grace 
through him. 

But some one will say, "Why should God adopt 
a plan which would necessitate a resurrection of the 

page 232 

dead, and a post-resurrection trial for eternal life? We 
answer, first, that it is not for us to inquire why the 
Lord adopts certain plans which differ from those 
which our poor finite minds might claim for him; 
rather it is for us to acknowledge that our wisdom is 
insufficient on such a subject and that we should come 
humbly to the Lord to hear from him whatever he may 
be pleased to inform us respecting his purposes. And 
as a matter of fact only those who approach the question 
from this standpoint need expect to see the truth 
or to "comprehend with all saints the lengths and 
breadths and heights and depths of the love of God." 
-Eph. 3:18. 

God has pleased, however, to reveal to us some of 
his reasons for arranging his plan as we see it. He 
assures us of his full wisdom and power to manage 
every feature of his own work according to his own 
good pleasure, assuring us that he knows the end from 
the beginning, and that the end will fully justify every 
step that he has taken. His Word, no less than observation, 
shows us that during all these six thousand 
years the world has been getting a lesson respecting 
the exceeding sinfulness of sin and its wages of sorrow 
and death. His Word assures us also that during the 
next age, the Millennium, the whole world will be 
brought to a knowledge of the way of righteousness 
and love and peace, and will see this law in practical 
operation, and will see its beneficent results in all those 
who will then come into harmony with the great Mediator. 
Thus mankind learns the lesson of evil and 
its consequence first, and then of righteousness and its 
blessed results under divine providence; and thus fully 
equipped with knowledge on both sides of the question 
and instructed by the Royal Priesthood, mankind will be 
ready for the tests, that will be applied by the Lord 



Jesus, under which the obedient and faithful will be 
granted full perfection and eternal life, and the disobedient 
and incorrigible will "be destroyed from 
amongst the people."— Acts 3:23. 

Another matter, and really the key to the whole 
question which we are discussing, is revealed in God's 
Word, viz., that in the divine purpose the promised 
"seed of Abraham" that should perform the great 
work of blessing all the families of the earth, is to be 
one, in the sense of one kind, but not in the sense 
of one person— that is to say, that the seed of Abraham 
consists of Jesus Christ the Head of the Church, 
and of the Church which is his body. Not the nominal 
or professing church, but the true Church, "whose 
names are written in heaven," and who walk in the footsteps 
of their Lord, and are found faithful unto death 
and shall be granted with their Lord the crown of life. 
This Gospel age intervening between the time of the 
great sin-offering and the time when the blessing of 
earth's billions will commence, God has set apart for 
the work of selecting or electing the body of Christ, 
the Church, the Bride, the "little flock," the "royal 
priesthood," the joint-heirs with Christ in his Kingdom. 
These, like their Head, are called with a "high 
calling," a "heavenly calling," and the salvation provided 
for them is higher than that which God has purposed 
for the world in general. He is selecting this 
"little flock" and trying them and proving them, fitting 
them and polishing them for the heavenly Kingdom, 
and to these, as the Apostle Peter declares, God 
has given "exceeding great and precious promises [far 
beyond any promises given to any other of his creatures] 
that by these [promises] we might be partakers 
of the divine nature," and joint-heirs with his 
Son. This is denominated a "heavenly calling" in 
contrast with the earthly salvation intended for whosoever 
will, in due time. 

This is another feature of the Gospel, dear brethren 
and sisters. If it is splendid, good news to know 
that ultimately all families of the earth are to be blessed 
through the Christ, it is still an additional feature to the 
good news to know that God has invited us to become 
members of the Christ company, "members in particular 
of the body of Christ." No wonder the Apostle 
calls this "our high calling," our "heavenly calling;" 
and it is to the attainment of this that the 
Apostle exhorts all the faithful to lay aside every weight 
and every besetment and to run with patience the 
race set before us in the gospel, looking unto Jesus 
the author, until he shall have become the finisher of 
our faith. 

This is the gospel, dear friends, the one we find 
set forth in the Scriptures, set forth by Paul himself, 
and of which he was not ashamed. This gospel shows 
the character of our Creator in a most wonderful light, 
—his Wisdom, able to discern the end from the beginning; 



his Power, able to accomplish that which he 
pleases; his Justice, squaring every feature of the plan 
from first to last, according to the most absolute features 
of righteousness; his Love, whose lengths and 
breadths and heights and depths we have not yet been 
able to explore; a love which sympathizes with his 
creatures in their fallen estate; a love which provided 
a Savior, and a great one; a love which prompted that 
Savior to give his life as our ransom price; a love which 
met all the requirements of divine Justice for us; a love 
which still pursues mankind, and in this Gospel age 
calls us to joint heirship with his Son in a nature and 
Kingdom far above angels, principalities and powers, 
of which the Apostle says, "Behold what manner of 
love the Father hath bestowed upon us that we should 
be called the sons of God." This love, still pursuing, 
will use the "elect" glorified house of sons, of which 
Christ Jesus is the Head (Eph. 1:22), in blessing all 
families of the earth with full opportunity of knowledge 
and full assistance up the highway of holiness 
(Isa. 35:8) that so many as will may have restitution 
to all that was lost in Adam by coming back into harmony 
with God through the great Mediator.— 
Acts 3:19-21. 

Verily, dear friends, of such a gospel we are not 
ashamed, "for it is the power of God unto salvation 
to every one that believeth." It has in our hearts a 
transforming and renewing power, a sanctifying power 
which no error could possibly have, and which all the 
theories of eternal torment have never equalled and 
never will. Let us more and more "show forth the 
praises of our God, who hath called us out of darkness 
into his marvelous light," by renouncing all God-dishonoring 
creeds and theories, and instead hold 
forth the Word of life, and witness the good confession 
—the "good tidings of great joy which shall be to all 
people." 

page 233 

All who will declare the true gospel will need to 
be well shod with the preparation of the gospel of 
peace (gentleness, patience, meekness) for, strange to 
say, they will find bitter opposition from professed 
servants of the Lord who have been blinded and prejudiced 
by Satan's misrepresentations of the gospel, by 
which he seeks to drive from the Lord all who have a 
remnant of reason and will use it in their religious 
thinking. But all who have ears to hear, and who do 
hear the true gospel, will quickly distinguish it from the 
miserable counterfeits which for so long have passed 
current among God's people. Let all such remember 
that ability to see is an evidence of divine favor, and 
let them not be ashamed, but glorify God on this behalf. 
Let such remember, also, that their acceptance of 
truth as due in the face of unpopularity is a part of their 



testing. The Lord puts his plan, his Word, as his representative, 
saying— He that is ashamed of me and my 
words, of him will the Son of Man be ashamed, when 
he cometh in the glory of his Father with his holy 
angels. -Mark 8:38. 
"Good tidings of great joy which shall be unto all people!" 



R2524 : page 233 

NEHEMIAH'S CONSECRATION AND PRAYER. 

NOV. 5.--NEH. 1:1-11. 

"Prosper, I pray thee, thy servant this day." 

ALTHO the book of Nehemiah is a historical 

one— that is to say, not a prophetical or inspired 

one— we are nevertheless to regard its historical 

presentations as having been supervised by divine providence 

and intended for the instruction and edification 

of God's people. In these respects it corresponds 

to the books of Judges, Samuel, Kings, Chronicles, 

Ezra, Esther, etc., and in these respects it differs from 

the prophetical books which present to us directly the 

words of divine inspiration. This book is sometimes 

recognized as the Second book of Ezra, because its 

narrative is the sequel to that of the book of Ezra. 

Undoubtedly, however, Nehemiah was the writer of 

the major part of it, additions being made of other 

features by some other historian. Portions of the 

book are apparently copied from the State archives 

and written in the third person, while Nehemiah evidently 

was the writer of the portion presented in the 

first person. 

Dr. Howard Crosby calls attention to the fact 
that altho the Book of Nehemiah is strictly historical, 
it nevertheless in a very remarkable manner outlines 
or shadows in various parts a Christian's experience. 
He says:— 

"It is interesting to see how admirably the Book 
of Nehemiah tells the story of the soul's renewal. In 
the first chapter is the conviction and confession of sin 
and unrighteousness; in the second, the determination 
to rebuild with God's grace; in the third, the actual 
rebuilding of the soul's defences in sanctification; in 
the fourth, the attacks upon the soul from without; 
in the fifth, the assaults from within; in the sixth, 
the sly temptations of the Adversary, in the guise of 
reasonableness; in the seventh, the successful accomplishment 
of the spiritual work and ordering of the soul 
in godliness; in the eighth, the study of the Word; in 
the ninth, the Christian's faith confessing its weakness; 
in the tenth, the covenant relationship emphasized; 
in the eleventh, the systematizing of the advanced 



soul in the godly life; in the twelfth, the thankful 
acknowledgement of God in everything; and in 
the thirteenth, the sad exhibition of the Christian's 
fall, and need of the renewed influences of the spirit. 
When, on the close examination of the book, we see 
how exactly this outline is filled up, we can hardly believe 
that such a spiritual application was not intended 
in the recorded history. It is probable that Bunyan 
took his Mansoul from the study of this book." 

Nehemiah informs us that he held the office of 
Cup-bearer to the king of Persia, at his palace, Shushan 
—the principal of the three Persian capitals. In 
ancient times the Cup-bearer was a confidential favorite 
with the monarch, highly trusted; he had access 
to the king's presence continually, and not merely on 
state occasions, as the political officers. His office 
was in the nature of trusted friend and counsellor, 
through whom instructions were sent, not only to the 
king's household servants, but also to ministers of the 
realm. Such trusted servants were expected to have 
a general oversight, especially of the household, and 
to be able to guarantee the king against conspiracies 
upon his life; he was expected to taste of the king's 
food in his presence as an assurance or guarantee that 
it had not been poisoned. In presenting wine to the 
king, it was the custom for this officer to pour out a 
sample for himself, and from this probably originated 
the title of Cup-bearer. Somewhat similarly, in Great 
Britain, various persons of high rank are known as 

R2525 : page 233 

Chamberlain, Master of the Household, etc. 

It may be inferred from various statements of 
chapter five, especially vss. 16-18, that Nehemiah had 
inherited great wealth, and we must think of him as 
a young man, gifted, educated, and highly honored 
by the monarch in the position which he held. That 
it was not impossible for Hebrews to occupy confidential 
and high positions in the Persian empire is shown 
in the cases of Daniel, Esther and Mordecai. 

We saw in a previous lesson (August 27) that 
those who returned to Jerusalem under the proclamation 
of Cyrus were for the most part the poorer of 
the captives who had not prospered exceedingly in the 
provinces of Babylonia. Nehemiah's parents had 

R2525 : page 234 

possibly been too comfortably situated and too prosperous 
to take a deep interest in the return. Nehemiah 
himself, as a young man in good position, had 
probably not given great thought to the fact that God's 
chosen nation was at this time for the most part a 
homeless people, and that the holy city was in a deplorable 
condition. Josephus informs us that while 



walking outside the city wall Nehemiah noticed some 

travel-stained strangers, was attracted to them by their 

Hebrew language, and conversing with them found 

one of them to be a relative of his, and that they had recently 

returned from Jerusalem, which they described 

as being in a deplorable condition. 

The Lord evidently permitted this circumstance, 
which exercised a great influence upon the mind of 
Nehemiah, stirring up the naturally good soil of his 
heart not only to sympathy with his persecuted co-religionists 
at Jerusalem, but also to consider the whole 
question of Israel's rejection from divine favor, and 
the forewarnings of this rejection given in the Law 
and the prophets, and the promises of a return of divine 
favor with the return of Israel to a proper condition 
of heart. As he thought upon the question his 
entire nature was stirred, plowed to its very depths; 
and he resolved that he would not only pray the Lord 
for divine blessing upon the true holy city, but that 
he would consecrate himself and the wealth which 
God had committed to his care, and his favored confidential 
relationship with the king— all these he would 
devote to the answering of his own prayers. 

He realized, however, that the work he was undertaking 
was of no small magnitude: he realized that 
to express to the king a sympathy for his own nation 
and its captive city might readily be misunderstood to be 
a lack of loyalty, and that thus he might not only fail 
to have the king's favor and assistance in connection 
with the project, but might, on the other hand, arouse 
his opposition and enmity, not only against himself, 
but also against his people. And at that time for a 
Chamberlain to arouse his monarch's ill-will might 
readily mean, not merely his removal from office, but 
the confiscation of his property, or even the taking of 
his life. 

With these facts before our minds, we not only 
gain an exalted opinion of Nehemiah's consecration to 
the Lord and the service of his people, but we also perceive 
the reasonableness, nay, the necessity, for his 
continuing in an attitude of mourning, fasting and 
praying, and waiting for the Lord to open a favorable 
opportunity for nearly four months before that opportunity 
came.— Neh. 1:1; 2:1. 

The mourning probably came first; then followed 
the fasting, self-denial, self-correction, that he might 
know the better the mind of the Lord on the subject; 
then discerning what he concluded was the Lord's will in 
respect to himself, the use of his time, talent, influence 
and means in the relief of his brethren, and consecrating 
his all fully to this service, his mourning, fasting 
and praying continued until the day that the Lord 
opened to him the door of opportunity, thus accepting 
his offer, his sacrifice. 

We may pause here to note the fact that all Christians 
to-day should have much of the spirit, the disposition, 



of Nehemiah. Being Israelites after the spirit 

and not after the flesh, their interest will chiefly be in 

the prosperity of spiritual Israel. Numbers of these, 

like Nehemiah, are still in Babylon, and a few of them, 

like him, possess wealth and influence there. Such 

as take note of the dishonor and contempt and abuse 

aroused against their faithful brethren will be touched 

with love and sympathy for the brethren. Their 

hearts will thus be turned longingly to look for the 

promises of God respecting spiritual Zion and her ultimate 

deliverance, and they will feel an earnest desire 

to be with and of the Lord's faithful ones, and 

such true fellowship will make them ready to sacrifice 

their temporal interests in the Lord's cause as well as 

to fast and pray for it. Those with such a spirit will 

be sure to have an increase of divine favor which will 

permit them to sacrifice their all and to share the privations 

and oppositions to which their brethren are 

subject, and being in a right condition of heart they will 

appreciate this as being a great privilege, a great honor. 

Such, however, will do wisely if they follow Nehemiah's 
course of earnest prayer and constant seeking 
for the opportunity which will permit them not 
only to make their sacrifice, but to make it most effectively 
as respects the Lord's cause. 

Our previous studies on this subject showed us 
that the wall of Jerusalem had been considerably repaired 
after the return from Babylon, but this repair 
work had been discontinued by imperial decree because 
of the representations made by the rulers of the 
Samaritans, who, we remember, were provoked by the 
refusal of the Israelites to permit them to join in the 
work and to consider them as Israelites; subsequently 
this hatred was intensified by Israel's course in instructing 
the people that those who had married Samaritan 
wives had violated the divine command. We 
cannot doubt that the return of these wives would be 
taken as a gross insult by the Samaritans, who evidently 
felt that under all the circumstances they were 
at liberty to oppose these poor Jews in every way in 
their power, even resorting to open attacks upon the 
people and the breaking down of the walls, the burning 
of the gates, etc. They felt secure in this lawlessness, 
because the imperial government of Persia showed 
the Jews no favor. 

R2525 : page 235 

However, we see that God used this very matter 
of trouble upon the Jews to raise up for them wealthy 
and friendly brethren yet in Babylon to come to their 
relief. Just so it is sometimes with the spiritual Israelite 
—the trials and difficulties which seem most discouraging 
and disadvantageous are often the very 
means which God employs for stirring up others of 
his people and bringing them needed relief. This 



again emphasizes the lesson which is taught throughout 

this narrative of Nehemiah respecting trust in 

the divine supervision of his people's interests, and 

the propriety of our not only trusting God but seeking 

to cowork with him along the lines of his 

providence. 

The condensed statement of Nehemiah's prayers 
which he furnishes us is interesting and instructive. 
The opening sentence reminds us of the opening statement 
of that which we designate the Lord's Prayer: 
"Our Father which art in heaven, hallowed be thy 
name." It is an acknowledgment of the divine greatness 
and relatively of the petitioner's littleness. It is 
a recognition also of God's faithfulness: His name is 
honorable, his character is unassailable, his ways just 
and true. Nehemiah, after acknowledging God's 
faithfulness toward those who love and obey him, acknowledged 
that the entire difficulty which had led to 
all the trouble upon Israel resulted from their sins— 
their neglect of God and his promises, their failure to 
keep their part of the covenant. 

And properly he included himself in this matter, 
for heretofore he had been like the others, chiefly 
careful for the things of this life, and tho doubtless 
honest and honorable in his dealings, he had been 
neglectful of the great promises of which he was an 
heir with the others of his nation. Altho he had not 
been sharing personally in the severe afflictions, he 
now shared them sympathetically with the faithful 
ones who had returned to the Land of Promise, and 
he might therefore voice a prayer for all. He summarizes 
the divine threatenings and promises expressed 
by Moses' lips (Deut. 28), expressing his thorough 
confidence in the Lord, that as the punishments predicted 
had been meted out to Israel as a people, so assuredly 
the promises of the regathering could be relied 
upon implicitly.— Rom. 11:29,32. 

There are lessons here profitable to all Israelites 
indeed who are in trouble because of past unfaithfulness 
to their covenant. All such should remember 
that the very fact that their indifference and neglect 
of the Lord has separated them from him according 
to the declaration of his Word, only proves the fact 
that God who is the same yesterday, to-day and forever 
is ready and willing to receive them back into 
harmony and favor if they but retrace their steps. To 
all such the Lord says, "Draw nigh unto me and I 
will draw nigh unto you." 

Nehemiah's prayer reminds us also of the fact 
that Israel was not gathered at the first advent because 
as a nation they did not come into the attitude 
of heart here exemplified by Nehemiah. Had the whole 
nation been of Nehemiah's attitude at our Lord's first 
advent the gathering of the elect would have been accomplished 
there: the Bride class would have been 
selected from the twelve tribes, the Kingdom would 



have been established, and the work of blessing all 
the families of the earth would have begun there. But 
as we have already seen* the unreadiness of that nation 
resulted in their receiving a "double" of chastisement 
from the Lord— so that they have since received 
as long a period of punishment without favor 
as they previously received with favor. And now 
their "double" being ended, the Lord's message to 



*See MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. II., Chap. 7. 

R2526 : page 235 

them is, "Comfort ye, comfort ye my people; speak ye 
comfortably unto Jerusalem, and cry unto her that 
her appointed time is accomplished, that her iniquity 
is pardoned, for she hath received at the Lord's 
hands double for all her sins." (Isa. 40:1,2.) Now 
the recovery of Israel is due and is in progress, 
and as soon as the spiritual Israel is complete and 
glorified the light will begin to shine upon fleshly Israel. 
-Rom. 11:25-27. 

Thus we see that Nehemiah's prayer has not yet 
been fully answered. The Lord has not yet gathered 
the natural seed of Abraham, who have faith in him, 
from the uttermost parts of the earth: but we do see 
that he is ready to do this quickly now, so soon as he 
shall have gathered the spiritual seed to heavenly conditions 
through the first resurrection. The gathering 
of natural Israel will not of course include all Jews, 
but merely such of that blinded people as maintain 
their Abrahamic faith in the divine promises. And 
these doubtless will be gathered through a great time 
of trouble through which fleshly Israel may still expect 
to pass. Their favor-time has commenced, and 
hence the "Zionist movement," but it will be requisite 
as a part of the favor, which shall bring them near to 
the Lord and back to the Land of Promise, that they 
shall endure great persecutions, from which the Lord 
shall deliver them. 

But altho Nehemiah's prayer was not fulfilled on 
the large scale he had before his mind, because the 
Lord's due time had not yet come and because the people 
were not then ready for such blessing, nevertheless 
his prayer was answered, for he was granted the 
desired opportunity to devote himself, his influence, 
his wealth and his time to the Lord's cause. And 
even tho the results were far from what he expected, 

R2526 : page 236 

we may be sure that they brought to his heart a rest 
and a blessing: and we may be sure also that they 
brought him into that condition of mind which was 



pleasing to the Lord, and we may reasonably expect 
that Nehemiah will be one of the class mentioned by 
the Apostle in Heb. 1 1:39,40, for whom is reserved 
a share in the earthly ministration of the Millennial 
age under the glorified Church. 

A lesson for the spiritual Israelite in this is that 
altho his prayers may not be answered in the manner 
he had anticipated, nevertheless he may rest assured 
that all things are working together for good to him; 
and that the Lord's way eventually will work out a 
far more exceeding and an eternal weight of glory. 
Therefore let us, as spiritual Israelites, perform our 
consecration and pour out before the Lord our prayers 
in harmony with his promise, and realize that in the 
end, when we shall know as we are known, we will 
see clearly that the Lord was answering our prayers 
in the most efficacious manner. 



R2526 : page 236 

NEHEMIAH'S FAITH AND WORKS. 

NOV. 12.--NEH. 4:7-18. 

"Watch and pray. "--Matt. 26:41. 

NEHEMIAH'S earnest desire to spend himself 
and his service for the Lord's glory and 
for the blessing of his people inspired his prayers, and 
such prayers always bring an answer of some kind: 
such prayers mean faith and cooperating works. 
Charles Reade, the converted novelist, briefly sums up 
the circumstances by which Nehemiah's heart-burden 
was brought to the favorable attention of the king, as 
follows:— 

"The answer came (1) through an arbitrary, self-willed 
and passionate king, who a few years before 
had issued an edict against Jerusalem, and put a stop 
to the building of its walls. (Ezra 4:8-24.) (2) It 
came through Nehemiah himself, and the feelings 
which prompted his prayer. The burden of his spirit 
and the earnestness of his fasting and praying left 
their marks on his countenance. Usually he was able 
to conceal his heart's sorrow (2:1); or during these 
four months it was the turn of others to serve the king. 
When he came again before the king the change was 
apparent, and the king noticed it. 'Why is your 
countenance sad?' No reply. 'You are not sick?' 
Still no reply. 'This is sorrow and nothing else.' 
Then Nehemiah was sore afraid, and I will tell you 
why. His life was in danger. Even a modern autocrat 
like Louis XIV. expected everybody's face to 
shine if he did but appear, and how much more an 
Artaxerxes. If he had ordered this melancholy visage 



away to prison or death it would have been justified 
by precedent." 

God gave Nehemiah favor with the king so that 
he not only was permitted leave of absence to engage 
in the work which his heart yearned for, but in addition 
he was appointed Governor of Judea, with letters 
instructing other governors en route to Jerusalem to 
grant him necessary aid, together with a safe military 
escort. Apparently the preparations for the journey 
occupied nearly a month, and the journey itself about 
three months, bringing Nehemiah and his retinue of 
servants to Jerusalem about July. 

It will be remembered that Ezra, in making this 
journey through a country infested with thieves and 
brigands, would not ask a military escort from the 
king lest it should seem a reflection against the divine 
providential care, of which he had spoken to the king: 
but Nehemiah, being offered the escort, did not permit 
any spirit of bravado to hinder his acceptance of 
it. In both cases we see that the right course was 
pursued, tho in some respects the conditions were opposites. 
Spiritual Israelites need to learn both of 
these lessons— to trust fully in the Lord's provision, 
be it great or small, and in no case to refuse reasonable 
safeguards, when under the Lord's providence 
they are furnished. We remember that one of our Lord's 
temptations was along this line— to perform a hazardous 
action for which there was no necessity— to leap from 
the pinnacle of the Temple. Frequently the Lord's people 
are beset by the great Adversary to attempt foolish 
or impossible or unnecessary things, simply to show 
their faith. Such should take a lesson from our Lord's 
reply in his temptation, "Thou shalt not tempt the 
Lord thy God:"— we are not to tempt divine providence, 
nor to expect miracles to be wrought on our 
behalf where the divine arrangement has not made them 
necessary. 

Arrived at Jerusalem, Nehemiah did not at first 
tell the chiefs of the Jews of his purposes; but secretly, 
in company with his personal attendants, he took 
a survey of the condition of the city walls by moonlight 
for three nights, meanwhile maturing in his 
mind the plan he was about to suggest. There is a 
valuable lesson here for spiritual Israelites: how necessary 
it is that if we desire to do a good work we 
first thoroughly inform ourselves respecting the needs 
of the case, so that our course of conduct may be both 
reasonable and efficient. This is none the less true 
and important if the walls which need repairing and 
building are the walls of spiritual Zion, the Church of 
the living God, the holy Jerusalem; nor less so if they 
are the walls of our characters, our own hearts, our 
own dispositions. We want to take a full survey of 

R2526 : page 237 



the weaknesses and deficiencies in order to be able, 
under the Lord's direction and by his assistance, to 
build up ourselves in the most holy faith, and to similarly 
build up others of the true Zion. Inspection 
properly precedes intelligent and profitable reformation 
of any kind. 

Nehemiah did not begin his work by chiding his 
brethren with unfaithfulness to God or lack of enterprise, 
etc.; such a course would have further discouraged 
them, and would have made them feel antagonistic, 
and perhaps to say, "You will see how it is yourself 
when you are here a few years," and some would 
then have taken pleasure in his failure to do more than 
they had accomplished. Neither did he begin by 
boastfully saying, "I have come here to do such a 
work, and within an incredibly short time you will see 
it accomplished; I will accomplish in days what you 
have failed to accomplish in as many years." To have 
taken such a course would have been to arouse the opposition 
of the very ones without whose aid his mission, 
humanly speaking, would be sure to be a failure. 

Many Christian people can learn a valuable lesson 
here: the lesson that whoever desires to be a co-worker 
with God should work in the Lord's way and 
be guided by the spirit of love— for love does not think 
unkindly or ungenerously or slightingly of the efforts 
of others, nor is it boastful. On the contrary, its 
trust is in the Lord, and its boast therefore must be in 
him. This lesson is valuable to us also in respect to 
individual efforts in our own hearts— to build up good 
characters acceptable in God's sight through Christ 
Jesus. We are to remember that nothing is gained, 
but much to be lost, by thinking or feeling boastfully 
of what we hope to attain in self-control and character-likeness 
to the Lord: nor is much to be gained 
by mourning and weeping over misspent opportunities 
of the past. The proper course is to begin work 
afresh with confidence, not in ourselves, but in him 
who called us and who has given such exceeding great 
and precious promises. This is our way to success in 
individual development, and also in our labors upon 
the walls of Zion, as it was Nehemiah's successful 
method for the building of the natural, typical 
Jerusalem. 

In answer to his prayer and earnest study, God 
gave Nehemiah great wisdom and tact in his work, 
and calling together the chief representatives of the 
people he laid before them his plans, in which they 

R2527 : page 237 

were all to be associates and partners in whatever 
blessing and honor might accrue from this service. 
His plan was to divide the work on the wall so that 
each person of prominence and capability should have 
a certain share of the work and the responsibility, as 



well as of the subsequent honor of success. Moreover, 
his plan was that each should undertake the building 
of the wall nearest to his own residence: he would not 
only be interested in having the work done, but also 
in having it substantial, (1) because of the credit for 
the rapid and good workmanship, and (2) because he 
would be anxious that the wall should be strong in 
the vicinity of his own home. 

There is a lesson here for us: our Lord declares 
that he gave "to every man [in the Church] his work" 
(Mark 13:34), represented by his talents, and each 
should seek to know his talents and to use them, and 
should not attempt the use of talents not given him, 
and a work therefore not committed to him. Again, each 
of us should begin "over against his house:" we, too, 
should begin our reform work at home. 

In our experience in character-building, the same 
lesson of turning everything to good account may be 
profitably applied; for instance, if by nature we are 
quick and impulsive, let us not only seek to restrain 
such impulsiveness from speaking evil and wrong, but 
let us exercise it in the speaking of that which is good 
and profitable for edifying, gradually accustoming ourselves 
to use this talent in a favorable and not in an 
unfavorable manner. Have we large combativeness, 
let us, while seeking to restrain this quality of our being 
as respects evil doing and injury to others, learn 
to exercise it kindly, lovingly, in opposing wrong, 
"in contending earnestly for the faith once delivered 
to the saints." And so with all the so-called baser 
organs of our fallen, unbalanced condition— they may 
all be turned to usefulness and helpfulness if but rightly 
directed by our wills and the spirit of a sound mind— 
"the mind of the Lord." 

The text of our lesson particularly relates to the 
difficulties and emergencies which arose after Nehemiah 
had wisely gained the assent and cooperation of 
the leaders of the people, inspiring them with his enthusiasm 
—after the work of building the wall had 
been begun. Then it was that enemies and oppositions 
began to show themselves. The leaders of the 
surrounding peoples had for centuries cultivated a 
hatred of the Jews, (1) on account of their exclusiveness 
when obedient to the Lord's command; (2) because 
of their racial differences and animosities, including 
the differences of their religions; (3) they had 
all experienced the fact that the Israelites, when under 
divine favor, were prosperous and capable beyond 
themselves— the same reason which to-day causes such 
a hatred of the Jew throughout Europe: (4) like birds 
of prey, they had been fattening at the expense of the 
Jews, and this marauding would be interfered with by 
the rebuilding of the wall and the establishment of a 
more permanent government in Jerusalem. 

Just so it is with individuals who, having learned 



R2527 : page 238 

the weaknesses of their own characters, resolve by the 
grace of God to build themselves up along the lines of 
justice, meekness, patience, love. They immediately 
find themselves beset with enemies bent on hindering 
their work for selfish reasons; the lust of the flesh and 
the eye, and the pride of life, like Philistines, Ammonites 
and Arabians, take council together against the 
building up of a character with which they would not 
be in accord, and which would hinder the exercise of 
their depraved instincts. Such a uniting of forces, 
such a conspiracy against the "new creature," is not 
begun until he begins the work of rectifying, building 
in his life the wall of righteousness. 

Similarly, this illustrates the position of the Lord's 
people as a Church; so long as they live carelessly, 
drowsily, inattentive to the doctrinal and the practical 
bulwarks of Zion, they are not subjected to specific 
attacks from the great enemy and his deluded servants; 
but from the time that they realize that in the rubbish 
pile of human tradition and falsity are to be found 
gold, silver and precious stones for the erection of the 
walls of Zion— from the moment that they begin to 
use the same, and to build according to the original 
pattern, contending earnestly for the faith once delivered 
to the saints— from that moment, we say, they 
are subjected to the conspiracies of the great deceiver 
and his Philistine and Ishmael hosts— Babylon— and 
then for the first time every faction and party is ready 
to conspire and unite against them, wroth, angry, not 
because injury has been done them, but because the 
progress of the truth is of itself a rebuke to all who 
are not of the truth. 

Apparently the most zealous of the Israelites resided 
in Jerusalem, or near it, while others, less zealous, 
resided in various favorable localities nearer to the Samaritans, 
etc., and were more or less influenced by their 
customs, methods and views, and therefore were less 
in sympathy with the repair work at Jerusalem. These 
seemingly are referred to as Judah (vs. 10), and expressed 
their doubts respecting the prosperity of the 
work, saying that it was useless to attempt so great a 
work because of the amount of rubbish requiring to be 
handled and disposed of, both to make ready for the 
work on the foundations and also to secure the suitable 
building stones. These early proclaimed that 
the laborers would soon weary of their task, and the 
builders be forced to suspend the work. They were 
not enemies of the Jews, and are not here classed as 
their adversaries, but they were lacking in faith, and 
hence were hindrances to the work by reason of their 
discouraging suggestions. Just so in the individual 
case, where reforms and character-building are commenced, 
he finds in himself various disheartening suggestions 
respecting the difficulties and impossibility of 



the work he is undertaking. These must be resisted. 
Similarly, in the work of Zion, in building up the waste 
places, reassembling the stones of precious truth from 
the rubbish-heaps of sectarianism: there are those who 
are in sympathy with the apostolic teachings who 
nevertheless clearly discourage the builders, and are 
thus, without intending it, to a considerable extent 
adversaries of the work. 

As for the open adversaries, their first attempt was 
to stop the work with ridicule (2:19; 4:1-3), "Even 
that which they build, if a fox go up he shall even 
break down their stone walls." Sarcasm is one of 
the most successful of our Adversary's weapons, and 
with it he slays many and hinders many from progress 
in the work of building their own characters and from 
the work of building upon the walls of the true Zion: 
but the faithful are not to be disconcerted by scorn or 
ridicule or irony; they build on and their Adversary 
becomes the more aggressive as he finds that he cannot 
stop them with ridicule. So it was with these 
open adversaries of Nehemiah and his faithful co-workers. 
They planned a sudden assault by which 
they would take the builders unawares, and by killing 
off some of their leaders would stop the work. 

The people of Judah who did not favor the building 
and who lived amongst the Samaritans, etc., learned 
of this conspiracy, and having a brotherly interest in 
the builders, sent them word, apparently advising 
them to desist from the work lest it would bring against 
them the destruction contemplated. But the builders 
were not to be thus intimidated, and instead of stopping 
the work they armed themselves for defence, Nehemiah 
setting bodies of men upon the eminences behind 
the lowest parts of the unfinished walls, the points 
where the attack would most likely be made, and 
where their enemies would most surely see them ready 
for defence. But finding them forewarned and forearmed, 
the projected attack was abandoned. 

Just so it is with the individual: when he cannot 
be dissuaded from his work of character-building by 
sneers and sarcasm, the attempt is made to vanquish 
him before he has gone far in his reformatory work. 
He is attacked along the lines of his weaknesses by 
the great Adversary, and finds necessity for the armor 
of the Lord, the shield of faith, the sword of the spirit, 
the helmet of salvation, etc., that he may withstand 
the attacks from the fiery darts of the wicked one. And 
just so it is with the Lord's people as they unite together 
for the study of his Word, as he has counseled 
them— "forgetting not the assembling of themselves." 
The Adversary will attack them as a little company, 
endeavor to frustrate the object of their assembling, 
endeavor to dishearten them before they have made 
much progress in the knowledge and practice of the 

R2527 : page 239 



truth. But if they will only go to the armory they will 
find that the Captain of our salvation has made abundant 
provision that we should not be helpless in the 
hands of our Adversary, for, as the Apostle declares, 
"we are not ignorant of his devices." And here it is 
well to remember what proved so helpful to Nehemiah 
and his faithful little band, of which he says, "We 
made a prayer unto God and set a watch against them 
day and night." This is our Captain's instruction to 
the Christian soldier, "Watch and pray." Let us not 
forget either of these important prerequisites to 
safety and victory. -Eph. 6:10-17; Heb. 10:25; 
2 Cor. 2:11. 

Not only did Nehemiah see to the arming and 
preparation of his band, but additionally he stimulated 
their faith, saying, "Be not afraid of them: remember 
the Lord, who is great and terrible, and fight for your 
brethren," etc. We are to remember, as soldiers of 
the cross, that our Captain has instructed us that to 
be full of faith, full of good courage in our reliance 
upon him, is a matter of primary importance in respect 
to our work and victory. His word is, "This is 
the victory that overcometh the world, even your faith." 
In our battle against sin and everything that would 
hinder the work to which the Lord has called us, and 
to which we have consecrated ourselves, we fight for 
the new creature, not for the old; yea, we expect to 
lay down the old nature in death, and already we reckon 

R2528 : page 239 

it dead, and put forth all of our efforts on behalf of 
the new creature. And similarly our brethren for 
whom we are fighting are contending earnestly for 
their deliverance from the thraldom of sin and of error 
—these brethren are also new creatures, brethren of 
Christ, sons of God; and the Apostle exhorts us, saying, 
"We ought also to lay down our lives for the 
brethren."— 1 John 3:16. 

As is often the case, the preparation for the conflict 
was all that hindered it; and so with the Lord's 
people, those who most carefully prepare themselves 
with the armor of God are much less frequently attacked 
than those who neglect the armament. 

Thenceforth, not only Nehemiah's servants, but 
all the people, seem to have maintained their armament, 
while they prosecuted their work, and so must 
the Christian Church and Christian as an individual 
maintain their defensive armor and keep watch against 
the Adversary while seeking to build up themselves 
and others in the most holy faith. Our faith and our 
works must cooperate to bring the desired success, 
and as success attended Nehemiah's efforts and that 
of his coadjutors, so success is sure to come to all of 
the Lord's people who follow this prescribed course. 



"If ye do these things ye shall never fall, but so an 
entrance shall be ministered unto you abundantly into 
the everlasting Kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus 
Christ. "--2 Pet. 1:4-11. 



R2528 : page 239 

INTERESTING LETTERS. 



page 239 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-Many thanks for VOL. 
V. It is truly a wonderful book and inspired me with 
awe when I read it and wonder why God has permitted 
me to understand his wonderful plan even as well as I 
do. My husband is reading it every spare moment. 
Sister Mooney has not yet received her copy of DAWN 
V. and thinks her subscription paid. Please have it 
seen to. ISABELLA LUNHAM.-Illinois. 



R2528 : page 239 

DEAR SIR AND BROTHER:-I have just completed 
the first reading of VOL. V. and it is not necessary to 
commend it. It commends itself to every thinking 
mind that will weigh its arguments. There is however 
one position taken on page 352 in reference to 1 Thes. 4:14 
that confuses me and if your position be 
the correct one and the sleepers referred to in verse 15 
are the same sleepers referred to in verse 14 it would 
imply that the general resurrection of all the dead must 
take place before the glorification of those of the Church 
who are alive at that time. I state the matter as clearly 
as I can in the hope that you will point out wherein 
my difficulty lies. 

Yours in the hope founded on the Ransom, 
A. F. HENKELS. --Pennsylvania. 

[REPLY.— Your favor of the 6th is at hand. I am 
glad to know that you have enjoyed thus far the study 
of DAWN VOL. V., and that it commends itself to your 
heart and head, except on the one point mentioned. 
On that point I would say: 

We must distinguish as between references to the 
Church and references to the world. Both classes die, 
both classes sleep, both classes need resurrection, yet 
they are different classes in every respect. In 1 Cor. 15 
the apostle points out that "as by a man came death, 
by a man came also the resurrection of the dead." He 
further points out that "As all in Adam die, even so 
all in Christ shall be made alive," but "every man in 



his own order" or class. Some will be made alive in 
Christ now at the end of the present age as his bride 
and joint-heir, and will be of the first order or first 
resurrection: others will be made alive in Christ during 
the Millennial age, completed at its close as his children, 
and will constitute the second order or subsequent 
resurrection. Both orders are referred to in the 
same connection. 

Now in reference to the text which troubles you, 
1 Thes. 4:14,15. Verse 14 refers to mankind in general, 
and verse 15 to the Church. All mankind "sleep 
in Jesus" as we show on page 352 of VOL. V., and all 
mankind are to be awakened, but not all in the first 
order or first resurrection. The apostle passes from 
the consideration of the general fact to the consideration 
of the first order, the Church, which is always 
made most prominent throughout the New Testament 

R2528 : page 240 

as most interesting to the Lord's people. Thus in 
verse 15 he speaks of the last members of the Church 
at the close of this age, indicating that the change of 
the remaining members will not precede that of the 
same class who have already fallen asleep. That this 
second class refers not to the world in general who 
"sleep in Jesus," but to the saints, is clearly indicated 
in the 16th verse, where they are spoken of as the 
"dead in Christ." The whole world sleeps in Jesus in 
the sense that Jesus bought the whole world, and is 
to be the quickener or lifegiver to the whole world; 
but only the saints are dead in Christ— members of 
Christ's body, the Anointed body. I trust this will 
make the subject more clear to you.— EDITOR.] 



MY DEAR BROTHER:-Inasmuch as it has been 
something more than a year since I have written you 
I feel at liberty to trespass upon your time for a little 
while now to thank you for VOL. V. of MILLENNIAL 
DAWN. It is, in my judgment, with the possible exception 
of VOL. I. the most instructive of the DAWN 
series yet published. I feel assured that members of 
the household of faith privileged to peruse its pages 
will with myself acknowledge having received from it 
a blessing and spiritual uplift. 

While my most earnest studies during the past 
years have been to be thoroughly clear upon the foundation 
stone of the gospel— the Ransom, yet in this 
work I have been permitted to see many new beauties 
of the height and depth and length and breadth of 
God's love through our dear Redeemer toward us as a 
class and the entire race as a whole. Many of the 
points brought out in the chapters devoted to the operations 
of the Spirit, as for example, "the spirit of 



fear," as treated on pages 213 and 214, must of necessity 
be exceedingly helpful, as I feel confident all true 
children of God have had similar tempting and 
discouragements. 

The short chapter upon "the spirit of a sound 
mind" also will be especially helpful to other dear 
ones who like myself are found by the truth a little 
lower down the scale of Christian character than the 
majority of professing followers of our dear Master at 
least appear to be. All of the company here in Philadelphia 
are quite hearty in their praise of the whole 
subject from first to last and acknowledge having received 
great blessings from it for which we thank our 
heavenly Father sincerely. 

We continue to have excellent meetings at which 
the spirit of our dear Master is displayed by all. The 
number attending and interest shown is, I think, all 
we could look for, inasmuch as we are so scattered. 

Hoping this may find you well and enjoying all 
spiritual and needful temporal blessings, with Christian 
love to yourself and all your household, I remain, 

Yours in the love and service of our Redeemer and 
King, J. WYLIE MACALLISTER.-Pennsylvania. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I have received VOL. 
V. of DAWN and I am reading it very carefully. I 
think, as do all with whom I have talked, that it is 
"meat in due season" and my prayer is that all may 
benefit by it and be able to "give a reason for the hope 
that is in them." There are some who have not received 
theirs as yet. Will you let me know when you 
can let me have 25 or 30 of them and the price, paper 
covers? There are a great many who have read the 
four volumes that do not subscribe for the TOWER that 
are anxious for it. I consider it good for those who 
have never read any of the other volumes. The "atonement" 
is a grand theme for every Christian to fully 
understand. Please find checks and orders. And may 
that peace and fellowship of Christ which prevailed at 
our Boston Convention remain with us forever, is the 
prayer of, Your Brother in Christ, 

WM. J. DAVIS. --Massachusetts. 

[We now have DAWN VOL. V. in good supply. 
For prices see second page of this journal. Encourage 
all who manifest any interest in present truth to become 
WATCH TOWER subscribers. Assure them that if too 
poor to pay they are thoroughly welcome to its visits 
free upon the terms stated on page 2. Those who hope 
to be able to pay in the future may say so and have it 
continued year by year indefinitely; so long as they 
continue to ask for it. We desire that so far as possible 
the WATCH TOWER lists may represent all who 
are interested in the Divine plan of salvation as presented 
in MILLENNIAL DAWN: nevertheless we are all 



aware that this would increase its issues three or four 
fold. And this is what we desire— not for our gain 
but for the assistance which we believe would thus be 
rendered to many who need it— EDITOR.] 

page 240 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-It gives me pleasure 
to write you again. You will find report of meetings, 
etc., on list sheets, therefore will not say anything 
about them in regular letter, except that some interesting 
meetings have been held since I left St. Louis. 

Words would fail to express the amount of spiritual 
and intellectual benefit I derived from the convention. 
It was indeed "a feast of fat things" to me, 
and I think also to all the other interested friends 
present. 

Since the Council Bluffs Convention (held a little 
more than a year ago), I have met quite a few of the 
friends who attended it and all confessed that it was 
a means of great spiritual blessing to them. 

I am more and more convinced that these conventions 
are being greatly blessed of the Lord to the edifying 
of his people, and the dissemination of "harvest" 
truths amongst many, who will be benefited by them 
later. There are four results of such gatherings in 
which I greatly rejoice: (1) the direct benefit to the 
Church, by way of instruction, fellowship, etc., (2) 
the distribution of DAWNS, Tracts, etc., (3) the newspaper 
reports, many of them more or less favorable, 
and (4) it gives to many of the Lord's dear people, that 
you otherwise might not meet in the flesh, an opportunity 
to become personally acquainted with you. 

And this last reason, dear brother, may be of more 
importance than you would be willing to admit. 

With much love in the Lord, your brother and 
servant, FRANK DRAPER. -Pilgrim. 



page 241 
Vol. XX. NOVEMBER 15, 1899. No. 22. 



CONTENTS. 



Views From the Watch Tower 243 

Zionism Making Progress 243 

Time's Secrets Revealing 245 

The Power of the Word of God 246 



"Wine is a Mocker" 249 

Noah's Intoxication Excusable 250 

Nehemiah's Correction of 

Sabbath-Breaking 252 

Some Neglected Facts of Human 

Biological History 254 

Interesting Letters 256 

Items:— Millennial Dawn, Vol. V— 

At-one-ment 242 

The Musical Tower 242 

A New Price List of Bibles 242 

page 242 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, N.Y. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity or 
adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, if they 
send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting the 
paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list 
continually. 



MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. V.-"AT-ONE-MENT." 

Copies of DAWN V. (500 pages), have been sent to all on the 
WATCH TOWER lists whose subscription is not in arrears— including 
all of the "Lord's poor," who applied as per above terms, 
during the present year. Any who expected it and have 
not received it, and whose reckonings would thus appear to be 
different from ours, are requested (1) to ask their postmaster to 
look for it in his office, and then if not found (2) to at once notify 
us, mentioning date of last remittance and how money was 
forwarded. 

THE MUSICAL TOWER. 

Some time ago (Feb. 1, '96) we issued a musical number of 
this journal containing eleven very choice hymns with music 
very expressive of our grand hopes and joys. We published a 
large extra edition but it is gone and in response to many calls 
we have gotten out a new edition,— for we know of none better. 
Furthermore, believing, trusting that the singing of these truly 
gospel hymns at your firesides is likely to favorably instill present 
truth, we have concluded to make the price of this issue 
2 cents each— post free. At regular sheet-music rates these 
would cost 25 to 50 cents each. 



A NEW PRICE LIST OF BIBLES, ETC. WILL BE ADDED TO 
OUR NEXT ISSUE. 



YOUNG'S ANALYTICAL GREEK, HEBREW AND ENGLISH 
-CONCORD ANCE.- 

The publishers will no longer permit this work to be sold 
by anyone, under their list price,— $5 in cloth binding. However 
we will DELIVER IT by mail or express for the above price, 
and additionally will give the purchaser as a premium five 
copies of MILLENNIAL DAWN in paper covers— any volume. 



R2528 : page 243 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 



ZIONISM MAKING PROGRESS. 



ZIONISM is not dying out, as some of its enemies 

predicted it would. It progresses steadily— 

the last of its three annual congresses at Basle (Aug., 

'99) being the best attended of all and one of deep interest. 

Three hundred representative Jews gathered 

from all parts of the world— some of them quite influential 

rabbis. 

Three different sets of ideas prevail among Jews 
interested in Zionism. Some of them view the matter 

R2529 : page 243 

as a political measure, believing that the Jew would be 
more respected if he had a home of his own. Others 
favor it as a social move essential to the future welfare 
of Israelites all over Europe: they see a growing Jew-hatred 
in Russia, Austria, France and Germany, and 
even some signs of ill-will in England and the United 
States, and they argue truly that the day is not far distant 
when a still more open persecution will compel 
extensive emigrations of Jews to somewhere; and that 
Palestine has some attractions over and above any other 
land. The third class views the subject from the religious 
standpoint, looking longingly for a fulfilment of the 
promises of God through the prophets, recorded in the 
Bible. And with this view are more or less intermingled 
Messianic hopes: some however hold that the nation of 
Israel restored is to be the Messiah for the other nations. 



The religious standpoint of interest seems to be growing 
—even Dr. T. Herzl at one time regarded as an agnostic 
—an infidel— is of late giving evidence of a deep interest 
in the movement as a prophetic fulfilment. 

The religious view in Zionism is reinforced by practical 
experience. Baron Hirsch, disregarding the religious 
or prophetic view, spent millions of dollars in 
planting Jewish colonies in Argentina, South America, 
and in New Jersey, U.S., etc., but these are all failures, 
tho not yet wholly abandoned. On the other hand 
Baron Rothschild and others planted colonies in Palestine 
which have flourished exceedingly. If trials and 
discouragements arise there, they do not utterly dishearten, 
for the prophetically inspired hope prevents 
this. It is said that a portion of the Baron Hirsch 
funds will be hereafter used in Palestine. 

The subscriptions to the Zionist Bank stock come 
in but slowly, however, and mostly from the poorer 
classes,— a little over one-seventh of the L. 2, 000, 000 
($9,750,000) being thus far taken. On this bank fund 
depends the present project, humanly speaking; for the 
scheme of the projectors seems to be to use this bank's 
capital in assisting commercial enterprises in the Holy 
Land. It is not the intention, as we understand the 
matter, to collect this money as a banking capital and 
then to offer the sum to the Turkish government as a 
purchase price for the freedom of Palestine: no, but to 
collect the sum and then, showing the facts to the Sultan, 
to request of him civil, commercial and religious 
liberty for the Jews in Palestine: guaranteeing him by 
this sum raised throughout the world that the territory 
would not be inundated by pauper Jews from whom no 
revenue could be derived, but by a thrifty, intelligent 
people, whose yearly taxes would double the imperial 
revenues from that quarter. When the Lord's time arrives, 
wealthy Jews will take a hand, and the door to 
Palestine closed to the Jew since 1891 will be opened. 

Rabbi Dr. Gaster of London, interviewed by a 
newspaper reporter, is accredited with having made the 
following remarks on Zionism,— since the August 
congress:— 

"A great step in the Zionist movement is the establishment 

R2529 : page 244 

of our bank. Of this Dr. Wolffson of 
Cologne is president, and there are seven directors, who 
founded the bank at a cost of $40,000 and paid the sum 
out of their private purses. Since the shares of the 
bank have been placed on sale 300,000 have been sold; 
$200,000 having been taken in Russia, $40,000 in Roumania 
and the rest by Jews all over the world, so that 
now, when asking the Sultan to give Palestine to us, 
we have a cash guarantee with which to back our good 
faith. 
"When Palestine is ours, every office will be filled 



by the elective vote of the people. It will be much the 
Biblical form of government; the head being a governor, 
supported by a privy council and a legislature. 
The Jewish authorities will levy taxes, and the people 
will reap the fruits of them. 

"Turkey will derive then a greater revenue from 
Palestine than she does now. We have great faith in 
the Turks. No one who has ever lived among them 
will fail to uphold me when I say that there is no race 
more honorable nor whose word is more sacred. Their 
laws, if rightly administered, are even wiser and more 
liberal than those of the United States. And I say, and 
have authority for the statement, that the Turkish government 
never has molested, for religious reasons, a 
race over which they had power. The Armenians 
brought their troubles on themselves. Jerusalem and 
Palestine now are downtrodden by the Turkish officials, 
but unscrupulous officials are to be found in every 
land. 

"Jerusalem is, unfortunately, a kind of a festering 
sore. It is there, first of all places, that 'sanitation' 
must take place. It is filled with beggars and with old 
men who have gone to lay their bones there. When 
my people went to Palestine, I said to them, 'Go north, 
for in the south are those who have gone there to die. 
You go to live.' In Jerusalem three religions meet, 
and that is a ticklish thing, and mixed with it is the 
depravity of the officials, living on money extorted from 
those under them. 

"And when the country is ready for the new colonization, 
will the Jews go there? 

"It will be a flood. They will go in millions: that 
is the great danger. The persecution of the race has 
spurred them on. They are enthusiastic now— then 
they will be wild. It will be a rush that I tremble to 
think of. Why, our shares, now placed on sale, are 
being bought up by people all over the world. They 
are being taken by men in the mines of Siberia, in 
South Africa, in Russia, in the west, the United States. 
When a London Jew has put aside a pound he comes 
and buys a share, and so it is all over the world. It is 
the poor Jews who are buying the shares, not the rich 
ones. The rich are not all with us. Our movement 
makes them remember the past of their race, and they 
do not wish to remember it. They have for years been 
trying to open the door of society with a gold key, and 
they want society to forget their history. They argue 
against us, and say that patriotism to their native land 
would interfere with their new nationalism. 

"We must find some way of checking this rush to 
Palestine when it comes. When the Jews realize that 
there is a land— and that their mother country— with 
Jews forming its government and peopled by their race, 
Europe will be almost depopulated by them. And when 
we have gone, Europe will look around her in bewilderment. 
The war between capital and labor is coming— 



it is now begun, and the Jew in Europe is its natural 
scapegoat. When that scapegoat is gone the two powers 
will have to face each other. 

"And nothing except Palestine will satisfy us. At 
Basle, when Mr. Trietsch, the American, asked for my 
support of his scheme to form a Jewish colony in Cyprus, 
I said: 'That plan now has advantages over a hasty 
colonization of Palestine, and I will aid you in it, but 
not under the flag of Zionism. Zionism means Palestine, 
or it means nothing.' And when he proposed his 
plans before the congress, the people were enraged. No 
sooner was his purpose put into words than every delegate 
was on his feet, crying as one man, 'Down with 
him!" 

Many exaggerated statements are made respecting 
the numbers of Jews now in Jerusalem and Palestine: 
old reports are taken as a basis of a guess-work calculation 
—in ignorance of or overlooking the fact that no 
Jews have been allowed to locate in Palestine for more 
than six years. The Hebrew Almanac, published in 
Jerusalem in 1897, gives that city's population as 45,420 
—composed of 28,112 Jews, 8500 Mohammedans and 
8780 Christians. The population of the whole land is 
estimated at 650,000, and of these about one-twelfth 
are Jews, viz., 55,000. 

Meantime persecutions against the Jews are breaking 
out afresh in Austria. A cablegram of the Associated 
Press dated Vienna, Oct. 23d, says:— 

"Anti-Semitic riots broke out at Halleschau, Moravia, 
yesterday evening. Jewish houses were stoned, 
stores were pillaged, a house was burned and the gendarmes 
charged the rioters, killing three persons, and 
injuring several others. The military finally restored 
order." 

Strange to say, the basis of these persecutions is 
the old charge of using Christian blood for baking, for 
washing and for religious ritual,— the same charges 
brought against these innocent people in the persecutions 
of the long ago, without a shadow of reason. 
If the word blood were used figuratively as when we 
speak of blood-money, there would perhaps be something 
in it: but literal blood is meant and charged, of 
course by ignorant people. 

Rabbi Doctor Gudeman, Jewish leader in Vienna, 
who opposed the Zionist movement, is now astounded 
and is holding public meetings at which he makes oath 
that nothing in the Jewish ritual sanctions blood, and 
points out that the Jewish law in every sense is to the 
contrary— pointing out that all Christians have that 
same law in their Bibles and well know that it sanctions 
nothing of the kind. Speaking of the charge the Rabbi 
characterized it as "low, shameless falsification of the 
truth," and has drawn against himself considerable 
bitterness. Perhaps thus the Lord is teaching him and 

R2529 : page 245 



others the necessity for Zionism. We expect much 
more persecution before the Jews get thoroughly awake 
to the fact that "the time to favor Zion" is at hand. 

TIME'S SECRETS REVEALING. 



Scientists and "higher critics" have for years been 
declaring the Bible narrative incorrect, especially its 
chronology;— that the histories of China and of Egypt 
proved this conclusively, showing that the world is 
several thousand years older than the Bible chronology 
would indicate (now 6027 years A.M.). Great stress 
has been laid on the testimony of papyrus records 
found in ancient Egyptian cities, whose ruins are being 
exhumed: these proved the XII. Dynasty of Egypt, 

R2530 : page 245 

according to M. Maretta, to have held sway in 3064 B.C. 
or about six hundred years before the Bible's date for 
the flood— with no destruction of those ruins by the 
waters of the flood and no record of a blotting out of 
Egypt's population. According to Prof. Lepsius the XII. 
Dynasty of Egypt flourished B.C. 2380 or about 88 years 
after the deluge date furnished by the Bible's chronology: 
and of course it would be impossible for eleven dynasties 
to have flourished in so short a period and for 
Egypt to be the great country it evidently was at that 
time— with its pyramids already built. Hence "science" 
laughed the Bible to scorn and ridiculed the idea of 
divine providence in its preparation. 

But now, what? The ruins of Egypt are contradicting 
the scientists and confirming in a general way 
the Bible chronology, by the showing of papyrus documents 
that were written during the reign of Usertesen 
III. of the XII. Dynasty of Egypt, and prove their 
date to be 1872 B.C. (possibly 1876)— six hundred years 
after the Bible's date for the deluge* and about fifteen 
years before Joseph was sold into Egypt. 

Below is the story of this valuable find narrated by 
Prof. T. H. Breastead, Secretary of the Egyptological 
section of the International Congress of Orientalists, 
upon adjournment of the congress. 

TEMPLE ARCHIVES. 

"The first fixed date in human history has been 
discovered. It is disclosed in Egyptian papyri nearly 
4000 years old. Announcement of its discovery has 
just been made at the twelfth international congress of 
orientalists, now being held in this city. 

"Last winter Dr. Borchardt, scientific attache of the 
German legation in Cairo, and Dr. Shaefer, assistant 



director of the Egyptian Museum in Berlin, discovered 
a mass of papyri near the pyramid of Usertesen III. at 
Illahun, about fifty miles above Cairo and about 175 
miles above the mouth of the Nile. 

"These papyri have proved of the greatest interest. 
They consist of a series of temple archives and records 
of temple administration in the twelfth dynasty, about 
2000 years before Christ. They have been deposited in 
the Royal Museum at Berlin, and there Dr. Borchardt 
has spent the past summer in giving them a preliminary 
examination and classifying them. 

"The lists of temple offerings and temple officials 
are chiefly of interest to the specialist, but there are 
many letters from one official to another particularly 
interesting as showing how these functionaries did business 
in the days of Abraham. 

"It is of one particular letter in this collection, 
however, that I wish to speak— the letter by means of 
which the date referred to is established. There was no 
more important religious feast among the Egyptians 
than the celebration of the rising of the star Sirius, or, 
as the Greeks called this star, Sothis. It is easy to understand, 
therefore, why the chief temple-official should write 
the accompanying letter. It is in hieratic, that is, the 
handwriting of the ancient Egyptians, as distinguished 
from the elaborate hieroglyphic used in stone inscriptions. 
I translate the essential portions of a letter sent 
to Pepy-hetep, the chief ritual priest, twenty days before 
the rising of Sothis, in order to give him ample 
time to make ready for the feast: 

'"Copy of the letter... which the prince, the overseer 
of the temple, Nub-Kau-Re, sent, saying to the chief ritual 
priest, Pepy-hetep: "Take note that the rising of Sothis occurs 
in the fourth winter month, on the xvith day. Give notice to 
the lay priests. ..and post this letter upon the bulletin board 
of the temple." 

"The feast was duly celebrated by the chief ritual 
priest on the 16th, and on the 17th he made note of the 
various offerings consumed at the feast, as follows:— 

'"Year vii., fourth winter month, xviith day. ...Gifts 
of the feast of the rising of Sothis: 200 various loaves, 60 jars 
of beer...' 

"The two documents therefore coincide perfectly, 
and it is as certain as evidence can make it that Sothis 
rose on the 16th day of the fourth winter month. 

"When this fact is established the chronological 
reckoning is very simple. The Egyptian calendar year 
contained 365 days, being one-fourth of one day shorter 
than the astronomical year. The calendar year therefore 
gained a quarter of a day each year on the astronomical 
year, or an entire day every four years. This 
can be made very simple in this way: Suppose we have 
a clock which gains a quarter of an hour every day. 
In four days it will have gained an hour, and in eight 
days two hours, etc. You will see that by comparing 
this clock with correct time and exactly measuring the 



gain, you can instantly compute how long it took the 
clock to make that gain. It is just so here. The occurrence 
of the rising of Sothis, an astronomical event, 
is here given in terms of the calendar year; we can thus 
check off this calendar and tell how far it has run ahead 
of real time, as we did with the fast running clock. 
Doing so, we find it has run ahead in all four months 
and nineteen days. The question now is, how long did 
it take the calendar to gain four months and nineteen 
days at the rate of a day every four years? 

IN 1872 OR 1876 B.C. 



"Without going into the reckoning further I will 
only say that the result brings us either to 1872 or 1876 
B.C., a margin of four years being unavoidable. 



*See MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. II., Chap. 2. 
R2530 : page 246 

"This is the oldest fixed date in human history. 
There are dates which belong at least 1000 [?] years 
earlier in Egyptian history, but we are unable to fix [!] 
them; they may be anywhere within a period of 500 or 600 
years, so wide apart are the limits of possible variation. 

[This is according to "science," which does not regard 
anything as fixed by the Bible's testimony.— EDITOR.] 

"The date of Sargon I. in Babylonian history 
claimed as fixed at 3750 B.C. by many Assyriologists is 
supported by only one document, written over 3200 years 
later than the date which it is quoted to support, and as 
far removed in time from the date of Sargon, as Queen 
Victoria is from Moses. It is properly looked upon 
with distrust by many orientalists. 

"But the date 1872 (or 1876) B.C. established by 
the new papyri rests upon contemporary evidence. There 
is no doubt of its correctness; and with this remarkable 
discovery we enter upon a new epoch in the chronology 
of oriental history. 

"To Chicagoans this discovery is of especial interest, 
for the new date belongs to the reign of the same 
king whose funeral barge (or that of his family) is in 
the Field Museum. All will recollect the large Egyptian 
barge standing in the east hall of the museum. It 
was acquired by the enterprise of Mr. Ayer and the 
generosity of Mrs. McCormick. The king to whose 
funeral furniture this barge belongs was a Usertesen III. 
of the twelfth dynasty. 

"The second document is dated in his seventh year 
-that is, 1872 or 1876 B.C. From the middle of the 
nineteenth century B.C. to the end of the nineteenth 



century A.D. the barge lay covered by the Sahara sands 
beside the king's pyramid, some thirty miles above 
Cairo. In 1894, after its discovery by De Morgan, it 
was removed to Cairo and thence to Chicago. This now 
certain date of the barge is several centuries later than that 
posted on the large gilded sign hanging over it in the 
museum. 

"Of course the announcement of this new date 
created great interest among the members of the congress. 
Unfortunately, Dr. Borchardt was called away 
by official duties in Egypt before the date for reading 
his paper announcing his discovery. The paper was 
read by Prof. Erman, in Borchardt's absence, and Professor 
Erman accepted for him the warm congratulations 
of the congress.— Rome, Oct. 14th, 1899." 



R2530 : page 246 

THE POWER OF THE WORD OF GOD. 

-NOV. 19.-NEH. 8:1-12.- 

"The ears of all the people were attentive 
unto the book of the Law."— Nehemiah 8:3. 

REBUILDING the city wall tended to unify the 

hearts of Israel and to revive faith in the 

Lord, and in his gracious promises to that nation. 

Nehemiah was wise in beginning the reformation movement 

as he did, and his wisdom undoubtedly was of 

the Lord and in harmony with his prayers for wisdom 

and usefulness. So all who would engage in divine 

service require not only zeal but also the wisdom which 

cometh from above, and only those who seek it prayerfully 

will be in condition to be used of the Lord and to 

be helpful as reformers amongst their brethren. 

As illustrating different methods of serving the 
Lord, and how some methods are wiser and more successful 
than others, and as a means of adding to our 
own wisdom respecting methods of serving the truth, 
let us here contrast the efforts of Nehemiah with those 
of Ezra. For instance— Ezra seemed to find only faults 
in the chiefs of the people, and berated them as tho 
they had nothing commendable in them. Nehemiah, 
on the contrary, began his work by ignoring some of 
the evils which he doubtless quickly discerned, and 
sought the cooperation of the nobles in the general 
cause. Subsequently at a favorable opportunity, when 

R2531 : page 246 

the people cried out because of usury and oppression, 
he very wisely yet very moderately remonstrated against 
their course, pointing out in kindly words yet boldly 



their wrong, and he was successful in correcting the 

wrong without antagonizing the wrongdoers. (Neh. 5:7-13.) 

Ezra, full of zeal and anxious for quick reform, 

convened the people, in the rain, without shelter. 

(Ezra 10:9-13.) Nehemiah, on the contrary, not only 

chose the pleasant season, but also the accustomed occasion, 

for his gathering of the people. Ezra attacked 

the one particular sin of intermarrying with the surrounding 

peoples, and thus held up one particular class 

of the people to special shame and confusion: Nehemiah 

seems to have taken a broader view and to have assailed 

sin in general, showing that all were sinners in 

some respects, and that all needed reformation. Ezra's 

method was the more aggressive, accompanied by legal 

prosecutions, penalties, etc. (Ezra 10:8,14.) Nehemiah's 

method was to make general a knowledge of the 

divine law, and through it to appeal to the awakened 

consciences of the people, that each might act for himself, 

heartily as unto the Lord. Without finding fault 

with Ezra's intentions, all reformers may profitably apply 

the lessons of this contrast to themselves, and seek 

to use Nehemiah's wise and gentle method in dealing 

with those who are in error, either doctrinally or 

otherwise. 

With the completion of the wall and the security 
thus realized and the faith and hopes thus inspired, it 
was but reasonable that the event would be celebrated 
with feasting and rejoicing. But Nehemiah wisely 
waited this until he had reorganized the people socially 
according to the heads of their families, especially the 
priests and Levites, who were the divinely appointed 
ministers and teachers of the people. (See Chap. 7:63-73.) 

R2531 : page 247 

Meantime also, donations were received for 
the Temple and its service, and Nehemiah, himself very 
wealthy, setting an example of liberality in his large 
gifts, was imitated by many. By this time the "Feast 
of Trumpets" on the first day of the seventh month 
drew near. It was a time for the general gathering of 
the people, the beginning of their civil year, announced 
by trumpet blowing. Here the narrative of our lesson 
begins, with the spontaneous gathering of the people 
in an open place, a plaza, near the water gate, called 
here a "street." 

In all probability this congregation of the people 
was instigated, first by Nehemiah, the Tirshatha (Persian 
for provincial governor), and secondly, through 
the heads of the people and the priests and Levites. 
Evidently preparations had been made for such a gathering, 
for a large platform, called a "pulpit," had been 
erected. When the people assembled and called for 
the reading of The Book of the Law of Jehovah, appropriate 
at this season, all things were in readiness, and 
Ezra the priest, accompanied by thirteen men, evidently 



chiefs of the people, representing the various tribes, 
took their appointed places on the platform or "pulpit" 
to give dignity and importance to the service. 

Apparently the convention was opened with prayer. 
"Ezra blessed Jehovah the great God. And all the 
people answered, Amen, with lifting up their hands: 
and they bowed their heads and worshiped Jehovah 
with their faces to the ground." They were about to 
begin a study of the divine Word, as expressed in 
the Law, and no one is in the proper attitude of mind 
to be taught and blessed by the Lord's Word unless he 
be in the attitude of heart which appreciates the greatness 
of God and the unworthiness of himself. Such a 
condition of heart is essential to true hearing and understanding. 
And here we have the secret of much of 
the failure to understand God's Word— today as well 
as in times past. "He that seeketh findeth; to him 
that knocketh it shall be opened," and the "seeking" 
consists not merely in church attendance or Bible reading, 
but in a heart-hunger to know the truth and to 
obey it. 

The service began early in the morning, "From 
the morning [daybreak] until midday," and during 
that time we are told that "the ears of all the people 
were unto the book of the Law," that is, they gave 
close attention to hear and to understand every word. 
It was not only necessary that they should desire to 
know and that they should be in the attitude of heart 
to implore divine blessing and assistance, but it was 
also necessary that they should be attentive, giving ear. 
And more than this, it was necessary that there should 
be amongst them teachers capable of expounding the 
Law, explaining the meaning of words, and how the 
divine Law was to be applied to the daily life, and 
what it signifies. Thirteen teachers (Joshua and twelve 
others) are indicated by name. These probably were 
priests, and the statement is that associated with him 
were "the Levites." These "caused the people to understand 
the law, and the people stood in their place." 
We are not to understand that the people stood for five 
hours: they stood while the Law was being read, and 
sat down, after the eastern custom, on their haunches, 
during the time explanations were being given. The 
expression "all the people stood in their place" signifies 
that the teachers mentioned moved about amongst 
the people, instructing them, answering their questions, 
making plain the meaning of the features of the Law 
just read, while the people remained in their places. 

There is a lesson here for God's people of today- 
all who are interested in the welfare of Zion and in the 
repair of her walls of righteousness. As Nehemiah 
looked up the genealogies of the priests, it is appropriate 
for us to recognize the difference between the consecrated, 
whose names are written in the Lamb's book of 
life, and the unconsecrated, whose names assuredly are 
not so written, and who therefore cannot be recognized 



as religious teachers in any sense. So also today our 
Governor, the Lord Jesus, is searching amongst the 
people and separating to himself those whose names 
are written— the consecrated— for his kings and priests— 
a "royal priesthood." Arrangements are already made 
for the great antitypical "Feast of Trumpets," and the 
beginning of a new civil year or Millennial era for mankind 
—for all who desire to be the Lord's people, to 
hear his Word and to obey it. Raised above the people, 
on a higher plane of being, will be Christ, the great 
Priest, and his associates, spiritual Israel, to declare 
the Word of Jehovah, the Law of righteousness, the 
Truth; and amongst the people, to teach them and to 
expound the Law to them, will be the ancient worthies, 
representatives of Israel in the flesh, and the Levites, 
all who believe, the entire household of faith aside from 
the elect and then glorified Church. 

The blowing of the trumpets announcing the beginning 
of the antitypical Jubilee year will soon be 
heard throughout all the world, and the true-hearted 
will speedily respond. Meantime our great and wise 
Governor is instructing the Royal Priesthood, and thus 
preparing for the great work of the future. The arrangements 
are all so perfect and so complete that when 
the declaration comes the people will all hear the word 
of the Lord "distinctly," and they will get the "sense" 
and "understanding" of it. It will no longer be as in 
the past and at the present time, a din, a Babylon of 
confused noises, misrepresenting the divine message, 
and confusing those who desire to know the will of the 
Lord. The first result of that presentation will be weeping 

R2531 : page 248 

and mourning for sin, but the message of the great 
Priest and Governor will go forth to the people, to the 
effect that they need not weep and mourn, because the 
great sacrifice for sins has already been offered, "the 
Lamb of God which taketh away the sin of the world," 
and that in consequence the Millennial Day in which 
they will be living is not to be a day of mourning but 
a day of rejoicing, a day of acceptance of divine favor, 
a day of newness of life and of consecration to the Lord. 

The message will then be similar to the one which 
Governor Nehemiah promulgated, "Go your way, eat 
the fat and drink the sweet [enjoy the wonderful provisions 
of God's bounty with thankfulness and pleasure] 
and send portions unto them for whom nothing 
is prepared [cause the knowledge of the Lord to fill the 
whole earth], for this day is holy unto the Lord: neither 
be ye sorry, for the pleasure of Jehovah is your 
strength"— rejoice that you are restored to divine favor. 
And all the people will rejoice, because they will understand 
the words of the divine Law— because they 
will see and appreciate the divine arrangement, and 
find it to be indeed "good tidings of great joy, which 



shall be unto all people." 

These blessings which will be to the world in the 
future may already be appropriated in a measure by 
the Lord's consecrated people— the Gospel Church, the 
Royal Priesthood. By faith we are permitted to hear 
the words of the divine Law in advance of their public 
proclamation, to the whole world, and therefore blessed 
are our ears which hear and our eyes which see, for 
many have not seen and have not heard,— the god of 
this world at the present time blinding their minds 
so that they cannot. To us, too, the first hearing of 
the divine Law should perhaps bring remorse and tears 
as we realize our shortcomings, and that with our very 
best efforts we cannot measure up to the perfect standard. 
But to us also comes the Lord's message, through 
his servants our brethren, saying, Weep not, but rejoice. 
Behold the goodness as well as the severity of 
God, behold his Love as well as his Justice, and that 
he has made through Christ a full propitiation, not only 
for the sins that are past, but also for the inherited 
weaknesses and blemishes of the present and future— 
that all of our blemishes have been covered with the 
great sin-offering finished at Calvary. 

R2532 : page 248 

It is our privilege, therefore, to dry our tears and 
to rejoice in the God of our salvation, and to eat of the 
fat things of his Word, the exceeding great and precious 
promises given to us, and to drink of the sweets of his 
favor, and to send portions of this our blessing to others 
who have not yet seen and have not yet heard and who 
have not yet tasted of the riches of divine grace. And 
whoever receives the grace of God not in vain will be 
prompt and zealous, not only in his own rejoicing, but 
also in his endeavors to communicate his blessings to 
others. 

Another lesson here is that while God has all power 
he nevertheless uses human instrumentalities. He 
could have spoken from heaven, instead of sending 
Nehemiah; but he did not. He could have thundered 
his Law without having it read by Ezra; but he did 
not choose to do so. He could have instructed the people 
without using the priests and Levites or any human 
instrumentality for exposition; but such was not his 
method. And the Lord's dealings in the past are our 
best guides respecting his mind on such subjects and 
respecting what are likely to be his methods for the 
present and the future. In full harmony with this 
thought is the apostolic statement that "God has set 
the various members in the body [the Church] as it 
hath pleased him." Are all apostles? are all teachers? 
are all orators? Evidently not! And amongst the 
Lord's people the desire should be to know the Master's 
will, to know what talents have been entrusted to him, 
and to use those zealously, and to wait for others to be 



given, rather than to neglect the talents possessed or to 
seek to use those not possessed. "Do with thy might 
what thy hand findeth to do." 

"The Word of God is quick and powerful." (Heb. 4:12.) 
There is much need that this lesson be thoroughly 
learned by the Lord's people. Nothing can take the 
place of the Lord's Word; and all teachings, whether 
oral or printed, should be recognized as secondary to 
the inspired Word, and should be received only as corroborated 
by the Scriptures. Or rather, they are to be 
appreciated only as they unlock the treasures of wisdom 
hidden in the Bible— riches of which the world in general 
is ignorant, and of which even the majority of 
Christian people, altho they have Bibles by the million, 
know comparatively little. Indeed, as Bibles become 
more numerous the great Adversary seems to be permitted 
to have the greater power to deceive and to mislead 
respecting its teachings; so that today, with its 
greatest opportunities, is witnessing a general decline of 
faith in the Scriptures— "a great falling away," led by 
some of the principal luminaries in the nominal systems 
—falling from their steadfastness of faith, falling 
into scepticism and into the radically anti-Biblical 
theory of Evolution— under the lead of so-called "higher 
criticism" and scholasticism. 

The more the Lord's people shall be able to discern 
that we are already in the "evil day" mentioned by 
the Apostle, in which many shall stumble and fall from 
their steadfastness of faith, the more should they give 
earnest heed lest they should let slip the precious things 
of the divine Word, which is a lamp to their pathway, 
and through which God supplies the needed aids 
for walking the narrow way which leads to the 

R2532 : page 249 

Kingdom.-Eph. 6:13; Heb. 2:1; Psa. 119:105. 

And let us beware also in this day of the "new 
lights" and of many presenting themselves as special 
teachers, that we permit none to lead us away from the 
Lord's Word, and to confuse us in our understanding. 
"Let us hold fast the confidence of our rejoicing [in 
Christ and his redemptive work— and not in our righteousness] 
firm unto the end." Let us earnestly contend 
for the faith once delivered to the saints, of which the 
ransom is the very center or hub into which and from 
which every other truth must and does fit perfectly. 
And let us remember that whatever assists us in this 
direction is a teaching that is from God, while whatever 
leads in another direction must evidently be not of God 
but of the Adversary. While proving the things which 
we receive, by their harmony with the Scriptures and 
their ability to unlock them and make clear their meaning, 
we may well remember the Master's words: "He 
that doeth truth cometh to the light, that his deeds may 
be made manifest, that they are wrought in God,"— 



and the reverse of this is evidently equally true.— John 3:20,21; 
Heb. 3:6; Jude3; 1 Thes. 5:21. 



R2532 : page 249 

"WINE IS A MOCKER." 

NOV. 26.-PROV. 23:29-35. 

"Wine is a mocker; strong drink is raging, and whosoever 
is deceived thereby is not wise."— Prov. 20:1. 

VERY RARELY indeed do we discuss the subject 

of intemperance: not because we do not realize 

it to be a crying evil, one of the most dreadful elements 

of and accessories to the degradation of our race, but 

because so far as we know our readers few of them 

would have need of advice or reproof along this line. 

As for the world, it is not our attempt to revolutionize 

and reform it along the lines of total abstinence or temperance 

in respect to the liquor evil, the social evil, the 

profanity evil, the backbiting evil, the war evil, the lying 

evil, or others. And this is not because we have 

no sympathy with reforms in all these various directions, 

but because, according to our understanding of 

the divine Word, it is God's plan that another and 

higher work be attended to now by the Lord's ambassadors 

—viz., the work of gathering out a people for 

his name, spiritual Israel, the holy nation, the peculiar 

people, the royal priesthood, the Church, the body of 

Christ— under whose ministration in glory, in a coming 

age, the world's reformatory uplift is to be accomplished, 

under conditions that will be adequate and 

make success certain. 

An intelligent and very earnest reader of the WATCH 
TOWER publications remarked the fact that he had been 
struck with the absence of all appeals on the liquor 
question, the tobacco question, gambling, etc., and yet 
he said— "When I began reading these publications I 
was a moderate drinker, an habitual smoker and chewer 
of tobacco, and altho not a gambler I was well versed 
in cardplaying as a social diversion and time-killer. 
But since reading the WATCH TOWER publications my 
life has undergone a complete change in respect to all 
of these things. I asked myself the question, Have I 
or have I not consecrated my all to the Lord, covenanting 
with him to use life, voice, strength, influence, 
and means to his glory, to the best of my knowledge 
and ability? I answered, Yes. The question then 
came, Can you see in what manner your drinking of 
wine or smoking or chewing tobacco or playing a social 
game of cards will be to the Lord's glory, to the increase 
of your influence for righteousness, or a proper expenditure 
of time and money, in harmony with your covenant? 



I was obliged to answer myself, No; that these 
things would all be contrary to my covenant, and I 
therefore abandoned them in the Lord's name and 
strength. But now what I want to know is, what was 
the nature of the influence exercised upon my mind 
by the reading of MILLENNIAL DAWN which produced 
or helped to produce these results? for, as I said before, 
I cannot remember anything directly upon these 
subjects in this reading matter, and on the contrary, 
other books which I have had and read which did deal 
with these subjects pointedly and explicitly, failed utterly 
to make any impression upon me. Why is this? 
How is this? What is it that has such influence over me?" 

We answered, that undoubtedly the good influence 
exercised was the spirit of the truth, operating upon 
the good ground of an honest and consecrated heart. 
We pointed out that the effort of our publications is to 
strike the axe of truth at the root of the evil tree, instead 
of attempting to lop off the various evil branches. 
A thorough consecration to the Lord is in opposition 
to every form of sin and in harmony with everything 
that is good, noble, true, pure. The difficulty with a 
majority of those who are truly consecrated to the Lord 
is that they have been mistaught. They have been 
misled to believe that Christianity is merely morality 
and civilization, instead of being taught by the divine 
Word that Christianity is a following of Jesus' footsteps 
in full consecration to the Heavenly Father's will in 
all matters. 

They have been taught that the chief work of the 
Christian is to get saved and to save others; and by 
saved is generally understood a breaking off of the 

R2532 : page 250 

gross immoralities, a conformity to civilized usages, and 

a membership in some earthly church. False views of 

the Church's mission evidently have much to do with 

this setting up of false standards in the name of Christianity. 

Thinking men have realized the impossibility 

of securing the conversion of the world along the Scriptural 

lines of full consecration to the Lord. It was 

realized long, long ago that such hopes are baseless from 

what we know of humanity in general, and having in 

mind the erroneous thoughts that God had committed 

the conversion of the world to the Church, the effort was 

made to bring about at least a partial reformation of 

the conduct of the world. Thus the high standard for 

the Lord's people as set forth in his Word has been, to 

the majority of Christian people, a dead letter, and to 

the majority of ministers an unknown or at least an 

untaught lesson, because in violent opposition to their 

cherished but unscriptural theory respecting the conversion 

of the world by human agencies. 

Thus we see what a great loss true Christianity and 
true Christian teaching sustained through the introduction 



R2533 : page 250 

of a false hope, a false theory, and through the 

abandonment of the original hope set before us in the 

gospel— the faith, the hope, that God is now electing, 

selecting, polishing and preparing a little flock of faithful 

covenanters, who in his own due time, as the body, 

the bride, the joint-heirs with Christ glorified, will be 

given the power and great glory necessary to the establishment 

of righteousness in the world,— the binding 

of Satan and of sin, the opening of the blind eyes 

of corrupted humanity, and the unstopping of the dull 

ears that all may hear, and know the truth respecting 

the divine character and gracious provision of our 

Heavenly Father's plan for the world's salvation— and 

to an opportunity of sharing in that salvation everlastingly, 

if they will. 

While still adhering strictly to the same principles, 
viz., the pointing out of the necessity for full consecration 
on the part of those who would be of the Lord's 
flock, we nevertheless think it not amiss to occasionally 
draw attention to the Scriptural presentation on the 
subject of intemperance in the use of intoxicating liquors. 
It is neither necessary nor proper that we should 
take the radical and unscriptural ground seemingly 
taken by so many who advocate total abstinence, viz., 
that to even taste liquor is a sin, a grievous sin. We 
can go no further on any point than do the Scriptures, 
when they declare, "Wine is a mocker, strong drink is 
raging; and whosoever is deceived thereby is not wise." 
In harmony with the intimation of these inspired words 
is the thought that whoever trifles with this mocker is 
in danger of being deceived by it, of being ensnared, 
of being injured, of being wrecked. 

Of course, the dangers are greater to some than to 
others, but dangers there are to all: and especially as 
our race has grown weaker physically and more nervous 
through the changed conditions peculiar to our times. 
Undoubtedly under present circumstances and conditions 
the movement toward total abstinence is an excellent 
one; we merely urge that the claims for total 
abstinence should be presented on their own true, proper 
basis, and not upon any misrepresentations of the 
Scriptural teachings on this subject. 

We can certainly without impropriety urge upon 
the Lord's people the language of the Apostle, "Be not 
drunk with wine, wherein is excess, but be filled with 
the spirit [the new wine, the new exhilarant, the new 
antidote for care and pain and trouble]." (Eph. 5:18.) 
Realizing the nervous pressure of our day we may certainly 
urge that each should consider for himself whether 
or not the use of wine at all under present conditions 
might not be improper, as being dangerous. And it 
would appear that those who get most thoroughly filled 
with the spirit have in it the new wine, the new exhilarant 



of the new nature in which they can rejoice 

most, and of which they cannot partake to excess and 

injury. 

It is in place here for us to remind ourselves of 
our Lord's words, through the Apostle, that no drunkards 
shall inherit the Kingdom of God. (1 Cor. 6:10; 
Gal. 5:21.) We are not to understand these texts to 
teach that no one who has ever been drunk can enter 
into the Kingdom of God, but rather that whoever has 
come under the influence of the Gospel call and been 
begotten of the holy Spirit must of necessity receive so 
much of the spirit of a sound mind that he would not 
be deceived by the mocking wine and the insane influence 
of strong drink. (2 Tim. 1:7.) On the contrary, 
if any had been unwisely addicted to the use of liquors 
to intoxication he must, under the instructions of the 
Lord's Word and the leadings of his holy Spirit, become 
more thoroughly instructed in the way of righteousness, 
and sanctified to God, else he can never be accepted 
as one of the overcomers, one of the "little 
flock," who through the wisdom that cometh from 
above, and in laying hold upon the power of God in 
Christ, are enabled to break the bonds of Satan which 
have enslaved them. 

NOAH'S INTOXICATION EXCUSABLE. 



For the sake of some who may be inclined to excuse 
a certain amount of dissipation in view of Noah's 
drunkenness (Gen. 9:20,21), we should say a word 
in defence of the patriarch. The record is that Noah 
was a God-fearing man whom God recognized and especially 
favored because of his righteousness; and the 
fact that he became intoxicated after having had six 

R2533 : page 251 

hundred years of experience has not only struck Christian 
people with astonishment, but has inclined some 
weaker characters to excuse their own unwisdom by 
his course. 

In Noah's defence we call attention to the fact that 
his intoxication was after the flood and was purely accidental. 
The flood itself was a part of a great change 
in the aerial conditions of our earth: to our understanding 
the flood was produced by the precipitation to the 
earth of an immense quantity of water which previously 
had surrounded the earth at a distance as a cloudy 
canopy. 

The breaking of this canopy or envelope of water 
not only produced the flood, but altered the conditions 
of nature so that storms, rains, etc., resulted, things 
which had never been before. (Gen. 2:5,6.) Another 
result, we believe, was the production of an aciditous 



condition of the atmosphere tending toward ferment, 
which directly affected human longevity, so that according 
to the Scripture records the average of human 
life quickly decreased from eight and nine hundred 
years to one hundred. This ferment from the changed 
atmosphere, affecting the grape, produces "must," and 
thence the alcoholic condition which produces drunkenness. 
According to the record, Noah's drunkenness 
was the result of the first vintage of grapes after the 
flood, and it evidently was contrary to all his experiences 
preceding the flood. As we have no record of 
his ever having become intoxicated afterward we are 
justified in supposing that this one instance was the 
result of ignorance respecting the changed character of 
the grape product fermented. From this standpoint 
nothing will be seen in Noah's conduct calculated to 
encourage or excuse drunkenness on the part of those 
who know very well that "wine is a mocker." 

Those who have received the holy Spirit and who 
have found it to be the spirit of a sound mind should 
seek to inculcate some of their new soundness of judgment 
on all matters to others as they have opportunity 
—especially to their children, who subsequently learning 
the source of that sound judgment may be the more 
favorably influenced toward a full consecration of themselves 
to the Lord, thus saving them from many disasters, 
moral and physical, to which they may be exposed 
if left without the wise counsel of those to whom 
they should and do look naturally for lessons of instruction 
and for helps in the way to nobility of life 
and character. 

We give below a portion of the lesson under consideration 
in the form of a wine glass, and some remarks 
of an unknown author in the form of a decanter, 
which may be interesting to the children and impressive 
to their memories. 

THE DRUNKARD'S WOE-CUP. 



"Who hath woe? who hath sorrow? who hath 
contentions? who hath complaining? who 
hath wounds without cause, who hath 
redness of eyes? They that tarry 
long at the wine; they that go 
to seek out mixed wine. 
Look not thou upon the 
wine when it is red, 
when it giveth 
its color 
in the 
cup, 
when it goeth 
down 
smoothly: 



at the 
last it biteth 
like a serpent, and 
stingeth like an adder. 



THE OLD DECANTER. 



"There was an old decanter, 
and its mouth was gaping 
wide; the rosy wine had 
ebbed away and left its 
crystal side; and the 
wind went humming 
humming, up and 
down the sides it 
flew, and through 
its reed-like, hollow 
neck, the wildest notes 
it blew. I placed it in 
the window, where the 
blast was blowing free, and 
fancied that its pale mouth 
sang the queerest strains to me. 
"They tell me— puny conquerors! 
the Plague has slain his ten, and 
War his hundred thousand of the very 
best of men; but I,"— 'twas thus the bottle 
spake— "but I have conquered more than all 
your famous conquerors so feared and famed of 
yore. Then come, ye youths and maidens all, come 
drink from out my cup, the beverage that dulls the 
brains and burns the spirits up; that puts to shame 
your conquerors that slay their scores below, for 
this has deluged millions with the lava tide of 
woe. Though in the path of battle darkest 
waves of blood may roll; yet while 
I killed the body, I have damned 
the very soul. The cholera, 
the plagues, the sword, such 
ruin never wrought as I, in mirth or 
malice, on the innocent have brought. 
And still I breathe upon them, and they 
shrink before my breath; and year by year my 
thousands tread the dismal road of DEATH." 



R2534 : page 252 
NEHEMIAH'S CORRECTION OF SABBATH-BREAKING. 
-DEC. 3.-NEH. 13:15-22.- 



"Remember the Sabbath day to keep it holy."— Exod. 20:8. 

NEHEMIAH remained with his people as its Persian 
governor for twelve years, when he was 
recalled to the palace by Artaxerxes. (Neh. 13:6.) He 
returned to Jerusalem by the king's permission probably 
five years afterward. Meantime the interests of 
the Israelites had prospered in temporal matters, but 
suffered from a moral and religious standpoint. Malachi 
prophesied during this period, and from his book 
we get a clear insight into some of the degeneracy of 
that time. The demoralization seems to have started 
with the desire to be on friendly terms with the gentiles 
in that vicinity, contrary to divine command. 

This led to more mixed marriages, and correspondingly 
to a growing lack of interest in the divine law 
and worship. The high priest's grandson, Manasseh, 
married the daughter of Sanballat, once a prominent 
enemy of the Jews, and a man of influence; and 
one of the tithe-chambers of the Temple was desecrated 
by fitting it up as a dwelling place for Tobiah, 
the Ammonite, who by marriage became related 
to the high priest: and this policy, sanctioned 
by such high authority, was greatly followed by others. 
(Neh. 13:4,5,28; Mai. 2:14-16.) It is not 
surprising that such disregard of divine law led naturally 
and quickly to the neglect of tithes for the support 
of the ministers of the Temple, leading also to 
further selfishness, which, if it brought a sacrifice to 
the Lord at all was disposed to bring the poor, the 
lame and the blind of the flock, not the unblemished 
fading. It is no wonder, either, that there followed in 
the wake of these things sorcery, adultery, false swearing, 
oppression, defrauding of widows and fatherless, 
etc. -Mai. 1:7,8; 3:5,9. 

But our lesson deals particularly with another evil 
of that time— Sabbath-breaking. The policy of those 
who succeeded Nehemiah on his return to Persia was, 
as we have seen, to conciliate foreigners, and this, no 
doubt, largely in the interest of commerce. With the 
coming of heathen wives and the relaxing interest in 
the Lord and his commandments, and the frequent intercommunication 
with heathen who observed no Sabbath 
day, Sabbath day regulations were quickly broken 
down. 

We may draw a lesson here for Spiritual Israel, 
and apply the Apostle's words, "Evil communications 
corrupt good manners," and our Lord's words, "Ye 
are not of this world, even as I am not of this world." 
The Spiritual Israelite is commanded to be separate 
from the world, and to seek his fellowships with his 
own people, the Lord's people, and not to be unequally 
yoked with unbelievers. (2 Cor. 6:14.) We may apply 
this specially to marriage, but to some extent it 
might be regarded as applicable also to business partnerships, 



etc. As the heathen peoples surrounding Israel 
exercised a continual pressure upon them, so worldly 
influences surrounding the Spiritual Israelites continually 
press them with the spirit of worldliness, which 
needs to be continually repelled; for once this spirit is 
admitted to the citadel of the heart it wars against the 
spirit of holiness, devotion to God, etc., and to whatever 
extent the worldly spirit invades the family, in 
that proportion the sanctifying of the spirit of truth is 
antagonized and off-set. Let us, as Israelites indeed, 
be continually on guard against all alien and alienating 
influences of the world, the flesh and the devil. 

Nehemiah, on his return to the governorship, 
at once addressed himself to the rectification of the 
disorders described, beginning with the cleansing of the 
Temple, the restoration of its service, and the proper 
supplies for its ministers. Then he came to the question 
of Sabbath desecration, with which our lesson particularly 
deals. He remonstrated with the nobles against 
such a violation of the divine command— the fourth in 
Israel's Decalogue. He pointed out to them the fact 
that Sabbath desecration had much to do with their 
Babylonish captivity. It will be remembered that in 
explaining the seventy years' desolation of the land of 
Israel the Lord declared that he would make it desolate 
seventy years until it should have fulfilled its Sabbaths 
—its Jubilee years. (2 Chron. 36:21.) True, those were 
year-Sabbaths, and not day-Sabbaths, but we are to 
remember the Sabbath system (the seventh day and 
the fiftieth day, the seventh year, and the fiftieth year) 
was a connected whole: and doubtless had Israel properly 
observed their Sabbath days they would also have properly 
observed their Sabbath years and Jubilees.* 

Nehemiah, after thus discoursing with the nobles 
on the propriety of the matter and the danger to the 
nation of thus violating the divine Law, began a reformation 
by closing the gates of Jerusalem at sundown 
of the sixth day of the week (Friday), and keeping 
them closed until sundown of the seventh day of the 
week (Saturday). The foreign tradesmen coming for 
business on the Sabbath were disappointed and obliged 
to camp outside the city; but in expectation that the 
reformation would be shortlived they came in like manner 
the next Sabbath. Nehemiah then warned them 
that to come again for Sabbath trade and to keep up a 
commotion around the gates of the city on the Sabbath 
day would subject them to arrest as disturbers of the 
law and peace of the city, and they were thus restrained. 



*See MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. II., Chap. 6. 
R2534 : page 253 
We must all commend Nehemiah's devotion to the divine 



Law and must concede that he in no sense of the 
word exceeded its requirements. 

The Spiritual Israelite, altho in no sense of the word 
under the Law of Sinai, which was given exclusively 
to the fleshly Israelite, has nevertheless his Sabbath 
day— his rest day. It is a larger and a fuller day than 
was the Jewish one, as his rest is a grander and more 
perfect rest than the physical one of the Jew. The 
spiritual Israelite rests in faith, rests in Christ. Having 
taken upon him the yoke of this new Master he 
finds, as was promised, rest to his soul, and not merely 
rest to his flesh— mind-rest, not merely bodily rest. 
(Matt. 1 1:29.) This is the rest or Sabbath mentioned 
by the Apostle (Heb. 4:3) saying, "We which have 
believed do enter into rest." Our rest in the Lord is 
as complete as is our belief in him. He who believes 
fully rests fully; he who believes only partially rests 
but partially. The ideal condition of the spiritual Israelite 
is the attainment of a perfect rest, a perfect Sabbath-keeping, 
in his present experience, and a waiting 
and laboring for another and still more complete rest— 
the actual rest of the perfected condition— the rest that 
remains for the people of God. "Let us therefore labor 
to enter into that rest [Sabbath], lest any man fall after 
the same example of unbelief [of fleshly Israel.]" 
-Heb. 4:9-11. 

While the Spiritual Israelite should never lose 
sight of these, his real Sabbaths, the antitypes of fleshly 
Israel's Sabbath days and Sabbath years, and while he 
should never forget that he is completely freed from the 
Law of Sinai respecting any and all Sabbaths, holy days, 
new moons, etc. (Col. 2:16), nevertheless he does rejoice 
in and should avail himself of any arrangements of 
nominal Christendom which may appear to be favorable 
to his spiritual resting, his continual Sabbath -keeping. 

It so happens that nominal Christendom has set 
apart one day in seven as a Sabbath of rest— not the 
seventh day, which was commanded to the Jews, but 
the first day of the week, which was never commanded 
to anyone by divine authority. No matter by whatsoever 
misconception this first day of the week, called 
Sun-day in commemoration of the ancient heathen 
worship of the sun, was originally set apart as sacred 
and is still set apart by the laws of Christendom, it 
contains a great blessing, not only to the people at large 
but especially to the true Israelites. 

(1) To the people at large it means a day of rest 
from toil, a day of recreation, refreshment, change; a 
day for different sights and sounds, a day different from 
other days immersed in toil; a day of opportunity for 
mental development according to the best lines they 
may have knowledge of and be willing to follow. For 
a time some laborers, mechanics and merchants regarded 
the compulsory cessation of toil as a hardship, 
injurious to their interests, but they very generally have 
come to see that there is an over-supply of labor anyway, 



and that as far as the whole people is concerned, 

the labor of the six days will be worth exactly as much 

as the labor of seven. Consequently we find that now 

labor organizations are earnest for the enforcement of 

Sunday laws, and that practically the only persons of 

contrary mind are those who own and operate machinery. 

In 1886 a thousand carpenters in Berlin petitioned 

the government for protection against Sunday labor; 

in the same year a Socialistic congress in Belgium propounded 

as one of its chief demands Sunday rest. In 

Holland there is at present in progress an effort for 

emancipation from Sunday work; and recently in Wisconsin 

a Law and Order League was organized to enforce 

Sunday laws, etc. Working men are finding that 

in losing Sunday they gain nothing to compensate them. 

While the fourth commandment to Fleshly Israel 
was chiefly in the nature of a type, foreshadowing the 
rest coming to Spiritual Israelites, nevertheless, like 
every divine law, it was in no wise injurious, but on 
the contrary very beneficial to Fleshly Israel to observe 
the seventh day, even as it is now beneficial to all mankind 
to observe a seventh day— whether the first day 
of the week, observed by Christendom, or the seventh 
day of the week observed by the Jews. Experience 
proves that such a rest is necessary from the human 
and physical standpoint. 

R2535 : page 253 

(2) To the true Spiritual Israelite Sunday is and 
for long centuries has been a great boon, a great blessing 
—the only drawback has been that not infrequently 
he has been mistaught to believe that Sunday is the 
Jewish Sabbath or a divinely appointed substitute for 
it, and in consequence has been brought under a bondage 
—the bondage of the Jewish Law, with which really 
the Spiritual Israelite has nothing whatever to do, he 
being under a new covenant with a new law and a new 
Mediator. (Heb. 8:6.) But the Spiritual Israelite, 
already resting in heart (Sabbath-keeping antitypically, 
by faith in the Redeemer's finished work), rightly understanding 
the matter and appreciating the privileges 
which a general Sunday observance brings, may use 
this day to wonderful profit and blessing. And the 
fact that he has an opportunity so to do means to him 
an obligation so to do; because, tho without stipulations 
of law to bind him, he is under the general Law 
of Love, and by it is obligated to do with his might 
what his hands find to do— to glorify the Lord, to bless 
the brethren, and to do good unto all men as he may 
have opportunity: and the day and customs are favorable 
to his exercise in all these respects. 

The Spiritual Israelite is to esteem that whatever 
mistaken notions humanity may have had which led 

R2535 : page 254 



them to set apart the first day of the week, the matter 

has nevertheless been evidently of divine providence 

to present special opportunities for profit and progress 

to the Spiritual Israelites now called to be of the Royal 

Priesthood. And such are prompt to avail themselves 

of these privileges and opportunities; to assemble themselves 

for the study of the divine Word, for praise, for 

prayer and for spiritual fellowship,— building one another 

up in the most holy faith. 

In view of the fact that the majority of the Lord's 
consecrated people are poor,— not many great, not many 
wise, not many learned, not many rich— how necessary 
it has been that the Lord should provide such an opportunity 
as this day affords for release from earthly 
toil and spiritual refreshment; and how fortunate it is 
for such that the masses of Christendom esteem rest on 
this day to be compulsory from the divine standpoint. 

Of all the people in the world, therefore, those who 
enjoy the light of present truth and recognize this day 
as a God-given privilege, and not as compulsory, should 
be the very last to either do or say anything which 
would bring discredit on the day and its sacred observance 
as a day of rest. This, of course, does not mean 
that we should advocate its observance with the usual 
arguments; but it does mean that all such should be 
careful in their observance of the day for three reasons: 

(1) Because they would not wish to see the day 

fall into disuse or disrespect in the esteem of the world 
in general, for humanity's sake, as well as for their 
own sakes— physical and spiritual. 

(2) Because they would not wish to do anything 

which would lead others to a violation of a less enlightened 
conscience, remembering that the conscience 
is the most valuable as well as the most tender and 
easily injured quality of the human nature. 

(3) Because they do wish to maintain a proper 
religious influence with their neighbors, whose minds 
are not clearly and fully enlightened on this subject- 
to the intent that they may exercise the greater influence 
for good and for the truth as time and opportunity 
shall offer. 

For all these reasons we urge upon the readers of 
this journal a glad and careful observance of Sunday 
as a sacred, a holy day, providentially set apart by 
human law. Let it be entirely separated from business, 
and so far as possible from all labor not actually 
necessary; let it be employed in the upbuilding of 
themselves, and their families, and the household of 
faith, and as many as the truth shall draw into their 
sphere of influence,— in moral and spiritual directions. 

In the concluding verse of the lesson Nehemiah 
asks the Lord's blessing upon himself, in view of the 
work which he had done in the name of the Lord. He 
was fighting valiantly for God's cause, and thereby 
making many enemies; and hence while not flinching 



from his duty it was not unreasonable, but very proper, 
that he should think of the Lord's faithfulness toward 
all faithful to him. Had Nehemiah lived in our day, 
with its Gospel high calling and privileges, we doubt 
not he would have been one of the "saints," and then, 
assuredly, he would have known definitely and clearly 
of the exceeding great and precious promises given to 
the Gospel Church. But he lived before the "high calling" 
began, before the exceeding great and precious 
promises were made. He knew not what he would receive 
of the Lord for his faithfulness, but we may know, 
because instructed of the holy Spirit through the Apostle's 
writings. We may be assured that if Nehemiah 
continued faithful to the end of his career he would be 
amongst the worthies of the past mentioned by the 
Apostle in Hebrews 11— those who wrought righteousness, 
and were valiant on the side of God and his Law. 
We are assured that these were acceptable with God and 
will ultimately be made perfect— in the future, after 
the Church, the elect body of Christ has been completed, 
been made perfect, and glorified in the heavenly Kingdom. 
-Heb. 11:39,40. 



R2535 : page 254 

SOME NEGLECTED FACTS IN HUMAN BIOLOGICAL HISTORY. 



"STUDENTS of Human Physiology, Pathology 

and Dietetics have hitherto persistently ignored 

certain facts in man's history which have a controlling 

influence on present conditions. To ignore 

these historical biological facts is as irrational as it 

would be to attempt to study the present civil institutions 

of our country and ignore our past history. 

"In regard to man's early biological history we 
have records of the highest credibility. There records 
are corroborated by all the facts within the reach of 
present observation. That present theories and speculations 
are contrary to them has no weight with a truly 
scientific mind, which cares for facts alone. 

"These records do not inform us what was the 
method used in the creation of man. They thus leave 
the field open for interesting speculation as to whether 
it was by an evolutionary process or otherwise. We 
do learn that the first progenitors of the human race 
were perfect human beings, a man and a woman of the 
highest organization, both physical and mental, lacking 
in nothing except character, something which 
could only be developed by experience and the exercise 
of their faculties. We are also informed that the 
woman was developed from the man by the method of 
reproduction known as gemmation or budding; this, 



however, being an exceptional case, all subsequent 
reproduction in the human race being by the sexual 
method. 

"This perfect human pair were placed in a perfect 
environment, called the garden of Eden, or Paradise. 
This was a small portion of the earth's surface specially 
prepared for the abode of man, who was specially 
favored above the rest of the animal kingdom, having 
been endowed with an organization so much superior 
to that of any other animal that he possessed the powers 
of reason, conscience, imagination, generalization 
and free will to a high degree, thus making him an 
earthly image of spirit beings. 

"So exalted an animal was worthy of a more prolonged 
existence than the lower animals, consequently 

R2535 : page 255 

he was endowed with the privilege of continued life 
on earth, being so constituted that as each cell of his 
structure became worn out and effete it was removed 
and a new cell put in its place, thus keeping his tissues 
always young and free from senile decay. 

"The design of the Creator being that the human 
race should be 'Sons of God' and not merely 'works 
of his hand' like the lower animals, the announcement 
was made to Adam that the law of limited existence 
and death which he saw controlling the lower animals 
should not prevail against him or his offspring, but 
that he would be permitted to live on everlastingly in 
his perfect environment, provided he developed a character 
which would love and pursue righteousness and 
eschew evil; otherwise the gift of lasting life would 
be taken from him and he would be brought under the 
law of limited existence and death, everlasting life being 
a curse to an evil being and not a blessing. 

"As we have seen, man, being a perfect being, endowed 
with the power of rejuvenating his tissues so 
that he could always remain young, was placed in a 
perfect environment, called Paradise. Here the climatic 
conditions were perfect, the sanitary conditions 
were perfect, and, last but not least, he was supplied 
with a perfect diet. 

"As a simple and suitable commencement of the 
disciplinary training necessary to develop his character 
and test his obedience, he was placed under a single 
prohibition. He was given the 'herb bearing seed' 
for food and allowed to eat of the fruit of every tree 
in Paradise with one exception. 'Of the tree of the 
knowledge of good and evil thou shalt not eat;' and 
he was warned that if he disobeyed this command he 
would surely die. Perhaps if man had not been influenced 
towards the wrong course he would have stood 
this simple first test successfully, but there was present 
a spirit being of a high order whom ambition and 
selfishness had led into rebellion. By a line of specious 



reasoning he succeeded in seducing Eve, 'the 

R2536 : page 255 

weaker vessel,' into a violation of the prohibition. 
Adam knew that the penalty for this was death; that 
his beloved and only congenial companion must cease 
to exist. Feeling that he would rather die than live 
without her, he also took of the forbidden fruit in order 
that he might share her penalty, preferring the 
nothingness of death to life without her who was his 
other self, 'bone of my bone, flesh of my flesh.' We 
are expressly informed that 'Adam was not deceived.' 
What he did he did with his eyes open. In effect he 
committed suicide for love. 

"The laws of God are unchangeable, and the penalty 
of death once threatened for this disobedience must 
be executed. Adam and Eve were put to death, within 
the limits of one of God's 'thousand year days,' as 
He had said, In the day that thou eatest thereof dying 
thou shalt die.' God had made man on a plan 
which permitted continued existence in a suitable environment, 
and man would have continued to live on, 
even in sin and rebellion, if he could have remained 
in Paradise. In order to put the sentence of death into 
execution it was necessary to drive man out of Paradise 
into the 'cursed' or unfinished part of the earth 
'lest he put forth his hand and eat of the tree of life 
and live forever.' In the unfinished earth he was exposed 
to climatic vicissitudes, to accidents and catastrophes, 
to the attacks of disease germs, to wearing 
and unwholesome forms of labor. Above all, he was 
deprived of his natural food. 

"Since the day when Adam and Eve were driven 
from Eden, 'the world being all before them where to 
choose,' and the cherubim, armed with the revolving 
sword of flame, took its station at the gate, no human 
being, so far as we know, has ever tasted a mouthful 
of man's natural food. Thus Adam and all his race 
have died, altho originally adapted to everlasting life 
on earth: Adam being put to death as the penalty of 
his sin, and all his posterity because the germs of the 
whole race being in Adam's body when he commenced 
to die, by the natural law of heredity they could only 
receive what Adam had to give them, which was death 
and not life. 

"These, then, are the controlling facts of man's biological 
history, a life history which is not paralleled 
by that of any other animal, namely: the possession 
of an organism built so as to be capable of running on 
forever if surrounded by a special environment and 
supplied with a special food, but separated from his 
special environment and deprived of his special food 
by a judicial decree: and the medical profession will 
fail to solve the problems of pathology and dietetics as 
long as they ignore these facts. With man every condition 



is pathological, every environment is unnatural, 
every article of his diet is abnormal. That the race 
did not become extinct long ago can only be explained 
by the history given above. 

"The mental condition of man depends upon the 
physical. There can be no mind without a body. Therefore, 
man's mind is unsound as the inevitable result 
of his physical derangement. This is why man, altho 
endowed with reason, everywhere acts in an irrational 
manner. Some men are insane, but all men are of unsound 
mind. There have been only two human beings 
who possessed perfectly sound minds. One was 
Adam, but his mental and physical health continued 
for only a brief period, perhaps not more than one 
year. The other was Jesus, the Christ. Altho not of 
Adam's race, he was a perfect human being; perfect 
mentally as well as physically. Imperfect men who 
attempt to conform their ideas and their conduct to 
his perfect standard are said by Paul to have the 'spirit 
of a sound mind.' It is the highest attainment of depraved 
humanity to have the spirit or disposition of a 
sound mind. Puck was fully justified by the facts 
when he exclaimed, 'What fools these mortals be!' 
Our weakened and unsound minds can make but little 
progress towards the truth on medical subjects or any 
other until we obtain 'the spirit of a sound mind' and 
endeavor to see man's condition in its true light. 

"I do not like to leave this subject without adding 
that the fall of man was foreseen and provided for in 
the Plan of God, and he has not changed in the least 
his purposes to have on earth a Paradise populated by 
perfect men. At the time appointed that purpose will 
be accomplished. The race of Adam will share in it, 
for altho the death sentence has been executed upon 
them and they have been consigned to the grave, they 
have been ransomed from the grave and will live again. 
All in Adam die, but all in Christ will be made alive 
in the future. 

R2536 : page 256 

"I can speak with positiveness on these points, 
thanks to the light thrown on these hitherto dark 
questions by that wonderful book, The Plan of the 
Ages. It is a key to that sublime treasury of facts, 
the Bible, enabling us to reduce its facts to a system, 
'having the completeness of a science, the precision 
of algebra.' The author's discovery of The Plan of 
the Ages has done for Bible phenomena what the discovery 
of the heliocentric character of the solar system 
did for astronomy. In another generation this will 
have displaced all other theology and philosophy as 
completely as the Copernican astronomy has displaced 
the Ptolemaic." DAVID P. JACKSON, M.D. 

In Toledo Medical and Surgical Reporter. 



page 256 

INTERESTING LETTERS. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-Your welcome letter 
hand. The interest and love which your letters show 
are a great blessing to me. Praise God for all the lovingkindness 
he shows me. If I had the ability (and 
if I were not afraid to weary you and take up your 
time) I would try to tell you how grateful I feel toward 
you also. 

Concerning the "harvest" work in Sweden: since 
I first recognized this work, and that the proper time 
for it is now due, I have, so far as I have been able, 
been spreading the precious truths with which the 
Lord through DAWN has honored me, to such as are 
professedly his people. Have had a number of encouraging 
experiences in the work, and feel that the 
Lord is constantly making me more fit for it. 

A few days before I started from Stockholm I 
enjoyed a visit from Bro. Winter. He is helping me 
greatly by writing me letters, the contents of which 
gladden my heart. May the Lord bless him! His 
health is poor, or maybe he would have gone along on 
this "missionary" trip. 

Since I left Stockholm I have sold 89 copies of 
VOL. I., but only a few copies of the other two; have 
distributed a good many tracts and have through conversation 
sought to interest the Lord's people whenever 
opportunity afforded. I visit preachers and teachers 
in "Babylon," even the priests of the state church. 
Pray that the Lord may give me wisdom and in all 
things be my leader. 

Have met with some people who have never heard 
of M. DAWN, but yet discern something of the true 
state of affairs in the churches, and hold views in considerable 
harmony with the DAWN teachings. I met 
a brother who reads the TOWER. He is deeply interested 
in the truth. Some who have received the DAWN 
through me have begun to work to help spread it. A 
lady of some prominence is acting as my "agent" in 
Stockholm; also another sister is zealously working in 
this service. 

My stock of books is kept by a firm of merchants, 
both believers, and personal friends of mine. They 
forward books as I need them. Have stamped their 
names on the tracts and books, and they fill all orders 
for books. The opportunities which I have for doing 
"harvest" work are many, and the knowledge that 
these opportunities will soon be gone spurs me on to 
harder work if possible, in the "harvest" field. God 
grant that I may have the proper wisdom to make the 



best of these opportunities as they present themselves. 

Up to date I have sold 248 copies of VOL. L, 37 
copies of VOL. II. and 27 copies of VOL. III.; total, 312 
copies. My "helpers," mentioned above, have sold 
some, but how many I am not able to say just now. 

That you may still continue to be the channel 
through which blessings upon God's people may flow, 
is the constant prayer of, 

Yours, gratefully, AUG. LUNDBORG.-Sweden. 



R2536 : page 256 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-Brother Weber was 
with us Saturday and brought an account of the grand 
feast you all had at St. Louis. I am in communication 
with the Trunk Line Association regarding a Philadelphia 
Convention. 

We are getting great blessings from VOL. V., and 
rejoicing in the light thrown on so many Scriptures. 
May the dear Lord continue to use you in dispensing 
such food to us all, is my constant prayer. When you 
said, at the Boston Convention, that you thought in the 
next few years a great many would come into the truth 
after seeing the pronounced unscriptural views of the 
nominal ministry I was somewhat surprised at first, 
as I had thought the wheat was pretty well sifted from 
the denominations, but your reasons were very convincing, 
and since then I have had many opportunities 
to note its harmony with the Word and the signs of 
the times. Corroborative evidence is furnished, I think, 
in the splendid newspaper accounts of some of the 
Boston and St. Louis meetings. The account of your 
discourse in Monday's St. Louis Republican was without 
a flaw so far as I can recall, and such articles must 
certainly be intended by the Lord to cause some to 
search further for the light. 

The adversary is also active. The friends in Philadelphia 
received postals, notifying us that E. C. Mott 
would speak here. I am so thankful, however, that 
his erroneous teaching is so well known to the brethren 
here that it seems most improbable that he could 
move them from their steadfastness if they heard him. 
He has for some time been teaching that none are 
justified but those that are spiritually begotten— basing 
it upon an erroneous interpretation of 1 John 5:1, 
and wresting all other Scriptures to suit his theory. 
It is a terrible thing to be so influenced by a desire to 
bring out something new that we reject the Old Theology 
in order to glorify self. I pray for grace and 
humility that I may not be led away by pride. 

As treasurer for the Philadelphia Church I have 
been instructed by the brethren to send to the WATCH 
TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY an order for $25, 
which is herein enclosed. 



With Christian love to yourself and the dear 
friends in the TOWER office, I remain, 
Yours in the service of the Truth, 

BENJAMIN H. BARTON. 



page 257 
VOL. XX. DECEMBER 1, 1899. No. 23. 



CONTENTS. 



Views From the Watch Tower 259 

Cold Comfort for Evolutionists, et al 259 

A Minister's Presentiments 261 

An Astounding Proposition 261 

Papacy's Demands in Spain 262 

Poem: Walking in the Narrow Way 263 

Questions and Answers: Borrowing 263 

and Lending— Man's Free Agency 

Meteoric Showers— The Study of 

Psychic Phenomena 264 

"Prehuman"— "Predestination" 265 

"God Loveth a Cheerful Giver" 265 

Right and Wrong Conditions and 

Their Results 269 

Resisting Worldly Influences 272 

Items: Z.W.T. Visits during 1900- 

The Attached Bible Price List, etc 258 

page 258 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, N.Y. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity or 
adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, if they 
send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting the 
paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list 
continually. 



DO YOU DESIRE ZION'S WATCH TOWER VISITS 
-DURING 1900?- 

If so, please respond at once, either enclosing the subscription 
price, or write a postal card requesting its continuance on 
credit— or requesting it free, as per our terms above, if you are 
one of the Lord's Poor. 

ATTENTION TO THIS BEFORE THE EXPIRATION OF YOUR YEAR SAVES 



US MUCH TROUBLE AND SOME EXPENSE. 

Remember that we are desirous of retaining your name upon 
the lists so long as you live and are interested in the writings 
(whether a paying or a free subscriber); but we have no better 
means of knowing of your continued life and interest than by 
your renewal of your subscription. 

THE ATTACHED BIBLE PRICE LIST. 

We have carefully selected from all publishers the best values 
in Bibles,— selecting according to contents and bindings— 
and have endeavored to describe them. Read the list carefully 
and, if you desire one, order by numbers. Please do not ask us 
to select for you. 

Each Bible has its own peculiarities. If you are well educated 
and critical, notice the "Variorum." We closed out all 
that remains of the large type edition at a bargain;— notice the 
prices. If you admire photo-engravings of the Holy Land, etc. 
notice the Holman Edition. If you desire an "Oxford" Bible 
with footnotes showing the various readings of the Revised 
Version, you will find it in the list. If you want low-priced 
Bibles notice the Oxford and Bagster specials. Remember that 
nearly all we have are "specials" in price or in quality or both. 
All Bibles at lowest wholesale prices— one as cheap as a hundred. 

FOR TRACT SOCIETY'S ANNUAL REPORT AND GOOD HOPES 
BLANKS FOR 1900, SEE NEXT ISSUE. 



WILL WE ACCEPT THREE MONTHS OR SIX MONTHS 
TRIAL SUBSCRIPTIONS? 

We certainly will not refuse them! We are very anxious 
that as nearly as possible the WATCH TOWER subscription lists 
shall represent all who are in sympathy with the harvest message, 
even tho some of them be not as yet fully ready to commit 
themselves unreservedly as fully endorsing our teachings. Urge 
any of this class that are too poor to pay to accept our offer above 
and have its visits regularly, free. But they must make application 
for themselves if able to write. 



R2536 : page 259 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 



COLD COMFORT FOR EVOLUTIONISTS AND 
HIGHER CRITICS. 



PROF. A. H. SAYCE, one of the greatest living 
archaeological explorers and professors of 
Assyriology in Oxford University, England, after 
thirty years spent in deciphering the ancient hieroglyphics 
of eastern lands, recently declared:— 

"Higher Criticism is wrong. The higher critics of 
the Bible are engaged in hair-splitting trivialities and 
are pursuing false methods. Our researches among the 
monuments of Babylon, Assyria and Egypt have opened 
up a new world undreamed of a few years ago. They 
show that the history of mankind goes back to a very remote 
past; and that civilization was then quite as high as 
that of imperial Rome or the civilization of Europe at 
the time of the Renaissance, if not higher in some respects. 

"They have also shown how much there is still to 
be discovered. After all, what we have found is only 
the beginning of what we shall find. It is no longer 
possible to say, as in the early days of oriental research, 
that such and such a thing could not have been. The 
population of the early East was highly cultured and 
highly literary. Both in Egypt and in Babylon a large 
portion of the people seem to have occupied their time 
in reading and writing. 

"The monuments that have been found in Egypt 

R2537 : page 259 

and Babylonia have revealed this fact in part. These 
are literally covered with writing. Even the smallest 
articles of daily use have been found covered with inscriptions. 
The revelations are also partly due to the 
discoveries that the old cities of the East had very 
large libraries of books. And some discoveries made 
a few years ago at Tel-el-Amarna, in Egypt— where 
a large number of letters on clay tablets were found- 
proved that in the fifteenth century before the Christian 
era the whole educated population of the East 
from the Euphrates to the Nile were engaged in writing 
letters to one another. This correspondence was 
going on actively in a language and form of writing 
which belonged only to the Babylonians. Those, therefore, 
who wrote in this language must have studied 
and learned it as we do French. Hence there must 
have been schools in which the language and script of 
Babylonia were studied all over western Asia. 

"Not long since a discovery was made in the extreme 
south of Egypt showing that papyrus books 
were written in the very early days of Egyptian history. 
As regards the Babylonian libraries, they were 
equally ancient and very numerous. Every great library 
had its clay books. Some time ago at a place 
called Tello, in South Chaldea, a French excavator 
discovered a library which was formed three or four 
centuries before the birth of Abraham, and which he 
concludes had contained 33,000 separate clay tablets 
or books on all kinds of subjects. He found them arranged 



in shelves, piled one upon another. They had 
probably been overwhelmed by the fall of the building 
in which they were placed. Many of these clay tablets 
are now in Constantinople. About 10,000 were 
stolen by the Arabs. The tablets are mostly written 
in Accadian, a language which is still imperfectly 
known." 



Amongst the papyri found recently in Egypt and 
mentioned in our View for Nov. 15th were others quite 
interesting. One was— An Ode of Welcome to Usertesen 
III., written probably on the occasion of a royal 
visit. It has six stanzas of ten lines each and is pronounced 
by scientists "the oldest known poem in the 
world." They forget the Bible again, for the Book of 
Job is of about the same age and conceded to be a masterly 
poetic production. 

Veterinary surgery is treated in a good sized volume, 
and we are told "the cures are very practical and 
similar to those used in the present day." But legal 
documents and private papers are amongst the most 
interesting, evidencing surely that if (as Evolutionists 
claim) the first man was but one remove from a monkey, 
he got civilized very quickly, and that so far 

R2537 : page 260 

as the Egyptians are concerned, very little evoluting 
has been done for the past 3700 years. We quote a 
few extracts from these interesting documents from 
the London Daily News of Sept. 29th, '99,— supplied 
to it by Mr. F. L. Griffith,-as follows:- 

"The wills and conveyances are certainly the 
earliest examples of legal documents known, and afford 
ample proof of the antiquity of the laws of ancient 
Egypt. The first is a curious transfer of the apparently 
hereditary office of 'regulator of priestly orders' 
from father to son. 

'"I am giving up my regulatorship of priestly orders to my 
son Antef, called Jusenb, an old man's staff (assistant); even as 
I grow old let him be promoted at once. As to the title to property 
I made for his mother it is annulled.' 

"Like all Egyptian documents, it concludes with 
'name list of those in whose presence this title to property 
was made,' and the date is the 19th day of Khoiak, 
in the 39th year of Amen-em-hat III., or about 
B.C. 2588.* The next papyrus is even of greater interest. 
It measures twenty-two inches by twelve and 
a half, and has been folded up and sealed with a scarab 
seal, and is inscribed with two wills. The first is a 
deed of gift by a man named Ankh-ren, servant of the 
superintendent of works, to his brother, of all his 
property in 'town and marsh land, his servants,' etc. 
It is stated a list of the property is deposited in the 



office of the 'second registrar.' The second will is 
that of the brother, named Uah, who bequeaths all to 
his wife, Teta. Considering its great age, it is really 
a very remarkable document. The writer says: 

'"I am making a title to the property to my wife— of all 
things given to me by my brother, the devoted servant of the 
superintendent of works, Ankh-ren, as to each article. She 
shall give it to any she desires of the children that she has 
borne me. I am giving her the four Eastern (Syrian) slaves 
that my brother gave me. She shall give them to whomsoever 
she will of her children. As to my tomb, let me be buried in 
it with my wife. Moreover as to the apartments my brother 
built for me, my wife shall dwell therein without allowing her 
to be put forth by any person. The deputy Gebu shall act as 
guardian for my son.' 

"The word used for guardian is curious, 'child 
instructor.' To the deed are appended the names of 
several official witnesses. Among the officials we find 
the name of 'the scribe of the hearing,' in whom we 
may see the official shorthand writer who wrote out 
the draft of proceedings. 

"Very curious are the private letters, a number 
of which were found. These letters, probably the oldest 
in the world, are in various handwritings, in the 
hieratic character, and resemble in style the Early 
English letters. The writing is across the longest 
width, the papyrus is then folded three times from the 
side, and sealed or tied, and the address written on the 
outside, for example: The master to whom be Life. 
Health Sakanu to whom be L.P.H., from Arisu, 
Year 2, 4th Month of Harvest, 12th day. Brought by 
Henat.' Like all Oriental letters, these ancient epistles 
are redolent with platitudes and flowery language, 
the pious phrase, Life, Prosperity and Health,' being 
constantly repeated. The less the importance of the 
letter the more flowery the language. Most of the 
letters are from officials, and relate to the public works 
being carried on. The following is a good example: 

"The servant of the wakf Arisu saith to the superintendent 
of the interior, Sa-ka-anu, to whom be life, health, and 
prosperity. This is a communication to the Master L.P.H., 
saying that I arrived in the city of Het-Gehes on the 4th Month 
of Harvest (July) on the early morning of the 5th day. I found 
that the Master had gone South. The foreman Ampy told me, 
and I gave him three laborers. Thereupon I sent to the foreman 
Henai, in a ship that I found at Het-Gahes. I caused him 
to bring thee a freight.' 

"The freight consisted of barley and durra, etc. 
Near the end of the letter is an interesting passage 
showing how the Egyptian officials worked together: 

'"Behold I have sent particulars of thy business to the 
Steward Hetu, for thou must be with him as one man (friends).' 

"There is also a letter from a lady which relates 
chiefly to the weaving carried on in the temple. 

"The letters are not always so polite, and a fine 
specimen of strong language is afforded by the 



following:— 

'"May thy speech be in all ill favor by Sebek (crocodile 
god), and whoever will send thee to perdition— favored be his 
Ka (spirit). Thus hath the dean of the temple, He Kat-Pepa, 
done for thee, continually for ever and ever, eternally. Ill be 
thy hoaring and a plague (on thee).' 

"The reports and account tablets are wearisome 
in bulk, but abound in details of the greatest value to 
the historian and archaeologist. The whole system of 
the corvee is set forth in detail. The men were called 
from certain villages and towns, hence the gangs contain 
several members of the same family, to work for 
two months. The gangs numbered usually ten, and 
each had a master, a ganger, and a timekeeper or 
scribe. They were lodged in sections in the town and 
fed from a common store. Some idea of the number 
of men and the work of the commissariat is afforded 
by the return for one day's baking of eighteen hundred 
and ninety loaves. An interesting account is that of 
the dancers employed in the temple in the great festivals. 
Many of them were Syrians and Nubians. The 
list of festivals is very curious, and among them are 
several which exist to the present day. Thus, the 'Festival 
of the Night of Receiving the River,' is the well-known 
festival of the cutting of the dam, celebrated 
to this day in Cairo on the second or third week in 
August. 

"As we turn these ancient fragments over— 
these accounts and revenue returns— it is hard to believe 
that they are the records of some forty-five centuries 
ago,+ they might be those of the Egypt of today. 
The return of the native reiyses and katibs 
(scribes) for the daily and monthly work on the barrage 
at Assouan, hardly differ in a single detail from 
those made for the reclimbing works in the Fayoum in 
Bezboim. The publication of these papyri only affords 
another proof of how real is the resurrection of the 
buried past and how vivid and full of life is the picture 
we can reconstruct." 



*Over 600 years in error (too long), as shown by the later 
findings and calculations referred to in our last issue. 

+More properly 3776 years ago, in harmony with the Bible 
Chronology and in harmony with the papyri dates discovered 
by Dr. Borchardt, set forth in our last issue, page 245. 

R2537 : page 261 

A MINISTER'S PRESENTIMENTS AND REASONS. 



Rev. H. R. Perseval, Episcopalian, of Pennsylvania, 



over his own signature has recently expressed 
his views of the present situation and the future outlook 
of the Christian religion in civilized lands. He sees a 
tendency toward the denial of all positive faith and a 
substitution of unbelief coupled with forms and liturgies: 
in other words, he foresees an Agnostic ceremonialism; 
and so far as we understand him, he is in full 
sympathy with such a faithless "church." We agree 

R2538 : page 261 

that the tendency is as he outlines it; but we are not 
in sympathy with the tendency and deny that it will 
be the Church of Christ or in any sense justified in the 
use of the name Christian. We hold that it will be 
merely the binding of the "tares" in bundles ready for 
the "fire" (trouble) of this Day of Vengeance;— that 
the true Church, the "wheat," will first all be separated 
from the "tares," as now commanded by the Lord. 
-Rev. 18:4; Isa. 48:20-22; 52:11; Jer. 51:6-10,45; 
2 Cor. 6:16-18. 

The reverend gentleman gives some cogent reasons 
for his views, from which we make brief extracts 
as follows:— 

"Even old-fashioned orthodox Protestantism is in 
America on the wane, and while the law of William 
Penn's own Pennsylvania still by statute fines those 
who speak against or insult the Holy Scriptures of 
God, many Protestant ministers in the hundreds of 
pulpits of Philadelphia find no more interesting and 
exciting theme for their Sunday preachments than the 
showing the Word of God to be the erring and often 
immoral and ridiculous word of man! 

"It is no exaggeration to say that Protestantism 
is rapidly disintegrating, and is losing its hold as a 
teaching power. 

"An American bishop, whose diocese is in the 
wilds of New England and contains but twenty-seven 
clergymen all told, has recently written a letter to a 
church newspaper in which he makes the highly interesting 
assertion that the clergy are not bound even to 
believe the statements they make in the prayers of the 
church service, which they offer out of the prayer-book 
to the God of truth! The bishop would seem to 
be a fair match, in this respect at least (altho not in 
others), to the rationalistic German professor, Adolf 
Harnack, who made a similar statement with regard 
to the Lutheran ministers of the state church, who 
were obliged to accept the Apostles' Creed which they 
did not believe! 

"It is not too much to say, then, that Protestantism 
as a system of positive religious belief is dying out, 
and that its professors are for the most part able to 
continue in its ministry only through some device of 
casuistry [equivocation, lying], which in any other 
matter would be considered by themselves, as it is in 



their case by almost every one except themselves, dishonest 

and dishonorable. It is manifest that this state 

of things can not go on, and that the only final result 

of 'progress' in this direction, so far as faith is concerned, 

must be unbelief, and, so far as organization 

is concerned, decay and dissolution." 

AN ASTOUNDING PROPOSITION. 

"THE DISAPPOINTMENT OF JESUS CHRIST." 

At a meeting of the "Canadian Society for Christian 
Union" held in Toronto, Canada, Oct. 3d, was a 
speaker, whose subject should have evoked astonishment, 
but evidently did not. The nominal Christian 
is in a sort of hypnotic stupor which accepts unquestioningly 
and unreasoningly whatever is presented to 
him by those duly authorized by any popular sect to 
bear the title of Reverend. The press reports say:— 

"Rev. A. Crapsey, of New York, had prepared a 
lengthy paper on the subject, 'The Disappointment of 
Jesus Christ' As it was too exhaustive for such a 
meeting, he gave the audience the essence of his idea 
extempore. There was, he held, one great petition in 
the Savior's prayer just before he suffered death that 
was not answered yet. He prayed that his people 
might be one, as he was one with the Father. He 
came to be a great unifier, and his plan was the most 
successful of any in the history of the world, yet his 
own people had disappointed him. They were continually 
at war with one another over trivial matters. 
The speaker held that one of the great causes of disunion 
was an improper theory of officialism, whereby 
the outward organization was considered the church." 

We would be deeply interested in reading the 
original exhaustive treatment of this subject that we 
might know,— 

(1) How it came that the Lord who had the Holy 
Spirit without measure (stint) at the time he offered 
the prayer referred to (John 17), did not know what 
to expect as the outcome of his work and hence met 
with the declared disappointment. 

(2) If disappointed in one particular may he not be 
disappointed in all? Hence, may not his prophecy of 
Matthew 24th chapter and all others of his precious 
promises be similarly mistakes— disappointments? 

(3) If our Lord and his words are thus "errant" 
would not the argument of the "Higher Critics" be 
correct when they claim that the Book is an unreliable 
guide and that instead of it we should take the wisdom 
of earth's wise men (the Higher Critics) as far better? 

(4) It is not unreasonable to suppose from his 
"orthodox" associations that the Rev. Crapsey is a 
trinitarian; and if so a believer that our Lord Jesus was 
his own Father in heaven at the same time that he was 

his own Son on earth.* This being the reverend gentleman's 



position the logic of his argument is that Jehovah 

has been disappointed and hence did not know 

the end from the beginning— as he supposed and said 



*See The At-one-ment Between God and Man, Chap. 5. 

R2538 : page 262 

he did. (Isa. 46:10.) And if Jehovah is thus "all at 
sea" and greatly disappointed at results, is it not time 
that we his creatures should become excited and abandon 
our rest in Christ and our hopes and our faith, and 
begin to try our own skill instead of trusting all to the 
Lord? 

(5) To cap the climax of this argument we should 
only need to be assured that the reverend gentleman is a 
Calvinist (a Presbyterian, or a Congregationalist, or a 
Baptist) and that he is a firm believer in "the divine 
decrees," in divine predestination,— that God foreordains 
whatsoever comes to pass. In other words, that 
God foreordained matters as we see them but did not 
know, or forgot that he had so foreordained, and was 
disappointed in consequence. 

What a wretchedly nauseating pabulum is this, 
that is being served to young and old Christians instead 
of the "sincere milk of the word" and its "strong 
meat" so abundantly supplied in the Scriptures. Is it 
any wonder that the rising generation in Christian 
lands is full of scepticism? They see the reasoning 
people leaving the Bible under the lead of Higher 
Criticism, and from the friends of the Bible they get 
such arrant nonsense as the above. The wonder 
is that all who do not see the truth do not quickly become 
skeptics. They are saved apparently by their 
stupor in things spiritual. 

THE OTHER SIDE OF THE PROPOSITION. 



What is the reverend gentleman's difficulty? The 
closing sentence quoted above shows that despite his 
gross darkness he has some light,— some light that 
many of his associates do not have. That last sentence 
gives us good hope for the man, for we see just where 
he floundered and why. He floundered in his logic by 
reason of his attempt to hold and harmonize a prominent 
teaching of Churchianity with the Scripture's 
teachings. He must sift and separate the teachings 
of the Scriptures from all others, and then he will find 
the logical harmony and consistency which he does not 
now find. 

Had he followed along Scriptural lines the logical 
reasoning of his last sentence quoted above that the 



outward organization is not the real Church, he would 
have seen that it was not for the union of the outward 
organization that our Lord prayed. He would have 
seen then that Christ is not disappointed that the outward 
organizations are not united. If the real Church 
is composed of believers and not of unbelievers, "higher 
critics" or otherwise: and if, as the Scriptures declare, 
it is composed of only such believers as are consecrated 
--the holy, "the saints" (Heb. 12:23; 2 Thes. 2:13; 
Rev. 20:6), was not the gentleman looking in a wrong 
quarter to find those who are at one with the Father 
and the Son and with each other? We think so. 

And no doubt he was mislead into all this error 
by that other doctrine of Churchianity that is in conflict 
with the teachings of the Bible,— the doctrine of 
eternal torment of all except the Church. Every man 
of generous heart, believing this false doctrine, will be 
disposed to "count into the Church" as many as possible, 
not wishing to count them into eternal torture. 
Many are thus blinded and misled and unintentionally 
arrayed against God and his Word. 

What these well-meaning but deluded people need 
is, to see the Scriptural doctrine of Election stript of 
the unscriptural doctrine of hopeless reprobation of the 
non-elect to eternal torture. They need to learn that 
God foreknew and foreordained an elect Church which 
he has been calling and selecting from among mankind 
during this age for a purpose (Acts 15:14; Rom. 8:28) 
—the glorious purpose of making them his agents for 
the blessing of all mankind. They need to see that 
this elect Church is the Seed of Abraham (Gal. 3:8,16,29), 
and that it will shortly inherit the promises 
made to Abraham:— "In thy seed shall all the families 
of the earth be blest." 

They need to see, too, what God has predestinated; 
and then they will see the absurdity of "counting in" 
the millions of nominal churchianity; and all the more 
they will see the need for their own neighbors and 
friends and families, of the promised blessed Millennial 
reign of Christ and his elect Church, his Bride. God's 
predestination is stated by inspiration by the Apostle, 
thus: "Those whom he foreknew, he also predestinated 
to be copies of his Son."— Rom. 8:29, Diaglott. 

"He shall see of the travail of his soul and be 
satisfied"— not disappointed.— Isa. 53:11. 

PAPACY'S DEMANDS IN SPAIN. 



Well do the Scriptures symbolically represent 
Papacy as a leopard beast (or mottled government- 
Rev. 13:2). In one place it is liberal, almost white 
in its professions or appearances; in another quarter it 

R2539 : page 262 



is black, corrupt, degrading, brutal; and in still other 

places it has various neutral and tawny shades of correspondence 

to the natural depravity of the people it 

rules with its rod of eternal torment and its staff of 

Purgatory. 

In Spain, which has been for centuries one of its 
dark spots— as dark as the general civilization of the 
people will permit,— the "leopard" has been accustomed 
to have its way, and is now incensed that freedom 
of worship, or even of thought, should be dreamed 
of. And now hints are thrown out that an insurrection 
would be supported against the present government, 

R2539 : page 263 

if the "Liberals" are granted any privileges. 
Of course, all the blame is attached to the "Liberals" 
(which there means any and all who demand the right 
to think and act for themselves in religious matters), 
and it is claimed that they should let things alone— not 
create a disturbance by demanding and seeking their 
rights. A Paris newspaper (Journal des Debats) analyses 
Papacy's demands thus:— 

"According to the views expressed at Burgos, the 
Spanish church, to quote the words of a French king, 
simply says: L'etat c'est moi!' The grave crisis of 
Spain, we are told, is due to her 'excessive Liberals,' 
and, further, that 'the chief error of Liberalism is that 
it substitutes individual discernment for the authority 
of the church.' The church, therefore, makes the 
following cardinal demands: Complete independence 
of ecclesiastical jurisdiction, which means that none 
of its members, under any consideration whatever, 
shall be judged by secular courts; re-establishment of 
all clerical privileges; abolition of the legality of marriages 
not sanctioned by the church; non-interference 
of the secular authorities with any legacies or grants 
obtained by the church; prohibition of religious association 
to non-Catholics. Thus the church makes 
demands which are altogether incompatible with modern 
life. The spirit of these demands is all the more 
easy to discern when we read that 'the increasing 
impudence and audacity of Protestantism, which raises 
its temples and opens its schools in the presence of 
Catholic sanctuaries and schools, in the capital as well 
as in other places of Spain, is a direct violation of the 
constitution.'" 

In a word, the Pope and his coadjutors seem to be 
seeking to put pressure on all the nations of Europe to 
compel an interference on his behalf to secure for him 
some restoration of temporal power at the opening of 
the new century. 



R2544 : page 263 

WALKING IN THE NARROW WAY. 



"Dear Lord, the way seems very dark, 

I cannot see." 
"Yes, child, I know, but I will be thy light, 

Come, follow Me!" 

"Dear Lord, so lonely is this way, 

Where are my friends?" 
"My child, dost thou forget how far from me 

Their pathway tends?" 

"Dear Master, I am growing weak, 

I scarce can stand." 
"O, foolish child, trust not in thine own strength, 

Come, take my hand; 

"For I have trod this way before, 

So dark to thee; 
I know each step, its weariness and pain; 

Wilt trust in ME?" 

"Yea, Lord, tho friendless, lonely, dark, 

This way may be, 
I will be strong! Beloved Guide, lead on, 

I follow Thee." --G. W. SEIBERT. 



R2539 : page 263 

QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS. 



BORROWING AND LENDING. 



QUESTION.— I have neighbors who bother me 

continually by wishing to borrow of me. 

I wish to be neighborly but do not like to be pestered 

by people with whom I have scarcely anything in common. 

If they were "brethren in Christ," I would 

think nothing of it, but be glad to oblige them. What 

is my duty under the circumstances? 

Answer.— Our advice is that you bear with them 
in this matter— for the truth's sake, for the Lord's 
sake, not directly, but indirectly. In this way seek 
to make friends with earthly things. You will find 
little enough that you and your neighbors can exchange 
along spiritual lines, and in order that what you have 



to offer of spiritual things may be the more acceptable 
to them, improve every opportunity to be kind, generous, 
in respect to the lending of earthly goods— not, 
of course, carrying matters to an extreme, so as to injure 
your own interests. Thus the Lord's people may 
be lenders, but not borrowers, as the typical fleshly 
Israelites were instructed also. (Luke 6:35; Deut. 15:6-14.) 
By pursuing a kind and generous course, you 
will to that extent favorably impress your worldly 
neighbors, and that at a trifling cost. If subsequently 
they misunderstand your religious views, they will at 
least concede you to be a kind and generous 
neighbor. 

It would seem that many of the Lord's dear people 
fail to see that with our clearer light we should 
become more kind in word and in action and in thought, 
and much more generous every way, than our neighbors 
—peace-able and peace-makers. The majority of 
people seem naturally to be mischief makers, and do not 
quickly see that this is contrary to the spirit of the 
Lord— the spirit of love. The possession of the quarrelsome, 
selfish spirit gives evidence that the possessor 
has not been taught of God, or has not properly learned 
of him who is meek and lowly, kind and gentle of 
heart. 

R2539 : page 264 

MAN'S FREE AGENCY. 



Question.— Has man been a free moral agent since 
the fall? 

Answer.— There are two ways of looking at this 
subject, and the answers accordingly would be 
opposites. 

(1) If by "free moral agent" is meant freedom 

of will in respect to moral questions, we would answer, 
Yes. Undoubtedly man is free to will as he may please 
on moral questions, altho he may not be able to carry 
out this will in all the affairs of life by reason of the 
weaknesses of his flesh or by reason of circumstances 
and conditions of others with whom he is in contact. 
Thus the Apostle Paul says, "To will is present with 
me; but how to perform that which is good I find not." 
-Rom. 7:18. 

(2) If by "free moral agent" is meant one who 

is not influenced or restricted by his environment, the 
answer should unquestionably be, No; because we are 
all born in a certain measure of slavery to ignorance, 
superstition and weakness, the results of the fall. 
Whoever is thus bounden may indeed seem to have 
full liberty to do right as easily as to do wrong, but in 
reality he has no such liberty, by reason of his own 
depravity and that of others, especially "the Prince of 



this world," who blinds the minds of them that believe 
not. 

If all men had absolute freedom from the curse 
and from the weaknesses which it entails, the present 
would be the time of the world's trial; but because 
such conditions do not prevail, therefore God has appointed 
a "day" (the coming Millennial age) in the 
which he will judge the world by that "man" whom he 
hath afore ordained— the Christ. (Acts 17:31.) When 
that appointed Day shall come, the ignorance now enslaving 
mankind will be dissipated before the Sun of 
Righteousness, the unfavorable surroundings will be 
largely corrected by the Great Prince of "the world 
[age] to come," our Lord Jesus; and such blemishes 
as may be connected with the imperfection of the flesh 
of those on judgment will be off-set according to the 
gracious provision of the New Covenant, under which 
their trial will take place. 

With the Church, whose trial or judgment takes 
place during this Gospel age, the case is somewhat 
similar. These are specially justified by faith under 
the New Covenant; their unintentional blemishes and 
weaknesses all being offset with the great sin-offering, 
and their knowledge being granted by special illumination 
of the holy spirit through the Scriptures. Only 
such as are thus made free by the Son are free indeed, 
—"free moral agents" in this sense and use of 
the expression. 

CONCERNING METEORIC SHOWERS. 



Question.— What about the falling of stars predicted 
in the newspapers by astronomers for Nov. 15-17? 
It is said that these meteoric showers occur every 
thirty-three years. How does this fit with the exposition 
set forth in MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. IV., where 
the Meteoric shower of 1833 is referred to as a sign? 

Answer.— It fits well! The fact that astronomers 
have located the floating star dust which produced the 
phenomena of 1833, and the fact that they know now 
that it approaches close to the earth every thirty-three 
years prove nothing. The original fact remains that 
in 1833 there was a starry shower such as was never 
heard of before and such as has never been seen since, 
tho twice predicted. 

Astronomers announced in 1 866 that the shower 
of 1833 would be repeated and that such showers had 
probably occurred often, but had never before attracted 
attention and record. But Nov. 14th, 1866, saw 
only comparatively few shooting stars— a few more 
than can be seen at other times. 

Now that the second prediction, Nov. 15-17, '99, 
has passed without any remarkable display, it rather 
strengthens our position and corroborates the thought 



that the meteoric shower of Nov. 13th, 1833, was a 
special one intended as a sign and understood at the 
time as such and that the like never occurred before 
as it has not occurred since. 

The last failure was particularly disappointing 
to astronomers for they had predicted wonders 
and had made extensive preparations. The Paris 
observatory had a balloon by which an ascent was made 
high above the city's lights and mists so as to obtain 
good results; but it could report only "about one hundred" 
meteors. At the Allegheny, Pa., Observatory 
elaborate preparations were made for months in advance 
and the largest photographic camera ever constructed 
in the world was in place to secure repeated 
photographic negatives of the heavens during the 
entire night. How different was the original shower 
intended for, and by many understood, as a sign. 

Read the testimony of MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. 
IV., pages 588-600. 

IS THE STUDY OF PSYCHIC PHENOMENA NECESSARY? 



Question.— I have recently seen a book on psychic 

phenomena, styled . Do you not think it would 

be well to obtain these for TOWER readers at wholesale 
rates? 

R2540 : page 264 

Answer.— We do not so think. We may only put 
before our brethren of the Lord's flock "clean provender." 
We can only recommend to them reading 
along the lines advised by the Apostle, saying: Whatsoever 

R2540 : page 265 

things are true, just, lovely and of good report- 
think on these things and stir up each other's minds 
with these. -Phil. 4:8; 2 Pet. 3:1. 

We have every confidence that the devil has plenty 
of power to produce any variety of psychic phenomena 
if the Lord permit him; and we have the Scriptural 
assurance that the Lord will permit him to exercise 
these powers in a special manner at the present 
time, to deceive, if it were possible, the very elect, and 
to bring strong delusions upon many in the nominal 
church, that they should believe a lie, because they 
do not have pleasure in the truth. (2 Thes. 2:10-12.) 
Please see booklet, What Say the Scriptures About 
Spiritualism? 

We do not think, dear Brother, that the children 
of light need special instructions along the lines of 
psychic phenomena, and a thousand other books which 
have been and will be published, calculated to confuse 



many. The strongest protection God's people can 

have is the one which he has provided them— the armor 

of his Word, his plan. Whoever sees the "plan 

of the ages," as laid down in the WATCH TOWER publications, 

clearly, distinctly, will be safeguarded, not 

only against one, but against all the devices of the 

great Adversary in this evil day: but it will require 

that they give careful attention and prayer in order 

that the study may be satisfactory in its results— in 

order that it may sink into conviction in their hearts, 

and establish them so strongly in confidence in the 

Bible and its inspired statements that all contradictory 

theories and so-called scientific proofs to the contrary 

will be unable to move them. 

PREHUMAN -MEANS WHAT? 



Question.— In the fifth volume of DAWN and also 
in various issues of the WATCH TOWER you mention 
the prehuman existence of Christ. Some have taken 
exception to this statement, holding that you mean 
that our Lord was human before his existence upon 
the earth. Please give us a word on this subject at 
your convenience. 

Answer.— The critic has erred respecting the 
meaning of the word prehuman. Pre means before, 
hence pre-human signifies before human. The thought 
is— that condition in which our Lord was before he became 
a man. At that time he was a spirit being. The 
critic has taken exactly the opposite to the true meaning 
of the word prehuman. 

CONCERNING PREDESTINATION. 



Question.— Is not individual, personal election to 
salvation taught in Rev. 13:8 and 17:8? 

Answer.— We think not. The first of these texts 
is much the simpler and, it will be noticed, does not 
say when the names would be written in the Lamb's 
Book of Life. It does, however, mention that in the 
divine plan the Lamb of God was slain from the foundation 
of the world, and that this Book of Life record 
is one of the consequences of our Lord's death. 

The second text is more obscure and reads as tho 
it had been intended to be a repetition of the former 
statement, but inadvertently a portion had been omitted, 
viz., the words, "of the Lamb slain." We do 
not surely know that these words were omitted, but 
merely that, if they were there, this passage would be 
in harmony with the preceding one and in harmony 
with all of the testimony of Scripture, without allowances 
or inferences. 



Taking this latter verse as it stands, and supposing 
it to be complete, we should be obliged to understand 
it to mean that the book or scroll covenanting 
life to an elect number was prepared from the foundation 
of the world, and that the names in it have been 
written as the individuals have made consecration of 
themselves, coming under the terms of the divine call. 
In this view of the matter the book or scroll would represent 
the original divine purpose— God's intention to 
have a Church, of which our Lord Jesus would be the 
Head. Such interpretation would be in perfect harmony 
with the various figures of speech which represent 
the writing of the names of the believers in the Lamb's 
Book of Life, and in harmony also with the other records 
which speak of blotting out the names of such as 
prove unfaithful to their consecration.— Rev. 3:5. 



R2540 : page 265 

"GOD LOVETH A CHEERFUL GIVER."-2 COR. 9:7. 

-DEC. 10.-MAL. 1:6-11; 3:8-12.- 

MALACHI uttered the words of his prophecy 

during the period of Nehemiah's absence 

from Jerusalem at the court of Persia, and the return 

of Nehemiah may at the time have seemed like a fulfilment 

of Malachi's prophecy,— "The Lord whom ye 

seek shall suddenly come to his temple," etc. No 

doubt the testimony of the Lord given through Malachi 

prepared the people for their quick response to Nehemiah's 

energetic appeals and commands already 

noticed. 

The International Sunday School Committee has 
very appropriately chosen Malachi's testimony as a 
basis for lessons on the grace of giving. While on the 
one hand we are wholly out of sympathy with the usual 

R2540 : page 266 

everlasting "dunning" carried on in religious circles 
—the passing of the collection box on every possible 
occasion, in season and out of season, and appeals for 
money for every conceivable object— nevertheless, on 
the other hand we fully realize that the grace of giving 
is indissolubly attached to all the other graces of 
God's spirit. Hence it is impossible for the Lord's 
people to grow in the other graces inculcated in his 
Word without growing also in the grace of benevolence. 
Indeed, while thoroughly disapproving the 
begging spirit as abominable, we are ready to concede 
that in all probability it has wrought some good— 
where doctrinal instructions in righteousness and truth 
were lacking and the ill-fed souls of the Lord's people 



were likely to die of spiritual starvation, the appeals 
for money have no doubt often awakened, in the hearts 
of many, such responsive sentiments as compensated 
to some extent for their ignorance of God and his 
Word: no matter how selfish the motives, no matter 
how ignoble the method adopted, if it touched the heart 
of the giver with a desire to offer something in loving 
appreciation and worship to his Creator, the effect was 
surely a blessing to the giver— the sacrificer. 

Vs. 6 lays down as a fixed principle that a proper 
son will honor his father, and a proper servant honor 
his master, and then these principles are applied as 
between God and Israel. If they claimed God as their 
Father they should render to him the love of children; 
if they claimed to be his servants they should render 
to him servants' reverence— and such love and reverence 
should be the greater toward God in proportion 
as God is great above all others. 

Phrenologists locate the organs of benevolence, 
reverence and spirituality in a row in the center of the 
top of the head. They are thus given places of prominence 
and nearness to God above all others: and it is 
certainly true that those who have these organs most 
largely developed are permitted, under the grace of 
the New Covenant, to come nearest to God in their 
hearts, in their sentiments, in all their experiences in 
life. But our day is not the most favorable for the 
development of these organs. Ours is a money-making 
and money-loving day, and the tendency is to concentrate 
thought and effort along the baser lines of acquisitiveness, 
combativeness, and in general the selfish 
propensities. 

Moreover, the great increase of knowledge which 
the Lord has permitted in connection with the present 
day of preparation for his Millennial Kingdom tends 
to egotism rather than to favor veneration. Children 
have opportunities for education to-day which their 
parents did not enjoy, and are inclined to a feeling of 
self-confidence and self-satisfaction, and feelings of 
disrespect toward their parents instead of reverence. 
And this dwarfing of the organ of reverence, in its relationship 
to human creatures, implies also its dwarfing 
in respect to God; and hence we see to-day, as never 
before, disrespect of parents and disobedience to parents, 
and proportionately disrespect to God, irreverence 
in holy things. Realizing the source of these evils we 
are bound to sympathize with the rising generation in 
its difficulties in these respects. 

As Christians taught of God through his Word 
and by its spirit, we are to realize for ourselves, our 
families, and the entire household of faith, the necessity 
for striving against these tendencies of our times 
—the necessity for curtailing our selfish, avaricious 
tendencies and egotism, and the necessity, on the contrary, 
of cultivating the higher and nobler graces of 
benevolence, veneration and spirituality. This the 



Apostle designates transformation, saying, "Be ye 
transformed by the renewing of your minds, that ye 
may prove what is that good and acceptable and perfect 
will of God."— Rom. 12:2. 

The prophet presupposed that those whom he addressed 
did not realize the true situation, and so in 
speaking to others to-day we should likewise presuppose 
that the majority do not realize how completely 
the spirit of selfishness dominates their hearts. "Ye 
say, Wherein have we despised thy name?" The 
answer is, not that they publicly and directly used profane 

R2541 : page 266 

and disrespectful language, but that they had 
failed to properly honor God by failing to manifest a 
proper reverence and devotion toward him and his holy 
things. They had become careless respecting the 
things offered unto the Lord— these were not of the 
best they had but, if not the worst, were at least inferior. 
Thus the Lord's table had lost its proper dignity, 
had become "contemptible," common. 

Apparently they had grown irreverent to the extent 
that, instead of bringing unblemished sacrifices to 
the Lord, they brought the sick, the lame, the blind: 
they continued to have "a form of godliness," of worship, 
of reverence, but they had lost the spirit or power 
of it. So it is with some in Spiritual Israel; they have 
consecrated themselves to the Lord, and in a formal 
manner at least desire to comply therewith; but as they 
have lost the spirit of devotion, the whole matter has 
become offensive in the divine sight. The Spiritual 
Israelite offers unto the Lord the fruit of his lips in 
prayer and praise, but if these are offered in a merely 
perfunctory manner as a "duty" and not from the 
heart, they are blind, sick and lame offerings, which 
the Lord despises. He offers unto the Lord service or 
money, but if these be given grudgingly, not heartily 
and with a loving appreciation which wishes they 
might be increased a thousandfold, then the offering 
is blind and lame and sick, and not pleasing in the 
Lord's sight. 

R2541 : page 267 

The Prophet inquires whether, if they were going 
to an earthly governor and, after the custom of that 
time, would entreat his favor with a gift, they would 
expect the favor if they took a mean gift, the sick, 
the lame, the blind of the flock as a present? Surely 
not. Then, turning the illustration, he suggests, And 
now I pray you that, in beseeching God for his mercies, 
you consider what kind of a present you have brought 
to him, and whether or not you have any right to expect 
his favor. 

The tenth verse in our Common Version would 



give the thought that all had become so selfish that 

they would refuse to do anything in connection with 

the Lord's service unless it yielded pay of some kind; 

but Leeser's translation and the Revised Version give 

a different thought here, viz.: "O that there were 

someone among you that would lock up the door of 

the sanctuary, that you might not light up my altar 

for nought: I have no pleasure in you, saith the Lord 

of hosts, neither will I accept in favor an offering from 

your hand." The thought is, that from the Lord's 

standpoint it were just as well to abandon all such formalistic 

worship devoid of reverence and love and 

heart- worship: and this is true to-day in respect to us 

Spiritual Israelites and our "better sacrifices," devotions 

and offerings. 

Vs. 1 1 in the Common Version declares that the 
Lord's name shall be great throughout the earth, but 
it will be noticed that the words "shall be" are italicized, 
which signifies that they are not in the original 
text. Some verb must be supplied to make sense, and 
the Revised Version supplies "is" instead of "shall 
be." This makes it read that God's name is great 
amongst the heathen— was great at the time of the 
writing of this prophecy. 

Altho Israel was the only nation in the whole world 
with which God had up to that time made a covenant 
or agreement as respected an offer of eternal life; and 
altho Israel alone had been favored of God with any 
revelation respecting his character, his plan; and altho 
Israel alone had received the Law of the Lord; and 
altho Israel had in these respects "much advantage 
every way: over all the other nations of the world;— 
nevertheless, we have evidences that the other nations, 
even those in idolatry, had a reverence for Jehovah, 
"the God of Israel." We have frequent instances of 
this in Scripture narratives. For instance, the Philistines 
revered Jehovah, the God of Israel, when they 
returned the Ark of Jehovah to Israel, after having 
taken it in battle. (1 Sam. 4:7,8 and chapter 6.) 
Nebuchadnezzar reverenced Jehovah, the God of Israel, 
as the great revealer of secrets through Daniel, and 
that there was no other god like unto him. Darius, 
who honored Daniel, and who was entrapped by his 
courtiers into the making of a law which cast Daniel 
into the den of lions, declared, nevertheless, his reverence 
for Jehovah the God of Daniel (Dan. 4:37; 6:26,27). 
The fame of Israel's God had reached the Medes and 
Persians also, and Cyrus, in reverence to God, had 
given liberty to the captives of Israel to return from 
Babylonian captivity. And there are not wanting 
evidences that the surrounding nations realized even 
more clearly than did Israel that many of the judgments 
which befell Israel were divine chastisements 
for their unfaithfulness to Jehovah.— See Ezra 1:2; 
Num. 24. 

Our lesson skips over certain other exhortations 



by the prophet, and comes to chapter 3:8, where he 
makes the inquiry, "Will a man rob God?" The 
matter is put in a startling form. Who would think 
of robbing his God? The thought connected with 
the word "God" is that of mighty one, powerful one, 
adorable one, and to the enlightened mind of the 
Christian additionally, the gracious, beneficent one. 
We realize a responsibility to God, obligation to bring 
him gifts and sacrifices and services, but who would 
refuse all this and on the contrary would rob God? 
Who would be so profane, so irreverent! Surely none 
would do so intelligently and wilfully; and so the natural 
Israelite is represented as doubting the matter and 
saying, "Wherein have we robbed God?" It is an 
important matter to see ourselves in a true light— to 
get a proper view of our conduct as precedent to any 
reform. 

Israel was bemoaning its impoverished condition, 
its lack of divine favor and blessing, and the 
Lord's testimony through the Prophet was designed 
to show them that their leanness and poverty were the 
result of losing God's favor, and that they had lost 
divine favor by reason of their irreverence and failure 
to show hearty appreciation and to render true worship. 
Applying the same lesson to Spiritual Israelites 
who find themselves lean of soul and starving spiritually, 
we find that the difficulty has been either (1) 
that they have been worshiping in a wrong direction, 
or (2), if worshiping in the right direction, they have 
failed to present unto the Lord their very best. 

Under the first of these errors many are worshiping 
and sacrificing to human institutions and not to 
God— they are offering their devotions and sacrifices 
perhaps to build up "churchianity" in some of its 
forms,— Presbyterianism, Methodism, Lutheranism, 
Adventism, etc. This is worshiping idols and sacrificing 
to idols and not to God. How can spiritual 
blessings be expected from God, when the reverence 
and service are rendered to men and to human 
institutions? 

Under the second error, others who are not thus 

R2541 : page 268 

deluded by human institutions, but who recognize the 
true God, and who know of their responsibilities toward 
him, are lean of soul because they have not sufficient 
love and reverence for the Lord whom they do 
know. They serve him much more meanly and sacrifice 
to him in a much more niggardly manner than do 
the devotees at the shrines of human isms. Knowing 
the true God, they have the larger responsibilities and 
should be the more careful to present to him the best 
offerings possible of their time, influence, means, talents. 
If they give to the Lord but the fag ends of 
time, but the offals of influence, but a dribble of their 



talents, such sacrifices cannot be acceptable in his 
sight, nor could any reasonable person expect them 
to be so. 

"Ye are cursed with a curse; for ye have robbed 
me, even this whole nation." Being one people, many 
of their interests were common, and their general poverty 
and leanness of soul was but a recompense for 
their course. And so it is and has all along been with 
the Lord's spiritual people, the one Church, the holy 
nation, the peculiar people, the sanctified in Christ 
Jesus. But now that we have reached the "harvest" 
time we find that a separating work is in progress- 
not merely a separating of "wheat" from "tares" and 
of suitable fish from unsuitable fish, as represented in 
the parables (Matt. 13:24-30,36-43,47-49), but also 
another separation amongst the Lord's true people, 
amongst the consecrated ones, as represented in the 
parable of the wise and the foolish virgins— all virgins, 
yet not all worthy to go in to the marriage and to constitute 
the Bride, Christ's joint heir.-Matt. 25:1-13. 

The present separation from amongst the consecrated 
will not only "gather out of the Kingdom those 
that do iniquity," and that have neither part nor lot 
in the matter, the "tares," but it will also gather out 
"those that offend"— those who fail to come up to the 
requirements of their covenant in fulness of consecration 
to the Lord, those who must therefore pass through 
the great tribulation and be brought through severe 
tests by trials and disciplines. 

Verses 10-12 give the gist of the entire lesson. 
When the Lord reproves, it is not for the purpose of 
discouraging his people, but for their reformation. 
When he chides, it is not to dishearten but to stimulate 
and to revive: and as here with natural Israel he 
exhorted to reformation and to thus prove his love and 
his bounty and his willingness to bless them, so we 
may apply a similar exhortation to a similar class in 
Spiritual Israel. "Bring ye all the tithes into the 
storehouse. ..and prove me now herewith, ...if 
I will not open to you the windows of heaven and pour 
you out a blessing that there shall not be room enough 
to receive it"— an overflow blessing. 

We exhort all Spiritual Israelites to thus prove the 
Lord, to awaken to a fresh realization of his goodness 
and bounty and of their own obligation to spend and 
be spent in his service, according to their covenant of 
self-sacrifice,— walking in the footsteps of Jesus. To 
such it will mean a revival of spiritual health, energy, 
vigor, joy. Looking unto Jesus, their eyes will see 

R2542 : page 268 

him the more clearly, and see also the heavenly crown 
in reservation for them, and all the exceeding great and 
precious things which God hath in reservation for them 
that love him, and whose love is manifested to be of 



the genuine kind, which loves to sacrifice to him and 
to his cause the very best of all that they possess. 

With the Jews there were two tithes obligatory. 
(A tithe signifies a tenth.) One tithe or one tenth of 
all their increase of flocks, herds, grain, etc., went for 
taxes, for the support of their government, and was 
rendered to the governor. The other tithe or tenth of 
their increase was a tax for religious purposes; it was 
rendered to the priests. Under the present Gospel age 
"high call" God has left Spiritual Israel without any 
specific instructions of this kind. The governments of 
this world generally take good care to look out for the 
tax part, while the obligation for religious and spiritual 
things represented by the holy tithe of the Jews is 
now left at the option of the Spiritual Israelite without 
even so much as a command respecting it or a stipulation 
as to the amount. 

The tithe obligation was commanded to fleshly Israel, 
Moses and the house of servants, of which he was 
the head,— Israel after the flesh; but in dealing with 
the house of sons, of which Christ Jesus is the Head, 
a Son "over his own house" of sons (Heb. 3:5,6), the 
Lord has placed no restriction. Why? Because in 
this household of sons he recognizes only those who 
have been begotten again by his holy spirit: the thought 
is that whoever has become a partaker of the spirit of 
the Lord, whoever has the mind of Christ, has a mind 
not merely to give a tenth of all his possessions and 
income to the Lord, but to consecrate it all— without 
the reservation of a single item— mind and body, influence 
and talents, time and means. 

But while the foregoing proposition of entire consecration 
will not be questioned by any who belong to 
the house of sons, nevertheless, the fact that they have 
the treasure of the new nature in earthen vessels frequently 
causes some to act very inconsistently— very 
much out of harmony with the real spirit of their consecration. 
The new mind is beset and continually 
fought by the mind of the flesh; as the Apostle declares, 
there is a warfare here continually, for the two 
minds are contrary. The new mind says, 
"All for Jesus! All for Jesus! 

All my being's ransomed powers; 
All my thoughts and words and doings; 
All my days and all my hours." 

R2542 : page 269 

But the mind of the flesh combats this and fights 
against such a full consecration, urging that it would 
be an extreme, that it is contrary to the general course 
of the world and its wisest men and women— urging 
that we must not thus make of ourselves "peculiar 
people," but must in general do as the world does, using 
all of time and talent, influence and means, selfishly 
—if not personally, then at least for our families. 



Here is the great battlefield on which so many surrender 
before the evil influences, the forces of the 
world, the flesh and the devil— the place where so many 
fail to come off conquerors, victors, through obedience 
to the Word of the Lord and the spirit of their 
consecration to follow in his footsteps. 

A few, but not very many, may need caution lest 
they should carry the matter of consecration to an extreme. 
An occasional one out of a thousand might 
perhaps act too literally upon the instruction that whosoever 
would be the Lord's disciple must forsake all to 
follow him,— might understand this too literally to 
mean an abandonment of houses, lands, families, etc. 
There can be no doubt, however, respecting the real 
import of the Scripture teachings along these lines: the 
Lord's followers are to forsake houses, lands, parents, 
children, etc., in the sense of not permitting any of 
these things to henceforth take his chief affection or 
to absorb his interest, his love, his devotion in the supreme 
sense. This supreme devotion by right and 
by covenant belongs to the Lord, and must be preserved 
inviolate. Family, home, the beauties of nature, 
should all be appreciated, but in a secondary 
sense as compared to the Lord. What would please 
the Lord must be supreme. 

If we were dealing with an unreasonable and irascible 
Master, such a covenant and such an obligation 
might mean unreasonable requirements of us, and 
might inflict injustice upon others; but we are dealing 
with one whose requirement is a "reasonable service." 
Altho we have covenanted our all to him— time, money, 
influence, name, earthly hopes and pleasures, 
family and friends, "even unto death," we find that 
the Lord, after accepting our full consecration, makes 
us personally "stewards" of these things which we 
sacrifice to him and his cause. And as his stewards 
he permits and commissions us to use our consecrated 
all reasonably and moderately and according to our 
best judgment of what would honor his name and forward 
his cause. He permits us to use some of our consecrated 
means for our own sustenance and the sustenance 
and care of our families, merely enjoining moderation 
in all things. He permits us to use, therefore, 
a portion of our time, energy and talent in providing 
for these necessities and, if properly and reasonably 
used, he does not reckon this a selfish use, but merely 
a necessary expenditure. 

Indeed, he leaves matters entirely in our hands, 
saying to us, so to speak: You have consecrated your 
all to me, and I have now returned it all to you to use 
in my name and to my glory and to the forwarding of 
my will in the earth as you shall understand my will 
from my Word. Go, occupy, use; I will inspect your 
work later and will judge of your love and your devotion 
by the carefulness with which you shall seek to 
use your hours, your moments, your dollars, your 



dimes, etc. If you have much love and devotion to 

me, it will manifest itself, or if you have little that also 

will be manifested, and my reward shall be accordingly. 

Only those who love me supremely and who 

rejoice to follow my Word and example shall be joint-heirs 

in my Kingdom— for only they will have the 

reverential and benevolent and spiritual dispositions of 

heart essential to the great work of the Kingdom 

which will be instituted as soon as the elect little flock 

has been completed and glorified. 



R2542 : page 269 

RIGHT AND WRONG CONDITIONS AND THEIR RESULTS. 

-DEC. 17.-MAL. 3:13 TO 4:6.- 

"Whatsoever a man soweth that shall he also reap."— Gal. 6:7. 

HOW FORCEFULLY divine truths were expressed 

by the Prophet Malachi! While 

no doubt his words were more or less applicable at the 

time and to the people addressed, it is very evident 

that his, like the other prophecies, was specially intended 

for the Gospel Church— more than for those 

who heard his words— as the Apostle Peter explains. 

-1 Pet. 1:10-12. 

We apply this lesson then to fleshly Israel in the 
time of the Prophet, and note its complete fulfilment 
in respect to the "wheat" and "chaff" of that age in 
its harvest time— the wheat gathered to the garner of 
the Gospel Church as spiritual Israel, and the chaff 
element burned in the fiery destruction which overthrew 
their national polity. But more particularly we 
apply it to the Gospel Church and to the harvest time 
at the end of this Gospel age, when the "wheat" will 
be glorified in the heavenly Kingdom and the "tares" 
will be destroyed in the fiery trials of the day of vengeance, 
the great time of trouble with which this age 
will be wound up, preparatory to the inauguration 
of the Millennial Kingdom's triumph. 

R2542 : page 270 

The lesson divides itself into four portions, vss. 13-15 
expressing the attitude and sentiments of nominal 
Christendom; vs. 16 telling of the attitude of the 
true saints; vss. 17—4:3, the Lord's declaration respecting 
the two classes (the nominal Christians, or tares, 
and the true saints, the wheat), and vss. 4-6 being 
counsels for the interim for whoever has ears to hear. 

Nominal Christendom is represented (13-15) as 
restive, out of harmony with the divine arrangement: 
the inquiry is, What is the use? How will it profit 



us? What advantage will we have? This view is 

from the purely selfish standpoint, which hears the divine 

requirements as so much of penal servitude— not 

having the heart interest in the Lord, his truth and 

his service. In the past it has walked mournfully, 

that is to say, with an outward show of reverence, contrition, 

observing Lenten seasons, etc., etc.; it brought 

lame, sick and blind gifts and sacrifices to the Lord's 

altar, as duty, but not being prompted by the spirit of 

love, the sacrifices were meager and inferior to those 

offered to themselves and to their families. The lesson 

represents that this condition, having continued for 

quite a while, toward the end of the age, is finally 

measurably dropped— and this we see about us today. 

Many who once made a more or less hypocritical confession 

of sins and penitence and of an outwardly careful 

walk are inclined to say, What is the use? What 

is the profit? We might just as well have a good time. 

As the Apostle foretold, one of the signs of our times 

is that men are lovers of pleasure more than lovers of 

God, while still having a form of godliness they deny 

its power.— 2 Tim. 3:4,5. 

As the Jews were inclined to look about them and 
note the prosperity of the other nations not favored 
with divine promises, as they were, so many professors 
of today incline to look at the general world conditions, 

R2543 : page 270 

and to say to themselves, Are not the proud the 
happiest? Are not the workers of iniquity the most 
firmly established in the world? Do not even some 
outwardly profane opposers of the truth get along well? 
As a result we see a decrease of reverence for God and 
for holy things, and an increase of doubt and skepticism 
as respects there being any advantage to be gained by 
a godly life— doubts respecting any future rewards, 
or at least any that would compensate self-denials for 
the present time. 

Then (vs. 17) the Prophet points us to the few, 
the "little flock," exceptions to the nominal whole, 
who are taking the proper view of matters. The general 
attitude of the nominal system in rejecting the 
way of holiness and consecration will only tend to 
draw nearer to the Lord and to each other these who 
at heart reverence and love the Lord. So long as the 
nominal mass professedly walked in the same way of 
outward observance of divine ordinances and with an 
outward manifestation of reverence, contrition and devotion, 
these having the spirit of the Lord that thinketh 
no evil, felt a fellowship and companionship in the 
nominal church; but in the harvest time under divine 
providence circumstances tend to make manifest the 
true from the false, and to separate them. Those who 
have not the matter at heart as they more and more 
neglect the outward forms will naturally hate the 



others who, having the matter at heart, are as faithful 
as ever— because their faithfulness is a standing rebuke 
and evidence of the unfaithfulness of the other. And 
the faithful few, coming to realize that all were not Israel 
who were of Israel, will be drawn nearer to each 
other as they realize that after all the number of the 
faithful is extremely small. 

This leads them to speak often one to another. 
Each finds his own need of help, counsel and encouragement, 
and realizes that the others need the same: 
and this draws them together. The further the nominal 
church gets away from the Lord and the truth and 
even from outward signs of reverence, the greater 
blessing it proves to be to this class, because it separates 
them from fellowships which all along have been 
unfavorable, hindrances to their spiritual development. 
Many of these today are meeting with us in little 
groups in various parts of the world for the study of 
the divine plan of the ages, and very many solitary 
ones meet with us (through the same medium— ZION'S 
WATCH TOWER publications) to break the heavenly 
bread and to commune concerning the Lord and his 
great purposes respecting us— our discipline as members 
of the body of Christ and our preparation to be 
his joint heirs in the promised Kingdom which shall 
bless all the families of the earth. 

"And the Lord hearkened and heard it." Thus 
he would represent to us his interest in our efforts to 
understand his plan, and to offer him in loving sacrifice 
the very best of everything that by his grace we possess. 
O, that as we meet (personally or through the 
printed page) we could always realize our Heavenly 
Father's interest in us and his willingness to bless our 
efforts in the study of his Word and in the development 
of character! Such a realization would probably 
make all such meetings increasingly profitable. Those 
who do not recognize the Lord's presence in the gathering 
of his people are apt to exercise an injurious 
rather than helpful influence upon others, and are less 
likely to get any profit for themselves. Let us more 
and more remember as we meet in the name of our 
Lord his promise, "Where two or three are met 
in my name, there am I in the midst of them." 
(Matt. 18:19,20.) Those who realize the Lord's presence 
amongst his people when they meet will be very 
careful of the words of their mouths, their actions and 
the very thoughts of their hearts: pride, vainglory, 
slander, and all evil things ("works of the flesh and 
of the devil") will be carefully shunned, if his presence 
is clearly realized by the eye of faith. 

The Lord presents to us great truths under figures 
which the least learned can comprehend: for instance, 

R2543 : page 271 

instead of telling us that he has knowledge of and will 



never forget those who are his, and their diligent 
efforts to know and to serve him, he pictures the lesson, 
telling us that he has a "book of life" and "a book 
of remembrance." Through these figures we get the 
thought that the Lord would have us get, viz., that 
he takes full knowledge of his true people. And he 
tells us that this class not only reverence him, but also 
"think upon his name"— his character, his goodness, 
his infinity, his plan, his love— thinking upon these 
things they come to know him more and more intimately 
and to realize his grand perfection, and thus 
more in his company and well acquainted with his 
character they become more and more like him. 

The Lord encourages these with the assurance 
that their love and devotion shall have its reward in 
the future— that a grand change is coming, and that 
then every sigh and every tear and every sacrifice, for 
righteousness' sake and for love of the Lord, his cause 
and his brethren, shall be fully rewarded in a manner 
that is beyond our present comprehension. They serve 
not for selfish reasons, but from devotion, from fidelity, 
and consequently from love, and hence they shall 
find that the light afflictions of the present, which are 
but for a moment, will work out for them a far more 
exceeding and an eternal weight of glory— looking not 
at the things now seen, but at the things now unseen, 
the eternal things.— 2 Cor. 4:17,18. 

Without attempting to detail what are the riches 
of grace in reservation for them that love God, two 
figures are used, which are quite expressive to the eye 
and ear of faith— God's Jewels, God's faithful Sons. 
These two thoughts suggest a full explanation of present 
experiences: the proper father will instruct, correct 
and discipline his son, tho he may pass by the greater 
faults and blemishes of others who are not his children. 
Then, as respects Jewels, we all know the necessity 
for cutting, trimming and polishing them to the intent 
that their real qualities may be developed. Thus we 
see ourselves in the Father's school of discipline and 
preparation to be his heirs— joint-heirs with Christ in 
his Kingdom— we see the necessity of the trials and 
perplexities and persecutions of this present time that 
we may be polished and prepared for the glory-time to 
come.* 

We may apply this gathering of Jewels in one 
sense to the Jewish nation, fleshly Israel, and say that 
the Lord gathered the faithful ones from that nation 
in the harvest time of their age, beginning A.D. 29. 
But the figure would not be complete there; its completeness 
is shown in connection with spiritual Israel 
and the polishing of these diamonds during this Gospel 
age. From this standpoint the time for making up 
the Jewels is the present "harvest" time. The faithful 
from the Lord's day until now will have part in 
the first resurrection, and all of the Jewel class now 
living, when polished and found worthy, will be 



"changed in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye," 
to be like and with the Lord— the moment of their death 
being the moment of their change— they having no 
need to sleep in unconsciousness, for behold, the 
"harvest," the gathering time, has come. They will 
be gathered into the Kingdom, as represented in our 
Lord's parable. (Matt. 13:30-43.) They will be 
"spared" from passing through the great time of 
trouble such as was not since there was a nation, as 
our Lord has said, "Watch ye, that ye may be accounted 
worthy to escape" all those things coming 
upon the world. 

Then there shall be a turning point (return), a 
change in the divine administration, tho not a change 
in the divine plan— for the plan of God formed from 
the beginning did not contemplate the perpetuation of 
the present condition of things, in which whosoever 
doeth righteousness suffers and in which the unrighteous 
prosper. It contemplated and arranged for the 
great re-turn of the rule of righteousness now about 
to take place, which will transfer the dominion of 
earth from Satan, its present supervisor, and from the 
kingdoms of this world, its present dominating powers, 
to the dominion of Christ and his Church in glory and 
in power,— the Millennial Kingdom, in which he that 
doeth righteousness shall be blessed, and he that doeth 
iniquity shall be punished, and if the correction be 
not heeded, shall eventually be cut off from amongst 
the people in the second death.— Acts 3:22,23. 

The day that brings the glorification to the faithful 
"jewel" or "wheat" class brings a different experience 
to the "tare" class. To them it will be a hot 
time— a time of fiery trouble that will completely consume 
their hypocrisies and pretended devotions to the 
Lord, which were merely in form without the heart 
and without power, and unacceptable to him. In 
that trouble-time their pride, their ambition, their 
world-love and their spirit of selfishness, will meet a 
retribution that will be terrible in the extreme— such 
a time of trouble as the world has never yet witnessed. 
The Lord's fierce anger will burn against their hypocrisies 
and shams; and will utterly consume the same— 
but not, we understand, consume the individuals. 
They will cease to be "tares," but not cease to be 
human beings; they will cease to make professions of 
consecration, as the Lord's true Church, when at heart 
they have neither part nor lot in the matter and are 
not in sympathy either with the Lord or his spirit, 
his righteousness. 

This burning day is referred to by Zephaniah also (3:8,9): 
and through him the Lord declares, "I will 
pour upon them mine indignation, even all my fierce 
anger, for all the earth [the present social order] 
shall be devoured with the fire of my jealousy." That 
this does not mean the literal earth nor the people of 
it, is clearly evident from the next statement of the 



*See Old Theology Tract, No. 44. 

R2544: page 271 

prophet, viz., "Then will I turn unto the people a 
pure language, that they may all call upon the name 
of the Lord, to serve him with one consent." 

While the "fire" of this day will burn the "stubble" 
and "tares" quickly, nevertheless the same fire 
of the Lord's anger against hypocrisy and pride and 
every evil thing will continue to burn throughout the 
entire Millennial age, wherever such things shall be 
manifested— even down to the end of the Millennial age, 
when some in the final testing will be found unworthy 
of life eternal. (Rev. 20:9.) Thus will evil eventually 
be destroyed, root and branch. 

Following the fiery time or day of trouble will 
come the new era, in which the Sun of Righteousness 
shall shine forth, dispelling the darkness of the present 
time— healing the wounds of sin and death and 

R2544 : page 272 

bringing in joy, peace, love and blessing. Then the 
righteous shall rejoice in their liberty and shall realize 
that the restraints of this present time have been blessings 
in disguise, for thereby they have been made 
spiritually fat— "stall-fed" during the winter of the 
prevalence of sin, they shall go forth to liberty in the 
springtime of the new age. 

Vs. 3 indicates the completeness of the victory of 
righteousness over sin, of the Lord's faithful over the 
workers of iniquity: a strong figure of speech is in the 
words, "Ye shall tread down the wicked"— as ashes. 

Then (vs. 4) the Prophet addresses the people of 
his day, "Remember ye the law of Moses," but the 
expression is equally applicable to the Spiritual Israelite 
who recognizes Christ as the antitype of Moses and 
the New Covenant as the antitype of the Law Covenant, 
and the new Law of Love as the antitype of the 
Decalogue. 

The faithful in fleshly Israel were not to expect 
the gathering of the jewel class immediately, but 
would know that before that time the Lord would send 
a great antitypical Elijah whose mission it would be 
to turn the hearts of the fathers to the children and 
the children to the fathers. Should he succeed in doing 
this the great burning day would not be necessary; 
but should he fail, then the burning day, the time of 
trouble, would come, and the Lord would smite the 
earth with a foretold awful trouble. 

The turning of the hearts of parents to children 
and children to parents would seem to mean the establishment 



in the earth of a spirit of reciprocal love. 
And it would further mean, the turning of the minds 
of the aged so that they would become as little children, 
humble, teachable; and had they become thus 
childlike they would have been ready to turn their 
hearts to the teachings and example of the early fathers, 
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and all the holy 
prophets, and they would have been made ready for 
divine favor and blessing and to be spared from the 
foretold curse or trouble. 

John the Baptist fulfilled this prediction so far as 
Fleshly Israel was concerned, endeavoring to turn their 
hearts so that they would be ready to receive Jesus in 
the flesh; but John the Baptist failed to turn them to 
repentance, and they crucified the Lord, and hence the 
curse or time of trouble came upon the nation, destroying 
it A.D. 69-70. 

But as the prophecy relates still more particularly 
to Spiritual Israel than to Natural Israel, so it relates 
still more particularly to the antitypical Elijah sent to 
Spiritual Israel than to the antitype sent to Natural 
Israel. For the evidences that the little flock throughout 
this age has been and still is the Elijah to the 
nominal system, exhorting it and seeking to bring it 
into harmony with God, and that it has failed so to 
do, as foretold in the Scriptures, and that hence the 
great time of trouble impends, we must refer our 
readers to MILLENNIAL DAWN, Vol. 2, Chap. 8. 



R2544 : page 272 

RESISTING WORLDLY INFLUENCES. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I wish to acknowledge 
receipt of VOL. V., M. DAWN. I appreciate very much 
the favor of receiving the volume so early. It rejoices 
my heart to see how much brotherly kindness is manifested 
among some of the Lord's people here. Bro. S., 
after reading only the table of contents, loaned his 
copy of VOL. V. to Bro. N. and Sr. M. who do not have 
so many privileges and opportunities in many ways as 
Bro. S. has. I learned from Sr. M. yesterday that she 
had intended letting me read it first, should her volume 
come before mine. I was ignorant for three days 
of the fact that only Bro. S. and I had received the 
volumes, and when I learned this, I hurriedly read 
mine and sent it to another brother anxious to see it. 

Altho I did not give the book a very careful reading, 
I am able to say that I feel the Lord has wonderfully 
used you in the work of setting before the household 
of faith so clear, logical and Scripturally satisfactory 
a presentation of the glorious corner-stone of 
our faith. How vastly superior the Bible explanation 
of man's fall and God's plan of redemption through 



our Savior, Jesus Christ, is to all the teachings of science 
falsely so-called! It seems that we alone of all earth's 
millions are able to sing the Song of Moses and the 
Lamb: "Just and true are all thy ways!" Sometimes 
I am almost overpowered by the desire to literally leave 
all and "spread the truth from pole to pole." It is so 
hard to be patient and wait; but I think of him who 
has waited more than six thousand years and is waiting 
still in infinite patience; and who am I— to faint! 

I wish your prayers especially, dear Brother, that 
I may be able to resist gently all the influences of my 
worldly surroundings, so antagonistic to the "new nature." 
I will call to mind the Apostle's encouragement, 
"Think it not strange concerning the fiery trial 
that is to try you." I have no difficulty in resisting 
the influence, but I find it hard to do it gently, without 
giving offence. I guess it must be my old nature which 
is very nervous and quick. I am sure I have not the 
faintest sympathy at heart with worldly things, but 
I do not wish to be too severe against those who mean 
kindly tho they try to draw me from the "narrow way." 

What do you think about the saints using opiates 
for pain, especially in a last illness? I have thought 
of it in connection with our Redeemer's refusal of the 
vinegar and myrrh. With much Christian love and 
prayers for your steadfastness, Yours, in the love of our 
Mediator and King, MRS. R. S. S , California. 

[REPLY.— We are glad, dear Sister, to note that 
your worldly surroundings do not ensnare your heart, 
but that on the contrary you fully maintain your love 
for the Lord and his way, the "narrow way." We 
sympathize with your desires to resist worldly influences 
in a gentle spirit, and trust that you may have 
much blessing in this endeavor, and may be enabled 
through it to cultivate the various graces of the spirit. 
You will be strengthened by the Lord's declaration— 
that in his sight a meek and quiet spirit is an ornament 
of great value.— 1 Pet. 3:4. 

Respecting our final illness and opiates: I had not 
thought of our dear Master's example in refusing opiates. 
Personally I would incline to leave the matter 
in the hands of friends and trust to the Lord's providence 
respecting what they would do and prescribe at 
such a time,— praying that the Lord's will might be 
fully done even unto death. —EDITOR.] 



page 273 
Vol. XX. DECEMBER 15, 1899. No. 24. 



CONTENTS. 



Higher Criticism Enthroned— The 

Bible Debased 275 

Dr. DeCosta's Letter to Bishop 

Potter 276 

Evolution Among the Baptists 279 

The Methodists also Distracted 279 

The Year 1900 a Papal Jubilee 279 

Watch Tower Bible & Tract Society's 

Report for 1899 281 

"The True Light Which Lighteth 

Every Man" 283 

"Bless the Lord, O My Soul" 285 

Interesting Letters 286 

Kind Words for Millennial Dawn, 

Vol. V., At-one-ment 287 

Items: Extra Copies of Nov. 1st and 

Dec. lstlssues-Z.W.T. Visits 274 

page 274 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, N.Y. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, OR REGISTERED 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity or 
adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, if they 
send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting the 
paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list 
continually. 



EXTRA COPIES OF NOV. 1ST AND DEC. 1ST ISSUES. 

We have a good supply of extra copies of these issues, and 
shall be pleased to receive lists of addresses of persons likely to 
become interested. We will mail copies to them free; or if our 
readers would prefer to hand them out personally, we will supply 
a number of them to any subscriber who requests them. 

DO YOU DESIRE ZION'S WATCH TOWER VISITS 
-DURING 1900?- 

If so, please respond at once, either enclosing the subscription 
price, or write a postal card requesting its continuance on 
credit— or requesting it free, as per our terms above, if you are 
one of the Lord's Poor. 

ATTENTION TO THIS BEFORE THE EXPIRATION OF YOUR YEAR SAVES 



US MUCH TROUBLE AND SOME EXPENSE. 

Remember that we are desirous of retaining your name upon 
the lists so long as you live and are interested in the writings 
(whether a paying or a free subscriber); but we have no better 
means of knowing of your continued life and interest than by 
your renewal of your subscription. 

WILL WE ACCEPT THREE MONTHS OR SIX MONTHS 
TRIAL SUBSCRIPTIONS? 

We certainly will not refuse them! We are very anxious 
that as nearly as possible the WATCH TOWER subscription lists 
shall represent all who are in sympathy with the harvest message, 
even tho some of them be not as yet fully ready to commit 
themselves unreservedly as fully endorsing our teachings. Urge 
any of this class that are too poor to pay to accept our offer above 
and have its visits regularly, free. But they must make application 
for themselves if able to write. 



R2545 : page 275 

HIGHER CRITICISM ENTHRONED-THE BIBLE DEBASED. 



SO PRONOUNCED is the acceptance of Evolution 
and Higher Criticism in the Episcopal 
Church that the Rev. Benj. F. DeCosta, D.D., has felt 
that he can best serve God and the cause of truth by 
separating himself from the denomination. As heretofore 
set forth in this journal, it is only a question of 
time until all men and women of character and true 
Christian principle will be forced to take similar steps 
out of all denominations,— from the pews as well as 
from the pulpits. We are in the "harvest" time of this 
age, and divine providence is permitting conditions 
which will demonstrate who are "wheat" and who are 
"tares." Such a separation must take place before the 
great symbolic burning day for "tares" can come, and 
before the "wheat" can be glorified as God's Kingdom 
in power. 

"Babylon is fallen, is fallen; come out of her, my 
people, that ye be not partakers of her sins and that ye 
receive not of her plagues." (Rev. 18:24.) But there 
is a wide difference between leaving "Babylon" and 
leaving the Lord's Church or Kingdom. All along it 
has been true that "the Lord knoweth them that are 
his:" he knew every consecrated one even tho surrounded 
by the unconsecrated ten or twenty times more numerous. 
Now the Lord will demonstrate what he already 
knows by separating the wheat from the tares. 
However, from the divine standpoint none have ever 
been recognized as the Kingdom class except the faithful 



little flock— the fully consecrated "wheat." And 
this is shown by our Lord's word when again, referring 
to the separation work of this harvest period, he declares 
that "he will gather out of his Kingdom all things that 
offend and them which do iniquity."— Matt. 13:41. 

Evidently, then, it is one thing to gather out of 
Babylon his people, and quite another thing to gather 
out of his Kingdom the offenders: yet both expressions 
cover the same events. The "wheat" have always been 
the heirs of the Kingdom— the "tares" have never been 
such, tho both have grown side by side throughout this 
Gospel age. In the past the "tares" have at least nominally 
professed to be "wheat"— professed faith in our 
Lord's Word and in his redemptive work. But now, under 
divine providence, they are being led of their error 
to repudiate the "wheat" altogether— as "non-critical, 
old fogies." 

They have abandoned both the Book and the Blood 
—not in word, but actually, logically. It is to all a test 
of standing, of holding to the anchorage of faith or of 
being blown by the winds of worldly wisdom, called 
"higher criticism," far, far away from our Savior and 
his inspired Word. 

Really, then, the "tares" leave the "wheat," by 
utterly abandoning the faith once delivered to the saints. 
Thus God gathers them out of or away from his Kingdom 
class. But, since the latter are a minority, they 
must leave the meeting-houses to the majority, who 
thus carry them with them "out of his Kingdom," to 
be places of musical and literary entertainment instead 
of places for worship and for hearing the Word of the 
Lord and for renewal of vows. 

The minority must leave the organizations of Babylon 
also— in order to be faithful to their Lord and his 
Word and to "show forth the praises of him who hath 
called us out of darkness into his marvelous light." 
This at first seems a trial— until we learn the difference 
between human organizations and the divine organization, 
and that the former never were instituted nor authorized 
by our Lord or his apostles; and that none of 
them ever were connected with any such human organizations; 
and that to leave the human organizations is 

R2545 : page 276 

merely to leave a "tare" institution of the long ago and 
has no bearing whatever on the real organization of which 
we still remain members, with our names written in 
heaven— in the Lamb's Book of Life.— Heb. 12:23; 
Rev. 13:8. 

DOCTOR DE COSTA'S LETTER TO BISHOP POTTER. 



Doctor DeCosta, in withdrawing from a church 



where he found the friends of the Savior and the Bible 
in a hopeless minority, wrote a letter to the Bishop of 
his diocese, setting forth some of his reasons: and very 
properly he made public the contents of the letter;— 
otherwise his reasons for his action might have been 
misunderstood by some of his friends and misrepresented 
by some not his friends. And a similar privilege and 
duty presents itself to all who withdraw from any division 
of Babylon.* 

We give liberal extracts from Dr. DeCosta's letter, 
believing that it will be of general interest to God's 
people, and well knowing that not only the religious, 
but also the secular press will be loth to give it much 
notice. The truth, let us remember, never has been 
popular with the world, and the "tare" influence, direct 
and indirect, is generally sufficient to either exclude 
such like matter or to ridicule it as "superstitious and 
cranky." The extracts follow:— 

"New York, Oct. 7th, 1899. 
The Rt. Rev. HENRY CODMAN POTTER, D.D., LL.D., 

Bishop of the Protestant Episcopal Church, Diocese 
of New York:— 

"DEAR SIR:— I hereby respectfully resign the office 
of Presbyter. 

"It is proper for me to give some reason for this 
course, which, at the end of long years of service, is 
adopted deliberately and in the fear of God. I must 
now, however, confine myself to a few points. In what 
I have to say at this time I desire to speak with entire 
plainness, as well as with kindness and respect; while, 
to avoid any possible misapprehension, I would add 
that I do not resign on account of any personal 
grievance. 

"I cannot reconcile my convictions with the present 
condition of the Episcopal Church, which, contrary 
to its own principles, has been drawn into the adoption 
of a policy of toleration toward a school of theology 
and Biblical criticism which in my judgment is hostile 
to revealed truth. 

"Further permit me to say respectfully that I do 
not find that you have been 'ready with all faithful diligence 
to banish and drive away from the church all erroneous 
and strange doctrines contrary to God's Word;' 
while much less have you seemed inclined 'both privately 
and openly to call upon and encourage others to 
do the same.' 

"On the contrary, I think the testimony proves 
that you have discouraged and baffled men inclined to 
take such action. I do not, however, undertake to impugn 
your motives or charge upon you the 'lamentable 
ignorance' and deliberate 'malice' which some time 
since in the public press you attributed to men by no 
means your inferiors either in learning or charity. I 
desire, nevertheless, to indicate that, as I view the subject, 
whatever may have been your own views, you have 
acted with and defended those who have struck at the 



Scriptures of the Old and New Testament as the plenarily 
inspired and infallible Word of God. 

DOUBT SPREADING RAPIDLY. 

"The progress of doubt during the last few years 
is most notable. If Newman had lived in our day, he 
would hardly have been able to write that beautiful 
eulogy of the Bible in which he says of the Englishman 
that 'It is the representative of his best moments,' and 
that 'all that there has been about him of soft, and 
gentle, and pure, and penitent, and good, speaks to him 
forever out of his English Bible. It is his sacred thing 
which doubt has never seen and controversy never 
soiled.' Even in Episcopal seminaries the inerrancy 
of Holy Scripture is boldly and systematically denied. 

"You, right reverend sir, have entered the field at 
a crucial hour, plainly declaring that the system of denial 
or negation embodied in the 'higher criticism' forms 
an allowable method of interpretation, and that the acceptance 
of the methods and its conclusions does not 
disqualify candidates for the ministry. You have therefore 
deliberately received into the denomination, and 
you have approved as proper teachers for the people, 
men who declare that the Scriptures are errant and do 
not form an infallible guide, but abound in myths, fables, 
scientific and historical errors. 

"The long catalogue of errors credited by so-called 
'higher criticism' to Holy Scripture may or may not in 
your estimation appear as trifles. That, however, has 
nothing to do with the present issue, but the system 
that you vouch for as within the liberty of clergymen 
leaves, in my judgment, no sufficient authority for the 
Christian religion. We are plainly told that 'The prevalent 
dogmatic theories of the inspiration and infallibility 
of the Bible have been undermined in the entire 
range of Biblical study, and it is a question in many 
minds whether they can ever be so reconstructed as to 
give satisfaction to Christian scholars.' 

"The worst is that the church approves your course. 
Future candidates may openly deride the story of Pentecost 
as the world has understood it from the time of 
the apostles. 



*We have prepared what we term Withdrawal Letters for 
the use of our friends. They are printed in typewriter type, 
and in kind but clear and forceful language explain some of the 
reasons moving to the withdrawal. You merely need to sign, 
date and mail these to the pastor and all members of the sect 
you have been bound to, and at once you are free. We supply 
these free, accompanied by missionary envelopes and tracts- 
enough to supply every member of the congregation one. Order 
a sample one first and see if it will suit you— then send for required 
quantity. These "Withdrawal Letters" should be sent 



out as soon as possible after you decide on regaining the liberty 

wherewith Christ hath made free his people. Every day or 

month or year that passes before sending them is a distinct disadvantage 

to you and to the truth: both are sure to be misrepresented 

by an informal withdrawal. You joined not the minister, 

but the congregation,— not secretly, but publicly; and your 

withdrawal should be after the same manner. 

R2546 : page 277 

"The former belief in the Bible is no longer required. 
Candidates of the school to which I refer will 
indeed continue to sign papers, agreeing to accept the 
Scriptures as the Word of God, but such subscriptions 
practically will prove little better than perjury. 

"The phrase 'Word of God' is now a phrase only; 
its meaning has been juggled away. 

'"Higher criticism' has struck every diocese in the 
land, and from all the States in the Union there is coming 
a wild, ungovernable flood of opinion and sentiment 
that renders your position still more significant. You 
do not stand alone. You are upborne by the power of 
unconsecrated wealth. Your Convention, which has 
just closed its session, is with you, having overwhelmingly 
vindicated your laisses faire Standing Committee 
by indorsing its dark act. Your examiners give unqualified 
support. Thus far the case is diocesan; but 
venerable and saintly men like the Bishop of Minnesota, 
men of superior judgment and influence, applaud the 
'wisdom and good sense' displayed in this phase of your 
administration, while the criminal silence of other 
Bishops speaks louder than words. 

"The press, being creedless, is, for the most part, 
with you, and hails you as the exponent of incoming 
'liberal thought.' A leading editorial, in a prominent 
daily, describing present society as one that 'has outlived 
the faith of dogma,' claims that your position is 
'invincible.' Humanly speaking, it is indeed secure. 
The masses of Episcopalians are with you. 

"I can understand why the Bishop of Western 
Texas is obliged to admit:— 'We know that the young 
men are not in the churches and the laboring classes 
are entirely alienated.' The president of your Standing 
Committee has just reported to Convention that the 
youth of the denomination 'deny any obligation to go 
to church. They go if they please, but if not, it makes 
no difference.' 

"Indeed, what have they to go for? To listen to 
the reading of what preachers pronounce myths and 
fables. Substantially, the battle for the Bible has been 
fought. The case is lost, and now you can present no 
inducements for either youth or age to go to church. 
By a town meeting process the Bible has been declared 
'literature.' 

"This new relation of your denomination to the 
Bible changes the relation of the denomination to other 



religious bodies, and never again can Episcopalians approach 
the Presbyterians calling to union on the basis 
of a common Bible. 

"Unbelief is in the air. Indeed, I must here call 
attention to the fact, as yet little noticed, that the worst 
of the prevailing scepticism does not appear in print, 
nor even in public addresses. In private not a few of 
both clergy and laity openly repudiate the authority of 
Bible and creed, using no concealment. 

"One very prominent rector, who stands high in 
the ranks of your supporters, speaks of the New Testament 
as a bundle of left over documents. Another has 
declared that the first three chapters of St. Matthew 
form simply a beautiful legend; while another ridicules 
even the Apostles' Creed. Important positions are held 
by men of this class, who remain in the pulpit to win 
present bread or accomplish ulterior ends. 

THE ONLY WAY. 

"Evils have been pointed out privately to the 
bishops, and the pessimistic reply of one, 'Things will 
never be any better in your day or mine,' may be accepted 
as the expression of nearly all. Letters in my 
possession from some of your associates in office form 
instructive reading. For myself, recognizing the situation 
as I do, there is but one course; and, therefore, 
whatever other men, whom personally I esteem, may 
do, and however they may regard their obligations, 
mine seem clear. 

"While no action on your part could lead me to go 
out, I recognize a condition that no one man, or any 
possible combination of men, can now successfully 
meet. The Episcopalian scheme, based on private judgment, 
is not only far overshadowed by doubt that will 
characterize the incoming twentieth century, but it is 
possessed by the unbelieving spirit. The storm is already 
here, but the Protestant Episcopal body has no 
anchors. The future is clear. Your people are hastening 
to accomplish their evolution. Few will be misled 
by the pompous diction of that bishop who in his last 
charge foretells great victories. Fewer still, allow me 
to say with all kindness, will be persuaded by your own 
phraseology, where you speak of 'the Book' as 'incomparable 
and precious,' since it is commonly believed that 
many churchmen would not now disdain such language 
if applied to the works of Shakespeare and Homer. 

"One can very well anticipate the reply of men 
who, with assumed indignation, deny that they refuse the 
Bible as the Word of God, but discerning persons know 
the value of phrases out of which the erstwhile faith, 
robustness and honesty have departed. 

A REMARKABLE DISCOVERY. 

"You charge that 'a modern fetichism which has 



dishonored the Bible by claiming to be its elect guardian 
has shut it up these many years within the iron 
walls of a dreary literalism, robbing it thus alike of 
interest and of power.' You have furnished a remarkable 
discovery. All along the people have regarded the 
Bible as a free book. It has stood, the pride and glory 
of the nations, accredited with the uplifting of society 
and the advance of civilization and modern thought. 
No language has been found too superb in describing its 
work of emancipation and purification. 

"Now, however, you assure us that we have been 
mistaken, that all the while the Bible has been shut up 
within iron walls, robbed of interest and power. Do 
you, right reverend sir, suppose that the people of the 
land, who have organized Bible societies and carried 
them on at a large cost for many years, are sufficiently 
ignorant of the history and influence of the Bible to 
accept tamely this charge? Your language is astonishing! 
I deeply deplore the necessity which exists for saying 
this, yet you are winning laurels among infidels far 
and wide. 

"The particular kind of usefulness that your criticism 
may aspire to is indicated by the language of one 
of your own friends, the Bishop of Washington, who 
declares that, 'under the influence of the "higher criticism" 
thousands have lost their faith in the Old Testament 
as the inspired Word of God;' while 'the faith of 
multitudes is so shaken that even Sunday school children 

R2546 : page 278 

speak of the Scriptures with an irreverent freedom 
that would have amazed the preceding generation.' 

"One may, therefore, safely dismiss your statement 
where you speak of what 'a higher scholarship has done 
for us in our generation for the advancement of godliness 
and good learning throughout the Christian world.' It 
is, on the contrary, driving people away from the religion 
of Christ. 

"Furthermore, it might be remembered with profit 
that Christianity was never designed to entertain any 
comparative religions, and the system you applaud can 
only degrade the Episcopal denomination to a plan 
where the maintenance of the simplest elements of 
Christianity will prove impossible. As for your own 
diocese, the central and most important, when its actual 
state is known, it will be seen that it is rapidly approaching 
the condition of the bloodless heart. Spiritually 
your strongest corporation is failing. The appearance 
of prosperity, as the statistics prove, is unreal. As 
things are tending, far sighted friends say that if the 
Cathedral is ever finished it will prove the sarcophagus 
of Episcopalianism, the coffin of its creed. It is to be 
devoutly hoped that the policy with which you are 
identified may yet be paralyzed. 

"For myself I cannot bow to the guidance of the 



'distinguished critics' whom you have set forth as teachers 
and examples for the faculties in Episcopal seminaries, 
masters in Israel— who now, side by side with 
the professional infidel, stand forth to lecture on the 
'Mistakes of Moses.' My sense of right would not support 
me in any such course. I retire from the field, 
convinced that I am no longer called to struggle with 
an overwhelming and rapidly increasing force. I cannot 
accept the revolution or drift with the tide. Your 
school is indeed benevolent, and quite willing to tolerate 
catholic faith, bestowing upon it from time to time 
nothing more severe than ignoble terms. But for myself 
I ask no favors. I will not remain where doubt 
commands a premium, and the belief in an infallible 
Bible enjoys simply the immunity granted to a fallible 
Koran." —From The New York Herald. 



DR. DE COSTA'S PARADOXICAL POSITION. 



At first it would appear paradoxical, if not absurd, 
that the gentleman who poses as a defender of the Bible 
in the language quoted foregoing, should conclude 
that the same honesty which led him to protest against 
the Protestant Episcopal communion as deserters of the 
Bible, led him into the Roman Catholic Church as the 
communion of the Bible's friends with whom alone he 
could find fellowship. Yet this is the Doctor's position: 
and in harmony with it he was received into the Roman 
Catholic Church on Sunday, Dec. 4. He has since published 
his reasons for the step, from which we extract 
as follows:— 

"I do not, however, propose to offer any apology 
for entering the Catholic Church. Standing in the midst 
of modern religious systems, toppling to their fall like 
columns in the temple of Karnak, no defense need be 
offered for accepting a firm and unshaken Catholic faith. 
...The Church of Rome stands before the English 
speaking people and Protestants everywhere as the 

R2547 : page 278 

unique and solitary defender of the Bible in its integrity 
and entirety." 

Dr. De Costa denies that the authorities of the 
Catholic Church are unfavorable to the circulation and 
use of the Bible, saying that it is the duty and privilege 
of Catholic scholars to study the Bible thoroughly in 
the original tongues. The gentleman must consider the 
Latin the original tongue, for surely it is it that is chiefly, 
almost exclusively, studied by Romanist priests,— 
or rather compiled and arranged extracts from the Latin 
New Testament and not the book itself. 



The Doctor concludes thus:— 

"On the Protestant theory there is no visible 
Church, the only body being a mystical body in the 
air. On this theory Christianity has failed; the empire 
that triumphed over the Roman empire has perished. 
This is simply pessimism resumed. Reformation, religionism, 
therefore offers no moral or intellectual outlook 
for coming generations, and leaves the world forced at 
last to choose between rationalism and the Catholic 
Church. I believe in the Holy Catholic Church and 
the life everlasting." 

Poor Doctor, he must have our sympathy, if we 
give him credit for candor and love for God's Word; 
and we believe there are many in his position. He sees 
inconsistencies on both sides of the question and has 
jumped from one horn of his dilemma to the other, instead 
of escaping from both. Thus:— 

(1) Dr. De Costa has forced himself to forget that 
for centuries Papacy has been the implacable foe of the 
Bible; that she has officially through her popes (claimed 
to be infallible) cursed the Bible Societies and denounced 
their work as of the devil; that she has caused Bibles 
circulated among the people to be gathered and publicly 
burned— "auto da fe." 

He cannot be ignorant of the fact— and hence he 
must merely close his eyes to it, and try to forget— that 
Papacy's advocacy of the Bible and permission of the 
people to have it and to read it is but a recent move 
(within the last ten years), and that only in the United 
States, and hedged about with certain restrictions governed 
by the priests and from translations containing 
Roman Catholic comments as footnotes. The Doctor 
utterly ignores the fact that Papacy has not really 
changed— boasts that she never changes,— and hence is 
no more the friend of the Bible than she was during 
the "dark ages," but merely appears to advocate the 
Bible so as to disarm suspicion and to gain the good 
will of the most enlightened nation in the world. He 
forces himself to forget that the portions of "Christendom" 
where the Bible is free and in the vernacular of 
the people are the most enlightened and the most Protestant 
—The United States, Great Britain, Norway, 

R2547 : page 279 

Sweden, Germany, Switzerland: and that the dark places 
of superstition and cruelty are the places where Papacy 
has persistently hindered the circulation of the Bible- 
Spain, Portugal, Italy, Southern Ireland, and as far as 
possible France and Austro-Hungary, Mexico and the 
South American countries. Well does Papacy know 
that the Bible— "the sword of the spirit," the Word of 
God, is her greatest foe: and she will never be its supporter 
and defender, except as a pretense,— even as Satan 
would pose as an angel of light instead of a prince 
of darkness to accomplish his purposes. 



(2) Having blinded himself on the above point 
the Doctor seeks to account for the Reformation movement 
as not being to secure a free Bible as the true light 
upon the Church's pathway. On the other hand he declares 
it was a mistaken effort to repudiate the visible 
church and to recognize it only as a spiritual body. 

Would to God the Doctor told the truth in this 
statement! Would to God all Protestants (and Romanists 
too) recognized the Scriptural teaching that the 
Church of Christ is not an earthly organization with 
names upon sectarian rolls of membership, but instead 
is a heavenly union and communion "whose names are 
written in heaven"— "in the Lamb's Book of Life." 
(Heb. 12:23; Rev. 13:8.) But alas! the Doctor is as 
much mistaken in this as in his other proposition, for 
Protestants as well as Romanists have earthly organizations 
and honor these as the true Church, and do not 
see that they are "Babylonish"— confused mixtures in 
which "wheat" and "tares" commingle— the "tares" 
predominating and consequently ruling. 

Erring on both these points, Dr. De Costa has gone 
from bad to worse— from one bad "tare" bundle to 
another containing still less "wheat." Oh, how many 
of God's people are confused, bewildered, and ensnared 
thus and otherwise! Only the meek, the humble, will 
go earnestly to God and be taught of him and be led 
out of all human entanglements and bondages into the 
liberty wherewith the Son of God makes free his sheep. 

EVOLUTION AMONG THE BAPTISTS. 



In evidence that the latest and worst form of Infidelity 
is permeating all denominations, all colleges and 
seminaries, note the following just clipped from the 
Rochester, N.Y., Post-Express:— 

"President A. H. Strong delivered last evening at 
the Rochester Theological Seminary an address on 'The 
Growth of Theological Thought During the Last Fifty 
Years.' Dr. Strong took advanced ground, accepting 
fully the theory of Evolution and approving the methods 
and general results of the higher criticism." 

The Rochester Baptist Seminary is the principal 
one of that denomination in the United States and furnishes 
its most prominent ministers. 

THE METHODISTS ALSO DISTRACTED. 



The Boston Morning Journal of Dec. 8th announced 
as the leading news of its first page— 

"NINE STUDENTS QUIT BOSTON UNIVERSITY." 



It then quotes the statement of one of the students, 
Schenk by name, as follows:— 

"Coming from the West to Boston University School 
of Theology a year ago, I was shocked to find the most 
rabid rationalism being taught as Old Testament exegesis, 
under cover of a leading Methodist school. Coming 
to Messianic prophecy, only half a truth was taught. 
Further on Jesus Christ was no authority on Old Testament 
Scripture. The miraculous conception was set 
aside and the atoning blood made non-essential." 

The worst of the matter is yet to be told, namely, 
that Prof. Mitchell is heartily endorsed by the other 
professors of the institution and by nearly all the students 
of the seminary— the soon-to-be preachers of 
Methodism; for the President of the institution says 
that the dissenters are only "eight or nine out of an 
aggregate of 178 students." 

It seems, too, that the seceders appealed to the 
Board of Bishops of the Methodist Episcopal Church, 
but got no redress but on the contrary; as a result 
the students who protested against the decimation of 
the Book and the rejection of the precious blood were 
notified that they must be quiet on the subject. Thereupon 
they nobly withdrew. 



So the leaven of error is rapidly permeating every 
branch of the nominal church, and the tests are coming 
to each individual Christian to prove him either 
"wheat" or "tare." The "wheat," today as of old, 
will be counted "fools for Christ's sake" by the worldly-wise. 
-1 Cor. 4:10. 



R2547 : page 279 

THE YEAR 1900 A PAPAL JUBILEE. 



POPE LEO XIII. has issued a decree, or "bull," 
designating the last year of the century a Jubilee 
year, a holy year, in which all his faithful are 
called upon to confess their sins, make many pilgrimages 
and prayers, and thus obtain forgiveness and indulgences 
—release from purgatorial sufferings justly 
merited and now in store for them. The bull has been 
translated into English and published broadcast, and 
we quote a portion of it, as follows:— 
"In opening the treasures of indulgences, whereof 

R2547 : page 280 

it is the dispenser, the Church invites the whole of 



Christendom to the hope of pardon.... 

"Raising our eyes to God, with his help and with 
the approbation of the cardinals, we order a universal 
Jubilee, to commence in this sacred city of Rome with 
the first vespers of Christmas, 1899, and to cease on 
the same day in 1900. 

"During the Jubilee Year we concede full indulgence 
and pardon of sins to all Christians truly repentant, 
who confess their sins and partake of communion, 
and who will visit the basilicas of St. Peter's, St. Paul's, 
St. John's, or that of Sta. Maria Maggiore, in Rome, at 
least once a day during twenty days, if having domicile 
in Rome, or, for pilgrims, during ten days. All ought 
to pray for the exaltation of the Church, for the extirpation 
of heresies, for the concord of Catholic princes, 
and for the salvation of Christian peoples. 

"Those who through sickness or other legitimate 
causes cannot visit the Roman basilicas, if they confess 
and communicate, may also benefit in the indulgence. 

"To Rome we invite you, with love, sons of the 
Church throughout the world." 



This pronunciamento of papal power in heaven and 
hell, on earth and in purgatory, is extremely mild and 
unassuming when compared to those of Leo's predecessors.* 
The statement is milder to suit the changed 

R2548 : page 280 

conditions of papal influence and general enlightenment; 
but the same thought, the same error underlies— 
that the power to forgive sins has been lodged by the 
Almighty in the hands of the pope and his conferees. 
If it were true, what an awful responsibility it would 
place upon these men! What if they had forgotten or 
neglected to appoint this Jubilee? And then, again,— if 
such confessions, prayers, pilgrimages, etc., can affect 
such blessings and releases from sufferings, why are not 
Jubilee years more frequent— every year? Think for 
a moment of the loss, the terrible loss, sustained by the 
pope's faithful who have died, and will die, before the 
time he and the cardinals have set! 

We notice with pleasure that, while "the extirpation 
of heresies" is mentioned, the injunction is to pray 
for this, and not as in olden times to labor for it by extirpating 
heretics as vermin. Let us continually thank 
God for the breaking up of the solidarity of Antichrist 
by the Great Reformation of the sixteenth century. 
The more it breaks up, and the smaller the fragments, 
the better for the truth and the true children of God,— 
the true Church "whose names are written in heaven." 
(Heb. 12:23.) Not the true "wheat," but the imitation, 
the "tares," need to be bound in bundles, by sectarian 
creeds and obligations of human device and imposition. 



And altho it is clearly pointed out in the Scriptures 
that a federative union of the various sects of Christendom 
will soon occur; and tho we know that this will 
mean a great increase of opposition, hatred and persecution 
of all who will not "join" nor be "bound" in 
the bundles, but who stand fast in the liberty wherewith 
Christ has made them free, still we may sing,— 
"I will fear no evil: for thou art with me; 
Thy rod and thy staff they comfort me!" 
—knowing that ere long all the "wheat" will be garnered 
and shine forth as the sun in the Kingdom of the 
Father with their Lord;— to bless all the families of the 
earth. -Matt. 13:30,43. 

Now, not to disparage the pope's efforts (which we 
will presume to be sincere and honestly intended to be 
a means of grace to his people), but by way of showing 
forth the error underlying the whole theory on which 
the pope's efforts are based, we will make a pronouncement: 
one which every true child of God as an "ambassador" 
and member of the "royal priesthood" is 
privileged to make daily, or so often as opportunity offers, 
namely,— 

IN THE NAME OF OUR LORD JESUS CHRIST, 
THE GREAT SHEPHERD (BISHOP) OF THE SHEEP, 
PONTIFEX MAXIMUS, VICAR OF GOD 
AND PRINCE OF 
THE KINGS OF THE EARTH, 

—I declare that whosoever cometh unto the Father by 
him is acceptable; because by him whosoever believeth 
in him as his Savior and Shepherd is justified freely from 
all things,— from which the Law could never justify or 
deliver him: 

—I therefore declare unto all who thus renounce sin 
and lay hold of the Deliverer with the arms of their 
faith, that without waiting for Christmas day, 1899, or 
any other date, and without pilgrimages to Rome or 
Allegheny or elsewhere, and without visiting cathedrals 
or other holy places, or having the prayers of popes, 
cardinals, bishops, underpriests or laymen, and even 
without prayers of their own, they may have this grace 
—even as it is written, "Being justified by faith [not 
prayers nor works], we have peace with God through 
our Lord Jesus Christ [not through other mediators]." 
-Rom. 5:1. 

—Moreover, by the authority of the same Great Potentate 
we declare unto you the efficacy of his Calvary-sacrifice 
not only thus to cleanse from sins that are past, 
but also to keep you reckonedly cleansed and pure in 
God's sight, so long as you abide by faith in Christ. 
For his blood cleanseth us from all sin— continually 
covering our unwilful imperfections; as it is written,— 
"My strength is made perfect in weakness," and "my 
grace is sufficient for thee." 



Verily, the god of this world (Satan) has not only 
blinded the heathen (2 Cor. 4:4), but he is quite 



*See MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. II., Chap. 9. 

R2548 : page 281 

considerably blinding two thirds of Christendom represented 
in the Roman and Greek Catholic communions, 
as evidenced by such proclamations as that of the pope 
and by the continual practice of their priests. 

Nor do we find the Protestant element of Christendom 
fully enlightened and clear on this point of there 
being no necessity for the intervention or mediation of 
men or prayers between the sinner and his Savior. The 
great majority of Protestants consider prayers and intercessions 
essential— as evidenced by the various "revival" 
methods— mourners' benches, kneeling at the 
altar, rising for prayers, inquiry rooms, etc.— all so 
contrary to the simplicity of the Scriptural arrangement, 
which is,— Preach the message of God's grace in Christ, 
and whosoever believingly accepts it is thereby justified 
and at peace with God: and his prayers that should follow 
such belief and acceptance would be thanksgivings 
for divine favors received and pledges of his own future 
faithfulness to the Light, the Truth, the Way. 

"I am the Light of the world: he that followeth 
me [Jesus] shall not walk in darkness but shall have 
the light of life. "-John 8:12. 

Very evidently the reason for so much darkness is 
that, under Satan's misleading, those who see the true 
light to some extent get to following Popes, Councils, 
Presbyteries, Conferences and Confessions of men, instead 
of following the Lord who is the True Light. We 
should esteem very highly for their work's sake all who 
have been or may be used of the Lord as finger posts to 
point us to the Light, the Way, the Truth, but no more 
—we are not to follow them, except as we discern clearly 
from the Word that they are closely following Christ. 
He is to be our Pattern and our only Light. 



Meantime in an endeavor to "make a fair show in 
the flesh" it is the proposition of the pope and his coadjutors 
to open during that Jubilee year one of the greatest 
cathedrals in the world in the greatest metropolis of 
the world— Westminster Cathedral, London. It is said 
to have already cost over ten millions of dollars: and 
that millions more are being collected in various parts 
of the world where "heretics," whom they condemn to 
hell torments unceasing, are by taxes, etc., feeding the 



Romanist poor in the almshouses of Christendom. 
Thanks be to God for the light and better day coming 
for the poor, deceived, "groaning creation" and for the 
blessed opportunities of eternal life which that Millennial 
Day will bring to them. 



R2548 : page 281 

WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY. 

-REPORT FOR THE YEAR, DEC. 1ST, '98, TO DEC. 1ST, '99. 

VERY PROPERLY all who are truly the Lord's 

people feel a deep interest not only in the Truth 

itself but also in all pertaining to it and its propagation; 

—not only in their own vicinities but also in its world-wide 

field and mission. And what is thus generally 

true seems to be intensified in all such after they have 

become acquainted with the "harvest" message— the 

light of the last days of this age,— the light of the parousia; 

—the bright shining of the present one— the epiphania 

—parousia. 

We are conscious therefore that many eyes will look 
for and carefully scan this report of the work accomplished 
in the year just ended,— especially all who have 
had a share in it, great or small, "every man according 
to his several ability" (Matt. 25:15), whether as a contributor 
to the funds which propel the work or an 
assistant in the labor of circulating the truth, or both. 
All such we know will be rejoiced in heart, refreshed 
for fresh endeavors for the new year as they read what 
we have to present. Rejoice, for it is your work, our 
work, the Lord's work. And as we realize how comparatively 
few there are whose eyes of understanding 
are opened that they can see the light, and when we 
remember too, that (as our Lord foretold) among them 
there are not many great or wise or rich in this world's 
riches and wisdom, we must say that the showing is 
"marvelous in our sight." 

(1) To begin with, we always reckon the truest 
progress of the cause to be indicated by the WATCH 
TOWER'S subscription list; for however interest may be 
awakened, by tracts, booklets and DAWNS, it is rarely 
fixed and riveted except through the regular visits of 
our semi-monthly pastoral. You will be pleased then 
to know that the WATCH TOWER list grew considerably 
during last year: and that the evidences point to a still 
larger increase during the year now beginning. And as 
each reader is interested in and praying for such results, 
each will proportionately lend a hand to the answering 
of his own prayers, by doing what he can to increase 
the circulation. Are there not friends to whom you 
have loaned and given tracts and books and whose 
interest is partially awakened? Why not go to such 



with a sample copy of the TOWER and ask them to look 
it over and consider the advisability of having its visits 
regularly? 

We offer no "premiums" to those who thus labor 
for this journal. Oh no; our friends need no such inducements, 
for they render this service with gladness 
and willingness of heart— "as unto the Lord" and on 
behalf of his brethren. But we will gladly furnish you 

R2548 : page 282 

sample copies free. And furthermore to assist you we 

will arrange a "special offer" thus: Anyone who is 

already a WATCH TOWER reader may send in new subscriptions 

for the year (one dollar each) and to each 

R2549 : page 282 

we will send one volume of the DAWN series free— whichever 
volume may be designated in your order;— but all 
such orders should be designated "Special offer" that 
we may understand that they are in compliance herewith. 

Furthermore: some of the brethren have intimated 
that they would like to send the WATCH TOWER for a 
while to their friends, with a view to awaking their 
interest in its teachings and have asked whether or not 
we will receive six months subscriptions under such 
circumstances. Assuredly we will and we will do more 
than that: we will share with you in the service by 
sending four six months trial subscriptions for ONE DOLLAR, 
eight for TWO DOLLARS, twenty for FIVE DOLLARS, 
forty for TEN DOLLARS. But we will accept only new 
subscriptions and none for longer than six months on 
these terms. Not that we are unwilling to treat old 
friends as well as new ones, but that our regular terms 
(page 2) are amply reasonable— those who cannot afford 
to pay one dollar a year for the WATCH TOWER cannot 
afford to pay anything, and such are as welcome to it as 
to the air they breathe, if they will apply for it on terms 
stated. 

(2) THE COLPORTEUR WORK has prospered during 
the past year as will be noticed by the Secretary's report 
following. The number of DAWNS put into the hands 
of the people exceeded the number circulated the previous 
year by fifty per cent; and the number of booklets 
over one hundred per cent. 

This increase is due in great measure to the financial 
prosperity which permits people to purchase books, 
and thus has permitted colporteurs who had been 
driven from the service by the "hard times" to reenter 
this fruitful quarter of the "harvest" field: besides the 
Lord has raised up new laborers willing, yea anxious, to 
spend and be spent in serving to others the meat in due 
season which has so blessed and strengthened their own 
hearts. It doubtless is true that tho money is more 
plentiful by reason of the "good times," the time to 



read the literature is curtailed thereby: nevertheless, the 
truth-hungry will find time for it; and if it costs some 
self-denial the blessing will be the greater. Others will 
find plenty of time in the not distant future when another 
financial collapse will carry labor to the lowest plane it 
has occupied for fifty years. Remember continually 
in your prayers the dear brethren and sisters of the 
Colporteur service. 

(3) THE PILGRIM SERVICE. During the year this 
branch of the service has been increased and its field 
widened— hundreds of meetings being held from Canada 

to Georgia and Texas, and from Massachusetts to California 
and Oregon. Many letters testify to good accomplished 
through this department of the work. We 
are planning for its still more effective operation during 
the coming year, as the Lord seems to be opening up 
ways and means. To him let our praise and thanks 
ascend: let us remember in our prayers the dear brethren 
serving as "Pilgrims." 

(4) THE TRACT DISTRIBUTION. This department 
has shared in the general prosperity, as you will see by 
the report of the Secretary following. It is the largest 
showing we have ever been able to present. It speaks 
volumes for the loving zeal of the Lord's people in 

the distribution of these tracts as well as in the providing 
of the funds for their publication. We publish no 
names: it is not necessary, for we are unitedly laboring 
for the Lord's approval and final "Well done!" 

(5) THE VOLUNTEER SERVICE. A year ago we 
called for volunteers to undertake the distribution of 

the booklet, The Bible vs. the Evolution Theory, to church 

attendants in every city and town on Sundays at respectful 

distance from church edifices. Responses were 

prompt— many true soldiers of the cross accepted the 

offer as the God-given opportunity, for which they had 

often prayed— opportunities to do and to serve, and opportunities, 

if need be, to suffer joyfully for the truth's 

sake. These, it is needless to say, besides the blessing 

they carried to others, received a great blessing in their 

own hearts, and are the stronger, and the closer to the 

Lord in consequence. Let us not judge some who discontinued 

as soon as they found some of the cross and 

its reproaches attached to this warfare for the truth— 

this endeavor to preach the gospel to those dear brethren 

who are shut off from other means of hearing the 

good tidings of great joy: let us even think very charitably 

of those who not only did not go out to the battle 

themselves, but who sought to discourage others from 

enlistment. Let us remember the noble Apostle Peter 

who sought to hinder our Lord from his sacrifice and 

thus became his "adversary," but who subsequently 

became one of his most faithful and zealous soldiers; 

and let us hope and pray that each true soldier of the 

cross may become bold to serve the truth according to 

the convictions of his own conscience, and brave and willing 

in some manner to endure the cross, that in due 



time we all may rejoice together as crown wearers in 
our Captain's Kingdom. 

(6) THE CORRESPONDENCE feature of the harvest 
has grown gradually to vast proportions; and we believe 
it is used of the Lord to the blessing of his flock. During 
the year just ended we received 31,956 letters and 
postal cards and sent out 23,676, or a total in and out 

of over a thousand per week during the year,— some 
brief, others lengthy. What a wonderful privilege to 
be thus in close touch with the household of faith, the 

R2549 : page 283 

"brethren" and other truth-seekers! We esteem it a 
great privilege to lend a helping hand to all in this way 
and welcome all your letters. But remembering the 
numbers, please condense your queries and separate 
them from orders in your letters. And do not be offended, 
if we refer you briefly to some back TOWER 
or to some page of the DAWN series for reply. 

(7) THE FINANCIAL end of the work,-has prospered 
amazingly, too,— for us "not many rich." The 
Treasurer's report shows nearly fifteen thousand dollars 
handed in by the Lord's people for use in his service- 
without one penny of it being begged or even asked. The 
most we ever do is to inform the friends of the cause 

that there is a Fund to which such as desire may contribute 
little or much as their holy spirits prompt them 
and their circumstances will permit. We do not even 
blow a trumpet for them nor herald their names— the 
matter is left between each soul and its Lord and each 
is encouraged to use his own best judgment in serving 
the Lord's cause and to look to him for the rewards of 
faithfulness and self-denial. 

True, fifteen thousand dollars is not much money- 
it is less than the salary of some ministers of the gospel 
in the nominal church, not to mention many in worldly 
positions who receive salaries or have incomes of as 
much or more. It is as nothing compared to the vast 
sums donated by the various denominations, by gift 
and bequest, to home and foreign missionary work, to 
their Bible Societies and Tract Societies. Yet this little 
under the Lord's blessing is accomplishing much in the 
keeping up of meetings through Pilgrims and in circulating 
nearly sixty-five millions of pages of literature 
throughout the length and breadth of the civilized world. 
It reminds us of the widow's cruse of oil and remnant 
of meal.— 1 Kings 17:9-16. 

(8) THE FOREIGN WORK is constantly growing. 
Brother Weber is still the representative of the French 
work, laboring in Switzerland. Brother Winter looks 
out for the interests of the Truth in Denmark, while 
Brothers Lundborg and Nelson do the same in Sweden. 
Sister Giesecke is the Society's representative in Germany. 
The latter has just sent in report which shows 

246 letters received and 263 letters sent out, and a free 



circulation of reading matter representing 258,664 tract 
pages. The work in Great Britain we do not reckon as 
foreign, because of close connection and one tongue, but 
it is prospering, too, and our stock of books and tracts 
in Brother Hart's care is larger than ever, made necessary 
by increased demands. 

All of these "brethren" need our love and sympathy 
and prayers. Let us remember all the interests of 
Zion when we approach the throne of the heavenly 
grace. And finally, dear brethren, pray for us of the 
home office, who occupy not only a place of interest in 
your hearts, but a place of prominence for the great 
Adversary's attacks. Pray that we may have more and 
more of the Master's blessed spirit— the spirit of wisdom 
and of might, the spirit of patience and of meekness, 
the spirit of zeal and of a sound mind, the spirit of love 
and devotion to the Lord, his truth and his "brethren." 
And as you thus pray, you will be drawn nearer to us 
and to the Lord and to the same spirit which worketh 
all in all. Very truly, 

Your brother and servant in the Anointed, 
C. T. RUSSELL, President. 

TREASURER'S ACCOUNT, DEC. 1ST, '98, TO DEC. 1ST, '99. 



Receipts— Cash, "Good Hopes" $11,303.32 

" from other sources 3,467.20 



Amount $14,770.52 



Expenditures— Pilgrim Account $2,612.01 

Publishing tracts and 
postage, etc., on same 1 1,286.97 



Amount $13,898.98 

Cash balance for 1900 871.54 



$14,770.52 



SECRETARY'S ACCOUNT, DEC. 1ST, '98, TO DEC. 1ST, '99. 



Copies of MILLENNIAL DAWN circulated 
during the year, 95,354 

Copies of various booklets circulated 
during the year, 43,361 



Copies of ZION'S WATCH TOWER supplied 
gratis to the Lord's poor and sent 
as samples, 156,536 

R2550 : page 283 



Copies of tracts and booklets sent out 
during the year, 2,566,073 

This, represented as usual when referring 

to tracts, aggregated tract pages, 64,650,204 

E. C. HENNINGES, Sec'y & Treas. 



R2550 : page 283 

"THE TRUE LIGHT WHICH LIGHTETH EVERY MAN." 

--DEC. 24.-ISA. 9:2-7.- 

"Unto you is born this day, in the city of David, 
a Savior, which is Christ the Lord."— Luke 2:11. 

CHRISTMAS-TIDE always brings some lesson associated 

with our Savior and the great salvation, 

the gift of God, provided through him. This year 

the chosen lesson is most excellent and beautiful. Appropriately, 

the first verse of the chapter is omitted: 

in Leeser's Translation it constitutes the 

last verse of chapter 8. 

Our lesson had no local and immediate application 
at the time of its delivery: it is strictly prophetical, as 
are indeed the preceding fifteen verses. We cannot even 
apply the lesson to the people and time of the first advent: 
its scope is far beyond the Jewish nation, and can 
only be applied to the worldwide blessings which follow 
the second coming of Christ and the establishment of 
his glorious Kingdom in power and great glory. Nevertheless, 
there is just a bare connection with the past 
in the expression, "Unto us a child is born"— thus indicating 
the humble beginning and earliest manifestation 

R2550 : page 284 

of the great light, the Sun of Righteousness, which 
has not yet arisen, but whose day-star is now shining 
in the hearts of the faithful. -2 Pet. 1:19. 

The two divisions of the first verse of the lesson in 
poetic form merely repeat the same thought with variations. 
The people that walk in darkness who are to see 
the great light are practically all mankind, for "gross 
darkness covers the people"— the exception, the very 
small minority, the Church, as our Lord declared, is 
"not of the world." (John 17:16.) This broad thought 
is emphasized by the next statement, for the whole 
world surely is "the land of the shadow of death:" 
"The whole creation groaneth and travaileth in pain 
together" under the sentence or curse of death which, 
with its accompaniments of pain and sorrow, casts a 
deep shadow in every heart and in every household. 

Surely, the whole world needs this great light— the 



light of the knowledge of the glory of God, as it shines 
in the face of Jesus Christ our Lord— the very light 
which the Apostle declares the world cannot now discern, 
because the eyes of their understanding are darkened 
by the misrepresentations and deceptions perpetrated 
by the god of this world, the prince of darkness. 
-2 Cor. 4:4; Rev. 20:3. 

The fact that this is expressed in the past tense 
does not signify that this light has already shined, even 
as the statement, "Unto us a child is born," did not 
signify the birth of Christ at a time prior to Isaiah's 
prophecy. It is merely a usual form of prophetic statement: 
the standpoint is taken away off in the future, 
and from that future standpoint the thing to be accomplished 
is stated as tho already done. 

Here, then, we have a prophetic assurance of the 
great light of the knowledge of God coming to all mankind: 
and this, be it noted, is in fullest agreement with 
the testimony of John 1:9, that Christ "is the true light 
which lighteth every man that cometh into the world." 
The fact that every man born into the world has not 
yet been enlightened by this great light, so far from 
disparaging the statement, gives us assurance that the 
time is coming when to him every knee shall bow and 
every tongue confess, and all shall know the Lord, from 
the least to the greatest, and knowing him have full responsibility 
or trial for everlasting life or everlasting 
death. 

Verses 3-5 intimate the process by which the great 
change shall come, and the world be prepared for the 
shining of the great light— the Sun of Righteousness 
with healing in his beams. Scholars are divided in their 
opinions respecting a proper translation of the first sentence 
of the third verse. The majority seem to favor 
the translation given by the Revised Version, "Thou hast 
increased the nation, thou hast increased her joy." 
Leeser's Translation renders it, "Thou hast multiplied 
the nation, made great her joy." In harmony with the 
context we must interpret this nation to be the world of 
mankind under the new administration of the Millennial 
Kingdom; for the kingdoms of this world will then 
become the kingdoms of our Lord, God's Anointed, 
and many nations shall go and say, "Come ye, and let 
us go up to the mountain of the Lord, to the house of 
the God of Jacob; and he will teach us of his ways, 
and we will walk in his paths."— Rev. 11:15; Isa. 2:3. 

Thus, instead of the Lord's empire being a typical 
one over a little nation of Israelites, as in the day of 
Isaiah's prophecy, it will be the antitypical one in 
which Immanuel shall be King over all the earth, and 
his name great to the ends of the earth. 

It is the joy of this great people that is described: 
it will not merely be a quiet joy of satisfaction, but an 
hilarious joy, as of men who are in the midst of plenty, 
in a harvest season; and as men rejoicing when dividing 
the fruits of victory. But what will be the cause 



of the rejoicing? The answer is given. Because from 
off their shoulder the great burden has been removed: 
the burden of sin and its curse will have been removed, 
and the rod of the oppressor, Satan, will be broken, 
and he himself then will be a captive, no longer permitted 
to oppress and deceive and blind mankind.— 
Rev. 20:2. 

An illustration of the process of the deliverance is given: 
"As in the days of Median." The suggestion obviously is 
that as Israel was delivered in the day of Midian by Gideon 
and his little band, armed with trumpets and pitchers 
with lights in them,— by the blowing of the trumpets, the 
breaking of the pitchers and the shining out of the 
lights— discomfiting the Midianites, so that they slew 
one another with a great slaughter, so likewise will be 
the deliverance by which the Lord will bring in the new 
dispensation. (Judges 7:19-25.) Our Lord Jesus is the 
antitypical Gideon, and his "little flock," the Church 
of this Gospel age, the "elect," are the antitype of 
Gideon's little army. And it will be through the intervention 
of these (on the other side of the vail) that the 
hosts of sin and the present enginery of evil will be 
utterly discomfited and work its self-destruction through 
anarchy, etc., in the great time of trouble rapidly drawing 
near. 

This great time of trouble is briefly yet graphically 
described in the fifth verse as being more severe, more 
intense, than all preceding troubles, for it is declared 
that all such victories are expected to be with tumult 
and bloody garments, but this shall be with a more furious 
destruction, best likened to a consuming of fuel 
in the fire. And it will be noticed that the fury of the 
final conflict of this age, which shall transfer the rule 
to our Prince Immanuel, is everywhere likened to a 
fire— throughout the prophecies and in our Lord's parables 

R2550 : page 285 

—evidently because of the intensity of the trouble 
and its destructiveness. 

Then comes (vss. 6 and 7) the explanation from 
the Lord's side of how all these things are of his provision 
and supervision— beginning with the birth of our 
Lord as the babe born in Bethlehem; next presenting 
him as God's Son, given on our behalf,— his sacrifice 
beginning at Jordan and culminating at Calvary. 
"Wherefore," as the Apostle says, because of his obedience 
unto death, "him hath God highly exalted and 
given him a name above every [other] name,"— honor, 
dominion and power above all others, next to his own. 

The change of dispensation will be ushered in because 
the Father's "times of restitution of all things" 
(Acts 3:19-21) will have come,— the time for Christ to 
receive the honor, glory and dominion promised him, 
with which he shall fulfil all the gracious things predicted 
by God through the prophets: hence the declaration 



is that then "the government shall be upon his 

shoulder"— the mantle of authority shall rest upon him. 

And when he shall thus assume the control of earth's 

affairs, his character of love and justice, his wisdom, 

and the all-power in heaven and in earth given unto 

him, insure all the faithful that his reign will be a time 

of blessing, of peace and of joy to all who love righteousness 

and truth; and equally a time of burning destruction 

against all who shall sin wilfully after having 

been brought to a knowledge of the truth.— Heb. 12:26. 

His names, his titles, representing the gracious 
things of which he is the representative, are brought to 
our attention: to all the world of mankind he will then 
be (and the Church, his body, with him) "Wonderful" 
—Great— beyond the power of human comprehension, 
as he is indeed the express image of the Father's person. 
He will be the "Counselor," whose instructions 
in righteousness will be satisfactory and respected by all 
the world of mankind seeking a return to divine favor 
and full restitution. And it shall come to pass that 
whosoever will not hear that Teacher, that Counselor, 
shall be cut off from among the people. (Acts 3:23.) 
He shall be called "Mighty God," or Mighty Mighty 
One, for indeed in him shall rest all the power and 
authority of the All-mighty One, Jehovah. He shall 

R2551 : page 285 

be called the "Father Everlasting," because in truth he 
shall be a Father unto the race, a Life-Giver to all who 
will accept life under the terms of the New Covenant, 
sealed with his own precious blood. Adam, the original 
father of humanity, through his sin and under its sentence, 
failed to give lasting life to his race, and death 
destroyed all his offspring; but the restitution life which 
our Lord will give, to as many as will receive it upon 
his terms, will be an everlasting life, and hence he, as 
the Giver of this life to all, will be an Everlasting Father. 
He shall be called the "Prince of Peace," for, altho his 
empire will be established by a smiting of the nations 
with a rod of iron, and breaking them in pieces as a 
potter's vessel, in the greatest time of trouble the world 
has ever known, nevertheless, every blow will be struck 
in the interest of peace, and so his entire reign will 
further the ends of righteousness and peace, even tho 
to the very end thereof there shall from time to time be 
destructions of the wicked.— Isa. 65:20; Rev. 20:9,14,15. 

Leeser's Translation reads thus:— "The Prince of 
Peace for promoting the increase of the government and 
for peace without end upon the throne of David and 
upon his kingdom, to establish it and to support it 
through justice and righteousness from henceforth and 
unto eternity: the zeal of the Lord of hosts will do 
this." 

In this last verse of the lesson the Millennial Kingdom 
is associated with the typical Kingdom of David. 



We are to remember, however, the statement that David 
sat upon the throne of the Kingdom of the Lord- 
he and his kingdom were typical. The name, David, 
signifies "beloved," and our Lord Jesus himself was 
proclaimed as the real David— "This is my Beloved Son, 
in whom I am well pleased." God hath appointed him 
heir of all things, and he is David's Lord, as David 
himself testified. -Heb. 1:2; Matt. 22:41-45. 

We fear that there are many Christians who have 
lost faith, not only in the prophetic promises, but in 
our Lord's and the apostles' exposition of them, and 
that such frequently pray merely with a lip service, 
"Thy Kingdom come, thy will be done on earth as it 
is done in heaven." But so much the more as we discern 
such blindness on every hand, such lack of faith, let 
us, the eyes of whose understandings have been opened 
by the Lord's mercy, be the more faithful, the more 
circumspect, and the more confident, remembering, in 
the words of this lesson, that an abundant fulfilment is 
assured, for "The zeal of Jehovah of hosts will perform 
all this." 

REVIEW OF 1899. -DEC. 31. 



Golden Text.— "Bless the Lord, O my soul, and forget not all his 
benefits. "-Psa. 103:2. 

The end of one year and the beginning of another 
is a most favorable occasion for circumspection and 
retrospection. 

We trust that as each reader reviews the year just 
closing he will be able to repeat our Golden Text appreciatively, 
—with the spirit and with the understanding 
also. One of the least expensive offerings we can 
present to the Lord our God, and yet one which he will 
appreciate very highly, is thanksgiving— for mercies 
past and present. The ungrateful are disdained among 
men, and we may well suppose are far from pleasing in 
the sight of the Almighty. While every creature throughout 
the world might find some cause for thankfulness 
and gratitude and praise, how much more should we 
who have received so abundantly of the riches of divine 

R2551 : page 286 

grace in the knowledge of his truth— the plan of the 
ages. We may well apply to ourselves on this occasion 
the words of our dear Redeemer, "Blessed are your 
eyes, for they see, and your ears, for they hear; for 
verily I say unto you, that many prophets and many 
righteous persons have desired to see the things which 
ye see and have not seen them, and to hear the things 
which ye hear, and have not heard them." 
We said that thanksgivings were cheap offerings; 



but whoever presents to the Lord real thanksgiving with 
lips of praise will follow his lip service with something 
more substantial; and this is intimated in our Golden 
Text by the words, "O my soul!"— the appeal is not 
merely to the lips, but to the entire being. And so we 
find it with ourselves and others today: whoever is truly 
thankful to the Lord and offers him praise, remembering 
his benefits, will seek to render substantial 
thanks also in deeds that will be acceptable and pleasing 
to the Lord. 

While prayers, adorations and praises are the most 
direct offerings of "incense" to the Lord, nevertheless, 
he has so arranged matters that we cannot offer these 
sincerely and acceptably except as we have his spirit: 
and if we have his spirit, we will at the same time that 
we offer this incense on the Golden Altar be offering also 
upon the brazen altar in the "Court" good works— "doing 
good unto all men as we have opportunity, especially 
to the household of faith."— Gal. 6:10. 

The close of the year is an excellent time also for 
the making of new resolutions for the year to come, and 
on the present occasion there is an added force from 
the fact that the year before us will be the last one of 
the century. Let us, beloved brethren, make plenty 
of good resolves respecting what we shall be willing to 
be, to do, to suffer, in fellowship with our Lord; that 
we may by his grace make of it the best year thus far 
of our lives— the year of largest hopes, of largest endeavors, 
and by the Lord's grace of largest successes in 
self-sacrifice, in overcoming the world and its spirit, in 
vanquishing self and the desires of the flesh, in resisting 
the Adversary, and in glorifying our Lord and blessing 
his people. 



page 286 

INTERESTING LETTERS. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELLr-Enclosed please find 
$1.00, renewal subscription for ZION'S WATCH TOWER, 
year 1900. The Spiritual food becomes more necessary 
and more enjoyable as time rolls on. 

I find in DAWN VOL. V. a grand spiritual feast, 
filling my heart with praise and love to our Heavenly 
Father, the giver of all good. I am thankful to have 
you Scripturally prove (effectually silencing subtle 
arguments of the adversary) the human perfection of 
our precious, sinless Redeemer, coming as he did in 
the line of David through Nathan— not Solomon's ancestral 
line. 

Brother Russell, this has been a very profitable 
year to mother and me, continuing to enter into 
the joys of our Lord; every experience, every trial has 
contained valuable instruction much to our advancement 



spiritually. We are daily learning that the advantage 
of the Kingdom of God is righteousness, peace 
and joy in the holy spirit. 

I do not write often to the Bible House as I am 
quite busy, but in spirit I am ever with you and all the 
dear "harvest" workers. I am sure we are all rejoicing 
because we are one year nearer our eternal home. 

My husband is now in Pittsburg; he has a position 
there. The Lord willing, mother and I will join 
him in the spring. What a blessed privilege that 
would be if God should permit us to again assemble 
with the saints that meet from time to time in the Bible 
House. And yet it seems with every blessing there is 

a trial;— there are dear friends in from whom 

it will be hard to separate. 

Kind greeting to yourself and all the Church at 
Allegheny. MRS. A. E. POWER,-Missouri. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELLr-Accept my heartfelt 
thanks for yours of Oct. 11th. The advice and admonitions 
it contained have proved blessings to me. I 
know that God is filling your heart with kindness and 
your mind with wisdom and all good, and often thank 
him in prayer for it. I often wish I could say something 
that would give you joy. I have many opportunities 
to converse with clergymen and other "professionally" 
religious people, and when I see the great 
darkness in which they are, and how firmly they are 
tied in it, my heart is filled with gratefulness to God, 
and to you as his earthly instrument, for the light 
which he has given me. 

You may well believe that I am glad Brother Nelson 
is coming over to help me. It is needed help, I 
assure you. I am so inexperienced and a "child" as 
yet. I am filled with a sense of my own smallness 
when I consider the amount of work that ought to be 
done. My heart is open for him and I am anxiously 
awaiting him,— hope he will come soon. 

Please send me 800 copies Vol. I. and 100 each of 
II. and III., in all 1,000 copies, and as many tracts as 
you see fit. I would suggest about 3,000 of each in the 
Swedish language. 

I am traveling again, but I do not spend all my 
time thus. I am acting on your suggestions in your 
letter. I try to be as practical as possible. I visit 
every house in the towns I go to. But I have also 
tried to follow the advice you gave in an earlier letter, 
namely, to get into communication with as many as 
possible of the leaders in the Salvation Army and other 
religious bodies, and to seek out such as appear to be 
unprejudiced and free among God's children. All this 
I have tried to do. My mode of traveling is cheap, 
I have a strong body, and can stand considerable hard 
usage, for instance, traveling by freight steamers, 
where the only accommodations are the bare deck, or 
on freight trains, always the cheapest way. The time 



spent in transit I use to speak to people and to study 
the Word and DAWNS, and am at the same time resting 
from the rather wearying walking connected with colporteuring 
I take the addresses of all to whom I sell. 

I cannot find words to express how grateful I am 
for all your kindness to me, in giving advice, etc. My 
highest desire is to please my Savior in all things. 
He fills my whole heart. Praise be to his name! 

That God may constantly bless you and keep you 
is my constant prayer. Your brother in Christ, 

AUGUST LUNDBORG.-Sweden. 



R2551 : page 287 
KIND WORDS FOR MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. V. 



The New Bedford (Mass.) Standard says:— 

"Charles T. Russell, editor of ZION'S WATCH TOWER, and 
author of several volumes of theological writings, five of which 
are included in his MILLENNIAL DAWN series, has issued a new 
volume of Bible study, The At-one-ment Between God and Man. 
Mr. Russell clings close to the Bible, as he interprets it, and endeavors 
to offset the theory of the evolutionists that, as no fall 
occurred, no redemption and atonement are necessary, by 
teaching the cross of Christ." 

The Jacksonville (Fla.) Times Union Citizen says:— 

"In this neat volume of five hundred pages we have a most 
reverent treatment of profound subjects, respecting which many 
Christians have wondered and prayed, in a clear and lucid style 
which even a child may understand. The author's loyalty to 
the Bible is pronounced and inspiring, and we do not wonder 
that some have denominated his books Bible Keys. In the volume 
under review the author examines his subjects from both 
the human and the divine standpoints— the necessity for atonement 
on man's part, and why it is demanded on God's part, and 
then what are its grand possibilities for all the race of Adam— 
'Whosoever will.' The writer's scope embraces the doctrine of 
the divine trinity." 

The Worcester (Mass.) Evening Post says:— 

"Among the most notable of the recent works on religious 
subjects is a publication from the press of the Watch Tower Bible 
and Tract Society of Allegheny, Pa., The At-one-ment Between 
God and Man. The book is one that treats of theological subjects 
in an entirely new and decidedly attractive manner. It 
advances no new dogmas nor seeks to combat old ones in any 
but a spirit of truth seeking. It makes plain in a particularly 
clear and helpful light many things that have heretofore puzzled 
students of the Bible and Biblical lore. It teaches the universal 
fatherhood of God and teems with the expression of his loving 
kindness for the creatures he has made. At the same time it is 



a text book of theological science and dissects its truths and 
principles in a logical and reasonable, yet reverent manner. 

"No single chapter of any recent book is more notable than 
the section of this work which deals with the ever-confusing 
mystery of the divine trinity. It must be said that a more convincing 
explanation of this axiomatic doctrine of theology has 
never yet presented itself, yet it is strictly along the lines of 
orthodox thought. The general effect of the book on the average 
reader who seeks for light on the subjects that to him have 
dark meaning, is most gratifying. It quickens faith and makes 
strong hopes that are dear to every serious and thinking mind. 

R2552 : page 287 

The tone of the book is reverent and wholesome, and it seems 
destined to bring happiness to many a doubt-laden heart." 

The Grand Rapids (Mich.) Herald says:— 

"Pastor Russell's new book, The At-one-ment Between God 
and Man, is of the sort that awakens Christians to do some thinking 
along theological lines. It is one of those 'epoch-making 
books' destined to influence thought not merely for the hour of 
their perusal, but for life— and for centuries. The book will 
make its author foes as well as friends, for there are people ready 
to fight for their dogmas, however unscriptural and unreasonable. 
However, many thinking Christian people, who hold to 
the Bible as the inspired Word of God and who have all their 
lives been troubled in their endeavors to harmonize it with their 
consciences and with facts, will surely welcome this volume as 
'a helping hand,' and praise God for the light it sheds on many 
subjects hitherto dark to all except theologians and possibly to 
many of them also. One thing is certain, and that is that every 
lover of the Bible must admire the author's loyalty to the Scriptures 
and his reverential style of dealing with church dogmas, 
which he rejects as being contrary to the divine Word, character 
and plan." 

The New Haven (Conn.) Courier Journal says:— 

"The reverential spirit of the work, its earnestness, its 
clearness of statement, impress the reader. It is a strong, forcible 
and logical setting forth of the doctrine of atonement for sin 
through Christ, the Mediator, and of the orthodox Christian 
belief in general regarding the great foundation of the Christian 
faith and scope of salvation. It is a work that appeals to all on 
a subject of such paramount importance." 

The Pittsburg Times says:— 

"The title explains the object of the book. The author, as 
is usual with him, fortifies his opinions and assertions by a close 
adherence to the Scriptures. He writes with great enthusiasm 
and with an apparent sense of strong conviction, and the book 
will be of considerable aid to those who find occasion to study 
the points treated." 

The Syracuse (N.Y.) Herald says:— 
"Mr. Russell is an able as well as an exceedingly voluminous 



writer on religious questions. The present bulky volume is 
the fifth of a series of books under the general title of MILLENNIAL 
DAWN. It discusses the fall of man, the penalty or curse 
upon him, his redemption and the terms of his 'At-one-ment.' It 
undertakes to explain the perplexing doctrine of the trinity and 
to render it simple and reasonable. The author is loyal to the 
Scriptures, but not always to church dogmas, which he deals with 
according to their agreement with the divine Word. All Bible-students 
will find matter for thought in Mr. Russell's writings." 

The Indianapolis (Ind.) Sentinel says:— 

"This book is sublimely comprehensive, and unquestionably 
its treatment will be pronounced a masterly one by many Bible 
students. 'The fear of the Lord is the only fear in evidence in 
this volume; but altho 'traditions of men' are treated fearlessly, 
they are kindly handled, and even partisan sticklers for exploded 
errors must concede the author's Christian spirit and courtesy, 
while all must admit his honesty, and his fidelity to the 
Scriptures. If human creeds suffer, it is in the interest of the 
Bible, which the author accepts as his only creed, in the interest 
also of love and justice and Christian common sense— all important 
considerations as against nonsense of the 'dark ages,' 
often mislabeled 'orthodoxy.' 

"After reading this book and comparing its numerous Bible 
citations, intelligent Christians will often say to themselves: 
Where have I been? What have I been thinking of? What 
poor use have I made of my Bible and my reason for years that 
I did not see the beauty, harmony and reasonableness of the 
divine Word! But the author lays no claim to superior ability 
or inspiration, merely claiming that God has a 'due time' for 
everything, and that now is God's due time for shedding light 
upon his Word in the interest of all his faithful people, and his 
aspiration is to be a humble servant of the Lord's flock, dispensing 
to them the 'meat in due season.'" 

The St. Louis Christian Advocate says:— 

"Concerning this volume, a recent reviewer has said: 'Pastor 
Russell's new book, The At-one-ment Between God and Man, is 
remarkable in fact, if not in its title. It is sure to make a stir 
among the dry bones of fossilized orthodoxy, as well as amongst 
the higher critics. Not that it is agnostic— for it is decidedly 
Biblical; nor that it is bitter and drastic and cutting toward those 
theories of the dark ages which have barnacled the good ship 
Zion— for it handles them gently, courteously, tho thoroughly. 
Its strength lies in the gentle persistence with which the writer 
uses his Biblical dynamics.'" 

The New York Merchants' Review says:— 

"A NOTABLE WORK. -A hell of fire and brimstone has no 
place in the belief of some intelligent Christians, man's folly 
and wickedness providing hell enough on earth, according to 
their views of the matter, but Pastor Charles T. Russell, in The 
At-one-ment Between God and Man, of the MILLENNIAL DAWN series, 
presents many arguments to show that hell, sheol or hades, 
has no existence at all as a place of punishment, the word in its 
different forms meaning simply the sleep which the human race 



passes into, to be awakened from at Christ's second coming. 

"His arguments are based upon copious texts from Scripture, 
as also is his attempt to prove that the orthodox view of the 
holy trinity has no foundation in the Bible. The Scriptures, and 
nothing but the Scriptures, are the guide of the author in his 
search for the truth in the various problems examined by him 
in his interesting book, and naturally he opposes 'Evolution.'" 

The St. Albans (Vt.) Daily Messenger says:— 

"This volume, like all others from this writer, differs from 
other theological writings in several particulars. (1) It is simple 
in style, easily understood by any Christian— making abstruse 
subjects plain to even the wayfaring man if he be of the class 
addressed by the author— the justified in Christ. (2) It entirely 
ignores all creeds and theories of men and appeals solely to the 
Scriptures and treats their testimony as inspired, authoritative, 
decisive— citing as well as quoting them freely. (3) It is logical 
as well as Scriptural, and whoever reads without prejudice is 
sure to be convinced. (4) Those who read and accept the presentations 
of this volume will not only know what they believe, 
but why they believe it; and will 'be ready to give a reason for 
the hope that is in them'— which cannot be said even of clergymen 
respecting the dogmas of the several denominations." 



