From Our Readers
Religious Freedom  I have been a reader of Awake! for several decades now, and I am writing to express my appreciation for the series “Your Religious Freedom—Is It Threatened?” (January 8, 1999) I knew that religious intolerance existed in Europe during the so-called Dark Ages and that the Catholic Church had succeeded in manipulating the authorities to prevent people from exercising their freedom of conscience and religion. Now that I have learned what is happening in France today, I ask myself, ‘Why does this country tarnish its name by denying guaranteed religious freedoms?’ Please inform your millions of readers of the outcome of this situation. I trust that France will show tolerance and set a good example for other countries.
C. C., Puerto Rico
Raising Seven Sons  Thanks for the experience of Bert and Margaret Dickman as told in the January 8, 1999, issue. It really encouraged us to rear our three children in a way that will give them a good spiritual heritage. Our children enjoyed the article too. We hear them reminding one another about the lesson of Doug, who did not get his cake! Thanks for publishing such an encouraging experience.
S. J., India
Holy Spirit  I would like to thank you for the fine article “The Bible’s Viewpoint: What Is God’s Holy Spirit?” (January 8, 1999) Although I have been one of Jehovah’s Witnesses for some years, I always want to learn more about Jehovah God. This article answered the title question very well and was easy to understand. The more I understand Jehovah and his works, the more I am filled with love for him.
Y. B., Russia
Gold  I read your article “Gold—The Mystique of It.” (September 22, 1998) You stated that Allied troops discovered a huge amount of gold in the Kaiseroda salt mines, in Germany, following the capitulation of Germany in 1945. Actually, the Allies captured the mine three weeks before the end of the war.
J. S., Germany
Thanks for this clarification. The Kaiseroda mines were indeed captured on April 4, 1945, over a month before the German capitulation on May 8, 1945.—ED.
Long-Distance Courtship  The article “Young People Ask . . . How Can I Carry On a Long-Distance Courtship?” (January 22, 1999) came too late for me. I’m from the United States and began corresponding with a young man from Latin America. Never in my life have I experienced something so difficult. You really cannot get to know someone through the mail, even if you do your best to be honest. Since the two of you are so far apart, you tend to fantasize. In our case, our cultures were opposites. When our relationship was finally over, I felt that I had nothing left to live for. Thanks to my loving, supportive family, I’ve made it through this experience.
S. H., United States
I’ve been writing to a girl that I met at an international convention of Jehovah’s Witnesses. It is difficult to explain one’s thoughts to another person when differences in culture and language are involved. So I am starting to learn her language. The tip on using a tape recorder was very good. Thanks a lot.
A. S., Germany
I met an Oriental sister at an international convention in the United States. I’ve been very unsure of how to carry on a correspondence with her. I prayed about it, and just a few days later, I received this wonderful article. I have read and reread it. It answered all my questions.
G. R., Italy

