From Our Readers
Gossip  Thank you for your timely articles on gossip. (June 8, 1991) I was recently the object of malicious gossip, and by applying the Scriptural principle at Matthew 18:15-17, I was able to work things out with the offender.
B. C., Australia
I thought the articles were informative and well written. I was amazed, though, at the photographs you used. Four of them depict women gossiping. The unspoken message is that gossiping is a characteristic of women.
H. W., United States
We did not intend to label either women or men in a negative way. Two of the photos involved gossiping men. Another photo depicted two women engaged in an upbuilding conversation. A woman was also shown refusing even to listen to gossip.​—ED.
Gangs  I have just received my June 8, 1991, issue with the article “Young People Ask . . . Should I Join a Gang?” There were times when my husband and I really worried about our youngest child, who was attracted to the gangs. She started to dress like them and copied their makeup and hairstyle. We did not notice what was going on until it was almost too late. Fortunately, we were able to move her away from the bad influence. I hope your article does some good. Do you plan to bring out more on this subject?
D. N., United States
See our July 22, 1991, issue.​—ED.
Lungs  I just have to thank you for the article “The Lungs​—A Marvel of Design.” (June 8, 1991) It aroused in me feelings of wonder toward Jehovah God’s marvelous work. The article was masterfully written and helped me in an incredibly simple way to comprehend things that are highly complex.
B. T. A., Brazil
Lottery Fever  Your articles on ‘Lottery Fever’ (May 8, 1991) reminded me of how before becoming a Christian, I had friends who gambled. One was sent to prison for forgery because of gambling. Another was beaten up by loan sharks and left paralyzed for not paying a loan. Gambling does indeed ruin people’s lives.
R. B., United States
Cameras  I recently purchased a camera that allowed for adjusting the aperture and changing shutter speeds, but I had difficulty understanding the operating manual. Your article “Memories​—At the Touch of a Button!” (July 8, 1991) answered my questions. Thank you for explaining technical matters in an easy-to-understand way.
S. H., Japan
Japanese Hospitality  I enjoyed the article “An Evening in a Japanese Home.” (April 22, 1991) I have a tremendous fear of flying that prevents me from traveling. But your article was so real and enjoyable that it allowed me to travel in my mind’s eye​—without flying.
K. R., United States
Rock Bands  This is regarding your article “Obscenity Set to Music.” (March 8, 1991) The first sentence of the article speaks of ‘the sacred mission of rock bands​—to offend parents.’ I can think of many popular rock bands that produce good, positive music. Maybe you should have spoken of “certain” rock bands.
L. H., United States
We were not condemning all modern music. The sentence in question was a direct quote from the magazine “U.S.News & World Report.” Later on the article stated that the particular bands under discussion were “far from the mainstream.” We also said that “some” of today’s music​—not all—​is objectionable.​—ED.

