Giving Our All in Jehovah’s Service
1 One of the highlights of the past service year was the 19-percent increase in the average number of pioneers worldwide. This notable increase resulted in grand measure from the many more who served as auxiliary pioneers during the year. For example, last April in the United States alone we had 84,285 auxiliary pioneers. This was 13 percent of the total publishers reporting that month. It is hoped that even more will have arranged to serve as auxiliary pioneers this April.
2 Those who are able to auxiliary pioneer find much joy in doing so. (Neh. 8:10; Acts 20:35) They are in a position to have a larger share in spreading the truth from God’s Word, and what greater privilege could anyone have? What more worthwhile work could anyone engage in? Congregations that have a goodly number of auxiliary pioneers are built up because such individuals share their fine experiences with others and invite them to participate with them in the field ministry.
CAN WE DO MORE?
3 Most of us, however, are not able to auxiliary pioneer all the time. But are we regularly giving our all in Jehovah’s service? Could we do more? In Trinidad last April, 52 percent of the total number of publishers served as auxiliary pioneers. It took much advance planning and a whole-souled desire to support the special month of activity. But think of the marvelous effect it had on the work there to have had more than half of the publishers in the auxiliary pioneer service during that one month. Could more of us in this country share in auxiliary pioneer work?
4 Perhaps some of us could be auxiliary pioneers on a more regular basis. Or, to give our all in Jehovah’s service, could more of us be in the regular pioneer work? Then there are those who may be in a position to serve where the need is greater. There are places in this country where the territory is not covered regularly. Are any of us in a position to move to such an area? Or, might some of us be able on a temporary basis to help work unassigned territories? Some Witness families, wanting to assist in this way, have used their vacations to work unassigned territory. They have even arranged for others to accompany them.
5 If we cannot increase the time we spend in the field ministry or move to a location where more help is needed, there may still be another way we can do more when it comes to giving our all in Jehovah’s service. That is to improve the quality of our service by making the most of the time we do spend in the ministry. Are we going in service at a time when we can expect to accomplish the most good, finding the greatest number of people at home? Also, when in the service, do we try to adapt our presentation to fit the householder? We should take into consideration what the householder may have to say, as well as his or her own facial expressions. Is the person young or old, male or female? We should try to tailor our presentation to fit the individual and the circumstances.
6 Now that we are featuring subscriptions, we are encouraged to present the offer at every opportunity. Just think: If people subscribe to The Watchtower, twice a month they will have spiritual food coming into their home for anyone in the household to pick up and read. If they also subscribe for Awake!, they will receive four magazines each month. When we consider how much we have learned from the magazines and how valuable they are to us, we certainly will want to do all we can to offer others the opportunity to subscribe.
HELP OTHERS ALSO
7 Last year there were 6,767,707 in attendance at the Memorial worldwide. A large proportion of these individuals also attended circuit assemblies and district conventions. We are concerned about the millions who are not as yet actively and regularly associating with Jehovah’s organization. We want to take definite steps to help Bible students and other interested persons to attend congregation meetings regularly. In addition, we want them to progress to the point of qualifying to share in organized field activity. Our desire is to help them to become active, dedicated, baptized Witnesses, following in the footsteps of Jesus Christ. So we should do our utmost to help as many of these individuals as possible to associate actively with our congregations. We have a big work to do in directing new ones to the organization.
8 As we continue giving our all in Jehovah’s service, we will be strengthened to remain steadfast in the truth in spite of any pressures Satan may bring our way. (1 Cor. 15:58) Added joy will be ours at the end of this year when we get the next Yearbook of Jehovah’s Witnesses and read about the work that we have shared in and how it has continued to progress worldwide, to Jehovah’s praise.​—Ps. 150:6.

