Make Your Street Witnessing Productive
1 Street witnessing is not new. Jeremiah was instructed to proclaim his message “in the streets of Jerusalem.” (Jer. 11:6) Jesus Christ taught in the “broad ways” of the cities and villages he visited. (Luke 13:22, 26) Though house-to-house visitation is the primary method used by Jehovah’s modern-day witnesses to contact people, street witnessing continues to be an effective way to publicize the Kingdom message.
2 Whether you engage in street witnessing only occasionally or spend a considerable amount of time in this feature of the ministry, you will want to make each hour of street witnessing as productive as possible. How? What can be done? First, keep in mind that your objective is to make personal contact with people in order to share the good news. With that goal in mind, select locations where many people pass regularly. Some find that shopping areas, places near bus or subway stops, or frequently used parks are good locations. Also, during the morning and evening hours when people are going to or coming from work, street witnessing can be very effective. People can be contacted as they enter or leave areas where it is difficult for us to gain entrance.
HOW TO DO IT
3 If you are physically able to move about freely, it is generally more effective to approach passersby, rather than wait for them to approach you. In doing so, be selective, discerning and considerate. Wisely avoid persons who look as if they may cause problems. Above all, be friendly, warm, complimentary and dignified in your approach. Try to establish eye contact. Endeavor to use pointed, thought-provoking questions to arouse interest in the magazines. When interest is shown, in a discreet way ask for the person’s name and address so a return visit can be made. In some territories it may be best to work with others; still, to get the most done, work separately but close enough to be of assistance to one another.
4 Regularly witnessing in one location at scheduled times can improve your effectiveness in street witnessing. Some who do this have found that the people come to know them and become friends with them. In one congregation an elderly sister did this. On occasions when she was not at her regular place due to sickness, people actually wrote the congregation, asking why she was not there.
5 Do you find many not-at-homes in your territory? One couple did and decided to do street work nearby. In one hour each of them placed 17 magazines. Several persons they contacted said they lived in the territory the publishers had just worked that morning.
6 There is no doubt that street witnessing can and does produce fine results. Our very presence in public places speaks well of the message we carry. One Canadian newspaper commented: “It must take courage to stand and offer these magazines to passersby. Those Jehovah’s Witnesses doing so do not appear to be ashamed or self-conscious and are obviously proud of the publication.”
7 You, too, can do street witnessing and you can be productive. Jehovah God will most certainly bless your sincere efforts in using this avenue of service to communicate Kingdom truth to persons in your territory.

