Meetings to Help Us Make Disciples
WEEK STARTING APRIL 1
Song 87 (47) (Number in parentheses refers to 1966 songbook.)
 5 min: Local announcements.
15 min: “Benefiting Fully From the Memorial.” Question-and-answer discussion. Make local application of material so that those in attendance will see what they need to be doing locally to support this special occasion. Arrange for short demonstration of suggestion presented in paragraph 4, showing how one could briefly, but thoroughly, prepare an interested one for attendance at his or her first Memorial celebration.
15 min: How the Ministry Is Supported. Talk and discussion on chapter 10 of Our Ministry book.
10 min: Offering the Subscription. Four-minute presentation of new Topic for Conversation, concluding with the offer of the subscription for $3.50, highlighting opening articles in April 1 Watchtower. Also stress that it is good to make the offer of the subscription at every appropriate opportunity and let the householder decide, rather than decide ourselves that he does not want it. Remember that when subscription is not taken, it may be appropriate to offer two magazines for contribution of 30 cents. Encourage all to bring School brochure for next Service Meeting.
Song 98 (91) and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING APRIL 8
Song 157 (73)
10 min: Announcements in Our Kingdom Ministry. Also local announcements and accounts report. Include reminders about Memorial celebration on Sunday, April 15.
15 min: What Children Face in School. Question-and-answer discussion of pages 26-29 of School brochure on “Class Instruction.” Interview some young publishers about the situation in their school in connection with “Religion and Prayer,” “Sex Education,” “Science and Evolution” and “Combat Instruction.” Emphasize the responsibility of parents to choose what their children will be taught.
20 min: “Presenting the Good News​—With Subscription Offer.” Questions and answers. After discussing material, demonstrate presentations in paragraphs 4 and 5 and ask audience why presentations should be effective. Encourage support of magazine activity this Saturday.
Song 29 (11) and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING APRIL 15
Song 107 (57)
10 min: Local announcements. Have two or three auxiliary pioneers relate experiences or joys they are having in their service.
20 min: “Make Your Street Witnessing Productive.” Question-and-answer discussion. Ask audience what they have found to be the best times and places in the territory to do street witnessing. Briefly demonstrate how current magazines can be used in street witnessing and what pointed questions may be used to arouse interest in them.
15 min: “Improving Our Teaching Ability​—Reaching the Student’s Heart.” Question-and-answer coverage. Have a pioneer or other well-qualified publisher demonstrate ways to reach a student’s heart by use of the questions in paragraph 8 on page 32 of the United in Worship book. Use the first and last questions on point (1) and the first question on point (2). Show how these questions are designed to reach the student’s heart and build appreciation.
Song 144 (78) and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING APRIL 22
Song 204 (109)
 5 min: Local announcements.
 5 min: Offering the Current Magazines. Demonstrate two brief house-to-house presentations of not more than one minute each, one highlighting the current Watchtower and one highlighting the current Awake! Encourage support of magazine day, fourth Saturday of the month.
20 min: “Giving Our All in Jehovah’s Service.” Questions and answers. In connection with paragraph 7 comment on difference between Memorial attendance and number of publishers reporting locally, to emphasize need to assist interested ones to progress. Paragraph 7 should be read; others also if time permits.
15 min: Ways to Expand Your Ministry. Consideration of chapter 9 of Our Ministry book. Talk (with some audience participation) preferably by an elder who is enthusiastic about encouraging others to make progress.
Song 123 (63) and concluding prayer.

