Presenting the Good News​—With Subscription Offer
1 Today insecurity and distress threaten the lives of people worldwide. War, famine, disease and disaster are on the increase. Governments are unstable, fearful and tottering. The best efforts of men do not alleviate the situation. Peace no longer exists. (Rev. 6:4) People want to know why there is so much distress.
2 How thankful we are that Jehovah has given us peace of mind in these stressful times. (Phil. 4:7) How pleased we are to understand why there is such turmoil in the world today. Our peace has come as a result of learning about Jehovah’s purposes and subjecting ourselves to his organizational arrangements. This precious possession of peace stimulates in us the desire to extend it to others by helping them understand how world events are fulfilling Bible prophecy.​—Rom. 10:14.
3 An effective means of bringing this message to others is The Watchtower. It offers to all people the good news that God’s Kingdom will soon destroy those who oppress their fellowman. The Kingdom will turn the earth into a peaceful Paradise. The April and May issues of The Watchtower are especially directed to the events surrounding the marked year 1914. This fits in with our Topic for Conversation “Hope Despite World Distress Since 1914.” No doubt you will enjoy using this topic and offering these timely issues that will help individuals gain insight as to why the world is filled with disturbing conditions. Do you have a presentation in mind?
OFFERING SUBSCRIPTIONS
4 One way of introducing the Topic for Conversation is this: “We are glad we found you home today. We are discussing a matter that is on the minds of many people due to the lack of peace in the world. Many wonder, ‘Why is it that the nations cannot work out their problems by cooperation?’” (Allow for comment.) Then go on to say: “At Matthew 24:7 Jesus foretold distressing conditions that would take peace away from the earth. [Read.] News reports indicate these things are happening today. Many sincere people are wondering if conditions will get better. What do you think? [Allow for comment.] Matthew 24:13 says that some will be saved through this time of distress. [Read.] The April 15 issue of The Watchtower develops the theme ‘1914​—A Focal Point of Bible Prophecy.’ [Possibly tie in specific point from article.] We are offering this magazine on a yearly subscription basis. You can receive 24 issues for $3.50.”
5 If the householder is very busy, you might simply say, “The Watchtower helps me keep watch on world events as they fulfill Bible prophecy. It brings the comforting message that soon God’s Kingdom will turn this earth into a wonderful Paradise. You can receive two issues of the magazine each month for a year for only $3.50.”
6 If the householder does not have the money for the subscription, then would it be possible for you to make arrangements to call back at another time? Or would it be practical to offer the subscription for six months for only $2.00? Those who do not wish to subscribe to the magazines should be encouraged to accept the current issues of The Watchtower and Awake! for 30 cents.
BE POSITIVE
7 Some have a personal goal that they strive to meet during the subscription campaigns. Work toward your goal with confidence and zeal. Keep a positive attitude. Remember all that Jehovah has done for us through his Son Jesus Christ and the provision of spiritual food by means of “the faithful and discreet slave.” As we do so and pray for Jehovah’s blessing on our efforts, we will have fine results with the subscription offer. Our joy will cause others to see the unique value of the magazines. (John 15:11) Do not hesitate to offer the subscriptions at every appropriate opportunity in field service!

