What the Ransom Provision Stirs Us to Do
1 The ransom provision has stirred us to do many things. On the basis of it, we have made a dedication to serve Jehovah wholeheartedly, and we regularly talk to other people about God’s loving provision for salvation. Because of appreciation for the ransom, we also attend the Memorial each year. We are keenly interested in obeying the command of our king Jesus Christ to commemorate his death, and we are grateful to have our minds and hearts refreshed about the significance of what he did in our behalf.​—2 Cor. 5:14, 15; Heb. 9:14.
2 We are pleased when many assemble for the Memorial; but the big attendance is not our main concern, is it? Rather, we want interested persons to attend because the information presented about the ransom can reach their hearts, stirring them to exercise faith and to share in pure worship. (Rev. 7:14, 15) Our own appreciation of the ransom provision is what motivates us to invite others to attend with us.
3 Often diligent efforts to invite others bring unexpected blessings. Thus, one congregation in Ecuador had the joy of seeing the hall they had rented filled to overflowing. Eight hundred persons attended! This had quite an impact on the congregation of 68 publishers. Within just five months thereafter, 17 persons manifested their appreciation for the ransom provision by beginning to proclaim the Kingdom message.
4 A congregation of just 40 in the Zaïre Republic (formerly the Democratic Republic of Congo) had the pleasure of welcoming 203 interested persons for the Memorial. That morning the congregation participated in distributing invitations. Then from 2:00 until 5:55 p.m., they played records of the Kingdom songs at the hall. This aroused the interest of those already invited as well as of passersby.
5 The good effect of the discourse was reflected in the comment made by one of the newly interested persons in attendance: “Only today have I really understood the doctrine concerning the ‘communion’ with Jesus, which we Protestants were obliged to celebrate without understanding. I have never heard such a simple explanation of this subject.” Might not many of those whom we invite to the Memorial be likewise benefited and eventually be moved to take the necessary steps to qualify to share in the field ministry?
6 Another outstanding meeting that can aid interested ones is scheduled for March 26. How fine it will be for us to hear the special public talk, “Mankind’s Deliverance into God’s New Order”! The nearness of that deliverance, made possible through Christ’s ransom, fills our hearts with gratitude for Jehovah’s undeserved kindness. We want others to share that grand prospect too. Surely, then, we will put forth every effort to encourage as many as possible to be present.
7 As our appreciation for the ransom provision has moved us to share the good news with others, might not many of those with whom we are studying want to do the same? Many thousands have been studying with us since last fall. Their hearts have been stirred sufficiently to attend meetings. Are they ready to participate in the field ministry? Some may not be ready for various reasons, but what about those who may be in in position to do so? Help them to share in the field ministry as soon as they qualify and are desirous of doing so.
8 Many need warm encouragement. So, what might we do? At our weekly Bible study, we could share one of our own experiences or one from the Yearbook to illustrate the joy that comes from serving Jehovah. Over a period of time we could consider the points on page 108 of the “Lamp” book to be sure that they understand what Jehovah requires of those whom He favors with bearing His name. When we invite them to share in the field work, we do well to allay any fears they may have. Many would doubtless appreciate our helping them to prepare something to say at the doors. If they can see that love for Jehovah and His provision of the ransom, as well as love of neighbor, is stirring us to activity, this will aid them to take the right view of the field ministry.
9 So, may it be our united prayer that we maintain a wholesome appreciation for the ransom provision, knowing that this will continue to move us to spare no effort in reaching the people in our territory with the Kingdom message. And, may the special public meeting and Memorial have their part in aiding all attenders to deepen their appreciation for Jehovah God and His Son Jesus Christ.
[Blurb on page 4]
How do you show appreciation for the ransom?

