Branch Letter
Dear Kingdom Publishers:
All of us have enjoyed sharing in the Theocratic School. We have benefited greatly by our participation. In the future we hope to gain even more.
For some time now no counsel has been given students having parts on the Theocratic School conducted at the circuit assemblies. This method has allowed time for the one conducting the school to highlight truths and principles that the students may not have included in their presentations. It has provided more information and knowledge to all in attendance. It also allows flexibility for giving better counsel to the student in that it is not given on the spur of the moment. More than two minutes may be used as advisable, and, being given privately, it could be more direct and specific.
Because of all these advantages, this method will be used in the Theocratic Schools in each congregation as of March 1977. Hence, all school overseers will need to familiarize themselves fully with the material on which student talks are based so as to be able to mention the main points if they have not been presented, or perhaps by questions to highlight certain pertinent points.
So that the Theocratic School may prove yet more helpful, literacy and/or reading improvement classes may be arranged in connection with it. Because of poor teaching systems in some communities, more and more youths are growing up with inadequate reading skills. Some adults may need further assistance in this respect, too. It will be up to each body of elders to survey carefully the needs of any associated with their congregation and then make such arrangements as they find are appropriate. As a suggestion though, the material scheduled for Bible reading may be used or a publication like the Great Teacher book, if necessary. Classes could be held at the same time the Theocratic School is being conducted if convenient to do so, with additional time given to the program on another occasion if deemed necessary to aid certain ones. The arrangements could include individual tutoring on a one-to-one basis or in small groups.
How happy we are to be working with you. We take this opportunity to send you an expression of our warm Christian love and greetings.
Your fellow servants,
BROOKLYN BRANCH OFFICE

