Improving Our Service Together
1 Who is there among us that does not need and appreciate encouragement from time to time? In this connection have you ever felt the need for help in handling objections you meet in your house-to-house activity, or in learning how to rekindle interest on a return visit? Or would you like someone to take you along in field service with the objective of starting a home Bible study? Since approximately one half of all those sharing in Kingdom service have been in the truth only five years or so, doubtless a good number would be pleased to have help in some way to become more capable in field service. What can we do to improve our field service together?—1 Cor. 3:6; Gal. 6:9.
2 In terms of being able to help, think of your own book study group. If you see there is someone you might take with you from house to house, who would appreciate learning how to converse better with householders, could you take the initiative to assist that one? Together the two of you could discuss the points outlined in “Presenting the Good News,” which center around Psalm 37:8-11. This is also highlighted in the article “Use Topics for Conversation in Field Service.” (The topic suggested is, “Will there ever be an end to violence?”) Then endeavor to discuss this information from house to house. This will prove helpful in improving your effectiveness as well as in building confidence, and you will train your perceptive powers by using them.—Heb. 5:14; Prov. 27:17.
3 Perhaps you need help in making return visits or in starting a home Bible study. Quite likely there is someone available to offer skilled help in these fields right in your own book study group. Do not hesitate to discuss your needs with the book study conductor, and perhaps he can make arrangements for helping you. How?
4 Often when midweek service arrangements are well organized and coordinated, pioneers and other qualified brothers and sisters are available to help, and these delight to do so. Or, if the best time for you to receive assistance is in the evening, perhaps some calls can be made for a short period of time before the book study. More and more people are working secularly, and a good time to visit them may be during the early evening hours, if conditions allow in your area. Saturday and Sunday are days most of us have time to share in field service and when many working people are at home. It is also the time most elders and ministerial servants can work with others in field service.
5 Book study conductors, aware of the spiritual needs of their groups, can do much to arrange for them to have assistance in improving their service, which can add so much to enjoyment and effectiveness. Can you cooperate by either giving or receiving assistance in this avenue of our sacred service? Surely you will be rewarded greatly.

