Presenting the Good News—With Effective Bible Conversations
1 Conversation, like music, is an art. To become skilled at it requires practice. If we are conscious of the need to cultivate the art, we will find much opportunity as we go from house to house. How grateful we are to Jehovah that we have the opportunity to carry on Bible conversations with those we meet at the doors. But what is involved in making our conversations “effective” and how do we get good results when “conversing” with householders? There are several ways: Be friendly, be discerning, be tactful, be a good listener.
2 Initially, it is good to put ourselves in the householder’s position. For example, many people are occupied with household duties and other matters when we ring the bell. So we may be viewed as intruding on their time, “uninvited guests” as it were. What will help to resolve this problem and gain a listening ear?
3 Perhaps we could say, after introducing ourselves appropriately; “Quite likely you have things to do, so I’ll get to the point of my call. Have you ever hoped for an end to the increasing violence we see all around us?” (Mention a local example of this, if available.) Allow time for a response by householder. Then you could say: “On this subject the promises made by God at Psalm 37 are of interest, and I’d like to share them with you.” Remember, conversation is a two-way street. It means listening as well as talking, so we should allow time for a response from the householders as we discuss matters with them.
4 At an appropriate time you can ask the householder how he feels about the fulfillment of such a promise by the only One really capable of carrying out his promises. Then, depending upon the reaction and the interest displayed, you could show him something in a publication that might interest him.
5 Since the offer during March is any one of the 50c books, it would be good to select in advance some fitting points relative to the end of wickedness by means of the Kingdom. Preparation will aid you to converse and to make practical use of the literature too.

