The Book Study—A Good Place for Spiritual Growth
1 Jesus called attention to the vital need that his followers would have for spirituality, that is, to be the kind of persons who think like God, whose thoughts are elevated above those of man. He said: “Happy are those conscious of their spiritual need.”—Matt. 5:3; 6:19-21.
2 There are many ways that all of us can work toward the spirituality that Jesus outlined. One of such is through the congregation book study arrangement. Have you taken time lately to think about the many benefits we receive through this arrangement?
PRACTICAL MATERIAL CONSIDERED
3 First of all, the material that we consider at our book studies helps us to think God’s thoughts, and by regularly elevating our minds and thoughts above those of man we are assisted in bringing every aspect of our lives into closer harmony with God’s requirements for his name people. For some weeks now we have been reading the paragraphs first at the book study, and it has been observed that this has enabled us to get more out of the lesson. Further, during March, as we study the Peace and Security book, we will discuss Romans 12:2, analyzing together what is involved in not being fashioned after this system of things. It will be especially beneficial for us to do this at our book studies because there is greater opportunity to comment personally in these smaller groups.
4 Our spiritual growth also includes progressing in appreciation of our privilege of sharing Bible truths with others. Every one of us can encourage others in the group to share fully in spreading the Kingdom good news. How? By inviting others to work with us in the house-to-house field service, possibly by using one’s automobile for service, or perhaps by taking someone along on a particularly good return visit or Bible study. Do we give needed attention to older ones among us? What encouragement do you give to younger ones in your book study group? Our genuine concern for one another will be of much help toward good spiritual growth.—1 Tim. 4:15, 16.

