Wise Use of Available Bible Study Aids
1 For over one hundred years Jehovah’s organization on earth has used the printed page to assist millions of people in coming to an accurate knowledge of the truth. Among the many printed publications used are both the large bound books and the pocket-size books.
2 It was in 1968 when The Truth That Leads to Eternal Life was released for general distribution. At that time there were over one million of Jehovah’s servants sharing the good news of the Kingdom with others. This large number of persons were assisted greatly in a spiritual way by the 384-page books available to them up to that time. Since then we have received additional large bound books at many of our yearly conventions and the information has been to our spiritual benefit and upbuilding.
USING THEM IN THE FIELD
3 Many who have come to a knowledge of the truth in recent years have not had the opportunity to study these publications. Such ones will benefit from getting copies of available publications to read and study. When using these books in our field service activity during March we should have in mind a highlight or two. For example, if you are using the topic for conversation centering around Psalm 37:8-11 and wish to highlight the value of the ‘Impossible to Lie’ book, you could refer to pages 298 and 312, or the ‘Know Jehovah’ book has a comment on this thought on page 122. In this way these older publications can be utilized in our field service.
4 Each congregation can stress placing such books that they have in stock. Congregations that would like to order what we have in stock in Brooklyn may do so. Or, they may ask neighboring congregations if they have extra supplies on hand. Mention of what is available in Brooklyn was made in the February issue of Our Kingdom Service. These publications will be placed at the regular contribution of 50c, and two booklets will be given free for study purposes. Where there is an opportunity to do so, try to use a booklet to introduce people to the Bible study arrangement. Surely this will result in praise to Jehovah’s name.

