Your Service Meetings
Note: In this issue of Our Kingdom Service we have arranged for only three parts on each service meeting. Be sure to plan on having as many participants in each part as seems advisable. Keep meetings lively, informative, spiritually upbuilding and within the allotted time. This calls for preparation on the part of each one and especially those responsible for the various parts of the program.
WEEK STARTING FEBRUARY 27
20 min: Song 81, announcements and a question-and-answer coverage of the article “The Book Study—A Good Place for Spiritual Growth.” Develop these points, with practical local application: (1) What will help us and our families to benefit fully in a spiritual way from the study itself? (2) How field service is involved in our spiritual development, and (3) What we can do to help one another in this.
25 min: “Presenting the Good News—With Effective Bible Conversations.” Discuss article with audience. Demonstrate approach suggested in paragraph three; include questions and answers on “Use Topics for Conversation in Field Service.”
15 min: “Wise Use of Available Bible Study Aids.” Question-and-answer coverage. Suggest demonstration (2-3 minutes) of information in paragraph three. Encourage new ones to get copies of available publications for personal library. Booklets will be used in March and April, so begin working with them in starting studies. Song 58.
WEEK STARTING MARCH 6
Cultivating a More Spiritual Outlook
25 min: Song 4. Announcements including accounts report.
Making the Book Study More Interesting. Brother handling part may use following outline of points in audience discussion. It may be possible for study conductors to make expressions on point one, others attending study on point two, and those with studies in their homes on point three.
(1) Consider the conductor’s role
To teach others, conductor himself must have a good knowledge of the material, getting the Bible’s view (2 Tim. 2:2; Mal. 2:7)
Teaching involves not just asking questions, but drawing out information
He should analyze how material being studied can contribute to one’s relationship with Jehovah and how it can be used in a practical way
Conductor should listen carefully to comments to see if heart appreciation manifested. Should not expect more than is reasonable from those with limited education
Be kind, considerate of those in group
(2) Those attending the study
Show interest by sharing in giving comments (Gal. 6:6)
Now that paragraphs are read first, make it a practice to give answers to questions in your own words. However, if new, you may read answers to questions propounded and seek to grow in knowledge
If a parent, consider needs of your children as well as others in attendance who appreciate an atmosphere conducive to learning. Thus when youngster may disturb meeting, take him outside of study area if possible and quiet him down so that study not disrupted
Always be ready to look up and read Bible texts
(3) Consider privilege to have such a study in your home
Householder should try to do his or her part to make each one welcome
Strive to maintain clean, well-lighted area for study
All should respect property of householder.
15 min: Reaching Hearing Ears. Talk, with audience participation. Revelation 22:17 says in part: “And let anyone hearing say: ‘Come!’”
We appreciate how satisfying it is to drink in waters of life.
Have desire to help other thirsty ones (1 Cor. 9:16)
Many opportunities to do so.
Need to realize people will live or die according to their reaction to good news (1 Pet. 4:5, 6, 17; 2 Thess. 1:6-8)
Our concern not just to cover territory or report activity.
Help all sheeplike persons because we love them (1 Thess. 2:8)
Heart appreciation should prompt us to speak at every opportunity
Do not allow selves to become discouraged by lack of results
When persons do not respond, that is their responsibility
Determination to prove our devotion and love for others should move us urgently to speak truth at every opportunity with assurance Jehovah will bless our efforts (Mal. 3:10)
Give encouragement to share in auxiliary pioneer work in April; make diligent efforts to reach hearing ears.
20 min: (The following information may be used if desired. If elders feel some congregation matters are in need of attention, this material may be deleted.)
“Have Tender Affection for One Another.” February 1, 1977, Watchtower. Suggest having cross section of congregation represented on stage, to express what they appreciate about article and how practical application of such can be made. Prepare well so that main points are developed. Song 50.
WEEK STARTING MARCH 13
25 min: Song 63, announcements and audience discussion of article “Improving Our Service Together.” Highlight scriptures and show how they apply. Wherever possible, have experiences showing benefits of giving and receiving assistance in field service. Include comments on Branch Letter, emphasizing beneficial adjustments in School. Review congregation field report.
20 min: How Our Young People Have Benefited from the Youth Book. Interview several young people, preferably teen-agers, who have sought and found answers in connection with certain problems or situations in life. Great pressures on them to conform to worldly ways. Stress realistic approach to each problem and in each case show how the Youth book material helped. Following situations are suggested, but if others fit your congregation, feel free to adjust. (1) How do you view discipline? (Pp. 92-96) (2) Movies and television? (Pp. 119-122) (3) Honorable conduct in courtship? (Pp. 152-156) (4) Is it realistic to be honest? (Pp. 172-179)
Use whatever situations fit and can be covered in allotted time. If not sufficient young people to match intended points, could discuss practical nature of material.
15 min: Consideration of Watchtower article of 11/15/76, “How Far Should Kindness Extend?” Cover as talk but with participation of audience on some key points. For example, appropriate to involve audience in discussion of paragraphs one through four of column one, page 676. Highlight fact Christians should not want their kindness and generosity to be less than that shown by persons who do not claim to serve God. Consider example of people on island of Malta where Paul was shipwrecked and what they did, in contrast with people claiming to be chosen of God in cities of Israel who showed Jesus greatest unkindness and indignity. Show need for Jehovah’s servants to exhibit kindness and consideration for all. Give consideration to how kindness can appropriately be shown in dealing with any who prove to be rebellious, unrepentant or stubborn. Highlight 2 Corinthians 10:1 as criterion for all our dealings. Song 37.
WEEK STARTING MARCH 20
25 min: Song 9. Starting and Continuing Home Bible Studies. Audience discussion.
On page three suggestions are given as to how we can improve our field service together. If you have heartfelt desire to start home Bible study, the following suggestions may prove helpful:
Start home Bible study on initial call. Some have had success by stating reason for calling is to find honest-hearted ones looking for God’s solution to problems that plague man today.
Then having a specific Bible thought in mind, such as Psalm 37:8-11, which deals with complete elimination of crime and violence, you could proceed to offer the Bible study. May tie in with booklet, Is There a God Who Cares?, pages 21-24.
More often, studies are started through return visits. Sometimes several visits are required before the actual study is started. May need to develop friendly basis first, perhaps by making a number of brief visits, featuring a helpful Bible thought. (Discuss information page 122, or.) Or by regularly placing magazines with individuals. Some have Bible questions they will want answered.
At appropriate time, demonstrate how regular study will answer many questions. Likely will stimulate desire to have regular Bible study.
What should we study?
  No set rule; consider individual student’s needs, interests. Topics the student first mentions may help you to determine what to study. Consider with audience some of local interests of people. Try to use what will help the student most and hold his attention. Show sincere interest in him.
Right from start of study, good to include other members of family. Fewer problems when husbands and wives whole families, study the truth together. Good to explain why there may be opposition to their study.—Matt. 10:36, 37 (tr, p. 16)
10 min: Local announcements and information on arrangements for special public talk scheduled for March 27, “The Faith That Means Survival.”
25 min: Memorial discussion, based on March 1, 1977, Watchtower article, “Memorializing Christ’s Death—Why? When? How? Who? Where?” Draw audience into discussion. Alert brothers previous week to bring copy with them. Song 118.
WEEK STARTING MARCH 27
Getting the Mind of Christ
20 min: Song 46, announcements, including Memorial arrangements, and brief comments on offer for month. Audience participation. Consider introductory article in March 1, 1977, Watchtower, “Judging with Righteousness, Wisdom and Mercy.” Highlight points showing that judges should always be Christlike in their thinking, decisions and dealings with others.
12 min: Interview those who have shared in auxiliary pioneer work recently. Get comments on working out satisfactory schedule for family, school, secular work; recommendations for others to participate. Encourage this for April, since there are holidays and better weather.
28 min: Imitate the Faith and Example of Our Lord Jesus Christ. Audience participation. April 3, 1977, will be occasion of celebrating Lord’s Evening Meal. Most appropriate to spend few moments now to reflect on the life of the Son of God. Following references are to material to be used, as taken from Aid book under “Jesus Christ.” Use scriptures only as time permits.
Vital Place in God’s Purpose (P. 923) Discuss Colossians 1:18-20.
‘Chief Agent of Life’ (Pp. 923, 924) Discuss John 3:16.
But not only our ransomer, also our High Priest (Heb. 3:1)
Our Judge (John 5:22); our resurrection hope (John 11:25)
His Ministry: ‘Bearing Witness to the Truth’ (P. 924)
The reason for his birth (John 18:37)
His Works and Personal Qualities (P. 927)
Set a hardworking example for his disciples (Mark 1:32-34)
Privacy often interrupted (Mark 6:31-34)
Courageous fighter for truth (Luke 4:28-30; Matt. 15:1-9; John 10:31-39)
Strong faith (Mark 4:37-40; Matt. 26:39; Luke 23:46)
Witnessed even when facing death (Luke 23:43)
Depth of Feeling and Warmth (Pp. 927, 931)
Jesus’ perfection did not make him hypercritical or arrogant toward imperfect persons (Matt. 9:1-13; Luke 7:36-48, paraphrase) Did not use authority to become demanding (Matt. 11:28-30)
By his example we should be strengthened to work hard to do all things pleasing to Jehovah. Song 47.

