Title Page/​Publishers’ Page
Paradise Restored To Mankind​—By Theocracy!
A Look at the Fulfillment of the Restoration Prophecies of Haggai and Zechariah, as Possible from the Twentieth-Century Vantage Point
“And the Lord God had planted a paradise of pleasure from the beginning; wherein he placed man whom he had formed.”​—Genesis 2:8, Douay Version.
“You will be with me in paradise.”​—Luke 23:43, Jerusalem Version.
Dedicated to the Heavenly Theocrat in the Joyful Hope of His Restoration of Paradise to Earth as Mankind’s Everlasting Home
Symbols of Scripture translations quoted or cited in this book:
AT    - An American Translation, by J. M. P. Smith and E. J. Goodspeed.
AV    - Authorized or King James Version, of 1611 C.E.
By    - The Bible in Living English, by Steven T. Byington, A.B., of Ballard Vale, Massachusetts, U.S.A. (Published in 1972).
Dy    - Roman Catholic English Version of the Latin Vulgate, made at Douay and Rheims, as of 1610 C.E.
Je    - The Jerusalem Bible, Roman Catholic English translation from the French, as of 1966 C.E.
JP    - The Holy Scriptures, by The Jewish Publication Society of America, as of 5712/1952 (Copyrighted 1917).
Mo    - A New Translation of the Bible, by James Moffatt, as of 1922 C.E.
NAB   - The New American Bible, Roman Catholic translation by the Catholic Biblical Association of America, as of 1970 C.E.
NE    - The New English Bible, by the Delegates of the Oxford University Press and the Syndics of the Cambridge University Press, as of 1961, 1970 (England).
Ro    - The Emphasised Bible - A New Translation, by Joseph B. Rotherham, as of 1897.
RS    - Revised Standard Version, by the Division of Christian Education of the National Council of the Churches of Christ in the United States of America, as of 1952 C.E.
Yg    - Young’s Literal Translation of the Holy Bible, by Robert Young, as of 1862.
Any Bible quotation or citation not followed by any specific abbreviation is made from the New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures (NW) in its revised edition of 1971.
DATING: In dating events the abbreviation B.C.E. means “Before Our Common Era,” and the abbreviation C.E. means “Of Our Common Era,” to distinguish the years before or after the year 1 C.E.

