Chapter 17
Unification in Spite of False Predictions
 1. Bringing back scattered peoples to their own land to the capacity of its territory suggests what problems in these days of population explosion and impending world famine?
IN THESE days ominous warnings are being sounded of overpopulating the earth​—population explosion!​—and of world famine as early as the year 1975 C.E. It seems strange, therefore, to be speaking predictively of young men and virgin girls thriving on the grain of the field and the luxury wine of the vineyards. Yes, and of bringing in more population to the point of having no more room for more. For the rapidly multiplying populations of some nations it seems that more room has to be found at the expense of territory outside the national borders, taken from neighboring lands. More food has to be grown; more land has to be put to raising crops. Why, then, regather the scattered people of a nation within their national borders, to the utmost capacity of the territory? How can its food problem be solved?
 2. In contrast with human governments, for whom is there no food problem, according to Psalm 104:13-16?
2 Food problem? For human governments, yes! But for the Planter of mankind’s paradise, No! No such problem exists even today for Him of whom it was written under inspiration more than twenty-three centuries before the present world situation: “He is watering the mountains from his upper chambers. With the fruitage of your works the earth is satisfied. He is making green grass sprout for the beasts, and vegetation for the service of mankind, to cause food to go forth from the earth, and wine that makes the heart of mortal man rejoice, to make the face shine with oil, and bread that sustains the very heart of mortal man. The trees of Jehovah are satisfied, the cedars of Lebanon that he planted.”​—Psalm 104:13-16.
 3. In what direction does Zechariah 10:1, 2 turn us to look for relief?
3 Let self-reliant men make what predictions they dare to make about solving the world problem by combined human efforts, there is only the one direction in which to look for relief. In that direction the pronouncement that comes from a source superior to that of man and devils and that is written down in Zechariah 10:1, 2 points all of us, saying: “Make your request of Jehovah for rain in the time of the spring rain, even of Jehovah who is making the storm clouds, and who gives a downpour of rain to them, to each one vegetation in the field. For the teraphim themselves have spoken what is uncanny; and the practicers of divination, for their part, have visioned falsehood, and valueless dreams are what they keep speaking, and in vain they try to comfort. That is why they will certainly depart like a flock; they will become afflicted, because there is no shepherd.”
 4. How was the Creator’s ability to give rain at a specified time demonstrated in Noah’s day and in Elijah’s day?
4 The ability of the Sovereign Lord Jehovah, the Creator, to give rain on a world scale was demonstrated in the year 2370 B.C.E., when, at the close of a week during which Noah and his family were told to get the animal and bird specimens into the mammoth ark (chest), it began to rain earth wide for forty days, this flooding the whole face of the earth for a year. (Genesis, chapters 6-8) Another occasion that he brought rain at a specific time, and this in answer to prayer, was when, at the end of three and a half years of drought over the land of the Ten Tribe Kingdom of Israel, the prophet Elijah prayed. The start of this answer to the prayer of a righteous man was a “small cloud like a man’s palm ascending out of the [Mediterranean] sea,” after which “the heavens themselves darkened up with clouds and wind and a great downpour began to occur.”​—1 Kings 18:43-45; James 5:16-18; Luke 4:25, 26.
 5. What experience during the neglect of temple building proved to the restored Jews that “pouring rains of blessing” (Ezekiel 34:26) were not to be taken for granted?
5 To the faithful remnant restored to the land of Judah it was promised that Jehovah would give them an excellent ecology or environmental conditions. He said: “I will make them and the surroundings of my hill a blessing, and I will cause the pouring rain to descend in its time. Pouring rains of blessing there will prove to be.” (Ezekiel 34:26) However, the remnant was not to take this for granted. During the years that they neglected the rebuilding of God’s temple at Jerusalem, they experienced scorching heat over the land, and “the heavens kept back their dew, and the earth itself kept back its yield. And I [Jehovah] kept calling for dryness upon the earth, and upon the mountains, and upon the grain, and upon the new wine, and upon the oil, and upon what the ground would bring forth, and upon earthling man, and upon domestic animal, and upon all the toil of the hands.” (Haggai 1:10, 11; 2:16, 17; Zechariah 8:10-12) Then they found it necessary to pray to the One “who is making the storm clouds, and who gives a downpour of rain.”​—Zechariah 10:1.
 6. Are the false gods of pagan, superstitious people rainmakers, and what statement about rainmaking will ecologists yet find to be true?
6 To the faithful remnant who directed their prayers to Him, along with obedience to his commandments, he gave “to each one vegetation in the field.” Each faithful individual’s plot of ground was blessed with needed vegetation for food. The false gods of pagan, superstitious people are not the ones to whom to look and pray. In an address to the heavenly Rainmaker, the earlier prophet Jeremiah said: “Do there exist among the vain idols of the nations any that can pour down rain, or can even the heavens themselves give copious showers? Are you not the One, O Jehovah our God? And we hope in you, for you yourself have done all these things.” (Jeremiah 14:22) All of today’s ecologists or environmental experts, who do not take Jehovah God into consideration, will yet find the inspired Bible statement about Jehovah’s rainmaking true.
 7. Why does the anointed remnant not pray for literal rain to avert world famine, and what do they know to be more important for survival?
7 At the present time the anointed remnant of spiritual Israel, who are giving their attention foremost to reestablishing the pure worship of Jehovah at his spiritual temple, are not praying for literal rain upon the earth in the hope of preventing world famine. They remember that Jesus Christ predicted that during this “conclusion of the system of things,” “famines,” “food shortages,” would add to the sufferings of the worldly nations and peoples. (Matthew 24:7, AV; NW) They know that more important for surviving the coming great world “tribulation” and gaining life in God’s new system of things are the spiritual blessings​—an increasing understanding of the Holy Bible and its prophecies, favorable relationship with God, more of his holy spirit or active force, regular meetings with his dedicated people, a share in the preaching of the good news of his Messianic kingdom, divine guidance and protection in all our endeavors to do His will. For a downpour of such blessings the God-fearing remnant have prayed. Hence their spiritual estate has yielded much “vegetation.” It has become a spiritual Paradise.​—2 Corinthians 12:4.
 8. To what as gods has Christendom looked for her blessings, but with what foretold result?
8 Contrary to her “form of godly devotion,” Christendom looks for her blessings to the false gods of this world, commercialism, militarism, evolutionistic schooling, patriotism, modern science and technology, and the United Nations. Her political leaders even consult astrologers and spirit mediums. What have we noticed to be the results? Exactly what Zechariah 10:2 foretold: “For the teraphim themselves have spoken what is uncanny; and the practicers of divination, for their part, have visioned falsehood, and valueless dreams are what they keep speaking, and in vain they try to comfort. That is why they will certainly depart like a flock; they will become afflicted, because there is no shepherd.”
 9. How have the people of Christendom been guilty of using “teraphim” and “divination”?
9 In their independence of the Holy Bible, the peoples of Christendom look to their “teraphim,” that is, their household gods, their Pe·naʹtes, as the superstitious ancient Romans did. They trust to their own private opinions, each one having his own brand of personal religion. They look to the predictions of the military, economic and political specialists; also, to the priests and clergymen who pray heaven’s blessing upon such worldly leaders and spokesmen. They rebel against the Word of God that Jehovah’s Christian witnesses have proclaimed to them, and they push ahead presumptuously with their own ideas of how to do things. To them the words of the prophet Samuel apply, when speaking to disobedient King Saul of Israel: “Rebelliousness is the same as the sin of divination, and pushing ahead presumptuously the same as using uncanny power and teraphim.”​—1 Samuel 15:23.
10. Have Christendom’s predictors proved true, has relief come and has the flock been kept together under a shepherd?
10 From Jehovah’s standpoint, not just the so-called pagan world, but even Christendom is involved with idolatrous teraphim and uncanny power and demonistic divination. The private opinions of men have therefore proved to be in error. The predictions made by public figures regarding an improvement of world conditions by all the man-made means that have been put to use have proved to be merely fond dreams, falsehoods. How has this affected the deceived, misled people? They are certainly departing like a flock of sheep, each one going his own way, like sheep not knowing where to go. They have gone astray and are the prey for the vicious elements of human society. They have consequently come into great affliction, with no remedy available from human sources. No political ruler, no political organization, is able to shepherd them, to protect them and guide them to peaceful pastures or quiet waters.
11, 12. (a) How have the rulers of Christendom not followed the example of King David the psalmist? (b) According to Zechariah 10:3-7, is Jehovah pleased with the political “shepherds” who are guided by the religious clergy?
11 The political rulers, even of professedly Christian Christendom, have refused to follow the example of King David, who shepherded the flock of the nation of Israel in 1077-1037 B.C.E. In Psalm 23:1, 2 the former shepherd-boy David said: “Jehovah is my Shepherd. I shall lack nothing. In grassy pastures he makes me lie down; by well-watered resting-places he conducts me.” Could the Supreme Shepherd Jehovah be pleased with the conduct of the political rulers who as shepherds of their peoples are guided and supported by the religious clergy of Christendom? Not according to Zechariah 10:3-7:
12 “Against the shepherds my anger has grown hot, and against the goatlike leaders I shall hold an accounting; for Jehovah of armies has turned his attention to his drove, the house of Judah, and has made them like his horse of dignity in the battle. Out of him [Judah] is the keyman, out of him is the supporting ruler, out of him is the battle bow; out of him goes forth every taskmaster, all together. And they must become like mighty men stamping down in the mire of the streets in the battle. And they must get engaged in battle, for Jehovah is with them; and the riders of horses will have to experience shame. And I will make the house of Judah superior, and the house of Joseph I shall save. And I will give them a dwelling, for I will show them mercy; and they must become like those whom I had not cast off; for I am Jehovah their God, and I shall answer them. And those of Ephraim must become just like a mighty man, and their heart must rejoice as though from wine. And their own sons will see and certainly rejoice; their heart will be joyful in Jehovah.”
13. The clergy have left the political “shepherds” and the “goatlike leaders” in ignorance of whose attitude toward them, and how so?
13 Even in Christendom the political “shepherds” do not appreciate that Jehovah’s anger has grown hot against them. Do not the religious clergy pray for them and call down heaven’s blessing upon them? Likewise, Christendom’s headstrong “goatlike leaders” do not believe and fear that Jehovah of armies will hold an accounting with them. Do they not go to Christendom’s churches and so will not the priests and preachers act as mediators for them with God and straighten out matters for them with God? So they do not expect to feel the heat of Jehovah’s hot anger in the foretold “war of the great day of God the Almighty.” They show no concern about his holding an accounting with them at Har–Magedon, the battlefield of that “war.” However, although their own religious clergy have left these political “shepherds” and “goatlike leaders” in ignorance and self-complacency, Jehovah of armies certainly has not done so. He has served notice upon them, doing this well in advance and repeatedly. By what means?
14. By means of whom has Jehovah served such notice well in advance, and how has he transformed these from being like sheep into being like a majestic war-horse?
14 By means of his anointed Christian witnesses, the antitypical “house of Judah.” These have not followed the misleading political “shepherds” and “goatlike leaders” of Christendom. Jehovah is their Shepherd, and since 1919 C.E. He has turned his favorable attention toward them as his “drove” of sheep. During World War I they were indeed like sheep, not taking part in military combat along with Christendom, but were subjected to the beastlike political, military exploiters of mankind who had the approval and backing of the religious clergy. But since that first world conflict the great Heavenly Shepherd has regathered his “drove,” the spiritual “house of Judah.” From being like sheep, He has transformed them to be like “his horse of dignity in the battle.” He has imparted to them by means of his Word and holy spirit a courage like that of a majestic battle horse.​—Zechariah 10:3.
15. Why ought this transformation to be so with the spiritual “house of Judah” since 1914 C.E.?
15 This ought to be so. For, at the close of the Gentile Times in 1914 C.E., Jehovah God enthroned in the heavens the “Lion that is of the tribe of Judah” and commanded him: “Go subduing in the midst of your enemies.” (Revelation 5:5; Genesis 49:9, 10; Psalm 110:1, 2) As is the Leader of the spiritual “house of Judah,” so the other members of the “house” should be. Respecting this “house of Judah” Jehovah goes on to say: “Out of him is the keyman, out of him is the supporting ruler [literally, peg], out of him is the battle bow; out of him goes forth every taskmaster, all together.”​—Zechariah 10:4.
16. (a) Who was the “keyman” in Zechariah’s day, but who is such in our day? (b) How is he the “supporting ruler,” the battle “bow” and the “taskmaster”?
16 In Zechariah’s day Governor Zerubbabel the son of Shealtiel of the tribe of Judah was the “keyman.” In our day, since the birth of Jehovah’s Messianic kingdom in 1914 C.E., the glorified Jesus Christ who descended from David of the house of Judah is the “keyman.” Things are centered in him; responsibilities of royal weight converge upon him. Like a “peg” from which the royal interests hang and draw their support, the Messianic King is the “supporting ruler.” In the almighty hand of his God, Jehovah of armies, he is the “battle bow,” to wound and strike down the enemies from far off. He is the Chief Taskmaster, who assigns the royal tasks to all the members of the “house of Judah,” some of whom he appoints as under-taskmasters, and all of whom must work together with him as their Chief and Leader. With him at their head, all the “house of Judah” has reason to be courageous.
17. Why do the times call for courage on the part of the spiritual “house of Judah,” as in warfare?
17 The times call for Christlike courage. We dare not let the world situation smite us with a paralysis of fear. We have plainly been forewarned that this would be a time of warfare against the anointed remnant of spiritual Israel, inasmuch as Satan the Devil and his demon angels have been cast out of heaven by the Messianic kingdom, and concerning this dragon-like adversary it stands written for us to read today: “And the dragon grew wrathful at the woman [God’s heavenly organization], and went off to wage war with the remaining ones of her seed, who observe the commandments of God and have the work of bearing witness to Jesus.” (Revelation 12:17) So, with the help of their God, the remnant of the spiritual “house of Judah” have had fulfilled in them the divine promise: “And they must become like mighty men stamping down in the mire of the streets in the battle. And they must get engaged in battle, for Jehovah is with them; and the riders of horses will have to experience shame.”​—Zechariah 10:5.
18. (a) Why did the spiritual “house of Judah” have to get engaged in the battle, and with whom on their side? (b) Because of what have the “riders of horses” had to experience shame?
18 The picture here is of victorious warriors who have invaded the enemy stronghold, the streets of which run red with the blood of the slain defenders. So the invaders must stamp down in the mire formed from blood mingled with dust. But for the anointed remnant of the spiritual “house of Judah” the warfare today is spiritual, with weapons that are “powerful by God for overturning strongly entrenched things.” (2 Corinthians 10:4; Ephesians 6:14-18) In this “wicked day,” when the dragon Satan the Devil and his demons have been cast down to this earth, the anointed remnant could not escape being involved in battle. They have courageously undertaken it, “for Jehovah is with them.” Their still being engaged in the battle to now near the close of the “time of the end” denotes spiritual triumph for them. But as for those enemies who trust in “horses,” that is, in the world’s way of carrying on a fight against Jehovah’s worshipers, they have indeed experienced shame, disappointment. All the opposition, interference and persecution by these “riders of horses” have failed to stop the remnant of the spiritual “house of Judah.”
A UNIFIED NATION
19. (a) What breakup in the twelve-tribe nation of Israel took place in 997 B.C.E.? (b) How did the survivors of both resulting kingdoms become exiles together in Babylonia?
19 In the day of the prophet Zechariah during the sixth century before our Common Era, the nation of Israel was unified by the releasing of the faithful remnant from Babylon and the restoring of them to the land of Judah. In the year 997 B.C.E. there had been a breakup of the nation. Ten tribes revolted against the further rulership of the royal family of David; only the tribes of Benjamin and Judah stuck true to David’s royal line. The ten-tribe kingdom of Israel was under the leadership of its most populous tribe, that of Ephraim, the younger son of the patriarch Joseph. The tribe of Manasseh, the firstborn son of Joseph, lined up with its brother tribe of Ephraim. The ten-tribe kingdom of the north lasted only till 740 B.C.E., when its then capital, Samaria, was destroyed by the Assyrians and the survivors were deported to Assyrian territories. But about 632 B.C.E., Babylon overthrew Assyria and absorbed its territories and its Israelite exiles. So when Babylon destroyed Jerusalem in 607 B.C.E. and deported its survivors to Babylonia, all tribes became exiles.
20. (a) Why were the exiles of the ten-tribe kingdom spoken of as the “house of Ephraim” or the “house of Joseph”? (b) How did Jehovah indicate there would be a unification of both houses?
20 Since the tribe of Ephraim, the son of Joseph, dominated the ten-tribe kingdom, its exiles were spoken of as the “house of Ephraim” or “the house of Joseph,” whose chief representative was Ephraim. Indicating that all twelve tribes of Israel would be reunified in the land of Judah by the return there of a faithful remnant of exiles, Jehovah now speaks of both houses and goes on to say: “And I will make the house of Judah superior, and the house of Joseph I shall save. And I will give them a dwelling, for I will show them mercy; and they must become like those whom I had not cast off; for I am Jehovah their God, and I shall answer them. And those of Ephraim must become just like a mighty man, and their heart must rejoice as though from wine. And their own sons will see and certainly rejoice; their heart will be joyful in Jehovah.”​—Zechariah 10:6, 7.
21. (a) Over whom did Jehovah make the “house of Judah” superior, and in what way did He save the “house of Joseph”? (b) How did they become like those whom Jehovah had never cast off?
21 The Sovereign Lord God was the One who made the “house of Judah,” that specially represented the Messianic kingdom of David, “superior” to its enemies. Exiles of the “house of Joseph” were also saved, that is to say, given the victory over their enemies. Jehovah of armies gave them a dwelling with their fellow tribesmen in the Persian province of Judah, after he delivered them from the exile into which Assyria had taken them. Like the house of Judah, these also became “just like a mighty man” in Jehovah’s service. Upon them he had mercy even as upon the other exiles, and all the restored exiles together became as a people whom he had never cast off because of their disobedience. This fact was especially plain for all to observe when the repatriated exiles finally completed the building of the second temple at Jerusalem, to worship him unitedly there as the God of the whole nation. He demonstrated that he heard their prayers by answering them.
22. (a) Why is the stimulation to joy on their part stronger than that induced by wine? (b) In what way do their “sons” share in that joy?
22 The stimulation of their heart to rejoice was stronger than that induced by drinking wine. Their stimulation was a spiritual one. Their heart was joyful in their God, Jehovah, because of what he had done for them, because of the mercy that he had displayed to them. Their sons, born to them in their regained homeland, would share in this divine mercy and goodness. They too see it, experience it and would rejoice with their parents because of it.
23. In the final fulfillment, what corresponds with the “house of Judah” and the “house of Joseph” (Ephraim), and where and since when has Jehovah united them?
23 In the final fulfillment of the prophecy in our twentieth century concerning the “house of Judah” and the “house of Joseph” (Ephraim) there are two parts of the anointed remnant of spiritual Israel to be taken into account. There was the original part that came through the hard experiences of World War I and was restored to divine favor and liberated in 1919 C.E. And there was the newer part that was delivered from Babylon the Great since 1919 C.E. and that was joined to the original anointed remnant. The unification of them all as one “people for special possession” of Jehovah took place in the spiritual estate into which he brought them together from 1919 C.E. onward. Thus they could unitedly work together for the reestablishment and expansion of the worship of the only living and true God at His spiritual temple. By his invincible spirit he caused this “drove” of sheeplike disciples of His Messiah to become like a dignified war-horse not afraid to charge into the battle.
24. How did the united remnant now show courage like that of a horse charging into the battle? That is, in Kingdom proclamation?
24 Thus they became more courageous than ever in the proclamation of the Messianic kingdom of God, the kingdom reigning in the heavens since the end of the Gentile Times in 1914 C.E. Yes, they continued to distribute free Bible tracts, by the hundreds of millions of copies, to the homes of the people. But now they did not leave the brunt of the work to some hundreds of full-time “colporteurs,” for now they all undertook to knock at the doors of the people and interview the householders and place with them Bible study helps in the form of booklets and bound books on a nominal contribution toward the work. They engaged hundreds of radio stations to broadcast the Kingdom message throughout the earth, even organizing some of the largest broadcasting chains on occasions to reach the homes and ears of as many listeners as possible. When the mounting religious, political, judicial opposition made it difficult to carry on the radiocasting of the Kingdom message freely, sound cars topped by loudspeakers were sent out to herald the message afield. Portable phonographs were carried from door to door to play the message recorded on phonograph disks.
25. How was courageous proclamation made of the judgment messages issued during the years 1922-1928?
25 During the seven years, 1922-1928 C.E., a series of seven general or international assemblies were held by the anointed remnant of spiritual Israelites. At each of these in succession a fearless judgment message from God’s Holy Bible was declared, also being supported by an appropriate public address direct to visible audiences and to invisible audiences by radio. These judgment message proclamations and their supporting speeches were issued in the form of free tracts for free distribution in many languages, and hundreds of millions of these were placed in the hands of the people in many lands. These annual messages by speech and printed page were like the sounding of a series of seven trumpets to blast Jehovah’s modern-day judgments for all the world to hear. This is how they are pictured in the apocalyptic book of Revelation, chapters eight and nine and eleven.
26. How does the Revelation presentation of the fifth trumpet picture the anointed remnant, after release from Babylon the Great, as being warlike?
26 Regarding the sounding of the fifth such trumpet message under angelic guidance, note how Revelation 9:7-11 pictures the remnant as released from Babylon the Great under the symbol of locusts and describes them: “And the likenesses of the locusts resembled horses prepared for battle; and upon their heads were what seemed to be crowns like gold, and their faces were as men’s faces, but they had hair as women’s hair. And their teeth were as those of lions; and they had breastplates like iron breastplates. And the sound of their wings was as the sound of chariots of many horses running into battle. Also, they have tails and stings like scorpions; and in their tails is their authority to hurt the men five months. They have over them a king, the angel of the abyss. In Hebrew his name is A·badʹdon, but in Greek he has the name A·polʹlyon.” This pictures the remnant as warlike.
27. How is the Revelation presentation of the sixth trumpet in agreement with Zechariah 10:3-7 in showing the remnant to be warlike, as “mighty men”?
27 The apocalyptic picture of the effects of the sounding of the sixth trumpet (beginning in 1927 C.E.) shows the remnant as riding hundreds of millions of publicity vehicles for announcing Jehovah’s judgments. Look at the description: “The number of the armies of cavalry was two myriads of myriads: I [John] heard the number of them. And this is how I saw the horses in the vision, and those seated on them: they had fire-red and hyacinth-blue and sulphur-yellow breastplates; and the heads of the horses were as heads of lions, and out of their mouths fire and smoke and sulphur issued forth. By these three plagues a third of the men were killed, from the fire and the smoke and the sulphur which issued forth from their mouths. For the authority of the horses is in their mouths and in their tails; for their tails are like serpents and have heads, and with these they do harm.” (Revelation 9:16-19) So these symbolic visions are in harmony with Zechariah 10:3-7 in likening the restored remnant to Jehovah’s “horse of dignity in battle” and to “mighty men.”
MIGHTY OBSTACLES OVERCOME
28. In Zechariah 10:8-12, how did Jehovah speak of his overcoming obstacles when regathering his people as from Egypt and Assyria?
28 As we can clearly see now, nothing has proved to be an insurmountable obstacle to Jehovah of armies in realizing his stated purpose. How he would treat such obstacles he stated in Zechariah 10:8-12, saying: “‘I will whistle for them and collect them together; for I shall certainly redeem them, and they must become many, just like those who have become many. And I shall scatter them like seed among the peoples, and in the distant places they will remember me; and they must revive with their sons and return. And I must bring them back from the land of Egypt; and from Assyria I shall collect them together; and to the land of Gilead and Lebanon I shall bring them, and no room will be found for them. And he must pass through the sea with distress; and in the sea he must strike down the waves, and all the depths of the Nile must dry up. And the pride of Assyria must be brought down, and the very scepter of Egypt will depart. And I will make them superior in Jehovah, and in his name they will walk about,’ is the utterance of Jehovah.”​—Zechariah 10:8-12.
29. (a) When did Jehovah humble the pride of Assyria, as foretold? (b) When did He whistle for his people who were scattered like seed, and what response was there to this?
29 In this divine utterance the term Assyria would take in the territories to which the Assyrians deported the survivors of the ten-tribe kingdom of Israel in 740 B.C.E. But the “pride” of Assyria was humbled by Babylon under King Nebuchadnezzar. In turn, the “pride” of this conqueror and dispossessor of Assyria was brought down by Jehovah’s earthly instrument, Cyrus the Great of Persia, in 539 B.C.E. Thereafter Jehovah could “whistle” to the scattered exiles of his people in the northern lands of the Babylonian Empire. Where he scattered them they multiplied like seed sown. In the lands of their exile, no matter how distant, they would hear his “whistle” and remember him. This would have a reviving effect upon them and upon their sons whom they had brought forth in exile. Alive and responsive to his inviting “whistle,” they would return to their desolated homeland.
30. What obstacles are suggested as to gathering his exiled people from Egypt, and how would Jehovah deal with those obstacles?
30 Many of the exiles had been taken into exile or had fled for refuge into Egypt to the south. (2 Kings 23:31-34; 25:22-26) So Jehovah ‘whistled’ in that direction also. From there he collected members of the remnant to worship him at his temple in Jerusalem. The scepter wielded by the ruler of Egypt could not prevent this. Jehovah’s will was accomplished just as if the Egyptian scepter of authority had departed, did not exist. The “whistle” of the Most High God had more authority than Egypt’s scepter. If the waters of Egypt’s deified Nile River were an obstacle to His people he could treat them as if they had dried up for his people. If the Red Sea hindered, he could pass through that sea with “distress” to its waters. He could strike down its waves, that His returning exiles might pass through to his place of worship at Jerusalem. He could do again what he did before in 1513 B.C.E.
31. (a) How would Jehovah take care of any tendency toward overpopulating the land, and still allow for growth? (b) In what sense would they walk about in His name?
31 There was no fear of overpopulating the land. The Owner of all the earth would merely enlarge the borders of the land for his restored exiles. Their borders would take in the “land of Gilead” to the east of the Jordan River. Yes, also the land of Lebanon to the west along the Mediterranean Sea. In this enlarged area of occupancy they must “become many, just like those who have become many.” Their rate of population growth will not be behind that of any other populous land. They will be just as many as ever. The Most High and Almighty God would make them “superior” to all foreign efforts to oppress, suppress and diminish them. In His name, or as a people called by His name, they would walk about. Wherever they walked, they would have His name in mind and seek to honor it, doing nothing to downgrade it.
32. When did Jehovah begin to “whistle” to his exiles, and how?
32 In the year 537 B.C.E. Jehovah began to “whistle” to his exiled people by the decree of liberation issued by Babylon’s conqueror, the Persian Cyrus the Great. (Ezra 1:1 to 3:2) That decree did not apply to Egypt, but later the way was opened for the exiles in Egypt to return to their God-given land.
33. When did Jehovah begin to “whistle” to the exiles of spiritual Israel, and by what means?
33 Likewise in the year 1919 C.E. Babylon the Great experienced a great fall at the hands of the Greater Cyrus, the triumphant enthroned King Jesus Christ. Did Jehovah then begin to “whistle” to his exiled remnant? Evidently, Yes! How? Notably by means of that semimonthly magazine that today is known world wide as The Watchtower Announcing Jehovah’s Kingdom and that bears the front-cover subscription “‘You are my witnesses,’ says Jehovah.” (Isaiah 43:12) It conveyed to the members of the anointed remnant throughout the earth the call to reunite and gather to the support of God’s Messianic kingdom. As a step in that direction, it announced the arrangements for the holding of a general convention at Cedar Point, Ohio, U.S.A., for September 1-8, 1919, and invited all readers to attend.
34. (a) How many attended that general gathering in 1919 C.E., and what did they learn about enlarging Kingdom preaching? (b) How has that enlarging of Kingdom publicity resulted today?
34 About six thousand found it possible or convenient to share in this significant regathering and spiritual feast. They rejoiced at being restored to their rightful spiritual estate on earth. They learned of the arrangements to enlarge the means of publicizing God’s Messianic kingdom by starting a companion magazine, then called The Golden Age but now Awake! The first issue of this was dated October 1, 1919. It has since served as a powerful vehicle for proclaiming the Messianic kingdom and the age of life, peace, happiness and prosperity that this kingdom will shortly usher in. It was in the year 1940 C.E. that this magazine began to be offered publicly on the streets to the general public. Today more than seven million copies of each semimonthly issue are printed in more than twenty-five languages, and the number of recipients and readers of it goes on increasing.
35. (a) How was Jehovah’s “whistle” sounded out more and more widely, and with what effect? (b) How were obstacles to responding to the “whistle” overcome?
35 From that start in the liberation year of 1919 C.E. the regathering of the remnant went forward. As the faithful surviving remnant courageously took up the Kingdom message with great joy and enthusiasm and spread it farther and farther, the “whistle” of Jehovah sounded out more widely. Many seekers of the true God, both inside and outside of Christendom, heard that “whistle” inviting them to the pure worship of the one living and true God at his spiritual temple. They put forth their best efforts to respond. Were there obstacles in their way, things like the Nile River or the Red Sea or political powers of oppression like Assyria and ancient Egypt? The God whom they sought to worship at the true spiritual temple opened his written Word to them and pointed out to them how to overcome and surmount those imposing obstacles. Obedience to God’s “whistle” must come first!
36. How, in their personal case, must the “pride of Assyria” be brought down, and the “scepter of Egypt” be made to “depart”?
36 Fear they must cast aside. They must heed the call from heaven to come out of Babylon the Great, that world empire of false religion that includes not only Christendom but also pagandom. (Revelation 18:1-4) They must not let the “pride” of militarized, nationalistic governments like that of Assyria swell their heads. They must put Jehovah’s Messianic kingdom ahead of all man-made governments. In their personal case the interests of all high and mighty human rulerships must be brought down low before the interests of Jehovah’s universal sovereignty and its Messianic instrument. The symbolic “scepter of Egypt” as wielded by the political powers of this world should not be considered as supreme in power and authority. They should think on the scepter wielded by God’s Messianic King, to whom Jehovah said, in 1914 C.E.: “The rod of your strength Jehovah will send out of [the heavenly] Zion, saying: ‘Go subduing in the midst of your enemies.’” (Psalm 110:1, 2) The comparing of this Messianic scepter with the “scepter of Egypt” makes this latter human scepter “depart.”
37, 38. (a) Instead of State worship, recognition must be given to Jehovah as being what, and how was help to see this requirement given? (b) What did that book Government say, in part, under “Theocracy” and “Jehovah King”?
37 Instead of their recognizing the political State as supreme and rendering worship to the man-made State, recognition must be given by them to the Sovereign Lord Jehovah as the God Ruler or Theocrat. Help for them to see this requirement was given to the people in the book entitled “Government,” which was released to the public in the year 1928 at the general convention of the International Bible Students Association in Detroit, Michigan, U.S.A., July 30 to August 6, 1928, at which the symbolic seventh trumpet began to be blown. (Revelation 11:15-18) On pages 247-250 this book discussed “Theocracy” and “Jehovah King” and said, in part:
38 “What form of government will then control the peoples of earth? That government will be a pure theocracy. For centuries the whole creation has groaned and suffered in pain, waiting for the manifestation of that government. (Rom. 8:19) Now the time has come for its establishment, and both the rulers and the ruled of the earth should learn the truth and rejoice. . . . A theocracy is a government of which the chief ruler is Jehovah God. He is the Maker and Executor of its laws through his duly constituted agencies. While it is true that supreme power has always resided in Jehovah, with the overthrow of Israel’s last king he permitted man to take his own course and has not interfered until his time has come to set upon his throne him ‘whose right it is.’ He it is whom God has appointed and anointed to rule under and in harmony with Jehovah. . . . The great theocracy, when seen and appreciated by the people, will be the joy of the whole earth.”
39. (a) By what form of government will Paradise be restored to mankind, and what kind of organization has Jehovah established in the spiritual Paradise of his remnant? (b) Those who would join the remnant in their theocratic spiritual estate must cut through what obstacles?
39 It will be through the coming Theocracy that Paradise will be restored to mankind. At present a spiritual Paradise obtains among the restored remnant, among whom the Great Theocrat has established a theocratic organization. This spiritual remnant, thus organized, puts Jehovah God above all human rulers, autocratic or democratic, and says, in the words of Isaiah 33:22: “Jehovah is our Judge, Jehovah is our Statute-giver, Jehovah is our King; he himself will save us.” They take the theocratic position taken by the twelve apostles of Jesus Christ when before the Supreme Court of Jerusalem: “We must obey God as ruler rather than men. . . . And we are witnesses of these matters, and so is the holy spirit, which God has given to those obeying him as ruler.” (Acts 5:29-32) Hence those who would join the anointed remnant in their theocratic spiritual estate must cut across the democratic flow and current of the symbolic Nile River and the changing tides of the symbolic Red Sea of humankind and must submit to Jehovah’s theocratic arrangement. For the willing and obedient ones He can make those water obstacles as not existing.
40. (a) With respect to what has God made the remnant “superior in Jehovah,” and how? (b) How has the prophecy come true, “In his name they will walk about,” and what will they have a part in doing with the Messianic kingdom?
40 In regathering and reuniting his anointed remnant of spiritual Israel the Almighty God has indeed ‘made them superior’ to all the obstacles and the adversaries. In their case it has indeed been, “not by a military force, nor by [human] power,” but by his spirit or invisible active force. It is just as He said: “I will make them superior in Jehovah.” Should they not, therefore, honor His sacred name and strive to act in harmony with the prayer that Jesus Christ taught them to pray: “Our Father in the heavens, let your name be sanctified”? They add dignity to his name and they make known that “his name alone is unreachably high.” (Psalm 148:13) Thus in all lands where members of the anointed remnant are found today it is true just as foretold in Zechariah 10:12: “‘In his name they will walk about,’ is the utterance of Jehovah.” Continuing to do this down to the “war of the great day of God the Almighty” at Har–Magedon, they will have part with the Messianic kingdom in forever vindicating the greatest Name in all the universe.

