Branch Letter
Dear Fellow Publishers:
Some of the brothers have inquired about how we are doing as to participation in the field ministry. They have in mind that the Yearbook, on page 32, mentioned that, although the total number of publishers increased last year, we were down 57,430 in hours devoted to the field ministry. How are we doing now?
We have analyzed the United States report for September through November, and these are the facts: We have fewer special pioneers than we did for the same period in the previous year, and their hours now average 143.2 per month, to compare with 144.7 for the same months the year before. The regular and temporary pioneers number 21,918, which is down from last year’s figure of 23,594. Last year they averaged 92.7 hours per month, and this year their report is down to 90 hours.
How about congregation publishers? They are increasing in numbers, from 389,555 for the previous year to 401,519 for the first three months of the 1973 service year. That is good to see. But their report of hours is down​—from 9.9 to 9.6 per month, on the average.
Some have said: ‘But we have no quotas now.’ Though the hour requirements for the various branches of pioneer service have not changed, it is true that congregation publishers have no set goal of, say, ten hours per month. Yet the question might be asked: Is this a valid reason for decreasing the amount of time spent in doing the will of Jehovah God in the field service? Really, in past years we were not going in the field service simply to meet a goal of hours, were we? We were interested in preaching the good news of God’s kingdom, to magnify Jehovah’s name and to give others the opportunity to hear. And we still are. Now that we do not all have a set goal of hours we are not to conclude that our field ministry is any less important. Our message is urgent. This is something to think about, don’t you agree? Jehovah’s requirement that our service be whole-souled has not changed.
How are we doing in Bible study activity? The number of studies conducted by special pioneers, regular and temporary pioneers as well as by congregation publishers has dropped off. In 1971 we regularly had 304,188 studies; now the report shows 268,648. That means that there are 35,540 fewer home Bible studies conducted each month than during the first three months of the previous service year. Time spent in the field service is one factor that definitely affects this work, does it not? Only by spending time in the field service are we going to reach people. Only by our talking to them and offering to study with them will we get studies started, and it is by this means that people come to an accurate knowledge of the truth.
It is true that much good work is being done in the field ministry, and many brothers and sisters are pouring themselves out in Jehovah’s service. We appreciate all that is being done. But it is good for us to analyze what we ourselves are doing in the field service. If we personally were doing more last year than this year, why? Are we doing all that we can? Can we buy out more time for this urgent work? As congregations, can we stimulate greater zeal for the field ministry? Can more go into pioneer service? The time left in which to share in field service activity is limited. Now is the time to give it our earnest attention.
Soon we will be gathering for the “Divine Victory” International Assembly of Jehovah’s Witnesses. We eagerly anticipate it. But let’s remember that it is by increased activity in the field service now that we can aid more to gather with us then, to Jehovah’s praise.
We pray that Jehovah’s blessing will be with all of you as you keep in mind our service theme for February: “Do not beg off from industriousness down to the end.”
Your brothers,
BROOKLYN BRANCH OFFICE

