Presenting the Good News​—Are You Overlooking an Important Field?
1 These days in many congregations the territory is worked quite frequently. This is good because it provides an opportunity to meet different members of the household, who may react in various ways to the good news. But are you overlooking someone? If, for example, a twelve-year-old boy answers the door, what is your reaction? Do you say, ‘Is your mother at home?’ Perhaps the boy’s mother has been witnessed to many times, but has the boy ever heard the good news of the Kingdom or about the Paradise earth that is to come?
2 There is a wonderful field open to us among the young people and many of them respond well to the good news. Why not give a testimony that you feel will appeal to the young person? You may not find it practical to make the subscription offer. But most young people these days have a little money and it may be possible to place a 25-cent book such as the Great Teacher book or the Truth book. Many teen-agers would find the Word of God or Evolution books very interesting. If a young person will listen, give a testimony and open up the opportunity for this fellow human to learn of Jehovah’s wonderful promises. One can always ask to speak to parents after conversing with a youth.
3 On school holidays publishers will often find the children at home. One sister in Pennsylvania reported working a street with four homes on it and at each home one of the youngsters came to the door. She told the youngsters about Jehovah’s promises and placed a book at each of the four homes. Notation was made so a return visit could be arranged. Some of the young people are glad to have a Bible study. Also, on return visits parents and other members of the family are contacted, so the witness reaches all. It is reported from New York state that, in two instances where studies were commenced with a youth, the end result was that the entire family are now in the truth.
4 It is good to have a positive attitude toward the youths. Although they may have long hair, wear odd clothing or sometimes show an attitude of disenchantment with the present system of things and its injustices, often they like to enter into a conversation and discuss things. Some will respond favorably to the good news of the Kingdom and be glad to see that there is a hope for the human family, which is just what they have been seeking deep down inside. Reports come from all around the world about young people who have been pleased to hear the good news. Some of the “hippies” show great appreciation for the Society’s publications and the Kingdom hope, and today there are many former “hippies” who have become dedicated Kingdom publishers and some are in the pioneer service.
5 You will find the field service even more interesting if you prepare yourself to present the good news in language that will be understood by youths of varying ages, and your joy will be great as you see some of them respond favorably to the good news you present.

