Question Box
● Can congregations with one or two elders get the help of elders from nearby congregations that have numerous elders?
Sometimes circuit overseers observe that one congregation has many elders while another congregation has only one elder, so some help could be used. The circuit overseer may make the need known to the congregation where there are many elders, but then it is up to the body of elders there to consider their own needs for elders to conduct studies and take care of the congregation activities. There is no reason for an elder to travel to another territory if he is needed where he is now. If they believe that it will not work a hardship in their congregation for an elder to go to work with a nearby congregation that has real need of older brothers, they can discuss the matter among themselves and see whether anyone among them wishes to travel to the nearby congregation.
Any elder considering such service should take into account what this would mean to himself spiritually and physically and how it would affect his family’s interests. He may wish to see how they feel about it. How much time would be required to go there and what are the traveling conditions and expenses involved in going from his home to the territory of the nearby congregation? He should take into consideration the hours when the other congregation has their meetings. He will be wise to give such a matter his prayerful consideration.
If, after such consideration of matters, someone is found to be available to serve with the nearby congregation, the presiding overseer may communicate with the nearby congregation to let them know that there is an elder who is willing to serve with them regularly. Upon receiving the information, if the brothers representing the nearby congregation wish to meet and discuss matters with the available elder they may do so. Then if they would like to have him serving with them they should send their recommendation of the brother to the Governing Body, asking that he be appointed to serve as an elder in their congregation, explaining the circumstances in the letter. When the recommendation is approved, the elder may serve in the new congregation and his name will be deleted from the list of elders of his former congregation.

