Your Service Meetings
WEEK STARTING FEBRUARY 11
17 min: Song 106. Introduction, text and comments. Field overseer discusses Branch Letter.
 3 min: Accounts report.
13 min: “Be Industrious​—Inherit the Promises.” Give a talk and interview someone in congregation who has placed a subscription in door-to-door work, showing how industrious effort brings good results. May ask what had to be done. How many doors were called at before getting subscription? Show value of not giving up in work.
15 min: Presenting the Good News. Questions and answers. Demonstrate how to present good news when youth opens door.
12 min: Concluding comments. Include field service report. Song 23.
WEEK STARTING FEBRUARY 18
10 min: Song 79. Introduction, text and comments. Theocratic News.
18 min: “Your Service to God.” By means of questions and answers have a thorough coverage of first part of Chapter 6 in “Organization” book, through paragraph 2 on page 109. Read together majority of texts that are not quoted and draw attention to those quoted. Paragraphs do not have to be read. It would be better to use time to read and discuss scriptures.
20 min: “Clean from the Blood of All Men.” After brief introduction two or three sisters discuss points in insert down to heading “Family Cooperation Helps.” If possible use pioneers who may mention own experience if’ time allows to show what can be done locally.
12 min: Concluding comments. Appropriate announcements, points from Question Box. Song 119.
WEEK STARTING FEBRUARY 25
 8 min: Song 60. Introduction, text and comments.
20 min: “Your Service to God.” Continue question-and-answer consideration of “Organization” book, page 109, paragraph 3 to page 112, paragraph 2 inclusive.
20 min: “Clean from the Blood of All Men.” Family group or couple discuss insert from heading “Family Cooperation Helps” to end. Conclude by reading last three paragraphs. Encourage each publisher personally to read the entire “Kingdom Ministry” insert.
12 min: Concluding comments. Mention how many new subscriptions were placed by congregation so far in campaign. Draw attention to one or two points in latest magazines that should be of interest to people when you offer the magazines. Song 54.
WEEK STARTING MARCH 4
 8 min: Song 73. Introduction, text and comments.
20 min: “Making Your Family Study Fill the Need.” Question-and-answer discussion. Do not read paragraphs. Encourage a family study for all families, even though there may be no children. Example of family study on “Your Service to God,” “Organization” book, pages 112, 113. Family group consider methods of service used by Jesus and his disciples. In conclusion father points out how all should want to copy their methods of serving Jehovah.
15 min: “Let No Man Ever Look Down on Your Youth.” (1 Tim. 4:12) Symposium using younger publishers, if available, in presenting the following material. Can be more effective if youths on program work up their own presentations and rehearse before parents or overseers. Work in appropriate local experiences, if possible.
(4 min.) Chairman draws expressions from youths in congregation on how Christian thinking and conduct on their part serve to remove any reason for others to look down on their youth. Actions around home, school and Kingdom Hall many times speak louder than words. Should be like Timothy, who was an example in many ways, “in speaking, in conduct, in love, in faith, in chasteness.”​—1 Tim. 4:12.
(3 min.) So as not to be looked down upon, youths’ conduct in and around Kingdom Hall needs to be exemplary. Form good habits early in life. Be attentive. Have own Bible and study materials. Unnecessary trips to rest room while meeting is on can be disturbing to others as well as causing one to miss part of the program. Encourage to go to rest room before meeting starts. Kingdom Hall is not a place for running and playing before or after meetings. Playing and loud noise outside of Kingdom Hall before or after meetings may annoy neighbors and cause them to look down on congregation’s youth.
(3 min.) Christian conduct in school will cause others to respect you. Reading, writing and arithmetic are good helps to prepare one for future service. Obedience to teachers, studying and paying attention in class are all important. A need to watch associations.​—1 Cor. 15:33.
(3 min.) Earning respect from parents. Show deep love and respect for parents. (Eph. 6:1, 2) Christian examples of children have directed parents to truth. Appreciate what they provide for you in way of home, food, clothing and truth. Willingly and joyfully care for family responsibilities given by parents, washing dishes, mowing grass, etc. Obedience is pleasing to Jehovah and parents.​—Col. 3:20.
(2 min.) Chairman. Youths’ proper conduct now paves the way for future privileges of service. Brings praise to Jehovah’s name, and greater respect from brothers. (Ps. 148:12, 13) Other youths in school and neighborhood, now looked down upon because of their conduct and thinking, will see good example and this may cause some to change, opening up way for witnessing and Bible studies.
17 min: Talk by presiding overseer on how much the youths are appreciated in the congregation. Commend them for their ministerial activities, meeting participation. Show from their Bible studies, return visits and placements what they are accomplishing in preaching the good news. If they have placed any subscriptions during campaign, may ask one to tell how he did it. Encourage them to keep up their fine work and learn all they can, because they may be future elders and ministerial servants, pioneers, Bethel members, missionaries, which are all fine privileges of service. Concluding comments. Song 39.

