R658 : page 1 

VOL. VI. 

PITTSBURGH, PA., SEPTEMBER, 1884. 
NO. 1. 



page 1 

ZION'S 
Watch Tower 
AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S 
PRESENCE. 

PUBLISHED MONTHLY. 



C. T. RUSSELL, Editor and Publisher. 



BUSINESS OFFICE: 
NO. 44 FEDERAL ST. ALLEGHENY, PA. 



The Editor recognizes a responsibility to the Master, relative to 
what shall appear in these columns, which he cannot and does not 
cast aside; yet he should not be understood as endorsing every 
expression of correspondents, or of articles selected from other 
periodicals. 

TERMS OF SUBSCRIPTION. 

TERMS:— Fifty cents a year, postage prepaid. You may send by 
Draft, P.O. Money Order, or Registered Letter, payable to C. T. 
RUSSELL. 

FOREIGN TERMS. 

Foreign Postage being higher, our terms to foreign subscribers will 
be 65 cents a year. Please send us no foreign money or postage 
stamps, as we can make no use of them. Remittances may be made 
by Foreign Postal Money Orders. 

TAKE NOTICE. 



This paper will be sent free to any of the Lord's poor who will 
send a card yearly requesting it. Freely we have received and freely 
we would give the truth. "Ho, every one that thirsteth, come ye to 
the waters; and he that hath no money, come ye, buy and eat— yea, 
come, buy wine and milk without money and without price." And 
you that have it— "Wherefore do ye spend money for that which is 
not bread? and your labor for that which satisfieth not? Hearken 
diligently— and eat ye that which is good, and let your soul delight 
itself in fatness."- ISAIAH 55: 1,2. 



page 1 

WE have removed our business office to No. 44 FEDERAL ST., 
ALLEGHENY PA., where we will be pleased to receive a visit 
from any of you, when in the city. 



R658 : page 1 

TO NEW READERS. 

The TOWER comes to you as unpretentiously as the ministers of 
the early church. We present no list of titled and world-renowned 
contributors— none whose fame would command your attention to 
the subjects we present. But we come to you with the Bible as 
God's Word, and seek to enlist your attention to its statements and 
your obedience to its requirements and thus to lead the hearts and 
minds of some of God's children away from the jarring confusion of 
precept and doctrine, prevalent among the various divisions (sects) 
of Christians, into the harmony, beauty, simplicity, and confidence, 
which come from the study of God's Word and its acceptance as a 
harmonious whole and a self-interpreter. 

It would be but natural that you should wonder how these things 
could be true, yet not recognized long ago by earnest Christians; 
and why so many of those in the churches manifest a bitter 
opposition to things so full of harmony with God's Word, and so 
fully vindicating the justice, wisdom and love of our heavenly 
Father. 

In answer to your supposed queries, we suggest that if a broad view 
of God's dealings be taken, it shows that he has a plan with 
reference to men. While he was pleased in past times to reveal an 
outline of that plan, it was nothing more; no details were given. The 
details of the plan began to be recognized since Pentecost. The light 
of revelation shines with special brightness on the ends of the ages. 
Upon the ending of the Jewish age which was the beginning of the 
Gospel Age, new and special light shone out relative to the blessed 
privileges about to be enjoyed in the Gospel Age. Remember, too, 
that it came from the Scriptures, written long before, but which 
were never before appreciated or understood. Matthew, Mark, 



Luke, John, Peter and Paul, all quoted the prophecies and applied 
them to the events taking place and due to take place, in their day- 
the opening of the Gospel Age. The prophecies had been there for 
centuries, but the revelation or understanding of them, was reserved 
for those in the ends of the ages. (See 1 Cor. 10:1 1.) So now in the 
closing of the Gospel Age and dawning of the grand Millennial 
Age, we should expect the light to shine out brightly relative to 
God's plans for this incoming age. And so it does. Search and see. 
Gem after gem of precious truth now glows with unparalleled lustre 
to the diligent searcher, not because of his superior ability to find it, 
but because God's due time has come for such to understand it. 
Soon the blessed bow of promise shall span the whole heavens, and 
weeping earth shall dry her tears and shout for joy. 

It is no more surprising that these truths relative to God's plan for 
the blessing of all mankind should have been but dimly seen 
heretofore, than that the call of the Gentiles to be heirs of the 
Abrahamic promise, (Acts 11:18; Eph. 3:5,7; Gal. 3:29,) should 
have been but dimly seen until the Gospel Age began to dawn. We 
can understand prophetic scriptural statements only as they become 
due. Thus— "Light, (truth, was long ago) sown for the righteous." 
When due, the light springs up and gradually unfolds. Thus our 
Father has made abundant provision for the household of faith and 
the true servants shall bring forth things both new and old, that the 
household may have meat in due season. The cause of the 
opposition on the part of many to the truth now due, is the failure to 
recognize this progressive and unfolding character of God's 
revelation of his plans. Most Christians take for granted that good 
men of the past who walked in the light then due, had all the truth 
worth knowing. Knox, Calvin, Luther, Wesley and others were, we 
believe, followers in our Lord's footsteps of self-sacrifice and 
devotedness to God; but more truth is due in our day than in theirs. 
According to God's plan, the light should shine more and more until 
the perfect day. Therefore many Christians of to-day make a great 
mistake, and sit in comparative darkness, when they might be 
walking in glorious light, because they search the theology of these 
men instead of the Word of God. 

O, that all would turn away from musty church creeds of times past 
and give more earnest heed to the ever living, ever fresh, ever 
unfolding, ever new Word of God. Again, others take the Bible and 
search it only for the purpose of seeing how nearly they can make it 
to fit either their mental or written creed. If your habit has been 
such, we hope you will at once resolve to lay aside all human 
teachings as authoritative, and hereafter judge all you hear or read 
by the statements of Scripture. If you believe anything, make sure 
that you have Scriptural statements warranting it. Prove all things, 
hold fast that which is good, and cast away all else. 

The action of the nominal church today relative to the light now 
shining clearly resembles that of the Jewish church relative to light 
in the end of their age. They reject every new ray of light because it 



would conflict with some cherished theory or statement of their 
creed. They are so enwrapped with their own plans and 
arrangements for converting the world, that they are unwilling to 
hear that God has a better, grander, and infinitely more 
comprehensive way of dealing with evil, and blessing and teaching 
the world. Their ears are so stopped by the din and confusion of 
their own religious efforts that they cannot discern the plan of 
Jehovah. 

Satan is doubtless interested in the promotion of the confusion of 
sects, and stimulates and encourages that zeal which is not 
according to knowledge, and thus hinders their hearing Jehovah's 
voice, saying, "Be still and know that I am God, (the mighty one); I 
will be exalted among the heathen; I will be exalted in the earth." 
(Ps. 46: 10.) The power to do this is with our Father, and not with 
us. When he gives the saints with Christ their Lord, the heathen for 
an inheritance —when he gives the kingdom under the whole 
heavens to the people of the saints, THEN, and not by poor human 
effort, will God's kingdom come and his will be done on earth as it 
is in heaven. (Dan. 2:35,44 and 7:18,27.) 



R658 : page 1 

A FORMER PASTOR'S LETTER 

TO THE PRESENT PASTOR AND HIS CONGREGATION. 

DEAR BROTHER:— Your note, stating that you and the church of 
which you are the pastor, desire me to write to you, is at hand. Not 
doubting the general interest of yourself and those for whom you 
speak, in the welfare of a former pastor whose relations were 
mutually most amicable, I still suppose that it is particularly on 
account of my having withdrawn from the ministry and 
membership in the M.E. Church that you desire to hear. To those 
who listened to my preaching during my pastorate at 
Townsendville, it is unnecessary to state that I was at the time a 
Methodist. My notions of the teachings of Scripture were gained 
while yet a child. They were taught me by Methodist parents, in 
Methodist Sunday-schools, and from Methodist pulpits. 

I find that years before I was capable of forming for myself 
intelligent opinions concerning even the general scope of Scripture 
teaching, they had already been moulded, and I had 
unquestioningly accepted the opinions of others and made them my 
own. I am now disposed to believe, however, that it was with some 
degree of mental reservation that I accepted some of the doctrines 
of orthodoxy. How else could I, while professing to believe in 
endless torment for the unrepentant, associate with them, accept 
their many kindnesses, and speak to them from the pulpit on themes 
often tending to divert their attention from, rather than attract it 
toward, so horrible a fate. I believe, however, that by the churches I 



served, I was adjudged faithful to my duties; and, though coming 
short of my own model of what a minister of Christ should be, I 
have the happy consciousness of having ordinarily walked up to the 
degree of light I possessed. To relate my varied and peculiar 
experiences after resigning my pastorate would transcend the limits 
of an ordinary letter, and perhaps would be without interest to those 
for whom I write. Suffice it to say, that after about two years of 
such experiences, there fell into my hands, providentially as it 
seems to me, a publication which was the means of a decided 
change in my understanding of much of God's Word; a change, 
however, which led me to much more exalted views of the 
character of God, and served to harmonize many passages in his 
Word which before appeared either unmeaning or contradictory. 

Though disposed to look with much suspicion on all that cast a 
doubt on so-called orthodox teachings, I nevertheless found them so 
fatally assailed by God's own Word, that my prejudices, one by 
one, yielded, and orthodoxy crumbled and lay in a mass of ruins at 
my feet. 

You are now ready to ask, which of these doctrines appear to me to 
be out of harmony with the teaching of the Word, that my 
prejudices, one by one, yielded, and orthodoxy crumbled and lay in 
a mass of ruins at my feet. 

You are now ready to ask, which of these doctrines appear to me to 
be out of harmony with the teaching of the Word? The present 
opportunity will allow me to speak of but few of these, and I will 
select such as I trust will appear plain to you. Orthodoxy teaches 
that the present life irrevocably determines the future condition of 
every human being. Though it is nowhere stated 

R659 : page 1 

in Scripture that there is not for any a probation after this life, it is 
preached and enforced much more vigorously than many things 
which the Bible does affirm. 

If it be true, as preached, that there will be no probation after this 
life, then surely much the larger part of the human family never 
have a probation. No person can be said to have a probation until 
made acquainted with that for which he is to be held accountable. 
Besides, if there be no future probation, many passages of the 
sacred Word are to me unmeaning; nay, more, are positively 
contradictory. Please notice Luke 2:10, "Behold, I bring you good 
tidings of GREAT JOY, which shall be to ALL PEOPLE. " 

We are all aware that a large majority of the PEOPLE who have 
lived and died, even since these words were uttered, never heard of 
the event here referred to. In what sense, therefore, has it been 
GREAT JOY to them? What possible advantage can they have 
derived from it? 



Again, in John 1:9, it is stated of Jesus, "That was the true light 
which lighteth EVERY MAN that cometh into the world." How, 



permit me to ask, has he lighted those millions of the race who 
never heard of him? How can this be true, unless there is to be a 
trial for them in the future in which this light shall be received? 
Again, in 1 Tim. 2:6, it is stated that Christ Jesus gave himself a 
ransom for ALL, to be testified in DUE TIME. Now, we all know, 
that it has not yet been testified to ALL. 

But, if this Scripture be true, it will be; so we can reach no other 
conclusion than that the DUE TIME-God's DUE TIME-for much 
the larger part of the human family to receive this testimony will be 
FUTURE. 

I might cite many other passages that are susceptible of a rational 
interpretation only in this light, but surely they will occur to your 
minds. 

But, you may ask, Why is it not taught in the Scripture, if there is to 
be an opportunity 

R659 : page 2 

for those who have never heard of him of whom it is declared, 
"There is no other name given under heaven, among men whereby 
we must be saved?" To this I answer, It is so taught, and not in a 
single text merely, but in many Scriptures. Before referring you to 
such teachings, however, permit me to remark, that the doctrine of a 
future probation for the world is not more strange to nominal 
Christianity to-day than was that of a salvation for the Gentiles to 
the Jewish Church at Christ's first coming. In illustrating my 
position, I will call attention to a single instance from Scripture; not 
because it does not contain others, but because the limits prescribed 
me will not permit their notice. This one instance, however, will be 
sufficient, I trust, to answer every reasonable objection. 

We will select what is usually regarded as the most marked 
illustration of Divine wrath, viz.: the Sodomites. Now, if we can 
show from the plain statements of God's Word that these people are 
to come back to life, in order that they may have an opportunity of 
having it testified to them that Jesus Christ gave himself a ransom 
for all, of believing this testimony if they will, and of receiving the 
benefits of belief, viz.: justification: if we make this plain, then we 
think the case of the others will appear, at least, very hopeful. But, 
first, let us learn from the Great Teacher, who "knew what was in 
man," what he thought of these Sodomites. 

In his preaching he compared them with the Jews, and particularly 
with the people of favored Capernaum (Matt. 11:23,24). Jesus here 
says, "If the mighty works which have been done in thee, had been 
done in Sodom, it would have remained unto this day. But I say 
unto you that it shall be more tolerable for the land of Sodom in the 
day of judgment than for you." 

Thus we see that it was for want of light that these people were 
destroyed. We see also, that Jesus teaches a time of retribution- 
future-which shall be tolerable for ALL, even for the people of 



Capernaum, who rejected Jesus and his miracles; and yet more 
tolerable for the Sodomites that perished in ignorance. Are we not 
all ready to say, this is surely, as we have a right to suppose God 
would deal with those to whom in their lifetime he had never given 
light and knowledge? 

Now, turn if you please to the prophet Ezekiel, 16th chapter, and 
see that God is teaching the Jews of their final restoration to the 
"land of promise," as he had long before promised to Abraham. 

Bear in mind that the prophet is writing about 1,000 years after the 
destruction of this people, and that Jesus says (Luke 17:29), "It 
rained fire and brimstone from heaven and destroyed them all." 
Notice now, that in the 46th verse the prophet refers both to the 
people of Samaria and to those of Sodom, and in the 53d and 55th 
verses plainly states that these people who were all destroyed 
SHALL RETURN to their FORMER ESTATE. In the 60th and 
61st verses it is again stated that God will establish with Israel an 
everlasting covenant, and that he will give to her Samaria and 
Sodom for daughters (that she may instruct them and bring them 
into harmony with God's plans). Thus we see that the promised 
blessing to Israel is not alone for herself, but that she may be God's 
agency in extending light and knowledge to "ALL PEOPLE." 

How well all this comports with Peter's words (Acts 3:21), in which 
he declares the "times of restitution of all things which God hath 
spoken by the mouth of all of his holy prophets since the world 
began. " A careful study of these holy prophets can scarcely fail to 
discover this glorious doctrine of a restitution of all things 
interwoven in all their writings. We are able in this light to 
comprehend John's definition of God's character— (1 John 4:8)— 
"God is love. " Is it not notably the case that the fear of future 
torment is now the principal incentive held out to induce men to 
come to God? John says, however, that "He that loveth not knoweth 
not God." 

Another teaching of the nominal Church, which I believe to be at 
variance with the teaching of the Word is, that all believers are to 
be of the body or Bride of Christ. The Bible teaches that the result 
of belief is justification to that condition which Adam forfeited by 
his disobedience. He forfeited human perfection; moral— mental- 
physical. Belief in Christ as the Redeemer, is the condition on 
which it may be recovered. The conditions to the high calling of 
God in Christ Jesus (Phil. 3:14); the holy calling (2 Tim. 1:9); the 
heavenly calling (Heb. 3:1), are far different. These require not only 
justification, but that their justified human nature shall be presented 
to God a living sacrifice— conditions which never were required 
until the narrow way to life was opened up by Jesus Christ (Heb. 
10:20; Matt. 7:14). Those who follow Jesus' footsteps in this 
narrow way are promised immortality. "For as the Father hath life 
in himself, so hath he given to the Son to have life in himself" (Jno. 
5:26); and we (his body) shall be like him (1 Jno. 3:2), spiritual 
beings, no longer human, but partakers of the Divine nature. 



By rejecting the Bible doctrine of a future probation— after the dead 
shall have heard the voice of the Son of God and come forth, as 
illustrated in the case of Lazarus, the widow's son and others —by 
rejecting this and other Bible teachings, the nominal Church has 
been thrown into confusion and led into many errors. 

That this confusion and these errors have largely contributed 
toward bringing about a rapid increase of infidelity, both within and 
without her own pale, I firmly believe. What is the spiritual 
condition of the Church to-day? Where are the revivals of former 
years? Alas, they exist only in name, or are the result of the efforts 
of a few professional revivalists. The barriers that formerly 
separated between the Church and the world are mostly swept 
away, and the man of fair worldly prospects, with whom she 
refuses to share all her privileges, must fall below the world's 
standard of morality. 

These, dear brethren, are some of the causes which led me to sever 
a connection which I once so highly prized, and to accept doctrines 
which, though they may bring reproach and obloquy, I believe to 
rest on the foundation of the Prophets and Apostles, Jesus Christ 
himself being the chief corner stone. 

Commending you to God, who is able to make all grace abound 
toward you, and trusting that this letter may lead you to a more 
careful study of His Word, which only is able to make you wise 
unto salvation, and to trust less in human creeds and traditions, I 
remain, 

Your servant, for Christ's sake. 

S. T. TACKABURY. 



R659 : page 2 

JUSTIFICATION DEFINED. 

"Being justified by faith, we have peace with God through our 
Lord Jesus Christ."— Rom. 5:1, 

The word justification has two meanings, which are closely 
related; one is to prove that a thing is right, the other to make a 
thing right which is wrong. 

Webster defines the word justify thus: I. "To prove or show to be 
just or conformable to law, right, justice or duty— to vindicate as 
right." II. "To pronounce free from guilt— to absolve." 

These terms are used in these two senses in Scripture. As 
illustrating the first definition, viz.: proving or showing to be just 
and right, notice that our Heavenly Father is said to be justified and 
Jesus also. When John preached repentance for sins, the people who 
believed justified God; i.e., they acknowledged that God had been 
just in condemning and punishing them as sinners; 



R660 : page 2 



his dealings were vindicated as being right. Jesus as a man was 
tried or tested in all points (the world, flesh, and devil) as we are, 
"yet without sin"-"In him was no sin." He was "holy, harmless, 
separate from sinners." Jehovah was his judge, and he justified, i.e., 
declared him to have been proved right and just. He was vindicated 
as being right, or, as we read, he was "justified in spirit and 
received into glory." (1 Tim. 3:16.) 

His unspotted humanity he gave up to death, to pay for us, the 
penalty of Adamic sin. Thus his death was not for his own sins, but 
for ours. "He bore our sins in his own body on the tree." "Jehovah 
(in harmony with his own desire) laid on him the iniquity of us all." 
The man Christ Jesus gave himself (his manhood) a ransom for all. 
And one of the best evidences that in God's sight he was free from 
all sin, is found in the fact that though he gave his humanity as a 
ransom, yet God, while accepting the human sacrifice for our sins, 
raised Jesus to life on a plane far above the human. Had he been a 
sinner, this would have been impossible, for God's law condemns 
every sinner to death. 

Now notice the second meaning of justification-the making right 
of something which is wrong. This is the sense in which the term is 
applicable to us, who by "the fall" are wrong and sinful. 

God cannot say arbitrarily, though you are sinful, a violator of my 
just laws, I will declare you to be right. No, he must be just-justice 
is the foundation of his throne; everything rests upon it. If you are 
imperfect and sinful he cannot say that you are righteous. If you 
were righteous he could not declare you a sinner, nor treat you as 
such. 

Do you remind us that there is none of the Adamic race righteous- 
no, not one— and urge that, therefore, God cannot justify any of us? 
We reply that he cannot justify us in the first sense of the word, as 
seen above, but there is a way which God's love and wisdom have 
devised by which he can be just and the justifier of those sinners 
who believe in or accept Jesus. (Rom. 3:26.) Thus our justification 
is in the second sense explained above; that is, we who are wrong, 
sinful and condemned before God, are made right by having our 
sins and shortcomings settled by another— by having the 
perfections of another set to our account. 

But, some one may raise the question as to what is the cause or 
basis of justification. One claims that is by Jehovah's grace, and not 
because our ransom has been paid, and quotes Titus 3:7, "Being 
justified by his grace." Another claims that we are justified, not by 
grace, nor by a ransom, but by faith, and quotes Rom. 5:1, "Being 
justified by faith." Another claims the ransom as the basis of all 
justification, and refers to Rom. 5:9, "Being now justified by his 
blood" (death). Are there three ways to be justified? No, answers 
Jesus, "I am the way.. ..No man cometh to the Father but by me." 



What can there be about believing in Jesus? Why not believe in 
Peter or Moses or Samson or Isaiah or Jeremiah? Why could not 
God justify those who believe in these as well as those "who 
believe in Jesus?" There must be something special and peculiar 
about Jesus, something different from all other teachers and 
prophets that we may be justified through faith in him, and not by 
faith in them. 

Again, what is it to believe in Jesus? Is it merely to recognize the 
fact that such a person once lived in Judea and died on a cross? 
Surely not; many prophets perished in Judea; many persons died on 
crosses. 

In explanation, we suggest that if the context be studied, these texts 
will be found harmonious. It is by Jehovah's grace or favor that we 
are justified, for 

"Grace first contrived the plan 
To save rebellious man." 

We are justified by faith, too; that is, we must by faith grasp the 
agency of God's grace-the ransom-before we can realize its full 
value. But down under all is the ransom— Jesus' death— the basis of 
all justifying faith and the channel of God's grace. These three 
things: the value of the ransom as the power of justification, the 
grace which provided it, and the faith which appropriates it are all 
beautifully joined by Paul in Rom. 3:24,25. "Justified freely by his 
grace through the redemption that is in Jesus Christ, whom God 
hath set forth to be a propitiation through faith in his blood." 

The secret is, that Jesus died for our sins. But, does some one 
suggest, that as sin is the cause of all death, therefore Isaiah, 
Jeremiah, Peter and others died because of sin as well as Jesus. We 
answer, yes; they all died because of sin; all except Jesus died 
because of their share in the sin, because they were descendants of 
the condemned Adam, whose life was forfeited by sin. Thus all but 
Jesus die because of the inherited taint. Jesus died because of sin, 
too, but not because of inherited taint or personal guilt. His life 
came direct from God and was unforfeited; but he died for our sins. 
"Jehovah laid upon him the iniquity of us all." "Him who knew no 
sin [either personal or inherited] he made a sin offering [treated as a 
sinner] on our behalf, that we might become God's righteousness in 
him." (2 Cor. 5:21, Diaglott). 

Thus we see why God justifies believers through Jesus and not 
through themselves, nor through apostles or prophets. Now, we see 
why there is no other name given under heaven or among men 
whereby we can be saved from the penalty of the fall. It is because 
he gave his sinless, perfect humanity a RANSOM-substitute for 
ours. 

Did God unjustly lay upon the willing substitute the iniquity of us 
all? Ah, no; for the joy set before him he endured the cross, 
despising the shame. Therefore his present exaltation and glory. 



Wondrous wisdom of the infinite Jehovah! Who can find a flaw in 
his glorious plan or charge him with injustice? 

Now we see what it is to believe in Jesus. Not merely believing that 
such a man lived and died, but that he lived and died free from all 
condemnation and sin— attested and approved of God— and that his 
death was for our sins. And thus we see how God can justly justify 
those who believe in and accept of that sacrificial offering of the 
humanity of Christ Jesus. Now we can see that the sins and the 
frailties of the Adamic family were cancelled by the ransom price 
which the second Adam gave. The first Adam's sins were imputed 
to the second, and the second Adam's human purity is imputed to 
the first and his children-when they believe, and thus they are 
justified to live again. 

It is blessed to realize, too, that the spotless one who bought us by 
the sacrifice of his humanity is now highly exalted to the spiritual 
condition and power, and thus as a new creature -partaker of the 
divine nature— he will continue to carry forward the Father's plan. 
Soon he will bring from the prison-house of death those whom he 
bought, that they all might be (thus) saved (from the penalty of 
Adam's sin) and come to a knowledge of the truth, viz.: that they, 
by faith in Christ, are justified freely from all things and may come 
to perfection and harmony with God as before sin. 

How Paul brings out this doctrine of justification in Rom. 5:18,19, 
showing the condemnation to death on all through Adam, and the 
justification out of death to life through Jesus Christ our Lord, to 
whom be glory throughout all ages. Amen. 

Justified freely by his grace, through the redemption that is in 
Christ Jesus, whom God hath sent forth to be a propitiation 
(satisfaction) through faith in his blood; to declare his righteousness 
(right doing) in the remission of sins that are past.. ..To declare, I 
say, at this time his (God's righteousness: that he might be just and 
the justifier of him which believeth in Jesus. (Rom. 3:24,25.) Those 
who will study the chart in "Food," page 105, will be helped in the 
understanding of this subject, and also the important subject of 
Sanctification, which should follow it, but cannot precede it. 



R660 : page 2 

"THE sentiment that it matters not what a man believes, so that he 
is sincere, is as unscriptural as it is absurd. Sincerity in belief has no 
more effect in warding off evil in the spiritual, than in the natural 
kingdom. If the teachings and persuasions of a reputed chemist 
should prevail on you to believe that arsenic is harmless, would it 
therefore be harmless? Could you mix it with your bread, and you 
and your children eat it without injury to health life? Oh, no! 
Neither will the sincerity of your belief save you from the 
consequence of error in religious faith. Right belief-truth, God's 



truth, my brethren, is the only foundation on which you can safely 
rest your hope. 



R661 : page 3 

A FREE SALVATION. 

ROMANS 3:24. 



Nothing to pay? No, not a whit; 
Nothing to do? No, not a bit; 
All that was needed to do or to pay, 
Jesus has done it his own blessed way. 

Nothing to do? No, not a stroke; 
Foiled is the captor, broken the yoke; 
Jesus at Calvary severed the chain, 
And none can imprison his free man again. 

Nothing to fear? No, not a jot; 

Nothing within? No, not a spot; 

Christ is at peace, and I've nothing at stake; 

Satan can neither harass me nor shake. 

Nothing to settle? All has been paid; 
Nothing to anger? Peace has been made; 
Jesus alone is the sinner's resource; 
Peace he has made by the blood of his cross. 

What about judgment? I'm thankful to say 
Jesus has met it and borne it away; 
Drank it all up when he hung on the tree, 
Leaving a cup of full blessing for me. 

What about terror? It hasn't a place 
In a heart that is filled with a sense of his grace. 
My peace is most sweet, and it never can cloy, 
And that makes my heart bubble over with joy. 

Nothing of guilt? No, not a stain; 

How could the blood let any remain? 

My conscience is purged, and my spirit is free; 

Precious that blood is, to God and to me. 

What of the law? Ah, there I rejoice; 
Christ answered its claims and silenced its voice. 
The law was fulfilled when the work was all done, 
And it never accuses a justified one. 

What about death? It hasn't a sting; 

The grave to a Christian no terror can bring; 

For death has been conquer'd, the grave has been spoiled, 

And every foeman and enemy foiled. 



What about feelings? Ah, trust not to them; 
What of my standing? Who shall condemn? 
Since God is for me, there is nothing so clear— 
From Satan and man I have nothing to fear. 

What of my body? Ah! that I may bring 
To God, as a holy, acceptable thing; 
For that is the temple where Jesus abides, 
The temple where God by his Spirit resides. 

What of my future? 'Tis glorious and fair, 

Since justified, sanctified, his glory I'll share; 

By his blood first redeem'd; by his grace then enthron'd. 

Side by side with my Lord, His Bride I'll be owned, 

What, then, dost thou ask? O, glory shall follow; 
Earth shall rejoice in the dawn of the morrow. 
To rule and to bless comes that kingdom and reign; 
Flee then, shall sorrow, death, crying and pain. 

-Selected. 



R661 : page 3 

THE LAW OF GOD. 

Christians are in the habit of looking at "the law" as a great 
enemy. Why? Because it does not countenance the least sin. It says, 
"walk before me and be thou perfect." Is this not right— could a 
perfect God recognize or make a law in any way imperfect? Surely 
not. The reason men count the law their enemy is that all have 
sinned, and ever since the disobedience of Adam they have been in 
the condition known as "sinful flesh." Prior to sin's entrance, the 
law was Adam's friend, and justified him; but the condition of death 
obtained after sin had entered, and man in this fallen condition of 
death finds it utterly impossible to so live and act in harmony with 
his Maker, that God's perfect law would not condemn him. And 
since all are sinners, of course none but a defective law could 
recognize such persons as perfect. The law of God has condemned 
all, and every one who has reasoning faculties seems to recognize 
that he is not perfect. 

God has always had a law; even before the giving of it at Mount 
Sinai. Since God always has been perfect, his laws always have 
been perfect, and condemned and opposed even the slightest sin. 
Abel, Noah, Abraham, and all the patriarchs recognized the fact 
that they were sinners when they made altars and sacrificed 
thereon, before attempting to hold communion. Thus they 
acknowledged themselves sinners and unable of themselves to 
approach God. How different from the way Adam and God walked 
and talked in the garden! No sacrifices or offerings for sin were 



there needed, for Adam was justified, or recognized as right by 
God's law. Thus we see that what the patriarchs knew of God's law 
condemned them. 

The giving of the law from Sinai did not take away man's sin. No, it 
only showed it the more fully. Did the keeping of it ever justify any 
of them? No; "By the deeds of the law shall no flesh be justified in 
his (God's) sight." Was the fault in the law, or in the people? Paul 
said, "The law is holy," and God's commands "holy and just and 
good." (Rom. 7:12.) The imperfection was with mankind. Since the 
law did not justify them, it must have condemned them, even as it 
had condemned the patriarchs. Not any more really (for there is 
only one penalty— death) but more loudly. They were no greater 
sinners than those of the Patriarchal Age who had not had the full 
law given them, but they were shown their condition as sinners 
more clearly. Why? That they might see their own fallen and 
imperfect condition, and learn the exceeding sinfulness of SIN, 
(Rom. 7:13,) and by this knowledge be prepared for the Redeemer. 

We have seen that God always has had a perfect law which 
condemned every sin in every being, and how it was shown in 
different degrees to the patriarchs and Israel, yet that the effect was 
the same-condemnation-only more fully realized by those who 
saw the law most clearly. Now, how about the great heathen world? 
Surely a righteous law could not say: The heathen are 
RIGHTEOUS; unless they live in harmony with God. And if you 
thought they were living in harmony with God you would not send 
missionaries to them. No, they too, are condemned by God's law. 
And as Paul says: These that have not the law (the full written law 
as given to Israel) "show the work of the law written in their 
hearts," a spark of that principle of justice and knowledge of right 
and wrong which must have been an important part of the natural 
organization of the first perfect man, Adam; a spark merely, not 
quite extinguished by the degrading effects of sin. 

What did this spark of conscience do for them? It sometimes 
justified, and sometimes condemned. But if their spark of 
conscience condemned them only ONCE during their lifetime, it 
showed that they were imperfect-sinners— hence subject to the sin 
penalty, death. 

Now, "all unrighteousness is sin," and "sin is the transgression of 
the law," and "the wages of sin is death." So we see that the only 
voice of the law of God to any who hear it is: You cannot live. "All 
have sinned and come short of the glory of God: " Therefore must 
"every mouth be stopped and all the world become GUILTY before 
God." (Rom. 3:9,19.) 

There lay the whole human family dead and dying through sin; the 
law hanging up before them, they admit, is grand, "just," and 
"holy." They were told that "The man that doeth these things shall 
live." (Rom. 10:5; Gal. 3:12.) But O, they could not do them. Some 
tried hard, as Paul describes. (Rom. 7:14-24.) When with their 



minds they resolved to "do those things and live," they found sin in 
their members hindering and preventing. When the striving ones 
found they could not deliver themselves from death, they 
exclaimed: "Wretched man that I am, who will deliver me from this 
body of death?" (Diaglott) or, from the sin and death which has 
gotten possession of me. When he so cries out, he has reached the 
place God wanted to bring him to, i.e., to realize that he can 
NEVER deliver himself from death and sin. But some one asks: If 
he dies does not the act of dying fill all the requirements of the law, 
and could he not, after thus dying, be raised up by God? No, you err 
in supposing that the act of dying is the penalty. Man has been 
dying ever since sin entered the world, but the penalty will not be 
entirely inflicted until all are dead. The penalty is, that sinners shall 
have life no longer; they forfeit their right to live. 

But when will the law of God release the sinner from the bondage 
of death? Never; if he could not obey the law while partially dead, 
he certainly cannot when completely so. Ever since the "fall" from 
perfect manhood through sin, man has been in a dying condition, 
sometimes spoken of as already dead (See Matt. 8:22). And none 
but a perfect man could keep a perfect law. But, says one, did not 
God send his Son into the world to show us how we could work our 
way up to spiritual life— appearing among us on the lowest round of 
the ladder, did he not point out to us the way? he being thus "our 
forerunner?" 

This view in many respects is held by a great many, mostly 
"Unitarians" and "Universalists," and like many other views has a 
mixture of truth in it; but as a whole it is far from being "the truth" 
on this subject. Jesus did indeed "lay aside the glory which he had 
with the Father, before the world;" he did appear to "set us an 
example that we should follow in his footsteps" and to be "our 
forerunner," but more, he is also our "Redeemer" from the curse of 
the Law. The curse of the law upon us as sinners is death. How did 
he redeem us from death? To redeem is to purchase back. He is 
therefore said to have "bought us with his own precious blood." 
Blood represents life— "The life of the flesh is in the blood" (Lev. 
17:11), therefore shed blood represents death or sacrificed life. "He 
gave his life;" "He shed his blood;" "He tasted death;" all have the 
same meaning. But how could his life purchase or redeem or buy 
ours? He as a man, a perfect man, kept the perfect law; and was 
therefore uncondemned by it. Therefore the same law which was 
the sinners' enemy condemning us to death, was his friend and 
guaranteed life to him. But was he not born into the world under 
condemnation of death, as much as any other son of Adam? No he 
was a direct creation of God— "made in the likeness of sinful flesh," 
but "in him was no sin." If he had done sin or been born a sinner, 
his life would have been forfeited as was ours. 

If born under condemnation as other human beings, he would have 
been as much a sinner as we, and as such would have been obliged 
to die for himself, and consequently would have nothing to give as 



a ransom for our life. But he was perfect, he kept the law, had a 
right to perfect human life forever; But "for the joy set before him," 
by the promise of the Father to raise him from the dead a spiritual 
body, he renounced the natural, human life, and gave it for our 
ransom. 

But when he arose from death, was not that a taking back of the 
price? Yes, if he had taken back the same life which he had laid 
down; but he did not take back the human; he was quickened by the 
Spirit— "made a quickening Spirit," raised a "spiritual body." There 
is a natural, human body and there is a spiritual body. 

Thus, "by his precious (valuable) blood" (life,) we were "redeemed 
from the curse of the law"-death. To what kind of life were we 
redeemed? The same which man had before death (the curse) came; 
the same kind that Jesus gave for us, i.e., human life. But we are 
promised spiritual life, and that we shall be made like unto Christ's 
glorious body? Yes; it is a part of God's offer to us (during the 
gospel age,) that we die earthly and fleshly— natural— life, we may 
be reckoned as "members of his body," and partake of the same 
kind of life as our Head. If we leave our Father's house (the human) 
we may become espoused to the Lord of glory as his Bride. In this 
arrangement we are reckoned as being justified to the perfect 
natural life first, else we could not give our lives. Being justified to 
life, Jesus says to us, you can either have this natural life, or, if you 
will renounce this natural, as I did, and become dead to the world, 
you shall have instead, the spiritual life and body. "If we be dead 
with Christ, we shall live with him." Rom. 6:4-8. "It is a faithful 
saying: For if we be dead with him, we shall also live with him; if 
we suffer we shall also reign with him." 2 Tim. 2:11. "Ye are 
partakers of Christ's sufferings." 1 Pet. 4:13. "Joint heirs with 
Christ, if so be that we suffer with him, that we may be also 
glorified together." Rom. 8:17. 

And it is because God thus waits until the elect number, the bride, 
the body, the Church, has "filled up the measure of the afflictions of 
Christ, which are behind," that the "restitution of all things," 
purchased for the world by the blood of Christ, is delayed and yet 
future. The Head suffered and died over eighteen hundred years 
ago; but all of the suffering and death of the body are not yet 
completed. Not noticing this, has caused wonder on the part of 
almost all, that the benefits and results of the ransom have not 
sooner come. (See Typical Sacrifices, in the Tabernacle Tract.) 

But would it be right for God to reckon the one righteous life given, 
as a full payment for the lives of the millions of sinners who have 
died? Does not the price— one, for a billion or more— seem like a 
short payment? 

This is a reasonable question, and we will allow Paul to give it a 
reasonable answer. He is a logical reasoner, as well as an inspired 
Apostle, and argues that, as God had seen proper to condemn all 
men to death on account of Adam's disobedience, so he had a right 



to reckon the second Adam a representative man, and justify to life 
all the race, in return for the sacrifice of this one perfect life. "For 
as by one man's disobedience many were made sinners, so by the 
obedience of one shall many be made righteous. "Therefore as by 
the offense of one, judgment came upon all men to condemnation," 
(condemned to suffer the penalty of sin, death,) "even so by the 
righteousness of one, the free gift came upon all men unto 
justification to life." Remember that none now enjoy life; our 
condition is a dying one. "Dying thou shalt die" was the penalty 
pronounced on Adam. Death reigns. 

The condition of perfect life as it was enjoyed before death came, is 
what all men are justified to, by the obedience of "Jesus Christ who, 
by the grace of God, tasted death for every man." 

"For as in Adam (or by Adam's sin) all die," so "in Christ (or by 
Christ's obedience, etc.) shall all be made alive." As the first 
Adam's bride was a party to the sin, so we see the second Adam's 
bride is made a party with her Lord in the removing of the curse. O 
glorious plan, of our all-wise and loving Father, and the exceeding 
riches of his grace toward us in Jesus Christ. 

But says one, I thought that Jesus had nullified, set aside and 
destroyed the law; and that therefore man could approach God. Oh 
no, that was a great mistake. Would it not be strange, indeed, if the 
Father made a law, which we have seen was "just" and "holy," and 
in fact the only one he could give because perfect and holy himself, 
would it seem proper even to think of Jesus as setting aside and 
destroying that "just" and "holy" law, or in any way making a 
league with sin or sinners? No, no. He came to do the Father's will, 
and the law is the record of that will. Jesus kept it himself, and 
taught the true meaning of it to be higher than the letter, and that to 
be "angry with a brother without cause," was to violate the 
command, "Thou shalt not kill." No, says Paul: "Christ magnified 
the law (made it larger and more minute), and made it honorable," 
showed, in fact, that that law could not be set aside or broken. He 
showed, too, by keeping it perfectly himself, that God's law was 
just, and not beyond a perfect man's ability. 

But we read, "Christ is the end of the law." What can that mean? 
The trouble is you have not quoted the connections. The text reads: 
"For Christ is the end of the law for righteousness to every one that 
believeth." (Rom. 10:4.) To whom is he this? To believers. How? 
Righteously, not by breaking it, but by righteously fulfilling its 
requirements, and we in him are just before the law. Because we in 
him are reckoned dead to the world and alive toward God through 
him— our new life, another similar text reads: "There is therefore 
now no condemnation to them which are IN Christ Jesus." Why are 
those in Christ not condemned? Because, since coming into him by 
faith they have received of his spirit, and with him can say, "I 
delight to do thy will, O my God; yea, thy law is within my heart." 
(Ps. 11:8.) They are then alive spiritually though yet living in the 
dead body of sinful flesh which they are opposed to, and which by 



the Holy Spirit given they are enabled to "crucify." These walk not 
after the flesh, but after the Spirit, and to all so walking in 

R661 : page 4 

Christ, there is no condemnation from the law. 

And in the glorious Millennial age, when all shall know God from 
least to greatest, when, "the knowledge of the Lord shall fill the 
whole earth;"— "the times of restitution"— there will be the same 
"holy and just" law, and under the "Royal Priesthood" after the 
order of Melchisedec (the order of an endless life), poor fallen 
humanity will be helped back again to that perfect condition from 
whence Adam fell; a condition in harmony with God's law, and 
therefore in harmony with God. 

But will they receive no punishment for misdeeds of the present 
life? They will receive punishment, "stripes" in proportion as they 
had light and lived contrary to it. As our Master explained, "It shall 
be more tolerable for Sodom," in the day of judgment (in the age of 
trial) than for the Jews to whom he spoke, because the Sodomites 
had sinned against less light. (Matt. 11:24.) There will be many or 
few "stripes," in proportion to the amount of light they have had 
and the use made of it. 

There will be rewards given to some during that age also; "for 
whosoever shall give to one of these little ones (of the 'little flock'), 
a cup of cold water only, in the name of a disciple, shall in no wise 
lose his reward." (Matt. 10:42). 



R663 : page 4 

THE ROYAL PRIESTHOOD. 

"But ye are a chosen generation, a royal priesthood, a holy nation, 
a peculiar people; that ye should show forth the praises of him who 
hath called you out of darkness into his marvelous light." 1 Pet. 2:9. 

"Unto him that loved us and washed us from our sins in his own 
blood, and hath made us kings and priests unto God and his Father; 
to him be glory and dominion for ever and ever." Rev. 1:5,6. 

"And hast made us unto our God kings and priests; and we shall 
reign on the earth." Rev. 5:10. 

"Blessed and holy is he that hath part in the first resurrection; on 
such the second death hath no power, but they shall be priests of 
God and of Christ, and shall reign with him a thousand years." Rev. 
20:6. 

The above scriptures clearly teach that a part, at least, of the 
Church's work in the future, will be to officiate as the priests of 
God. As the work of the priest is one of intercession and of 
instruction in righteousness, they clearly prove that the glorious 
work of evangelization will go on after the resurrection has taken 



place. The fact that these offices of "king" and "priest" will exist, 
logically implies that there will be subjects to rule and learners to 
teach; otherwise the names would be meaningless and the titles an 
empty sound. 

It is held by some that the reign of the saints will consist of a very 
brief "reign of terror," during which— with Jesus at their head— they 
will trample their enemies into the dust and utterly destroy them. 
We thank our dear Lord for a better hope. Our work will not be one 
of destruction, but of salvation. We shall rule as kings, even with a 
rod of iron; but the grand object will be to humble the nations, and 
so fit them for the reception of truth. "For, when thy judgments are 
in the earth, the inhabitants of the world will learn righteousness." 
Isa. 26:9. 

What a blessed prospect! what a glorious calling! A royal 
priesthood! 

Who that is imbued with the spirit of the Master; who that has but 
tasted that the Lord is gracious, could desire more agreeable 
employment than to show forth the praises of our Saviour King, to 
those sitting in darkness? to bind up the broken-hearted? to 
proclaim liberty to the captive? to give beauty for ashes and the oil 
of joy for mourning? 

"To tell the old, old story 
Of Jesus and his love?" 

To fit us for such an exalted and responsible position we require a 
peculiar training, and we feel warranted in claiming that the trials, 
temptations and discipline of this present life are for that very 
purpose. 

Many a struggling believer, trying hard to overcome, buffeted by 
the enemy, tried by friends, weighed down by hereditary 
weaknesses in self, discouraged and faint, has cried out, from the 
depths of a loving heart: "Why, O! why this suffering? why this 
severe chastisement?" Let us glance for a moment at the pathway 
trod by the Master— our forerunner— and we shall find the answer. 

"So, also, Christ glorified not himself to be made a high priest; but 
he that said unto him, Thou art my son.... Who in the days of his 
flesh, when he had offered up prayers and supplications with strong 
crying and tears unto him that was able to save him from death, and 
was heard in that he feared: Though he were a son, yet learned he 
obedience by the things which he suffered, and being made perfect, 
he became the author of eternal salvation unto all them that obey 
him." Heb. 5:5-9. 

"For it became him, for whom are all things, in bringing many sons 
unto glory, to make the captain of their salvation perfect through 
sufferings. Wherefore, in all things it behooveth him to be made 
like unto his brethren, that he might be a merciful and faithful high 
priest in things pertaining to God, to make reconciliation for the 
sins of the people. For in that he himself hath suffered being 



tempted, he is able to succor them that are tempted." Heb. 2:10,17- 
18. 



"For we have not a high priest who cannot be touched with the 
feeling of our infirmities; but was in all points tempted like as we 
are, yet without sin. Let us therefore come boldly unto the throne of 
grace, that we may obtain mercy and find grace to help in time of 
need." Heb. 4:15,16. 

The reason, then, that the Church is called on to "fill up that which 
is behind of the afflictions of Christ" is, that all the body, in like 
manner to the Head, may be trained to perfect sympathy and to 
perfect obedience through suffering. In this present time, we in all 
our troubles come to our compassionate High Priest with boldness, 
realizing that he, having been partaker of flesh and blood, can truly 
feel for us and pity us; so in the age to come, the Church, the 
promised seed of Abraham, through whom all the families of the 
earth shall be blessed (compare Gen. 12:3; Gal. 3:14,16,29,) shall 
go forth a royal priesthood, according to the order of Melchisedec, 
fully prepared to sympathize with the nations, to lead them to the 
paths of righteousness, and to encourage them in the way of life. 

Shall we shrink, then, from our cross? Shall we seek to put away 
the bitter cup that is sometimes pressed to our lips? Surely not. 'Tis 
a loving hand that presents it, 'tis a loving heart (infinitely loving) 
that sees the need of it. It is but the Master fitting us for his work; 
training us for the priesthood; teaching us to rule ourselves that we 
may know how to rule others; opening our eyes to the weakness of 
our own flesh, that we may have patience with those over whom we 
shall be given authority. (Luke 19:17,19.) 

Courage, then, my Christian brother or sister, seeking with weary 
steps to run the narrow way. Heed not the rugged course; it is all 
hallowed and sanctified by the blessed feet of the Master. Count 
every thorn a flower; every sharp-rock a mile-stone, hurrying you 
onward to the goal. Let every advancing step be a "Nearer, my God, 
to thee:" every hillock in the road an "upward toward heaven." 
Keep your eye fixed on the prize. Soon— very soon— you may wear 
the crown. 

"It is a faithful saying: For if we be dead with him, we shall also 
live with him; if we suffer, we shall also reign with him." 

W. I. MANN. 



R663 : page 4 

LOVE DEFINED. 

"By this shall all men know that ye are my disciples, if ye have 
love one to another." 

Love is that tender solicitude and affection with which anything 
commanding admiration and respect, is regarded. That which is not 



lovely never can be loved in the true sense of the word. A 
degenerated nature may desire and find a morbid satisfaction in that 
which is unlovely, but that is not love. Love wherever found is a 
gleam of the divine likeness, and is spontaneously awakened by the 
presence of that which is noble and pure and good. This wonderful 
principle binds in holiest and most delightful union and harmony all 
intelligent beings controlled by it. God is the most glorious 
exhibition of its nobility and grandeur. It is the law of his being and 
shall ultimately be the controlling law of all his universe. 

But one inquires, if only that which commands admiration and 
respect can be truly loved, how could God love sinners and tell us 
to do the same? We reply that God never loved sinners as such; he 
loved the jewel he had brought into perfect being because it was 
truly lovely; and when, under temptation it lost its excellence and 
glory, his love for its perfection pitied it in its fall, while his justice 
condemned it; and that love devised the wondrous scheme for its 
recovery. 

Let us here note the attitude of Jehovah toward those whom he so 
loved as to give his only begotten Son to redeem them. For six 
thousand years he has permitted their adversary to have dominion 
over them. Famine and pestilence have stalked abroad; hatred and 
strife, and war and bloodshed, have filled the earth with untold 
agony and woe, until the grave closed over generation after 
generation. Six thousand years, but no deliverance yet; God still 
stands off, and still the king of terrors reigns. When the long 
promised Deliverer comes, it is to rule with a rod of iron- to dash 
in pieces as a potter's vessel the kingdoms of earth, which from 
human standpoint seem necessary for protection against greater 
evils. In fear and dismay men look upon God as an enemy, and seek 
to hide from his presence; yet "God is love," and 

"He knows, not they, how sweet accord 
Shall grow at length from out this clash 
Of earthly discords, which have jarred 
On souls and sense: They hear the crash, 
But do not know that on His ear, 
Breaks harmony— full, deep and clear." 

Now the love of God is vailed, but soon it shall be revealed in the 
glorious restoration to Edenic perfection and bliss. 

R664 : page 4 

Soon "the redeemed of the Lord (all mankind) shall return and 
come with singing unto Zion, (the Church in kingdom power,) and 
everlasting joy shall be upon their heads: they shall obtain joy and 
gladness, and sorrow and sighing shall flee away." Thus viewing 
God's dealings, we see that his wisdom often veils his love. 

True love while it seeks to shield and protect, will justly judge and 
endeavor to eradicate a fault-expose it, let the light shine on it and 



show it up to those affected by it, that it may be removed, and grace 
and beauty take its place. 

A very false notion of love obtains among the majority of Christian 
people, and under this false notion our adversary endeavors to 
shield some of the most dangerous and deadly errors that seek to 
sap the very foundation of the Christian's hope. Let this deadly 
thing which the adversary dares to present to God's children be 
touched by the sword of the Spirit which is the Word of God, and 
he who wields it is said to be uncharitable, loveless. But does this 
make it so? By no means. Jesus was full of the love of God, but he 
spoke most emphatically against evil doers:-"Ye blind guides 
which strain at a gnat and swallow a camel;" "Woe unto you, for 
you shut up the kingdom of heaven against men; ye neither go in 
yourselves, neither suffer ye them that are entering to go in." (Matt. 
23:13-33.) And again he said to erring Peter, "Get thee behind me 
Satan, (adversary) thou art an offence unto me, for thou savorest 
not the things that be of God, but those that be of men. " (Matt. 
16:23.) But how differently the Lord's rebukes affected his loving 
disciples and the proud Pharisees. 

Paul was a noble pattern of his Master's spirit in his zeal for the 
truth, and his care for fellow members of the church. His usual 
manner toward all, like that of Jesus, was kind, generous, and 
affectionate, but did Paul cover the truth, shield error, or fail to 
warn an erring brother or the flock of God against the 
encroachments of the enemy? If he had so done, as an unfaithful 
steward he would have lost his stewardship. Though Peter was a 
noble soldier of the cross and fellow servant in the Lord, Paul 
withstood him to the face when, by giving way to the old nature for 
a time, he was to be blamed. (Gal. 2:11.) Note in connection with 
this, the sympathy and love existing between these brethren; (2 Pet. 
3:15,) evidently the rebuke was accepted in the spirit of meekness. 
And again we find Paul faithfully warning the church against 
"some" who had become the enemies of the cross of Christ. Phil. 
3:18. 

Does some one object that we must "judge not that we be not 
judged?" We reply that to exercise human judgment in condemning 
others would be wrong; but to apply the judgment of God as 
expressed in his Word is right. We are commanded to do so. And 
the various descriptions of evil deeds, false teachings, and seducing 
doctrines, are given that we may judge- "That the man of God may 
be thoroughly furnished," for reproof, for correction of error and 
instruction in righteousness. (2 Tim. 3:16-17.) It is therefore the 
duty of every child of God to judge what is right and what is wrong, 
what is true and what is false. That against which we are cautioned 
is judging by other standards than the Word of God —condemning 
on our own, or any other human authority. That Paul judged 
according to God's Word and taught the church to do the same is 
very clear. (See 1 Cor. 5:3; Gal. 2:11; 1 Thes. 5:21; 2 Tim. 4:2; 1 



Cor. 6:2,3- Note also Paul's prayer that love might abound in 
judgment, Phil. 1:9,10. 



No doubt Paul's faithfulness in seeking to build up and establish the 
church in purity of doctrine and life, was often misunderstood, and 
failed to be appreciated by them. This is very apparent from 1 Cor. 
chap 4. "But (he says) it is a very small thing that I should be 
judged of you, or of man's judgment. He that judgeth me is the 
Lord." Then speaking of his labor and suffering for them, he says: 
"I write not these things to shame you, but as my beloved sons I 
warn you." (Read the chapter throughout). 

Jesus said: "By this shall all men know that you are my disciples, if 
ye have love one toward another," and Paul says: "Let love be 
without dissimulation; abhor that which is evil, cleave to that which 
is good." When contending with an unseen, but wily and powerful 
foe, what mere hypocrisy is that profession of love which fails to 
warn of immediate or approaching danger. 

The new creature in Christ is a jewel of infinite value, "and every 
one that loveth him that begat, loveth him also that is begotten of 
him." (1 John 5:1.) Dearly beloved, "Be kindly affectioned one to 
another, with brotherly love; in honor preferring one another;" 
"Reprove, rebuke, exhort (each other) with all long suffering and 
doctrine." Give and receive in the spirit of meekness, remembering 
that "Love vaunteth not itself, is not puffed up, doth not behave 
itself unseemly (unbecomingly) seeketh not her own, is not easily 
provoked, thinketh no evil." 

By this mutual love, and this care one for another, will all men be 
able to discover who are Jesus' disciples— "Let love be without 
dissimulation; abhor that which is evil, cleave to that which is 
good." So shall you "be blameless and harmless, the sons of God 
without rebuke in the midst of a crooked and perverse nation, 
among whom ye shine as lights in the world." 

MRS. C. T. RUSSELL. 



page 4 

A BIBLE READING. 

THE ATONEMENT. 

When we know that a doctrine rests on the Word of God, we can 
rest on it without fear. Many of God's children, though walking in 
the light, are inclined to lean too much on the arm of flesh; and if 
we mistake not God is going to shake them loose. Blessed will they 
be who are standing on the rock of his truth. 

All do not have equal facilities for searching the Word, so we wish 
to help 

page 5 



them. We would say, however, that there is but little excuse for the 
most of us, seeing that good reference Bibles are so cheap. A 
teacher's Bible and a full concordance, a prayerful heart and an 
honest mind, with time and patience, are all we need— God will give 
the rest. 

Study carefully and prayerfully the following texts; use them as 
starting points with your reference Bibles; you will find plenty 
more. Keep a list of all you find; compare any theory of the 
atonement, no matter where it comes from, with every text on your 
list; if it agrees, believe it; if not, reject it. Let God's Word be the 
end of all controversy between you and every doctrine brought 
before you. Don't be afraid to investigate. "Light is sown for the 
righteous." "Prove all things, hold fast that which is good." 

Here are some of the things that Jesus did for us in the 

ATONING WORK: 

He died for us. 1 Thes. 5:10; Rom. 5:8. 

He died for all. 2 Cor. 5:14,15; John 11:50-52. 

He died for our sins. 1 Cor. 15:3; 1 Pet. 2:24. 

He justified us. Gal. 2:17; Rom. 4:25. 

The law could not. Gal. 5:4; Rom. 3:20. 

Our works could not. Gal. 2:16; Rom. 3:27,28. 

Faith in his work justifies. Gal. 3:13,14; Rom. 4:24. 

He bought us. 1 Cor. 6:20; 7:23. 

He redeemed us. Gal. 3:13; 1 Pet. 1:12-20. 

He ransomed us. Matt. 20:28; 1 Tim. 2:6. 

He washed us. Rev. 1:5; 1 John 1:7. 

He sanctified us. Heb. 13:12; Eph. 5:26. 

He saves us. 1 Cor. 1:21; 1 Tim. 1:15. 

He was an offering for us. Heb. 9:28; 10:10. 

He was sacrificed for us. Eph. 5:2; 1 Cor. 5:7. 

He knew no sin. 1 John 3:5; Heb. 4:15. 

He was made sin (a sin-offering) for us. 2 Cor. 5:21; 1 Peter 2:22- 
24. 

The Just died for the unjust. 1 Pet. 3:18; consider also the meaning 
of the sacrifices of 4,000 years. 

His blood bought us; 1 Pet. 1:2. Purchased us; Acts 20:28. 
Redeemed us; Rev. 5:9. Justified us; Rom. 5:9. Washed us. Rev. 
1:5. Sanctified us; Heb. 13:12. Saves us; Acts 4:12. 

"A little Scripture is better than a good deal of reasoning." 



W. I. MANN. 



R664 : page 5 

MAN'S INHERITANCE. 

When God created man, he endowed him with qualities of being 
like his own. Qualities of justice and judgment fitted him to be a 
ruler; qualities of mercy and love prepared him to be a reasonable, 
kind and wise ruler. Such is a brief description of earth's first king- 
Adam. An image of his Creator, (not physically, but mentally and 
morally,) he was invested with authority over earth and its affairs, 
like as God is ruler over all, as we read: After our likeness let them 
have dominion over the beast of the field, the fowl of heaven and 
the fish of the sea. (Gen. 1:26.) Thus was he installed lord of earth. 
He was but another form of creation, a step lower than angels, as 
lower and under him, came the brute creation. Accordingly we 
read: "Thou hast made him a little lower than the angels, and hast 
crowned him with glory and honor. Thou madest him to have 
dominion over the works of thy hands. Thou hast put all things 
under his feet," (Ps. 8:5-6.) 

All of this glory, honor and rulership was invested in him, to be 
used in harmony with his nature, which being perfect, was in 
perfect harmony with the will of God. This was his inheritance, but 
he lost it. 

As God had foreseen, man disobeyed his superior ruler, the King of 
kings and Lord of lords. This could not be allowed to go 
unpunished. He had been informed from the first that disobedience 
to God would be sin, and that its legitimate punishment and effect 
is death. While man always was mortal, i.e., liable to death, if 
disobedient to God's laws, yet the loving Creator had made every 
provision necessary to his welfare, in the garden prepared for his 
trial. And not only had he arranged that the soul (person) that 
sinned should die, but also that if obedient the person should 
continue to live. The means for life's continuance was in "every tree 
of the garden," i.e., the food provided for man's sustenance was 
amply sufficient to meet all the wastes of his system, and would 
have preserved the freshness and vigor of his perfect being forever. 
This would be everlasting life. 

When man became a sinner the penalty "death" must be executed. It 
mattered not so far as the penalty was concerned, whether Adam 
should die the same moment that he disobeyed, or the same year, or 
a thousand years after. He must die. The word "day" used in 
connection with the penalty, is the general term used now as well as 
in past times, for a period or epoch of time, as: "The day of 
temptation in the wilderness —forty years;" the days of creation, etc. 
The marginal reading clears up the meaning: "In the day that thou 
eatest thereof, dying, thou shalt die," (Gen. 2:17.) This was fulfilled 



not by God's striking Adam dead with a thunderbolt but simply by 
cutting off his access to the life-giving food supplied by the trees of 
the prepared garden. Accordingly an angel drove Adam from the 
garden and prevented with flaming sword, his access thereafter to 
the tree (trees or woods) of life, (Gen. 3:24.) 

Thus was the lord of creation driven out into the world which God, 
foreknowing his fall, had left in an unprepared or "cursed" 
condition. The garden which we are told was "prepared" was 
doubtless an illustration of what the whole earth will be when man 
and his perfect conditions are restored-in "The times of restitution 
of all things which God hath spoken by the mouth of all his holy 
prophets." 

Thus thrown upon his own resources for obtaining by sweat of face 
elements to sustain life, Adam found it a hard lot, and by its effects 
was enabled to know what evil is, and the exceeding bitterness of 
sin. And oft, no doubt, he desired, perhaps prayed, that he might be 
permitted again to dwell in Eden, and promised that with his 
present knowledge of sin and evil he would more highly prize the 
good things there enjoyed and more fervently love and obey him 
"from whom cometh every good and perfect gift." But though 
God's plan was no less loving than this, it was broader, wiser and 
more comprehensive. God's plan was to let not only Adam, but also 
the entire race, learn just this same lesson of the bitterness of sin 
and disobedience which each must individually learn to fully 
appreciate. Then bringing all back to the Eden condition, sin might 
be forever banished, and the entire race live in harmony with God. 

Toil and care told in time upon even the perfect physical form of a 
perfect man, resulting finally in his complete overthrow and 
wresting from his grasp the last shred or spark of life. He is dead. 
After nine hundred and thirty years of struggle with his foe-death- 
he is conquered. The penalty of sin was inflicted and continues to 
this moment, since he still is one of the prisoners in the great 
charnel house of death, which has since swallowed up the race, and 
will hold them all until the second Adam, who ransomed the race, 
and who declares, "I have the keys of hell and death" [hades— the 
grave] (Rev. 1:18) shall take his great power and reign, releasing 
"the prisoners of the pit" [grave], "the captives" of sin and death. 

But not only did the casting out from the life -preserving fruits of 
the garden tend to the impairing of Adam's physical powers, but of 
his mental qualities also. It was not possible that he should retain 
perfect mental vigor, when he became physically impaired, thought 
being the product of the mental organism made active by the 
physical vitality. 

We see then that Adam's mental powers decreased with his physical 
deterioration, and the moral qualities of his mind suffered the most. 
While the energy of body and mind were taxed to their utmost to 
take care of self, it is but reasonable to suppose that the quality of 
benevolence (love) which, as he was in God's image, must have 



been one of the ruling characteristics of his being was crowded out, 
and the qualities of acquisitiveness (selfishness) and combativeness 
were developed instead. This same idea followed out would show 
us that all the higher, grander, nobler qualities were suffered 
measurably to decline, while all of the lower ones (common to the 
lower animals) were the more developed. 

As man lost the grandeur of his being, and its powers decreased, his 
rulership over the lower creation, as well as over self gave way, 
until to-day we find him afraid of all wild beasts, and that they no 
longer recognize the rulership of their fallen lord. And the influence 
once exercised by our father Adam is barely discernible in the 
occasional man who can master and tame (partially) the ferocious 
beasts. Here we have a brief glance at the first dynasty of earth and 
its overthrow. Now we see the result: "By sin came death." In the 
expressive language of Paul, 

"DEATH REIGNED" 

King of Terrors under "him that has the power of death, that is, the 
devil"— "the prince of this world." All bow before him; all are 
under his control. From the cradle to the tomb, every ache and pain 
attests his power over us, and the same agency which first placed us 
under his rule (sin) conspires yet, to more quickly destroy the race. 
His rule or reign must continue so long as there is sin to be 
punished, or until the entire race is reduced to the condition of 
lifelessness. But Jehovah foresaw all this, and in his plan has 

A DELIVERER PROVIDED. 

Such a ransom and deliverance was a part of God's plan from the 
first; and we read, "for this purpose the Son of God was manifested, 
that he might destroy the works of the devil"— sin and death, (1 John 
3:8.) And not only so, but also "him that hath the power of death, 
that is, the devil," (Heb. 2: 14,) and thus release from his grasp all of 
the race. 

But as Satan, in exercising the power of death, is the executor of 
justice, and thus unwittingly serving God's purpose for a time, his 
destruction is delayed for a season. The one who would deliver the 
race from death must first satisfy the claims of the law of God. This 
the fallen ones could not do for themselves, as God had from the 
first foreknown and arranged for in his plan. Carrying out this plan 
he had already condemned the entire race on account of one man's 
disobedience. His purpose from the first being that he would 
provide another, man, who, being without sin, should give himself 
"a ransom for all" the race— that "as by one man's disobedience 
[the] many [all] were made sinners, so by the obedience of one 
shall [the] many [all] be made righteous" (justified from sin and 
death,) (Rom. 5:19.) 



But who is the one righteous, pure, holy, sinless, one? How could 
there be such an one among a race all of whom were condemned? 



"There is none righteous, no not one," the scriptures answer. But 
when mankind had learned effectually his own weakness and 
inability to deliver himself from death, his extremity became God's 
opportunity, and "God's eye pitied and his arm brought salvation." 
The very chief of God's creation higher than angels (Heb. 1:5-8,) he 
who is called "the beginning of the creation of God" (Rev. 3:14) is 
selected as the one who shall undergo the labors of redeeming 
humanity. We are not to suppose this was an irksome or unwilling 
work, for we cannot suppose a being in perfect harmony with 
Jehovah who would not take delight in doing his will. Nor would 
obedience be the only motive which would actuate, partaking as all 
perfect beings on whatever plane they exist must, of the divine 
quality— love —he would love to do the work for the sake of its 
benefits to mankind, in releasing them from death. This no doubt 
was a part of "the joy set before him, for which he, "endured the 
cross despising the shame." (Heb. 12:2.) 

But in addition to this joy at the opportunity to release the human 
race from death, was that of "bringing many sons to glory,"— some 
to the lost earthly glory and some to heavenly glory. To a little 
flock gave he power to become sons of God of a higher than human 
nature— even to be "partakers of the Divine nature," and joint heirs 
with him of his own inheritance. These, according to God's plan are 
reckoned as the bride of Christ and as such enter the heavenly 
family. To these sons this mighty one is now the leader or "captain 
of their salvation." He leads them now through suffering, toil and 
sacrifice even unto death, which is working out for them an 
exceeding and eternal weight of glory. Another part of this 

"JOY SET BEFORE HIM, " 

was that he himself should, because of his obedience, labor, 
sacrifice, etc., be accounted worthy of still higher honor and more 
intimate relationship and communion with Jehovah than he had 
ever yet possessed, even to partake of his divine nature. So we read: 
"He became obedient unto death, even the death of the cross. 
Wherefore, God also hath highly exalted him and given him a name 
which is above every name," (Phil. 2:8,9,) "that all men should 
honor the Son even as they honor the Father." (John 5:23). 

But how shall this redemptive work be accomplished? We have 
seen that God's plan was, that since by man came death, by man 
should also come the resurrection of the dead. (1 Cor. 15:21.) Then 
to redeem man, this mighty one must become a man, in every 
particular. He must partake of "flesh and blood," (Heb. 2:14,) and 
consequently must have the exact nature of the fleshly race, but not 
the sinful and depraved dispositions with which we are now 
burdened, but he must be a perfect man, standing exactly where 
Adam stood, except to know more perfectly the exceeding 
sinfulness of sin and its dire effects which he saw everywhere about 
him, and also for what purpose he had come. He took not the nature 



and form of angels, for that would not have served God's purpose, 
but he took the nature and form of a man. 

All things were now ready. "In the fullness of time, God sent forth 
his Son, born of a virgin," "born not of the will of the flesh but of 
the will of God"— in a word, as much of a specially creative act on 
God's part as was the creation of Adam; the difference being that 
the one could say, "The earth is my mother," the other was "born of 
a woman." Had he been a descendant of Adam he would have been 
under the curse of death, as all other members of that race. He 
would have been unable to keep the law as other men in whom 
sinful dispositions and depraved tastes are born. But while of the 
same (human) nature he is a new being, distinct from the race. He is 
born, grows in wisdom and in stature but manifests powers beyond 
others because he is perfect, they imperfect. Now he has reached 
maturity (according to the law) at thirty years of age. He knows as 
no one else does, the great work for which during those thirty years 
he has been coming-his body preparing— it was "for the suffering 
of death"-that he "should taste death for every man" -"that 
through death he might destroy death," and liberate the dead race— 
"in due time." Now he is come, the second perfect sinless man, and 
offers his perfect life as a ransom for the race-"Lo, I come, (as) in 
the volume of the Book it is written of me, to do thy will, O, God." 
(Heb. 10:7.) This was his covenant, to die, as he afterward 
expressed it, saying: "For this cause came I into the world." And 
here in type he was buried in the water and rose again, thus making 
the picture of that which he covenanted to do. 

There then, as the perfect one he had done all that he could do, 
given himself up to die in whatever way the Father might direct. 
But though the death had not actually occurred (at baptism) it was 
so reckoned, (as with us when we covenant,) and the new nature's 
powers and will, which belong to the spiritual body, which he was 
to be when the work of death was complete; ("raised a spiritual 
body,") these powers and qualities were given to him in a measure 
as soon as the human— earthly— body was consecrated. This was at 
his baptism when the spirit descended and a voice from heaven 
acknowledged his begetting again to the spiritual plane, and to the 
divine nature— "This is my beloved Son in whom I am well 
pleased." (Matt. 3:17.) Henceforth the life of Jesus is that of a dual 
being, the outward form being 

R664 : page 6 

the man Christ Jesus, whose life and being were daily spent for the 
good of others— a body already given up to death, and a new being 
within— the Divine nature— the spirit power of God. And in this he is 
the pattern and leader of "all who come unto God by him," "who 
become partakers of the Divine nature"-the "little flock" called his 
bride— his body. We must surrender ourselves to God— be baptised 
in his death— in order to be begotten of the spirit and receive the 
earnest of our new spiritual being, the fullness of which will be 



received when we are completely delivered from this fleshly 
condition to our spiritual bodies. 

Thenceforth he "did not his own (human) will" but was "led of the 
Spirit," and the actions now were of God, as Jesus testified: "The 
word which ye hear is not mine, but the Father's which sent me." 
(John 14:24 and 17:8.) "The Father that dwelleth in me, He doeth 
the works." (John 14:10.) If we as our head "are led by the Spirit of 
God"— even unto death— we also become "the sons of God," (Rom. 
8: 14,) who will also work in us to will and to do of his own good 
pleasure." (Phil. 2:13). 

And we who are now "new creatures (in Christ Jesus") should take 
courage from the life of our beloved Master; as Paul says: 

"CONSIDER HIM 

who endured such contradiction of sinners against himself, lest ye 
be weary and faint in your minds." If you sometimes find it hard to 
endure the frowns of the world and to be thought of and treated as a 
deceiver by your friends, think of him weeping in Gethsemane, 
condemned before Pilate, crucified as a malefactor, forsaken and 
denied by his loved ones, "yet he opened not his mouth." And if 
human nature sometimes shrinks, although reckoned dead, think of 
him. Remember that he was tempted in all points like as we are, 
(yet without sin,) and can and does sympathize with us, and though 
you may sometimes cry out, as he did: "Father, if it be possible, let 
this cup (the ignominy) pass from me," forget not to add, as he did, 
"yet not my will but thine be done. " The human will of Jesus 
though given up at consecration— baptism— felt the crucifixion so 
that he needed the heavenly "grace to help in time of need" to keep 
the human will perfectly obedient to the new being— the divine. 

This dying process continued during the three and one-half years of 
his ministry, from the moment of his consecration and acceptance 
at baptism, until on the cross he cried: "It is finished." But what was 
finished there— the work of atonement? No, the work of atonement 
signifies the making at one of two parties. In this case God was one 
and humanity the other party. Man's sin had brought upon him 
God's curse, death, instead of his blessing; and by its degrading 
influence (as we have seen) it had so marred the mental and moral 
likeness of man to his maker, that he no longer took "delight in the 
law of God," but in sin, and it will be readily seen that there was 
much work necessary to bring about full reconciliation between 
God and man. First— Justice must be met, a ransom must be given 
for the sinner, else God could never, to all eternity, recognize him 
as having a right to live. Secondly— Man must be brought to his 
original condition of perfection— in God's image— before he can be 
of himself perfectly in harmony with God's perfect will and law. 
Now, while this work, as a whole, was Jehovah's plan from "before 
the creation of the world," its accomplishment only began with 
Jesus, and will not be completed until the end of the millennial 



reign, when Jesus shall deliver up all things to the Father, having 
put down (destroyed) all opposition to God's law. 1 Cor. 15:24-28. 

When Jesus cried, "it is finished," he referred only to the first 
mentioned part of this work of atonement viz.: The giving of the 
ransom; this was now complete; the penalty of Adam's sin was now 
met, for "Christ died for our sins according to the Scripture"— "He 
gave himself a ransom for all to be testified in due time." He "is a 
propitiation (satisfaction) for our sins, and not for ours only, but 
also for the sins of the whole world." (1 John 2:2.) 

Having thus "purchased us from death with his own precious 
blood," all the race belongs to him. A race of sinners they were, 
having no right to life; a race of ransomed beings they are against 
whom justice has no claim, who may be restored to perfect life at 
the pleasure or will of Jesus their Redeemer who proclaimed, that in 
due time "all that are in their graves shall hear the voice of the Son 
of man and come forth." And again: "I am he that liveth and was 
dead, and behold I am alive for evermore, and have the keys of hell 
[hades-the grave] and of death." (Rev. 1:18.) Yes, says Paul: "For 
this purpose Christ was manifested, [in the flesh] that he might 
destroy death, and him that has the power of death, that is the 
devil." 

But while we are thus informed of the plan of God to destroy 
"death," yet nearly two thousand years have passed since the 
ransom was paid and still death reigns. Why does not the purchaser 
take his "purchased possession"? Ah, he has a grand plan with 
regard to some of the race he has purchased. He will by trial of faith 
and patience, develop and separate from the world "a little flock" 
whom he will associate with himself as his bride. They will be a 
peculiar people, zealous of good works, and full of faith, who walk 
in his footsteps of self-sacrifice and entire giving up of their human 
nature-will and body-receiving instead the Divine nature -will 
and body. 

When the Church, the body of Christ is made perfect through 
suffering and trials, and united with him [which event we believe to 
be so close at hand], then the great work and reign of earth's new 
monarch— the second Adam— begins. Though possessing the power 
over evil ever since he rose from the grave its victor, yet he has not 
exercised that power up to the present time, because evil is 
necessary to the development of his body. But when we are 
complete, he shall take to himself his great power and reign. (Rev. 
11:17.) This statement is applied as having its fulfillment at the end 
of the Gospel age during the sounding of the seventh (symbolic) 
trumpet. 

Now let us inquire, how long will Christ reign— or exercise 
authority and rule? The Scriptures answer, "He shall reign forever 
and ever," (Rev. 11:15.) that is, being associated with the Father, 
Christ (and we in him) shall always belong to the reigning and 
ruling power-Jesus at the Father's right hand (next in authority) 



and we at his right hand, consequently "above all principalities and 
powers." But in the especial sense of ruling over and subduing 
earth, the reign is limited to the period of time necessary to the 
restoring of all earth's people and affairs to a condition of at-one- 
ment or harmony with God, the Father. As Paul expresses it: 

"HE MUST REIGN TILL HE HATH PUT ALL ENEMIES UNDER HIS FEET 

The last enemy that shall be destroyed is death." For "He (the 
Father) hath put all things under his (Christ's) feet," but it is evident 
that the Father did not put himself under the control of Christ. "And 
when all things shall be subdued unto him, then shall the Son also, 
himself, be subject unto him (the Father) that put all things under 
him, that God may be all in all," (or above all.) 

Man having been restored to his original dominion, every inferior 
creature will recognize him as its Lord, and every human being will 
recognize "Christ as Lord to the Glory of God the Father." (Phil. 
2: 1 1.) And thus will be completed the great work planned before 
our creation, commenced at the baptism of Jesus and ending with 
the close of the Millennial reign. (Rev. 20:6,) viz.: At-one-ment. 

Then, "the knowledge of the Lord shall fill the whole earth," and 
his "will be done on earth as in heaven." 

That this is God's plan, is implied in the term "Restitution," and is 
the legitimate conclusion to be drawn from Paul's argument. (Heb. 
2:6-9.) He starts out with the original plan of God in creating man 
perfect— "Thou madest him a little lower than the angels; thou 
crownedst him with glory and honor and didst set him over the 
works of thy hands. Thou hast put all (earthly) things in subjection 
under his feet." But as we have seen, sin has marred all this glory 
and honor, and has degraded us far below angels; taking the 
dominion out of our hand and permitting death to reign. And if we 
look about us we will say with Paul, that it seems as though God's 
plan was a failure, for though six thousand years have passed, "We 
see not yet all things put under him" [man]. But is there any hopeful 
sign to indicate that man may yet be restored to his honor and glory, 
and set over the earthly works of God's hand? Yes, we have the 
assurance that ALL God's purposes shall be accomplished, (Isa. 
14:24,) and that a "seed of the woman" should yet destroy the 
serpent —evil— and "bless all the families of the earth." And though 
this work is not yet accomplished, yet we see a beginning of it. As 
Paul says, "we see Jesus, who was made a little lower than the 
angels," [the condition of a perfect man], for the suffering of 
death... that he, by the grace of God, should taste death for every 
man." Thus far had the plan progressed in Paul's day and if he were 
living now, he would doubtless add, as we can, that the Church, as 
his body, is about complete; that the Gospel age of suffering with 
him and "filling up the measure of the afflictions of Christ which 
are behind" is ending and the Millennial age in which we shall "live 
and reign with Christ a thousand years" is dawning. 



As those who expect to be of the bride— the body— of Christ and to 
be glorified together with him, we rejoice to think that the time is so 
near at hand when we shall be changed, leaving forever the human 
nature, and being made like unto Christ's glorious body. But one 
thing which adds much to our interest and rejoicing, is the thought 
of the necessity of our development and change, as the body of the 
great deliverer before death can be destroyed and the race liberated, 
brought to the liberty of the sons of God, as Adam and angels —free 
from the bondage of corruption —death. For we know that "they 
without us shall not be made perfect." We must be perfected, on the 
spiritual plane as divine beings, before they can be perfected on the 
earthly plane as human beings. 

Seeing then what high honors and glory await the overcoming sons 
of God, and the blessings awaiting the world through us, can any 
one wonder that we long for the happy moment of change? Surely 
not, and not only we, but the world also, are waiting and hoping 
[though ignorantly] for a good time coming, for the whole creation 
groaneth and travaileth in pain together until now waiting for the 
manifestation of [the Church] the sons of God, (Rom. 8:22,19,) — 
the sun of righteousness which "arises with healing in his wings" to 
heal, and perfect, and restore all things to the perfect will of God. 
Thus earth will have had when man is restored, the following great 
over-ruling powers: First, Man under God; Second, Death reigned 
and him that has the power of death, that is the devil (Rom. 5:17; 
Heb. 2:14); Third, Righteousness under Christ; Fourth, The first 
restored, i.e., man under God. 

God classes all present governments of earth as Satan's. "The 
prince— ruler— of this world" would not permit any government 
which would not in a great measure, act in harmony with him, so 
long as he has the control, which will be until the end of this age, 
when the Redeemer takes his great power and reigns. Satan has 
ruled among the nations for ages, except the one nation, Israel, of 
which God says: "You only have I known of all the [nations] 
families of the earth. " (We have seen that they were used thus as a 
type of the higher spiritual Israel, the Church, which was to be in 
the world, but not of it). The time came, however, that God gave 
over even this nation as the others, when they went into captivity to 
Babylon, and God's prophet said of the last reigning prince, "Take 
off the diadem, remove the crown; this shall not [continue to] be the 
same, I will overturn, overturn, overturn it [the kingdom] until he 
come whose right it is, and I will give it him" [The Christ]. Ezek. 
21:27. 

At the same time, God indicated that the government of earth was 
given over to the dominion of evil, and pictures it to 
Nebuchadnezzar as 

A GREAT IMAGE 

illustrative of human power, divided into four parts, 
Nebuchadnezzar's government representing the head; the 



succeeding, Medo-Persian government represented by the breast 
and arms; and the belly and thighs representing the third or Grecian 
government; while the fourth and last part, the legs and feet 
represent the last phase of earthly government, the Roman Empire, 
which, in a divided form, still continues, and is to be followed by 
Messiah's Kingdom— the kingdom of heaven, which "shall break in 
pieces and consume all these kingdoms [not people], and it shall 
stand forever." (Dan. 2:44.) 

Thus, as a glorious image, did these earthly kingdoms appear to the 
natural man; and as glorious they still are regarded by the world. 
Extolled in prose and verse, through all generations, are their deeds 
of blood and violence, which shock the feelings of all possessed of 
the spirit of love. Their history is one successive record of crime 
and death, each of their heroes claiming higher honor than his 
predecessor because he had butchered greater numbers of his 
fellow-beings, and made more widows and orphans and more 
misery. No wonder that when God pictured the same four earthly 
governments to the holy prophet Daniel, he gave it as a beastly 
picture. (Dan. 7.) They are indeed beastly governments. How 
perfectly they represent, in their evil and death-dealing power, their 
master, the devil. The picture, or likeness of the fourth (Roman 
power) to Satan is so strong that Jesus, when presenting it in 
symbol in Revelation, almost invariably calls it "the dragon," "that 
old serpent, which is the devil and Satan," etc., thus using the name 
of its prince as a name for the kingdom. 

While God thus permits evil to triumph now, seemingly without 
restraint, and uses it as an agency for punishing sin, yet it is under 
an over-ruling guidance by which God "causes the wrath of man to 
praise him, and the remainder he will restrain." 

The inventions and arts of the last three centuries (machinery, 
printing, application of steam, electricity, etc.,) have come about 
gradually, but we believe are none the less of God— His agencies 
now in preparation for the blessing of humanity during the coming 
reign of righteousness. These scientific attainments, which will so 
fully bless in the future, are even now exercising a powerful effect 
upon humanity, enlightening the understanding, and, by increasing 
the dependency of one upon another, they naturally tend to promote 
sympathy, affection, and fraternity between the various members of 
the human family. 

But all of these blessings, while they serve to lift mankind in a 
measure out of evil, are only temporary helps. Satan is still equal to 
the occasion, and though he could not now induce millions of men 
to follow for years a leader for his glory's sake, he can foment angry 
strife between nations upon pretexts of honor, etc., and, though men 
do not now fight as incessantly as of old, yet the "arts of war" more 
than keep pace with those of peace, so that to-day the standing 
armies of earth are far larger and far better prepared for mutual 
destruction than ever before. 



The progress of science and art fails to bring now the blessings 
which will result in the future, because avarice (selfishness) has 
crowded out love and benevolence. Capital and power combine to 
oppress the poor, and they in turn despise and envy the rich. 

Nor can we wonder if the masses of mankind notice this condition 
of affairs; and that as knowledge increases among them, they 
should seek to band themselves together for self -protection, 
especially if they see, as in Europe, kings, emperors, nobles, and 
landlords rolling in wealth and luxury, while some of them 

R664 : page 7 

barely eke out an existence on the commonest necessaries of life, 
without luxury or comfort. All that they can earn more than will 
purchase meal, potatoes, and salt, with coarse fabric for clothing, is 
required as tax to support these corrupt governments, which, like 
great boils, absorb the strength and vitality of humanity. So we see 
that Satan is still ruling over earth. He may change his tactics 
according to the necessities of the hour, but he is ruling still. 

God's Word informs us that, by the general uprising of humanity 
and overthrow of governments, the new age will be introduced. In 
the coming struggle the two spiritual powers, Christ and his saints, 
and Satan and his angels, will each have earthly armies whose 
causes they will support and advance. Satan's will be the kings, 
chief captains, rich men, and mighty men, [Rev. 19:19,] while 
Christ will espouse and bring to victory the cause of the oppressed, 
who, inspired by a vague sense of justice and right, will be used to 
some extent as agents to their own liberation from the thraldom of 
evil and oppression. 

How we see the preparation for this time of trouble in the world 
going on all around us, and how unconsciously each one takes his 
place to play his part in the closing act of the reign of sin and death! 
In this country, less oppressed and in every way more blessed than 
others, 

CAPITAL AND LABOR 

are arraying themselves against each other as if against enemies; 
labor fearing that capital will grind the life out of it unless it 
organizes and protects itself; capital fearful of losing the upper hand 
of labor. Look abroad and see the Nihilists of Russia, the Land 
Leaguers and Liberals of Great Britain and Ireland, and the 
Socialists and Communists of Austria, Germany, and France, and 
tell me, do not all of these things, visible to our natural eye, 
corroborate what our spiritual eye of faith has seen by the light of 
the prophetic page— that "the day of the Lord is a day of trouble," 
and "distress upon nations"? 



THE RESTORATION. 

The future dynasty of earth, like the present one, will be the ruling 
of an invisible power through visible agencies of earth. As now 
Satan reigns unseen, then "The Christ of God" will reign and rule 
unseen. As now sin abounds, so then the opposite— righteousness- 
will rule. As Satan now has agents in men and governments, so 
with Christ's reign, every man coming into harmony with truth and 
righteousness will be reckoned a servant of God. The kingdoms of 
this world being all overthrown, (Dan. 2:44,) will be re-established 
on principles of justice and equity, based upon the golden law of 
love to God and men. 

The chief nation of earth during that age, the Word informs us, will 
be fleshly Israel, in glory and prominence exalted above all other 
nations— "The joy of the whole earth." And next in positions of 
favor and blessing will come other nations in proportion as they 
conform to the law of the kingdom of God. Thus will the light of 
truth emanating from the spiritual city— the church— the New 
Jerusalem, (Rev. 21,) bless all nations, and result in healing and 
blessing all mankind, until ultimately, having put down all 
opposition, and brought all men to the condition of perfection and 
righteousness, the third empire will give place to the fourth, which 
is the first restored, viz. : man over earth its lord and himself in 
perfect obedience to the King of kings and Lord of lords. Thus, 
"God [will be] all in all." Amen. 

Whosoever in faith prays, "Thy kingdom come, Thy will be done, 
on earth as it is in heaven," let him watch for the evidences of the 
presence of the King and the manifestations of his power." 



R664 : page 7 

THE ECCLESIA. 

This is a Greek word which is translated church. It signifies a 
company, assembly, or body of people bound or compacted 
together. 

To-day there are many organizations claiming to be the church, and 
having various bonds of union; but we wish to know, upon the 
authority of God's Word, what ekklesia, body, or church, Jesus 
established, and what are its bonds of union; secondly, we wish to 
show that every Christian should belong to that church; thirdly, the 
injurious effects of joining the wrong ekklesia or church; and 
fourthly, having joined the right church, what are the results of 
losing our membership. 

First, then, the church which Jesus began to gather during his 
ministry, and which was recognized by the Father at Pentecost after 
their ransom price was paid, was the little company of disciples 
who had consecrated earthly time, talents and life, a sacrifice to 
God. They were organized and bound together as members of one 



society, and as such had laws and government, and consequently a 
head or recognized ruling authority. The bonds, were bonds of love 
and common interest. Since all were enlisted under the captaincy of 
Jesus, the hopes and fears, joys and sorrows, and aims of one were 
those of the other; and thus they had a far more perfect union of 
heart than could possibly be had from a union on the basis of any 
man-made creed. Thus their organization was of the Spirit; their 
law for the government of each was love, and all as a whole were 
put under obedience to the "law of the Spirit" as it was expressed in 
the life, actions, and words of their Lord. Their government was the 
will of him who said, "If ye love me keep my commandments." 

Thus we see the early church organized, governed, and in perfect 
unity and harmony under the rulership or headship of Jesus. 
Contrast this church organization with what now affects to be a 
continuance of the same-viz.: the various denominational 
organizations, each of which binds its members to a mental union 
on the basis of some creed or dogma of its own (many of them 
anything but love-ly) and each having its own laws. 

These laws emanate from their heads, and rulers or law-givers; so it 
is clearly seen that these present day churches, have and recognize 
as heads, or directing, ruling powers over them, the ancient 
founders of their various creeds, each contradicting the other, while 
their clergy, in conferences, councils, synods, and presbyteries, 
variously interpret and enforce the "traditions of the elders" which 
"make void the Word of God." These take the place of the true head 
of the church- Jesus-and the true teacher and guide into all truth, 
the Holy Spirit. Hear the prophet Isaiah express it. (chap. 9:15.) 
"The ancient and honorable, he is the head, and the prophet that 
teacheth lies, he is the tail." And the whole nominal system is 
described in the Revelation as "Babylon "-confusion- Papal mother 
and Protestant daughters. 

Will they own this to be so? No, for the lukewarm nominal church 
of to-day believes herself to be rich and increased with goods, 
having need of nothing; not knowing that she is wretched, and 
miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked. (Rev. 3:17.) 

These are "hard sayings, who can receive them?" But these are not 
our sayings: it is the warning voice of the "sure word of 
prophecy.. .whereunto ye do well that ye take heed." And it is a 
loving voice, for again our Lord declares: "As many as I love, I 
rebuke and chasten." 

There are two senses in which the true church of Christ may be 
considered: All who, like the early church, were fully consecrated 
to the doing of our Father's will, amenable only to His will and 
government, recognizing and obeying none other— these saints, 
from the beginning of the Gospel Age down to its close, when all of 
this class are sealed, constitute the "CHURCH OF THE FIRST 
BORN," whose names are written in heaven. These are all one in 
aim, hope, and suffering, and in due time will be joint-heirs with 



Jesus Christ to the great inheritance —heirs of the kingdom which 
God hath promised for them that love him. 

The other sense in which this same class is recognized, is by 
counting a part for the whole; thus all the living of this class may be 
spoken of as the church; or, again, any part of this class of living 
followers who may meet together may properly be called the 
church; for, by the word of Jesus we know that wherever two or 
three are assembled he will be among them, consequently that 
would be a church meeting— an assembly of the "church of the First 
Born." The general assembly will be, when all the church are made 
like, and glorified with, their head-Jesus. 

Such, then, is our definition of the church of Christ; it is perfectly 
illustrated by Paul (Rom. 12:4,5) when he compares the church to a 
human body. In this figure Jesus represents the head, and all who 
are his constitute the body, over and through which the head rules. 
Jesus has been and always will be the head over his church as a 
whole; he is likewise the head and ruler of the entire living church, 
and in every assembly where two or three meet in his name he is 
the head, ruler, and teacher. 

Is it asked, in what sense does he teach? We answer, by exercising 
the qualities of the head, or teacher; by using one or more of those 
present as his mouth-pieces in unfolding truth, strengthening faith, 
encouraging hope, inspiring zeal, etc., just as the head of your body 
can call upon one member to minister to another. But here a word 
of caution: If one becomes a useful instrument as a right hand, he 
should take care that he aspire not to become the head. Be not 
puffed up; pride will paralyze and render useless. "Be not ye called 
Rabbi, (master, teacher,) for one is your master, (head,) even Christ, 
and all ye are brethren. " And let not the least member despise his 
office, "for if all were one member, where were the body?" "Nay, 
those members of the body which seem to be more feeble are 
necessary"— "God hath set the members every one of them, in the 
body as it hath pleased him." 

How simple, beautiful and effectual is God's plan of organization! 

This brings us to our second proposition, viz. : that all Christians 
should be joined to this organization. In the light of what has just 
been said as to the class constituting the Church which Jesus 
organized, it is evident that if you have given up all your will, 
talent, time, etc., you are recognized by Jesus as a follower, and 
member of the ekklesia, or body of which he is the head, whose 
names are written in heaven. Thus we join Jesus' Church and have 
our names recorded as members by consecration. But, says one, 
must I not join some organization on earth, assent to some creed, 
and have my name written on earth? No; remember that Jesus is 
your pattern and teacher, and neither in his words nor acts will you 
find any authority for binding yourselves with creeds and traditions 
of the elders, which all tend to make the word of God of none 
effect, and bring you under a bondage which will hinder your 



growth in grace and knowledge, and against which Paul warned 
you, saying, "Stand fast, therefore, in the liberty wherewith Christ 
hath made us free, and be not entangled again with the yoke of 
bondage." (Gal. 5:1.) 

But some say: If it is not proper to unite with any of the present 
nominal churches, would it not be well to form a visible 
organization of our own? Yes, this is what we have-an 
organization modeled after that of the early church. We think we 
have come back to primitive simplicity. The Lord Jesus alone is our 
head or lawgiver; the Holy Spirit is our interpreter and guide into 
truth; our names are all written in heaven; we are bound together by 
love and common interest. 

Do you inquire— how shall we know one another? We reply, how 
could we help knowing one another when the Spirit of our Master is 
made manifest in word and act and manner and look? Yes, the 
living faith, the unfeigned love, the long-suffering meekness, the 
child-like simplicity, coupled with the constancy and zeal of 
maturity, make manifest the sons of God, and we need no earthly 
record, for the names of all such are written in the Lamb's book of 
life. 

Do the sick need visiting or assistance? —these stand ready with 
consecrated time. Does the Lord's work require money?— these 
stand ready with consecrated means. Does His work bring the 
reproach of the world, and of a degenerate nominal church- these 
have also sacrificed reputation- all-all to God. 

But again, do you inquire how shall we deal with one who walks 
disorderly in our midst; if we have no organization such as we see 
about us, how can we free ourselves from such, as the Lord requires 
us to do? We answer, Do just as Jesus and Paul directed. 

Now, as in the early church, there are various degrees of 
advancement among the individual members; and Paul says, (1 
Thes. 5:14,) some are feeble-minded, comfort them; some are 
weak, support them; but while you should be patient toward all, you 
should warn the disorderly, (those who are drifting away from the 
true spirit of Christ). Don't mistake the disorderly for the weak, and 
comfort them; nor for the feeble-minded, and support them; but 
patiently, lovingly, warn the disorderly. Whom does he call 
disorderly? Doubtless there are many ways of walking disorderly, 
but in 2 Thes. 3: 1 1, he speaks of some who work not at all, but are 
busy-bodies, these he says should do as he did— work, that they be 
not chargeable to any; and if any will not work, neither should he 
eat. Thus he said he did, that he might be an example to others. He 
warns us also against immoral and unjust persons, and those who 
wrest (twist) the Scriptures, and thus turn the truth of God into a lie. 
Then again, vs. 14: After you have warned such a one, if he "obey 
not,. ..note that man, and have no company with him, that he may be 
ashamed. Yet, count him not as an enemy, but admonish him as a 
brother. " 



Again Jesus gives explicit directions where there is a matter of 
offense between two brethren, (Matt. 18:15,17): "If thy brother 
shall trespass against thee, go and tell him his fault between thee 
and him alone; if he shall hear thee, thou hast gained thy brother; 
but if he will not hear thee, then take with thee one or two more, 
that in the mouth of two or three witnesses every word may be 
established. And if he shall neglect to hear them, tell it unto the 
church, (the company of brethren who assemble together,) but if he 
neglects to hear the church, let him be unto thee as an heathen man 
and a publican." If, under the organization of our Head, we heed his 
commands, which we will do if we love him, how few will be the 
misunderstandings and difficulties among the brethren. 

This organization has its evangelists, pastors and teachers appointed 
and directed by the Lord. They need no laying on of hands by the 
so-called "Apostolic succession"; for the "Spirit of the Lord" hath 
anointed all the members of the body "to preach," (Isa. 61:1,) and it 
is the duty of every member of the body to exercise his office for 
the edification of the other members. How complete is the 
organization of the Church of Christ with its heaven-written, love- 
bound and Spirit-ruled membership, and how sad the error of 
mistaking the nominal for the real Church! 

The importance of our fourth proposition need not be urged. It 
would, indeed, be a dreadful calamity to lose our membership in the 
true Church or body of Christ. And no member is out of this danger 
except when keeping a vigilant watch over the old nature, counted 
dead, lest it come to life again, and assert itself in the form of pride, 
selfishness, envy, evil- speaking— or what not? But if filled with love 
(the love that prompts to sacrifice) and clothed with humility, and 
under cover of the redeeming blood, we are safe in the Church 
(body), having the assurance that it is our "Father's good pleasure to 
give us the kingdom." 

Yes, the kingdom is the glorious destiny of the true Church— the 
"little flock"-now treading the pathway of humiliation and drinking 
the bitter cup of death. The glory that shall be revealed in us, doth 
not yet appear except to the eye of faith, but the temptations and 
trials are very apparent on every hand. "Let us, therefore, fear lest a 
promise being left us of entering into his rest, any of you should 
seem to come short of it." (Heb. 4:1.) 

Thus Paul warned others, and thus he 

R664 : page 8 

feared, lest (even after) having preached to others, he himself 
should be a castaway. (1 Cor. 9:27.) We may have our names cast 
out as evil by those of the nominal Church, and yet "rejoice and be 
exceeding glad because our names are written in heaven." They 
may frown upon you and despitefully use you and say all manner of 
evil against you falsely, or they may seek to win you back by 
flattery, saying they cannot afford to lose your influence- you 



could do so much good by remaining among them. Oh, how 
necessary in this "evil day" is the faith— 

"That bears unmoved the world's dread frown, 
Nor heeds its flattering smile; 
That seas of trouble cannot drown, 
Nor Satan's arts beguile." 

Dearly beloved, let us again repeat the warning: "Stand fast in the 
liberty wherewith Christ hath made you free, and be not again 
entangled with the yoke of bondage"— not even in the slightest 
degree. Make sure that you are of the Church which alone is 
recognized in Scripture and cut loose completely from all the 
Babylon systems which it condemns— "Come out of her my 
people." 



page 8 

THE CHURCH WALKING WITH THE WORLD. 

The Church and the World walked far apart 
On the changing shores of time, 
The World was singing a giddy song, 
And the Church a hymn sublime. 

Come, give me your hand," said the merry World, 
"And walk with me this way"; 
But the good Church hid her snowy hands 
And solemnly answered "Nay, 

I will not give you my hand at all, 
And I will not walk with you; 
Your way is the way that leads to death; 
Your words are all untrue." 

"Nay, walk with me but a little space," 
Said the World, with a kindly air; 
"The road I walk is a pleasant road, 
And the sun shines always there; 

Your path is thorny and rough and rude, 
But mine is broad and plane; 
My way is paved with flowers and dews, 
And yours with tears and pain; 

The sky to me is always blue, 
No want, no toil I know; 
The sky above you is always dark, 
Your lot is a lot of woe; 



There's room enough for you and me 

To travel side by side." 

Half shyly the Church approached the World 

And gave him her hand of snow; 

And the old World grasped it and walked along, 
Saying in accents low, 
"Your dress is too simple to please my taste; 
I will give you pearls to wear, 

Rich velvets and silks for your graceful form, 
And diamonds to deck your hair." 
The Church looked down at her plain white robes, 
And then at the dazzling World, 

And blushed as she saw his handsome lip 
With a smile contemptuous curled. 
"I will change my dress for a costlier one," 
Said the Church, with a smile of grace; 

Then her pure, white garments drifted away, 
And the World gave in their place, 
Beautiful satins and shining silks, 
Roses and gems and costly pearls; 

While over her forehead her bright hair fell 
Crisped in a thousand curls.: 

"Your home is too plain," said the proud old World, 
"I'll build you one like mine; 

Carpets of Brussels and curtains of lace, 
And furniture ever so fine." 
So he built her a costly and beautiful house; 
Most splendid it was to behold; 

Her sons and her beautiful daughters dwelt there 
Gleaming in purple and gold; 
Rich fairs and shows in the halls were held, 
And the World and his children were there. 

Laughter and music and feasts were heard 

In the place that was meant for prayer. 

There were cushioned pews for the rich and the gay, 

To sit in their pomp and pride; 

But the poor, who were clad in shabby array, 
Sat meekly down outside. 

"You give too much to the poor," said the World, 
"Far more than you ought to do; 

If they are in need of shelter and food, 
Why need it trouble you? 
Go take your money and buy rich robes, 
Buy horses and carriages fine, 

Buy pearls and jewels and dainty food; 
Buy the rarest and costliest wines: 



My children they dote on all these things, 
And if you their love would win, 

You must do as they do, and walk in the ways 
That they are walking in." 

Then the Church held fast the strings of her purse, 
And modestly lowered her head, 

And simpered, "Without doubt you are right, sir, 
Henceforth I will do as you've said." 
So the poor were turned from her door in scorn, 
And she heard not the orphan's cry; 

But she drew her beautiful robes aside, 

As the widows went weeping by. 

Then the sons of the World and sons of the Church 

Walked closely hand and heart, 

And only the Master, who knoweth all, 
Could tell the two apart. 
Then the Church sat down at her ease and said 
"I am rich and my goods increase; 

I have need of nothing, or ought to do, 

But to laugh, and dance, and feast." 

The sly World heard, and he laughed in his sleeve, 

And mocking said, aside— 

"The Church is fallen, the beautiful Church, 
And her shame is her boast and her pride." 
The angel drew near to the mercy-seat, 
And whispered in sighs her name, 

Then the loud anthems of rapture were hushed, 
And heads were covered with shame. 
And a voice was heard at last by the Church 
From Him who sat on the Throne, 

"I know thy works, and how thou hast said, 

I am rich;' and hast not known 

That thou art naked, poor and blind, 

And wretched before My face; 

Therefore from My presence, I cast thee out, 

And blot thy name from its place."— Selected. 



R670 : page 8 

INSPIRATION. 

A beautiful landscape might inspire the artist or poet, each in his 
talent. Circumstances, audiences, etc., may be said to inspire a 
public singer or speaker. Murder is sometimes inspired by jealousy, 
etc., etc. And the child of God should be so inspired by the 



teachings of Jesus, the Apostles and Prophets, as to act and teach in 
harmony with them. 

But let no one forget that these, though proper uses of our English 
word inspired, yet, when used in Scripture the word has a much 
deeper significance. It there means, that the "Scriptures given by 
inspiration of God" are given not by inspiration of circumstances, 
nor by inspiration of the teachings of others, but are a special 
inspiration or infusion of knowledge direct from God. Thus only 
Apostles and Prophets ever spoke to the Church. 



R670 : page 8 

WAITING FOR HIS COMING. 

If in this world only we have hope we are of all creatures the most 
miserable. It is comparatively easy for the few of us who live in 
comfort, who have been refined by culture and thought till we can 
see how the shadows of time lend a new intensity and beauty to its 
lights, and how pain and suffering are a discipline in wisdom and 
goodness, to think this world a very tolerable one, and to regard 
human life as a grand, a sacred possession. But think what life is to 
the countless myriads of our race; think what the world is, and has 
been, as a whole. Remember how in all ages the vast majority of 
men have been plagued by toil, by care, by fear, by sordid penury; 
how they have been crushed under the bloody heels of tyrants who 
were bound to protect them, maimed and tortured, stultified and 
coerced, by the very priests who were bound to enlighten and 
emancipate them; how they have been decimated and degraded by 
war, by famine, by disease, by ignorance and superstition; and who 
can deny that, if this life be all, then human life taken as a whole, is 
the most fatal of blunders, of curses the most terrible? If the tragedy 
of human life be pregnant with no divine purpose, if there be no 
better time coming, no golden age of righteousness and peace— if, 
in short, we can no longer believe in the advent and reign of Christ, 
then surely every thoughtful spectator of this vast tragedy must say, 
"It were better for men that they had never been born!" 

But if we believe in this great promise, if we cherish this great 
hope, then can we with patience wait for it. And this is the very 
posture which our Lord enjoins. He would have us to be like 
servants who watch for the coming of their Lord, that, when he 
comes, they may open to him immediately. He would have us 
believe in, and look for, the advent of a better era, in which all the 
wrongs will be rectified. He would have us sustain ourselves under 
all the toils and sorrows of our individual lot, and under the still 
heavier oppression of the world's lot, by looking forward to that end 
and purpose of the Lord God Almighty which will vindicate all the 
ways in which we have been led, the painful discipline by which we 
have been tried and purified and refined. And whosoever holds fast 
this great hope for himself and for the world at large, he is a true 



believer in the distinct promise of the New Testament, viz., the 
second advent of Christ, and may use with sincerity all the words 
and phrases which it has expressed.— The Expositor. 



R664 : page 8 

THE LORD'S JEWELS. 

BY H. GRATTAN GUINNESS. 

The Christian Church as a witness for God in the world has failed, 
like the Jewish nation, and become apostate. There is a little flock, 
there is a true Church, but its members are scattered abroad and 
almost invisible in the great Babylon; they are the seven thousand 
who have not bowed the knee to Baal, they are the called and 
chosen and faithful who follow the Lamb, they are those who have 
turned to God from idols to serve the living and true God, and to 
wait for his Son from heaven; they are those who have not the form 
only, but the power of godliness, those who keep themselves 
unspotted from the world, and overcome through faith. They are 
found in every section of the professing Church, and the Lord 
knoweth those that are his— "They shall be mine, saith the Lord of 
Hosts, in the day when I make up my jewels." 

But for the rest— for the vast professing body which bears the name 
of Christ, it has not continued in the goodness of God, it has turned 
his grace into licentiousness, its sentence is gone forth, it must be 
"cut off. " The long suffering of God has been abundantly 
manifested, it is right that his holy severity should be again 
revealed. The professing Church has long been unworthy of the 
sacred name it bears, and of the high and holy responsibility of 
being God's witness on earth, which belongs to it; it is time it 
should cease to hold the position it has so fearfully forfeited. 
Instead of being the instrument of spreading the truth of the Gospel 
among men, it is the worst hindrance to their attaining that 
knowledge of God, and of Jesus Christ whom he has sent, in which 
life eternal lies. Like the Pharisees of old it stands as the great 
obstruction, neither entering itself into the kingdom, nor suffering 
those who would, to enter in. The name of God is blasphemed 
among the nations, by reason of the corruption of the professing 
church; the light that should have been in it, is become darkness, 
and great is that darkness ! The church is confounded with the 
world, and the true saints are strangers in its society; It is no longer 
the pillar and ground of the truth, it is the hotbed of heresy, false 
doctrine, and corruption of every kind. What contrast can be more 
complete, than that between the church as Christ intended it to be, 
and the church as it now exists in the world! An end must come to 
all this! Not only does the Word of God predict it, not only does our 
own sense of righteousness demand it, but the solemn analogies of 
history distinctly intimate it. Let the undeniable fact that past 
apostasies brought down the judgment they deserved, forewarn men 



what must be the end of the existing apostasy of the professing 
people of God. Babylon must come in remembrance before God, 
who will give unto her the cup of the wine of the fierceness of his 
wrath, for her sins have reached unto heaven, and God hath 
remembered her iniquities. 



R664 : page 8 

CONSECRATION. 

Submission is a strong word, consecration still stronger. Surrender 
is cessation of resistance, consecration a transfer of all we are and 
have to Christ for active service. It covers person and property, 
talents and opportunities, and accepts of Christ as leader, manager, 
friend, and Saviour, present, active, and efficient in all the minutiae 
of life. There are degrees of consecration, and even entire 
consecration is progressive, for new interests, cares, burdens, 
capacities, and opportunities rise and await disposal, and Christ is 
revealed in new relations, making new demands, offering new 
privileges, and these await trustful acceptance, so that ever and 
anon the proposition to devote all to Christ and receive all of Christ 
claims fresh attention. Many commit spiritual interests to his care, 
and worry on alone with temporal concerns; they trust Him to save 
their souls, but hesitate to ask His aid in business; accept daily 
grace, but doubt respecting daily bread; rejoice in Christ, as a 
Saviour, but fail to apprehend Him as a brother, a companion, a 
present constant friend. Consecration is not absolutely perfect until 
the fulness of our Lord is perceived and received, and the fulness of 
life is devoted to Him, for every revelation of Christ calls for new 
devotion from us. The consecration must be as broad as the 
apprehension, covering the fulness of Christ and fulness of man.— 
Sel. 



R670 : page 8 

WHENEVER I meet with the will of God, I feel that I meet with 
God; whenever I respect and love the will of God, I feel that I love 
and respect God; whenever I unite with the will of God, I feel that I 
unite with God; so that practically and religiously, although I am 
aware that a difference can be made philosophically, God and the 
will of God are to me the same. He who is in perfect harmony with 
the will of God, is as much in harmony with God himself as it is 
possible for any being to be. The very name of God's will fills me 
with joy.— Madame Guyon. 



R670 : page 8 

PRAYER.— He that is much in prayer shall grow rich in grace. He 
shall thrive and increase most that is busiest in this, which is our 



traffic with Heaven, and fetches the most precious commodities 
thence. He that sets oftenest these ships of desire, that makes the 
most voyages to that land of spices and pearls, shall be sure to 
improve his stock most, and have most of heaven upon earth.- Sel. 


