Demonstrating Christian Loyalty in New Caledonia
ALL was not well in paradise. By early 1985, political unrest had claimed some 20 lives on the South Pacific island of New Caledonia. This led Maclean’s magazine to comment: “The island is already beginning to resemble Northern Ireland, divided into two heavily armed and hostile camps.”
The situation had become so serious in January 1985 that President François Mitterrand of France scurried half way around the world on an unscheduled Saturday visit to Nouméa, the island’s capital. The islanders, divided in their loyalties, were anxious to express their feelings during his visit. The original inhabitants, pushed by religious leaders and feeling a strong sense of loyalty to their Melanesian roots, pressed hard for an end to over 130 years of French rule. On the other hand, many descendants of European Polynesians and Asian settlers, and even Melanesians, expressed their loyalty to the French government and advocated that its rule continue.
Meanwhile, on this same Saturday, 1,567 of Jehovah’s Witnesses and their friends had also gathered in Nouméa to make a public display of loyalty. Their loyalty, however, was not to any particular ethnic group or to an earthly government; it was loyalty to God’s established Kingdom. But how did it come about that they were in Nouméa on this particular day? For that matter, how did it come about that they were in New Caledonia at all?
The Beginnings of Christian Loyalty
New Caledonia has what you might expect of a South Pacific paradise​—a pleasant climate the year round, luscious fruits to incite the palate, abundant vegetation to delight the eye, and a colorful mixture of over 150,000 Melanesians, Polynesians, Asians, and Europeans.
It was discovered in 1774 by Captain James Cook, the famous British navigator and explorer, but became a French colony in 1853. Half a step behind the first explorers and traders came Christendom’s missionaries. The people they found obviously needed to be freed from certain wrong practices. The missionaries succeeded, for example, in wiping out cannibalism. They also introduced the people to the Bible and even translated it into four local languages. Commendably, they included God’s name, rendered Iehova or Jehova in the vernacular. Yet, more was needed.
In the 1930’s a group of Jehovah’s Witnesses sailed through the Loyalty Islands distributing Bible literature. In the mid-1950’s several Australian Witnesses moved to New Caledonia. Although they were later deported, the work prospered, and by 1967 the number of local Witnesses had grown to over a hundred. In 1976 the Watch Tower Society established a branch office in Nouméa and oversaw the construction of the island’s first Kingdom Hall.a
Especially since then, great strides have been made in gathering loyal subjects for Jehovah’s established Kingdom from all the country’s different ethnic groups. For example, some 17,000 people from Wallis and Futuna​—tiny islands located north of Fiji—​live in New Caledonia. Many of these Wallisians are Catholics and very devoted to their church. But their attitude has been changing as more and more of them have begun listening to the Kingdom message. A priest, upset about this, sent the lady in charge of church finances out to “save the sheep from going astray.” However, she also listened. Then her daughter, who was studying in Rome to become a missionary, returned home and accepted the Bible truth taught by Jehovah’s Witnesses. Now both she and her mother are dedicated, loyal Witnesses.
Today the Witnesses are well known everywhere in these islands; in certain areas, there is one Witness for every 80 persons. On the island of Lifou, a young carpenter became a Pentecostal. He went from village to village, announcing that Christ would return visibly to the island. To point up his conviction that material possessions are of no value, he publicly burned his clothes and money. But he became interested in what he read in a tract published by Jehovah’s Witnesses. A regular Bible study helped him to an accurate knowledge of God’s Word. Today, he is a balanced Christian, a full-time minister.
Loyalty to God’s Kingdom Under Test
The political unrest and chaotic conditions that broke out in 1984 created problems for many New Caledonians, including the Witnesses. Some of these were mobbed and beaten while out preaching. Three men entered one Witness home, demanded the man’s car keys at gunpoint, and then stole his car. A missionary discovered that his car had been set afire and destroyed while he was conducting a Bible study.
Whereas the islanders are divided in their loyalties, the Witnesses​—regardless of which ethnic group—​are united in their neutral stand. The clergy, themselves politically involved, have used the present state of unrest to stir up hatred of the Witnesses. For example, Witnesses driving to pick up interested persons for a meeting were stopped. Their traveling overseer, who was visiting them that week, was dragged from one of the two cars and beaten, and his glasses were smashed. An interested person was shoved against a wall and beaten until his head was bloody, his pregnant wife being forced to watch.
Yet the Witnesses know that their loyalty has not been misplaced. They remember Paul’s words: “All those desiring to live with godly devotion in association with Christ Jesus will also be persecuted.”​—2 Timothy 3:12; see also Matthew 10:16.
Loyally Expanding Despite Unrest
In mid-1984 the Witnesses saw the need for building an Assembly Hall. An appropriate piece of property was found on a hill overlooking Nouméa harbor, and work was started in September. But in November, because of the political unrest, the authorities imposed a curfew, and a state of emergency was declared. Despite these difficulties, Witnesses from the entire island responded to the need for help at the construction site. Up to 400 volunteers came at a time, much to the amazement of onlookers. Since the construction work took place during school holidays, many youngsters assisted. One young girl said: “This was the best vacation I ever had.” And seeing a 60-year-old female Witness shoveling cement and gravel into a concrete mixer was enough to surprise any professional builder!
After just four months the project was finished. Dedication plans were made, but it turned out to be the very weekend of Mitterrand’s unexpected visit! Because of the possibly explosive political situation, the authorities asked the Witnesses to cancel their program. However, the man in charge of security, who had previously seen a Witness convention in France, told them: “I know you people. It will not be with you that we will be having our problems. Just take necessary security measures; we will not interfere with your meetings.”
Over 1,500 persons showed up for the fine dedication program, climaxed by a dedication talk delivered by Lyman Swingle, a visiting member of the Governing Body of Jehovah’s Witnesses. The attendance at this meeting, despite civil unrest, demonstrated loyalty to Jehovah’s Kingdom, a loyalty that is bearing fruit in New Caledonia. A new peak of 889 Kingdom proclaimers has been reached, and prospects for further increase are excellent. Proof of this can be seen in the 2,145 who attended the Memorial of Christ’s death in 1986.
The recent period of political unrest clearly shows that most New Caledonians are looking to human governments to solve their problems. Not so those loyal to God’s Kingdom, who put their complete confidence in God-rule. During these difficulties, a sign was spotted on the east coast’s main road reading: “Jehovah Out!” But Jehovah, as represented by his established Kingdom, is here to stay. So are “his loyal ones.”​—Psalm 37:28; see also Ps 37 verses 9-11, 22, 29, and 34.
[Footnotes]
For a more complete report on the history of Jehovah’s Witnesses in New Caledonia, see the 1984 Yearbook of Jehovah’s Witnesses, pages 243-9.
[Maps on page 25]
(For fully formatted text, see publication)
AUSTRALIA
[Map]
NEW CALEDONIA
Lifou
LOYALTY ISLANDS
Nouméa

