Bible Book Number 31​—Obadiah
Writer: Obadiah
Writing Completed: c. 607 B.C.E.
 1. What shows the message, rather than the messenger, to be important?
IN JUST 21 verses, Obadiah, the shortest book of the Hebrew Scriptures, proclaims a judgment of God that resulted in the end of a nation, while foretelling the eventual triumph of the Kingdom of God. The introductory words simply state: “The vision of Obadiah.” When and where he was born, of what tribe, the details of his life​—none of this is told. Clearly, the identity of the prophet is not the important thing; the message is, and rightly so, because as Obadiah himself declared, it is ‘a report from Jehovah.’
 2. On what country does the prophecy of Obadiah focus, and what made its inhabitants feel secure?
2 The report focuses its chief attention on Edom. Extending south from the Dead Sea along the Arabah, the land of Edom, also known as Mount Seir, is a rugged country of lofty mountains and deep ravines. At some points, the mountainous range to the east of the Arabah reaches an altitude of 5,600 feet [1,700 m]. The district of Teman was renowned for the wisdom and courage of its people. The very geography of the land of Edom, with its natural defenses, made its inhabitants feel secure and proud.a
 3. Had the Edomites acted as brothers to Israel?
3 The Edomites were descendants of Esau, the brother of Jacob. Jacob’s name was changed to Israel, and so the Edomites were closely related to the Israelites; so much so that they were viewed as ‘brothers.’ (Deut. 23:7) Yet Edom’s conduct had been anything but brotherly. Shortly before the Israelites entered the Promised Land, Moses sent to the king of Edom requesting permission to pass peaceably through his land, but in a display of hostility, the Edomites coldly refused and backed up their refusal with a display of force. (Num. 20:14-21) Though subjugated by David, they later conspired with Ammon and Moab against Judah in the days of Jehoshaphat, revolted against Jehoshaphat’s son King Jehoram, took charge of Israelite captives from Gaza and Tyre, and raided Judah in the days of King Ahaz to take even more captives.​—2 Chron. 20:1, 2, 22, 23; 2 Ki. 8:20-22; Amos 1:6, 9; 2 Chron. 28:17.
 4. (a) What despicable action evidently provided the basis for Obadiah’s denunciation of Edom? (b) What evidence suggests 607 B.C.E. as the most likely date of writing?
4 This hostility reached a peak in 607 B.C.E. when Jerusalem was desolated by the Babylonian hordes. Not only did the Edomites watch approvingly but they urged on the conquerors to make the desolation complete. “Lay it bare! Lay it bare to the foundation within it!” they shouted. (Ps. 137:7) When lots were cast over the booty, they were among those to share the loot; and when escapees of the Jews tried to flee out of the land, they blocked the roads and handed them over to the enemy. It is this violence at the time of Jerusalem’s destruction that evidently is the basis for the denunciation recorded by Obadiah, and it was no doubt written while Edom’s despicable act was still fresh in mind. (Obad. 11, 14) Since Edom itself was apparently captured and plundered by Nebuchadnezzar within five years after Jerusalem’s destruction, the book must have been written before then; 607 B.C.E. is suggested as the most likely date.
 5. (a) What proves the record of Obadiah to be authentic and true? (b) How did Obadiah fulfill the requirements of a true prophet, and why is his name appropriate?
5 Obadiah’s prophecy against Edom was fulfilled​—all of it! In reaching its climax, the prophecy states: “The house of Esau [must become] as stubble; and they must set them ablaze and devour them. And there will prove to be no survivor to the house of Esau; for Jehovah himself has spoken it.” (Vs. 18) Edom lived by the sword and died by the sword, and no trace of her descendants remains. Thus the record is proved to be authentic and true. Obadiah had all the credentials of a true prophet: He spoke in the name of Jehovah, his prophecy honored Jehovah, and it came true as subsequent history proved. His name appropriately means “Servant of Jehovah.”
CONTENTS OF OBADIAH
 6. How does Jehovah speak of Edom, and from where will he bring her down?
6 Judgment upon Edom (Vss. 1-16). At the command of Jehovah, Obadiah makes known his vision. The nations are summoned to join in war against Edom. “Rise up, you people, and let us rise up against her in battle,” God commands. Then, directing his remarks to Edom itself, he assesses her position. Edom is just a small one among the nations and is despised, yet she is presumptuous. She feels safe lodged in among the lofty crags, sure that no one can bring her down. Nevertheless, Jehovah declares that even if her dwelling were as high as the eagle’s, even if she were to nest among the stars themselves, from there he would bring her down. She is due for punishment.​—Vs. 1.
 7. To what extent is Edom to be despoiled?
7 What is going to happen to her? If thieves were to despoil Edom, they would take only what they wanted. Even grape gatherers would leave some gleanings. But what lies ahead for the sons of Esau is worse than this. Their treasures will be completely ransacked. The very allies of Edom will be the ones to turn on her. Those who have been her close friends will catch her in a net as one without discernment. Her men known for wisdom and her warriors known for valor will be no help in the time of her calamity.
 8. Why is Edom’s punishment so severe?
8 But why this severe punishment? It is because of the violence that the sons of Edom did to the sons of Jacob, their brothers! They rejoiced at the fall of Jerusalem and even joined with the invaders in dividing up the plunder. In strong denunciation, as if Obadiah is witnessing the vile deeds, Edom is told: You ought not to rejoice at your brother’s distress. You ought not to hinder the flight of his escapees and hand them over to the enemy. The day of Jehovah’s reckoning is near, and you will be called to account. The way you have done is the way it will be done to you.
 9. What restoration is foretold?
9 Restoration for the house of Jacob (Vss. 17-21). In contrast, the house of Jacob is due for restoration. Men will return to Mount Zion. They will devour the house of Esau as fire does stubble. They will take hold of the land to the south, the Negeb, as well as the mountainous region of Esau and the Shephelah; to the north they will possess the land of Ephraim and Samaria, and the region as far as Zarephath; to the east they will get the territory of Gilead. Proud Edom must cease to be, Jacob must be restored, and “the kingship must become Jehovah’s.”​—Vs. 21.
WHY BENEFICIAL
10. What other prophecies foretold Edom’s doom, and why will it be beneficial to consider these along with Obadiah?
10 Attesting to the sureness of the fulfillment of this message of judgment against Edom, Jehovah had similar pronouncements made by others of his prophets. Outstanding among them are the ones recorded at Joel 3:19; Amos 1:11, 12; Isaiah 34:5-7; Jeremiah 49:7-22; Ezekiel 25:12-14; 35:2-15. The earlier pronouncements obviously make reference to acts of hostility in times past, while the ones of later date evidently are indictments of Edom for her unpardonable conduct, referred to by Obadiah, at the time the Babylonians seized Jerusalem. It will strengthen faith in Jehovah’s power of prophecy if we examine how the foretold calamities befell Edom. Moreover, it will build confidence in Jehovah as the God who always brings to pass his stated purpose.​—Isa. 46:9-11.
11, 12. (a) How did those “at peace with” Edom come to prevail against her? (b) By what stages did Edom come to be “cut off to time indefinite”?
11 Obadiah had foretold that “the very men in covenant with” Edom, those “at peace with” her, would be the ones to prevail against her. (Obad. 7) Babylon’s peace with Edom did not last. During the sixth century B.C.E., Babylonian forces under King Nabonidus conquered Edom.b Nevertheless, a century after Nabonidus’ invasion of the land, confident Edom still hoped to make a comeback, and concerning it, Malachi 1:4 reports: “Because Edom keeps saying, ‘We have been shattered, but we shall return and build the devastated places,’ this is what Jehovah of armies has said, ‘They, for their part, will build; but I, for my part, shall tear down.’” Despite Edom’s efforts at recovery, by the fourth century B.C.E. the Nabataeans were firmly established in the land. Having been pushed out of their land, the Edomites dwelt in the southern part of Judea, which came to be called Idumea. They never succeeded in reconquering the land of Seir.
12 According to Josephus, in the second century B.C.E. the remaining Edomites were subjugated by the Jewish king John Hyrcanus I, were forced to submit to circumcision, and were gradually absorbed into the Jewish domain under a Jewish governor. Following the Roman destruction of Jerusalem in 70 C.E., their name disappeared from history.c It was as Obadiah had foretold: “You will have to be cut off to time indefinite. . . . And there will prove to be no survivor to the house of Esau.”​—Obad. 10, 18.
13. What happened to the Jews, in contrast to the Edomites?
13 In contrast with Edom’s desolation, the Jews were restored to their homeland in 537 B.C.E. under the governorship of Zerubbabel, where they rebuilt the temple in Jerusalem and became firmly established in the land.
14. (a) What warning is to be found in Edom’s fate? (b) What should all acknowledge, as did Obadiah, and why?
14 How evident it is that pride and presumptuousness lead to calamity! Let all who proudly exalt themselves and cruelly gloat over the hardship that comes upon the servants of God take warning from the fate of Edom. Let them acknowledge, as did Obadiah, that “the kingship must become Jehovah’s.” Those who fight against Jehovah and his people will be completely cut off to time indefinite, but Jehovah’s majestic Kingdom and eternal kingship will stand vindicated forever!​—Vs. 21.
[Footnotes]
Insight on the Scriptures, Vol. 1, page 679.
Insight on the Scriptures, Vol. 1, page 682.
Jewish Antiquities, XIII, 257, 258 (ix, 1); XV, 253, 254 (vii, 9).

