Bible Book Number 65​—Jude
Writer: Jude
Place Written: Palestine (?)
Writing Completed: c. 65 C.E.
 1. Because of what conditions inside the congregation did Jude find it necessary to write his vigorous letter in behalf of his brothers?
THE Christian brothers of Jude were in danger! During the time that had elapsed since the death and resurrection of Christ Jesus, foreign elements had wormed their way into the Christian congregation. The enemy had infiltrated for the purpose of undermining the faith, just as the apostle Paul, about 14 years previously, had warned. (2 Thess. 2:3) How should the brothers be alerted and placed on guard against the danger? The letter of Jude, vigorous and robust in its forthright statement, provided the answer. Jude himself stated his position clearly in verses 3 and 4: ‘I found it necessary to write you because certain men have slipped in, ungodly men, turning the undeserved kindness of our God into an excuse for loose conduct.’ The very foundations of sound doctrine and morality were being threatened. Jude felt called upon to fight for the interests of his brothers, that they, in turn, might put up a hard fight for the faith.
 2. (a) Who was Jude? (b) What relationship with Jesus did Jude esteem the most?
2 But who was Jude? The opening words tell us that the letter was written by “Jude, a slave of Jesus Christ, but a brother of James, to the called ones.” Was Jude, or Judas, an apostle, since 2 of Jesus’ original 12 apostles were named Judas? (Luke 6:16) Jude does not speak of himself as an apostle, but instead he speaks of the apostles in the third person as “they,” manifestly excluding himself. (Jude 17, 18) Moreover, he calls himself “a brother of James,” evidently meaning the writer of the letter of James, who was a half brother of Jesus. (Vs. 1) As one of the “pillars” of the congregation in Jerusalem, this James was well-known, and hence Jude identifies himself with him. This makes Jude also a half brother of Jesus, and he is listed as such. (Gal. 1:19; 2:9; Matt. 13:55; Mark 6:3) However, Jude did not make capital of his fleshly relationship with Jesus, but he humbly placed the emphasis on his spiritual relationship as “a slave of Jesus Christ.”​—1 Cor. 7:22; 2 Cor. 5:16; Matt. 20:27.
 3. What proves the authenticity of the letter of Jude?
3 The authenticity of this Bible book is supported by mention of it in the Muratorian Fragment, of the second century C.E. Additionally, Clement of Alexandria (second century C.E.) accepted it as canonical. Origen referred to it as a work of “but a few lines, yet filled with the healthful words of heavenly grace.”a Tertullian also considered it to be authentic. There is no doubt that it belongs with the other inspired Scriptures.
 4. What kind of letter is Jude, where was it probably written, and what is suggested as to the time of writing?
4 Jude writes “to the called ones,” specifying no particular congregation or individual, so his epistle is a general letter to be circulated widely to all Christians. Though it is not stated, the most likely place of writing is Palestine. It is also difficult to fix the date with certainty. However, it must have been well along in the development of the Christian congregation, for Jude calls attention to “the sayings that have been previously spoken by the apostles of our Lord Jesus Christ” and apparently quotes 2 Peter 3:3. (Jude 17, 18) Moreover, there is a strong similarity between Jude 1-25 and the second chapter of Second Peter. This indicates that he wrote about the same time as Peter, both being deeply concerned over the danger to the congregation at that time. Hence, 65 C.E. is suggested as an approximate date. This date is also supported in that Jude does not mention Cestius Gallus’ moving in to put down the Jews’ revolt in 66 C.E., nor does he mention the fall of Jerusalem in 70 C.E. Jude in his epistle refers to specific divine judgments executed against sinners, and it is logical that had Jerusalem already fallen, he would have reinforced his argument by mention of this execution of judgment, especially since Jesus foretold the event.​—Jude 5-7; Luke 19:41-44.
CONTENTS OF JUDE
 5. (a) Why does Jude find it necessary to write the called ones “to put up a hard fight for the faith”? (b) What warning examples does Jude cite?
5 Warnings against fornication and disregard for lordship (vss. 1-16). After conveying loving greetings to “the called ones,” Jude says he intended to write “about the salvation we hold in common,” but he has now found it necessary to write them “to put up a hard fight for the faith.” Why so? Because ungodly men have slipped in, turning God’s undeserved kindness into an excuse for loose conduct. These men, says Jude, are “proving false to our only Owner and Lord, Jesus Christ.” (Vss. 1, 3, 4) He reminds them that though Jehovah saved a people out of Egypt, He afterward “destroyed those not showing faith.” Additionally, Jehovah has reserved “for the judgment of the great day” those angels who forsook their proper dwelling place. Likewise, the everlasting punishment on Sodom and Gomorrah and their neighbor cities is a warning example as to the fate of those who ‘commit fornication excessively and go out after flesh for unnatural use.’​—Vss. 5-7.
 6. In what are ungodly men indulging, and how does Jude illustrate the wrongness and the outcome of their conduct?
6 Now, in like manner, ungodly men “are defiling the flesh and disregarding lordship and speaking abusively of glorious ones.” Why, even Michael the archangel did not speak abusively to the Devil when disputing over Moses’ body, simply saying: “May Jehovah rebuke you.” Yet these men use abusive speech and go on corrupting themselves like unreasoning animals. They have gone in the way of Cain, Balaam, and the rebellious Korah. They are like rocks hidden below water, like waterless clouds, like fruitless trees twice-dead and uprooted, like wild waves that foam up their shame, and like stars with no set course. For these “the blackness of darkness stands reserved forever.” (Vss. 8, 9, 13) Enoch prophesied that Jehovah will execute judgment against these ungodly ones. They are murmurers and complainers, and they selfishly admire personalities.
 7. (a) What judgment awaits the ungodly ones, and how did the apostles warn concerning them? (b) In view of the hope of everlasting life, what should the “beloved ones” do for themselves and others?
7 Counsel on remaining in God’s love (vss. 17-25). Jude reminds the brothers of how the apostles of the Lord Jesus Christ used to warn that “in the last time there will be ridiculers, proceeding according to their own desires for ungodly things.” These troublemakers are “animalistic men, not having spirituality.” The “beloved ones,” therefore, should build themselves up in the faith and keep themselves in God’s love, while they await the mercy of Christ “with everlasting life in view.” In turn, let them extend mercy and aid to those who waver. Jude closes by ascribing glory through the Lord Jesus Christ to “God our Savior,” the One who can guard them from stumbling.​—Vss. 18-21, 25.
WHY BENEFICIAL
 8. What use did Jude make of the inspired Scriptures and of “the book of nature” in admonishing his brothers?
8 Jude himself found the inspired Scriptures beneficial for warning, exhorting, encouraging, instructing, and admonishing the “beloved ones.” In exposing the gross sin of the ungodly intruders, he used expressive illustrations from the Hebrew Scriptures, such as those of the backsliding Israelites, the angels who sinned, and the inhabitants of Sodom and Gomorrah, showing that all who practice like vices will suffer a like punishment. He compared corrupt men to unreasoning animals, and he said that they were going in the path of Cain, rushing into the error of Balaam, and perishing like Korah for their rebellious talk. He also drew vivid pictures from “the book of nature.” Jude’s forthright letter itself became a part of “all Scripture,” to be studied along with the rest of the Scriptures, admonishing right conduct “in the last time.”​—Jude 17, 18, 5-7, 11-13; Num. 14:35-37; Gen. 6:4; 18:20, 21; 19:4, 5, 24, 25; 4:4, 5, 8; Num. 22:2-7, 21; 31:8; 16:1-7, 31-35.
 9. Why is Jude’s warning still needed at this time, and in what areas must Christians continue to build themselves up?
9 Opposition and trials from the outside had failed to check the growth of Christianity, but now the brothers were endangered by corruption from within. Rocks hidden beneath the surface threatened to wreck the entire congregation. Realizing that this danger could be even more devastating, Jude argued strongly in favor of ‘putting up a hard fight for the faith.’ His letter is as timely today as it was back then. The same warning is still needed. Faith still must be guarded and fought for, immorality uprooted, doubters helped with mercy and ‘snatched out of the fire,’ if that is possible. In the interest of moral integrity, spiritual effectiveness, and true worship, Christians today must continue to build themselves up in the most holy faith. They must stand by right principles and draw close to God in prayer. They need also to have proper regard for “lordship,” respecting God-given authority in the Christian congregation.​—Jude 3, 23, 8.
10. (a) How must the congregation treat animalistic men, and in what will this result? (b) What reward awaits the Kingdom heirs, and in what do these join Jude?
10 “Animalistic men, not having spirituality,” will never enter God’s Kingdom and will only endanger others who are on the way to everlasting life. (Jude 19; Gal. 5:19-21) The congregation must be warned against them, and it must get rid of them! Thus, “mercy and peace and love” will be increased toward the beloved ones, and they will keep themselves in God’s love, ‘while they are waiting for the mercy of their Lord Jesus Christ with everlasting life in view.’ God the Savior will set the Kingdom heirs “unblemished in the sight of his glory with great joy.” Certainly these join with Jude in ascribing “glory, majesty, might and authority” to Him through Jesus Christ.​—Jude 2, 21, 24, 25.
[Footnotes]
The Canon of the New Testament, 1987, by B. M. Metzger, page 138.

