Bible Book Number 5​—Deuteronomy
Writer: Moses
Place Written: Plains of Moab
Writing Completed: 1473 B.C.E.
Time Covered: 2 months (1473 B.C.E.)
 1. What questions may be asked in connection with Israel’s entry into the Promised Land?
THE book of Deuteronomy contains a dynamic message for Jehovah’s people. After wandering in the wilderness for 40 years, the sons of Israel now stood on the threshold of the Land of Promise. What lay ahead of them? What were the peculiar problems that they would face on the other side of the Jordan? What would Moses finally have to say to the nation? We may also ask, Why is it beneficial for us today to know the answers to these questions?
 2. In what outstanding way is Deuteronomy important?
2 The answers are to be found in the words that Moses spoke and that he recorded in the fifth book of the Bible, Deuteronomy. Though it restates much from the earlier books, Deuteronomy is important in its own outstanding way. Why so? It adds emphasis to the divine message, being provided at a time in the history of Jehovah’s people when they really needed dynamic leadership and positive direction. They were about to enter the Promised Land under a new leader. They needed encouragement to go forward, and at the same time they needed divine warning to enable them to take the right course leading to Jehovah’s blessing.
 3. What does Moses emphasize throughout Deuteronomy, and why is this important to us today?
3 In accord with the need, Moses was moved mightily by Jehovah’s spirit to make a forthright appeal to Israel to be obedient and faithful. Throughout the entire book, he emphasizes that Jehovah is the Most High God, who exacts exclusive devotion and who desires his people to ‘love him with all their heart and all their soul and all their vital force.’ He is “the God of gods and the Lord of lords, the God great, mighty and fear-inspiring, who treats none with partiality nor accepts a bribe.” He tolerates no rivalry. To obey him means life, to disobey, death. Jehovah’s instruction, as given in Deuteronomy, was just the preparation and counsel that Israel needed for the momentous tasks that lay ahead of them. It is also the kind of admonition we need today so that we may keep walking in the fear of Jehovah, sanctifying his name in the midst of a corrupt world.​—Deut. 5:9, 10; 6:4-6; 10:12-22.
 4. What is the meaning of the name Deuteronomy, and what is the purpose of the book?
4 The name Deuteronomy comes from the title in the Greek Septuagint translation, Deu·te·ro·noʹmi·on, which combines deuʹte·ros, meaning “second,” with noʹmos, meaning “law.” It therefore means “Second Law; Repetition of the Law.” This comes from the Greek rendering of the Hebrew phrase in Deuteronomy 17:18, mish·nehʹ hat·toh·rahʹ, correctly rendered ‘copy of the law.’ Despite the meaning of the name Deuteronomy, however, this Bible book is not a second law nor a mere repetition of the Law. Instead, it is an explanation of the Law, exhorting Israel to love and obey Jehovah in the Promised Land that they would soon be entering.​—1:5.
 5. What proves that Moses was the writer of Deuteronomy?
5 This being the fifth roll, or volume, of the Pentateuch, the writer must have been the same as for the preceding four books, namely, Moses. The opening statement identifies Deuteronomy as “the words that Moses spoke to all Israel,” and later expressions, such as “Moses wrote this law” and “Moses wrote this song,” clearly prove his writership. His name appears nearly 40 times in the book, usually as authority for the statements made. The first person, referring to Moses, is used predominantly throughout. The closing verses were added after Moses’ death, most likely by Joshua or by Eleazar the high priest.​—1:1; 31:9, 22, 24-26.
 6. (a) What time period is covered by Deuteronomy? (b) By when was the book practically complete?
6 When did the events of Deuteronomy take place? At the outset, the book itself states that “in the fortieth year, in the eleventh month, on the first of the month, Moses spoke to the sons of Israel.” On completion of the record in Deuteronomy, the book of Joshua takes up the account three days before the crossing of the Jordan, which was “on the tenth of the first month.” (Deut. 1:3; Josh. 1:11; 4:19) This leaves a period of two months and one week for the events of Deuteronomy. However, 30 days of this nine-week period were spent mourning the death of Moses. (Deut. 34:8) This means that practically all the events of Deuteronomy must have occurred in the 11th month of the 40th year. By the close of that month, the writing of the book must also have been practically complete, with Moses’ death coming early in the 12th month of the 40th year, or early in 1473 B.C.E.
 7. What shows that Deuteronomy is authentic?
7 The proofs already submitted for the authenticity of the first four books of the Pentateuch hold also for Deuteronomy, the fifth book. It is also one of the four books in the Hebrew Scriptures most often cited in the Christian Greek Scriptures, the others being Genesis, Psalms, and Isaiah. There are 83 of these citations, and only six of the books in the Christian Greek Scriptures omit alluding to Deuteronomy.a
 8. What conclusive testimony by Jesus bears out the authenticity of Deuteronomy?
8 Jesus himself gives the strongest testimony in support of Deuteronomy. At the outset of his ministry, he was three times tempted by the Devil, and three times he came back with the answer, “It is written.” Written where? Why, in the book of Deuteronomy (8:3; 6:16, 13), which Jesus quoted as his inspired authority: “Man must live, not on bread alone, but on every utterance coming forth through Jehovah’s mouth.” “You must not put Jehovah your God to the test.” “It is Jehovah your God you must worship, and it is to him alone you must render sacred service.” (Matt. 4:1-11) Later, when the Pharisees came testing him with regard to God’s commandments, Jesus quoted in reply “the greatest and first commandment” from Deuteronomy 6:5. (Matt. 22:37, 38; Mark 12:30; Luke 10:27) Jesus’ testimony conclusively stamps Deuteronomy as authentic.
 9. What external evidence vindicates Deuteronomy?
9 Moreover, the events and statements in the book fit exactly the historical situation and surroundings. The references to Egypt, Canaan, Amalek, Ammon, Moab, and Edom are faithful to the times, and place-names are accurately stated.b Archaeology continues to bring to light proof upon proof as to the integrity of Moses’ writings. Henry H. Halley writes: “Archaeology has been speaking so loudly of late that it is causing a decided reaction toward the conservative view [that Moses wrote the Pentateuch]. The theory that writing was unknown in Moses’ day is absolutely exploded. And every year there are being dug up in Egypt, Palestine and Mesopotamia, evidences, both in inscriptions and earth layers, that the narratives of the [Hebrew Scriptures] are true historical records. And ‘scholarship’ is coming to have decidedly more respect for the tradition of Mosaic authorship.”c Thus, even external evidence supports Deuteronomy, as well as the rest of the Pentateuch, as being a genuine, authentic record made by God’s prophet Moses.
CONTENTS OF DEUTERONOMY
10. Of what is Deuteronomy composed?
10 The book is mainly composed of a series of discourses that Moses delivered to the sons of Israel on the Plains of Moab opposite Jericho. The first of these concludes in chapter 4, the second runs to the end of chapter 26, the third continues through chapter 28, and another discourse extends to the end of chapter 30. Then, after Moses makes final arrangements in view of his approaching death, including the commissioning of Joshua as his successor, he records a most beautiful song to Jehovah’s praise, followed by a blessing on the tribes of Israel.
11. How does Moses introduce his first discourse?
11 Moses’ first discourse (1:1–4:49). This provides a historical introduction to what follows. Moses first reviews Jehovah’s faithful dealings with His people. Moses is telling them to go in and take possession of the land promised to their forefathers Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. He recounts how Jehovah coordinated the activity of this theocratic community at the outset of the wilderness trek by having him, Moses, select wise, discreet, and experienced men to act as chiefs of thousands, of hundreds, of fifties, and of tens. There was splendid organization, watched over by Jehovah, as Israel “went marching through all that great and fear-inspiring wilderness.”​—1:19.
12. What events surrounding the initial spying out of Canaan does he next recall?
12 Moses now recalls their sin of rebellion when they heard the report of the spies returning from Canaan and complained that Jehovah hated them because, they charged, He had brought them up out of Egypt only to abandon them to the Amorites. For their lack of faith, Jehovah told that evil generation that none of them, except Caleb and Joshua, would see the good land. At this they again behaved rebelliously, getting all heated up and making their own independent assault on the enemy, only to have the Amorites chase them like a swarm of bees and scatter them.
13. On what basis did Moses assure Joshua of victory?
13 They traveled in the wilderness down toward the Red Sea, and during 38 years, all the generation of the men of war died off. Jehovah then commanded them to cross over and take possession of the land north of the Arnon, saying: “This day I shall start to put the dread of you and the fear of you before the peoples beneath all the heavens, who will hear the report about you; and they will indeed be agitated and have pains like those of childbirth because of you.” (2:25) Sihon and his land fell to the Israelites, and then Og’s kingdom was occupied. Moses assured Joshua that Jehovah would fight for Israel in the same way in overcoming all the kingdoms. Moses then asked God if he himself might by any means pass over to the good land beyond the Jordan, but Jehovah continued to refuse this, telling him to commission, encourage, and strengthen Joshua.
14. What emphasis does Moses place on God’s Law and on exclusive devotion?
14 Moses now lays great emphasis on God’s Law, warning against adding to or taking away from His commandments. Disobedience will bring disaster: “Only watch out for yourself and take good care of your soul, that you may not forget the things that your eyes have seen and that they may not depart from your heart all the days of your life; and you must make them known to your sons and to your grandsons.” (4:9) They saw no form when Jehovah stated the Ten Words to them under fearsome circumstances in Horeb. It will be ruination to them if they now turn to idolatry and image worship, for, as Moses says, “Jehovah your God is a consuming fire, a God exacting exclusive devotion.” (4:24) He it was who had loved their forefathers and had chosen them. There is no other God in the heavens above or on the earth beneath. Obey Him, Moses exhorts, “that you may lengthen your days on the soil that Jehovah your God is giving you, always.”​—4:40.
15. What arrangement for cities of refuge is made east of the Jordan?
15 After concluding this powerful speech, Moses proceeds to set apart Bezer, Ramoth, and Golan as cities of refuge to the east of the Jordan.
16. What does Moses’ second discourse stress?
16 Moses’ second discourse (5:1–26:19). This is a call to Israel to hear Jehovah, who spoke with them face-to-face at Sinai. Note how Moses restates the Law with some necessary adjustments, thus adapting it for their new life across the Jordan. It is no mere recounting of regulations and ordinances. Every word shows that the heart of Moses is full of zeal and devotion to his God. He speaks for the welfare of the nation. Obedience to the Law is stressed throughout​—obedience from a loving heart, not by compulsion.
17. How must Israel reciprocate the love that Jehovah has shown them?
17 First, Moses repeats the Ten Words, the Ten Commandments, and tells Israel to obey them, not turning to the right or to the left, that they may lengthen their days in the land and that they may become very many. “Listen, O Israel: Jehovah our God is one Jehovah.” (6:4) Heart, soul, and vital force must be given to loving Him, and Israel must teach their sons and tell them of the great signs and miracles that Jehovah performed in Egypt. There are to be no marriage alliances with the idolatrous Canaanites. Jehovah has chosen Israel to become his special property, not because they are populous, but because he loves them and will keep the sworn statement he made with their forefathers. Israel must shun the snare of demon religion, destroy the images out of the land, and hold to Jehovah, truly “a great and fear-inspiring God.”​—7:21.
18. Against what does Moses exhort the Israelites to guard themselves?
18 Jehovah humbled them for 40 years in the wilderness, teaching them that man lives, not by manna or bread, but by every expression of Jehovah’s mouth. During all those years of correction, their clothing did not wear out, nor did their feet become swollen. Now they are about to enter a land of wealth and plenty! However, they must guard against the snares of materialism and self-righteousness and remember that Jehovah is ‘the giver of power to make wealth’ and the dispossessor of the wicked nations. (8:18) Moses then recounts occasions when Israel provoked God. They must remember how Jehovah’s anger blazed against them in the wilderness, with plague and fire and slaughter! They must remember their ruinous worship of the golden calf, which resulted in Jehovah’s hot anger and the remaking of the tablets of the Law! (Ex. 32:1-10, 35; 17:2-7; Num. 11:1-3, 31-35; 14:2-38) Surely they must now serve and cling to Jehovah, who has loved them for their fathers’ sakes and had constituted them “like the stars of the heavens for multitude.”​—Deut. 10:22.
19. What choice is clearly stated, and what laws are outlined for the nation?
19 Israel must keep “the whole commandment,” and they must without fail obey Jehovah, loving him as their God and serving him with all their heart and all their soul. (11:8, 13) Jehovah will back them up and reward them if they obey him. However, they must apply themselves and diligently teach their sons. The choice before Israel is clearly stated: Obedience leads to blessing, disobedience to malediction. They must not “walk after other gods.” (11:26-28) Moses then outlines specific laws affecting Israel as they move in to take possession of the Land of Promise. There are (1) laws touching religion and worship; (2) laws relating to administration of justice, government, and war; and (3) laws regulating the private and social life of the people.
20. What points highlight the laws concerning worship?
20 (1) Religion and worship (12:1–16:17). When the Israelites enter the land, every vestige of false religion​—its high places, altars, pillars, sacred poles, and images—​must be absolutely destroyed. Israel must worship only in the place where Jehovah their God chooses to put his name, and there they must rejoice in him, all of them. Regulations on the eating of meat and sacrifices include repeated reminders that they must not eat blood. “Simply be firmly resolved not to eat the blood . . . You must not eat it, in order that it may go well with you and your sons after you, because you will do what is right in Jehovah’s eyes.” (12:16, 23-25, 27; 15:23) Moses now launches into an outspoken condemnation of idolatry. Israel must not even inquire into the ways of false religion. If a prophet is proved to be false, he must be put to death, and apostates​—even one’s dear relative or friend, yes, even entire cities—​must likewise be devoted to destruction. Next come regulations on clean and unclean food, the payment of tenths, and the care of the Levites. The interests of debtors, the poor, and bond slaves are to be lovingly protected. Finally, Moses reviews the annual festivals as times to thank Jehovah for his blessing: “Three times in the year every male of yours should appear before Jehovah your God in the place that he will choose: in the festival of the unfermented cakes and in the festival of weeks and in the festival of booths, and none should appear before Jehovah empty-handed.”​—16:16.
21. What laws are given relating to justice, and what important prophecy does Moses utter?
21 (2) Justice, government, and war (16:18–20:20). First of all, Moses gives the laws affecting judges and officers. Justice is the important thing, bribes and perverted judgment being hateful to Jehovah. The procedures in establishing evidence and handling legal cases are outlined. “At the mouth of two witnesses or of three witnesses the one dying should be put to death.” (17:6) Laws are stated concerning kings. Provision is made for the priests and Levites. Spiritism is outlawed as “detestable to Jehovah.” (18:12) Looking far into the future, Moses declares: “A prophet from your own midst, from your brothers, like me, is what Jehovah your God will raise up for you​—to him you people should listen.” (18:15-19) However, a false prophet must die. This section closes with laws concerning cities of refuge and the avenging of blood, as well as qualifications for military exemptions and the rules of war.
22. Laws governing what private and social matters are discussed?
22 (3) Private and social life (21:1–26:19). Laws touching the everyday life of the Israelites are set forth on such matters as a person found slain, marriage to captive women, the right of the firstborn, a rebellious son, the hanging of a criminal on a stake, evidence of virginity, sex crimes, castration, illegitimate sons, treatment of foreigners, sanitation, payment of interest and vows, divorce, kidnapping, loans, wages, and harvest gleanings. The limit for beating a man is to be 40 strokes. A bull must not be muzzled while threshing. The procedure for brother-in-law marriage is outlined. Accurate weights must be used, for injustice is detestable to Jehovah.
23. What does Moses show will result when God’s people obey His commandments?
23 Before concluding this fervent discourse, Moses recalls how Amalek struck the weary Israelites from the rear as they fled from Egypt, and Moses commands Israel to “wipe out the mention of Amalek from under the heavens.” (25:19) When they enter into the land, they must offer the firstfruits of the soil with rejoicing, and they must also offer the tithes with the thankful prayer to Jehovah: “Do look down from your holy dwelling, the heavens, and bless your people Israel and the soil that you have given us, just as you swore to our forefathers, the land flowing with milk and honey.” (26:15) If they carry out these commandments with all their heart and soul, Jehovah, on his part, will ‘put them high above all the other nations that he has made, resulting in praise and reputation and beauty, while they prove themselves a people holy to Jehovah their God, just as he has promised.’​—26:19.
24. What blessings and cursings does the third discourse set before Israel?
24 Moses’ third discourse (27:1–28:68). In this the older men of Israel and the priests are associated with Moses as he recites at length Jehovah’s curses for disobedience and the blessings for faithfulness. Dire warnings are given concerning the fearful results of unfaithfulness. If Israel as his holy people keep listening to the voice of Jehovah their God, they will enjoy wonderful blessings, and all the peoples of the earth will see that Jehovah’s name is called upon them. However, if they fail in this, Jehovah will send upon them “the curse, confusion and rebuke.” (28:20) They will be stricken by loathsome disease, by drought, and by famine; their enemies will pursue and enslave them, and they will be scattered and annihilated out of the land. These curses, and more, will come upon them if they “will not take care to carry out all the words of this law that are written in this book so as to fear this glorious and fear-inspiring name, even Jehovah, [their] God.”​—28:58.
25. (a) What covenant does Jehovah now conclude with Israel? (b) What choice does Moses place before the people?
25 Moses’ fourth discourse (29:1–30:20). Jehovah now concludes a covenant with Israel at Moab. This incorporates the Law, as restated and explained by Moses, that will guide Israel as they enter the Land of Promise. The solemn oath accompanying the covenant drives home the nation’s responsibilities. Finally, Moses calls the heavens and the earth to witness as he places before the people life and death, the blessing and the malediction, and exhorts: “You must choose life in order that you may keep alive, you and your offspring, by loving Jehovah your God, by listening to his voice and by sticking to him; for he is your life and the length of your days, that you may dwell upon the ground that Jehovah swore to your forefathers Abraham, Isaac and Jacob to give to them.”​—30:19, 20.
26. What final arrangements does Moses make before his death?
26 Commissioning of Joshua, and Moses’ song (31:1–32:47). Chapter 31 relates how, after writing the Law and giving instructions concerning the regular public reading of it, Moses commissions Joshua, telling him to be courageous and strong, and then how Moses prepares a memorial song and completes the writing of the words of the Law and arranges for it to be placed at the side of the ark of the covenant of Jehovah. After that, Moses speaks the words of the song to all the congregation as a final exhortation.
27. What powerful message is contained in Moses’ song?
27 How appreciatively does Moses’ song open, identifying the refreshing Source of his instruction! “My instruction will drip as the rain, my saying will trickle as the dew, as gentle rains upon grass and as copious showers upon vegetation. For I shall declare the name of Jehovah.” Yes, attribute greatness to “our God,” “the Rock.” (32:2-4) Make known his perfect activity, his just ways, and his faithfulness, righteousness, and uprightness. It was shameful that Israel acted ruinously, though Jehovah encircled them in an empty, howling desert, safeguarding them as the pupil of his eye and hovering over them as an eagle over its fledglings. He made his people fat, calling them Jeshurun, “Upright One,” but they incited him to jealousy with strange gods and became “sons in whom there is no faithfulness.” (32:20) Vengeance and retribution are Jehovah’s. He puts to death and makes alive. When he sharpens his glittering sword and his hand takes hold on judgment, he will indeed pay back vengeance to his adversaries. What confidence this should inspire in his people! As the song says in climax, it is a time to “be glad, you nations, with his people.” (32:43) What worldly poet could ever approach the exalted beauty, power, and depth of meaning of this song to Jehovah?
28. How is Jehovah exalted in Moses’ final blessing?
28 Moses’ final blessing (32:48–34:12). Moses is now given final instructions concerning his death, but he is not yet through with his theocratic service. First, he must bless Israel, and in doing this, he again extols Jehovah, the King in Jeshurun, as beaming forth with his holy myriads. By name the tribes receive individual blessings, and then Moses praises Jehovah as the eminent One: “A hiding place is the God of ancient time, and underneath are the indefinitely lasting arms.” (33:27) From a heart brimming with appreciation, he then speaks his final words to the nation: “Happy you are, O Israel! Who is there like you, a people enjoying salvation in Jehovah?”​—33:29.
29. In what ways was Moses outstanding?
29 After viewing the Land of Promise from Mount Nebo, Moses dies, and Jehovah buries him in Moab, his tomb being unknown and unhonored to this day. He lived to be 120 years of age, but “his eye had not grown dim, and his vital strength had not fled.” Jehovah had used him to perform great signs and miracles, and as the final chapter reports, there had not yet “risen up a prophet in Israel like Moses, whom Jehovah knew face to face.”​—34:7, 10.
WHY BENEFICIAL
30. How does Deuteronomy provide a fitting conclusion to the Pentateuch?
30 As the concluding book of the Pentateuch, Deuteronomy ties together all that has gone before in declaring and sanctifying the great name of Jehovah God. He alone is God, exacting exclusive devotion and tolerating no rivalry by demon gods of false religious worship. In this day, all Christians must give earnest attention to the great principles underlying God’s law and obey him so that they will be free of his curse as he sharpens his glittering sword for execution of vengeance on his adversaries. His greatest and first commandment must become the guidepost in their lives: “You must love Jehovah your God with all your heart and all your soul and all your vital force.”​—6:5.
31. How do other inspired scriptures draw on Deuteronomy in enriching appreciation for God’s purposes?
31 The rest of the Scriptures frequently refer to Deuteronomy to enrich appreciation for the divine purposes. In addition to his quotations in answering the Tempter, Jesus made many other references. (Deut. 5:16​—Matt. 15:4; Deut. 17:6​—Matt. 18:16 and John 8:17) These continue into Revelation, where the glorified Jesus finally warns against adding to or taking away from the scroll of Jehovah’s prophecy. (Deut. 4:2​—Rev. 22:18) Peter quotes from Deuteronomy in clinching his powerful argument that Jesus is the Christ and the Prophet greater than Moses whom Jehovah promised to raise up in Israel. (Deut. 18:15-19​—Acts 3:22, 23) Paul quotes from it with reference to rewards for workers, thorough investigation at the mouth of witnesses, and the instruction of children.​—Deut. 25:4​—1 Cor. 9:8-10 and; 1 Tim. 5:17, 18; Deut. 13:14 and De 19:15​—1 Tim. 5:19 and; 2 Cor. 13:1; Deut. 5:16​—Eph. 6:2, 3.
32. In what respect are Joshua, Gideon, and the prophets fine examples for us?
32 Not only the writers of the Christian Scriptures but also God’s servants of pre-Christian times drew instruction and encouragement from Deuteronomy. We do well to follow their example. Consider the implicit obedience of Moses’ successor, Joshua, in devoting conquered cities to destruction during the invasion of Canaan, taking no spoil as did Achan. (Deut. 20:15-18 and De 21:23​—Josh. 8:24-27, 29) Gideon’s elimination of those “afraid and trembling” from his army was in obedience to the Law. (Deut. 20:1-9​—Judg. 7:1-11) It was out of faithfulness to the law of Jehovah that the prophets in Israel and Judah spoke boldly and courageously in condemnation of backsliding nations. Amos provides an excellent example of this. (Deut. 24:12-15​—Amos 2:6-8) Indeed, there are literally hundreds of examples tying Deuteronomy in with the rest of God’s Word, thus showing that it is an integral and beneficial part of the harmonious whole.
33. (a) How does Deuteronomy breathe praise to Jehovah? (b) What does the accompanying table show as to the worldly nations’ recognition of principles of God’s law?
33 The very essence of Deuteronomy breathes praise to the Sovereign God, Jehovah. It stresses throughout: ‘Worship Jehovah; render him exclusive devotion.’ Though the Law is no longer binding upon Christians, its underlying principles have not been abrogated. (Gal. 3:19) How much true Christians can learn from this dynamic book of God’s law, with its progressive teaching, candor, and simplicity of presentation! Why, even the nations of the world have recognized the excellence of Jehovah’s supreme law, writing many of the regulations of Deuteronomy into their own lawbooks. The accompanying table gives interesting examples of laws that they have drawn on or applied in principle.
34. What connection is there between this “Repetition of the Law” and God’s Kingdom?
34 Moreover, this explanation of the Law points to and heightens appreciation of God’s Kingdom. How so? While on earth the King-Designate, Jesus Christ, was thoroughly acquainted with the book and applied it, as his skillful references to it show. In spreading his Kingdom rule over all the earth, he will govern according to the right principles of this same “law,” and all who come to bless themselves in him as the Kingdom “seed” will have to obey these principles. (Gen. 22:18; Deut. 7:12-14) It is beneficial and advantageous to start obeying them now. Far from being out-of-date, this 3,500-year-old “law” speaks to us today in dynamic tones, and it will keep on speaking right on into the new world under God’s Kingdom. May Jehovah’s name continue to be sanctified among his people in the application of all the beneficial instruction of the Pentateuch, which so gloriously reaches its climax in Deuteronomy​—certainly an inspired and inspiring part of “all Scripture”!
[Footnotes]
See the list of “Quotations from the Old Testament” in The New Testament in Original Greek, by B. F. Westcott and F. J. A. Hort, 1956, pages 601-18.
Deuteronomy 3:9, footnote.
Halley’s Bible Handbook, 1988, Henry H. Halley, page 56.
[Chart on page 41]
     SOME LEGAL PRECEDENTS IN DEUTERONOMYd
  I. Personal and family laws            Chapters and Verses
     A. Personal relations
        1. Parents and children          5:16
        2. Marriage relations            22:30; 27:20, 22, 23
        3. Laws of divorce               22:13-19, 28, 29
     B. Property rights                  22:1-4
 II. Constitutional laws
     A. Qualifications and duties         17:14-20        of the king
     B. Military regulations
        1. Exemptions from military      20:1, 5-7; 24:5           service
        2. Minor officers                  20:9
III. The judiciary
     A. Duties of judges                 16:18, 20
     B. Supreme court of appeal          17:8-11
 IV. Criminal laws
     A. Crimes against the state
        1. Bribery, perverting justice   16:19, 20
        2. Perjury                       5:20
     B. Crimes against morality
        1. Adultery                     5:18; 22:22-24
        2. Unlawful marriage            22:30; 27:20, 22, 23
     C. Crimes against the person
        1. Murder and assault           5:17; 27:24
        2. Rape and seduction           22:25-29
  V. Humane laws
     A. Kindness toward animals         25:4; 22:6, 7
     B. Consideration for the           24:6, 10-18        unfortunate
     C. Building safety code            22:8
     D. Treatment of dependent          15:12-15; 21:10-14;        classes, including slaves       27:18, 19        and captives
     E. Philanthropic provisions        14:28, 29; 15:1-11;        for the needy                   16:11, 12; 24:19-22
[Footnotes]
Israel’s Laws and Legal Precedents, 1907, C. F. Kent, pages vii through xviii; see also Insight on the Scriptures, Vol. 2, pages 214-20.

