Bible Book Number 63​—2 John
Writer: Apostle John
Place Written: Ephesus, or near
Writing Completed: c. 98 C.E.
 1. To whom may Second John have been written?
JOHN’S second letter is short​—it could have been written on a single sheet of papyrus—​but it is full of meaning. It is addressed “to the chosen lady and to her children.” Since “Kyria” (Greek for “lady”) did exist as a proper name at the time, some Bible scholars feel that an individual by that name was being addressed. On the other hand, it is thought by some that John was writing to a Christian congregation, referring to it as “the chosen lady.” This may have been done in order to confuse persecutors. In that case, the greetings of the “sister” mentioned in the last verse would be those of the members of another congregation. So the second letter was not intended to be as general in scope as the first, for it evidently was written either to an individual or to one particular congregation.​—2 Jo Vs. 1.
 2. (a) What evidence points to the apostle John as writer of Second John? (b) What suggests that the letter was written in or near Ephesus, about 98 C.E., and what supports its authenticity?
2 There is no reason to doubt that John wrote this letter. The writer calls himself “the older man.” This certainly fits John not only because of his advanced age but also because, as one of the “pillars” (Gal. 2:9) and the last surviving apostle, he was truly an “older man” in the Christian congregation. He was well-known, and no further identification would be required for his readers. His writership is also indicated by the similarity in style to that of the first letter and John’s Gospel. Like the first letter, the second letter appears to have been written in or around Ephesus, about 98 C.E. Concerning Second and Third John, McClintock and Strong’s Cyclopedia comments: “From their general similarity, we may conjecture that the two epistles were written shortly after the 1st Epistle from Ephesus. They both apply to individual cases of conduct the principles which had been laid down in their fullness in the 1st Epistle.”a In support of its authenticity, the letter is quoted by Irenaeus, of the second century, and was accepted by Clement of Alexandria, of the same period.b Also, John’s letters are listed in the Muratorian Fragment.
 3. Why did John write the letter?
3 As was true of First John, the reason for this letter is the onslaught by false teachers against the Christian faith. John wants to warn his readers about such ones so they can recognize them and stay clear of them, while continuing to walk in the truth, in mutual love.
CONTENTS OF SECOND JOHN
 4. Why particularly does John admonish loving one another, and how must those who push ahead beyond the teaching of Christ be treated?
4 Love one another; reject apostates (Vss. 1-13). After expressing his love in the truth for ‘the chosen lady and her children,’ John rejoices that he has found some of them walking in the truth, as commanded by the Father. He requests that they show their love for one another by continuing to walk according to God’s commandments. For deceivers and antichrists have gone forth into the world, who do not confess Jesus Christ as coming in the flesh. He that pushes ahead beyond the teaching of Christ does not have God, but he that remains in this teaching “has both the Father and the Son.” Anyone that does not bring this teaching is not to be received into their homes, nor is he even to be greeted. John has many things to write them, but instead he hopes to come and speak with them face-to-face, that their joy may be “in full measure.”​—Vss. 9, 12.
WHY BENEFICIAL
 5. (a) What situation arose in John’s day that has also arisen in modern times? (b) Like John, how can we today show appreciation for the unity of the congregation?
5 It appears that in John’s day, as in modern times, there were some who were not content to stay with the plain, simple teachings of Christ. They wanted something more, something that would tickle their ego, something that would exalt them and put them in a class with worldly philosophers, and they were willing to contaminate and divide the Christian congregation in order to gain their selfish ends. John valued the harmony of the congregation that rests in love and in right teaching in union with the Father and the Son. We should place like store on the unity of the congregation today, even refusing fellowship or greetings to those who apostatize to another teaching beyond that received through the inspired Scriptures. By continuing to walk according to God’s commandments, and in the full measure of joy to be found in true Christian association, we can be assured that “there will be with us undeserved kindness, mercy and peace from God the Father and from Jesus Christ the Son of the Father, with truth and love.” (Vs. 3) Certainly John’s second letter underlines the blessedness of such Christian oneness.
[Footnotes]
1981 reprint, Vol. IV, page 955.
New Bible Dictionary, second edition, 1986, edited by J. D. Douglas, page 605.

