Bible Book Number 9​—1 Samuel
Writers: Samuel, Gad, Nathan
Place Written: Israel
Writing Completed: c. 1078 B.C.E.
Time Covered: c. 1180–1078 B.C.E.
 1. What great change in the organization of the nation of Israel came in 1117 B.C.E., and what conditions were to follow thereafter?
IN THE year 1117 B.C.E., there came a momentous change in Israel’s national organization. A human king was appointed! This happened while Samuel was serving as Jehovah’s prophet in Israel. Though Jehovah had foreknown and foretold it, still the change to a monarchy, as demanded by the people of Israel, came as a stunning blow to Samuel. Devoted as he had been to Jehovah’s service from birth, and filled as he was with reverential recognition of Jehovah’s kingship, Samuel foresaw disastrous results for his fellow members of God’s holy nation. Only at Jehovah’s direction did Samuel give in to their demands. “Upon that Samuel spoke to the people about the rightful due of the kingship and wrote it in a book and deposited it before Jehovah.” (1 Sam. 10:25) Thus there came to an end the era of the judges, and there began the era of human kings that would see Israel rise to unprecedented power and prestige, only to fall finally into disgrace and divorcement from Jehovah’s favor.
 2. Who wrote First Samuel, and what were their qualifications?
2 Who would qualify to make the divine record of this momentous period? Fittingly, Jehovah chose the faithful Samuel to start the writing. Samuel means “Name of God,” and he was indeed outstanding as an upholder of Jehovah’s name in those days. It appears that Samuel wrote the first 24 chapters of the book. Then, at his death, Gad and Nathan took up the writing, completing the last few years of the record down to Saul’s death. This is indicated by 1 Chronicles 29:29, which reads: “As for the affairs of David the king, the first ones and the last, there they are written among the words of Samuel the seer and among the words of Nathan the prophet and among the words of Gad the visionary.” Unlike Kings and Chronicles, the books of Samuel make practically no reference to earlier records, and thus David’s contemporaries Samuel, Gad, and Nathan are confirmed as the writers. All three of these men held positions of trust as prophets of Jehovah and were opposed to the idolatry that had sapped the strength of the nation.
 3. (a) How did First Samuel come to be a separate Bible book? (b) When was it completed, and what period does it cover?
3 The two books of Samuel were originally one roll, or volume. Samuel was divided into two books when this part of the Greek Septuagint was published. In the Septuagint, First Samuel was called First Kingdoms. This division and the name First Kings were adopted by the Latin Vulgate and continue in Catholic Bibles to this day. That First and Second Samuel originally formed one book is shown by the Masoretic note to 1 Samuel 28:24, which states that this verse is in the middle of the book of Samuel. The book appears to have been completed about 1078 B.C.E. Hence First Samuel likely covers a period of a little more than a hundred years, from about 1180 to 1078 B.C.E.
 4. How has the accuracy of the record in First Samuel been supported?
4 Evidence abounds as to the accuracy of the record. Geographic locations fit the events described. Interestingly, Jonathan’s successful attack on a Philistine garrison at Michmash, which led to the complete rout of the Philistines, was repeated in World War I by a British Army officer, who reportedly routed the Turks by following the landmarks described in Samuel’s inspired record.​—14:4-14.a
 5. How do Bible writers testify to the genuineness of First Samuel?
5 However, there are even stronger proofs of the inspiration and authenticity of the book. It contains the striking fulfillment of Jehovah’s prophecy that Israel would ask for a king. (Deut. 17:14; 1 Sam. 8:5) Years later, Hosea confirmed its record, quoting Jehovah as saying, “I proceeded to give you a king in my anger, and I shall take him away in my fury.” (Hos. 13:11) Peter implied that Samuel was inspired when he identified Samuel as a prophet who had ‘plainly declared the days’ of Jesus. (Acts 3:24) Paul quoted 1 Samuel 13:14 in briefly highlighting the history of Israel. (Acts 13:20-22) Jesus himself stamped the account as authentic by asking the Pharisees in his day: “Have you not read what David did when he and the men with him got hungry?” He then related the account of David’s asking for the showbread. (Matt. 12:1-4; 1 Sam. 21:1-6) Ezra also accepted the account as genuine, as already mentioned.​—1 Chron. 29:29.
 6. What other internal Bible evidence shows First Samuel to be authentic?
6 This being the original account of David’s activities, every mention of David throughout the Scriptures confirms the book of Samuel as being part of God’s inspired Word. Some of its events are even referred to in superscriptions of the psalms of David, as at Psalm 59 (1 Sam. 19:11), Psalm 34 (1 Sam. 21:13, 14), and Psalm 142 (1 Sam. 22:1 or 1 Sam. 24:1, 3). Thus, the internal evidence of God’s own Word testifies conclusively to the authenticity of First Samuel.
CONTENTS OF FIRST SAMUEL
 7. The history contained in the book concerns the lives of which leaders in Israel?
7 The book covers in part or entirely the life spans of four of Israel’s leaders: Eli the high priest, Samuel the prophet, Saul the first king, and David who was anointed to be the next king.
 8. What are the circumstances of Samuel’s birth and of his becoming “a minister of Jehovah”?
8 Eli’s judgeship and the youthful Samuel (1:1–4:22). As the account opens, we are introduced to Hannah, the favorite wife of Elkanah, a Levite. She is childless and is scorned on this account by Elkanah’s other wife, Peninnah. While the family is making one of its yearly visits to Shiloh, where the ark of Jehovah’s covenant is located, Hannah prays fervently to Jehovah for a son. She promises that if her prayer is answered, she will devote the child to the service of Jehovah. God answers her prayer, and she bears a son, Samuel. As soon as he is weaned, she brings him to the house of Jehovah and places him in the care of the high priest, Eli, as one ‘lent to Jehovah.’ (1:28) Hannah then expresses herself in a jubilant song of thanksgiving and happiness. The boy becomes “a minister of Jehovah before Eli the priest.”​—2:11.
 9. How does Samuel come to be prophet in Israel?
9 All is not well with Eli. He is old, and his two sons have become good-for-nothing scoundrels who do “not acknowledge Jehovah.” (2:12) They use their priestly office to satisfy their greed and immoral lusts. Eli fails to correct them. Jehovah therefore proceeds to send divine messages against the house of Eli, warning that “there will not come to be an old man in your house” and that both of Eli’s sons will die on the one day. (1 Sam. 2:30-34; 1 Ki. 2:27) Finally, He sends the boy Samuel to Eli with an ear-tingling judgment message. Thus young Samuel is accredited as prophet in Israel.​—1 Sam. 3:1, 11.
10. How does Jehovah execute judgment on Eli’s house?
10 In due course Jehovah executes this judgment by bringing up the Philistines. As the tide of battle turns against Israel, the Israelites, shouting loudly, bring the ark of the covenant from Shiloh to their army encampment. Hearing the shouting and learning that the Ark had been brought inside the Israelite camp, the Philistines strengthen themselves and win a startling victory, completely routing the Israelites. The Ark is captured, and Eli’s two sons die. His heart atremble, Eli hears the report. At mention of the Ark, he falls backward off his seat and dies of a broken neck. Thus ends his 40-year judgeship. Truly, “Glory has gone away from Israel,” for the Ark represents Jehovah’s presence with his people.​—4:22.
11. How does the Ark prove to be no magic charm?
11 Samuel judges Israel (5:1–7:17). Now the Philistines too have to learn to their great sorrow that the ark of Jehovah must not be used as a magic charm. When they take the Ark into Dagon’s temple at Ashdod, their god falls flat on his face. On the next day Dagon again falls down flat at the threshold, this time with his head and both palms cut off. This starts the superstitious Philistine practice of ‘not treading upon the threshold of Dagon.’ (5:5) The Philistines hurry the Ark off to Gath and then to Ekron but all to no avail! Torments come in the form of panic, piles, and a plague of rodents. The Philistine axis lords, in final desperation as the death toll mounts, return the Ark to Israel on a new wagon drawn by two cows that were giving suck. At Beth-shemesh disaster befalls some of the Israelites because they look upon the Ark. (1 Sam. 6:19; Num. 4:6, 20) Finally, the Ark comes to rest in the house of Abinadab in the Levite city of Kiriath-jearim.
12. What blessings result from Samuel’s advocacy of right worship?
12 For 20 years the Ark remains in the house of Abinadab. Samuel, grown to manhood, urges Israel to put away the Baals and the Ashtoreth images and to serve Jehovah with all their heart. This they do. As they gather to Mizpah to worship, the axis lords of the Philistines seize the opportunity for battle and catch Israel off guard. Israel calls on Jehovah through Samuel. A loud noise of thunder from Jehovah throws the Philistines into confusion, and the Israelites, strengthened by sacrifice and by prayer, gain a smashing victory. From that time on, ‘the hand of Jehovah continues to be against the Philistines all the days of Samuel.’ (7:13) However, there is no retirement for Samuel. All his life he keeps judging Israel, making a yearly circuit from Ramah, just north of Jerusalem, to Bethel, Gilgal, and Mizpah. In Ramah he builds an altar to Jehovah.
13. How does Israel come to reject Jehovah as King, and of what consequences does Samuel warn?
13 Israel’s first king, Saul (8:1–12:25). Samuel has grown old in Jehovah’s service, but his sons do not walk in their father’s ways, for they accept bribes and pervert judgment. At this time the older men of Israel approach Samuel with the demand: “Now do appoint for us a king to judge us like all the nations.” (8:5) Greatly disturbed, Samuel seeks Jehovah in prayer. Jehovah answers: “It is not you whom they have rejected, but it is I whom they have rejected from being king over them. . . . And now listen to their voice.” (8:7-9) First, however, Samuel must warn them of the dire consequences of their rebellious request: regimentation, taxation, loss of freedom, and eventually bitter sorrow and crying to Jehovah. Undeterred in their wishes, the people demand a king.
14. How does Saul come to be established in the kingship?
14 Now we meet Saul, a son of Kish of the tribe of Benjamin and by far the handsomest and tallest man in Israel. He is directed to Samuel, who honors him at a feast, anoints him, and then introduces him to all Israel at an assembly at Mizpah. Though Saul at first hides among the luggage, he is finally presented as Jehovah’s choice. Samuel once again reminds Israel of the rightful due of kingship, writing it in a book. However, it is not until his victory over the Ammonites, which relieves the siege at Jabesh in Gilead, that Saul’s position as king is strengthened, so the people confirm his kingship at Gilgal. Samuel again exhorts them to fear, serve, and obey Jehovah, and he calls on Jehovah to send a sign in the form of unseasonal thunders and rain in harvesttime. In a frightening demonstration, Jehovah shows his anger at their rejection of him as King.
15. What presumptuous sin leads to Saul’s failure?
15 Saul’s disobedience (13:1–15:35). As the Philistines continue to harass Israel, Saul’s courageous son Jonathan strikes down a Philistine garrison. To avenge this, the enemy sends a huge army, ‘like the sand of the seashore’ for number, and they encamp at Michmash. Unrest sweeps the Israelite ranks. ‘If only Samuel would come to give us Jehovah’s direction!’ Impatient at waiting for Samuel, Saul sins by presumptuously offering up the burnt sacrifice himself. Suddenly Samuel appears. Brushing aside Saul’s lame excuses, he pronounces Jehovah’s judgment: “And now your kingdom will not last. Jehovah will certainly find for himself a man agreeable to his heart; and Jehovah will commission him as a leader over his people, because you did not keep what Jehovah commanded you.”​—13:14.
16. Saul’s rashness results in what difficulties?
16 Jonathan, zealous for Jehovah’s name, again attacks a Philistine outpost, this time with only his armor-bearer, and they quickly strike down about 20 men. An earthquake adds to the enemy’s confusion. They are routed, with Israel in full pursuit. However, the full force of the victory is weakened by Saul’s rash oath forbidding the warriors to eat before the battle is over. The men tire quickly and then sin against Jehovah by eating freshly killed meat without taking time to drain the blood. Jonathan, on his part, has refreshed himself from a honeycomb before hearing of the oath, which he boldly denounces as a hindrance. He is redeemed from death by the people because of the great salvation he has performed in Israel.
17. What further rejection of Saul follows his second serious sin?
17 Now it comes time to carry out Jehovah’s judgment on the despicable Amalekites. (Deut. 25:17-19) They are to be completely wiped out. Nothing is to be spared, man or beast. No spoil is to be taken. Everything must be devoted to destruction. However, Saul disobediently preserves Agag, the Amalekite king, and the best of the flocks and herds, ostensibly to sacrifice to Jehovah. This so displeases the God of Israel that he inspires Samuel to express a second rejection of Saul. Disregarding Saul’s face-saving excuses, Samuel declares: “Does Jehovah have as much delight in burnt offerings and sacrifices as in obeying the voice of Jehovah? Look! To obey is better than a sacrifice . . . Since you have rejected the word of Jehovah, he accordingly rejects you from being king.” (1 Sam. 15:22, 23) Saul then grabs Samuel’s coat to beseech him, but it is ripped from his grasp. Samuel assures him that Jehovah will just as surely rip the kingdom from Saul and give it to a better man. Samuel himself picks up the sword, executes Agag, and turns his back on Saul, never to see him again.
18. On what basis does Jehovah choose David?
18 David’s anointing, his valor (16:1–17:58). Jehovah next directs Samuel to the house of Jesse in Bethlehem of Judah to select and anoint the future king. One by one the sons of Jesse pass in review but are rejected. Jehovah reminds Samuel: “Not the way man sees is the way God sees, because mere man sees what appears to the eyes; but as for Jehovah, he sees what the heart is.” (16:7) Finally, Jehovah indicates his approval of David, the youngest, described as “ruddy, a young man with beautiful eyes and handsome in appearance,” and Samuel anoints him with oil. (16:12) Jehovah’s spirit now comes upon David, but Saul develops a bad spirit.
19. What early victory does David gain in Jehovah’s name?
19 The Philistines again make inroads into Israel, putting forward their champion, Goliath, a giant towering to the height of six cubits and a span (about 9.5 ft) [2.9 m]. He is so monstrous that his coat of mail weighs about 125 pounds [57 kg] and the blade of his spear about 15 pounds [6.8 kg]. (17:4, 5, 7) Day after day this Goliath blasphemously and contemptuously challenges Israel to choose a man and let him come out and fight, but none reply. Saul quakes in his tent. However, David comes to hear the Philistine’s taunts. With righteous indignation and inspired courage, David exclaims: “Who is this uncircumcised Philistine that he has to taunt the battle lines of the living God?” (17:26) Rejecting Saul’s armor because he had never tried it before, David goes out to do battle, equipped only with a shepherd’s staff, a sling, and five smooth stones. Regarding a match with this young shepherd boy as beneath his dignity, Goliath calls down evil on David. The confident reply rings out: “You are coming to me with a sword and with a spear and with a javelin, but I am coming to you with the name of Jehovah of armies.” (17:45) One well-aimed stone is flung from David’s sling, and the champion of the Philistines crumples to the ground! Running to him, in full view of both armies, David draws the giant’s sword and uses it to cut off its owner’s head. What a great deliverance from Jehovah! What rejoicing in the camp of Israel! Now that their champion is dead, the Philistines take to flight, with the jubilant Israelites in hot pursuit.
20. How does Jonathan’s attitude toward David contrast with that of Saul?
20 Saul’s pursuit of David (18:1–27:12). David’s fearless action in behalf of Jehovah’s name opens up a wonderful friendship for him. This is with Jonathan, who is the son of Saul and is the one naturally in line for the kingdom. Jonathan comes “to love him as his own soul,” so that the two conclude a covenant of friendship. (18:1-3) As David’s fame comes to be celebrated in Israel, Saul angrily seeks to kill him, even while giving him his daughter Michal in marriage. Saul’s enmity grows more and more insane, so that at last David has to make his escape with Jonathan’s loving assistance. The two weep at parting, and Jonathan reaffirms his loyalty to David, saying: “May Jehovah himself prove to be between me and you and between my offspring and your offspring to time indefinite.”​—20:42.
21. What events mark David’s flight from Saul?
21 In his flight from the embittered Saul, David and his small band of famished supporters come to Nob. Here the priest Ahimelech, on receiving assurance that David and his men are clean from women, permits them to eat the holy showbread. Now armed with the sword of Goliath, David flees to Gath in Philistine territory, where he feigns insanity. Then he goes on to the cave of Adullam, then to Moab, and later, at the advice of Gad the prophet, back to the land of Judah. Fearful of an uprising in favor of David, the insanely jealous Saul has Doeg the Edomite slaughter the priestly population of Nob, only Abiathar escaping to join David. He becomes priest for the group.
22. How does David demonstrate loyalty to Jehovah and respect for His organization?
22 As a loyal servant of Jehovah, David now wages effective guerrilla warfare against the Philistines. However, Saul continues his all-out campaign to get David, gathering his men of war and hunting him “in the wilderness of En-gedi.” (24:1) David, the beloved of Jehovah, always manages to keep one step ahead of the pursuers. On one occasion he has opportunity to strike down Saul, but he refrains, simply cutting off the skirt of Saul’s coat in evidence that he has spared his life. Even this harmless act strikes David at heart, for he feels he has acted against the anointed of Jehovah. What fine respect he has for Jehovah’s organization!
23. How does Abigail make peace with David and finally become his wife?
23 Though Samuel’s death is now recorded (25:1), his successor scribe keeps the account moving. David requests that Nabal, of Maon in Judah, provide food for him and his men in return for their befriending Nabal’s shepherds. Nabal only ‘screams rebukes’ at David’s men, and David sets out to punish him. (25:14) Realizing the danger, Nabal’s wife, Abigail, secretly takes provisions to David and appeases him. David blesses her for this discreet act and sends her back in peace. When Abigail informs Nabal of what has taken place, his heart is stricken, and ten days later he dies. David himself now marries the gracious and beautiful Abigail.
24. How does David again spare Saul’s life?
24 For a third time, Saul takes up the fanatic pursuit of David, and once again he experiences David’s mercy. “A deep sleep from Jehovah” falls upon Saul and his men. This enables David to enter the camp and take Saul’s spear, but he refrains from thrusting out his hand “against the anointed of Jehovah.” (26:11, 12) David is forced a second time to flee to the Philistines for refuge, and they give him Ziklag as a place of dwelling. From here he keeps up his sorties against others of Israel’s enemies.
25. What third grave sin does Saul commit?
25 Saul’s suicidal end (28:1–31:13). The axis lords of the Philistines move a combined army to Shunem. Saul, in a countermove, takes up his position at Mount Gilboa. He frantically seeks guidance but can get no answer from Jehovah. If only Samuel could be contacted! Disguising himself, Saul commits another grave sin when he goes to seek out a spirit medium at En-dor, behind the Philistine lines. Finding her, he begs her to contact Samuel for him. Anxious to jump to conclusions, Saul assumes that the apparition is the dead Samuel. However, “Samuel” has no comforting message for the king. Tomorrow he will die, and true to Jehovah’s words, the kingdom will be taken from him. In the other camp, the axis lords of the Philistines are going up to the battle. Seeing David and his men among them, they become suspicious and send them home. David’s men arrive back in Ziklag just in time! A raiding band of Amalekites has made off with the family and possessions of David and his men, but David and his men give chase, and all are recovered without harm.
26. How does the calamitous reign of Israel’s first king end?
26 Battle is now joined at Mount Gilboa. Israel suffers a disastrous defeat, and the Philistines get control of strategic areas of the land. Jonathan and other sons of Saul are slain, and the mortally wounded Saul kills himself with his own sword​—a suicide. The victorious Philistines hang the bodies of Saul and his three sons on the walls of the city of Beth-shan, but they are removed from this disgraceful position by the men of Jabesh-gilead. The calamitous reign of Israel’s first king has reached its disastrous end.
WHY BENEFICIAL
27. (a) Wherein did Eli and Saul fail? (b) In what respects are Samuel and David fine examples for overseers and for youthful ministers?
27 What a history is contained in First Samuel! Starkly honest in every detail, it exposes at once both the weakness and the strength of Israel. Here were four leaders in Israel, two who heeded the law of God and two who did not. Note how Eli and Saul were failures: The former neglected to act, and the latter acted presumptuously. On the other hand, Samuel and David showed a love for Jehovah’s way from their youth on, and they prospered accordingly. What valuable lessons we find here for all overseers! How necessary for these to be firm, watchful of cleanness and order in Jehovah’s organization, respectful of his arrangements, fearless, even-tempered, courageous, and lovingly considerate of others! (2:23-25; 24:5, 7; 18:5, 14-16) Note also that the two who were successful had the advantage of a good theocratic training from their youth upward and that they were courageous from an early age in speaking Jehovah’s message and guarding the interests entrusted to them. (3:19; 17:33-37) May all youthful worshipers of Jehovah today become young “Samuels” and “Davids”!
28. How is obedience stressed, and what counsel of First Samuel is repeated later by other Bible writers?
28 Clearly to be remembered among all the beneficial words of this book are those that Jehovah inspired Samuel to utter in judgment of Saul for his failure to “wipe out the mention of Amalek from under the heavens.” (Deut. 25:19) The lesson that ‘obedience is better than sacrifice’ is repeated in various settings at Hosea 6:6, Micah 6:6-8, and Mark 12:33. (1 Sam. 15:22) It is essential that we today benefit from this inspired record by fully and completely obeying the voice of Jehovah our God! Obedience in recognizing the sanctity of blood is also drawn to our attention at 1 Samuel 14:32, 33. Eating flesh without properly draining the blood was regarded as “sinning against Jehovah.” This also applies to the Christian congregation, as is made plain at Acts 15:28, 29.
29. First Samuel illustrates the consequences of what national error on the part of Israel, with what warning to self-willed persons?
29 The book of First Samuel illustrates the pitiful error of a nation that came to view God’s rule from heaven as impractical. (1 Sam. 8:5, 19, 20; 10:18, 19) The pitfalls and futility of human rulership are graphically as well as prophetically portrayed. (8:11-18; 12:1-17) Saul is shown at the outset to be a modest man who had God’s spirit (9:21; 11:6), but his judgment darkened and his heart became bitter as love of righteousness and faith in God diminished. (14:24, 29, 44) His early record of zeal was annulled by his later acts of presumptuousness, disobedience, and infidelity to God. (1 Sam. 13:9; 15:9; 28:7; Ezek. 18:24) His lack of faith bred insecurity, festering into envy, hate, and murder. (1 Sam. 18:9, 11; 20:33; 22:18, 19) He died as he had lived, a failure to his God and to his people, and as a warning to any who might become “self-willed” as he did.​—2 Pet. 2:10-12.
30. What qualities of Samuel may be cultivated with profit by modern-day ministers?
30 However, there is the contrast of the good. For example, note the course of the faithful Samuel, who served Israel all his life without fraud, partiality, or favor. (1 Sam. 12:3-5) He was eager to obey from his boyhood on (3:5), polite and respectful (3:6-8), dependable in performing his duties (3:15), unswerving in his dedication and devotion (7:3-6; 12:2), willing to listen (8:21), ready to uphold Jehovah’s decisions (10:24), firm in his judgment regardless of personalities (13:13), strong for obedience (15:22), and persistent in fulfilling a commission (16:6, 11). He was also one having a favorable report from others. (2:26; 9:6) Not only should his youthful ministry encourage young ones to take up the ministry today (2:11, 18) but his continuance without retirement to the end of his days should uphold those weary with age.​—7:15.
31. In what was Jonathan a fine example?
31 Then there is the splendid example of Jonathan. He showed no hard feelings over the fact that David was anointed to the kingship that he might have inherited. Rather, he recognized David’s fine qualities and made a covenant of friendship with him. Similar unselfish companionships can be most upbuilding and encouraging among those today who faithfully serve Jehovah.​—23:16-18.
32. What fine traits are to be observed in the women Hannah and Abigail?
32 For women, there is the example of Hannah, who accompanied her husband regularly to the place of Jehovah’s worship. She was a prayerful, humble woman, who gave up companionship with her son to keep her word and show appreciation for Jehovah’s kindness. Wonderful indeed was her reward in seeing him embark on a lifetime of fruitful service to Jehovah. (1:11, 21-23, 27, 28) Further, there is the example of Abigail, who displayed a womanly submission and sensibleness that won David’s praise, so that later she became his wife.​—25:32-35.
33. David’s fearless love and loyalty should impel us to what course?
33 David’s love for Jehovah is movingly expressed in the psalms that David composed while being hounded in the wilderness by Saul, the backsliding “anointed of Jehovah.” (1 Sam. 24:6; Ps. 34:7, 8; 52:8; 57:1, 7, 9) And with what heartfelt appreciation did David sanctify Jehovah’s name as he hurled defiance at the taunter Goliath! “I am coming to you with the name of Jehovah of armies . . . This day Jehovah will surrender you into my hand, . . . and people of all the earth will know that there exists a God belonging to Israel. And all this congregation will know that neither with sword nor with spear does Jehovah save, because to Jehovah belongs the battle, and he must give you men into our hand.” (1 Sam. 17:45-47) David, the courageous and loyal “anointed one” of Jehovah, magnified Jehovah as God of all the earth and the only true Source of salvation. (2 Sam. 22:51) May we ever follow this fearless example!
34. How do Jehovah’s Kingdom purposes further unfold in connection with David?
34 What has First Samuel to say about the development of God’s Kingdom purposes? Ah, this brings us to the real highlight of this Bible book! For it is here that we meet David, whose name probably means “Beloved.” David was loved of Jehovah and chosen as the “man agreeable to his heart,” the one fit to be king in Israel. (1 Sam. 13:14) Thus the kingdom passed to the tribe of Judah, in harmony with Jacob’s blessing at Genesis 49:9, 10, and the kingship was due to remain in the tribe of Judah until the Ruler to whom the obedience of all people belongs should come.
35. How did David’s name come to be associated with that of the Kingdom Seed, and what qualities of David will that Seed yet show?
35 Moreover, David’s name is associated with that of the Kingdom Seed, who was also born in Bethlehem and was of David’s line. (Matt. 1:1, 6; 2:1; 21:9, 15) That one is the glorified Jesus Christ, “the Lion that is of the tribe of Judah, the root of David,” and “the root and the offspring of David, and the bright morning star.” (Rev. 5:5; 22:16) Reigning in Kingdom power, this “son of David” will show all the steadfastness and courage of his illustrious forebear in fighting God’s enemies to their downfall and sanctifying Jehovah’s name in all the earth. How strong our confidence in this Kingdom Seed!
[Footnotes]
The Romance of the Last Crusade, 1923, Major Vivian Gilbert, pages 183-6.

