Studies on the Inspired Scriptures and Their Background
The Inspired Scriptures Bring Eternal Benefits
 1. What glorious vision has our review of “all Scripture” opened before our eyes?
OUR review of “all Scripture . . . inspired of God” has opened before our eyes a glorious vision of Jehovah’s sovereignty and his Kingdom purpose. We have noted that the Bible is one Book, with one powerful theme​—the vindication of Jehovah’s sovereignty and the ultimate fulfillment of his purpose for the earth by means of his Kingdom under Christ, the Promised Seed. From the Bible’s opening pages, this one theme is developed and explained through the writings that follow, until, in its closing chapters, the glorious reality of God’s grand purpose by means of his Kingdom is made clear. What a remarkable book the Bible is! Starting from the awe-inspiring creation of the material heavens and of the earth with its creature life, the Bible gives us the one inspired and authentic account of God’s dealings with humankind until our time and carries us through to the complete realization of Jehovah’s glorious creation of “a new heaven and a new earth.” (Rev. 21:1) With his grand purpose fully accomplished by means of the Kingdom of the Seed, Jehovah God is seen in the relationship of a kind Father to a happy united human family, which joins in with all the heavenly hosts in praising him and sanctifying his holy name.
 2, 3. How is the theme involving the Seed developed throughout the Scriptures?
2 How wonderfully this theme involving the Seed is developed throughout the Scriptures! Expressing the first inspired prophecy, God gives the promise that ‘the seed of the woman’ will bruise the serpent in the head. (Gen. 3:15) More than 2,000 years pass, and God tells faithful Abraham: “By means of your seed all nations of the earth will certainly bless themselves.” Over 800 years later, Jehovah gives a like promise to one of Abraham’s descendants, loyal King David, showing that the Seed will be a kingly one. As time passes, Jehovah’s prophets thrillingly join in to foretell the glories of Kingdom rule. (Gen. 22:18; 2 Sam. 7:12, 16; Isa. 9:6, 7; Dan. 2:44; 7:13, 14) Then the Seed himself appears, more than 4,000 years after the first promise in Eden. This One, who is also ‘the seed of Abraham,’ is Jesus Christ, “Son of the Most High,” and to him Jehovah gives “the throne of David his father.”​—Gal. 3:16; Luke 1:31-33.
3 Though this Seed, God’s anointed King, is bruised in death by the Serpent’s earthly seed, God raises him from the dead and exalts him to His own right hand, where he awaits God’s due time to ‘crush Satan’s head.’ (Gen. 3:15; Heb. 10:13; Rom. 16:20) Then the Revelation brings the entire vision to its glorious climax. Christ enters into Kingdom power and hurls “the original serpent, the one called Devil and Satan,” from heaven down to earth. For a short time, the Devil brings woe to the earth and wages war with ‘the remaining ones of the seed of God’s woman.’ But Christ, as “King of kings,” smites the nations. The original Serpent, Satan, is abyssed and then is to be finally destroyed forever. Meanwhile, by means of New Jerusalem, the Lamb’s bride, the benefits of Christ’s sacrifice are applied to mankind for the blessing of all the families of the earth. Thus, the magnificent theme of the inspired Scriptures unfolds before us in all its thrilling grandeur!​—Rev. 11:15; 12:1-12, 17; 19:11-16; 20:1-3, 7-10; 21:1-5, 9; 22:3-5.
BENEFITING FROM THIS INSPIRED RECORD
 4. How can we gain the greatest benefit from the Holy Scriptures, and why?
4 How can we gain the greatest benefit from the Holy Scriptures? We can benefit by letting the Bible go to work in our lives. By daily study and application of the inspired Scriptures, we can get guidance from God. “The word of God is alive and exerts power,” and it can be a marvelous power for righteousness in our lives. (Heb. 4:12) If we continually study and follow the leadings of God’s Word, we will come to “put on the new personality which was created according to God’s will in true righteousness and loyalty.” We will be made new in the force actuating our minds, and we will be transformed by making our minds over, so as to prove to ourselves “the good and acceptable and perfect will of God.”​—Eph. 4:23, 24; Rom. 12:2.
 5. What can we learn from the attitude and example of Moses?
5 We can learn much by observing how other faithful servants of God have benefited from studying God’s Word and meditating upon it. For example, there was Moses, ‘the meekest of all men,’ who was always teachable and willing to learn. (Num. 12:3) We should always have the same prayerful appreciation of Jehovah’s sovereignty as he had. It was Moses who said: “O Jehovah, you yourself have proved to be a real dwelling for us during generation after generation. Before the mountains themselves were born, or you proceeded to bring forth as with labor pains the earth and the productive land, even from time indefinite to time indefinite you are God.” Moses was thoroughly acquainted with God’s wisdom, for he was used by Jehovah in writing the opening books of the Bible. Hence, he understood the importance of daily seeking wisdom from Jehovah. Thus, he prayed to God: “Show us just how to count our days in such a way that we may bring a heart of wisdom in.” Since “the days of our years” may be few, just 70 years, or 80 in the case of “special mightiness,” we are wise if we feast daily upon his Word, for then “the pleasantness of Jehovah our God” will “prove to be upon us,” as it was upon his faithful servant Moses.​—Ps. 90:1, 2, 10, 12, 17.
 6. How may we, like Joshua, make our way successful?
6 How necessary it is to meditate daily on God’s Word! Jehovah made this plain to Moses’ successor, Joshua, telling him: “Only be courageous and very strong to take care to do according to all the law that Moses my servant commanded you. Do not turn aside from it to the right or to the left, in order that you may act wisely everywhere you go. This book of the law should not depart from your mouth, and you must in an undertone read in it day and night, in order that you may take care to do according to all that is written in it; for then you will make your way successful and then you will act wisely.” Did Joshua’s continual reading of Jehovah’s Law ‘make his way successful’? Jehovah’s blessing on his courageous campaign in Canaan supplies the answer.​—Josh. 1:7, 8; 12:7-24.
 7. How did David express his appreciation for the wisdom from God, and how is the same appreciation expressed in Psalm 119?
7 Consider, too, the beloved David, another who deeply treasured wisdom from Jehovah. What heartfelt appreciation he showed for Jehovah’s “law,” “reminder,” “orders,” “commandment,” and “judicial decisions”! As David expressed it: “They are more to be desired than gold, yes, than much refined gold; and sweeter than honey and the flowing honey of the combs.” (Ps. 19:7-10) This exulting theme is expanded and repeated by another psalmist with soul-stirring beauty throughout the 119th Psalm 119. As we daily study God’s Word and abide by its wise counsel, may we ever be able to say to Jehovah: “Your word is a lamp to my foot, and a light to my roadway. Your reminders are wonderful. That is why my soul has observed them.”​—Ps. 119:105, 129.
 8. What sayings of Solomon should we make our very own?
8 In the days of his faithfulness, David’s son Solomon also lived by God’s Word, and in his sayings too, we can find moving expressions of appreciation that we do well to make our very own. Through daily reading and application of the Bible, we will come to understand fully the inner depth of meaning of Solomon’s words: “Happy is the man that has found wisdom, and the man that gets discernment. Length of days is in its right hand; in its left hand there are riches and glory. Its ways are ways of pleasantness, and all its roadways are peace. It is a tree of life to those taking hold of it, and those keeping fast hold of it are to be called happy.” (Prov. 3:13, 16-18) Daily study and obedience to God’s Word lead to the greatest happiness now, together with the assurance of “length of days”​—eternal life in Jehovah’s new world.
 9. What encouragement may we draw from the example of Jeremiah?
9 Not to be overlooked among those who have cherished and obeyed the inspired Scriptures are God’s faithful prophets. Jeremiah, for example, had a very difficult assignment. (Jer. 6:28) As he said: “The word of Jehovah became for me a cause for reproach and for jeering all day long.” But he had been well fortified by his studies of God’s Word, and in fact, he himself was used to write four books of the inspired Scriptures​—First and Second Kings, Jeremiah, and Lamentations. So, what happened when discouragement seemed to envelop Jeremiah and he thought he would desist from preaching “the word of Jehovah”? Let Jeremiah himself answer: “In my heart it proved to be like a burning fire shut up in my bones; and I got tired of holding in, and I was unable to endure it.” He was compelled to speak out Jehovah’s words, and in doing so, he found that Jehovah was with him “like a terrible mighty one.” If we study and keep studying God’s Word, so that it becomes just as much a part of us as it was of Jeremiah, then Jehovah’s invincible power will likewise be with us, and we will be able to triumph over every obstacle in continuing to speak of His glorious Kingdom purpose.​—Jer. 20:8, 9, 11.
10. What role did the Scriptures play in Jesus’ life, and what did he pray in behalf of his disciples?
10 Now, what of our greatest example, “the Chief Agent and Perfecter of our faith, Jesus”? Was he familiar with the inspired Scriptures after the manner of all the prophets and other faithful men before him? Certainly he was, as his many quotations and his course of life in harmony with the Scriptures clearly show. It was with God’s Word in mind that he presented himself to do his Father’s will here on this earth: “Here I have come, in the roll of the book it being written about me. To do your will, O my God, I have delighted, and your law is within my inward parts.” (Heb. 12:2; Ps. 40:7, 8; Heb. 10:5-7) Thus, God’s Word played a key role in Jehovah’s sanctifying of Jesus, or setting him apart for his service. Jesus prayed that his followers might likewise be sanctified: “Sanctify them by means of the truth; your word is truth. Just as you sent me forth into the world, I also sent them forth into the world. And I am sanctifying myself in their behalf, that they also may be sanctified by means of truth.”​—John 17:17-19.
11. (a) What did Peter stress to anointed Christians regarding God’s Word? (b) Why is study of the Bible also important to the great crowd?
11 Being sanctified “by means of the truth,” the spirit-begotten and anointed footstep followers of Jesus must ‘remain in his word’ in order to be really his disciples. (John 8:31) Thus, Peter, in writing to “those who have obtained a faith,” stressed the need for continued study and attention to God’s Word: “For this reason I shall be disposed always to remind you of these things, although you know them and are firmly set in the truth that is present in you.” (2 Pet. 1:1, 12) Continual reminders, such as are found in the daily reading and study of God’s Word, are important also to all who hope to be of the “great crowd” whom John saw in vision after describing the 144,000 sealed ones of the tribes of spiritual Israel. For unless they keep on taking in life’s water of truth, how can this great crowd intelligently “keep on crying with a loud voice, saying: ‘Salvation we owe to our God, who is seated on the throne, and to the Lamb’”?​—Rev. 7:9, 10; 22:17.
12. Why must we constantly meditate on God’s Word?
12 We cannot escape it! The way to gain the greatest benefit from the inspired Scriptures, the way to find salvation to everlasting life, is to study those Scriptures and live by them every day of our lives. We must constantly meditate on God’s Word, with the same prayerful attitude of appreciation as expressed by the psalmist: “I shall remember the practices of Jah; for I will remember your marvelous doing of long ago. And I shall certainly meditate on all your activity.” (Ps. 77:11, 12) Meditating on Jehovah’s ‘marvelous doing and activity’ will stir us also to be active in fine works, with everlasting life in view. The purpose of this book, “All Scripture Is Inspired of God and Beneficial,” is to encourage everyone who loves righteousness to share in the eternal and satisfying benefits that accrue from continued study and application of the Word of God.
IN “CRITICAL TIMES”
13. In what “critical times” are we living?
13 This modern age is the most critical time in human history. It is explosive with awesome possibilities. Indeed, it can truly be said that the very survival of the human race is in peril. Most appropriate, then, are the words of the apostle Paul: “But know this, that in the last days critical times hard to deal with will be here. For men will be lovers of themselves, lovers of money, self-assuming, haughty, blasphemers, disobedient to parents, unthankful, disloyal, having no natural affection, not open to any agreement, slanderers, without self-control, fierce, without love of goodness, betrayers, headstrong, puffed up with pride, lovers of pleasures rather than lovers of God, having a form of godly devotion but proving false to its power; and from these turn away.”​—2 Tim. 3:1-5.
14. In view of the times, what advice of Paul should we heed?
14 Why turn away from such ones? Because their godless way is soon to end in destruction! Rather, let us, along with all honesthearted ones, turn to the healthful teaching of the inspired Scriptures, making these Scriptures the very foundation of our daily living. Let us heed the words of Paul to young Timothy: “You, however, continue in the things that you learned and were persuaded to believe.” (2 Tim. 3:14) Yes, “continue” in them, says Paul. Doing so, we must humbly let the Scriptures teach us, reprove us, set things straight for us, and discipline us in righteousness. Jehovah knows what we need, for his thoughts are so much higher than our thoughts. By his inspired Scriptures, he tells us what is beneficial for us so that we may be fully equipped and competent for the good work of witnessing to his name and Kingdom. Paul gives this outstanding advice in the context of describing the “critical times” that come “in the last days”: “All Scripture is inspired of God and beneficial for teaching, for reproving, for setting things straight, for disciplining in righteousness, that the man of God may be fully competent, completely equipped for every good work.” May all of us survive these critical times by giving heed to this inspired advice!​—2 Tim. 3:16, 17; Isa. 55:8-11.
15. (a) What has resulted from disobedience? (b) What glorious opportunity has been opened up by the obedience of Christ?
15 Obedience to the inspired Scriptures should be our goal. It was through disobedience to the word and command of Jehovah that the first man fell into sin and death, “and thus death spread to all men.” So man lost the opportunity that might have been his in the Edenic Paradise to “actually take fruit also from the tree of life and eat and live to time indefinite.” (Rom. 5:12; Gen. 2:17; 3:6, 22-24) But it is through the obedience of Christ and on the basis of the sacrifice of this “Lamb of God” that Jehovah will cause “a river of water of life, clear as crystal,” to flow forth for the benefit of all those of mankind who dedicate themselves to Him in obedience. As the apostle John saw it in vision: “On this side of the river and on that side there were trees of life producing twelve crops of fruit, yielding their fruits each month. And the leaves of the trees were for the curing of the nations.”​—John 1:29; Rev. 22:1, 2; Rom. 5:18, 19.
16. Of what eternal benefit are the inspired Scriptures?
16 Once again the way to everlasting life lies open to mankind. Happy, then, are those who heed the inspired scripture: “You must choose life in order that you may keep alive, you and your offspring, by loving Jehovah your God, by listening to his voice and by sticking to him; for he is your life and the length of your days.” (Deut. 30:19, 20) Blessed is Jehovah, the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who makes this grand provision for life through the sacrifice of his Son and by means of his everlasting Kingdom. How great is our joy and gratitude that we can read and reread, study and restudy, and meditate on these precious truths, for truly “all Scripture is inspired of God and beneficial,” leading on to eternal life either in heaven or on a paradise earth. (John 17:3; Eph 1:9-11) Then everything will be ‘holiness to Jehovah.’​—Zech. 14:20; Rev. 4:8.

