From Our Readers
History  I am writing in regard to the series “What Should We Learn From History?” (March 8, 2001) These were among the most brilliantly written articles I have ever read. I could not put the magazine down until I had completely finished it. I am constantly amazed at the research that goes into your magazine and the never-ending quantity and quality of information presented.
M. C., United States
Debilitating Disease  Thank you very much for the article “My Struggle With a Debilitating Illness.” (March 8, 2001) My life with interstitial cystitis (IC) began when I was 18. I’ve always been bothered by the limitations my illness has placed upon me. I have felt that I haven’t demonstrated enough endurance, and I have struggled with feelings of unworthiness. Years of pent-up emotion was released after I read this article. Reading that IC also restricted Tanya Salay helped me to get a better perspective on things.
B. Y., United States
When I read articles like this, my own problems fade into the background. I want Tanya Salay to know how proud I am of her and how glad I am that she didn’t take her life but relied on Jehovah. Her husband is to be commended as well for his support.
I. W., United States
Thank you so much for articles of this nature. Even if we do not suffer from these problems ourselves, such articles help us to be more understanding of those who do.
C. L., United States
Unrequited Love  As I read the article “Young People Ask . . . How Can I Turn Him Down?” (March 22, 2001), I couldn’t help but feel the pain of my own experience. I ignored my feelings, and our marriage was a disaster. As the article said, “pity is a poor foundation on which to build a marriage.”
A. M., United States
A young man asked me to date him, but since our goals were different, I refused. In spite of that, he again declared his feelings for me. I was badly shaken, fearing that if I turned him down, I’d be alone. However, when I read this article, my feelings settled down. I knew my decision was the right one.
S. N., Japan
Three days before I received this article, a young man said to me, “I’d like to get to know you better.” I felt torn in two. I was attracted to him but knew that I was too young to date. Now after reading this article and rereading the article “Young People Ask . . . What if My Parents Think I’m Too Young to Date?” (January 22, 2001), I know what I have to do.
R. S., United States
I thought I was making the right decision when I got engaged. My parents and mature Christian friends advised me that it did not seem I had made the right choice, but I did not pay attention to them. After more than a month, I broke off the engagement. If only I had had the courage to say no before things got so serious, I would have saved myself and my former fiancé a lot of suffering.
V. T., Italy
Circulatory System  I recently had an operation on my lymphatic system and was suffering with edema. When I read the article “The Marvels of the Circulatory System” (March 22, 2001), I felt reassured. On the last page of the article, I found an explanation of why such swelling occurs.
M. R., Italy

