Vol. XXXIX 


BROOKLYN, N. T., FEBRUARY 15, 191SNo
. 4 


TWO CLASSES IN THE CHURCH 

"Nevertheless the foundation of God standeth sure, Jtaving this seal, The Lord knoweth them that are his. And, Let every one 

that nameth the name of Christ depart from iniquity. But in a great house there are not only vessels of 

gold and of silver, but also of wood and of earth; and some to honor f and some to 

less honor." — 2 Timothy 2:19, 20. 

The Scriptures clearly teach that when God's plan con- dom. {Matthew 13:43) Those who have sacrificed all things 

"to follow in the footsteps of the Master, because of their love 
for God and his beloved. Son, are anxious to awake in his 
likeness and be forever w'ith the Lord. — Psalm 27:4. 
BE HOT AT EASE (IDU5) IN ZION 
Some who for a long while have actively participated in 
the harvest work under the direction of the Watch Tower 
Bible and Tract Society have recently assumed a position 
in opposition to its work, and their speech and conduct has 
tended to disturb some of the Lord's dear sheep. Reference 
is made to Thk W t atch Tower of January 15, 1918, page 30, 
wherein the brother who is really the leader of those who 
take this position in opposition is quoted as saying, in substance
, that those adhering to the Society or having anything
 to do with its present management, and all those who 
are participating in the distribution of The Bible Students 
Monthly, "The Fall of Babylon," and of "The Finished Mystery
'' are of the great company class. The purposes in making 
such a statement could be only to induce those actively engaged
 in the harvest work to cease their efforts and to discerning
 man is completed there will be four classes redeemed 
from among men; viz., (1) the little flock, who are to sit with 
Christ on his throne, reign with him in the regeneration of 
the human race, and who will forever be the recipients of 
God's favor through Christ Jesus; (2) the great company 
class, born on the spirit plane, who are to be the servants before
 the throne, like unto angels; (3) the ancient worthies, 
who will be princes or representatives of the. Christ in the 
earth; and (4) restored human beings, who shall inherit the 
earth forever. All of these classes, "when finally completed, 
will be perfectly happy in the position they gain. 

The little flock is mentioned in the Scriptures under many 
names, such as, the bride of Christ, the body of Christ, the 
royal priesthood, etc. To such the Jx>rd Jesus said, "I appoint 
unto you a kingdom, as my Father hath appointed unto me; 
that ye may eat and drink at my table in my kingdom, and 
sit on thrones judging the twelve tribes of Israel." (Luke 22: 
29,30) These shall "bear the image of the heavenly" (1 Corinthians
 15:49) and shall "shine forth as the sun in the king- 


[6211] 


(52 53) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


BaoOKtYir, N. Y. 


courage others, so that they would not enter the service, and 
to cause as many as possible to withdraw their support from 
the Society and thus hinder its work. 

To aid some of the weaker in faith to get their equilibrium
 and to encourage all the dear saints to press with vigor 
the good fight of faith while yet it is called day, we mention 
these matters here. We have no desire for a controversy and 
will not engage in one. It is not for ua to judge who is of 
the great company class and who is of the little flock. We 
desire to leave all judgment to him who judge th without mistake
 and who doeth all things well. It is proper, however, 
that each one of us apply the measuring line of the divine 
Word, that we may have the full assurance of faith, so essential
 to enable us to stand in the hour of peril. The question 
with each of the consecrated now is and should be, Shall we 
be wise virgins, or shall we be foolish virgins? We must answer
 these questions in the light of the Scriptures and according
 to, the Scriptural standard. 

A SAFE RULE 

Where a brother gives an interpretation of a Scripture 
which differs from that given by Brother Russell, and Brother 
Russell's interpretation seems reasonable and in harmony 
with the plan of God, then we believe it a safe rule to follow 
Brother Russell's interpretation, for the reason that he is the 
servant of the ehurch, so constituted by the Lord for the 
Laodicean period; and therefore we should expect the" Lord 
to teach us through him. Where there arises a doubt in the 
mind as to which interpretation is correct, then it is always 
safer to resolve that doubt in favor of Brother Russell's interpretation
. We believe such to be in harmony with the Lord's 
will. 

No one could be either of the little flock or of the great 
company class unless he is spirit- begotten. Both classes must 
be perfected in love ; for God will require perfect love of every 
creature to whom he grants life eternal on any plane. Addressing
 himself to the class who shall ultimately inherit the 
kingdom with him, the great Master said: "If any man will 
come after me, let him deny himself and take up his cross 
and follow me." (Matthew 16:24) No one is called to membership
 in the great company class, but all are called "in one 
hope of our calling." What, then, is the distinction between 
the two? We believe that the whole matter may be summed 
up in a few words by saying that the little flock is zealously 
faithful to the covenant of sacrifice, even unto death, whereas 
those composing the great company class become indifferent 
and negligent. — 2 Peter 1:4-11. 

The Lord Jesus likens the one to the branches in the vine 
which go out to fruit-bearing, developing ripe and luscious 
fruit; while the others bring forth chiefly leaves, or tendrils
 — feeling after earthly honors and emoluments. (John 
15:2) Again, the Lord Jesus, referring to the great company 
class, said: "How can ye believe [effectively] which receive 
honor one of another and seek not the honor which cometh 
from God only?" (John 5:44) This would mean that the 
course whieh is pleasing to the Lord is that which leads one 
to give all glory and honor to him and to seek no honor, glory 
or recognition for self, The Apostle again refers to the great 
company class as being din obedient, because they fail to mortify
, or put to death, earthly and sinful tendencies. (Colossians
 3:5, G) Another picture is given of the great company 
class, as contrasted with the little ilock, in Joshua £i:25, -where 
the great company class is represented by Rahab, who was 
in the citadel of Jericho when it fell, representing those who 
are in Babylon at it^ fall; while the Christ class, pictured by 
Joshua, causes it to fall.— Z. '07-267. 

These two classes are pictured in the experiences of Gideon
's band. The 9,700 represented those of the larger company
 who buried their faces from the work by getting down 
and drinking , out of the brook; while the little flock is pictured
 by those dipping the water in their hands and drinking 
it, thus showing a class with their eyes out over the horizon, 
seeking to serve, to spend and be spent in the Master's service
, who are anxious not only to drink the truth, but, having 
it in their hand (using its power), to do with their might 
what their hands find to do. (Judges 7:2-8) Again, the apostle
 represents the great company class as being double-minded, 
having some idea of attaining heavenly things and some idea 
of getting all the earthly tl tings they can in the way of honor, 
emoluments, etc. — James 1:8. 

Furthermore, the great company class is likened unto 
those who, while they love the truth, fail to become active in 
its proclamation because of faint-heartedness and fear. {Numbers
 13:31; Z. '04-220) They are also represented by the 
prophet as saying, "The harvest [the time of special favor] is 
past, the summer is ended, and we are not saved." (Jeremiah 


8:20) They are also pictured as those who do not keep^ their 
garments unspotted from the world, but who must paas 
through the great tribulation with which the Gospel age is to 
end.— Revelation 7:9-16. 

CHARACTERISTICS OF THE OVERCOMES S 

The Psalmist seems clearly to mark out a characteristic 
of the little flock when he says: "I am become a stranger 
unto my brethren, and an alien unto my mother's children. 
For the zeal of thine house hath eaten me up; and the 
reproaches of them that reproached thee are fallen upon me." 
(Psalm 69:8,3) The one who has fully consecrated himself 
to walk in the footsteps of Jesus realizes that he must forget 
his own people and his father's house and become a stranger 
and an alien to the things of the earth ; and he does so gladly. 
As he performs the terms of his covenant, he find's that the reproaches
 that fell upon the Lord Jesus now fall upon him. He 
esteems it a privilege to prove his devotion to the Lord by enduring
 hardness in his service as a good soldier. He expects 
to receive • taunts, reproaches and persecutions; and receiving 
these, he endures them patiently, while his heart grows in 
love for the Lord, for his brethren, and his pity love increases
 for even those who wickedly persecute him. 

The predominant characteristic, then, is a loving zeal for 
the Lord and his cause. The Psalmist shows that this zeal is 
peculiar to the house of the Lord; and it is such that it 
causes the sacrifices to be wholly consumed. The Lord Jesus 
manifested this peculiar zeal as the Head of the house, by 
faithfully fulfilling every -part of his covenant; and he did so 
with a joyful heart. Those who shall sit on the throne with 
him likewise manifest that zeal and loving devotion for him 
and his cause by gladly doing his will, willing and anxious to 
engage in any part of his service. 

THE LAST WOBK OF THE CHURCH 

God clearly outlined the commission given to the entire 
Christ class, as set forth in Isaiah 61:1-3. This commission 
plainly says that such are to preach the good tidings unto the 
teachable; to bind up the broken-hearted; to proclaim liberty
 to the captives; and amongst other things to proclaim 
the acceptable year of the Lord and "the day of vengeance of 
our God." Clearly, then, the Lord intended that at some 
time those who would compose the little flock, or kingdom 
class, would be the ones to declare the day of vengeance. Thig 
would mean to tell all those who would have the hearing ear 
what would be the natural results of not heeding the Lord's 
instruction. The Lord caused his holy prophets and apostles 
to mark out the course that should be followed by those who 
profess to be his and what would be the result to those not 
following this instruction. 

Through his prophets, Isaiah, Jeremiah, Ezekiel and others
, God foretold what would constitute Babylon and foretold 
that some of the true saints would be found in Babylon. He 
caused these prophets to write all the evil that shall come 
upon Babylon. Surely the Lord purposed that those in Babylon
 should know something about this, and that some one 
should deliver the message concerning Babylon. IHd he design 
tllat the great company or the little flock should deliver this 
message? It is very clear from the Scriptures above cited 
concerning the day of God's vengeance that he intended the 
little flock to give this message. It must be conceded by all 
who are in harmony with the teachings of present truth that 
we are in the closing days of the harvest period; and before 
that harvest would entirely close it would become necessary 
for some one to declare the day of God's vengeance. Surely 
it would be only those who have the zeal peculiar to the Lord's 
house that would engage in joyfully declaring the message 
against Babylon. 

"The Finished Mystery," Volume Seven of Studies in the 
Scriptures, brings together all that the messenger of the 
Laodicean Church lias written concerning Babylon, and, in the 
light of what he has written, further explains other parts of 
Revelation and Kzekiel, thus putting in compact and pointed 
form the Word of the Lord, by the use of which the declaration 
against Babylon must be made. The Bible Students Monthly
 — "The Fall of Babylon" — is made up almost entirely of 
what has been written by "that servant," and is directed 
against Babylon in that it calls attention to what constitutes 
Babylon, why it shall fall, and what will be the result of its 
fall. And it seems to be clearly in harmony with the Scriptures
 above cited that the little flock, possessing the zeal peculiar
 to the Lord's house, would be the ones that will fearlessly 
declare this message. The thought that the great company 
class would have anything to do with the proclamation of this 
message is entirely out of harmony with the Scriptures which 
indicate the predominant characteristics of that class. — Hebrews
 2:15. 


[6212] 


February 15, 1918 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(53-54) 


JOHN THE BAPTIST A TYPE 

We have long recognized that John the Baptist was a type 
of the little flock class. In this connection the Lord's servant 
wrote: 

"It is altogether possible, indeed probable, we think, that 
John's course, which brought him into conflict with Herod, 
was in some degree typical of the course of the Gospel church 
in this present time and of the course of events that may he 
expected. If it be a type, Herod would represent the civil 
government and the unlawful wife would represent the nominal
 church, which throughout the symbolic Scriptures is represented
 as a woman — Jezebel, etc. Should it prove to be a 
type by its fulfilment in antitype, the fulfilment will probably 
be on something like the following lines: 

"(1) A partial reunion of church and state. (This is 
now practically an accomplished fact.) 

"(2) In such case it would become the duty of the true 
church, the forerunners and announcers of the Messianic kingdom
, to reprove the civil powers as well as the nominal church 
systems and to declare tneir union unlawful — contrary to the 
Word of God. 

"(3) The effect of this would pretty surely be to awaken 
the animosity of both civil and religious powers; but it 
would draw out especially the animosity and venom of the 
latter. 

u (4) The church nominal, in her false position, would be 
anxious to stifle the reproofs and to destroy the reprovers; 
and the effect would be that the civil powers would be induced 
to pas3 such legislation as would restrain the liberty of the 
faithful ones and hinder them from public utterances, as 
John was hindered by imprisonment. 

"(5) Herodias' daughter (united Protestantism) will become
 the tool for the destruction of the most loyal servants 
of God."— Z. 1898-95 

Instead of the great company class engaging in the work 
above mentioned, the Scriptures show that those who will be 
of that class are such as rebel against the words of God and 
disregard the counsel of the Most High, and are in fear of 
performing their covenant. — Psalm 107:9-16; Hebrews 2:15. 

A LOGICAL CONCIAJSIOH 

Again, commenting upon the spirit manifested by the little 
flock class in singing the song which none could learn except 
the little flock, "that servant" wrote: 

"Nothing is more manifest than that it is necessary to be 
somewhat of an overcomer of the world and its spirit, which 
pervades nominal Christendom, ere any one would have the 
courage to sing this song — to declare before men the lengths, 
breadths, heights and depths of the goodness of God's plan, 
of which Jesus and his sacrifice are the center. To all others 
the fear of man bringeth a snare and stoppeth their mouths 
from speaking forth the praise of him who called us out of 
darkness into his marvelous light. But the people that do 
know their God {his character and plan) shall be valiant and 
do exploits, and like the apostles of old vnll feel and say, 
'Whether it be right to obey God or men, judge ye; but we 
cannot but speak the things which we have seen and heard/ " 
— Z. 1900-37. 

The Watch Toweb Bible and Tbact Society has been 
used of the Lord since its organization as a vehicle to convey 
the message of truth to all who would hear. It would hardly 
seem probable, therefore, that it would be pleasing to the Lord 
now to put aside this vehicle when it comes to declaring the 
day of vengeance of our God and carrying to the people the 
message concerning Babylon. If the great company class is 
in charge of the Society, then the conclusion must follow that 
all the harvest work is finished, and that there is nothing for 
the little flock to do but to stand and wait for their change. 
Such does not seem to be at all in harmony with the Scriptures
, nor with that which Brother Russell has heretofore 
written on the subject. The period of the harvest is not yet 
over; and the work of the harvest, as outlined in the Scriptures
 (Revelation 14:13-19), does not seem to have been completed
- Concerning that work and those who would do it, 
Brother Russell wrote in Volume Three, Studies in the 
Scbtpttjbes, page 231, as follows: 

"It will probably be in an effort at self-preservation on the 
part of Great Babylon — 'Christendom' — when she sees her 
work in politics, priestcraft and superstition waning, that the 
work of truth-spreading will be stopped as detrimental to her 
system. And probably at this juncture the Elijah class, persisting
 in declaring the truth to the last, will suffer violence, 
pass into glory and escape from the severest features of the 
great time of trouble coming — just in the crisis of affairs 
when men begin to feel that desperate measures must be resorted
 to, to sustain the tottering structure of Christendom. 


Although the exact time of the deliverance or 'change' of the 
last members of the body of Christ is not stated, the approximate
 time is nevertheless clearly manifest, as shortly after 
the 'door 5 is shut."— Matthew 25:10. 

It will be observed from the above quotation that Brother 
Russell plainly says that the Elijah class (the little flock) 
will persist in declaring the truth. It would be exactly in harmony
 with the tactics of the adversary to induce some of 
those who have engaged in the harvest work to desist now 
and to let their zeal and ardor cool, that they might not have 
part in this iinal witness of the Lord's great message. Surely 
it would not be the will of the Lord that one should sit down 
and idly fold his hands, waiting for his deliverance. 

"Ne'er think the victory won, 
Nor once at ease sit down ; 
Thine arduous work will not be done, 
Till thou hast gained thy crown." 

EXPERIENCES OF ELIJAH AND ELISHA TYPICAL 

Time and again the church has been told through the channel
 which the Lord chose as his mouthpiece during the church's 
last experience that Eli j all is a type of the overcoming church 
and that Elisha probably represents in a measure the great 
company class. It is a noticeable fact that Elisha walked 
with Elijah. There was never any disagreement between them ; 
they did not quarrel. There is no record that Elijah ever 
opposed anything that Elisha was doing. If those now claiming
 to be the Elijah class are correct in their view that only 
the Elisha class is doing the work of the Society, then the 
facts do not seem to fit the picture at all. Elisha did not 
smite the waters of the Jordan until after Elijah had been 
taken up in the fiery chariot. If the Elisha class is now 
smiting the Jordan, then it must be that all the Elijah class 
have gone up in the fiery chariot. Tims we see the ridiculous 
position in which we would place ourselves if we assumed such 
to be true. 

Again, if it is the Elisha class that is now smiting the Jordan
, then surely those who compose the Elijah class would not 
wish to interfere \ for Elisha did according to the Lord's will, 
and any one who has the Lord's spirit could not consistently 
interfere with the Elisha work. As we read: "If any man 
have not the spirit of Christ, he is none of his." (Romans 
8:9) We aTe not here saying who is oi one class and who of 
the other. That is not our province. We do not know. The 
Lord did not purpose for us to know; and we will not presume
 to judge that which the Lord has not given us to judge. 
Quoting Brother Russell upon this point: 

"We are to be careTul not to form a judgment as to who 
are to be of the great company. Some say to us, 'What do you 
think of such a brother?' We are not to judge one another. 
It is not for us to say that such a one belongs to the great 
company class. We are to consider all the friends as one 
people. Only the Lord knows who are his wholly faithful 
ones, and he is leaving the matter to be manifested. At the 
end of the earthly career of the little flock the Lord himself 
will do the dividing."— Z. 1S16-38. 

We call attention to these words of Brother Russell that 
the dear friends may not be discouraged by the statement of 
another who volunteers to teach them, that all who have anything
 to do with the Society and its present work are a part 
of the great company class. We do not believe it is proper for 
any one to say, "Brother A is of the great company and Brother
 B of the little flock." The Lord shows the characteristics 
that will be manifested by each class; and we may examine 
ourselves to enable us to determine whether or not we are 
coming up to the proper standard. But let us carefully refrain
 from passing judgment upon any one else. 

THE AKTITYPIOAL OHAEIOT 

Again referring to the letter in our issue of January 15, 
1918, the brother who leads the opposing thought is quoted as 
saying that "the Watch To-web Bible and Tbact Society is 
the chariot of the Elijah class; that the separation is now 
taking place; that the lurid legalities are separating the two 
classes; that those who are putting out the Seventh Volume 
and the Babylon tract are the great company." 

The chariot, being a vehicle, would very fitly represent the 
Society which the Lord has used as a vehicle to bear the message
 of truth. What makes it lurid, in our opinion, is the 
fiery message of Ezekiel and John, which message it is now 
conveying to others. There were no legal differences between 
Elijah and Elisha, and nothing in the picture would seem to 
indicate that the management of the Society could have been 
pictured by what occurred between Elijah and Elisha. They 
were on the very best of terms until the last moment, Elisha's 
last request being that he might receive a double portion of the 


[6213] 


( 54 -55) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, N. Y. 


spirit of Elijah. The suggestion, therefore, that "lurid legalities
" were represented by the fiery horses does not seem at all 
to fit. According to that interpretation it is the Elisha class 
that is now in the chariot and the Elijah class is outside of it. 
And if that picture were true and were carried out to its 
finality, it would mean that the Elisha class would be taken 
up in the fiery chariot and the Elijah class left behind! Here 
seems to be a wide difference in interpretation by Brother Russell
 and these other brethren. And following the rule that we 
suggested above, we think it the safer course to heed the interpretation
 given us by the Lord's chosen servant. Note what 
Brother Russell says on this subject: 

ELIJAH, NOT ELISHA, USED THE CHARIOT 

"We recognize that the church of God is the antitype of 
Elijah, because she is, with her groat Head, the Christ of 
God. It is the Christ in the flesh that antitypes Elijah. His 
experiences during his career as God's prophet typify the experiences
 of the Christ class during all the more than eighteen 
hundred years of their earthly career. His closing experiences 
would parallel, Ave understand the Scriptures to teach, the 
closing experiences of the last members of the Christ body in 
the flesh. . . . 'The Lord knoweth them that are his.' 

"When the Lord's time comes for separating his little flock 
class, he will make no mistake. It will be the little flock 
that will go up in the chariot, and no others. Let us, therefore
, keep ourselves in the love of God. Never mind what any 
one else thinks. Of course we are to love and serve the brethren
 ; but even when we do our best, some of the brethren 
may misunderstand us. Do not decide about anybody else ; 
but let each of us watch for himself and see to it that he keeps 
his heart in the right attitude toward the Lord and the brethren
. We shall see the Elijah class taken away in the chariot; 
the others will not be taken. Then we- shall see the radical 
division. We shall know all about it then. The Lord will attend
 to it."— Z. 1916-38, 30. 

Since it is conceded that the Society is the chariot, then, 
according to Brother Russell's interpretation, it is the Elijah 
class that will take to the chariot; and "it will be the little 
flock that will go up in the chariot and no others. We shall 
see the Elijah class taken away in the chariot; the others will 
not be taken. " 

SIGNIFICATION OF ELIJAH'S MANTLE 
Referring to the picture, we note that Elijah and Elisha 
journeyed together until they reached the Jordan, and there 
they stood and talked awhile. Then Elijah took his mantle, 
wrapped it up and smote the waters of the Jordan. The waters
 represent the peoples ; and their separation would picture 
the separation of people from people. We are to keep in mind 
that Elijah had this mantle all during his journey, and that 
not until he reached the Jordan did he wrap up the mantle and 
use it to smite the waters (people). We are also reminded that 
the antitypical Elijah class has had the message of truth during
 their entire journey of the harvest of the Gospel age. 
Brother Russell pointed out that October, 1914, antityped 
Elijah and Elisha standing at the Jordan, talking the matter 
over; that this was the last point to which Elijah was directed
 to go, and that it represented the last definite date we 
had concerning the church. He then pointed out that something
 else must be done after that time, We quote Brother 
Russell : 

"Elijah and Elisha came to the river Jordan. They stopped
 there and stood talking. Something must be done before 
they could go further. So the Lord's people have been standing
 for a time since we came to October, 1914. Then Elijah 
took his mantle, wrapped it together and smote the waters 
of Jordan." 

Tn Ezekiel 21:14,15 we read, "Let the sword be doubled 
the third time," which to our mind would represent the message
 of truth contained in the first six volumes of Studies in 
the Scriptures. And then we read: "I have set the point 
of the sword against all their gates, that their heart may 
faint and their ruins be multiplied. Ah, it is made lightning 
brightness; it is wrapped up for the slaughter." We suggest 
that this represents the message of truth contained in the 
Seventh Volume, which is in truth and in fact a condensed 
statement of the entire message relating to Babylon and the 
true church and the relationship between the two, as set forth 
in the preceding six volumes. Therefore, it is properly designated
 "the point of the sword," and is wrapped up (put into 
compact form) for the purpose of doing the smiting, viz., the 
separation of people from people. In the eighth chapter of 
Revelation, verses 3 to 5, seemingly referring to the same message
, we read that it (the message) "is deliberately hurled into 
the earth;" that is to say, deliberately distributed broadcast 
amongst order-loving people. 


The message of truth contained in Volume Seven of Studies
 in the Scbhtubes, therefore, seems to be more fitly represented
 in Elijah's wrapped-up mantle than does anything 
else. If that is true, then it follows that it is the message of 
truth sent far and wide amongst the people that will cause the 
division or separation ; and it is manifest beyond the question 
of a doubt that it is the Elijah class that uses it, and not 
Elisha. It is easy to be seen now that the Elija class, persisting
 in the proclamation of the message against Babylon, would 
thus separate themselves from the Elisha class, who would be 
fearful or negligent of performing any part of this work; and 
that Elijah, continuing thus to use the point of the sword, 
would in due time be taken up in the fiery chariot by a whirlwind
 of anarchy. 

Again we quote from Brother Russell ( The Watch 
Tower, February 1, 1916, page 39) : 

"Are you expecting the fiery chariot any minute now, or do 
you think it some distance off — perhaps some months yet, or a 
year or more? will be asked. At least a year, or probably 
more, is my thought. [Just one year and five months later 
Volume Seven was issued. 1 Something else is coming first, 
dear friends. We do not as yet see clearly what it is. But this 
matter of Elijah's rolling his mantle together and smiting the 
waters of the Jordan seems to mean something, and also the 
crossing of the river. This picture is not given for nothing. 
What does it mean? you ask. Ah, we know that most prophecies
 are understood only after they are fulfilled. We might, 
however, have a suspicion. What would that be? Something 
like this: In Riole symbolic language water represents truth 
and also represents people. Both of these are given in Scripture
 as being symbolized by water. (Revelation 17:1, 15; 22: 
1,2: Jeremiah 51:12/13; Ezekiel 47:1-12; Ephesians 5:26) 
Furthermore, Jordan means testing or judging down. Now 
who or what would be judged in the antitype? 

"We answer, we believe that the peoples of the earth, the 
public in general, are to be judged by the truth. The peoples 
are represented by waters. It would seem that in some way 
the people are to be judged and tested; and that a division of 
public sentiment is to be caused in connection with the truth. 
Waters are to be separated from waters, people from people; 
the truth being received by some and rejected by others. Elijah
 wrapped his mantle together and smote the waters; and 
they were divided. Elijah's mantle was the outward indication 
or sign of God's power with him and represented God's 'power 
and blessing with the church. The mantle was in Elijah's 
hand when he smote the waters with it. So the church, it 
would seem, will use what is in their hand, the power and authority
 of the truth, the power of God, in smiting the waters 
— the peoples. Do you think that this has not vet taken 
place? may be a question in your mind. We think it has not 
as yet fully taken place. Do you think that the PhotoDrama
 of Cbeation has had a part in this ? It may be. Will 
there be something more? W T e do not know. We rather think 
there is something more." 

"CHARIOT," "FIRE," AND "WHIRLWIND" 
"Now, as to the meaning of the fire and the chariot: Eire 
always represents destruction, and a chariot of fire would 
seem to signify some very trying experience that will separate 
the Elijah Class from the Elisha class, and bring the deliverance
 of the Elijah class. 

"Brother Russell, are you not afraid of alarming us? some 
may ask. No! We are all very desirous of getting into the 
Lord's chariot, surely. It is the best thing in all the world. 
But it means trouble! Well, we desire trouble, if this trouble
 will be our chariot to take us home. We are waiting for 
it day by day. When Elijah's chariot came, it was in a 
whirlwind that he was carried into the heavens, into the atmosphere
, beyond earthly vision. What did the whirlwind 
signify as regards the church? Does it mean more trouble? 
you will ask. We think it does. Dear friends, we are waiting 
for that chariot and whirlwind. What will it be? Well, we 
know that the Lord pictures the great time of anarchy that is 
coming as a great whirlwind. He says, 'Behold, evil shall go 
forth from nation to nation, and a great whirlwind shall be 
raised up from the coasts of the earth. And the slain of the 
Lord shall be at that day from one end of the earth even unto 
the other end of the earth; they shall not be lamented, neither 
gathered nor buried; they shall be dung upon the ground.' — 
Jeremiah 25:30-33; 30:23,24. 

"To our understanding the Elijah class will be amongst 
the first to be affected by the great whirlwind of anarchy. 
We believe it signifies that many of the Lord's people — all of 
the faithful at that time — will be taken from the present life 
in some anarchistic movement. We would not talk about 
these things to the public; for the public would not be interested
 in them. The Master said, 'Cast not your pearls 


[6214] 


February 15, 1&1& 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(55 6H 


before swine.' We are talking about it here because we think 
that all here are deeply interested, and are expecting to share 
in the chariot and whirlwind experiences. Here is the point, 
then: We think that our final experiences will be during 
some kind of anarchistic uprising. For some time we have 
been wondering just how all the church would be taken. 
If the change comes to each one by death in the usual way, 
it would seem very wonderful to see the consecrated all over 
the world die suddenly. Neither can they all die of old age; 
for this would mean that some would have to live a good 
many years yet." 

If Brother Russell's interpretation be correct — and we 
would prefer to take it to that of any one else— then it would 
seem that the Elijah class, with the power of truth in their 
hands, viz., the message of God's vengeance against Babylon, 
must use that power, or message; and their persisting in using 
it unto the end would produce the separation and ultimately 
result in the taking up of the Elijah class in a time of fiery 
trials and testings. 

"THE LORD KNOWETH THEM THAT ABE HIS*' 

Let us not be deceived, dear brethren, and become slack 
now in the performance of our covenant with the Lord. But, 
grasping the sword of the Spirit which the Lord has placed 
in the hands of his people, let every one who loves the Lord 
and his cause better than this life and all things else this 
life may bring, go forward in a united effort to perform the 
duty which the Lord has laid before U3. If one is fully consecrated
 to the Lord and actively striving to fulfil his covenant
 of sacrifice, let him not be disturbed by the expressed 
opinion of another that his activity in some part of the Lord's 
work will put him in the great company class. God is not 
unmindful of your labor of love; he is faithful and true to his 
promise. Those who are his will not be disturbed or discouraged
 by what others may say, but will be governed in 
their conclusions by the Lord's Word, "The Lord knoweth 
them that are his." It is not necessary for us to know just 
where our brother will be. It ia sufficient if we are diligent 
to make our own calling and election sure. In the Lord's 
house there are some occupying positions of honor and some of 
less honor. God setteth the members in the body as it pleaseth
 him; and this setting applies both to their position while 


in the flesh and beyond the vail. If we do our "best to fulfil 
our part of the covenant, he is faithful and just to fulfil his; 
and to each one who manifests a diligence (not negligence) to 
make his calling and election sure he will grant an abundant 
entrance into the everlasting kingdom of our Lord and Savior 
Jesus Christ. 

Let every one who would thus serve the Lord refrain from 
judging another. Let us put no one into this class or the 
other class. Let us leave the judgment with the Lord; and 
doing so, look well to ourselves. It is for the Lord to judge, 
not us. But in the language of John, the Beloved, let us 
"look to ourselves, that we lose not those things which we 
have wrought, but that we receive a full reward." — 2 John 8. 

In harmony with the thoughts above expressed, we call attention
 to the words of Revelation ID: 17: "And I saw an 
angel standing in the sun; and he cried with a loud voice, 
saying to all the fowls that fly in the midst of heaven. Come 
and gather yourselves together unto the supper of the great 
God." The angel here clearly is the Elijah class, standing 
in the resplendent light of the Gospel, now more brilliantly illuminated
 than ever before by reason of having the interpretations
 of the lurid prophecies of Ezekiel and John. And thug 
standing in the light, they are joyful, fearlessly and plainly 
declaring the message of truth, calling first to the eagle's 
(Matthew 24:28), their brethren in Christ, the far-sighted 
ones, to come and join in this glorious feast that the Lord has 
spread before us. And may he give every one of his little ones 
the courage and faith arid strength to stand at this time. 
Those who faithfully trust and follow our great Captain will 
ultimately be brought off more than conquerors, yea, most 
fervent overcomers. 

We emphasize the fact that the church— Elijah and Elisha
— were standing in 1914, talking together. When Brother 
Russell died in 1916 everything seemed to have come to a 
standstill. No one seemed to know exactly what should be 
done. Then suddenly something was delivered to the church. 
What was it? All remember how that on a certain day in 
July, 1917, the message of the truth wrapped up in compact 
form in "The Finished Mystery" was delivered into the hands 
of the church ; and then the antitypical Elijah had the message
 in such form that it could be used for the smiting of the 
antitypical Jordan; and the smiting began. 


JESUS MINISTERING TO THE MULTITUDE 

[This article was a reprint of that entitled, "He Giveth Food to the Hungry," published in issue of May 15, 1906, which 
please see.] 


JESUS OUR EXAMPLE IN SERVICE 

[This article was reprinted from article entitled, "He That Humbleth Himself Shall Be Exalteth," published in issue of 
December 1, 1897, which please see.] 


COMPENSATION 


"Hush! oh, hush! for the Father, whose ways are true and 
just, 
Knoweth and careth and loveth, and waits for thy perfect 
trust ; 
The cup he is slowly filling shall soon be full to the brim, 
And infinite compensations forever be found in him. 

"Hush! oh, hush! for the Father hath fulness of joy in store, 
Treasures of power and wisdom, and pleasures forevermore ; 


Blessing and honor and glory, endless, infinite blis*. 

Child of his love and his choice, oh, canst thou not wait for 
this?" 

"Hush! oh, hush! for the Father portioneth as he will 
To all his beloved children; and shall they not be still? 

Is not his will the wisest? Is not his choice the best? 
And in perfect acquiescence is there not perfect rest? 


JESUS SETS MEN FREE 

[This article was reprinted from article entitled, "Christ Brought Life and Immortality to Light Through the Gospel/ 3 
published in issue of March 15, 1904, which please see.] 


THE LAST PASSOVER OF CHRIST 

"Christy our Passover is sacrificed for us; therefore let us keep tJie feast, with the unleavened bread of sincerity and truth." — 

1 Corinthians 5:7, 8. 


During the past two thousand years the new moon nearest
 the spring equinox has been reckoned as the beginning of 
the Hebrew religious year. (/. '07-88; Z '15-78) The Passover 
comes on the following full moon. 

In 1918, the nearest new moon to the spring equinox (5.26 
a.m., March 21) appears at 2.52 p.m., Eastern time, on March 
twelfth. That moon reaches its full at 10.33 a.m. on March 
the twenty-seventh. The Hebrew day begins at sundown of 
the previous modern day, and our antitypical Passover memorial
 should be celebrated on the evening of March twentvsixth
, some time after sundown — say at 7:30 *p«xn. At this 


time the Lord's dear ones consecrated, set apart unto death, so 
far as their earthly lives are concerned, will doubtless be 
anxious to assemble for the celebration of this solemn spiritual
 feast. 

It is a matter of interest that, if the Passover date were 
reckoned as formerly indicated in Volume Six, page 470, it 
would have fallen on the same date as the date for the smiting 
of the city, or April twenty-sixth, 1918. 

Let us review the events of that tragic day when our 
Passover Lamb was slain. It was on Thursday evening 1,885 
vears ago in the upper chamber that the thirteen celebrated 


[6215] 


(62 63) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, N. Y. 


their Passover, the last one for the Lord. The same evening 
Judas went out to clinch his evil bargain with the clergy of 
his day. The betrayer had left the little faithful company, 
and, as his last legacy, the Master gave them the most spiritual
 message of the Gospels, tne thirteenth to seventeenth 
chapters of the Gospel according to the beloved disciple, John. 
After he sang with his dear ones a hymn, and conversed with 
them, he knowing and they ignorant of the tragedy just before
 them, he led them to Gethsemane. 

JUDAS, GETHSEMANE, OALVABY 

It was on that Thursday evening that Judaa, with an expression
 of intimacy, fellowship and love, betrayed the Son 
of God into the hands of the crucifiers. That night the Light 
of the World was before the hostile forces of a benighted ecclesiasticism
 bound in unholy alliance with the secular powers. 
Secularism saw his innocence, but ecclesiasticism, blinded by 
envy and hatred, overcame the honorable scruples of the 
earthly rulers, and secured on a false and trumped up charge 
of treason, unjust conviction of the Son of Man. Forsaken 
and shunned by those who "had trusted that it had been he 
which should have redeemed Israel" (Luke 24:21), the Messiah
 faithfully kept the sacrifice on the altar, through ridicule 
and abuse of clergy, soldiers and public servants, through the 
Via DoZoro«<fr— the way of tears— and up the difficult path 
to Calvary and finished the offering of that bodv which God 
has prepared for him. 

Judas, who had not looked for such a dreadful outcome of 
his evil scheme, went and ended his iniquitous course by selfdestruction
. By nine o'clock Friday morning the Beloved 
was raised up, aa the brazen or copper serpent (perfect humanity
), as though made sin, even for those of the great 
worldly system of government, "which spiritually is called Sodom
 and Egypt, where also our Lord was crucified" (Rev. 
11:8), and which continues to this day, -being now called Christendom
, where his feet members soon shall at last fill up completely
 the sufferings of Christ that are left behind. 

Under the heat of a semi-tropic sun, the great Lover of 
mankind, stripped by unholy hands to open view, was the 
object of revilings by the Hebrew clergy and laity, a spectacle 
and a wondrous lesson of divine love for men and for angels. 
There hung the Savior of humanity, forsaken by all save those 
who loved him most — Peter, the strong, and John whom he 
loved, and the women who would, if they might, have died in 
his stead. And "sitting down about him, the unbelievers 
watched him there." 

And from noon, "the sixth hour" of that dreadful day, there 
was both a literal darkness and an obliteration of light and 
of love over all the land, over all in the condition termed 
"Sodom and Egypt," for while they were covering themselves 
with the greatest weight of guilt ever known, filling up the 
chalice of their iniquity until it overran, they were in the 
darkness of night as to the real quality of their acts — "they 
knew not what they did." 

It was afternoon of Friday, Passover day, that the holy 
Sufferer said, "I thirst" — and they gave him to drink, not 
cold, refreshing water, but that which while somewhat stupifying
 was calculated to enhance the agonies of thirst in the 
most brutal and cruel death known to wicked and degenerate 
men. 

By this act the prince of this world sealed his death sentence
, for "by death the mighty one was beginning to destroy 
him that hath the power of death, that is to say, the devil." 
And bv their death the feet members of Christ will set in motion
 the forces which will utterly destroy them that destroy 
the earth — Great Babylon, the accursed system of organized 
and established iniquity* 

"IT IS FINISHED!" 

But pain of body was not sufficient for the fiery trial of 
him who was to be the first to suffer that he might reign 
with God. He must be finally and fully made a sin offering, 
and experience to the full the wages of sin, that he might save 
to the uttermost. And as in the extremity of mortal pain 
and weakness the realization came upon him that he was, as 
it were and as it seemed to him, utterly cast off by his 
Father, with the final despairing cry, "My God! My God! why 
hast thou forsaken me?" in pain of spirit that was too much 
to bear, the great heart broke, and there came forth his last 
exclamation, "IT IS FINISHED!" like unto the last loud 
cry of the Church in the flesh— "It is done." (Rev. 16:17) 
The Wonderful One 'bowed his majestic head and gave up the 
life he had covenanted to lay down; and the new life, the 
new creature, the spirit, became hid in God until the third 
day there should come the springing forth of the first-fruiU 
of the dead. 

This is the central event of all history which we celebrate 
on the approaching Passover — the death of the Savior of the 
world. We suggest that «ach participant read beforehand 
with reverence and prayer the Bible chapters on the Passover 
— the first Passover in Exodus 11 to 13; the story of the 
death of the antitypical lamb in Matthew 26 and 27, Mark 
14 and 15, Luke 22 and 23, John 12 to 10, and such other 
passages as 1 Corinthians 10:16-21, 11:20-34, etc., and the 
comments in Volume VI Scripture Studies, Chapter 11, on 
"The Passover of the New Creation." Let not the consecrated 
unto death fail of the injunction, "Assemble yourselves together
, and so much the more as ye see the day approaching." 
— Hebrews 10:25. 

Let the bride get herself thoroughly ready for whatever 
the wise and loving Father and the altogether lovely Bridegroom
 may have for her in the way of experience of preparation
, trial, change or exaltation. Let each one consecrated 
unto death examine himself, cast out every alien thought or 
affection from the heart, cast out every weight and the sin that 
doth so easily beset him. Especially let each see that he loves 
even his enemies, but that he loves supremely the beloved 
Father in heaven. Let us so increase and abound in divine 
love toward one another and toward all men, that whether 
it be near or far in time our change will find us "ready" to 
go in, ready to stand in the confidence of pure and singlehearted
 love before our Elder Brother and before our God 
and Father. 


LETTERS FROM THE INTERESTED 


GIVING LIFE TO THE IMAGE 
Deak Brethren*. — 

I am sending you some thoughts regarding the vitalizing of 
the "image of the beast" as it appears to me after a cursory 
examination of a book entitled "The Churches of Christ in 
Time of War," edited by Charles A. Macfarland, General 
Secretary of the "Federal Council of the Churches of Christ 
in^ America." It is manifestly official. It Bays, among other 
things, "There is now being witnessed the cooperation of politics
 and religion in the common service of the whole people 
as never before in the history of the human race." On the 
last page of the book is a letter from President Wilson to Dr. 
Macfarland, dated June 8, 1917, which says, "I need not say 
how much I appreciate the message from the Federal Council 
of Churches of Christ in America. It has helped to reassure 
me and keep me in heart." 

Briefly the United States, by alliance with Great Britain, 
naturally becomes identified with it <G214), and thus the 
"other beast with two horns like a lamb" vitalizes the "image 
of the beast" ("the Federal Council of the Churches of 
Christ") by the United States Government giving official recognition
 (the President's letter of June 8, 1917, to Secretary
 Macfarland is such) to the image which was patiently 
awaiting this vitalization, having previously (on May 8, 1917) 
declared "its endorsement and support of" the war aims and 
policies of the Government." "All this took place before the 
publication of the Seventh Volume — before the coming of the 

[621 


seventh plague. "The change of name of the 'image of the 
beast' to that of 'false prophet' in Rev. 16:13, between the 
sixth and seventh plagues, shows that the 'image' was vitalized
 prior to the publication of Volume VII." — Ot\\. The 
cooperation of the "beast" and the "false prophet" with the 
"dragon" is very manifest in army camps jn the way the 
Knights of Columbus and the V. M*. C. A. work under' military
 authorization . 

Permit me to now mention some correspondencies between 
the French Revolution and the present time of trouble which 
seem to be transpiring at this time. 

1. The decisive defeat of the Austrians and Prussians bv 
the French Revolutionists on the 20th of September, 1792, 
seems very clearly to indicate the importance of the eventa 
connected with the German Reichstag sessions of Sept., 1917. 

There can be no doubt that the Reichstag session of September
 27th was of far-reaching importance. It seems to have 
definitely proven that the majority of the Reichstag were opposed
 to the war aims of the Prussian military autocracy, and 
ina sense resulted in the downfall of Prussia — in the appointment
 of Count von Hertling, the Bavarian Premier, to 
the German chancellorship. The German chancellorship, 
created by Bismarck, has always been in Prussian or pro-Prussian
 hands. Bavaria is regarded as thoroughly unsympathetic
 to Prussian aims, and the new Chancellor may therefore
 prove to be a chancellor of peace. 
2. On December 11, 1792, King Louis XVI was placed on 

6] 


February 15, 1918 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(63-50) 


trial by the revolutionists; was convicted and condemned to 
the guillotine. The correspondency seems to be in the peace 
negotiations between Russia and Germany and we may expect
 a further defeat of the Prussian military autocracy. It 
is very remarkable that the peace negotiations opened on the 
very day (December IB, 1917) indicated by the beginning of 
the trial of Louis XVI. 

I have received a great blessing from the January 1st 
Watch To web. The first article is certainly timely. The 
statement, "He will give all of his people a share," is specially
 comforting to one situated as I am (in an army camp). 
I may be mistaken, but I hope and believe that we who are 
now restrained because of being drafted will be released in 
time to participate in the smiting of Babylon. Here we have 
some opportunities to present the truth, but there seems to be 
little appreciation of the message, although they seem to generally
 recognize that we are Bible Students. We have been 
having a Seventh Volume study. It started out as a class for 
the study of Revelation led by a Pentecostal preacher who 
bought the Seventh Volume since coming here. He used the 
Seventh Volume altogether and depended on the three members
 of the 1. B. S. A. for bringing out the correct thoughts. 
However he "taught" the class only a few evenings and then, 
seemingly realizing that he was not well enough acquainted 
with the subject, turned it over to us; so we have been privileged
 to present to a few, whom we could probably not have 
reached at all otherwise, the explanation of Revelation furnished
 in Volume Seven. We use the Seventh Volume; asking
 questions, reading the comments, and now and then emphasizing
 or explaining such features ag those not familiar 
with the truth might not be able to understand. 

I am greatly pleased with the way the election at Pittsburgh
 turned out. It surely is a complete vindication of the 
present management of the Society. Undoubtedly the Lord's 
hand was in the holding of the straw vote on November 21st. 
for had it not been held the claim would probably have been 
made that the election was purely a matter of voting shares 
and did not represent the voice of the ohurch. Now this 
leaves them absolutely without excuse for any agitation 
against the Society and its work. Undoubtedly the Lord still 
has a very important work for the Watch Toweb Bible and 
Tract Society and is himself directing all its interests. 

With much Christian love, your brother in Christ, 

James Allen Mukch. — Ky. 
THE LORD IS NIGH UNTO A CONTRITE HEART 
My Beab Bbotheb Rutiierfobd : — 

There is a matter which has been on my mind and heart 
for several months which I am constrained to present to you 
as the chief representative of all the brethren in the truth. 
In 1912 1 dissented in a measure from the common view of 
the brethren in regard to the impending events of 1914. The 
resentment of the friends, which I thought unjust, was returned
 with an emphasis whioh brought darkness to my mind. 
The adversary took advantage of it and caused a series of 
stumblings such as has not occurred in all my Ghristian experience
 of 47 years. 3 sought for and began to magnify every 
trivial mistake I could find and to publish it abroad, I not 
only censured my brethren but I repudiated my vow. Now 
the Lord in love and mercy is opening my eyes and I review 
the^past with amazement and sorrow. ^ The harvest is closing, 
and 1 realize that if I make my calling and election sure I 
must renew my obligation to my brethren and ray vow to the 
Lord. I do so today with an humble heart, praying that the 
Lord and the dear brethren will forgive me. I desire that you 
and the dear Bethel family may know of this determination 
and that I may have a special interest in your prayers. 
Praying God's rich blessing upon you, dear brother, and upon 
all those associated with you in the most significant work of 
all ages, I am, 

Your brother in best of bonds, Kdwin Bum)y- Ore. 


BLESSED EFFECT OF VOLUME SEVEN 
Dear Brethren; — 

At Montreal, Canada, we were much interested and pleased, 
recently, to fellowship with a brother and sister who received 
the truth only live weeks ago, through the reading of Volume 
Seven. The sister had formerly taken no interest at all in 
things religious. Now both husband and wife are fully consecrated
 and are showing wonderful progress. They have a 
clearer knowledge of the truth than many who have been 
"truth people" for several years. Jt was inspiring to note their 
zeal. With Christian love. 

Yours in joyful service, K V. Crist. -Pi!ttrit,i. 

PRESENT POSSIBILITIES BEING REALIZED 
Dear Brethren; — 

Enclosed find usual weekly report. The past week has been 
crowned with much personal blessings from the Lord. The 
work goes forward grandly and the sublime possibilities of the 
present are being more and more realized by the Lord's people
. They are undergoing a wonderful heart-and-mind shaping 
in preparation for the final conflict with the powers of darkness
. Many who had settled down to the thought that the 
work was (about) over are now rubbing their eyes and becoming
 conscious of the fact that the mightiest conlliet of the 
ages is upon us. 

(), how evident it is that everything should be swept aside 
that would hinder us in following our Captain 1 What is the 
value of time, energy, money, treasures of any kind to the 
consecrated NOW, except to forward ihw can* * to which our 
lives are dedicated and for which Jesus died? 

The Seventh Volume is being accepted, studied and pushed 
everywhere. It is my observation that those most interested 
in it are invariably happy and prosperous in the Lord, 
whereas the few who reject it are unhappy and developing 
bitterness. With much Christian love, I am, 

Your fellow servant, 0. L. iSkulivan. — Pilgrim. 

RESOLUTION FKOM FRENCH BBETHREH 
Dkar Brethren; — 

We hereby send you a resolution passed by the Paris 13 cclesia
 in reference to the management of the Society. We received
, much delayed, the facts in relation thereto, and now 
wish to send you direct the following resolution: 

"By unanimous vote of the Paris (France) Ecclesia, assembled
 on Sunday, December 23d, we hereby express: 

"1st. Our gratitude to the Lord for permitting the present 
Board of Directors of the Watch Tower Bible and Tract 
Society (Brother J. F. Rutherford being their President) to 
administer with wisdom and faithfulness the interests of -the 
harvest work during the past months; 

"2d. Our desire to see maintained in charge of the work 
during the year 1918 the same Board and President; 

"3d. Our fervent Christian love and moral support to said 
Board; also to their valiant colaborers near and far; and we 
daily present them all to the throne of heavenly grace in accordance
 with our Vow." 

The Ecclesia of Paris, — France. 

"We cannot tell you how grateful we are to have the Seventh
 Volume nor of the heart full of thankfulness and love to 
God and to you, as we read it. We surely realize that the 
Lord is using the same channel in dispensing meat in due season
. We assure you of our loyal support now and to the end 
and recognize that out dear Brother Rutherford was surely 
chosen of the Lord to lead the Church to the end of her 
journey." A. K. \Y. W.— O/mo. 

"I feel that my eup of joy overflows. I rejoice that it is 
due time for this solemn message, and I desire to use Volume 
Seven as a chariot that shall help me mount to the skies." 

Mrs. K. B.- -~M<lss. 


"LET PATIENCE HAVE 

As is quite generally known, the present traffic congestion 
due to shortage of cars, etc., is unprecedented in the history 
of the country. We hear of unparalleled delays in not only 
freight shipments, but also in express and mail. The Government
 is endeavoring to alleviate this congestion. Let us hear 
from you if you feel that sufficient time has elapsed for your 
order to have reached you under present circumstances, and we 
will do what we can to trace the shipment. In the meantime 


HER PERFECT WORK" 

we advise patience in respect to undelivered shipments and the 
importance of placing future orders as far in advance as possible
. Mail matter is usually delivered with reasonable 
promptness, although we have ' recently heard of instances 
where Watch To wee issues have been in transit three or four 
weeks before reaching subscribers. We mention this that the 
friends may not think us negligent when The Watch Tower 
fails to arrive on time. 


MARGOLIS BIBLE— A NEW HEBREW TRANSLATION 


We have recently added to our stock a Jewish Translation 
of the Old Testament which some claim to be superior to the 
Leaser version. This new translation is known as the Margolis
 Version, as Prof. Max L. Margolis was the Editor-inChief
 and Secretary of the Editorial Board; but the actual 


work of translation was accomplished by a Committee of over 
twenty-five eminent Jewish Rabbis and Hebrew scholars, whose 
work covered a period of twenty-four years. The volume is 
in good, clear type, cloth bound, $1.25 postpaid. 


[6217] 

