God’s Word Is Alive
What Is Your Goal in Life?
WHAT do you want to achieve in life? An advanced secular education? a good position in the world? money? fame? security? These are common goals. But will realizing them actually give you what you want out of life?
To help answer such questions, consider the life of Moses, as illustrated in these pictures. He was raised as “the son of the daughter of Pharaoh”​—the world ruler. So, as a part of Pharaoh’s royal household, Moses had full opportunity to share in the “enjoyment of sin.” Also, he had ready access to “the treasures of Egypt.”​—Hebrews 11:24-26.
Furthermore, the Bible says, “Moses was instructed in all the wisdom of the Egyptians.” (Acts 7:22) So, then, due to his favored position, Moses had everything that most people today seek to attain. Yet did these things bring him true satisfaction and happiness?
Not really. Although he had everything in a material way, Moses knew that these things were of no lasting value. Do you realize this important fact? It is just as Jesus Christ himself said: “What benefit will it be to a man if he gains the whole world but forfeits his [life]?” (Matthew 16:26) Everything we may have is worthless if we lose our life. Is that not so?
Therefore, the Bible says of Moses: “He looked intently toward the payment of the reward.” Yes, Moses looked to what God offers. He realized that God’s gift of everlasting life is more valuable than anything else. So Moses “continued steadfast as seeing the One who is invisible.” (Hebrews 11:26, 27) Jehovah was real to Moses, and so were His promises of everlasting life.
Is that true of you? When you read about God’s promises to provide everlasting life in an earthly Paradise, are these promises real to you? Do you picture yourself as being a part of that Paradise and enjoying the blessings God has in store for his people? (Psalm 37:9-11, 29; 46:8, 9; 72:7, 8, 16; Isaiah 9:6, 7; 11:6-9; 35:5, 6; Luke 23:43; Revelation 21:3, 4) If you do, you will be like Moses and will set as your main goal in life the serving of Jehovah God and the winning of his approval.
[Picture on page 16]
What was Moses’ goal in life?
[Picture on page 17]
Is it your goal in life to enjoy what God offers to his servants?

