From Our Readers
When Memorizing Comes Easy
I want to confirm how beneficial your article was on memorizing. (July 22, 1987) My four-year-old has spent considerable time with me in the house-to-house ministry. To help keep her from getting restless, I had her memorize Psalm 83:18, which she was delighted to recite at the door, with her Bible open to it. Within a couple of weeks, I read your article on memorizing and resolved to help her learn more scriptures. This month she is reciting John 17:3 at the door when appropriate. This week a man declined my sharing a Bible verse with him, and just as he was starting to close the door, my four-year-old daughter said: “Could I share a scripture?” Immediately he said yes and reopened the door.
B. C., United States
Hope for the Mentally Ill
For 12 years I have been a victim of mental illness, suffering much from pain, disillusionment, and lack of understanding on the part of others, despite medical care and attention from a loving wife. You see, I would not accept the fact that I was mentally ill but would put my troubles down to other causes. Your articles “Hope for the Mentally Ill” (September 8, 1986) prompted me to do an about-face. I came to understand that my illness was not necessarily of demonic origin, as I had thought, and so accepted alternative explanations and submitted to medical treatment. How grateful I am to Awake! for the help it has given me in this and many other matters!
A. A. C., Brazil
Getting Along With a Brother or Sister
I would like to thank you for the article “Young People Ask . . . Why Is It So Hard to Get Along With My Brother and Sister?” (July 22, 1987) I am 16 and have two brothers. They often get on my nerves, and I have sometimes even wished something bad would happen to them. Nevertheless, I realize that deep down I love them. It has taken real effort to avoid getting angry each time they tease me. The last paragraphs of the article under the subtitles “Mom Likes You Best!” and “Overcoming Jealousy” have helped me a lot. I can see now that I was just like Joseph’s brothers who were jealous of him.
S. L., Guadeloupe
I want to thank you for the article “Young People Ask . . . Why Is It So Hard to Get Along With My Brother and Sister?” I have a big brother with whom I always used to fight, but I’m getting on much better with him now. And since I’ve read your article, I’m going to try much harder. Thank you again.
L. M., England
Papal Articles
As Catholic Christians, we read your informative magazines with interest, and we thank you for presenting factual information about the pope. (“Prayers for Peace​—Who Listens?” June 8, 1987; “The Pope’s Visit to Australia​—Just a Pilgrimage?” July 8, 1987) Even though your teachings are contrary to those of Catholicism, we are happy to see the fairness with which you deal with such subjects.
P. O., Federal Republic of Germany

