Jehovah Empowers the Tired One
“[Jehovah] is giving to the tired one power; and to the one without dynamic energy he makes full might abound.”—ISAIAH 40:29.
 1. Illustrate the power that resides in things God has created.
JEHOVAH is limitless in power. And what dynamic energy resides in the things he created! The tiny atom—the very building block of all things—is so small that a single drop of water contains one hundred billion billion atoms.a All life on our globe depends on the energy generated by atomic reactions on the sun. But how much solar energy is needed to sustain earthly life? The earth receives only a minuscule fraction of all the energy that is produced by the sun. Nevertheless, the very tiny fraction of the sun’s energy that falls on the earth is immeasurably greater than the total energy used in the world’s industries.
 2. In essence, what does Isaiah 40:26 say about Jehovah’s power?
2 Whether we think about the atom or turn our attention to the vast universe, we are impressed by Jehovah’s awesome power. No wonder he could say: “Raise your eyes high up and see. Who has created these things? It is the One who is bringing forth the army of them even by number, all of whom he calls even by name. Due to the abundance of dynamic energy, he also being vigorous in power, not one of them is missing”! (Isaiah 40:26) Yes, Jehovah is “vigorous in power,” and he is the Source of the “dynamic energy” used to bring the entire universe into existence.
More Than Normal Power Needed
3, 4. (a) What are some factors that may tire us out? (b) What question requires consideration?
3 While God has no limit in power, humans do tire out. Everywhere we go, we see tired people. They wake up tired, go to work or school tired, come home tired, and go to bed not merely tired but exhausted. Some wish that they could go somewhere and get a little badly needed rest. As Jehovah’s servants, we also get tired, for our life of godly devotion calls for vigorous exertion. (Mark 6:30, 31; Luke 13:24; 1 Timothy 4:8) And there are many other factors that drain us of strength.
4 Even though we are Christians, we are not immune to the problems experienced by people in general. (Job 14:1) Illness, financial reverses, or other difficulties common to life may cause discouragement, with its weakening effect. Added to these challenges are the trials peculiar to those persecuted for righteousness’ sake. (2 Timothy 3:12; 1 Peter 3:14) Because of daily pressures from the world and opposition to our Kingdom-preaching work, some of us may be so fatigued that we feel like slowing down in Jehovah’s service. Furthermore, in an effort to break our integrity to God, Satan the Devil is using every means at his disposal. How, then, can we get the spiritual strength needed to keep from tiring out and quitting?
 5. Why is more than human strength needed to carry out the Christian ministry?
5 For spiritual strength, we must rely on Jehovah, the all-powerful Creator. The apostle Paul pointed out that the Christian ministry would require more than the normal power of imperfect humans. He wrote: “We have this treasure in earthen vessels, that the power beyond what is normal may be God’s and not that out of ourselves.” (2 Corinthians 4:7) Anointed Christians are carrying out “the ministry of the reconciliation” with the support of their companions who have the earthly hope. (2 Corinthians 5:18; John 10:16; Revelation 7:9) Since we imperfect humans are doing God’s work in the face of persecution, we cannot do it merely in our own strength. Jehovah helps us by means of his holy spirit, and thus our weakness magnifies his power. And how we are comforted by the assurance that “Jehovah will be supporting the righteous ones”!—Psalm 37:17.
‘Jehovah Is Our Vital Energy’
 6. How do the Scriptures assure us that Jehovah is our Source of strength?
6 Our heavenly Father is “vigorous in power” and can easily invigorate us. In fact, we are told: “[Jehovah] is giving to the tired one power; and to the one without dynamic energy he makes full might abound. Boys will both tire out and grow weary, and young men themselves will without fail stumble, but those who are hoping in Jehovah will regain power. They will mount up with wings like eagles. They will run and not grow weary; they will walk and not tire out.” (Isaiah 40:29-31) Because of increasing pressures, we may sometimes feel like an exhausted runner whose legs seem unable to carry him any farther. But the finish line in the race for life is just ahead, and we must not give up. (2 Chronicles 29:11) Our Adversary, the Devil, is roving about “like a roaring lion,” and he wants to stop us. (1 Peter 5:8) Let us remember that ‘Jehovah is our strength and our shield,’ and he has made abundant provisions ‘to give the tired one power.’—Psalm 28:7.
7, 8. What proof is there that Jehovah strengthened David, Habakkuk, and Paul?
7 Jehovah gave David the strength needed to carry on in the face of great obstacles. With full faith and confidence, David therefore wrote: “By God we shall gain vital energy, and he himself will tread down our adversaries.” (Psalm 60:12) Jehovah also energized Habakkuk so that he might complete his assignment as prophet. Says Habakkuk 3:19: “Jehovah the Sovereign Lord is my vital energy; and he will make my feet like those of the hinds, and upon my high places he will cause me to tread.” Also noteworthy is the example of Paul, who wrote: “For all things I have the strength by virtue of [God] who imparts power to me.”—Philippians 4:13.
8 Like David, Habakkuk, and Paul, we should exercise faith in God’s ability to strengthen us and in his power to save us. Aware that the Sovereign Lord Jehovah is our Source of “vital energy,” let us now consider some ways to draw spiritual strength from provisions that God makes in abundance.
Spiritual Provisions to Invigorate Us
 9. What role do Christian publications play in nourishing us?
9 Diligent study of the Scriptures with the help of Christian publications can invigorate and sustain us. The psalmist sang: “Happy is the man . . . [whose] delight is in the law of Jehovah, and in his law he reads in an undertone day and night. And he will certainly become like a tree planted by streams of water, that gives its own fruit in its season and the foliage of which does not wither, and everything he does will succeed.” (Psalm 1:1-3) Just as we must eat to maintain physical strength, we need to take in spiritual food provided by God through his Word and Christian publications to maintain our spiritual strength. Therefore, meaningful study and meditation are essential.
10. When might we find time for study and meditation?
10 It is rewarding indeed to meditate on “the deep things of God.” (1 Corinthians 2:10) But when can we find time for meditation? Abraham’s son Isaac “was out walking in order to meditate in the field at about the falling of evening.” (Genesis 24:63-67) The psalmist David ‘meditated on God during the night watches.’ (Psalm 63:6) We may study God’s Word and meditate on it in the morning, in the evening, at night—indeed, at any time. Such study and meditation lead to another of Jehovah’s spiritually strengthening provisions—prayer.
11. Why should we attach great importance to regular prayer?
11 Regular prayer to God helps to invigorate us. May we therefore “persevere in prayer.” (Romans 12:12) At times, we need to make a specific request for the wisdom and strength needed to cope with a trial. (James 1:5-8) Let us also thank and praise God when we observe the outworking of his purposes or see that he has strengthened us to carry on in his service. (Philippians 4:6, 7) If we remain close to Jehovah in prayer, he will never abandon us. “Look!” sang David, “God is my helper.”—Psalm 54:4.
12. Why should we ask God for his holy spirit?
12 Our heavenly Father invigorates us and strengthens us by means of his holy spirit, or active force. Paul wrote: “I bend my knees to the Father . . . to the end that he may grant you according to the riches of his glory to be made mighty in the man you are inside with power through his spirit.” (Ephesians 3:14-16) We should pray for holy spirit, confident that Jehovah will bless us with it. Jesus reasoned: If a child asks for a fish, will a loving father give him a serpent? Of course not. Hence, he concluded: “If you, although being [sinful and thus more or less] wicked, know how to give good gifts to your children, how much more so will the Father in heaven give holy spirit to those asking him!” (Luke 11:11-13) Let us pray with such confidence and always remember that faithful servants of God can be “made mighty” with power through his spirit.
The Congregation a Strengthening Aid
13. How should we view Christian meetings?
13 Jehovah invigorates us through the meetings of the Christian congregation. Jesus said: “Where there are two or three gathered together in my name, there I am in their midst.” (Matthew 18:20) When Jesus made that promise, he was discussing matters that needed the attention of those taking the lead in the congregation. (Matthew 18:15-19) However, his words apply in principle to all of our meetings, assemblies, and conventions, which are opened and closed with prayer in his name. (John 14:14) So it is a privilege to attend such Christian gatherings, whether few are on hand or thousands are present. Let us therefore display gratitude for these occasions designed to strengthen us spiritually and incite us to love and fine works.—Hebrews 10:24, 25.
14. What benefit do we derive from the efforts of Christian elders?
14 Christian elders provide spiritual help and encouragement. (1 Peter 5:2, 3) Paul helped and encouraged the congregations he served, as traveling overseers do today. In fact, he yearned to be with fellow believers so that there might be an upbuilding interchange of encouragement. (Acts 14:19-22; Romans 1:11, 12) May we always show appreciation for our local elders and other Christian overseers, who play a large part in strengthening us spiritually.
15. How do fellow believers in our congregation prove to be “a strengthening aid”?
15 Fellow believers who make up our congregation can be “a strengthening aid.” (Colossians 4:10, 11) As ‘true companions’ they can help us in times of distress. (Proverbs 17:17) For instance, when 220 servants of God were released from the Sachsenhausen concentration camp under Nazi guard in 1945, they faced a 120-mile [200 km] trek. They traveled in a group, and the stronger ones pulled the weakest along in a few small carts. The result? In a death march that claimed the lives of more than 10,000 concentration camp inmates, not one of Jehovah’s Witnesses died. Such accounts appearing in Watch Tower publications, including the Yearbook of Jehovah’s Witnesses and Jehovah’s Witnesses—Proclaimers of God’s Kingdom, prove that God empowers his people, so that they do not give up.—Galatians 6:9.b
Strengthened by Our Field Ministry
16. How does regular participation in the ministry strengthen us spiritually?
16 Regular participation in the Kingdom-preaching work strengthens us spiritually. Such activity helps us to focus on God’s Kingdom and to keep eternity and its blessed prospects in view. (Jude 20, 21) The Scriptural promises that we talk about in our ministry give us hope and can make us as resolute as the prophet Micah, who said: “We . . . shall walk in the name of Jehovah our God to time indefinite, even forever.”—Micah 4:5.
17. What suggestions are offered regarding home Bible studies?
17 Our own relationship with Jehovah is strengthened as we make greater use of the Scriptures in teaching others. For example, when conducting home Bible studies with the help of the book Knowledge That Leads to Everlasting Life, it is wise to read and discuss a number of the cited scriptures. This helps the student and strengthens our own spiritual comprehension. If a student has trouble understanding a Biblical concept or an illustration, more than one session of study can be used to cover a single chapter in the Knowledge book. How glad we are to prepare well and make an extra effort to help others draw close to God!
18. Illustrate how the Knowledge book is being used effectively.
18 Each year, the Knowledge book is being used effectively to help thousands to become Jehovah’s dedicated servants, and this includes many who have no Bible background. For instance, when he was a child, a Hindu man in Sri Lanka overheard a Witness talk about Paradise. Some years later he approached her, and soon her husband started a Bible study with him. In fact, the young man came for a study daily, and the Knowledge book was completed in a relatively short time. He began to attend all the meetings, cut ties with his former religion, and became a Kingdom publisher. When he was baptized, he was already conducting a home Bible study with a personal acquaintance.
19. As we seek first the Kingdom, of what can we be sure?
19 Seeking first the Kingdom brings us strengthening joy. (Matthew 6:33) Though we experience various trials, we continue happily and zealously proclaiming the good news. (Titus 2:14) Many of us are meeting the requirements for full-time pioneer service, and some are serving where the need for evangelizers is greater. Whether we joyfully promote Kingdom interests in these or other ways, we are confident that Jehovah will not forget our work and the love we show for his name.—Hebrews 6:10-12.
Carry On in Jehovah’s Strength
20. How can we demonstrate that we look to Jehovah for strength?
20 By all means, let us demonstrate that we hope in Jehovah and look to him for strength. We can do so by fully availing ourselves of the spiritual provisions he makes through the ‘faithful slave.’ (Matthew 24:45) Private and congregational study of God’s Word with the aid of Christian publications, heartfelt prayer, spiritual assistance of the elders, fine examples of faithful fellow believers, and regular participation in the ministry are among the provisions that strengthen our relationship with Jehovah and empower us to carry on in his sacred service.
21. How did the apostles Peter and Paul express the need for God-given strength?
21 Despite our human frailty, Jehovah will strengthen us to do his will if we rely on him for aid. Aware of the need for such help, the apostle Peter wrote: “If anyone ministers, let him minister as dependent on the strength that God supplies.” (1 Peter 4:11) And Paul showed his reliance upon God-given strength when he said: “I take pleasure in weaknesses, in insults, in cases of need, in persecutions and difficulties, for Christ. For when I am weak, then I am powerful.” (2 Corinthians 12:10) May we display the same conviction and bring glory to the Sovereign Lord Jehovah, who empowers the tired one.—Isaiah 12:2.
[Footnotes]
This number, by the U.S. system of numeration, is the figure 1 followed by 20 zeros.
Published by the Watchtower Bible and Tract Society of New York, Inc.
How Would You Answer?
• Why do Jehovah’s people need more than normal power?
• What Scriptural proof is there that God empowers his servants?
• What are some spiritual provisions that Jehovah has made to strengthen us?
• How can we show that we look to God for strength?
[Picture on page 12]
Our own relationship with Jehovah is strengthened as we use the Bible to teach others

