The Bible—A Textbook for Living
“THE word of God is alive and exerts power and is sharper than any two-edged sword . . . and is able to discern thoughts and intentions of the heart.” (Hebrews 4:12) This description of what God’s Word can accomplish surely stamps the Bible as more than just a good book.
“Its message is as vital to our lives as our next breath,” one religion writer put it succinctly. Then he added: “When you take the issue of our longing and need for healing today and read the Bible in that light, astonishing results follow.” Like a lamp that burns brightly, the Bible sheds light on the many complex issues and problems of modern-day living.—Psalm 119:105.
Indeed, the wisdom expressed in the Bible has the power to mold our thinking, help us solve problems, improve the quality of our life, and equip us with the skills to cope with those situations that we cannot change. Most important, the Bible enables us to get to know and love God.
A Book That Gives Purpose
The Author of the Bible, Jehovah God, is ‘familiar with all our ways.’ He knows more about our physical, emotional, and spiritual needs than even we do. (Psalm 139:1-3) Thoughtfully, he sets clear limits for human behavior. (Micah 6:8) It makes sense to seek to understand those limits and directions and learn to live by them. Happy is the man whose “delight is in the law of Jehovah,” says the psalmist. “Everything he does will succeed.” (Psalm 1:1-3) Such a prospect surely merits our examination.
Maurice, a retired schoolteacher, always believed that the Bible had some historical and literary value. Yet, he was skeptical about its being divinely inspired. After listening to an explanation of why God gave his written Word to humans, Maurice examined various Bible prophecies. As a young man, he had studied ancient history, literature, science, and geography. He admits that he was too clever in his own eyes to see the numerous examples in support of the Bible’s authenticity. “I was caught up in the blind race for ease, wealth, and the pleasures of life. Unfortunately, I remained uninformed and ignorant to the beauty and veracity of the greatest book ever written.”
Now in his 70’s, Maurice, alluding to the account about Jesus’ appearance to the apostle Thomas, says appreciatively: “My hand has been guided to the ‘bleeding wound’ which will forever banish from my mind all doubt that the Bible is anything but the truth.” (John 20:24-29) As the apostle Paul rightly said, the Bible exposes the intentions of the heart, and it gives meaning to life. It is truly a textbook for living.
Adding Stability to a Troubled Life
The Bible also gives counsel that helps people to rid themselves of bad habits. Daniel was able to overcome the unclean habit of smoking, as well as to stop wild partying and alcohol abuse. (Romans 13:13; 2 Corinthians 7:1; Galatians 5:19-21) Realistically, to root out such habits and to put on “the new personality” takes concerted effort. (Ephesians 4:22-24) “It was a challenge,” says Daniel, “because we are so imperfect.” Nevertheless, he succeeded. Now Daniel reads God’s Word every day, and it keeps him close to Jehovah.
As he was growing up, Daniel always had deep respect for the Bible—even though he never read it—and he prayed to God every night. Yet, something was missing. Happiness eluded him. The turning point came when he saw God’s name in the Bible for the first time. (Exodus 6:3; Psalm 83:18) Thereafter, he used the name Jehovah when he prayed, and his prayers became much more personal. “Jehovah became the closest person to me, and he is still my closest friend.”
Prior to learning about the Bible, Daniel’s view of the future was bleak. “It does not take much intelligence to see what is happening in the world,” he says. “I was scared, and I tried to keep busy to block it out of my mind.” Then he learned that God will establish justice for all on a cleansed earth, where obedient humans can enjoy eternal peace and happiness. (Psalm 37:10, 11; Daniel 2:44; Revelation 21:3, 4) Now Daniel has a sure hope. This stabilizing influence of the Bible enables him to maintain a positive outlook on life.
Help in Overcoming Emotional Problems
George was seven when his mother died. He dreaded going to sleep at night, not knowing if he would wake up the next day. Then he read what Jesus said about death and the resurrection: “The hour is coming in which all those in the memorial tombs will hear [Jesus’] voice and come out.” He was also touched by Jesus’ words: “I am the resurrection and the life. He that exercises faith in me, even though he dies, will come to life.” (John 5:28, 29; 11:25) Such thoughts sounded reasonable, logical, and comforting. “This truth,” says George, “not only appeals to the mind but also touches the heart.”
Daniel, mentioned earlier, also had fears. His mother could not raise him on her own, so he was sent to live in many foster homes. He always felt like an outsider and longed for the security of belonging to a loving family. Eventually, he found what he was looking for through his study of the Bible. Daniel came into association with the Christian congregation of Jehovah’s Witnesses and became part of a spiritual family, where he experienced the feeling of acceptance and of being loved by others. Indeed, the Bible is beneficial in a practical and an emotionally satisfying way.
Remember, Jehovah sees what is in our heart and knows what we are looking for. God is “making an estimate of hearts,” and he gives “to each one according to his ways.”—Proverbs 21:2; Jeremiah 17:10.
Practical Counsel on Family Life
The Bible gives practical counsel when it comes to matters of human relations. George says: “Personality conflicts or misunderstandings are among the most stressful situations in life.” How does he deal with them? “If I feel that somebody has something against me, I apply the straightforward counsel from Matthew 5:23, 24: ‘Make your peace with your brother.’ The simple fact that I can talk about the conflict produces results. I can feel the peace of God that the Bible speaks of. It works. It is so practical.”—Philippians 4:6, 7.
When husband and wife disagree, both need to “be swift about hearing, slow about speaking, slow about wrath.” (James 1:19) Such advice improves communication. George adds: “When I apply the counsel to love and treat my wife as I do myself, I see immediate results. It is easier for her to respect me.” (Ephesians 5:28-33) Yes, the Bible teaches us how to acknowledge and deal with our own imperfections and how to have success in coping with those of others.
Counsel That Endures
Wise King Solomon said: “Trust in Jehovah with all your heart and do not lean upon your own understanding. In all your ways take notice of him, and he himself will make your paths straight.” (Proverbs 3:5, 6) How uncomplicated, yet profound, those words are!
The Bible is a force for good. It enables lovers of God to bring their life in harmony with his will and to find happiness in “walking in the law of Jehovah.” (Psalm 119:1) No matter what our circumstances, the Bible contains the direction and counsel that we need. (Isaiah 48:17, 18) Read it daily, meditate on what you read, and apply it. It will keep your mind clear and focused on things that are pure and wholesome. (Philippians 4:8, 9) You will learn not only how to live and enjoy life but also how to love the Creator of life.
By following such a course, the Bible will become for you—as it has for millions of others—more than just a good book. It will truly prove to be a textbook for living!
[Picture on page 6]
The Bible can strengthen your resolve to overcome harmful habits
[Picture on page 7]
The Bible teaches you how to draw close to God

