VOL. XXV. NOVEMBER 1, 1904. No. 21. 



CONTENTS 

Views from the Watch Tower 323 

Signs of Degeneration 323 

The Prayer-Meeting Test 323 

The Panic of 1913 324 

Japan and Christianity 325 

Watch Tower Special Bibles 325 

Great Pyramid Measurements 326 

A Search for Atoning Blood 326 

Cease to Do Evil, Learn to Do Well 327 

Spiritual and Animal Intoxication 331 

Interesting Questions Answered 334 

Publishing Bro. Russell's Sermons 322 

page 322 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-24 EVERSHOLT ST., LONDON, N.W. 
GERMAN BRANCH-MIRKER STR., 45, ELBERFELD. 
AUSTRALIAN BRANCH-32 JOHNSTON ST., FITZROY, MELBOURNE. 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE, 5c (2-l/2d.) A COPY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER, will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE 



THIS JOURNAL IS PUBLISHED IN THE 

FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN LANGUAGES. 

SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



R3450 : page 322 

PUBLISHING BROTHER RUSSELL'S SERMONS. 



Word has come from many brethren and sisters of their 
efforts to secure the publication of Brother Russell's Sunday 
discourses in papers published nearer to them than the 
Pittsburgh Gazette. Many have sent postal cards to their 
favorite local papers, saying that they would gladly subscribe 
for a year if assured that these sermons would appear 
regularly and in full. 

Our advice on the subject might not in every instance 
be the best: you know some of the conditions better than 
we do. For instance, the friends near St. Louis may think 
better of the Republic than of the Democrat; and The Kansas 
City Star, a weekly; near Chicago the Inter-Ocean 
may be preferred to the American, etc. Canadian friends 
assure us that the Toronto Mail and Empire or the Montreal 
Family Herald would be more likely to publish them than 
others there. Our general advice is that papers of large circulation 
and good character be preferred in every case. If 
you have written a postal card to one paper and it has not responded, 
it could do no hurt to write similarly to another, 
—to whichever you prefer. Where papers are obtainable 
regularly at a news-stand it is not necessary to promise a 
year's subscription: it would be enough to say that you 
would get the papers of your newsdealer and extra copies 
of those issues containing these discourses. 

From time to time we will mention the papers proposing 
the publication of the sermons regularly. Friends in 
the neighborhood of each journal will, we are sure, be glad 
in some measure to show their appreciation by patronizing 
such journals and using among their friends extra copies of 
the issues containing the sermons. In cases where the papers 
can be purchased of the newsman a card of appreciation 

R3451 : page 322 

might be sent to the editor: in cases where subscriptions 
are sent in for a journal it would be well to say that 
the sermons are one of the attractive features, or that it is 
sent on the understanding that the sermons will appear 
regularly. So far the following journals have intimated 
that they will probably publish these sermons regularly:— 
The Commercial Appeal, - Memphis, Tenn. 

The Oregonian, Portland, Ore. 

The State, Columbia, S.C. 

The Sunday World, New York City. 

page 322 

"SCRIPTURE STUDIES, SERIES I." FOR GIFTS. 



This is another title for Vol. I. DAWN, preferred by 
some, though we prefer the old title, which will continue. 
We have these in special leather binding with gold edges, 
intended for holiday tokens. At cost to TOWER subscribers, 
viz., 60c, including postage to any address. 



R3451 : page 322 

POLISH TRACTS can now be supplied to all who have 
special opportunities for using them. They are published 
by our Society, although our name and address does not 
appear on them, because of prejudice of Catholics against 
everything like Bible Societies. 



R3449 : page 323 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 
SIGNS OF DEGENERATION. 



"LOVERS OF PLEASURE MORE THAN LOVERS 
OF GOD. "--2 TIM. 3:4. 

DR. HALL, President of Union Theological Seminary, 
New York, declared recently:— 

"We all rejoice in the remarkable growth and 
the excellent features of American civilization, and 
we are pleased at the relatively good state of the commonalty 
of the people, but a deeper examination of 
the social side of our American life reveals a situation 
that causes anything but satisfaction. 

"It is a matter of consternation and deep concern 
to us that the moral standard of American life is 
deteriorating. In the hustle and bustle of every-day 
activity we have astonished the world, but morally we 
are rapidly going astern— so rapidly that one is dumfounded 
at the contrast of a visit to some of the countries 
of the Old World. 

"I am an optimist through and through, but I 
am not a stoneblind optimist. I feel and I know from 
observation that religion has little, if any, part in our 
American civilization today. This is a lamentable 
state of affairs, and it behooves each and all of us to 
do all we can to help stem this tide of indifference. 
Our home life is not what it should be, and it is not 
to be wondered at when we realize the general apathy 
of the people as regards their spiritual welfare." 



Doctor Hall should have expected just such results 
from the teaching of Evolution and Higher Criticism 
in "Union" and other Theological Seminaries. 
And it is only beginning, too. For twenty years the 
Doctor and his coadjutors have been sowing the seed 
of unbelief: now they are surprised at the first samples 
of the crop. They have failed to gauge up the 
ordinary layman as more honest than their clerical 
brethren: when they lose faith in the Bible and supernatural 
religion they will soon drop the forms and 
ceremonies associated therewith. Some clerical higher 
critics and agnostics would do the same were they 
not looking for honor and "gain every one from his 
own quarter," or denomination.— Isa. 56:11. 

THE PRAYER-MEETING TEST. 



"It is a common thing in village and rural districts 
to find churches where the prayer meeting has 
not even a name to live. It is just as common to find 
in towns and cities among the larger churches where 
the membership goes up into the hundreds to find, 
comparatively speaking, a handful of people, mostly 
women, gathered in the weekly prayer-meeting, when 
scores if not hundreds might reasonably be expected 
to be present. The situation is one of concern, if not 
of alarm, and unless a remedy is soon found, that 
meeting of the Church which above all others is vital to 
its life and work will have gone out of existence. We 
do not believe that either the necessity for the prayer 
meeting or its genuine usefulness has gone, but we 
are persuaded that many of our people need to be reconverted 
regarding its responsibility and value to 
themselves and the community in which they live."— 
Canadian Baptist. 



Yes, the prayer-meeting test is a good one. Wherever 
true Christians find it possible to meet for mid-week 
communion with the Lord and with each other, 
they will surely have pleasure in so doing. The Spirit 
of the Lord will constrain them and his Word will encourage 
them,— "Where two or three of you are met 
in my name, there am I in the midst." 

We are glad to say that the Allegheny congregation 
has this evidence of spiritual life. Six meetings 
of this nature are held every Wednesday evening in 
the various districts contiguous to Allegheny. The 
attendance ranges from seven to thirty, and those most 
regular in attendance are usually the most earnest and 
most spiritually alive. Our hope is that this love of 
prayer and praise and communion with each other on 



R3449 : page 324 

spiritual themes and experiences of the week may be 
more and more a characteristic of all of "this way"— 
of all WATCH TOWER readers. 

CONGREGATIONALISTS ALARMED. 



"Congregational leaders, especially those in the 
West, are alarmed over the showing just reported 
made by their body in the states of Illinois, Iowa and 
Michigan. In all three states Congregationalism lost 
in membership last year, and in two of them in Sunday-school 
attendance. The leaders referred to are 
pointing out to their brethren that in these states conditions 
are best fitted of all states, New England not 
excepted, for Puritan growth. Yet there has been 
less. The membership in all states is 120,000 in round 
figures, or a little more than one-sixth of the entire 
Congregational membership, and almost exactly the 
membership of the same body in Massachusetts. 
These leaders are asking the cause and the remedy. 
The former they give as too much higher criticism and 
too little real religion. They point out that these 
states are filled with educational institutions."— Secular 
Press. 



The thing which seems to strike the alarm bell 
in religious clerical circles is any sign of falling off in 
numbers. That is a sore spot. It means fewer 
preachers or less salaries, and naturally awakens alarm. 
The numbers and wealth are too great now. If the 
"wheat" could only get together and study God's 
Word and learn something of the lengths and breadths 
and heights and depths of the great divine plan of the 
ages and the love which it exemplifies, they would be 
blest richly, and the great bulk of well-meaning but 
unconsecrated and unbelieving tares could better be 
dispensed with. "Fear not, little flock." "Not many 
great or wise or noble hath God chosen"— to be heirs 
of the Kingdom which shortly now will be set up in 
power and great glory to bless the "tares" and "all 
the families of the earth." 

THE PANIC OF 1913. 



"There is something almost uncanny in the 
thought that panics in the financial and commercial 
world have a habit of recurring at such regular intervals 



that, if not prevented, we, here in the United 

States, are doomed to suffer another cataclysm in the 

business world in 1913. It would seem that, given 

R3450 : page 324 

nine years' warning, we ought to be able to forestall 

such a catastrophe. Yet we are stared in the face by 

the fact that during the last one hundred years the 

United States has been visited by periodical convulsions 

of the kind described, at intervals of almost exactly 

twenty years, with premonitory symptoms of 

derangement at or about midway intervals. The first 

real panic in the domestic commercial world in the 

nineteenth century was in 1814— the outcome of the 

war of 1812, the exclusion laws and the embargo; 

the next was in 1837-39, following the United States 

Bank convulsion, wild-cat banking and speculation in 

land, with 33,000 resultant failures, more than three 

times the average annual total today; after that came 

the big reversal of 1857, consequent on over-expanded 

banking credits and tariff legislation; and next, the 

disturbance of 1873, caused by over-speculation following 

the civil war; and finally, the most serious 

panic in our history, in 1893, due to over-extended 

credits in commercial and other lines. Punctuating 

these five plunges into the region of unreasoning 

fright there were minor panics: those of 1818, 1826 

and of 1829, due to tariff legislation upsetting business; 

that of 1848, which was a reflection of the disturbed 

conditions in Europe; one in 1864, which was 

lost sight of by the turmoil incident to the closing 

year of the War of the Rebellion; the Eastern commercial 

and banking credit derangement in 1884, the 

echo of the Barings' failure in 1890, and last, but not 

least, among these disturbances of a so-called minor 

class, the wrenching liquidation or deferred panic of 

1903. This brief review makes it plain that some 

not well-understood psychological or sociological law 

has, for a century past, exercised an unerring influence 

to produce the cycles of prosperity, panic and 

liquidation which have scared the domestic business 

world. It likewise emphasizes, in a way that should 

come home to every banker and business man, that in 

1913 it is certain that the twenty-year variety or major 

panic will be due. There was not much in the Mississippi 

or South Sea Bubble enterprises which was 

not duplicated in kind at least in that which underlay 

the violent liquidation in prices of securities that so 

marred the fortunes of millions in the year just 

elapsed. The theory has grown apace, in view of the 

liquidation without panic in 1903, that with stronger 

and bigger banks, chains of banking houses, clearing 

houses, combinations of industries and mercantile enterprises, 

panics may be prevented, just as civilization 

has found panaceas for various ills to which the flesh 



is heir. But fright, which is the basis of panic, is 

like a thief in the night. It may seldom be foreseen. 

No solvent bank or merchant could meet all its or his 

obligations if asked for peremptorily, at the instant. 

The undue expansion of credits, by either, in proportion 

to reserves, in an emergency, is always likely to 

precipitate a crisis, after which the house of cards 

falls. The dangers of company promotion, over-capitalization, 

undue expansion of credits have been and 

still are too often overlooked. Nine years is a long 

while in which to prepare to avoid a given contingency. 

It also furnishes time in which to grow prosperous 

and careless, and in which to forget." 



The above clipping, we believe, is from The Saturday 
Evening Post. We print it not for its own sake 
as an item merely, but also because it so closely coincides 
with our expectations, based on the divine Word 
—regarding the ending of "Gentile Times" in October, 
1914, when will follow the "time of trouble such as 
was not since there was a nation;"— the anarchous 
period which will in divine providence be followed by 
the Kingdom rule of everlasting righteousness. 

Our readers will recall that for the past two years 
we have expressed the opinion that there would not 

R3450 : page 325 

be time for a general panic and its following years of 
depression and then another gradual rise and another 
panic before 1914, and that we therefore looked for 
only a temporary lull of the world's prosperity now 
(such as is now being experienced) followed by a 
period of reasonable prosperity of growing proportions 
lasting for some years. We advise the consecrated, 
however, to take heed not to be overcharged by 
cares of this life and the pursuit of riches. Seek first 
the Kingdom. So long as we can realize ourselves 
heirs of it we can feel "rich toward God." "All 
things are yours, for ye are Christ's and Christ is 
God's." 

THE TREASURES OF ETHIOPIA. 



It has long been known that King Menelek of 
Abyssinia, Africa, claims to be a lineal descendant of 
Solomon through the Ethiopian Queen of Sheba; but 
the evidences of this have only recently been discovered 
by H. LeRoux, a French scientist. LeRoux obtained 
permission to visit the islands of the Sacred 
Lake, where he discovered, in a semi-ruined monastery, 
documents written on ancient paper parchments 



(papyri) dating back to the time of the visit of the 
Queen of Sheba to King Solomon and ascribing to him 
the paternity of the first King Menelek. 

Our informant declares that LeRoux is in great 
favor with the king, or negus, Menelek, and has been 
granted permission to negotiate the construction of a 
railroad into Abyssinia and to make further explorations 
on the islands of that sacred lake, Zonai. These 
islands, which, until the day when visited by LeRoux, 
had never been seen save in the distance by any white 
man, are dotted with ancient monasteries, most of 
them in ruin, and only a few of them inhabited by 
ignorant monks, who have no knowledge or power to 
comprehend the importance of the treasures that are 
contained within the walls of their abode. For it is 
known that at the time of the great Mohammedan 
invasion about 400 years ago, all the sacred relics and 
the treasures of the nation, all the historical records 
and, in fact, everything of value, was bundled off to 
the monasteries on the island of Zonai and concealed 
therein order to protect them from being carried off 
and destroyed by the Moslems. 

It is a matter of tradition in Abyssinia and of 
belief in the scientific world of Europe that the original 
Jewish Ark of the Covenant, containing the Mosaical 
stone of Tables of Law and all the other treasures 
of the Temple of Solomon, which disappeared 
from Jerusalem at the time of the so-called Jewish captivity, 
were despatched by the Jewish high priests for 
safety to Abyssinia. It is generally believed that the 
Ark of the Covenant, along with all the other relics 
contained in the holy of holies of the Temple of Solomon, 
will be found in some of these monastery islands 
of Lake Zonai. 

JAPAN AND CHRISTIANITY. 



That the Japanese are not becoming Christianized 
but merely civilized, note the views of a Japanese 
university professor, quoted in the Booklovers' Magazine 
as follows:— 

"Our empire has salted all the seas that have flowed 
into it. The West cannot hope to Christianize Japan 
when our ambition is to Japanize Christianity, and to carry 
the new doctrines, the gospel of rational ethics, to the 
millions of Asia, and, in time, to all the world. We shall 
go to China— in fact, we are already there— with a harmonious 
blending of the best precepts in Buddhism, Confucianism, 
Bushido, Brahmanism, Herbert Spencer, Christianity 
and other systems of thought, and we shall, I 
think, have little trouble in awakening the naturally 
agnostic mind of the Chinese to the enlightenment of 
modern free thought. What the Far East needs is a religion 
as modern as machinery. We have had more gods 



than were good for us. We believe that a cosmopolitan 
gospel, tolerating the existence but minimizing the potency 
of prayers, offerings, shrines, temples, churches, litanies 
and gods, and dwelling more on the time that now is and 
the relation of man to man, will create a wonderful reformation 
in Asia. We confidently believe that it has been 
assigned to Japan to lead the world in this new intellectual 
era in the progress of mankind." 



R3451 : page 325 

WATCH TOWER SPECIAL BIBLES, 

WITH WIDE MARGINS, CONTAINING DAWN AND TOWER REFERENCES. 

ONE brother, noting our recent call for these 
Bibles, writes us that if we will issue a new 
edition he would gladly purchase eight copies. 
We note the fact, and if 3,000 more were thus wanted 
we would lose no time in arranging for them. We 
fear that many have only partially learned the value 
of the special features of this remarkable work. 

For the benefit of new readers we explain that 
the Bible is printed from the regular Linear Bible 
plates, showing Common and Revised Versions at 
once. It has wide margins, in which, aside from 
the usual references, are special ones which direct to 
the volume and page of TOWER or DAWNS treating 
the passage. 

Notwithstanding the advance in the cost of paper 
and leather, we believe that we could duplicate 
the special prices, too. They were: 
French Seal, divinity circuit, gold edges, $2.00. 
Genuine Morocco, " " 3.00. 

The matter is with you. We will undertake 
the labor, etc., if a sufficient number desire the Bibles 
to make the new edition practicable. 



R3451 : page 326 

THE GREAT PYRAMID MEASUREMENTS. 

ARE we quite sure of the accuracy of the measurements 

of the Great Pyramid's passages as 

given in MILLENNIAL DAWN, Vol. III.? I 

have seen another measurement of the downward 

passage (3465 inches instead of 3416 inches), said to 

be from Prof. Piazzi Smyth's writings, says a reader. 



We have no reason to question the accuracy of 



the figures given in DAWN III. They were all secured 
from Prof. Piazzi Smyth's work entitled, Our Inheritance 
in the Great Pyramid. Moreover the manuscript 
of that chapter was submitted to Prof. Smyth by a 
friend before it was published and no flaw in its figures 
was noted. The illustrations are of Prof. Smyth's 
preparation, too. 

We remark, however, that Prof. Smyth's interest 
centered in the upper chambers of the Pyramid, and the 
passages leading upward to these. Much less care and 
precision are manifested in his dealings with all other 
parts of the Pyramid than with this. As an evidence of 
this note the difference in the two drawings in VOL. III. 
which show this downward passage and the "pit" at its 
terminus. In the frontispiece the lower or level portion 
of the downward passage is shown as running to 
the axis line of the Pyramid, nearly one-half the 
length of the "pit." The illustration showing "The 
Passage System" of the Pyramid (MILLENNIAL DAWN, 
Vol. III., page 333) shows this totally different— it 
shows the depressed and broken floor commencing 
before the vertical axis is reached. Examine the illustrations 
carefully and note what we refer to. 

The cut of page 333 is to a scale, and, being prepared 
by the one Astronomer Royal of Scotland, it 
should be accurate, yet the figures we have given 
(3416 inches) reach (into the "pit" of this diagram, 
—to the "pit" in the frontispiece) to the vertical 
axis of the Pyramid. We cannot therefore see how 
any longer measure for the passage could be possible. 
Measure for yourself, using the scale given on the 
diagram, page 333. If you have not the proper calipers 
use a piece of stiff paper as your measuring line 
and then apply it to the scale. 

At the time of the Editor's visit to the Pyramid 
in 1892 the downward passage was filled full of debris 
and evidently had been long in that condition, as only 
one Arab was found who had any knowledge of it. 
He was quite an old man who many years before had 
assisted Prof. Smyth. The Editor, therefore, like 
other measurers of recent years, could ascertain nothing 
new respecting the "downward passage." 



R3454 : page 326 

A SEARCH FOR ATONING BLOOD. 

THE following will prove interesting reading to 
many of our subscribers. It is a report of remarks 
made by an old Hebrew at a "mission" 
meeting. We note that God has so overturned 
natural Israel that even if they had possession of the 
holy places where sacrifices were appointed to be 
offered, they have no priest qualified to make the 



offerings. No Jew living in the world today could 
prove his right to the priest's office by showing his 
pedigree back to Aaron. Jews named Levy and Cohen 
are supposed to be of the Levitical tribe, but could 
not prove it so as to qualify for the office according 
to their Law. With the true Priest and the offering 
of the "better sacrifices," the types were obliterated 
most effectually by the Lord. By and by fleshly Israel 
will realize the truth— they will "look upon him 
whom they pierced"— they will recognize him as the 
great Priest who "offered up himself." Thank God 
for the assurances of his Word on this subject in 
Rom. 11:25-33. 

The testimony follows:— 

"This is Passover week among you, my Jewish 
brethren, and as I sat here I was thinking how you 
will be observing it. You will have put away all 
leaven from your houses; you will eat the motsah— 
unleavened wafers— and the roasted lamb. You will 
attend the synagogue services and carry out the ritual 
and directions of the Talmud; but you forget, my 
brethren, that you have everything but that which 
Jehovah required first of all. He did not say, 'When 
I see you eat the motsah or the lamb, or go to the synagogue; 
but his word was, 'When I see the blood 
I will pass over you.' Ah, my brethren, you cannot 
substitute anything for this. You must have blood, 
BLOOD, BLOOD!" 

As he reiterated this word with ever increasing 
emphasis, his black eyes flashed warningly, and his 
Jewish hearers quailed before him. "Blood!" It is 
an awful word, that, for one who reveres the ancient 
oracles and yet has no sacrifice. Turn where he will 
in the Book, the blood meets him, but let him seek 
as he may, he cannot find it in the Judaism of the 
present. After a few minutes' pause the patriarchal 
old man went on somewhat as follows: 

"I was born in Palestine nearly seventy years 
ago. As a child I was taught to read the Law, the 
Psalms, and the Prophets. I early attended the synagogue 
and learned Hebrew from the rabbis. At first 
I believed what I was told, that ours was the true and 
only religion, but as I grew older and studied the Law 
more intently I was struck with the place the blood 
had in all the ceremonies outlined there, and equally 
struck by its utter absence in the ritual to which I was 
brought up. Again and again I read Exodus 12 and 
Leviticus 16 and 17, and the latter chapters especially 
made me tremble, as I thought of the great Day of 
Atonement and the place the blood had there. Day 
and night one verse would ring in my ears, 'It is the 

R3454 : page 327 

blood that maketh an atonement for the soul.' I knew 
I had broken the Law. I needed atonement. Year 



after year, on that day, I beat my breast as I confessed 
my need of it; but it was to be made by blood, 
and there was no blood! 

"In my distress I at last opened my heart to a 
learned and venerable rabbi. He told me that God 
was angry with his people. Jerusalem was in the 
hands of the Gentiles, the temple was destroyed, and 
a Mohammedan mosque was reared up in its place. 
The only spot on earth where we dare shed the blood 
of sacrifice, in accordance with Deuteronomy 1 2 and 
Leviticus 17, was desecrated and our nation scattered. 
That was why there was no blood. God had himself 
closed the way to carry out the solemn service of the 
great Day of Atonement. Now we must turn to the 
Talmud, and rest on its instructions, and trust in the 
mercy of God and the merits of the fathers. 

"I tried to be satisfied, but could not. Something 
seemed to say that the Law was unaltered, even 
though our temple was destroyed. Nothing else but 
blood could atone for the soul. We dared not shed 
blood for atonement elsewhere than in the place the 
Lord had chosen. Then we were left without atonement 
at all. This thought filled me with horror. In 
my distress I consulted many other rabbis. I had but 
one great question— Where can I find the blood of 
atonement?' 

"I was over thirty years of age when I left Palestine 
and came to Constantinople, with my still unanswered 
question ever before my mind, and my soul 
exceedingly troubled about my sins. One night I 
was walking down one of the narrow streets of that 
city, when I saw a sign telling of a meeting for Jews. 
Curiosity led me to open the door and go in. Just as 
I took a seat I heard a man say: 'The blood of Jesus 
Christ, his Son, cleanseth us from all sin.' It was 
my first introduction to Christianity, but I listened 
breathlessly as the speaker told how God had declared 
that, 'Without shedding of blood is no remission,' 
but that he had given his only begotten Son, 
the Lamb of God, to die, and all who trusted in his 
blood were forgiven all their iniquities. This was the 
Messiah of the fifty-third of Isaiah; this was the suffering 
of Psalm 22. Ah, my brethren, I had found 
the blood of atonement at last! I trusted it, and now 
I love to read the New Testament and see how all the 
shadows of the Law are fulfilled in Jesus. His blood has 
been shed for sinners. It has satisfied Justice, and is 
the only means of salvation for either Jew or Gentile." 



R3451 : page 327 

CEASE TO DO EVIL, LEARN TO DO WELL. 
-ISA. 1:1-9,16-20.-NOVEMBER 20.- 



ISAIAH was one of the grandest of the Lord's prophets. 
Not only is his message couched in kindly, 
sympathetic terms, but it is most comprehensive, 
including, with the rebukes and exhortations appropriate 
to his own day and nation, sublime glimpses of the glorious 
future which the Lord in his own due time will bring 
to pass for the blessing not only of Israel, but of all the 
families of the earth. This variation in the style of the 
prophets teaches us that although all the holy prophets 
spoke and wrote as they were moved by the holy Spirit, 
nevertheless the Lord was pleased to permit his messengers 
to throw into their words a certain amount of their own 
personality. We may assume, too, that the Lord in choosing 
his messengers had in view their personal characteristics 
as well as their willingness to be used as his mouthpieces. 
While, therefore, we appreciate all the prophets 
and all their messages as being from the Lord, we may 
properly enough discriminate amongst them, loving most 
those who most abundantly manifested the Spirit of the 
Lord. So today, while loving all the Lord's people and 
appreciating all whom he uses as servants of the Truth for 
its public and private ministry, we are bound to appreciate 
most those who with greatest constancy and fullest 
measure illustrate the teachings of the divine Word— who 
manifest most the Spirit of the Lord and the wisdom which 
cometh from above, which is "first pure, then peaceable, 
easy of entreatment, full of mercy and good fruits." 

The first verse of our lesson simply informs us that the 
book of Isaiah, the prophecy of Isaiah and what he saw 
and foresaw, was prepared during the times of certain 
kings— altogether a period of about forty years. 

His prophecy opens with a stirring appeal, "Hear, 
O heavens, and give ear, O earth: for the Lord hath spoken." 
The message was not to be considered as the wisdom 
or exhortation of Isaiah, but as the Lord's message 
through the Prophet. It is the Lord who declares, "I 
have nourished and brought up children and they have rebelled 
against me." The original signifies, "I have 
caused children to grow up and have lifted them high in 
greatness and they have rebelled." All familiar with the 
history of natural Israel can appreciate the truth of this 
statement. From the little obscure beginning the Lord 
brought that people forward to the most prominent place 
in the world's history and gave them much advantage every 
way, chiefly in that he communicated to them his will 
through Moses and the prophets, promising them additional 
greatness in the future. Notwithstanding all these 
favors of God they were a rebellious people, as both the 
Old and New Testaments agree. In saying this we do 
not wish it to be understood that the Israelites were worse 
than the other nations, to whom God extended no such 
favors and privileges: we have no reason for so thinking. 
Quite probably the other nations under the same circumstances 
would have followed a similar course; but it was a 
wrong course, an ungrateful course, a sinful course, 



nevertheless. 

A FORM OF GODLINESS WITHOUT ITS POWER. 

In Israel was illustrated the natural tendency of humanity 
towards sin— the downward tendency resulting 
from the fall. In that nation was illustrated the fact that 
if God had not imposed the death penalty and separation 

R3452 : page 328 

from his favor, the result anyway would have been downward, 
and more seriously so because of the continuance of 
life and the increasing opportunities for delving into sin. 
In other words, we can readily see that had God not interposed 
with the death sentence, the condition of the 
world would today probably have been much more 
terrible than it now is. Even with the brevity of life 
staring the world in the face, and disease blighting every 
pleasure and comfort, and fear clouding every hope, the 
tendency is to forget God and to go every one after his 
own schemes and selfish plans: how terrible would have 
been the condition without this constraining influence, 
with perfection of health, with the fruits of the garden and 
perpetual life. As it is we see that even the part of the 
penalty which refers to sorrows and labor with sweating 
of face, incidental to present "cursed" conditions, is a 
great blessing, a great restraint to the downward tendency 
of sin. Those who must labor here and have much of 
tribulation are thereby led to look away from present conditions 
to the Lord and to the relief which he offers. 

God proposed to adopt the children of Abraham according 
to the flesh for his children, and the nation of 
Israel was hoping to attain this glorious station, "Unto 
which promise our twelve tribes, instantly serving God day 
and night, hope to come." Since they were "cast off" 
when they rejected Messiah, this same hope has still been 
before all of their nation who believe in Jesus and the gracious 
things of the Kingdom which he has promised to all 
called and found faithful to him. (Acts 26:6,7.) We are 
to distinguish between the few and the many. There was 
a remnant in natural Israel who did not rebel against the 
Lord, but who, like the prophet Isaiah, sought to walk in 
his ways. And so likewise in nominal spiritual Israel, 
there are two classes in both cases. The masses, however, 
now as then, are in an attitude of rebellion against the 
Lord. Not that they rebel openly, but while outwardly 
affecting obedience and reverence, in their hearts they are 
far from the Lord and his requirements. 

"The ox knoweth his owner, and the ass his master's 
crib: but Israel doth not know, my people do not consider." 
The brute recognizes an obligation to the one who 
cares for him, while often those gifted with bright intellects, 
as, for instance, the masses of Christendom today 
—like the masses of the Jews in Isaiah's day— seem not to 
realize their responsibility to the Lord, their dependence 



upon him and their proper obligations to him. A "remnant," 

a handful as it were, appreciate the situation. 

The Apostle Paul refers to this class saying, "Ye are not 

your own, ye are bought with a price," "even the precious 

blood of Christ"— therefore glorify God in your bodies 

and spirits which are his. The masses do not consider, 

they have no time to consider; they are too busy with 

their own plans and schemes— honest and dishonest; selfishness 

and pride have full control of them. 

The Prophet addresses Israel as sin-laden and corrupt 
through having forsaken the Lord. He tells them that 
their course implies that they have despised the Lord— his 
promises of blessing to the obedient and his threats of retribution 
to evil doers; then he inquires what would be 
the use of any more stripes or chastisements, what hope 
would there be of effecting a reformation?— "Ye will revolt 
more and more: the whole head is sick and the whole 
heart is faint. From the sole of the foot even unto the 
head there is no soundness in it; but wounds and bruises 
and putrefying sores." This picture probably referred to 
the people as a whole and to their land, which had been 
desolated by their enemies from the north and from the 
south. These chastisements had not wrought reformation, 
and apparently the only thing to do with the nation was 
to wipe it out, and this the Lord did about a century later, 
permitting their enemies to lay waste and make utterly 
desolate the land, without inhabitants for seventy years. 
The Prophet Isaiah was probably looking down into the 
future rather than describing events of his own day when 
he said, "Your country is desolate, your cities are burned 
with fire: your land, strangers devour it.. .and the 
daughter of Zion is left as a booth in the vineyard, as a 
lodge in the garden." The booth and lodge were very 
unsafe, unsatisfactory, temporary shelters, a dwelling whose 
occupant was continually on the alert against depredators, 
spoilers. Thus the Prophet pictures the condition of the 
Jewish nation— thus he shows to what their course would 
lead unless they turned from it. 

NOMINAL SPIRITUAL ISRAEL ASTRAY. 

We may draw a lesson applicable to Christendom, the 
civilized world, and see that so far as spirituality is concerned 
Christendom is in a deplorable condition. The 
enemies of the Truth, boastful higher critics and powerful 
evolutionists, have invaded all the territory of faith and 
hope and are laying waste the heritage of the Lord's people, 
and the majority are going into captivity to these 
enemies. Those who remain loyal to the Lord are in 
straits, and, like those who dwell in the booths and lodges 
watching against depredators, merely on the defensive, 
and that in unfavorable quarters in many respects. 

As for the Lord's dealing with Christendom as a 
whole, it would be useless to prosecute the matter, as the 
increased knowledge and opportunities and blessings are 
seen to bring more of worldliness, selfishness and corruption: 



Why should they be stricken any more? Why 
should they be dealt with a view to correction? As 
a matter of fact we know that Christendom will not be 
much longer dealt with under present conditions: already 
we are in the time of the fall of Babylon, already the message 
is being proclaimed in every quarter of the spiritual 
heavens that the harvest of the age is come, that great 
Babylon is no longer to be esteemed God's representative 
in the earth, and that his people should all come out of 
her. (Rev. 18:3.) The light of Present Truth showing 
us the errors of Babylon is the divine voice to all who are 
of the Truth, to all who love the Truth. Such will hear and 
will obey. 

R3452 : page 329 

In verse 9 the Prophet declares that, except for the 
small remnant left to the Lord, the nation and its hopes 
would have been like Sodom and Gomorrah— would have 
been utterly destroyed. Because of this faithful remnant in 
natural Israel to whom God's promises and favors belonged, 
he specially cared for that nation even after he permitted 
the full overthrow and desolation of their land to come 
upon them. His providences were with them still even 
in their captivity in Babylon, and he brought them back 
again, in due time, to their own land and perpetuated in 
that remnant the promises of which the nation as a whole 
had proven themselves unworthy. So it was again with 
natural Israel in the end of their age when Messiah appeared. 
He found only a remnant worthy of the Kingdom, 
and the great mass were cast off and the time of trouble 
destroyed them nationally. The faithful remnant, 
however, were accepted of the Lord to be the nucleus of 
the house of spiritual Israel, and to this number he has 
since been adding out of every nation, kindred and 
tongue. 

Similarly also in the end of this Gospel age, at the 
second advent of Christ. The Scriptures assure us that 
only a remnant will be found Israelites indeed, while the 
majority, the great mass of Christendom, will be rejected. 
To these remnants the oppositions of their evil surroundings 
serve as polishing instruments to prove them, to test 
them, to prepare them for future services and honors. 
Otherwise, had there been no faithful ones found, all 
hopes of Kingdom privileges and blessings, so far as the 
people are concerned, would have failed, and Messiah 
alone, without his Church, would have been the King of 
the Millennial age. Had God not foreseen these remnants, 
Israel and Christendom would have received no more consideration 
than did the other nations of the earth. 

To be as Sodom and Gomorrah, therefore, does not 
signify to be in an utterly hopeless condition as respects 
the future, though it would have implied hopelessness as 
respected the Kingdom opportunities of the Jewish and 
Gospel ages; because even to the Sodomites a blessing 
shall yet come through the glorified Christ Jesus, the 



Head, and the remnant Church, the little flock, his body. 
Our Lord mentioned this future hope of the Sodomites in 
one of his discourses, and the Prophet Ezekiel has stated 
it further in considerable detail, showing that as natural 
Israel will be reclaimed in due time from her cast-off condition 
and be dealt with by the great Messiah during the 
Millennial age, so also will the Sodomites come back to 
their "former estate," and if obedient they as well as others 
may yet return to all that was lost in Adam and redeemed, 
bought back, by the precious blood of Christ.— 
Ezek. 16:48-63; Matt. 10:15. 

"WASH YOU, MAKE YOU CLEAN." 

The latter part of our lesson was addressed primarily 
to the well-intentioned Israelite of Isaiah's time. As an 
exhortation it reminds us of the words of John the Baptist 
and his disciples and of Jesus and his disciples when appearing 
to the Jewish nation in the harvest time of their 
age. It is a plea for reform to a people already justified, 
consecrated. We are to remember that the whole nation 
of Israel was baptized into Moses in the sea and in the 
cloud, and that, as the mediator, Moses, by divine arrangement 
instituted a covenant between God and Israel by which 
that nation was recognized as under special divine care, 
and by which their sins were typically atoned for every year 
in advance on the Day of Atonement with the blood of 
bulls and goats. These sacrifices, as the Apostle points 
out, could never really cleanse them from sins; they were 
merely temporary coverings of those sins, and typical lessons 
respecting the necessity of blood atonement for the 
sins of the whole world, into which they were precipitated 
by Adam's transgression. It was for the Israelites to learn 
later in God's due time, about the better Mediator than 
Moses, about his better sacrifices for sins, and concerning 
the eternal redemption effected thereby. 

Meantime they were to recognize their responsibility 
for such sins as they could have avoided, and they were to 
cleanse themselves from these and to seek the Lord with 
their whole hearts. The exhortation, therefore, of verse sixteen 
does not mean a washing away of original sin, 
which they could not effect, which was only figuratively 

R3453 : page 329 

done on the Day of Atonement and will only be actually 
accomplished by the Lord Jesus' work. 

Hence this entire exhortation is as appropriate to 
spiritual Israel as it was to natural Israel. As they had 
their typical cleansings in their typical atonement sacrifices, 
we have our real cleansing in the better sacrifice of 
Christ. It is appropriate, however, that we remember 
that if we would be of those who will constitute his elect, if 
we would be of those who would be used of him as kings 
for the blessing of all the families of the earth, we must 
not only be justified from all the evils of the past but we 



must develop character by putting forth effort against evils 

which are natural to us, by overcoming those evils. The 

command is, "Cease to do evil." We can keep this command 

so far as our hearts, our intentions, are concerned. 

To be acceptable to God our wills must be firmly established 

in opposition to sin of every kind, and this will 

mean that to the extent of our ability all our words and 

conduct will be free from evil, free from sin; but since 

our new wills must operate through imperfect bodies, we 

cannot hope to be absolutely free from sin, from blemishes, 

from imperfection. 

Similarly we are to strive continually to "learn to do 
well." Perfection must be our aim, and in our hearts it 
must be continually the criterion. But experience corroborates 
what the Scriptures set forth on the subject, 
namely, that in our imperfect condition and unfavorable 
surroundings we cannot do the things that we would— we 
cannot live fully up to the grand standard which our hearts 
appreciate and desire to meet. This reminds us of our 
Lord's words, "Be ye perfect even as your Father in 

R3453 : page 330 

heaven is perfect." The Lord knew that this would be 
impossible except in our minds, in our hearts, in our intentions; 
we cannot be his and be anything else than 
pure in heart, pure in intention. But he knew that we 
could not under present conditions measure up to the 
heavenly Father's perfection, nor could he set for us a lower 
standard than that. There is only the one standard, and 
we must attain to that as nearly as we can in our conduct 
and approve it fully in our hearts. 

JUSTICE, EQUITY, A CHRISTIAN QUALITY. 

But we should explain what is meant by "doing well." 
We are exhorted to "seek judgment [always be on the side of 
right and justice, desiring to do justice to all with whom 
we have dealings]; relieve the oppressed [be of generous 
spirit, be willing and anxious to lift some of the burdens 
from the groaning creation to the extent of our ability]; 
judge the fatherless [see that the orphans and those not 
properly capable of looking out for their own welfare 
shall suffer no loss at our hands, but on the contrary we 
shall do what we can to secure to them their just and reasonable 
rights]; plead for the widow [feel a sympathy for 
the helpless and plead their cause with others, which 
would imply generosity on our part as well as justice to 
them]." 

It would appear that Christian people spend a good many 
years of their experiences as New Creatures without making 
great progress. One difficulty leading up to this condition 
is a failure to recognize the basic principles underlying the 
divine laws, which apply to us from the moment we are adopted 
into the Lord's family. The first of these basic principles 
is justice. We need to learn more and more clearly what 



are our own rights and the rights of our fellow creatures 
in the Church and out of the Church. We need to learn 
how to measure the affairs of ourselves and of others with 
the plummet of justice, and to realize that we must not under 
any circumstances or conditions infract the rights, 
interests or liberties of others— that to do so would be 
wrong, sinful, contrary to the divine will, and a hindrance 
to our growth in grace. Secondly, we must learn to esteem 
love as next to justice in importance in the divine code. 
By love we mean not amativeness nor soft sentimentality, 
but that principle of kindness, sympathy, consideration 
and benevolence which we see manifested in our heavenly 
Father and in our Lord Jesus. 

In proportion as we grow up in the Lord, strong in 
him, it must be along the lines of these elements of his 
character. More and more we must appreciate and sympathize 
with others in their trials and difficulties and 
afflictions; more and more we must become gentle, patient, 
kind toward all, but especially toward the household 
of faith. All the graces of the Spirit are elements of love. 
God is love, and whoever, therefore, receives of his Spirit 
receives the spirit of love. 

These two basic principles must cover all of our conduct 
in life. Justice tells us that we must cease to do evil 
—that we must not speak a word or do an act that would 
work injustice to another, nor even by look imply such 
injustice; we must be as careful of his or her interests 
and welfare as of our own. Justice must cover all 
of our dealings with others. Love may permit us to 
give them more than justice would require, but justice 
demands that we must never give them less than due, 
no matter if they do not require justice at our hands, 
no matter if they are willing to take less than justice, 
no matter if they would say nothing if we should take advantage 
of them, no matter if they would not appreciate 
our degree of justice— no matter, our course is the same. 
We have received of the Lord's Spirit, and must act from 
this standpoint and not from the standpoint of others who 
have not his Spirit or who are more or less blinded and 
disabled thereby from dealing justly. 

If justice must mark our conduct toward others, so 
love must be used by us in measuring the conduct of others 
toward us. We may not apply to others the strict 
rules of justice which we acknowledge as our responsibility 
to them. Love, generosity, demand that we accept 
from others less than justice, because we realize that they 
are fallen, imperfect, not only in their flesh but also in 
their judgments. Furthermore, we see that the great mass 
of the world has not received the Spirit of the Lord at all, 
and therefore cannot fully appreciate these basic principles 
of justice and love as we appreciate them. We must in 
love look sympathetically upon their condition, as we 
would upon the condition of a sick neighbor or friend, 
parent or child. We must make allowance for their disordered 
condition, and think as charitably as possible of 
their words, conduct, etc. 



LOVE AND JUSTICE BOTH CONTROL. 

This does not mean that we must be blind and oblivious 
to true conditions, and permit ourselves to be deprived 
of all that we possess or earn; but it does mean that 
we should take a kind, sympathetic view of the unrighteousness 
and injustice of those with whom we have dealings 
—that we should remember that they are fallen and 
that they have not received the grace of God as we have 
received it, and that they are not, therefore, to be measured 
by the line of strict justice, but rather that their imperfections 
are to be allowed for reasonably by the elastic 
cord of love. It is our own conduct that we are to measure 
by the rule of justice, the Golden Rule. 

How clearly the Master sets forth these conditions, 
urging upon us the Golden Rule as the measure for our 
conduct toward others, and that in measuring their conduct 
toward us we shall be as generous as we shall wish 
our Lord to be in his judgment of ourselves, in harmony 
with his statement, "With what judgment ye judge, ye 
shall be judged." A right appreciation of these basic 
principles, justice and love, by the Lord's people, and 
worked out in the daily affairs of life, would lift them 
above the world. It would save many an altercation, 

R3453 : page 331 

many a law suit, many a quarrel, and would make of the 
Lord's people shining examples of kindness, generosity, 
love, and at the same time examples of justice, right living, 
sterling honesty, etc. 

Verses 1 8-20 apply specially to natural Israel, though 
we shall see that an application is also possible to spiritual 
Israel. Without telling the Israelites how he would accomplish 
the complete cancellation of their sins in due 
time through the great antitypical sacrifice, the Lord 
merely assures them of the fact that such a result would 
come, and that if they would accept this by faith they 
would see how reasonable were the Lord's requirements in 
every particular. If they would thus seek to walk in the 
Lord's ways they would eat the good of the land, they 
would have blessings upon their herds and flocks and 
crops, for this was the Lord's covenant with that nation; 
while on the contrary it was equally a part of the covenant 
that if they would be disobedient to him they would go 
into captivity, fall by the sword, have famine, pestilences, 
etc.— See our Lord's statement of this matter in 
Leviticus 26:3-33. 

The application to spiritual Israel is that we should 
continually remember that we were bought with a price, 
even the precious blood of Christ, and that his sacrifice 
and not any works that we could do are the basis of our 
acceptance with God— that by his stripes we are healed. 
Another lesson is that no matter how gross or dark our 
condition was before we thus came to the Lord, no matter 



how sinful we had been in ignorance and darkness, the 

merit of the great Atonement Sacrifice covers all these 

blemishes and makes us from the moment it is applied 

absolutely clean, "whiter than snow." We are to remember 

that those sins do not cling to us afterward, that we 

will not be held responsible for them even though some 

weakness of the flesh resulting from sin may be with us 

even until the day of death. The New Creature accepted 

in Christ is counted as being without spot or blemish. 

We are to appreciate this standing granted to us as sons of 

God, and not, like the prodigal, eat the swinish husks nor 

walk carelessly in life, so as to have the robes of our justification 

sullied by contact with the world and the flesh. 

We are, as the Apostle declares, to "keep ourselves unspotted 

from the world." 

R3454 : page 33 1 

Thus appreciating our standing, relationship and favors, 
we are to enter willingly and obediently into all the 
good will of God, seeking to cultivate in ourselves the 
principles of his righteousness— justice and love. The 
assurance is that under these conditions we shall "eat the 
good of the land." To us this would not refer to natural 
good things, but to spiritual good things, for have we not 
exchanged our interest in all earthly things for the heavenly, 
the spiritual? Thus it is fulfilled: the Lord's true followers 
have the best there is so far as heart and mind, peace 
and rest and joy are concerned— the "peace of God which 
passeth all understanding," and a realization that "all 
things are ours, for we are Christ's and Christ is God's." 

If, on the contrary, the spiritual Israelites of today 
refuse to walk in harmony with the Lord's direction and 
rebel against him, they would surely bring upon themselves 
the "destruction," the Second Death which the 
Scriptures indicate as the proper portion of those who, 
after having tasted the good Word of God, the powers of 
the world to come, and have been made partakers of the 
holy Spirit, fall away in unappreciation— unthankfulness. 

We might remark, too, that amongst those who maintain 
their relationship to God as willing and obedient, 
there is a difference: Some are willing and obedient when 
the matter comes to a crisis and they must decide as between 
the Lord and the world, as between the Lord and 
the Adversary. They are loyal to the Lord to the extent 
that they would never oppose him. Such will be overcomers, 
but will constitute the "Great Company" class. 
Others of this class, more zealous, more faithful, more willing 
and more obedient, will be brought off more than 
conquerors and get more than the spiritual new nature. 
Their reward will be the glory, honor and immortality, 
joint-heirship in the Kingdom, as the Bride, the Lamb's 
Wife. 



R3454: page 331 

SPIRITUAL AND ANIMAL INTOXICATION. 

--ISAIAH 28:l-13.-NOVEMBER 27.- 

Golden Text:— "They also have erred through wine, 
and through strong drink are out of the way." 

THIS date has been for years observed throughout 
England as "Temperance Sunday," and the International 
S.S. Lesson Committee of the United 
States has appropriated the date for the conservation of 
temperance interests in the United States also. 

We yield to none in opposition to intoxicating beverages 
and in abhorrence of the terrible results they entail. 
We acknowledge also that the Scriptures everywhere favor 
temperance, and nowhere favor intemperance. We agree 
also that those of humanity who are entrapped by this 
snare are either very weak or very foolish, with the numerous 
evidences all about them showing the bestiality 
which intoxication induces and in general the evils entailed. 
We agree further that no saint should ever be intoxicated, 
and accept the Lord's word that "no drunkard 
shall inherit the Kingdom of God." (I Cor. 6:10.) Nevertheless, 
we find very little in the Scriptures addressed to 
the saints on this subject, and would be surprised if matters 
were otherwise. Why should those who have received 
the spirit of a sound mind, the wisdom that cometh from 
above— why should such require special exhortation not to 
be intoxicated, not to be intemperate? In harmony with 

R3455 : page 332 

our expectation we find the Apostle's exhortation to the 
Church is to be temperate in all things— in eating, in 
drinking, in clothing, in pleasure, in sorrow. "Let your 
moderation be known unto all men," says the Apostle.— 
Phil. 4:5. 

THE DRUNKARDS OF EPHRAIM. 

We are aware that our lesson could be viewed with 
some degree of reason as a temperance lesson— as an exhortation 
against the use of natural intoxicants. We agree 
that the Prophet might possibly have referred to the 
drunkards amongst the people of the ten-tribe kingdom 
known as Ephraim or as Israel, but we do not understand 
that this was the Lord's object in giving the message of 
which our lesson is a part. We believe that he was rather 
giving a lesson to us, his spiritual house of sons of this 
Gospel age. The lesson surely is either a literal statement 
respecting literal intoxication, or a figurative one respecting 
figurative intoxication. If literal, the whole connection 
should bear this out by being similarly literal; if 
figurative, the whole connection should bear it out as 



figurative. 

We cannot think that the drunkards of Ephraim were 
so numerous or so highly esteemed as to be "the crown of 
pride" of that nation, nor that those drunkards lay "at the 
head of every fat valley," nor that the Lord paid so much 
more attention to those drunkards than he does to drunkards 
of our day as that he would make a special demonstration 
against them. On the contrary, we must assume 
that while intemperance may have been one of the faults 
of the people of Israel, pride was another and perhaps a 
greater one. They were intoxicated with pride and self-sufficiency, 
and did not properly appreciate their dependence 
upon the Lord. Hence it was that a few years after 
the date of this prophecy that proud people were carried 
captive by their enemies into Syria. It was the coming 
of this enemy that is figuratively referred to as a tempest 
of hail, a destroying storm, a flood of mighty waters that 
cast down the crown of pride of those people intoxicated 
with self-conceit. 

THE LESSON TO NOMINAL SPIRITUAL ISRAEL. 

In previous studies we noted that, in harmony with 
the Apostle's words, nearly all the Old Testament prophecies 
were written for our admonition upon whom the 
ends of the ages have come, and in many instances those 
who uttered the prophecies and those who heard them 
comprehended them not. (I Pet. 1:12.) The prophecy 
at present under consideration we understand to be of this 
kind— specially applicable to spiritual Israel, though not 
without a meaning to natural Israel at the time of this 
writing. Today we see the Christian world intoxicated, 
bewildered and confused with the wine of false doctrine 
mentioned so explicitly in our Lord's last message to his 
people. There it is clearly set forth that the great mother 
of harlots would make all the nations of Christendom 
drunk with the wine of her fornication. The crown of 
pride and the fat valleys of her possessions are easily seen 
from this standpoint. Churchianity today is intoxicated 
with its material prosperity, its increasing power and dignity 
in the world. It wears a crown of pride and self-sufficiency, 
and in a stupid and maudlin way is blinded to 
its real condition. Thus our Lord pictures nominal Israel 
of the present day as the Laodicean Church, and declares, 
"Thou art wretched, miserable, blind and naked," though 
"thou sayest, I am rich, and increased with goods, and have 
need of nothing." The prosperity of Churchianity is, however, 
like the fading flower— its beauty and fragrance will 
soon pass away; it will soon be swallowed up like a first 
ripe fig. 

But at the same time that the glory passes away from 
the nominal system a proportionately special blessing will 
come to the residue of the Lord's people who are not of 
this class, drunken with the wine of false doctrine, but, as 
the Apostle declares, "Sober, girding up the loins of their 
minds, and pressing along the narrow way for the prize." 



This will mean to this class a spirit of judgment, or what 

the Apostle calls the spirit of a sound mind, enabling them 

to comprehend the divine plan, and enabling them to be 

strong in the defense of the Truth and to "turn the battle 

to the gate;" that is to say, the citadel of Truth will be 

preserved notwithstanding the fall of the masses of Churchianity. 

This is in accord with the prophetic statement, 

"A thousand shall fall at thy side, and ten thousand at thy 

right hand, but it shall not come nigh thee. Only with 

thine eyes shalt thou behold and see the reward of the 

wicked, because thou hast made the Lord, which is my 

refuge, even the Most High, thy habitation."— 

Psalm 91:7-10. 

Where do we find ourselves, dear brethren and sisters, 
as we investigate this picture, so applicable to our day. 
Are we amongst those intoxicated with the spirit of the 
world, the spirit of Babylon, the spirit of Antichrist, the 
spirit of false doctrine, that has "a form of godliness but 
denies its power"? Or are we classed with the Lord and 
more and more being filled with the spirit of a sound 
mind? and are we standing faithful as good soldiers in the 
defense of the Truth and turning the battle at the gateway; 
not suffering that any false doctrine shall intrude 
upon us, but insisting that every doctrine shall be decided 
by the Word of the Lord, and be squared by the Golden 
Rule and by the Scriptural presentations on the subject of 
the Ransom? We trust that the more we examine ourselves 
the more we can assure ourselves that we are with 
the latter class. 

Verse 7 seemingly pictures these drunkards of Ephraim 
as the leaders of the people, their priests and prophets, 
their religious instructors, who have all been misled 
through the strong drink, the false doctrine of the dark 
ages, and who are all erring in vision and stumbling in 
their judgment respecting the Truth, the Divine Plan. 

TABLES FULL OF VOMIT. 

The statement in verse 8 that all their tables are full 
of vomit and filthiness so that there is no place clean could 

R3455 : page 333 

hardly be understood to apply literally to the millions of 
Israelites of Isaiah's day, but it does apply spiritually to the 
millions of nominal Israel of our day. We need scarcely 
say that the table of the Lord's people signifies their spiritual 
supply of food, nourishment; and as we look about 
us we find in Churchianity many such tables, one to each 
denomination— its creed. The creed of each denomination 
represents what it claims God has set before it as the 
truth for its spiritual nourishment and refreshment; and 
for centuries each denomination has been busily inviting 
each other and the world to come to its table. Now, 
however, these tables are measurably deserted. Very few 
want to talk about the doctrine or creed of their sect; they 



generally prefer to ignore creeds. 

Why? Because creeds are nauseating; they are spread 
with doctrines which the preachers and laity have rejected 
—"vomit"; they are full of filthiness; there is no place 
clean, as the Prophet describes. Not a solitary creed in 
Christendom will stand examination in the light of common 
sense; not a preacher in any "orthodox denomination" 
—that is, in any denomination that is recognized by 
the Evangelical Alliance— would be willing to discuss the 
church creed which he accepted and outwardly professes 
and vowed to teach. 

On the contrary, how is it with the remnant mentioned 
in verses 5 and 6? Have they any table? Yes, 
indeed! They have a table spread with divine bounties, 
and it is referred to prophetically in the 23d Psalm, "My 
table thou hast furnished in the presence of mine enemies." 
Having gotten free from the wine of the false doctrine of 
Babylon, these have sought the Truth of the Divine Word 
unadulterated, and have drawn nigh unto the Lord with 
their hearts and not with their lips merely; they have gotten 
mercy and found grace to help in time of great need. 
The Lord has bountifully supplied their wants with truths 
both new and old, and thus he fulfilled the promise he 
made when leaving us, saying to those servants who would 
be ready to hear the knock, indicating his "presence" at 
his second coming, that he would open the door, enter in 
and sup with them. Furthermore, he promised that he 
would gird himself and become our servant, and bring forth 
to his faithful ones things new and old from the larder, 
from the treasure house of truth and grace. We found it 
so! We have a table spread with the most wonderful 
bounties, "riches of grace, mercy and truth." 

Taking up the matter from a little different standpoint, 
verse 9 throws out a suggestive inquiry in full harmony 
with the foregoing,— "Whom shall he teach knowledge? 
and whom shall he make to understand [pure] doctrine?" 
Here is the key for the foregoing. The difficulty with 
Churchianity is a superabundance of mysticism, ignorance 
and superstition and a dearth of knowledge— "My people 
perish for lack of knowledge." The question is asked in 
order to suggest something in connection with the answer, 
as though the question were, Why does not the Lord instruct 
those who are drunken with ignorance and error? 
Why does he not teach them the Truth? 

The answer is that those who will be ready for the 
pure doctrine must first be weaned from the milk and 
drawn from the breasts. So long as the Lord's people are 
babes to the extent that is here indicated, they will be dependent 
upon the systems and sects and false doctrines 
with which the Adversary has so much to do in developing. 
Those who are the Lord's true people in these various 
sects must get strong enough to be weaned from them before 
they can be in the proper attitude of mind to receive 
the Lord's instructions from another quarter. To all who 
are thus weaned from Churchianity the Lord will very graciously 
grant precept upon precept, line upon line, here a 



little, and there a little, that they may grow thereby, that 
they may become strong in the Lord and able to partake 
eventually of the strong meat which he so abundantly supplies 
to those of His table— His Word. 

R3456 : page 333 

WITH STAMMERING LIPS. 

Verse 1 1 tells of the stammering lips with which the 
message is being told, little by little, line upon line. Is 
it not so? Those who are proclaiming Present Truth by 
the printed page and orally are for the most part quite 
unqualified for the work from the standpoint of the world. 
Just as in the Jewish harvest the Lord's people were mostly 
from common people as now— not many great, not many 
wise, not many learned has God chosen, but chiefly the 
poor of this world,— but rich in faith and heirs of the 
Kingdom. 

Through these stammering lips of the Lord's consecrated 
humble ones a proclamation is made throughout 
Christianity, saying, "This is the rest wherewith you may 
rest, and this is the refreshing." There is no doubt at 
all that this brief description of the harvest message is very 
appropriate to the divine plan of the ages. It is indeed 
to those who can receive it a message of rest and refreshment, 
but, as the Prophet pointed out, the majority will 
not hear. Nevertheless, the message of the Lord is to be 
sent forth, line upon line, precept upon precept, tract 
upon tract, here a little and there a little, that every 
true child of God may be reached and be gathered out of 
Babylon. "Come out of her, my people, that ye be not 
partakers of her sins, and receive not of her plagues." 

The Prophet points out that the result will be that 
the nominal system will go and fall backward, and be broken, 
and snared, and taken. We see that this is already 
approaching. Higher Criticism and Evolutionism is undermining 
the faith of the great body of Christendom; 
unbelief is ensnaring them, and their fall backward is near 
at hand. How appropriate it is that those who have the 
privilege of being the Lord's mouth-pieces now shall cry 
aloud, not with the view of awakening or converting, or 
reforming Churchianity as a whole, but to arouse the few 
—all amongst them who are the Lord's true sheep. 

R3456 : page 334 

It will be remembered that the Apostle quoted the 
last verse of our lesson and applied it also in the end of 
the Jewish age— pointing out that because of unbelief the 
nation of Israel stumbled and fell from divine favor. We 
have already seen on previous occasions the parallel between 
the Jewish and Gospel dispensations, and are therefore 
to expect in nominal spiritual Israel something to 
correspond to the stumbling and falling which took place 
in nominal natural Israel in the end of their age. 



Who shall be able to stand? Let us abide under the 
shadow of the Almighty, and stand firmly for the righteousness 
of Christ, the standard that the Lord has set up; 
and let us put on the whole armor of God, and having 
done all, stand. 



R3456 : page 334 

INTERESTING QUESTIONS ANSWERED. 
JUSTIFIED OR CONDEMNED 



Question.— If lasting life is the portion of all when 
awakened, are they justified? If not justified, are 
they still under condemnation? If neither justified 
nor condemned, what is their condition? 

Answer.— The condition of the world on trial during 
the Millennial age will be neither one of justification 
nor of condemnation. The "curse" of the whole 
world under divine condemnation, or sentence to death 
on account of Adam's sin, will cease thoroughly and 
completely with the close of this Gospel age, with the 
close of the antitypical Day of Atonement. But if, 
when awakened, all past sins were fully and freely 
forgiven, and the world were on trial before the bar 
of the Heavenly Father, they would be subject to instant 
condemnation as unworthy, unfit to live, because 
the divine law is that only that which is perfect 
shall live. Hence God has provided the mediatorial 
Kingdom of Christ to deal with the poor world in its 
wretched and undone condition, after the divine sentence 
against mankind has ceased, has been cancelled, 
has been revoked. The revoking of the sentence of 
death effects no restitution— the two things are entirely 
separate and distinct. 

Take an illustration: Suppose a man, justly condemned 
to death for murder, had already served 
twenty years of imprisonment, and in that time he 
had become bald, lost half his teeth and to some extent 
his eyesight. Suppose that in some manner the 
cancellation of the sentence against him was accomplished 
and that he was set free, would the cancellation 
of the balance of the sentence restore to the man 
his teeth or his hair or his eyesight or anything else? 
Surely not. But if a kind friend had in some manner 
effected a settlement of his sentence, we may be sure 
the same friend would be glad upon his release to assist 
him in any manner in his power— to make good 
so far as possible his loss. He could procure for him 
glasses that would aid his sight, false teeth and a wig, 
and that would come as near as the friend could go to 
doing that which the Lord Jesus proposes to do for 



the human family by restitution processes. 

The Millennial Kingdom will have full charge of 
the human family. He who bought the race with his 
own precious blood, he who effected a cancellation of 
the sentence, is to be granted a thousand years to 
effect the restitution of so many of those whom he 
bought as choose to come back into harmony with 
God and his laws. 

We have seen they will not be in a condemned 
condition, because their sins will be forgiven. For 
the same reason they will not be justified by faith, because 
it is better to be forgiven than to be merely 
"covered," or reckoned forgiven. Their condition 
and relationship to Christ under the New Covenant 
provisions of mercy will be all that could be desired for 
them. A little confusion is apt to prevail in our minds 
for a time on this subject of justification. Realizing 
how important is our justification, how indispensable 
to our relationship to the Father and our joint-heirship 
with Christ, we are now inclined to feel that a similar 
justification process would be necessary for the 
world by and by. But not so. If the world were to be 
on judgment before the Father they would need justification, 
that is, a reckoned imputation of righteousness, 
a covering with Christ's merit, etc.; but they are not 
to stand before the judgment seat of the Father until 
the close of the Millennial age. They are to be on 
judgment and trial before Christ, not as sons of Adam, 
under his condemnation, etc., but as individuals, taken 
just for what they are, judged according to their several 
abilities for obedience. At the close of the Millennial 
age, when Christ's Kingdom shall be delivered 
up to God, even the Father (1 Cor. 15:24), these will 
not need justification by faith in order to stand before 
him, because during the Millennial age they will have 
been tried according to their works, and only those 
justified by works will have any standing before the 
Father; and they, being perfect, will need no covering 
for imperfections, but be in just such a condition 
as the Father could approve and declare worthy of 
continued lasting life. 

WHAT IS REPENTANCE? 



Question.— How would you define repentance 
from the Scriptural standpoint? 

Answer.— Webster's definition merely gives the 
views of mankind in general on this subject. We are 

R3456 : page 335 

not to choose which we prefer, but are to choose the 
definition which the Scriptures substantiate; namely 
this, "Godly sorrow worketh repentance." People 



may be sorry, without being repentant, in matters in 
which they have failed where they had wished to succeed. 
This is not a godly sorrow, but merely a sorrow 
of disappointment and regret; just as the thief who 
attempted to steal and was caught was, of course, 
sorry that he was caught. The godly sorrow is that 
which is sorrow for the sin rather than for the penalty, 
and sorrow for the sin produces repentance and 
reformation of character— the only kind recognized in 
the Scriptures. 

Let us not be misunderstood in this matter. Sorrow 
for sin does not necessarily mean a certain amount 
of tears and agony: it does mean a contrition of 
the heart, a regretful heart on account of sin, with 
a full determination to do to the contrary. We mention 
this, because some of our Methodist friends hold 
that unless there be manifestations of agony there has 
been no true repentance. To this we cannot assent. 
The sorrow or regret respecting the past is manifested 
by a radical change of life. 

We are not competent to pass upon the case of 
Cain, to determine whether or not he had a proper 
repentance or merely a fear of punishment. "Judge 
nothing before the time." Cain's own particular sentiments 
would have nothing to do with the fact that 
in a general way he represented the world, with its 
evil spirit, while Abel represented Christ and the 
Church, with the sacrificing spirit. Assuredly, if we 
abhor evil and grieve upon doing that which is wrong, 
and cleave to that which is good, it must be because 
we have learned "the exceeding sinfulness of sin." 
This implies regret for any measure of wilfulness in 
any sins we may have committed. 

In re justification; we believe that quite a good 
many Christians were born in a justified condition, 
and that the sentiments of their hearts always were 
for righteousness, and that therefore they cannot accuse 
themselves of having sinned wilfully, nor feel 
such great contrition as those who have been living 
in sin— in alienation from God. Nor should they. 
They are already the Lord's, and for them to be converted 
(turned round) would mean to turn away from 
the Lord. The Editor is one of this class. 

R3457 : page 335 

SITTING WITH ABRAHAM, ISAAC AND JACOB IN THE 
KINGDOM. 



Question.— Who are meant when it is said, "Many 
shall come from the east and from the west and shall 
sit down with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob in the Kingdom 
of heaven" ?-Matt. 8:11. 

Answer.— As already pointed out in the DAWN 



series, the Gospel Church only will constitute the 

Kingdom in its highest and strictest sense; but Abraham, 

Isaac and Jacob and all the ancient worthies 

will be the chief ministers of that Kingdom in the 

world of mankind, and all mankind will be invited to 

come into harmony with the spiritual Kingdom, that 

God's will may be done in this, as an earthly class, 

as it is done in the heavenly class. In this sense of 

the word, all who shall accept of the terms and conditions 

of the Kingdom will sit down, or be at rest and 

at peace with God, with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob 

and all the faithful of the earthly class. Thus it will 

be seen that the Lord is pointing to a large class of 

the world of mankind who will ultimately become citizens 

of the earthly phase of the Kingdom. This 

same thought is represented in Revelation, where it is 

intimated that all the worthy will enter into the city 

—the Kingdom— while without will be all the unworthy, 

who love and serve sin, subjects of the Second 

Death. 

"CHILDREN OF DISOBEDIENCE" 



Question.— Who are the "children of disobedience" 
ofEph. 2:2? 

Answer.— Since father Adam was created in God's 
likeness, and is designated a son of God, it follows 
that all of his children, had they remained in harmony 
with God, would have been sons of God,— earthly 
sons. But since Adam became disobedient, and all of 
his children shared in his fall, all of the race of Adam 
are children of disobedience, children under punishment, 
under wrath, except those who have "escaped 
the condemnation that is upon the world," by acceptance 
of the divine provision of favor and return to 
harmony with their Creator. Those who return to 
harmony with God through the appointed way become 
children of obedience; those who do not, even 
though they have not yet had the full opportunity 
which God designs they ultimately shall have to discern 
good from evil, and though they may choose the 
good, are, nevertheless, even now denominated "children 
of disobedience" and "children of wrath." 

DEAD TO THE LAW BY THE BODY OF CHRIST 



Question.— In Romans 7:4 we read: "Ye also 
are become dead to the Law by the body of Christ that 
ye should be married to another, even to him who is 
raised from the dead." What body is meant— the 
body of Jesus' flesh or "the Church his body"? 

Answer.— It refers to the flesh of Jesus, whose 



death cancelled all claims of the Law against a believing 
Jew— made free to become united to the risen 
Christ (the Lord of Glory) as new creatures, as his 
Bride. 



page 337 

SEMI-MONTHLY 