From Our Readers
Theology of Prosperity  I found the “Watching the World” item “Theology of Prosperity” (June 22, 1999) to be very misleading, to put it politely. Pentecostal and charismatic churches everywhere encourage giving based on sound Biblical principles. The article was written with a judgmental attitude.
C. B., United States
Our item accurately and objectively quoted the words of Lutheran theologian Wanda Deifelt as they appeared in the “ENI Bulletin,” the newsletter of the World Council of Churches. As was stated, the article in that newsletter was not about Pentecostal and charismatic churches in general but was specifically about certain ones in Latin America.—ED.
Vinland  I would like to thank you for the article “Where Is the Legendary Vinland?” (July 8, 1999) I have been interested in the Vikings for a long time and have hoped that you would discuss this subject. At last my wish has been granted.
S. S., Japan
Your articles are educational. However, I feel the need to clarify one point. Many historians use the popular term “Vikings” only for the Norse pirates who raided the European coast.
J. S., United States
“Awake!” consulted several respected historians in Norway and Greenland on this matter. The consensus is that while there may be some disagreement among historians regarding the use of the term “Viking,” the terms “Vikings” and “Norsemen” are virtually synonymous in the English-speaking world.—ED.
Prison Survivor  I want to thank you from the bottom of my heart for the article “God Has Been Our Helper.” (June 22, 1999) It brought tears of joy to my eyes as I read of how Francisco Coana learned the truth and made serving Jehovah a priority in his life. Reading about the trials my Christian brothers went through in Mozambique was truly faith strengthening.
J. H., United States
Sick Parents  I was moved by the article “Young People Ask . . . Why Is Mom So Sick?” (July 22, 1999) I did not think that there were so many other youths who, like me, have the privilege of caring for a sick loved one. My grandmother stays with us, and she has been bedridden for four months. I was beginning to feel burdened down and tired of caring for her. I got much-needed strength from reading the article. It made me feel confident of Jehovah’s support.
J. P., Philippines
The article was of great comfort to me, and it gave me the strength to support my mother, who suffers from depression. I was able to use the suggestions that the article made to see the situation more realistically and to show more empathy, understanding, and tact.
G. L., Italy
The article came at exactly the right time. I have cancer, and my son lives with me. My son was suffering so terribly that I no longer knew how to comfort him. The article accurately described his feelings. These articles are not for young people only. They are about life itself.
R. Z., Germany
This article helped me to realize how important it is to remain spiritually active. I became aware that you can only help a sick person when you keep your own life focused on God’s Kingdom.
P. E., Austria

