





Can Education and Money Guarantee a Secure Future?




Many think that those who are well-educated and rich have a secure future. They believe that a university education can help a person become a better worker, a better family member, and a better citizen. They may also feel that a good education will lead to a better-paying job and that those who make a lot of money will be happy.



A CHOICE MANY MAKE

Consider the comments made by Zhang Chen, who is from China. He says, “I believed that I needed a university degree to get out of poverty and that a high-paying job would guarantee a happy and satisfying life.”
To improve their chances of gaining a secure future, many are eager to attend famous universities, perhaps in other countries. This trend had increased noticeably until COVID-19 restricted international travel. A 2012 report by the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development says: “Asians account for 52% of all students studying abroad.”
Parents often make great sacrifices so that their children can attend university overseas. Qixiang, from Taiwan, recalls: “My parents were not well-off, but they sent all four of us children to college in the United States.” To pay for such education, his family, like many others, had to go deep into debt.



WHAT ARE THE RESULTS?





Many who pursued advanced education and wealth are left frustrated




Education can improve life in some ways, but it does not always bring the results that students expect. For example, after years of sacrifice and incurring significant debt, many cannot find the job they wanted. A report by Rachel Mui in Singapore’s Business Times says: “Graduate unemployment appears to be a growing issue.” Jianjie, a doctorate holder who lives in Taiwan, says, “Many have no choice but to accept a job that has nothing to do with their degree.”
Those who can obtain a job in their chosen profession may still find that their life has not turned out as they had hoped. After returning from university in the United Kingdom, Niran, who is from Thailand, found a job in his field. “As I expected, the degree helped me to get a job with a higher salary. However, the higher salary demanded more work and more time from me. Eventually, the company laid off most of its employees, including me. I realized that there is no security in any job.”
Even those who are rich or have achieved the so-called good life still face family problems, health tragedies, and economic uncertainty. Katsutoshi, from Japan, admits, “I enjoyed many material things, but I was frustrated by competition, jealousy, and bullying.” Lam, a woman who lives in Vietnam, says, “I see many people strive for a well-paying job to obtain financial security, but in reality, it has the opposite effect​—insecurity, health disorders, emotional exhaustion, and depression.”
WHY EDUCATION AND MONEY ARE NOT ENOUGH
To be sure, people need a basic education and money to provide for themselves and their family. However, these are not enough to guarantee a secure future. Why not? Consider what the Holy Writings say.
HIGHER EDUCATION DOES NOT ALWAYS BRING SUCCESS.
“The swift do not always win the race, . . . nor do the intelligent always have the riches, nor do those with knowledge always have success, because time and unexpected events overtake them all.”​—ECCLESIASTES 9:11.
Those who seem most qualified to succeed often do not, and usually for reasons they cannot control. Economic instability, social injustice, and prejudice can prevent even the best educated people from doing what they want to do.
WEALTH MAY NOT LAST.
“Do not wear yourself out to gain wealth. Stop and show understanding. When you cast your eyes on it, it is not there, for it will surely sprout wings like an eagle and fly off into the sky.”​—PROVERBS 23:4, 5.
Any security that money provides is temporary. Upheavals in the financial world can wipe out a person’s life savings overnight. Natural disasters, such as earthquakes, wildfires, and cyclones, can leave a person bankrupt and homeless.
MONEY OFTEN BRINGS PROBLEMS.
“The plenty belonging to the rich one does not permit him to sleep.”​—ECCLESIASTES 5:12.
Franklin, who lives in Hong Kong, experienced the truthfulness of that wise saying. He had advanced education and a well-paying job. Then he was promoted to be a manager. “The stress began to affect my health,” he said. “I worried so much that I could not sleep.” Eventually he reached a breaking point. “I started to question why I was doing this,” he recalled, “and it led me to think more about the purpose of life.”
“Do not wear yourself out to gain wealth.”​—PROVERBS 23:4



Like Franklin, many have concluded that there is more to life than pursuing higher education and riches. Rather than focus their life on material things, some seek a better future by striving to be a good person and to do good to others. Will pursuing such a way of life guarantee a secure future? The next article offers the answer.



