Service Meeting Schedule
Week Starting January 8
Song 29
 7 min: Local announcements. Selected Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry.
13 min: “Let Your Light Shine.”a Include comments on June 1, 1997, Watchtower, page 15, paragraphs 12-13. Encourage all to take advantage of every opportunity to witness.
25 min: Loving Provisions for Our Health Care. Talk by a qualified elder, based on the December 1, 2000, letter and outline from the Society. Emphasize that the best possible legal protection against unwanted transfusions is achieved by filling out both the Advance Medical Directive/​Release card and the Society’s health-care durable power of attorney (DPA) form. These documents will be made available to baptized publishers after tonight’s meeting, but they should NOT be filled out tonight. The congregation should have a sufficient quantity of all three​—the card, the revised DPA, and the Advance Directive Guide—​on hand for distribution. Signing, witnessing, and dating of all cards will be done after the next Congregation Book Study, with assistance where necessary from the book study conductor. Those signing as witnesses should actually see the individual sign the document. The Society’s Advance Directive Guide should be carefully considered before completing the DPA. If a publisher has moved to another state, he should execute a new DPA form for that state. Book study conductors should ensure that all assigned to their group have the assistance they need to fill out the Advance Medical Directive/​Release card and the DPA form. Identity Cards for children are available to parents after this meeting. Unbaptized publishers may write out their own directive for themselves and their children by adapting language from these documents to their own circumstances and convictions.
Song 1 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting January 15
Song 51
10 min: Local announcements. Accounts report.
15 min: Local needs.
20 min: Are You Examining the Scriptures Daily? Talk and interviews. Consider the December 15, 1996, Watchtower, pages 17-18, paragraphs 12-14, highlighting the wisdom of having a daily text discussion as a family. Interview family members, who each recall a recent discussion of the daily text that proved to be especially beneficial and give the reason why. Emphasize that this should be part of a regular program of family study designed to strengthen our households and keep the family active in the ministry.
Song 67 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting January 22
Song 90
 7 min: Local announcements.
18 min: How to Prepare Introductions. Talk and demonstrations. Review key points in the Reasoning book, page 9. Show how we can select introductions best suited to our manner, personality, and territory. Review some sample introductions that can be used with the Require brochure, and have one or two of them demonstrated. (See the April 1997 Our Kingdom Ministry, page 8.) Encourage everyone to make good use of the suggestions offered in the Reasoning book and Our Kingdom Ministry in their field service activity.
20 min: “Be a Good Listener.” Talk and audience discussion. Review points from the School Guidebook, pages 27-8, paragraphs 15-17. The best test of our listening habits is how much we can remember. Invite audience to recall some outstanding points covered by the participants in tonight’s Theocratic Ministry School.
Song 96 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting January 29
Song 139
10 min: Local announcements. Remind publishers to turn in field service reports for January. Mention the literature offer for February, highlighting the books that the congregation has in stock.
15 min: Get to Know the Creator Better. Talk based on the June 15, 1999, Watchtower, pages 24-6, building anticipation for the congregation study of the book Is There a Creator Who Cares About You? Encourage youths to get involved in the weekly discussions at the book study. All will want to attend regularly, being eager to learn as much as possible about our Grand Creator.
20 min: “Parents​—Instill Useful Habits in Your Children.” Talk and interview of parents whose children are doing well spiritually. The parents reflect on the positive things that they have done to get their children involved in the field ministry. As time permits, incorporate suggestions from the Family Happiness book, pages 55-9.
Song 149 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting February 5
Song 168
10 min: Local announcements.
15 min: “Be a Happy Doer.”b Show what adds to our joy in God’s service, as outlined in the Insight book, Volume 2, page 120, paragraphs 6-8.
20 min: You Can Find Wholesome Entertainment. Family group discusses advice given in the May 22, 1997, Awake! Father is concerned about the family’s recreational pursuits. After briefly reviewing “What Has Happened to Entertainment?” (pages 4-7), they focus on types of entertainment that can be wholesome and beneficial. Consider material in Our Ministry book, pages 131-2, under “Recreation,” and pages 135-6, under “Do All Things for God’s Glory.” Emphasize the role of parents in taking the lead and the need for family members to cooperate for the benefit of the entire household.
Song 190 and concluding prayer.
[Footnotes]
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.

