
April
Saturday, April 1

Be watchful! Your adversary, the Devil, walks about like a roaring lion, seeking to devour someone.—1 Pet. 5:8.



At one time, he enjoyed a fine standing with Jehovah. At some point, however, this spirit creature began to desire the worship of humans. Rather than dismiss that improper desire, he nurtured it and let it grow until it gave birth to sin. (Jas. 1:14, 15) We know that creature as Satan, who “did not stand fast in the truth.” He rebelled against Jehovah and became “the father of the lie.” (John 8:44) Since his rebellion, Satan has proved to be Jehovah’s greatest enemy, and he certainly has not been a friend of mankind. The titles given to Satan reveal the depth of his corruption. Satan means “Resister,” indicating that this wicked spirit creature does not support God’s sovereignty; rather, he hates it and aggressively fights it. More than anything else, Satan wants to see the end of Jehovah’s sovereignty. w15 5/15 1:1, 2




Sunday, April 2

If anyone loves God, this one is known by him.—1 Cor. 8:3.



Studying the Scriptures does more than reveal areas in which we can improve spiritually. It also deepens our appreciation for Jehovah’s endearing ways, causing us to love him even more. And when our love for God grows, his love for us intensifies, thus strengthening our bond with him. For us to draw close to Jehovah, however, it is essential that we study with the right objective. John 17:3 says: “This means everlasting life, their coming to know you, the only true God, and the one whom you sent, Jesus Christ.” Thus, our objective should be not merely to take in knowledge but to come to “know” Jehovah better as a Person. (Ex. 33:13; Ps. 25:4) As we come to know Jehovah more intimately, we will not be unduly disturbed if certain Bible accounts leave us wondering why he acted as he did. w15 4/15 3:6-8




Monday, April 3

[Timothy] will remind you of my methods in connection with Christ Jesus, just as I am teaching everywhere in every congregation.—1 Cor. 4:17.



Recently, a group of elders who are successful in helping brothers to grow spiritually were asked what approach they use when training others. Though the circumstances of these brothers vary greatly, the advice they gave was strikingly similar. What does this indicate? That Bible-based training is applicable to learners “everywhere in every congregation”—just as it was in the apostle Paul’s day. A teacher needs to create the right conditions for training. Just as a gardener needs to cultivate, or loosen, the soil before sowing seeds, so a teacher needs to prepare, or encourage, the heart of a learner before teaching him new skills. So how do teachers create the right conditions for training others? By following an approach similar to that taken by Samuel when he was preparing Saul to lead Israel.—1 Sam. 9:15-27; 10:1. w15 4/15 1:11, 12




Tuesday, April 4

The whole world is lying in the power of the wicked one.—1 John 5:19.



Much of what this world promotes runs counter to the standards set forth in the Bible. Of course, not everything the world offers is evil. However, we should expect that Satan would use his world to exploit our desires and try to induce us to sin or to develop love for the world and neglect our worship of Jehovah. (1 John 2:15, 16) Evidently, love for the world affected some first-century Christians. For example, Paul wrote: “Demas has forsaken me because he loved the present system of things.” (2 Tim. 4:10) The Bible does not specifically say what aspect of the world Demas loved, causing him to abandon Paul. It could be that Demas began to love material things more than spiritual pursuits. If that was the case, Demas missed out on thrilling spiritual privileges—and for what? Could the world possibly offer Demas anything that would surpass the blessings Jehovah could give him as an associate of Paul?—Prov. 10:22. w15 5/15 2:10, 11




Wednesday, April 5

Jehovah is merciful and compassionate.—Ps. 103:8.



Jesus sensed the pain of others, even those whose exact circumstances he had never experienced. For instance, the common people lived in fear of the religious leaders, who deceived them and burdened them with many man-made rules. (Matt. 23:4; Mark 7:1-5; John 7:13) Jesus was never frightened or deceived, but he could understand situations that he had not lived through. Therefore, “on seeing the crowds, he felt pity for them, because they were skinned and thrown about like sheep without a shepherd.” (Matt. 9:36) Like his Father, Jesus was loving and compassionate. When Jesus saw people suffering, he was moved to show them love. Thus, he perfectly reflected the love of his Father. After one extensive preaching tour, Jesus and his apostles were about to go to an isolated place to get some rest. Because he felt pity for the crowd awaiting him, however, Jesus took time “to teach them many things.”—Mark 6:30, 31, 34. w15 5/15 4:3, 4




Thursday, April 6

I was especially fond of the sons of men.—Prov. 8:31.



God’s firstborn Son was the earliest and most complete expression of Jehovah’s unfathomable wisdom. He was wisdom personified, “a master worker” alongside his Father. We can only imagine the joy and satisfaction that he experienced as his Father “prepared the heavens” and “established the foundations of the earth.” However, though appreciating these inanimate things, God’s firstborn Son “was especially fond of the sons of men.” (Prov. 8:22-31) Yes, Jesus has a fondness, or tender affection, for mankind that stretches back to his prehuman existence. Later, as proof of his loyalty and love for his Father, as well as of his deep love for “the sons of men,” God’s Firstborn willingly “emptied himself” and came to be in the likeness of men. He did so in order to provide “a ransom in exchange for many.” (Phil. 2:5-8; Matt. 20:28) What love he has for the human family! w15 6/15 2:1, 2




Friday, April 7

God sent his only-begotten Son into the world so that we might gain life through him.—1 John 4:9.



Do you appreciate what Jehovah has done for you? Then it would be fitting to dedicate your life to Jehovah and get baptized. Remember, dedication involves a solemn promise to Jehovah to do his will forever, no matter what happens. Should you be afraid to make such a commitment? Not at all! Bear in mind that Jehovah has your best interests at heart, and he is “the rewarder of those earnestly seeking him.” (Heb. 11:6) Dedicating yourself to Jehovah and getting baptized do not make your life worse. On the contrary, serving Jehovah will make your life better. How different Jehovah is from Satan, whose interest in you is only selfish! Satan offers no lasting reward to those who side with him. And really, how can he give you something that he does not possess? w16.03 2:16, 18, 19



Memorial Bible reading:  (Daytime events: Nisan 9)  Luke 19:29-44


Saturday, April 8

Father, I thank you that you have heard me. True, I knew that you always hear me.—John 11:41, 42.



For your relationship with Jehovah to be real, you must be convinced that he is hearing prayers. Consider this: From his prehuman existence, Jesus observed firsthand Jehovah’s response to the prayers of His human servants. Then, during his earthly ministry, Jesus used prayer as his means of communicating his feelings to his Father in heaven. Would he have done so—even spending an entire night in prayer—had he thought that Jehovah was not really listening? (Luke 6:12; 22:40-46) Would he have taught his disciples to pray had he thought that prayer was nothing more than a psychological crutch? Clearly, Jesus knew that prayer is real communication with Jehovah. We too can have confidence that Jehovah is the “Hearer of prayer.”—Ps. 65:2. w15 4/15 3:11, 13



Memorial Bible reading:  (Daytime events: Nisan 10)  Luke 19:45-48; Matthew 21:18, 19; 21:12, 13


Sunday, April 9

Abba, Father, all things are possible for you; remove this cup from me. Yet, not what I want, but what you want.—Mark 14:36.



When you pray humbly in the presence of your children, they will learn to rely on Jehovah. Ana, who lives in Brazil, states: “When there were problems, such as when my grandparents were ill, my parents would ask Jehovah to give them the strength to cope with the situation and the wisdom to make good decisions. Even when under terrible pressure, they left their problems in Jehovah’s hands. As a result, I learned to rely on Jehovah.” When you pray with your children, do not pray just for them. Ask Jehovah to help you too—perhaps to help you speak to your employer about getting time off for a convention, to give you courage to witness to your neighbor, or to help you in other ways. Humbly rely on God, and your children will learn to do so too. w15 11/15 1:7, 8



Memorial Bible reading:  (Daytime events: Nisan 11)  Luke 20:1-47


Monday, April 10

You must love Jehovah your God with your whole heart and with your whole soul and with your whole mind.—Matt. 22:37.



One of the best ways that you can grow in your love for Jehovah is to meditate on the greatest gift Jehovah has provided—the ransom sacrifice of his Son. (2 Cor. 5:14, 15; 1 John 4:9, 19) Thinking about the ransom and what it means for you will motivate you to respond appreciatively. Your response to the ransom might be illustrated this way: Imagine that someone rescued you from drowning. Would you simply go home, dry yourself off, and forget about what was done for you? Of course not! You would certainly feel indebted to the person who rescued you. The fact is, you would owe that person your life! We owe Jehovah God and Jesus Christ much more. Because of this great act of love, we now have the incomparable prospect of living forever on a paradise earth! w16.03 2:16, 17



Memorial Bible reading:  (Daytime events: Nisan 12)  Luke 22:1-6; Mark 14:1, 2, 10, 11


Memorial DateAfter SundownTuesday, April 11

Christ died for us.—Rom. 5:8.



Jehovah had complete confidence in his only-begotten Son, who had been faithful to him in heaven for countless ages. On earth, Jesus maintained his integrity and upheld Jehovah’s sovereignty under the severest of tests, dying as a faithful servant of his Father. How grateful we should be that by his death, Jesus also paid the ransom price needed to redeem mankind and open the way to everlasting life in God’s promised new world! The apostle John wrote: “By this the love of God was revealed in our case, that God sent his only-begotten Son into the world so that we might gain life through him. The love is in this respect, not that we have loved God, but that he loved us and sent his Son as a propitiatory sacrifice for our sins.”—1 John 4:9, 10. w15 11/15 3:13, 14



Memorial Bible reading:  (Daytime events: Nisan 13)  Luke 22:7-13; Mark 14:12-16  (Events after sunset: Nisan 14)  Luke 22:14-65


Wednesday, April 12

Death spread to all men because they had all sinned.—Rom. 5:12.



As children of the first man, Adam, we have all inherited sin and its penalty, death. Not one of us can say, “I do not need the ransom.” Even the most faithful servant of God is completely dependent on Jehovah’s undeserved kindness through Christ. Each of us must recognize that we have been forgiven an enormous debt. What should Jehovah’s love and mercy compel us to do? If we are harboring some resentment against any of our brothers or sisters, we should imitate Jehovah, who is “ready to forgive.” (Neh. 9:17; Ps. 86:5) If we appreciate what Jehovah has done for us in canceling our own enormous debt, then we will want to forgive others from our heart. We simply cannot receive the love and forgiveness of God unless we love and forgive others. (Matt. 6:14, 15) While it is true that forgiving will not change the past, it will certainly change our future for the good. w16.01 2:5, 15-17



Memorial Bible reading:  (Daytime events: Nisan 14)  Luke 22:66-71


Thursday, April 13

You who have followed me will sit on 12 thrones, judging the 12 tribes of Israel.—Matt. 19:28.



Jesus said the above words to help Peter and other disciples to imagine the future. They could thus contemplate their role in the government that would rule over the earth and bring grand blessings to obedient mankind. Jehovah’s earthly servants have always benefited from thinking about the fulfillment of divine promises. Abel knew enough about God’s purposes to envision a better future, exercise faith, and embrace a reliable hope. Abraham’s outstanding acts of faith were possible because he “saw” something about the fulfillment of God’s prophecy concerning the promised “offspring.” (Gen. 3:15) Moses “looked intently toward the payment of the reward,” acting in faith and growing in love for Jehovah. (Heb. 11:26) Our own faith in God and love for him can help us to envision what Jehovah has promised. w15 5/15 3:17, 18



Memorial Bible reading:  (Daytime events: Nisan 15)  Matthew 27:62-66


Friday, April 14

Christ . . . [left] a model for you to follow his steps closely.—1 Pet. 2:21.



In line with the model Jesus provided, a Christian who wants to grow spiritually will not be satisfied with a superficial knowledge of the Bible. He will regularly dig deeply into its contents, realizing that “solid food belongs to mature people.” (Heb. 5:14) Clearly, a mature Christian wants to have “accurate knowledge of the Son of God.” (Eph. 4:13) Do you schedule daily Bible reading? Do you follow a routine of personal study, making every effort to set aside time each week for family worship? As you consider God’s Word, be alert to Scriptural principles that will help you to see more clearly how Jehovah thinks and feels. Then try to apply Bible principles, relying on them when you make decisions, thus drawing ever closer to Jehovah. w15 9/15 1:5, 9, 10



Memorial Bible reading:  (Daytime events: Nisan 16)  Luke 24:1-12


Saturday, April 15

Christ is the power of God.—1 Cor. 1:24.



Jesus fully understands earth’s ecology. He knows how to use, manage, and distribute earth’s resources fairly and properly. When on earth, Jesus showed that he is “the power of God” by exercising control over the forces of nature. Picture the scene: Christ is exhausted from his demanding ministry. The waves are pounding the ship, hurling spray and foam into the boat. Yet, despite the noise of the storm and the violent pitching of the boat, Jesus continues to sleep. His body needs rest. The frightened disciples wake Jesus up and exclaim: “We are about to perish!” (Matt. 8:25) Rousing himself, Jesus commands the wind and the sea with the words: “Hush! Be quiet!” and the raging wind stops. (Mark 4:39) Jesus is, in effect, commanding the wind and the sea to be quiet and to stay that way. The result? “A great calm set in.” What power Jesus displays! w15 6/15 1:12-14




Sunday, April 16

Give us today our bread for this day.—Matt. 6:11.



In referring to our daily bread, Jesus likely meant our immediate needs. Thus, he went on to show how God clothes the wildflowers, and then he said: “Will he not much rather clothe you, you with little faith?” He concluded by repeating this important advice: “Never be anxious about the next day.” (Matt. 6:30-34) This shows that rather than be materialistic, we should be content with our basic daily needs. Such needs may include suitable accommodations, employment to provide for our family, and wisdom to cope with health concerns. If we were to pray only for such physical needs, however, it would indicate an imbalance. We have spiritual needs that are of much greater importance. “Man must live,” said our Master, “not on bread alone, but on every word that comes from Jehovah’s mouth.” (Matt. 4:4) So we should continue to pray that Jehovah will keep on feeding us with timely spiritual food. w15 6/15 5:4, 7, 8




Monday, April 17

Do not bring us into temptation.—Matt. 6:13.



Do we regularly petition God to help us maintain our integrity when we are faced with temptation? Our upbringing or our past conduct may have developed in us a liking for practices that Jehovah condemns. Even then, he can help us to bring about necessary changes so that we can continue to serve him acceptably. King David recognized this. After he had committed adultery with Bath-sheba, David implored Jehovah: “Create in me a pure heart, . . . and put within me a new spirit, a steadfast one.” (Ps. 51:10, 12) Sinful conduct may strongly appeal to our fallen flesh, but Jehovah can stir within us a willing spirit, the desire to obey him. Even if wrong desires are deeply rooted and tend to crowd out our chaste thoughts, Jehovah can guide our steps so that we can obey his commandments and succeed in living by them. He can prevent anything harmful from dominating us.—Ps. 119:133. w15 6/15 3:5, 6




Tuesday, April 18

Through many advisers there is victory.—Prov. 24:6.



Older ones in our midst remember when congregations had a congregation servant rather than a body of elders, when countries had a branch servant rather than a Branch Committee, and when direction was given by the president of the Watch Tower Society rather than by a clearly established Governing Body of Jehovah’s Witnesses. Although all these devoted brothers were supported by faithful assistants, one person was basically responsible for making decisions in the congregations, at the branch offices, and at world headquarters. During the 1970’s, adjustments were made to put the responsibility for oversight on groups of elders rather than on individuals. These adjustments were based on increased knowledge about the pattern set in the Scriptures. Instead of having the influence of one individual dominate, the composite good qualities of all the “gifts in men” whom Jehovah has provided benefit the organization.—Eph. 4:8. w15 7/15 1:14, 15




Wednesday, April 19

They are no part of the world.—John 17:16.



Loyalty and neutrality are always issues for true Christians, not just in times of war. Why? Because all who are dedicated to Jehovah have promised him their love, loyalty, and obedience. (1 John 5:3) We want to abide by God’s righteous standards wherever we live and whatever our background, nationality, or culture. Loyalty to Jehovah and to his Kingdom transcends any other attachment we may have. (Matt. 6:33) Such loyalty requires that Christians remain separate from all conflicts and controversies of this world. (Isa. 2:4; John 17:11, 15, 16) People who do not share our faith may feel a special loyalty to their country, tribe, or culture or even to their national sports team. Challenges to such loyalties have resulted in competition and rivalry and, in extreme cases, bloodshed and genocide. It would be all too easy to take sides in worldly issues and be drawn into controversy. w15 7/15 3:1, 2




Thursday, April 20

Let all things take place decently and by arrangement.—1 Cor. 14:40.



Once a new Kingdom Hall is built, it needs to be kept clean and tidy to reflect the qualities and personality of the God whom we worship—a God of order. (1 Cor. 14:33) The Bible associates holiness and spiritual cleanness with physical cleanliness. (Rev. 19:8) Thus, if people desire to be acceptable to Jehovah, they must also practice good hygiene. In harmony with these principles, we should always feel comfortable inviting interested people to our meetings, confident that the condition of the hall will complement the good news we share with them. They will see that we worship a God who is holy and who will soon transform the earth into an uncontaminated paradise. (Isa. 6:1-3; Rev. 11:18) Whatever the local situation, our Kingdom Hall should be exemplary when it comes to being well-kept, since it bears the name of Jehovah and is a place of pure worship.—Deut. 23:14. w15 7/15 4:13-15




Friday, April 21

Keep on the watch.—Mark 13:35.



Upon recognizing that Christ’s presence began in 1914, Jesus’ followers rightly prepared for a possible early arrival of the end. They did so by intensifying their Kingdom-preaching work. Jesus indicated that he might come later—“at dawn or early in the morning.” If that happened, how were his followers to respond? He said: “Keep on the watch.” So a long wait would not justify mentally postponing the end or totally dismissing their expectations. In the new world, we will have reason to reflect on the fact that all the foretold events associated with the conclusion of the system of things did indeed take place. Meditating on how matters actually turned out will further strengthen our confidence in Jehovah and his promises yet to be fulfilled. (Josh. 23:14) We will surely be thankful that God, who ‘has placed times and seasons in his own jurisdiction,’ exhorted us to live with an awareness that ‘the end of all things had drawn close.’—Acts 1:7; 1 Pet. 4:7. w15 8/15 2:10, 11, 14




Saturday, April 22

All those desiring to live with godly devotion in association with Christ Jesus will also be persecuted.—2 Tim. 3:12.



For entertainment, many people view or practice things that the Bible identifies as violent, sexually immoral, spiritistic, or ungodly in other ways. For instance, the Internet, television programs, movies, novels, and magazine articles often present violence and immorality in a favorable light. Behavior once considered unacceptable has even been legalized in some places. But that does not make such conduct acceptable to God. (Rom. 1:28-32) In the first century, Jesus’ followers shunned unclean entertainment. Because of this and their godly conduct in general, they were maligned and persecuted by others. “They are puzzled that you [Christians] do not continue running with them in the same decadent course of debauchery,” wrote the apostle Peter, “so they speak abusively of you.”—1 Pet. 4:4. w15 8/15 4:2, 3




Sunday, April 23

When each respective member functions properly, this contributes to the growth of the body as it builds itself up in love.—Eph. 4:16.



A mature servant of Jehovah promotes unity within the congregation. (Eph. 4:1-6, 15) It is our goal that God’s people be “harmoniously joined together” and that all members cooperate with one another. According to Jehovah’s Word, to achieve this unity, we need humility. A mature brother or sister has the humility to work for unity, even when facing the imperfections of others. How do you react when confronted with the imperfection of a brother or sister in the congregation? Or what if you personally are wronged by someone in the congregation? Is it your inclination, or even your pattern, to build a wall, so to speak, that separates you from the offender? Or do you try to construct a bridge across the gap between the two of you? A mature Christian wants to—yes, strives to—build bridges, not walls. Do you have the goal of promoting unity in the congregation? w15 9/15 1:12, 13




Monday, April 24

Your word is truth.—John 17:17.



Jesus was convinced that the Bible is God’s Word, which provides the best guidance in life. Following Jesus’ example, we must read the Bible daily, study it, and meditate on what we learn. Along with general Bible study, dig into topics about which you may have questions. To illustrate, you might increase your conviction that the end of this system of things really is near by studying in detail the Scriptural proof that we live in the last days. Strengthen your trust in the Bible’s promises for the future by investigating its many prophecies that have already come true. Develop your confidence in the practical value of the Bible by considering examples of how the Bible improves people’s lives. (1 Thess. 2:13) You can also imitate Jesus by meditating on the wonderful promises Jehovah has made to you. (Heb. 12:2) See these as God’s promises not just to mankind in general but to you personally. w15 9/15 3:16, 17




Tuesday, April 25

Honor Jehovah with your valuable things.—Prov. 3:9.



What are some ways that we can show our love for God? Obviously, we can use our material things to support the Kingdom work locally and worldwide. This is certainly a fine way to express love for Jehovah, whether we have much or little materially. (2 Cor. 8:12) There are, however, other ways to show Jehovah that we love him. Recall Jesus’ reminder to his followers not to be anxious about food and clothing but to keep on seeking first the Kingdom. He said that the Father knows what we really need. (Matt. 6:31-33) The degree to which we trust that promise is an indication of the depth of our love for Jehovah because love and trust go hand in hand. We cannot truly love someone whom we do not trust. (Ps. 143:8) So we might ask ourselves: ‘Do the goals I pursue and my way of life reflect that I truly love Jehovah? Do my actions day in and day out show that I trust his ability to care for my needs?’ w15 9/15 5:7, 8




Wednesday, April 26

Without faith it is impossible to please God well.—Heb. 11:6.



Have you ever thought, ‘Am I the kind of person Jehovah will want to save during the great tribulation and bring into the new world?’ One very important requirement is that we cultivate strong faith. The apostle Peter drew special attention to the importance of faith when he spoke of its “tested quality” that “may be found a cause for praise and glory and honor at the revelation of Jesus Christ.” (1 Pet. 1:7) Since the great tribulation is fast approaching, do we not want to make sure that we have the type of faith that puts us among those whose faith will be praised by our glorious King when he is revealed? Most certainly, we want to be “the sort who have faith for the preserving of our lives.” (Heb. 10:39) With this goal in mind, we may plead like the man who said: “Help me out where I need faith!” (Mark 9:24) Or we may be moved to say, as did Jesus’ apostles: “Give us more faith.”—Luke 17:5. w15 10/15 2:1, 2




Thursday, April 27

Let us also throw off every weight.—Heb. 12:1.



Paul focused on “the more important things” and slaved in God’s service, traveling back and forth between Syria, Asia Minor, Macedonia, and Judea. “Forgetting the things behind and stretching forward to the things ahead, I am pressing on toward the goal for the prize,” wrote Paul. (Phil. 1:10; 3:8, 13, 14) Taking full advantage of his singleness, Paul succeeded in being in “constant devotion to the Lord without distraction.” (1 Cor. 7:32-35) Like Paul, some servants of God choose to remain single so that they have fewer family responsibilities and can devote themselves to Kingdom service. (Matt. 19:11, 12) Married servants of God often have more extensive family responsibilities. But whether single or married, all can “throw off every weight” and serve God with as few distractions as possible. This may require cutting down on time-wasting habits and setting goals to increase the time spent in the service of God. w15 10/15 3:15, 16




Friday, April 28

Wicked men and impostors will advance from bad to worse.—2 Tim. 3:13.



History has demonstrated beyond any doubt the truthfulness of what the Bible says: “I well know, O Jehovah, that man’s way does not belong to him. It does not belong to man who is walking even to direct his step.” (Jer. 10:23) No, Jehovah did not create humans with the ability or the right to direct their affairs independent of him. In addition to showing how futile human rule is, God’s temporary permission of wickedness serves another long-range purpose. It provides permanent testimony that only God’s rule can be successful. After Jehovah destroys wickedness and those who cause it, if anyone ever again would challenge Jehovah’s way of ruling in love, there would be no need for God to permit the challenge to stand. He could use what has happened in mankind’s history as the just reason to remove such rebels quickly, not allowing them to establish wickedness once again. w15 11/15 3:5, 6




Saturday, April 29

May the God of peace . . . equip you with every good thing to do his will.—Heb. 13:20, 21.



Jesus loved to talk about God’s Kingdom. According to the Bible record, he spoke more about the Kingdom than about any other subject—referring to it more than 100 times during his ministry. The Kingdom was truly dear to his heart. (Matt. 12:34) Shortly after his resurrection, Jesus met with more than 500 prospective Kingdom proclaimers. (1 Cor. 15:6) Perhaps it was on that occasion that he gave the command to take the Kingdom message to “people of all the nations”—a daunting task back then! This great work, Jesus foretold, would be carried on right up to “the conclusion of the system of things,” and that has proved to be the case. Quite likely you are having a share in the fulfillment of that commission and prophecy. (Matt. 28:19, 20) And our God has equipped us with “every good thing” to help us fulfill that commission. w15 11/15 5:1-3




Sunday, April 30

This is my name forever.—Ex. 3:15.



Those who study ancient Hebrew Bible manuscripts, such as the Dead Sea Scrolls, are struck by the many occurrences of the Tetragrammaton—the four Hebrew letters that represent God’s name. The divine name appears not only in those ancient Hebrew manuscripts but also in some copies of the Greek Septuagint from the second century B.C.E. through the first century C.E. Despite the clear evidence that the personal name of God belongs in the Bible, many translations completely omit the sacred name of God. In 1952, the Revised Standard Version was published. That version omitted the name, reversing the policy of the editors of the American Standard Version of 1901. Why? The preface says: “The use of any proper name for the one and only God . . . is entirely inappropriate for the universal faith of the Christian Church.” That set a pattern for many subsequent translations, English and non-English. w15 12/15 2:3-5




