
August
Tuesday, August 1

Will the Judge of all the earth not do what is right?—Gen. 18:25.



Because he made it a practice to obey Jehovah even in seemingly minor matters, Abraham kept his friendship with God healthy and flourishing. He felt free to open his heart to Jehovah, asking for help as he struggled with hard questions. For example, when he learned that God was going to destroy the cities of Sodom and Gomorrah, Abraham was concerned that righteous people might be swept away along with the wicked. Perhaps Abraham was worried about his nephew Lot and his family, who were then living in Sodom. Abraham asked his questions with great humility and trust in God, “the Judge of all the earth.” Jehovah patiently taught Abraham how merciful He is, reading every heart and looking for righteous ones to preserve, even in times of judgment. (Gen. 18:22-33) No doubt, every bit of knowledge and experience helped Abraham maintain his close friendship with Jehovah. w16.02 1:11, 12




Wednesday, August 2

May Jehovah be between you and me and between your offspring and my offspring forever.—1 Sam. 20:42.



Loyalty is almost universally admired. However, we would miss a vital lesson if we were to admire Jonathan’s loyalty to David without taking into account his loyalty to God. Why did Jonathan view David as a friend rather than a rival? Loyalty to God had first place in Jonathan’s heart. Indeed, loyalty to Jehovah was the very basis for his loyalty to David. And both men loyally lived up to their sworn oath. As Christians, we do not merely admire loyalty in others; we ourselves are loyal to family members, friends, and fellow worshippers. (1 Thess. 2:10, 11) But what loyalty should take first place in our heart? Why, it is loyalty to the One who gave us life! (Rev. 4:11) Maintaining that loyalty gives us true joy and satisfaction. But if we are to prove loyal to God, we must stick to him even through difficult trials. w16.02 3:3, 4




Thursday, August 3

Daniel resolved in his heart that he would not defile himself.—Dan. 1:8.



A mature young person is stable in his convictions. He does not act like a friend of God at the Kingdom Hall but a friend of the world at school. He remains unmovable even during tests of faith. (Eph. 4:14, 15) Of course, no one is perfect; young people as well as adults make mistakes from time to time. (Eccl. 7:20) Still, as you are considering baptism, it would be wise to analyze to what extent you are resolved in your heart to stick to Jehovah’s standards. Ask yourself, ‘What is my track record of adhering to God’s standards?’ Give thought to the way you have reacted to recent tests of faith. Have you demonstrated that you have the discernment needed to distinguish right from wrong? What if, like Daniel, you are treated as special by someone in Satan’s world? Are you able to “keep perceiving what the will of Jehovah is” even when God’s will conflicts with what you are tempted to do?—Eph. 5:17. w16.03 1:7-9




Friday, August 4

Those days will be days of a tribulation such as has not occurred from the beginning of the creation that God created until that time.—Mark 13:19.



We are living in what the Bible calls “the last days,” and straight ahead is a tribulation like nothing that has occurred before. (2 Tim. 3:1) Furthermore, Satan and his demons have been cast out of heaven and are confined to the vicinity of the earth, resulting in intense woe for earth’s inhabitants. (Rev. 12:9, 12) We have been commissioned to carry out a historic and unprecedented preaching campaign that is reaching peoples and language groups as never before! To keep receiving God’s blessing, we need to pay attention to all the directions provided through the Christian congregation. Having an obedient spirit now will help us to follow directions during the “great tribulation,” which will eliminate Satan’s entire evil system. (Matt. 24:21) Thereafter, we will need new directions for new world living. w16.03 4:16, 18




Saturday, August 5

Locusts came out of the smoke.—Rev. 9:3.



Toward the end of the first century C.E., the apostle John received a vision of seven angels, each of whom sounded a trumpet blast. When the fifth angel blew his trumpet, John saw “a star” fall from heaven to earth. The “star” had a key in his hand with which he opened the shaft of an abyss. Thick smoke poured out, and from this came a plague of locusts. Rather than ravage vegetation, the symbolic locusts swarm against “those people who do not have the seal of God on their foreheads.” (Rev. 9:1-4) John no doubt knew how devastating a locust swarm could be. Had not locusts plagued ancient Egypt in Moses’ day? (Ex. 10:12-15) The figurative locusts that John saw well illustrate anointed Christians proclaiming Jehovah’s powerful judgment messages. They are joined now by millions of companions with an earthly hope. Little wonder that our united preaching undermines the authority Satan exercises through his worldwide empire of false religion! w16.03 3:3




Sunday, August 6

Open my eyes so that I may see clearly the wonderful things from your law.—Ps. 119:18.



To determine to what extent a less experienced brother’s thoughts and actions are influenced by Kingdom truth, an elder might ask him, ‘How has your dedication to Jehovah changed the way you use your life?’ That question can lead to a meaningful conversation about what makes our sacred service whole-souled. (Mark 12:29, 30) Perhaps at the end of such a conversation, he might say a prayer, asking Jehovah to give the brother the holy spirit he needs to complete his training. How upbuilding it will be for the brother to hear the elder’s heartfelt prayer in his behalf! In the initial phase of training, an elder could consider some Bible accounts that might help the learner to see the need to be willing, reliable, and humble. (1 Ki. 19:19-21; Neh. 7:2; 13:13; Acts 18:24-26) Such qualities are as essential to the learner as nutrients are to the soil. They quicken his spiritual growth and serve to ‘open his eyes’ to “the wonderful things” in God’s Word. w15 4/15 2:3, 4




Monday, August 7

Draw close to God.—Jas. 4:8.



Having regular communication with Jehovah is a vital part of drawing close to him. How can you communicate with God? You talk to Jehovah by means of your frequent prayers to him. (Ps. 142:2) And you allow Jehovah to talk to you, as it were, when you regularly read his written Word and meditate on it. (Isa. 30:20, 21) When you are specific in your prayers, you become more keenly aware of Jehovah’s answers, even though they may be subtle. Answered prayers will make Jehovah more real to you. In addition, the more you express your innermost concerns to Jehovah, the closer he will draw to you. Developing a closer relationship with Jehovah is a lifetime pursuit. We must take steps to draw close to God if we want him to take corresponding action toward us. By all means, then, let us remain in regular communication with our God by means of Bible study and prayer. As a result, our ever-growing relationship with Jehovah will enable us to meet our trials successfully. w15 4/15 3:3, 14, 16




Tuesday, August 8

Your adversary, the Devil, walks about like a roaring lion, seeking to devour someone.—1 Pet. 5:8.



How well this text describes Satan’s vicious disposition! Although the whole world already lies in his power, Satan is hungry for more victims. Satan is intent on devouring Jehovah’s people. The waves of persecution he has unleashed against Jesus’ followers from the first century until now give evidence of his vicious spirit. A famished lion feels no pity for its prey. It feels no compassion before the kill and experiences no remorse afterward. In a similar way, Satan has shown no pity for those whom he tries to devour. For example, think about how often Satan the Devil must have been lurking somewhere when the Israelites succumbed to such sins as sexual immorality and greed. When you read about the tragic consequences that befell immoral Zimri and greedy Gehazi, for instance, can you “see” the roaring lion reveling in his conquest?—Num. 25:6-8, 14, 15; 2 Ki. 5:20-27. w15 5/15 1:8, 9




Wednesday, August 9

Oppose the Devil, and he will flee from you.—Jas. 4:7.



How can we fight Satan and win? Jesus told his disciples: “By your endurance you will preserve your lives.” (Luke 21:19) Nothing that any human can do will cause us permanent harm. Nobody can take away our precious friendship with God unless we allow that to happen. (Rom. 8:38, 39) Even the death of Jehovah’s servants does not score a victory for Satan, for Jehovah will see to it that they are resurrected! (John 5:28, 29) On the other hand, Satan’s prospects are bleak indeed. After the destruction of his ungodly system, Satan will be abyssed for 1,000 years. (Rev. 20:1-3) At the end of Jesus’ Thousand Year Reign, Satan will be “released from his prison” for a short time to make a final attempt to mislead perfect mankind. After that, the Devil will be destroyed. (Rev. 20:7-10) Satan faces certain doom, but that is not true of you! Take your stand against Satan, firm in the faith. (1 Pet. 5:9) You can fight Satan and win! w15 5/15 2:1, 18




Thursday, August 10

The shrewd one sees the danger and conceals himself, but the inexperienced keep right on going and suffer the consequences.—Prov. 22:3.



A shrewd person realizes that contemplation can be like a fire. If fire is handled properly, it can be useful, such as when it cooks our food. But fire is deadly when it is uncontrolled and burns down a house and kills its occupants. Similarly, contemplation is useful when it helps us to imitate Jehovah. However, it can be harmful when it feeds immoral desires. For example, if we make it a practice to think about sinful actions, this could lead to our acting out such fantasies. Indeed, indulging in immoral reverie can be spiritually deadly! (Jas. 1:14, 15) Jesus warned against entertaining mental images of immoral conduct. He said: “Everyone who keeps on looking at a woman so as to have a passion for her has already committed adultery with her in his heart.”—Matt. 5:28. w15 5/15 4:11, 12, 14




Friday, August 11

I was especially fond of the sons of men.—Prov. 8:31.



Woven throughout the fabric of Jesus’ preaching tours were evidences of his genuine concern for the human family. In one instance, Jesus encountered a pitiful sight. (Mark 1:39, 40) Right in front of him was a man with a frightful disease, leprosy. Testifying to the advanced stage of the man’s illness, physician Luke describes him as being “full of leprosy.” (Luke 5:12) “When he caught sight of Jesus, [the leper] fell facedown and begged him: ‘Lord, if you just want to, you can make me clean.’” The man had no doubt that Jesus possessed the power to heal him, but what he needed to know was, did Jesus have the desire to do so? How would Jesus respond to this heartfelt request? Jesus stretched out his hand, touched the leper, and with a voice reflecting both strength and tenderness, he said: “I want to! Be made clean.” Then “the leprosy vanished from him.” (Luke 5:13) Yes, Jesus demonstrated how much he loved people.—Luke 5:17. w15 6/15 2:3-5




Saturday, August 12

Whoever isolates himself . . . rejects all practical wisdom.—Prov. 18:1.



Courageously placing ourselves under the kindly scrutiny of a mature Christian may prevent us from rationalizing any wrong desires. (Heb. 3:12, 13) Talking about our weakness with a mature, spiritually qualified Christian may help us to identify blind spots. This can help us to make the necessary adjustments in order to remain in Jehovah’s love. Christian elders are especially qualified to help us. (Jas. 5:13-15) Seeking assistance is essential if the source of any immoral desires is the unclean habit of viewing pornography. The longer the delay in seeking help, the greater the risk that unclean desires will ‘become fertile and give birth to sin’ that will hurt others and bring reproach on Jehovah’s name. The desire to please Jehovah and to remain in the Christian congregation has moved many of his servants to accept loving help.—Jas. 1:15; Ps. 141:5; Heb. 12:5, 6. w15 6/15 3:15-17




Sunday, August 13

In that day each of the prophets will be ashamed of his vision when he prophesies; and they will not wear an official garment of hair in order to deceive.—Zech. 13:4.



Will the destruction of the religions of Babylon the Great result in the death of all the former members of those religions? Apparently not. Some of the clergy will abandon their religious course and deny that they were ever part of those false religions. (Zech. 13:5, 6) How will God’s people fare at that time? Jesus explains: “In fact, unless those days were cut short, no flesh would be saved; but on account of the chosen ones those days will be cut short.” (Matt. 24:22) In 66 C.E., the tribulation was “cut short.” This allowed “the chosen ones,” anointed Christians, to flee the city and its environs. Likewise, the initial part of the future great tribulation will be “cut short” because of “the chosen ones.” The political “ten horns” will not be allowed to annihilate God’s people. (Rev. 17:16) Rather, there will be a brief respite. w15 7/15 2:5, 6




Monday, August 14

The Tempter approached.—Matt. 4:3.



It is up to each individual whether he will allow himself to be brought into temptation or not. (Matt. 6:13; Jas. 1:13-15) For his part, Jesus immediately rejected each temptation from the Devil by the use of a relevant quotation from God’s Word. Thus, Jesus upheld God’s rightful sovereignty. But Satan did not give up. He waited “until another convenient time.” (Luke 4:13) Jesus continued to resist all of Satan’s efforts to break his integrity. However, Satan attempts to ensnare Jesus’ followers, including you. Because of the ongoing issue regarding God’s sovereignty, Jehovah allows the Tempter to use this world to tempt us. God is not bringing us into temptation. On the contrary, he has confidence in us and he wants to help us. Out of respect for our free will, though, Jehovah does not automatically prevent us from falling into temptation. We have to do two things—remain spiritually awake and persist in prayer. w15 6/15 5:13, 14




Tuesday, August 15

In no way are we giving any cause for stumbling, so that no fault may be found with our ministry.—2 Cor. 6:3.



Christians have to train their mind and conscience to respond appropriately when neutrality-related issues arise. (Rom. 14:19) Take, for example, Mirjeta from a region of the former Yugoslavia. She was raised to hate Serbians. On learning that Jehovah is impartial and that Satan is responsible for inciting ethnic problems, she strove to rid herself of nationalistic sentiments. Yet, when ethnic violence broke out in her area, old hatreds began to resurface in her, causing Mirjeta to find it difficult to preach to Serbs. She realized, though, that she could not just sit back and hope that such unwholesome feelings would go away. She begged Jehovah for help to overcome this challenge. “I have found that focusing on the ministry is the best help ever,” she says. “In the ministry, I try to imitate Jehovah’s loving personality, and I have seen my negative feelings melt away.” w15 7/15 3:11-13




Wednesday, August 16

The eyes of Jehovah are roving about through all the earth to show his strength in behalf of those whose heart is complete toward him.—2 Chron. 16:9.



Note the case of King Jehoshaphat of Judah. On one occasion, Jehoshaphat unwisely agreed to accompany King Ahab of Israel in a military venture. Although 400 false prophets assured wicked Ahab of success, Jehovah’s true prophet Micaiah foretold certain defeat. Ahab died in battle, and Jehoshaphat barely escaped with his life. Upon returning to Jerusalem, he was reproved for allying himself with Ahab. Even so, Jehu, the son of Hanani the visionary, told Jehoshaphat: “There are good things that have been found in you.” (2 Chron. 18:4, 5, 18-22, 33, 34; 19:1-3) Yes, Jehoshaphat committed a foolish act, but Jehovah was not blind to the good things he had done. (2 Chron. 17:3-10) This Bible account provides a reminder that despite our human imperfection, Jehovah will have enduring love for us if we wholeheartedly seek to please him. w15 8/15 1:8, 9




Thursday, August 17

Tell them to work at good, . . . so that they may get a firm hold on the real life.—1 Tim. 6:18, 19.



How might we prepare now for life in God’s new world? Well, suppose we were planning to move to another country. How could we prepare for that change? We might start learning the language of the people who live there. Learning about their customs would be beneficial. We might sample some of their foods. To a certain extent, we would begin to live as if we were already residents of that land. After all, that is the way we expect to live once we arrive there. Similarly, we can prepare for life in the new world by living now, to the extent possible, as we expect to live then. Independence and an unreasonable insistence on personal preference may be highly regarded by some, but what has been the result? Failure to accept God’s direction has led to suffering, misery, even tragedy. (Jer. 10:23) How we look forward to the time when all mankind will submit to Jehovah’s loving sovereignty! w15 8/15 3:4, 5




Friday, August 18

Do not become unevenly yoked with unbelievers.—2 Cor. 6:14.



Watching their associations is particularly important for single Christians who want to get married. The Bible counsels God’s servants who are seeking a marriage mate to marry “only in the Lord,” that is, to marry only a dedicated, baptized worshipper of Jehovah who lives according to Scriptural teachings. (1 Cor. 7:39) By marrying fellow believers, Christians gain companions who are dedicated to Jehovah and will help them maintain their integrity to him. Jehovah knows what is best for his servants, and he has been consistent in stating his viewpoint regarding marriage. Note his easily understood command to Israel through Moses. With reference to the inhabitants of surrounding nations—people who did not serve Jehovah—the Israelites were instructed: “You must not form any marriage alliances with them. . . . For they will turn your sons away from following me to serve other gods.”—Deut. 7:3, 4. w15 8/15 4:12, 13




Saturday, August 19

Make sure of the more important things, so that you may be flawless and not stumbling others.—Phil. 1:10.



How can we train our conscience? Key ways are by regularly and prayerfully studying the Bible, meditating on what we read, and then putting into practice what we have learned. Obviously, this involves more than accumulating facts and learning rules. Our study of the Bible should gradually give us an ever more precise picture of Jehovah, his personality, his qualities, and what he likes or dislikes. Our conscience becomes attuned to the ways of Jehovah God. This should stir our heart, moving us to want to become more and more like him. However, if we cannot understand the conscientious decision of a fellow believer on some personal matter, we should not quickly judge him or feel that we ought to pressure him to change his mind. Perhaps his conscience is still “weak” and in need of more training or is too sensitive on certain issues.—1 Cor. 8:11, 12. w15 9/15 2:4, 8, 10




Sunday, August 20

The earth he has given to the sons of men.—Ps. 115:16.



The earth appears to be unique among all of God’s creation. Just imagine, out of the unknown number of planets that exist in the Milky Way and beyond, Jehovah created the earth to be not merely a habitable place but a comfortable, beautiful, and safe home for his human creation! (Isa. 45:18) This reflects how Jehovah must love us. (Job 38:4, 7; Ps. 8:3-5) Though Jehovah created a wonderful home for us, he knows that for us to be happy and content, we need more than material provisions. A child feels truly secure when he senses his parents’ love and attention. Jehovah created humans in his image, giving them the spiritual capacity to sense and to respond to his love and care. (Gen. 1:27) Furthermore, Jesus said: “Happy are those conscious of their spiritual need.” (Matt. 5:3) As a loving Father, Jehovah “richly provides us with all the things we enjoy,” both physically and spiritually.—1 Tim. 6:17; Ps. 145:16. w15 9/15 4:6, 7




Monday, August 21

There is a way that seems right to a man, but in the end it leads to death.—Prov. 14:12.



The psalmist showed the right heart attitude when he wrote: “Wait for God, for I will yet praise him as my Grand Savior. My God, I am in despair. That is why I remember you.” (Ps. 42:5, 6) What deep feeling and love for Jehovah! Have you developed such love for and reliance on our heavenly Father? Even if you are inclined to answer yes, you may be able to increase your reliance on him in line with what the Bible tells us: “Trust in Jehovah with all your heart, and do not rely on your own understanding. In all your ways take notice of him, and he will make your paths straight.” (Prov. 3:5, 6) By loving us first, Jehovah has shown us how to love him. (1 John 4:19) Let us always keep in mind his surpassing example. And let us increasingly demonstrate our love for him ‘with our whole heart and with our whole soul and with our whole mind and with our whole strength.’—Mark 12:30. w15 9/15 5:17-19




Tuesday, August 22

As for me and my household, we will serve Jehovah.—Josh. 24:15.



When we share in the field ministry, not only do we build faith in others but our own faith grows. Like the early Christians, we learn to put full faith in Jehovah and speak boldly in any situation. (Acts 4:17-20; 13:46) As we sense how Jehovah helps us in life and how he answers our prayers, our faith grows. This was true of Caleb and Joshua. They showed faith in Jehovah when they spied out the Promised Land. However, as they saw Jehovah’s direction at each turn in their life thereafter, their faith grew even more. No wonder Joshua spoke so strongly to the Israelites, saying: “Not one word out of all the good promises that Jehovah your God has spoken to you has failed.” He later added: “Therefore, fear Jehovah and serve him with integrity and faithfulness.” (Josh. 23:14; 24:14) As we taste Jehovah’s goodness, we too can develop such conviction.—Ps. 34:8. w15 10/15 2:10, 11




Wednesday, August 23

Ezra had prepared his heart.—Ezra 7:10.



Do you at times take notes during public talks, assemblies, and conventions? Reviewing these notes provides excellent opportunities for meditation as you think about what you have learned from God’s Word and from his organization. Also, each month’s issues of the Watchtower and Awake! magazines and the latest convention releases give us fresh information that we can read and digest. When you read the Yearbook, you may find it helpful to pause and reflect on what you read and let the experiences touch your heart. You may want to underline key thoughts or to make notes in the margin, which you might find helpful when preparing for a return visit, a shepherding call, or a future talk. Most important, pausing and meditating every now and then while reading Bible-based publications will give you the opportunity to absorb the material and to say a prayer of thanks to Jehovah for the good things you are learning. w15 10/15 4:9, 10




Thursday, August 24

Jesus went on progressing in wisdom and in physical growth and in favor with God and men.—Luke 2:52.



Christian parents have few joys like that of watching their child get baptized. “It was a highly emotional experience for us. We were, of course, grateful that our children wanted to serve Jehovah,” says Berenice, whose four children were baptized before they turned 14. “But,” she adds, “we also knew that as teenagers our children would face many challenges.” One expert on child development states: “Adolescence is not a period of being ‘crazy’ or ‘immature.’ It is an essential time of emotional intensity, social engagement, and creativity.” While they are teenagers, your children can develop a more meaningful friendship with Jehovah, set and pursue goals in the ministry, and use more initiative as they make their dedication and live up to it. They may find adolescence to be a rewarding time of spiritual growth, even as Jesus did when he was young. w15 11/15 2:1, 2




Friday, August 25

Let your Kingdom come. Let your will take place, as in heaven, also on earth.—Matt. 6:10.



God’s love for mankind is evident in the arrangement he has made for the Messianic Kingdom. Jehovah has already placed this government in the hands of his Son, who loves mankind and is superbly qualified to rule. (Prov. 8:31) At their resurrection, Jesus’ 144,000 heavenly joint heirs take with them the experience of human life. (Rev. 14:1) The Kingdom was the main theme of Jesus’ teaching, and he taught his disciples to pray for it and the blessings it will bring. Bible prophecy shows that God’s heavenly Kingdom was established when Christ’s presence began in 1914. Since then, there has been a gathering of the remaining ones who will rule with Jesus in heaven as well as of “a great crowd” of people who will survive this system’s end and be ushered into the new world.—Rev. 7:9, 13, 14. w15 11/15 3:16, 18




Saturday, August 26

Please listen, and I will speak.—Job 42:4.



The apostle John referred to God’s first companion as “the Word” and “the beginning of the creation by God.” (John 1:1; Rev. 3:14) Jehovah God communicated his thoughts and feelings to this firstborn Son. (John 1:14, 17; Col. 1:15) The apostle Paul speaks of ‘the tongues of angels,’ a heavenly form of communication superior to human language. (1 Cor. 13:1) Jehovah has intimate knowledge of billions of intelligent creatures, earthly and heavenly. At any given moment, countless individuals may be praying to him in many languages. Not only does he listen to those prayers but he simultaneously gives direction to and communicates with heavenly beings. To accomplish this, his thoughts, language, and communication must be vastly superior to those of humans. (Isa. 55:8, 9) Clearly, when Jehovah communicates with humans, he simplifies how he expresses his thoughts so that man can understand them. w15 12/15 1:1, 2




Sunday, August 27

The earth will certainly be filled with the knowledge of Jehovah as the waters cover the sea.—Isa. 11:9.



In many lands, Bibles are expensive and not readily available, so just receiving a Bible is a great blessing. A report from Rwanda stated: “For a long time, many people with whom the brothers were studying had not progressed because they had no Bibles. They could not afford to purchase the local church edition. And they often could not clearly understand the meaning of certain verses, which hindered their progress.” Things changed when the New World Translation in their language became available. A Rwandan family with four teenagers said: “We really thank Jehovah and the faithful and discreet slave for giving us this Bible. We are very poor and had no money to purchase Bibles for every member of the family. But now each of us has his own Bible. To show our gratitude to Jehovah, we read the Bible as a family every day.” w15 12/15 2:15, 16




Monday, August 28

O Jehovah, show me favor. Heal me, for I have sinned against you.—Ps. 41:4.



David may have written that regarding the time when Absalom tried to usurp the throne while David was ill and unable to handle the situation. Despite having received God’s forgiveness, David did not forget his own sin with Bath-sheba and its consequences. (2 Sam. 12:7-14) Still, the king was sure that God would sustain him on his sickbed. David did not pray for God to heal him miraculously. The context suggests that David asked Jehovah to help him in the same way that He would help an individual who showed consideration to a lowly one. That included being sustained “on his sickbed.” (Ps. 41:3) Because David’s sin had been forgiven, he could ask that God would comfort and support him and that the physical resources of his body might enable him to recover. (Ps. 103:3) We can do likewise. w15 12/15 4:8, 9




Tuesday, August 29

You received a spirit of adoption as sons, by which spirit we cry out: “Abba, Father!”—Rom. 8:15.



Those who have received this special invitation from God do not need another witness from any other source. They do not need someone else to verify what has happened to them. Jehovah leaves no doubt whatsoever in their minds and hearts. The apostle John tells such anointed Christians: “You have an anointing from the holy one, and all of you have knowledge.” He further states: “As for you, the anointing that you received from him remains in you, and you do not need anyone to be teaching you; but the anointing from him is teaching you about all things and is true and is no lie. Just as it has taught you, remain in union with him.” (1 John 2:20, 27) These ones need spiritual instruction just like everyone else. But they do not need anyone to validate their anointing. The most powerful force in the universe has given them this conviction! w16.01 3:9, 10




Wednesday, August 30

[Be] content with the present things.—Heb. 13:5.



True contentment is based on our trust in Jehovah. It allows us to have a balanced view of material possessions. (1 Tim. 6:6-8) It helps us to realize that our relationship with Jehovah and our Christian brothers is far more important than anything that money can buy. A contented person does not complain, grumble, or find fault; nor does he succumb to feelings of envy and greed—feelings that can stifle the development of brotherly love. Rather, contentment promotes a generous spirit. (1 Tim. 6:17-19) Also, our trust in Jehovah gives us courage, no matter what challenges we may face. (Heb. 13:6) This courage, in turn, allows us to have a positive attitude and to build up and comfort our fellow believers. (1 Thess. 5:14, 15) Even when the world faces the great tribulation, we will be able to “stand up straight and lift up [our] heads,” knowing that our deliverance is near.—Luke 21:25-28. w16.01 1:16, 17




Thursday, August 31

Jehovah knows those who belong to him.—2 Tim. 2:19.



In recent years, we have seen an increase in the number of those partaking at the Memorial of Christ’s death. That trend contrasts with the decrease in the number of partakers that we saw for many decades. Should this increase trouble us? No. Let us consider some key factors to keep in mind. Those taking the count at the Memorial cannot judge who truly have the heavenly hope. The number of partakers includes those who mistakenly think that they are anointed. Some who at one point started to partake of the emblems later stopped. Others may have mental or emotional problems that lead them to believe that they will rule with Christ in heaven. Therefore, the number of partakers does not accurately indicate the number of anointed ones left on earth. And the Bible does not state how many will be left at the time that the great tribulation begins. w16.01 4:12-14




