
December
Friday, December 1

Close friendship with Jehovah belongs to those who fear him.—Ps. 25:14.



Three times the Bible identifies Abraham as God’s friend. (2 Chron. 20:7; Isa. 41:8; Jas. 2:23) In fact, that faithful man is the only person specifically referred to that way in the Bible. Should we assume, then, that Abraham was the only human ever to become Jehovah’s friend? No, for the Bible shows that friendship with God is something that each of us can attain. God’s Word teems with accounts of faithful men and women who feared Jehovah, put faith in him, and became his close friends. The apostle Paul wrote of “a great cloud of witnesses,” all of whom surely were God’s friends. (Heb. 12:1) Among them we find a delightful variety of people. They have enjoyed the wonderful privilege of being friends of God. May we continue to imitate such examples of faith. (Heb. 6:11, 12) As we do so, we may be assured of a great reward—being Jehovah’s close friends forever! w16.02 2:1, 2, 19




Saturday, December 2

I have come . . . to do, not my own will, but the will of him who sent me.—John 6:38.



Imagine that a friend gives you a car as a gift. He hands you the title and says: “I will keep the keys. And I will be the one who drives the car, not you.” How would you feel? Now think about what Jehovah rightfully expects of a person who makes a dedication to him, a person who tells him: “I am giving you my life. I belong to you.” What if that person were to start living a double life, perhaps secretly dating an unbeliever? What if he were to accept employment that crippled his whole-souled service in the ministry or attendance at Christian meetings? Would that not be like keeping the keys to the car? A person who dedicates himself to Jehovah is, in effect, saying: “My life belongs to you more than to me. If there is ever a conflict between what you want and what I am inclined to want, what you want will win—every time.” That would reflect the thinking of Jesus, as stated in today’s text. w16.03 1:16, 17




Sunday, December 3

I will not leave you.—2 Ki. 2:2.



Nearly 3,000 years ago, the prophet Elijah invited young Elisha to become his attendant. Elisha promptly accepted the invitation and faithfully served the older man by caring for humble tasks. (2 Ki. 3:11) Then, after some six years of training, Elisha learned that Elijah’s work in Israel was about to come to an end. At that point, Elijah urged his well-trained companion to stop following him, but Elisha was determined to stay with his mentor as long as possible. If you are a young brother, how can you imitate Elisha today? Promptly accept assignments, including humble tasks. View your teacher as a friend, and let him know how much you appreciate the effort he makes in your behalf. Above all, be faithful in carrying out any assignment you are given. Why is this so important? Because only after you demonstrate that you are faithful and reliable will the elders feel assured that Jehovah wants you to be entrusted with added responsibilities in the congregation.—Ps. 101:6; 2 Tim. 2:2. w15 4/15 2:13, 14




Monday, December 4

He does not go back on his promise, even when it is bad for him.—Ps. 15:4.



Saul urged Jonathan to pursue his own interests. (1 Sam. 20:31) But loyalty to God moved Jonathan to befriend David rather than seek the advantages of the kingship for himself. Jonathan did not “go back on his promise” to David; neither should we go back on our promises. For example, if a business agreement becomes harder to honor than expected, our loyalty to God and regard for the Bible should move us to keep our word. And what if our marriage proves to be more challenging than anticipated? Love for God will surely move us to be loyal to our mate. (Mal. 2:13-16) Also, let us prove our loyalty to Jehovah by being loyal to his people, even those who may disappoint us. When we are loyal to Jehovah God in the face of challenging situations, we make his heart rejoice. (Prov. 27:11) If we remain loyal to Jehovah, we will see how he eventually works everything out for the good of those who love him. w16.02 3:16, 17




Tuesday, December 5

Happy are all those keeping in expectation of him.—Isa. 30:18.



Jehovah is fully aware of our limitations. (Ps. 103:14) Therefore, he does not expect us to endure trials in our own strength but offers us his fatherly help. Of course, at times, we might feel that we cannot go on anymore. But Jehovah assures us that he will never allow his servants to suffer beyond their limit of endurance. Yes, he will “make the way out.” (1 Cor. 10:13) Therefore, we have good reason to trust that Jehovah’s assessment of what we can bear is right. When relief does not immediately follow our prayers for help, let us wait on the One who knows just when to act in our behalf. Remember that he too is exercising patience, for he is ever eager to come to our rescue. “Jehovah is waiting patiently to show you favor, and he will rise up to show you mercy. For Jehovah is a God of justice.” w15 4/15 4:8, 9




Wednesday, December 6

This is how the holy women of the past who hoped in God used to adorn themselves, subjecting themselves to their husbands.—1 Pet. 3:5.



During Family Worship sessions, we focus on spiritual matters, and this contributes to the unity of the family. Practicing for the field ministry can equip the family to be better prepared to preach effectively. And it is not hard to see that when members of a family share comments about God’s Word, they are drawn closer together—all love the same God and all are interested in doing his will. What can married couples do to cooperate to Jehovah’s praise? When both mates are faithful servants of Jehovah, they can rejoice in the unity that this affords them. Abraham and Sarah, Isaac and Rebekah, Elkanah and Hannah—all expressed their love for their mate. We should make it a point to do the same. (Gen. 26:8; 1 Sam. 1:5, 8) That will unite us with our mate and draw us closer to our heavenly Father.—Eccl. 4:12. w16.03 3:12, 13




Thursday, December 7

Take your stand against [Satan], firm in the faith.—1 Pet. 5:9.



Satan is at war with the anointed remnant and the “other sheep.” (John 10:16) The Devil’s goal is to devour as many of Jehovah’s servants as he can in the short time that he has left. (Rev. 12:9, 12) Can we win our fight against Satan? Yes! The Bible says: “Oppose the Devil, and he will flee from you.” (Jas. 4:7) Many scoff at the idea that Satan even exists. To them, Satan and the demons are fictional characters of novels, horror movies, and video games. Such people feel that no intelligent person believes in wicked spirits. Now, do you think that it bothers Satan that he and his invisible cohorts have been relegated to the world of folklore? That is not likely! After all, it is easy for Satan to blind the minds of those who doubt that he exists. (2 Cor. 4:4) Promoting the idea that spirits do not exist is one of the many ways that Satan uses to mislead people. w15 5/15 2:1, 2




Friday, December 8

[Moses] considered the reproach of the Christ to be riches greater than the treasures of Egypt, for he looked intently toward the payment of the reward.—Heb. 11:26.



From his natural parents, Moses evidently learned about Jehovah and His purpose to free the Hebrews from slavery and give them the Promised Land. (Gen. 13:14, 15; Ex. 2:5-10) As Moses thought deeply about what Jehovah had promised to do for the Israelites, his faith and his love for God grew. Like other God-fearing humans, he could likely conceive of the time when Jehovah would set mankind free from death. (Job 14:14, 15; Heb. 11:17-19) It is no wonder that Moses was moved to love the God who felt compassion for the Hebrews and for all mankind. Faith and love motivated Moses throughout his life. (Deut. 6:4, 5) Even when Pharaoh threatened Moses with death, his faith, love for God, and likely a mental picture of a bright future strengthened him to face the threat courageously.—Ex. 10:28, 29. w15 5/15 3:11-13




Saturday, December 9

They have no wine.—John 2:3.



At a marriage feast in Cana of Galilee, Jesus performed his first miracle. The number of guests may have been greater than expected. But whatever the case, the wine ran out. Among the guests was Mary, Jesus’ mother. For years, she had no doubt pondered all the prophetic promises associated with her son, who she knew would be called “Son of the Most High.” (Luke 1:30-32; 2:52) Did she believe that in him there were powers not yet revealed? What is evident is that at Cana, Mary and Jesus felt compassion for the newly married couple and wanted to save them embarrassment. Jesus knew that hospitality was a duty. So he miraculously turned some 100 gallons (380 L) of water into “fine wine.” (John 2:6-11) Was Jesus obligated to perform this miracle? No. He simply cared about people and was imitating his heavenly Father by being generous. w15 6/15 1:3




Sunday, December 10

Lord, are you restoring the kingdom to Israel at this time?—Acts 1:6.



Before Jesus ascended to heaven, his apostles asked the above. Jesus’ answer showed that it was not the time for them to know when God’s Kingdom would start ruling. He told his disciples to focus on the important witnessing work that they needed to do. (Acts 1:7, 8) Nevertheless, Jesus taught his followers to look forward to the coming of God’s Kingdom. So Christians since the days of the apostles have been praying for it to come. When the time approached for God’s Kingdom in the hands of Jesus to start ruling from heaven, Jehovah helped his people to understand the timing of events. In 1876, an article written by Charles Taze Russell was published in the magazine Bible Examiner. That article, “Gentile Times: When Do They End?,” pointed to 1914 as a significant year. The article linked the “seven times” of Daniel’s prophecy with “the appointed times of the nations” spoken of by Jesus.—Dan. 4:16; Luke 21:24. w15 6/15 4:11, 12




Monday, December 11

Jesus gave way to tears.—John 11:35.



Jesus’ heart was touched by the pain of others. Deeply moved by others’ reaction to the death of his friend Lazarus, Jesus “groaned” and “became troubled.” He felt that way even though he knew that he would shortly bring Lazarus back to life. (John 11:33-36) Jesus was not ashamed to manifest strong emotions. Onlookers could see the affection Jesus felt for Lazarus and his family. What compassion Jesus showed by using his God-given power to bring his friend back to life! (John 11:43, 44) The Bible describes Jesus as “the exact representation of [the Creator’s] very being.” (Heb. 1:3) Thus, by his miracles, Jesus proved that he and his Father have the desire to undo the pain of sickness and death. This desire extends far beyond the few resurrections recorded in the Bible. Jesus stated: “The hour is coming in which all those in the memorial tombs will . . . come out.”—John 5:28, 29. w15 6/15 2:13, 14




Tuesday, December 12

Let them praise your great name.—Ps. 99:3.



Unlike some religious people who mistakenly think that they will praise God once they have left the earth and gone to heaven, all of Jehovah’s Witnesses realize the need to praise him here and now on the earth. We thereby follow the example of the faithful servants of Jehovah described at Psalm 99:1-3, 5. As that psalm indicates, Moses, Aaron, and Samuel offered their full support to the arrangement for true worship in their day. (Ps. 99:6, 7) Today, before moving on to serve as priests with Jesus in heaven, the remaining ones of his anointed brothers faithfully serve in the earthly courtyard of the spiritual temple. Millions of “other sheep” loyally support them. (John 10:16) Although having different hopes, both groups unitedly worship Jehovah here at God’s footstool. As individuals, however, we do well to ask ourselves, ‘Am I giving full support to Jehovah’s arrangement for pure worship?’ w15 7/15 1:4, 5




Wednesday, December 13

Keep in expectation of it!—Hab. 2:3.



Jehovah’s worshippers have long lived in expectation of the fulfillment of inspired prophecies. Isaiah, who foretold that Jehovah would bring about a restoration after Judah’s desolation, declared: “Happy are all those keeping in expectation of him.” (Isa. 30:18) Micah, whose prophecies also involved God’s ancient people, personally resolved: “I will keep on the lookout for Jehovah.” (Mic. 7:7) For centuries, God’s servants also lived in expectation of the fulfillment of prophecies concerning the Messiah, or Christ. (Luke 3:15; 1 Pet. 1:10-12) God’s present-day servants also keep in expectation, for prophecies about the Messiah are still undergoing fulfillment. Through the Messianic Kingdom, Jehovah will soon put an end to human suffering by destroying the wicked and delivering his people from this unstable world lying in Satan’s power. (1 John 5:19) Let us therefore remain alert and fully aware that this system is rapidly nearing its end. w15 8/15 2:1, 2




Thursday, December 14

The zeal for your house will consume me.—John 2:17.



At Jehovah’s direction, the Israelites built the tabernacle. (Ex. 25:8) Later, they constructed a temple for the worship of Jehovah. (1 Ki. 8:27, 29) After returning from exile in Babylon, the Jews regularly gathered in synagogues. (Mark 6:2; John 18:20; Acts 15:21) Early Christians met in the homes of members of the congregation. (Acts 12:12; 1 Cor. 16:19) Today, Jehovah’s people meet for education and worship in tens of thousands of Kingdom Halls worldwide. So great was Jesus’ love and appreciation for Jehovah’s temple in Jerusalem that a Gospel writer attributed to him the prophetic sentiment found in today’s text. (Ps. 69:9) No Kingdom Hall can rightly be called “the house of Jehovah” in the same sense that these words applied to the temple in Jerusalem. (2 Chron. 5:13; 33:4) Even so, the Bible contains principles that show us how our modern-day places of worship should be used and respected. w15 7/15 4:1, 2




Friday, December 15

Clothe yourselves with love.—Col. 3:14.



Will we be able to deal lovingly with one another during Christ’s Thousand Year Reign? If we learn to forgive freely and if we avoid strained relations now, it will be easier for us to do so then. (Col. 3:12, 13) Life in the new world may not mean that we will always get what we want when we want it. Instead, that life will involve being appreciative and content in any situation as we benefit from submitting to Jehovah’s loving sovereignty. It will mean putting into practice the very qualities that Jehovah is teaching us to cultivate now. By learning to live now as we expect to live then, we are developing qualities that we will need to manifest for all eternity. We are strengthening our faith in the reality of “the inhabited earth to come.” (Heb. 2:5; 11:1) Moreover, we are showing how deeply we yearn for the righteous conditions that will then exist on earth. Indeed, we are preparing for everlasting life in God’s new world. w15 8/15 3:11, 12




Saturday, December 16

Go on walking in union with [Jesus].—Col. 2:6.



When you examine ripe fruit at the market, you see that not all the pieces are identical. Yet, they do share some characteristics that identify them as being ripe. Similarly, mature Christians may be of different nationality, background, health, age, and experience. There are even differences in personality or culture. Still, all who grow spiritually develop qualities that identify them as being mature. How so? A mature servant of Jehovah builds his life around the example of Jesus, who left a model for us “to follow his steps closely.” (1 Pet. 2:21) What did Jesus highlight as being very important? Loving Jehovah with all one’s heart, soul, and mind, and loving one’s neighbor as oneself. (Matt. 22:37-39) A mature Christian strives to live in harmony with that counsel. He has established a life pattern that shows that he gives priority to his relationship with Jehovah and he displays self-sacrificing love for others. w15 9/15 1:3-5




Sunday, December 17

By making the truth manifest, we recommend ourselves to every human conscience in the sight of God.—2 Cor. 4:2.



A good conscience does much more than warn us against wrongdoing. It moves us to do good works. Foremost among these good works is our participation in the ministry from house to house and our taking advantage of opportunities to witness informally. Paul’s conscience moved him to do so. He wrote: “Necessity is laid upon me. Really, woe to me if I do not declare the good news!” (1 Cor. 9:16) As we imitate him, our conscience speaks to us, assuring us that we are doing the right thing. And by preaching the good news, we appeal to the conscience of those to whom we speak. Yes, the conscience can be an invaluable tool. By regularly immersing ourselves in God’s Word, meditating on what we find, and striving to put it into practice, we train our conscience. It will thus prove to be a valuable asset in our Christian life! w15 9/15 2:16, 18




Monday, December 18

Those whom Jehovah loves he reproves.—Prov. 3:12.



Accounts of Joseph, Moses, and David are among the most detailed and vivid of all Bible characters. Reading about how Jehovah was with them throughout their trials and how they came to be used mightily by Jehovah makes us feel all the more Jehovah’s care and love for his servants. Discipline from Jehovah helps us see another aspect of his love. When those who have done wrong are disciplined by Jehovah and they respond and repent, “he will forgive in a large way.” (Isa. 55:7) What does that mean? David gave a touching description of Jehovah’s forgiveness in these words: “He forgives all your errors and heals all your ailments; he reclaims your life from the pit and crowns you with his loyal love and mercy.” (Ps. 103:3, 4) May we always be sensitive to Jehovah’s counsel, even his discipline, and be quick to respond, recognizing that it is an expression of his boundless love for us.—Ps. 30:5. w15 9/15 4:13, 14




Tuesday, December 19

Mary . . . kept listening to what [Jesus] was saying.—Luke 10:39.



Martha is busy preparing a special meal for Jesus, and she becomes irritated with Mary. Jesus notices that Martha is trying to do too much, so he kindly says: “Martha, Martha, you are anxious and disturbed about many things.” He then suggests that just one dish of food would be sufficient. Jesus now turns his attention to Mary and clears her of any negligence, saying: “For her part, Mary chose the good portion, and it will not be taken away from her.” (Luke 10:38-42) Mary may soon have forgotten what she ate on that special occasion, but she would never forget the commendation and fine spiritual food she received by giving Jesus her undivided attention. More than 60 years later, the apostle John wrote: “Jesus loved Martha and her sister.” (John 11:5) These inspired words surely indicate that Martha took to heart Jesus’ loving correction and that she strove to serve Jehovah faithfully for the rest of her life. w15 10/15 3:3, 4




Wednesday, December 20

The power beyond what is normal [is] God’s.—2 Cor. 4:7.



We have ample reason to believe that Jehovah is active in people’s lives today. Time and again, we have heard experiences of how individuals prayed for spiritual help and then received it. (Ps. 53:2) While preaching from house to house on a small island in the Philippines, Allan met a woman who started to cry. He states: “Just that morning, she prayed to Jehovah that his Witnesses would find her. God answered her prayer so quickly that she was visibly moved.” Within a year, she dedicated her life to Jehovah. Many of God’s servants have seen evidence of his help when they broke free from such addictive habits as smoking, drug abuse, or the viewing of pornography. Some say that they repeatedly tried to stop on their own but were not successful. However, when they turned to Jehovah for help, he supplied “the power beyond what is normal,” and they finally conquered their weakness.—Ps. 37:23, 24. w15 10/15 1:10, 11




Thursday, December 21

[Make] the best use of your time.—Eph. 5:16.



Some get up early in the morning to read, meditate, and pray. Others do so during their lunch break. You might find that this can be done early in the evening or before you go to bed. Some enjoy reading the Bible in the morning and again before retiring. Thus they “read it . . . day and night,” or regularly. (Josh. 1:8) The important thing is to buy out time from less important things for daily meditation on God’s Word. God’s Word repeatedly promises blessings to all who meditate on it and who strive to apply what they learn. (Ps. 1:1-3) “Happy are those hearing the word of God and keeping it,” said Jesus. (Luke 11:28) Most important, meditating on spiritual things each day will help us to bring honor to the Grand Creator of our marvelous brain, and he will reward us with happiness now and everlasting life in his righteous new world.—Jas. 1:25; Rev. 1:3. w15 10/15 4:17, 18




Friday, December 22

Peter took [Jesus] aside and began to rebuke him, saying: “Be kind to yourself, Lord; you will not have this happen to you at all.”—Matt. 16:22.



The apostle Peter meant well when he urged Jesus to be kind to himself in order not to be killed. Jesus, however, knew that Peter’s comment reflected faulty thinking. To help him and the other disciples, Jesus gave frank counsel, stated the consequences of a self-sparing attitude, and outlined the blessings of a self-sacrificing spirit. (Matt. 16:21-27) Peter learned the lesson. (1 Pet. 2:20, 21) Pray to Jehovah to give you insight so that you can understand where your teenager needs help. (Ps. 32:8) For example, what might indicate that your child’s faith is wavering? Perhaps his joy is waning, he is speaking critically of fellow believers, or he has become secretive. Do not hastily conclude that these are signs of a double life involving serious sin. On the other hand, do not ignore such signs or dismiss your teenager’s isolation as a mere phase. w15 11/15 2:12, 13




Saturday, December 23

Clothe yourselves with the tender affections of compassion, kindness, humility, mildness, and patience. . . . Clothe yourselves with love, for it is a perfect bond of union.—Col. 3:12, 14.



Genuine love and unity identify Jehovah’s servants as the ones who practice the true religion, for Jesus said: “By this all will know that you are my disciples—if you have love among yourselves.” (John 13:34, 35) And the apostle John wrote: “The children of God and the children of the Devil are evident by this fact: Whoever does not practice righteousness does not originate with God, nor does the one who does not love his brother. For this is the message that you have heard from the beginning, that we should love one another.” (1 John 3:10, 11) Love that results in extraordinary unity marks Jehovah’s Witnesses as Christ’s true followers, the ones whom God is using to serve his purpose to have the good news of the Kingdom preached in all the inhabited earth.—Matt. 24:14. w15 11/15 4:10, 11




Sunday, December 24

Like apples of gold in silver carvings is a word spoken at the right time.—Prov. 25:11.



Since cultures and religious beliefs vary greatly, we need to be discerning when it comes to choosing the right time to speak. And there are many occasions when we may need to discern that. For example, someone may offend us, even with well-intentioned words. It would be prudent on our part to take time to reflect on whether the matter is serious enough to say something. If we must speak, it would not be wise to approach the offender when we are upset and perhaps might speak a bit rashly. (Prov. 15:28) Similarly, we need to be discerning when speaking about the truth to our unbelieving relatives. We want them to come to know Jehovah, but we must be patient and perceptive. Speaking the right words at the right time may help to open their hearts. w15 12/15 3:6, 8, 9




Monday, December 25

It trains us . . . to live with soundness of mind . . . amid this present system of things.—Titus 2:12.



Having “soundness of mind,” or being sober-minded, should certainly come into play when the explanation of a diagnostic method or therapy seems strange or mysterious. Can the practitioner or the one promoting it explain satisfactorily how it works? Is it in accord with known facts, and do numerous qualified people view it as credible? (Prov. 22:29) Or is the main appeal to the emotions? Perhaps the claim is that it was discovered or used in a distant or remote place, as if hidden from modern research. Does such a claim prove anything or even seem reasonable? Some diagnostic devices or forms of treatment are described as using a ‘secret substance’ or ‘body force.’ That warrants serious caution because God warned against “the use of magical power” and spirit mediums.—Isa. 1:13; Deut. 18:10-12. w15 12/15 4:16




Tuesday, December 26

There has not been raised up anyone greater than John the Baptist, but a lesser person in the Kingdom of the heavens is greater than he is.—Matt. 11:11.



Throughout the Scriptures, we see many examples of men of faith who were deeply moved by holy spirit; yet they did not have the hope of living in heaven. John the Baptist was one such person. Jesus highly praised him but stated that John would not be included in the heavenly Kingdom. David was likewise moved by holy spirit. (1 Sam. 16:13) He was a man of great spiritual depth and was even inspired to write sections of the Bible. (Mark 12:36) Still, at Pentecost, Peter said of David that he “did not ascend to the heavens.” (Acts 2:34) Holy spirit worked mightily in such ones, but it did not give them the special witness that they had been selected for heavenly life. That did not mean that they were in some way unworthy or deficient. It simply meant that Jehovah would resurrect them to life on a paradise earth.—John 5:28, 29; Acts 24:15. w16.01 3:16




Wednesday, December 27

I and the Father are one.—John 10:30.



When we work along with those we love, we draw close to them and come to know their personality and their qualities. We learn not only what they want to accomplish but also how they go about doing it. Jesus worked along with Jehovah for perhaps billions of years, and they forged a strong, unbreakable bond of love and affection for each other. They enjoyed a wonderful unity, always working together in full harmony. In prayer, Jesus asked Jehovah to watch over his disciples. The reason? He prayed: “So that they may be one just as we are one.” (John 17:11) As we conform to God’s standards and share in the work of preaching, we come to understand his appealing qualities. We learn why it is wise to trust in him and to follow his direction. As we draw close to God, he draws close to us. (Jas. 4:8) We also draw close to our spiritual brothers and sisters because we face similar challenges and joys and because we share the same goals. w16.01 5:9, 10




Thursday, December 28

Return with your sister-in-law.—Ruth 1:15.



Naomi is determined to press on to her homeland, Israel. With her is Ruth, who faces what may be the most important decision of her life. She can either go home to her people in Moab or stick with her mother-in-law, Naomi, and travel to Bethlehem. (Ruth 1:1-8, 14) Ruth could easily have reasoned that she had a family there in Moab—a mother and other relatives who would take a young widow in and help provide for her. Moab was her homeland. Its culture was her culture, its language her language, its people her people. Naomi could promise her no such advantages in Bethlehem. In fact, she advised Ruth to stay in Moab. Naomi feared that she could provide neither a husband nor a home for her daughters-in-law. What would Ruth do? Note the contrast between her and Orpah, who “returned to her people and her gods.” (Ruth 1:9-15) Did Ruth want to return to the false gods of her people? No, she did not. w16.02 2:4, 5




Friday, December 29

What is Jehovah requiring of you? Only to exercise justice, to cherish loyalty, and to walk in modesty with your God!—Mic. 6:8.



In the dead of night, David and Abishai silently make their way through 3,000 sleeping troops. At the center of the camp, the two men find King Saul fast asleep. He has journeyed to the Judean wilderness in order to find David and kill him. Abishai whispers: “Let me pin [Saul] to the ground with the spear just once, and I will not need to do it twice.” David’s reply is astonishing! “Do not harm him, for who can lift his hand against the anointed of Jehovah and remain innocent? . . . It is unthinkable from Jehovah’s standpoint for me to lift my hand against the anointed of Jehovah!” (1 Sam. 26:8-12) David understood what loyalty to God involves. He had no intention of harming Saul. Why not? Because Saul was God’s anointed king over Israel. Loyal servants of Jehovah respect those whom he appoints. Indeed, Jehovah requires that all of his people “cherish loyalty.” w16.02 4:1, 2




Saturday, December 30

To do your will, O my God, is my delight.—Ps. 40:8.



Are you a young person who is considering baptism? If so, what lies before you is the greatest privilege any human could have. However, baptism is a serious step. It symbolizes your dedication—a solemn promise you make to Jehovah that you will serve him forever by putting his will above everything else in your life. Understandably, you should get baptized only when you are qualified to make that decision, you have a personal desire to do so, and you understand the meaning of dedication. What if you are not sure that you are ready for baptism? Or what if you want to get baptized but your parents feel that you should wait, perhaps until you gain more experience in Christian living? In either case, do not be discouraged. Instead, use this opportunity to make progress so that, before long, you can get baptized. w16.03 2:1, 2




Sunday, December 31

Do not become unevenly yoked with unbelievers.—2 Cor. 6:14.



Some now serving God were married when they learned the truth, and their mate is not a Witness. Still, applying Bible principles can contribute to harmony in the family. That involves cooperating to the greatest extent possible without compromising. This may be challenging, but think of the possible reward. Also, in view of Satan’s attack on the family today, it is vital for all of God’s servants to maintain good cooperation in their marriage. No matter how long you have been married, give thought to what you personally can say or do to strengthen your marriage. Older ones can even assist younger members of the congregation in this regard. You might on occasion invite a younger couple to your home to share in family worship with you and your mate. While the younger ones are with you, they can observe that affection and harmony are important no matter how long one has been married.—Titus 2:3-7. w16.03 3:14, 15




