
January
Sunday, January 1

The things you heard from me . . . entrust to faithful men, who, in turn, will be adequately qualified to teach others.—2 Tim. 2:2.



Circuit overseers around the world have noted that in many congregations, more needs to be done to train brothers—younger and older—to help care for the flock. This presents a challenge. Why is that the case? If you are a Christian elder, you no doubt realize that personal training is important. You know that more brothers are needed to keep existing congregations spiritually strong and to allow new congregations to be formed. (Isa. 60:22) You also know that God’s Word urges you to “teach others.” Even so, you may find it hard to do so. After you have taken care of family needs, job requirements, congregation responsibilities, and other urgent matters, there just seems to be no time left to train others in the congregation. Yet, training is needed in order for them to share the workload. And as that is accomplished, everyone will benefit. w15 4/15 1:2, 3




Monday, January 2

Timothy . . . is my beloved and faithful child in the Lord. He will remind you of my methods.—1 Cor. 4:17.



A newly appointed brother should not feel that as soon as he receives some responsibility in the congregation, he needs to use it to change course—to do things in a way that is completely different from the way they were done before. The need for change is determined, not by one’s desire for change, but by the needs of the congregation and the direction we receive from Jehovah’s organization. So if you are appointed, reassure your fellow believers and show respect for experienced elders by continuing to use their Bible-based methods. However, as you gain experience, you will no doubt share in applying changes that will help the congregation to stay in tune with Jehovah’s progressive organization. In fact, Jehovah may in time move all you faithful learners to do even greater works than those of your teachers.—John 14:12. w15 4/15 2:17




Tuesday, January 3

I will give you insight and instruct you in the way you should go. I will give you advice with my eye upon you.—Ps. 32:8.



When under severe hardship, you may feel as did Paul—that you are in or at least very near “the lion’s mouth.” (2 Tim. 4:17) These are times when trust in Jehovah is most challenging—and most essential. For example, suppose you are nursing a dear family member through a chronic illness. Perhaps you have prayed for wisdom and strength. Having done all you can in this regard, do you not find a measure of peace in knowing that Jehovah has his eye upon you and will provide what you need to endure faithfully? Circumstances might make it seem otherwise. You might receive conflicting opinions from doctors. Or relatives who you had hoped would provide comfort might instead seem to make the situation more difficult for you. Keep looking to Jehovah for strength. Keep drawing close to him. (1 Sam. 30:3, 6) When relief comes, your relationship with him will be stronger. w15 4/15 4:10, 11




Wednesday, January 4

Take your stand against [Satan].—1 Pet. 5:9.



As servants of Jehovah, we are not among those who are misled into thinking that Satan does not exist. We know that the Devil is real, for it was Satan who spoke to Eve through a serpent. (Gen. 3:1-5) Satan taunted Jehovah regarding Job. (Job 1:9-12) It was Satan who tried to tempt Jesus. (Matt. 4:1-10) And after the birth of God’s Kingdom in 1914, it was Satan who began “to wage war” with the remnant of anointed ones. (Rev. 12:17) That war still rages as Satan seeks to destroy the faith of the remnant of the 144,000 and the other sheep. To win the battle, we must take our stand against Satan and remain firm in the faith. Satan is anything but humble. In fact, for a spirit creature to have the audacity to challenge Jehovah’s sovereignty and set himself up as a rival god is the epitome of pride and presumptuousness. Therefore, one way that we can take a stand against Satan is by shunning pride and cultivating humility.—1 Pet. 5:5. w15 5/15 2:3, 4




Thursday, January 5

Jehovah will wipe away the tears from all faces.—Isa. 25:8.



As Christians we are encouraged by visualizing our hope, whether it is heavenly or earthly. Can you see yourself enjoying the things that God has promised? Contemplating what you may do as God fulfills his promises undoubtedly brings joy to your heart. Perhaps you “see” yourself living on earth forever. Think about cooperating with others in making this globe into a paradise. Your neighbors love Jehovah, even as you do. You are healthy, energetic, and have a bright outlook. Those supervising the work of restoration make life a pleasure because they genuinely care about you. And you are happy using your talents and skills because everything you do is benefiting others and honoring God. For example, you are helping newly resurrected ones to come to know Jehovah. (John 17:3; Acts 24:15) No, this is not a dreamworld. This appealing mental picture is based on Scriptural truths about the future.—Isa. 11:9; 33:24; 35:5-7; 65:22. w15 5/15 3:15




Friday, January 6

The director of the feast tasted the water that had now been turned into wine.—John 2:9.



Jesus miraculously provided a large amount of fine wine, enough for a sizable group. (John 2:6-11) It is of interest that when the Devil tempted Jesus to turn stones into loaves of bread, Christ refused to use his miraculous power to satisfy his personal desires. (Matt. 4:2-4) But he did use his power to respond to and satisfy the needs of others. How can we imitate Jesus’ unselfish concern for others? He encouraged God’s servants to “practice giving.” (Luke 6:38) Can we show the noble quality of generosity by inviting others to our home to share a meal and a spiritual feast? Can we be generous with our time after a meeting, aiding someone in need, such as by listening to a brother practice his talk? What help might we be able to offer to those needing assistance in the ministry? We show that we have learned from Jesus by generously providing material and spiritual things to others as we are able. w15 6/15 1:3, 4, 6




Saturday, January 7

No resident will say: “I am sick.”—Isa. 33:24.



If we maintain our Christian integrity, we may well witness one of the greatest miracles of all time—the miracle of surviving the great tribulation. Soon after the war of Armageddon, more miracles will occur, restoring humans to good health. (Isa. 35:5, 6; Rev. 21:4) Imagine watching people discard eyeglasses, canes, crutches, wheelchairs, hearing aids, and the like. Armageddon survivors will have work to do. They can move forward with zest to make our planet, a gift from God, into a global paradise. (Ps. 115:16) Jesus’ healings in the past encourage the “great crowd” today, reinforcing their joyous prospect of being healed of all ills. (Rev. 7:9) Those healings reflected his deep feelings and showed just how much love God’s firstborn Son has for mankind. (John 10:11; 15:12, 13) Jesus’ compassion paints a touching portrait of Jehovah’s concern for each one of his servants.—John 5:19. w15 6/15 2:16, 17




Sunday, January 8

Woe for the earth and for the sea, because the Devil has come down to you, having great anger, knowing that he has a short period of time.—Rev. 12:12.



In 1914, war broke out between nations of Europe—a war that spread and engulfed the whole world. By the time it ended in 1918, terrible food shortages had been experienced and there was a flu epidemic in which more people died than were killed in the war. Thus “the sign” that Jesus had given to identify his invisible presence as earth’s new King started to be fulfilled. (Matt. 24:3-8; Luke 21:10, 11) Ample evidence points to the year 1914 as the time when “a crown was given” to the Lord Jesus Christ. He “went out conquering and to complete his conquest.” (Rev. 6:2) He cleansed the heavens in a war against Satan and his demons, who were hurled down to the vicinity of the earth. Ever since, mankind has experienced the truthfulness of the inspired words of today’s text. w15 6/15 4:13




Monday, January 9

I will move on to supernatural visions and revelations of the Lord.—2 Cor. 12:1.



Less than a century after the Christian congregation was established, a foretold apostasy began to develop. (Acts 20:28-30; 2 Thess. 2:3, 4) Thereafter, it became increasingly difficult to identify who was truly serving God at his spiritual temple. Only centuries later did the time arrive for Jehovah to clarify matters by means of his newly enthroned King, Jesus Christ. By 1919, those approved by Jehovah and serving at his spiritual temple were clearly identified. They had been spiritually refined in order to make their service to God even more acceptable to him. (Isa. 4:2, 3; Mal. 3:1-4) What the apostle Paul had foreseen centuries before in a vision began to be fulfilled in a limited way. We find Paul’s vision described at 2 Corinthians 12:2-4. What Paul saw in a supernatural vision was referred to as a revelation. It involved a future event, not something that existed in his day. w15 7/15 1:6-8




Tuesday, January 10

At that time the righteous ones will shine as brightly as the sun in the Kingdom of their Father.—Matt. 13:43.



Does this mean that there will be a “rapture” of the anointed ones? Many in Christendom believe, according to this teaching, that Christians will be bodily caught up from the earth. Then, they expect that Jesus will visibly return to rule the earth. However, the Bible clearly shows that “the sign of the Son of man” will appear in heaven and that Jesus will come “on the clouds of heaven.” (Matt. 24:30) Both of these expressions imply invisibility. Additionally, “flesh and blood cannot inherit God’s Kingdom.” So those who will be taken to heaven will first need to be “changed, in a moment, in the blink of an eye, during the last trumpet.” (1 Cor. 15:50-53) Therefore, while we do not use the term “rapture” here because of its wrong connotation, the remaining faithful anointed will be gathered together in an instant of time. w15 7/15 2:14, 15




Wednesday, January 11

In the midst of the congregation I will praise you.—Ps. 22:22.



A Kingdom Hall is the center of pure worship for the local community. Among the provisions that Jehovah makes for our spiritual nourishment are the weekly meetings at the Kingdom Hall. It is here that we receive vital spiritual refreshment and direction through his organization. Even though we have a standing invitation to eat at “the table of Jehovah,” we must never take that invitation for granted. (1 Cor. 10:21) Jehovah considers such occasions for worship and mutual encouragement so important that he inspired the apostle Paul to urge us not to forsake our meeting together. (Heb. 10:24, 25) Would we be showing respect for Jehovah if we missed Christian meetings for unnecessary reasons? Indeed, we can show how much we appreciate Jehovah and his provisions by preparing for and wholeheartedly participating in these meetings. w15 7/15 4:3, 4




Thursday, January 12

Keep on the watch.—Matt. 24:42.



That admonition in itself is a good reason to remain in expectation—Jesus told us to do so! In this regard, Jehovah’s organization has set an example. Its publications have consistently exhorted us to “await and keep close in mind the presence of the day of Jehovah” and to fix our hope on God’s promised new world. (2 Pet. 3:11-13) Although keeping in expectation was appropriate for Christians living centuries ago, it is particularly important for us. Why? Because we are living during Christ’s presence. The sign of his presence has been in evidence since 1914. And the multifeatured sign, which includes worsening world conditions and global Kingdom preaching, means that we are living in “the conclusion of the system of things.” (Matt. 24:3, 7-14) Since Jesus did not say how long that period of time would go on before the end arrived, we need to be especially vigilant, watchful. w15 8/15 2:4, 5




Friday, January 13

Find exquisite delight in Jehovah.—Ps. 37:4.



In the new world, we will derive the greatest pleasure from having our spiritual need filled. (Matt. 5:3) Spiritual activities will be our highest priority, and we will demonstrate that we are finding exquisite delight in Jehovah. By giving spiritual things priority now, we are preparing for the real life in the future. (Matt. 6:19-21) How can we increase our joy in theocratic activities? One way is by setting spiritual goals. If you are young and are giving serious consideration to a career in Jehovah’s service, why not review some of the material that has been published about various avenues of the full-time ministry and set one of these as a goal? You might talk with some who have spent many years in the full-time service. By making the ministry your career, you are preparing for continued service to God in the new world, where your theocratic training and experience will be of great value. w15 8/15 3:13, 14




Saturday, January 14

The fruitage of the spirit is love.—Gal. 5:22.



Other aspects of the fruitage of the spirit—such as mildness, self-control, and patience—are important too. (Gal. 5:23) They can help a mature Christian to handle difficult situations without becoming irritated and to endure heartbreaking disappointments without losing hope. In his program of personal study, he continually searches for Scriptural principles that can help him to distinguish right from wrong. Thereafter, when he makes decisions, he gives evidence of spiritual maturity. For instance, he listens to his Bible-trained conscience. The mature Christian shows humility in that he recognizes that Jehovah’s ways and standards are always better than his own. He zealously preaches the good news and contributes to the unity of the congregation. No matter how long we have been serving Jehovah, each of us can ask, ‘Are there areas where I yet should model myself more closely after Jesus, thus continuing to progress spiritually?’ w15 9/15 1:6, 7




Sunday, January 15

You with little faith, why did you give way to doubt?—Matt. 14:31.



The disciples see Jesus walking on the Sea of Galilee. Peter calls out to Jesus, asking if he could walk across the water to his Master. When Jesus tells him to come, Peter gets out of the boat and miraculously walks toward Jesus on the choppy surface. Moments later, though, Peter starts to sink. Why? He looked at the windstorm and became afraid. Peter cries out to Jesus, who quickly catches hold of him and says the words quoted above. (Matt. 14:24-32) When Peter climbed out of the boat to walk on the water, he did so in faith. Jesus had called him, and Peter trusted that God’s power would support him just as it was supporting Jesus. Similarly, when we dedicated ourselves to Jehovah and got baptized, we did so because of our faith. Jesus called us to be his followers, to walk in his footsteps. We had to exercise faith in both Jesus and God, trusting that they would support us in various ways.—John 14:1; 1 Pet. 2:21. w15 9/15 3:1, 3




Monday, January 16

He is guarding the lives of his loyal ones; he rescues them from the hand of the wicked.—Ps. 97:10.



Certainly, one of a loving father’s priorities is that of protecting and safeguarding his family against any possible harm or serious danger. Jehovah, our heavenly Father, does no less. Consider an example. How precious your eyes are to you! That is how Jehovah feels about his people. (Zech. 2:8) How precious God’s people are to him! Jehovah has on occasion allowed enemies to take the life of a faithful one, such as Stephen. Yet, God protects his people overall by providing timely warnings against Satan’s crafty acts. (Eph. 6:10-12) Through his Word and Bible-based publications from his organization, we are helped to see the truth about deceptive riches, immoral and violent entertainment, misuse of the Internet, and so on. Clearly, as a loving Father, Jehovah looks after the safety and well-being of his people. w15 9/15 4:15, 17




Tuesday, January 17

The hand of Jehovah is not too short to save.—Isa. 59:1.



The fact that Jehovah’s Witnesses have been successful in “defending and legally establishing” the good news is proof of support from Jehovah’s mighty hand. (Phil. 1:7) Some governments have tried to stop the work of God’s people completely. But when we look back and see that Jehovah’s Witnesses have received at least 268 high-court victories, including 24 cases won in the European Court of Human Rights just since the year 2000, it becomes clear that no one can hold back God’s hand. (Isa. 54:17) The preaching of the good news worldwide is accomplished only with God’s help. (Matt. 24:14; Acts 1:8) Add to that the unified, multinational brotherhood of Jehovah’s people today—something the world cannot imitate—and we can see why even outsiders admit: “God is really among you.” (1 Cor. 14:25) So as a whole, we have abundant proof that God is working in behalf of his people.—Isa. 66:14. w15 10/15 1:13, 14




Wednesday, January 18

Do not love . . . the things in the world.—1 John 2:15.



There is a danger in making too much use of what the world has to offer. (1 Cor. 7:29-31) A Christian can easily waste an excessive amount of time on things that are not wrong in themselves, such as hobbies, recreational reading, TV watching, sightseeing, window shopping, and seeking out the latest electronic gadgets or luxuries. Social networking, texting, circulating e-mails, and frequently checking the latest news and sports events can also waste our time and can even become an obsession. (Eccl. 3:1, 6) If we do not limit the amount of time we spend on nonessential things, we may find ourselves neglecting the most important activity of all—our worship of Jehovah. (Eph. 5:15-17) Satan has designed his world to attract and distract us. That was true in the first century, and it is even more so today. (2 Tim. 4:10) Thus, we need to heed the counsel of today’s text. w15 10/15 3:7, 8




Thursday, January 19

Instruct us about what we should do.—Judg. 13:8.



Manoah and his wife were going to have a son! No doubt, Manoah was happy, but he was also aware of the great responsibility that rested on his shoulders. In a nation filled with badness, how could he and his wife successfully raise their son to serve God? Manoah “pleaded with Jehovah,” saying: “Please let the man of the true God [the angel] whom you just sent come again to instruct us about what we should do with the child who will be born.” (Judg. 13:1-8) If you are a parent, you can likely relate to Manoah’s earnest plea. You too bear the weighty responsibility of helping your child to come to know and love Jehovah. (Prov. 1:8) To that end, Christian parents arrange for a meaningful and progressive Family Worship program. Of course, to impress Bible truths on a child’s mind, you need to do more than conduct a weekly family study. (Deut. 6:6-9) Can you meet the challenge of inculcating the truth in your child? w15 11/15 1:1, 2




Friday, January 20

See, truly an Israelite in whom there is no deceit.—John 1:47.



You cannot read hearts as Jesus could, but with God’s help you can exercise insight. Will you use that ability to look for the good in your teenager? No one wants to be labeled a “troublemaker.” In thought or word, never label your son or daughter a “rebellious teenager” or a “problem child.” Even if your teen is struggling, let him know that you see his potential and heartfelt desire to do what is right. Note any signs of growth and progress, and commend him. Help him to develop his good qualities by giving him increased responsibility when possible. Jesus did that with his disciples. About a year and a half after meeting Nathanael, Jesus selected him as an apostle, and Nathanael proved to be a zealous Christian. (Luke 6:13, 14; Acts 1:13, 14) Your commendation and encouragement will help your child to feel that he is, not someone who always fails to measure up, but a capable Christian whom Jehovah can use. w15 11/15 2:15, 16




Saturday, January 21

They are rendering [God] sacred service day and night.—Rev. 7:15.



When the last days began in 1914, there were only a few thousand servants of Jehovah worldwide. Motivated by love for neighbor, and with the backing of God’s spirit, a small remnant of anointed Christians persevered in the Kingdom-preaching work. As a result, today a great crowd with an earthly hope is being gathered. Our ranks have grown to about 8,000,000 Witnesses associated with more than 115,400 congregations throughout the earth, and we continue to grow in number. For example, over 275,500 new Witnesses were baptized during the 2014 service year—an average of some 5,300 each week. The remarkable growth that we see today is the result of our faith in God and full acceptance of the Bible—Jehovah’s miraculously inspired Word. (1 Thess. 2:13) Especially outstanding is the spiritual prosperity of Jehovah’s people—despite the hatred and opposition of Satan, “the god of this system of things.”—2 Cor. 4:4. w15 11/15 4:12, 14, 16




Sunday, January 22

The word of our God endures forever.—Isa. 40:8.



Thousands of fragments, manuscripts, and ancient translations have been compared and painstakingly studied by Bible scholars. This study validated the contents of the vast majority of Bible passages. The few verses about which there is a degree of uncertainty do not change the overall message. A study of ancient manuscripts convinces sincere Bible students that they have what Jehovah originally inspired Bible writers to record. Despite fierce opposition from enemies, Jehovah has seen to it that his Word is the most widely translated book in the history of mankind. Even at a time when many have little or no faith in God, the Bible remains a best seller and is now available, in whole or in part, in over 2,800 languages. Though some Bible translations are not as clear or as reliable as others, it is still possible to learn the Bible’s basic message of hope and salvation from nearly all translations. w15 12/15 1:13, 14




Monday, January 23

Thoughtless speech is like the stabs of a sword.—Prov. 12:18.



Words have the power to hurt as well as to heal. Using words to inflict pain is common in Satan’s world. The field of entertainment incites many to “sharpen their tongue just like a sword” and to “aim their cruel words like arrows.” (Ps. 64:3) A Christian needs to avoid this harmful practice. One example of “cruel words” is sarcasm, stinging remarks intended to belittle or rebuke others. Sarcasm is often meant to be humorous, but it can quickly deteriorate into disrespectful, insulting speech. Cruel sarcasm is one form of abusive speech that Christians should “put away.” Humor can add spice to our speech, but we need to avoid the trap of trying to evoke a laugh by resorting to cutting, sarcastic quips that hurt or humiliate others. The Bible admonishes us: “Let a rotten word not come out of your mouth, but only what is good for building up as the need may be, to impart what is beneficial to the hearers.”—Eph. 4:29, 31. w15 12/15 3:10




Tuesday, January 24

If you carefully keep yourselves from these things, you will prosper. Good health to you!—Acts 15:29.



These final words of the letter that the first-century governing body sent to the congregations can also be rendered “be strong.” We definitely want to prosper in “good health” and be strong as we serve our great God. As long as the present system of things remains and we are imperfect, sickness is a fact that we must face. We cannot expect now to be cured miraculously. However, Revelation 22:1, 2 points to the time when we will be healed completely. The apostle John saw in vision “a river of water of life” and “trees of life” with leaves “for the healing of the nations.” This does not refer to any herbal remedy now or in the future. Rather, it points to Jehovah’s provision through Jesus for giving everlasting life to obedient mankind—truly something we can look forward to.—Isa. 35:5, 6. w15 12/15 4:17, 18




Wednesday, January 25

We want to go with you, for we have heard that God is with you people.—Zech. 8:23.



Speaking of the time in which we are living, Jehovah foretold: “In those days ten men out of all the languages of the nations will take hold, yes, they will take firm hold of the robe of a Jew, saying: ‘We want to go with you, for we have heard that God is with you people.’” (Zech. 8:23) Like the figurative ten men, those who have an earthly hope have taken “firm hold of the robe of a Jew.” They are proud to associate with the spirit-anointed “Israel of God,” knowing that Jehovah is blessing his anointed ones. (Gal. 6:16) As did the prophet Zechariah, Jesus highlighted the refreshing unity that is experienced by God’s people. He spoke of his followers as two groups, a “little flock” and “other sheep,” but he said that they would be “one flock” with “one shepherd.”—Luke 12:32; John 10:16. w16.01 4:1, 2




Thursday, January 26

Continue considering these things.—Phil. 4:8.



We need to safeguard our spirituality. Because we live in a world that is dominated by Satan the Devil and because we are imperfect, it is easy for us to adopt the wrong thinking and conduct of the world. The world’s spirit might be compared to a river current that is pulling us in a direction we do not want to go. To avoid being swept downstream, we must vigorously swim in the other direction. Similarly, effort is required to keep from being swept away by the spirit of Satan’s world. When we are preaching to others, we focus on important and beneficial spiritual matters, not on thoughts that will erode our faith. Preaching strengthens our convictions, reminding us of God’s promises and loving standards. It also helps keep our spiritual armor intact. (Eph. 6:14-17) If we keep busy in our spiritual activities, we simply do not have time to become overly concerned with our own problems, and that helps to protect us. w16.01 5:12, 13




Friday, January 27

Your people will be my people, and your God my God.—Ruth 1:16.



Note Ruth’s love for Jehovah. The landowner Boaz later praised Ruth for seeking refuge under Jehovah’s wings. (Ruth 2:12) That may remind us of a baby bird taking refuge under the wings of a powerful, protective parent. (Ps. 36:7; 91:1-4) Jehovah became such a parent to Ruth. He rewarded her for her faith, and she never had any reason to regret her decision. Today, many learn about Jehovah but hesitate to take refuge in him. They hold back from becoming his dedicated, baptized servants. If you hesitate to make a dedication to Jehovah, have you stopped to ask yourself why? Everyone alive serves some god or other. (Josh. 24:15) Why not take refuge in the only God worth serving? Making a dedication to Jehovah is an excellent way to demonstrate faith in him. He will help you live up to that decision and face whatever challenges may arise. That is what God did for Ruth. w16.02 2:6, 7




Saturday, January 28

Let me pin him to the ground with the spear just once, and I will not need to do it twice.—1 Sam. 26:8.



When Abishai crept into Saul’s camp, he did not have his loyalties in the proper order. Out of loyalty to David, Abishai was eager to kill King Saul, but David restrained him, realizing that it would be wrong to lift one’s hand “against the anointed of Jehovah.” (1 Sam. 26:9-11) From that incident, we learn an important lesson: Although we can properly have several loyalties in our heart, the correct order of their importance should be determined by our application of Bible principles. Loyalty springs from the heart, but the human heart is treacherous. (Jer. 17:9) Thus, one who is loyal to God could easily feel strong ties of loyalty to a close friend or relative even if that person is practicing what is bad. Especially when someone close to us abandons the truth must we remember that Jehovah always merits our primary loyalty.—Matt. 22:37. w16.02 4:5, 6




Sunday, January 29

Prove to yourselves the good and acceptable and perfect will of God.—Rom. 12:2.



Why did Christians in Rome need to prove to themselves something that they had already accepted? Consider a Bible example. Timothy knew the Scriptures well. He had been taught “from infancy” by his mother and grandmother. Nevertheless, Paul urged Timothy: “Continue in the things that you learned and were persuaded to believe.” (2 Tim. 3:14, 15) According to one reference work, the original-language word for “persuaded” has the sense “to be convinced and certain of the truth of something.” Timothy had made the truth his own. He accepted it, not because his mother and grandmother told him to do so, but because he had reasoned on it for himself and had been persuaded. (Rom. 12:1) Likewise, diligent personal study can help you answer questions, resolve any doubts, and strengthen your convictions.—Acts 17:11. w16.03 2:3, 4, 7




Monday, January 30

[They went] from year to year to Jerusalem for the festival of the Passover.—Luke 2:41.



Picture the Israelites in Bible times praising Jehovah during a festival at his temple in Jerusalem. They would have prepared for the journey, cared for one another’s needs en route, and then been united in worship at the temple. All of this called for cooperation. As we continue our journey toward the new world, we too need to be harmoniously joined together and cooperating. Think of what blessings await us! We have already left behind the disunity and confusion marking the present system of things. We now see being fulfilled what both Isaiah and Micah foretold—God’s people are unitedly going up to “the mountain of Jehovah.” (Isa. 2:2-4; Mic. 4:2-4) Indeed, how elevated our form of worship is in “the final part of the days.” But how great will be our happiness and joy when we live at the time when all mankind will be harmoniously joined together and cooperating! w16.03 3:16, 17




Tuesday, January 31

There is an appointed time for everything.—Eccl. 3:1.



Some elders may find it hard to set aside time for training others. Perhaps they think: ‘Training is important, but it is not as urgent as other congregation matters that simply cannot wait. If I have to postpone training for a while, the congregation will continue to function.’ Though it is true that numerous matters require an elder’s immediate attention, delaying training may harm the spiritual well-being of the congregation. Elders care for many important tasks that have to be handled promptly. But if elders keep postponing necessary training, sooner or later the congregation will lack sufficient qualified brothers to care for all that needs to be done. Clearly, then, we should guard against thinking that training is of low priority. Elders who take a long-range view and invest their time in training less experienced brothers are wise stewards and a true blessing to the entire congregation.—1 Pet. 4:10. w15 4/15 1:4, 6, 7




