
March
Wednesday, March 1

You do not know what your life will be like tomorrow.—Jas. 4:14.



Forward-looking elders share in a timely fashion with younger brothers the experience they have acquired during their years of faithful service. (Ps. 71:17, 18) Elders who train others are a blessing to the flock. They strengthen the congregation’s defenses. How? The efforts of elders to train others result in more brothers who will be ready to help the congregation to stand firm and united, not only now but especially when turbulent times come during the great tribulation. (Ezek. 38:10-12; Mic. 5:5, 6) Therefore, dear elders, we appeal to you to make training a regular feature of your ministry today. Of course, we understand that the time you spend on caring for important congregation activities may already make you feel stretched to the limit. Hence, you may need to take some of that time and use it for training. (Eccl. 3:1) Doing so would be a wise investment. w15 4/15 1:8-10




Thursday, March 2

Your own ears will hear a word behind you saying, “This is the way. Walk in it.”—Isa. 30:21.



You no doubt agree that the Bible contains God’s message for mankind in general. But does the Bible also convey how you in particular can draw closer to Jehovah? Indeed it does. How? As you regularly read and study the Bible, consider your response to what it says and give thought to how you can apply it to your circumstances; then you are allowing Jehovah to talk to you through his Word. This draws you into a closer relationship with him. (Heb. 4:12; Jas. 1:23-25) For example, read and meditate on Jesus’ words to “stop storing up for yourselves treasures on the earth.” If you feel that you are already focusing your life on Kingdom interests, you sense Jehovah’s commendation. On the other hand, if you see a need to simplify your life and to focus more on Kingdom interests, Jehovah has alerted you to an area where you can work at drawing closer to him.—Matt. 6:19, 20. w15 4/15 3:3-5




Friday, March 3

The Lord stood near me and infused power into me, so that through me the preaching might be fully accomplished and all the nations might hear it; and I was rescued from the lion’s mouth.—2 Tim. 4:17.



As we, like Paul, busy ourselves in the preaching work, we trust that Jehovah will see to it that all other necessary things “will be added” to us. (Matt. 6:33) As Kingdom preachers, we have been “entrusted with the good news,” and we are considered by Jehovah to be his “fellow workers.” (1 Thess. 2:4; 1 Cor. 3:9) By being as active as possible in God’s work, we will find it easier to wait for relief. Let us, then, use the present time to strengthen our relationship with God. If any situation makes us anxious, use it to draw closer to Jehovah. Yes, by being immersed in God’s Word, by praying continually, and by staying absorbed in spiritual activities, let us trust that Jehovah can and will see us through our present circumstances as well as everything else that lies ahead. w15 4/15 4:17, 18




Saturday, March 4

What is the source of the wars and fights among you?—Jas. 4:1.



Pride can disrupt the peace of a congregation. Deep-seated feelings of animosity and superiority can affect our speech and actions, causing untold pain to others. (Prov. 12:18) If we personally have a tendency to feel superior to others, we need to remember that “everyone proud in heart is detestable to Jehovah.” (Prov. 16:5) We would also do well to examine our view of those who belong to another race, nationality, or culture. If we harbor feelings of racial or national pride, we ignore the fact that God “made out of one man every nation of men.” (Acts 17:26) In that sense, there is just one race because all mankind has a common ancestor, Adam. Therefore, how absurd it is to believe that some races are inherently superior or inferior. Such thinking would suit Satan’s scheme to disrupt our Christian love and unity. (John 13:35) To fight Satan and win, we must resist all forms of improper pride.—Prov. 16:18. w15 5/15 2:8, 9




Sunday, March 5

Become imitators of God.—Eph. 5:1.



Undoubtedly, we rejoice that God has promised immortality in heaven to faithful anointed ones and everlasting life on earth to Jesus’ loyal “other sheep.” (John 10:16; 17:3; 1 Cor. 15:53) Of course, neither immortal life in heaven nor eternal life on earth will be plagued by the suffering common today. Jehovah is aware of the pain we experience, even as he knew how the Israelites suffered as slaves in Egypt. Indeed, “during all their distress it was distressing to him.” (Isa. 63:9) Centuries later, the Jews were afraid because of enemy opposition to the rebuilding of the temple, but God said: “Whoever touches you touches the pupil of my eye.” (Zech. 2:8) Just as a mother has tender feelings for her baby, Jehovah is moved to act lovingly in behalf of his people. (Isa. 49:15) In a sense, Jehovah can put himself in the place of others, and he has given us that ability.—Ps. 103:13, 14. w15 5/15 4:2




Monday, March 6

You always have the poor with you.—Matt. 26:11.



Did Jesus mean that there would always be poor people on the earth? No, he meant that there would be poor people as long as this corrupt system of things lasts. Today the basic needs of hundreds of millions of people go unmet because of unjust human rule. Yet, relief is in sight! (Ps. 72:16) Jesus’ miracles give us confidence in his ability and his desire soon to use his authority for our good. (Matt. 14:14-21) Though we cannot perform miracles, we can enthusiastically draw people’s attention to God’s inspired Word. Bible prophecies guarantee better times ahead. As dedicated Witnesses of Jehovah who possess this precious knowledge about the future, do we not sense that we have a debt toward others? (Rom. 1:14, 15) May meditating on this move us to tell others the good news of God’s Kingdom.—Ps. 45:1; 49:3. w15 6/15 1:7, 10, 11




Tuesday, March 7

Cleanse your hands, . . . and purify your hearts.—Jas. 4:8.



When we treasure our friendship with Jehovah, we strive to please him in every aspect of our life, including our thoughts. We desire to have “a pure heart” by focusing our minds on what is chaste, virtuous, and praiseworthy. (Ps. 24:3, 4; 51:6; Phil. 4:8) Granted, Jehovah makes allowances for our imperfect nature. He knows that we are prone to improper desires. But we recognize that it saddens him when we nurture wrong thoughts instead of doing all we can to reject them. (Gen. 6:5, 6) Reflecting on this fact makes us ever more determined to keep our thoughts chaste. An important way to show our complete reliance on Jehovah is by making our fight against unclean thoughts a matter of prayer. When we draw close to Jehovah in prayer, he draws close to us. He generously gives us his holy spirit, thus strengthening our resolve to resist immoral thoughts and remain chaste. w15 6/15 3:4, 5




Wednesday, March 8

Give us today our bread for this day.—Matt. 6:11.



Notice that this is a personal request not purely for “my” bread for the day but for “our” bread for the day. Victor, a circuit overseer in Africa, explains: “I often sincerely thank Jehovah that my wife and I don’t have to be seriously concerned about where our next meal will come from, nor do we have to worry about who will pay the rent. Our brothers kindly look after us every day. But I do pray that those helping us will manage to handle the economic pressures they face.” If we have sufficient food for many days, we can think of brothers who live in poverty or who are affected by disasters. We should not only pray for them but also act in harmony with our prayers. For example, we can share what we have with fellow worshippers in need. We can also regularly contribute to the worldwide work, knowing that such funds are used wisely.—1 John 3:17. w15 6/15 5:4-6




Thursday, March 9

God is our God forever and ever. He will guide us forevermore.—Ps. 48:14.



A marvelous work of transformation in connection with the earthly part of Jehovah’s organization was foretold at Isaiah 60:17. Those who are young or comparatively new in the truth have read about the evidences of this transformation or have heard about it from others. But how privileged the brothers and sisters are who have personally experienced it! No wonder they are convinced that by means of his enthroned King, Jehovah is guiding and directing His organization! They know that their confidence is well-founded, a confidence all of us share. Hearing their heartfelt expressions will fortify your faith and strengthen your trust in Jehovah. Regardless of how long we have been in the truth, we must tell others about Jehovah’s organization. The existence of a spiritual paradise in the midst of a wicked, corrupt, and loveless world is a modern-day miracle! w15 7/15 1:12, 13




Friday, March 10

They gathered them together to the place that is called in Hebrew Armageddon.—Rev. 16:16.



The war of Armageddon will lead to the magnifying of Jehovah’s holy name. At that time, all goatlike ones “will depart into everlasting cutting-off.” (Matt. 25:31-33, 46) The earth will finally be cleansed of all wickedness, and the great crowd will pass through the final part of the great tribulation. With these exciting events ahead of us, what should each of us now be doing? The apostle Peter was inspired to write: “Since all these things are to be dissolved in this way, consider what sort of people you ought to be in holy acts of conduct and deeds of godly devotion, as you await and keep close in mind the presence of the day of Jehovah . . . Therefore, beloved ones, since you are awaiting these things, do your utmost to be found finally by him spotless and unblemished and in peace.” (2 Pet. 3:11, 12, 14) Let us, then, be resolved to remain spiritually clean, supporting the King of Peace. w15 7/15 2:17, 18




Saturday, March 11

Unless Jehovah builds the house, it is in vain that its builders work hard on it.—Ps. 127:1.



Jehovah’s organization goes to tremendous lengths to provide and help finance modest Kingdom Halls. The work of designing, building, and remodeling them is handled by unpaid volunteers. Since November 1, 1999, more than 28,000 beautiful new centers of pure worship have been provided for congregations worldwide. That means that for 15 years, on average, five new Kingdom Halls have been provided every day of the year. Efforts are being made to support the construction of Kingdom Halls wherever they are needed. This loving provision is based on the Scriptural principle that the surplus of some might offset the deficiency of others, in order that “there may be an equalizing.” (2 Cor. 8:13-15) As a result, beautiful new centers of pure worship have been provided for congregations that would otherwise never have had the financial resources to build a Kingdom Hall for themselves. w15 7/15 4:9-11




Sunday, March 12

Keep in expectation of it!—Hab. 2:3.



For the composite sign of Christ’s presence to serve its purpose, the fulfillment of it would have to be obvious enough to command the attention of those who have been obeying Jesus’ counsel to “keep on the watch.” (Matt. 24:27, 42) And that has been the case since 1914. From that time onward, the features of the sign have been undergoing fulfillment. Clearly, we are now living in “the conclusion of the system of things”—a limited period of time leading up to and including the destruction of this wicked system. (Matt. 24:3) Why, then, should Christians today keep in expectation? Out of obedience to Jesus Christ, we remain in expectation. Also, we recognize the sign of his presence. Our expectations are based, not on a naive readiness to believe anything, but on solid Scriptural evidence that compels us to remain vigilant, awake, watchful and, yes, in expectation of this wicked system’s end. w15 8/15 2:8, 9




Monday, March 13

You . . . satisfy the desire of every living thing.—Ps. 145:16.



Personal interests and pleasures will have their place in God’s new world. After all, why did Jehovah create us with a hunger for personal accomplishment and wholesome pleasures if he did not intend to have us satisfy these desires to the full? (Eccl. 2:24) In this and other ways, Jehovah will always “satisfy the desire of every living thing.” Recreation and relaxation have their place, but the pleasure derived from them is increased when we put our relationship with Jehovah first. It will also be that way in the earthly Paradise. How wise it is for us to learn to keep personal interests in their proper place while we seek first the Kingdom and focus on the spiritual blessings now available to Jehovah’s people! (Matt. 6:33) In the coming Paradise, we will attain happiness on a level that we have never before experienced. May we show the intensity of our desire for the real life by preparing for it now. w15 8/15 3:17, 18




Tuesday, March 14

Put on the new personality that was created according to God’s will in true righteousness and loyalty.—Eph. 4:24.



During his life on earth as a perfect man, Jesus was surrounded by imperfect humans. He was raised by imperfect parents, and he spent years at home with imperfect relatives. Even his closest followers were influenced by the ambitious, manipulative spirit common around them. For example, on the evening before Jesus was executed, there “arose a heated dispute among them over which one of them was considered to be the greatest.” (Luke 22:24) But Jesus was confident that his imperfect followers could grow spiritually and form a united congregation. That same evening, Jesus prayed for the loving unity of his apostles, asking his heavenly Father: “May [they] all be one, just as you, Father, are in union with me and I am in union with you, that they also may be in union with us, . . . in order that they may be one just as we are one.”—John 17:21, 22. w15 9/15 1:10, 11




Wednesday, March 15

He said: “Come!” So Peter got out of the boat and walked over the waters and went toward Jesus.—Matt. 14:29.



The wind and waves surrounding Peter as he walked on the water might be compared to the trials and temptations we face in our life of dedication to God. Even when these are severe, we can stand firm with Jehovah’s support. Recall that Peter did not sink because of a gust of wind or a big wave. Think back on the sequence of events: “Looking at the windstorm, he became afraid.” (Matt. 14:24-32) Peter lost his focus on Jesus, and then his faith wavered. We could begin to sink if we were to begin “looking at the windstorm,” focusing on its power and doubting that Jehovah will support us. We should take seriously the possibility that our faith could diminish, for the Bible refers to a weakening of faith or loss of faith as “the sin that easily entangles us.” (Heb. 12:1) As Peter’s experience shows, our faith can quickly weaken if we focus on the wrong things. w15 9/15 3:1, 6, 7




Thursday, March 16

Every good gift and every perfect present is from above, coming down from the Father of the celestial lights.—Jas. 1:17.



When you receive a gift, what do you do? Most likely you show your appreciation in some way. In addition, you will likely make good use of the gift, not taking it for granted. Jehovah unfailingly provides what we need to live and to be happy. Does that not move us to want to love him in return? The Israelites lived under Jehovah’s loving care for hundreds of years and were bountifully blessed by him, in both material and spiritual ways. (Deut. 4:7, 8) Their continuing to receive such blessings, however, was contingent on their obeying God’s Law, which included regularly offering to Jehovah “the best of the first ripe fruits” of the land. (Ex. 23:19) The Israelites would thus demonstrate that they did not take for granted Jehovah’s love and blessings.—Deut. 8:7-11. w15 9/15 5:5, 6




Friday, March 17

Happy are the pure in heart, since they will see God.—Matt. 5:8.



How might we see Jehovah’s hand in our lives? Consider: Perhaps you feel that the way you received the truth was clearly at God’s direction. Have you ever attended Christian meetings, heard a part, and said: “That was just what I needed”? Or you may have experienced an answer to a prayer. Maybe you decided to expand your ministry and were amazed at how Jehovah helped to work things out for you. Or have you ever experienced leaving a job for spiritual reasons and then seen the truth of God’s promise: “I will never abandon you”? (Heb. 13:5) By being spiritually alert and “pure in heart,” we can discern how Jehovah has helped us in many ways. How can we be “pure in heart”? We must be clean on the inside and stop any wrong conduct. (2 Cor. 4:2) As we cultivate stronger spirituality and manifest upright conduct, we put ourselves among those who can see God. w15 10/15 1:17, 19




Saturday, March 18

If anyone would minister to me, the Father will honor him.—John 12:26.



Among the crowds in Jerusalem were some Greek proselytes who evidently were so impressed with Jesus that they asked the apostle Philip to arrange a meeting with him. Jesus, however, refused to be distracted from the more important matters that lay ahead. He certainly did not want to try to gain popularity in order to avoid a sacrificial death at the hands of God’s enemies. So after explaining that he would soon die, he said to Andrew and Philip: “Whoever is fond of his life destroys it, but whoever hates his life in this world will safeguard it for everlasting life.” Rather than satisfy the curiosity of those Greeks, he recommended following his self-sacrificing course and said the words of today’s text. No doubt, Philip carried this positive message back to the inquirers. (John 12:20-25) Though Jesus refused to be distracted from his main purpose of preaching the good news, he was not always thinking about work. w15 10/15 3:13, 14




Sunday, March 19

All those for whom I have affection, I reprove and discipline.—Rev. 3:19.



Although Jesus’ disciples repeatedly argued about who was the greatest among them, Jesus did not give up on them. He also did not ignore it when they failed to respond to his counsel. Lovingly and mildly, Jesus reproved them at a suitable time and place. (Mark 9:33-37) Show your love for your children by disciplining them. It is sometimes enough to explain why a certain course is right or wrong. At other times, a child may fail to apply what you say. (Prov. 22:15) When that happens, imitate Jesus. At a fitting time and place, discipline your child lovingly and mildly through patient guidance, training, and correction. “My parents never disciplined me in anger or without explaining why I was being disciplined,” says Elaine, a sister in South Africa. “As a result, I felt secure. I knew my boundaries, and I understood what was required of me.” w15 11/15 1:5, 6




Monday, March 20

God is love.—1 John 4:16.



Imagine what life would be like if God did not have love for mankind. We merely have to look at the awful history of this world with its human rulerships under its unloving and wrathful god, Satan the Devil. (2 Cor. 4:4; 1 John 5:19; Rev. 12:9, 12) This shows us how horrible the future would be if the universe were to function without the operation of God’s love. When rebelling against Jehovah’s rule, the Devil challenged the rightfulness and righteousness of God’s universal sovereignty. In effect, Satan claimed that his rule would be better than that of the Creator. (Gen. 3:1-5) Though Jehovah permitted Satan to try to prove his side of the issue, such permission was temporary. In his great wisdom, Jehovah has allowed enough time to pass to expose very clearly the inadequacy of any rule other than his. The miserable record of mankind shows that neither humans nor Satan can provide what we need in the way of good rulership. w15 11/15 3:3, 4




Tuesday, March 21

Make a defense . . . with a mild temper and deep respect.—1 Pet. 3:15.



By maintaining a humble attitude, Jehovah’s people obey an important principle given by Jesus. In his Sermon on the Mount, he declared: “You heard that it was said: ‘You must love your neighbor and hate your enemy.’ However, I say to you: Continue to love your enemies and to pray for those who persecute you, so that you may prove yourselves sons of your Father who is in the heavens, since he makes his sun rise on both the wicked and the good and makes it rain on both the righteous and the unrighteous.” (Matt. 5:43-45) Yes, as God’s servants, we must learn to ‘love our enemies,’ regardless of their attitude toward us. In all areas of life, Jehovah’s people must show by their attitude and actions that they love Jehovah and their neighbor. For instance, even if some do not respond favorably to the Kingdom message, we show neighbor love when they are in need. w15 11/15 4:17, 19, 20




Wednesday, March 22

They understood the words that had been made known to them.—Neh. 8:12.



God’s people have always used their ability to speak—to use language—to praise Jehovah and to make his will known to others. In recent times, a significant way to promote pure worship by the use of language has been through Bible translation. There are thousands of Bible translations, but they vary in how faithfully they convey the message from the original texts. In the 1940’s, the New World Bible Translation Committee established principles of translation that have been followed in over 130 languages. These are: (1) Sanctify God’s name by restoring it to its rightful place in the Scriptures. (Matt. 6:9) (2) Translate the original inspired message literally where possible, but convey the correct sense when a word-for-word rendering would distort the meaning. (3) Use easy-to-understand language that encourages reading.—Neh. 8:8. w15 12/15 2:1, 2




Thursday, March 23

If the trumpet sounds an indistinct call, who will get ready for battle?—1 Cor. 14:8.



An indistinct trumpet call could be disastrous for an advancing army. In the same way, if our speech is unduly vague or indirect, it may well be confusing or misleading. (1 Cor. 14:9) Of course, in our effort to keep our words crisp and clear, we would not want to be blunt or tactless. Jesus set the finest example of appropriate word selection. Consider his short yet powerful discourse recorded in Matthew chapters 5 through 7. Jesus did not use flowery or ambiguous speech; nor did he employ harsh or hurtful language. Instead, he chose clear, simple expressions to reach the hearts of his listeners. For example, to allay the people’s anxieties over their daily need for food, he referred to how Jehovah provides for the birds of heaven. Then, comparing his hearers to birds, he asked: “Are you not worth more than they are?” (Matt. 6:26) What a loving appeal in simple, understandable words that touch the heart! w15 12/15 3:13, 14




Friday, March 24

Let your brotherly love continue.—Heb. 13:1.



What does it mean for us to show brotherly love? The Greek term used by Paul, phi·la·del·phiʹa, literally means “affection for a brother.” Brotherly love is the type of affection that involves a strong, warm, personal attachment, such as to a family member or a close friend. (John 11:36) We do not pretend to be brothers and sisters—we are brothers and sisters. (Matt. 23:8) Our strong feeling of attachment to one another is summed up nicely in these words: “In brotherly love have tender affection for one another. In showing honor to one another, take the lead.” (Rom. 12:10) Combined with principled love, a·gaʹpe, this type of love promotes close companionship among God’s people. Christianity embraces all believers, no matter what their nationality. (Rom. 10:12) As brothers, we have been taught by Jehovah to have brotherly affection for one another.—1 Thess. 4:9. w16.01 1:5, 6




Saturday, March 25

The love the Christ has compels us.—2 Cor. 5:14.



Our love for Jesus moves us to work whole-souled in the preaching and disciple-making work. (Matt. 28:19, 20; Luke 4:43) During the Memorial season, we will have the opportunity to serve as an auxiliary pioneer and spend 30 or 50 hours in the preaching work. Could you arrange your circumstances to do so? One 84-year-old widower did not feel that he could auxiliary pioneer because of his age and poor health. Nonetheless, the pioneers in his area rallied to his aid. They provided transportation and carefully chose territory that he could work, so that he could meet his 30-hour goal. Could you reach out and help someone share in the joy of auxiliary pioneering during the Memorial season? Of course, not all of us may be able to auxiliary pioneer. Even so, we can use whatever time and energy we have to increase our sacrifice of praise to Jehovah. w16.01 2:7, 11




Sunday, March 26

We want to go with you, for we have heard that God is with you people.—Zech. 8:23.



If it is not possible to know with certainty the names of all spiritual Israelites on earth today, how can members of the other sheep “go with” them? Notice what the prophecy in Zechariah states concerning the figurative ten men. These ones would “take firm hold of the robe of a Jew, saying: ‘We want to go with you, for we have heard that God is with you people.’” Although only one Jew is mentioned here, in both instances the pronoun “you” refers to more than one person. This spiritual Jew must, then, be a composite person, not just one individual! So it is not necessary to identify every spiritual Jew and then go with him or her. Rather, we need to identify these ones as a group and then support them as such. In no way do the Scriptures encourage us to follow an individual. Jesus is our Leader.—Matt. 23:10. w16.01 4:4




Monday, March 27

You, O Israel, are my servant, you, O Jacob, whom I have chosen, the offspring of Abraham my friend.—Isa. 41:8.



From the cradle to the grave, our greatest need is love. Humans do need and crave love—and not just the romantic kind. We hunger for friendship and connection with others. But there is one kind of love that we need more than any other—Jehovah’s love. Many find it hard to imagine that humans could acquire a close, loving friendship with Almighty God. Do we share such skepticism? Far from it! The Bible shows that imperfect humans have become friends with God. Their examples are worth contemplating, for building such a friendship is the most worthwhile goal we could pursue in life. An outstanding example of a man who cultivated such a friendship was Abraham. (Jas. 2:23) How did Abraham draw so close to Jehovah? A key ingredient in that friendship was faith. In fact, the Bible calls Abraham “the father of all those having faith.”—Rom. 4:11. w16.02 1:1, 2




Tuesday, March 28

There was no one like him.—2 Ki. 18:5.



Although Hezekiah was the son of one of Judah’s worst kings, he grew up to be one of the very best. (2 Ki. 18:6) Hezekiah set about righting the terrible wrongs that his father had committed. He did so by cleansing the temple, atoning for the people’s sins, and destroying pagan idols in a vigorous and far-reaching campaign. (2 Chron. 29:1-11, 18-24; 31:1) When he faced daunting challenges, such as the threat of attack on Jerusalem by the Assyrian king Sennacherib, Hezekiah showed profound courage and faith. He relied on God for salvation and strengthened his people by word and example. (2 Chron. 32:7, 8) Later, when Hezekiah needed correction for showing a haughty attitude, he humbled himself and repented. (2 Chron. 32:24-26) Clearly, Hezekiah did not let his past ruin his present or deprive him of a future. Rather, he showed that he was Jehovah’s friend and a fine example to imitate. w16.02 2:11




Wednesday, March 29

If a man takes a false step before he is aware of it, you who have spiritual qualifications try to readjust such a man in a spirit of mildness.—Gal. 6:1.



Kindness can help you to deal with a conflict of loyalties. For example, you may have definite knowledge that a certain fellow believer is guilty of serious misconduct. You may feel loyal to him, especially if he is a close friend or a relative. But if you were to cover up the wrongdoing, you would be disloyal to God. Of course, your loyalty to Jehovah should come first. Be kind yet firm. Urge your friend or relative to seek the help of the elders. If he or she does not do so within a reasonable period of time, loyalty to God should move you to report the matter to the elders. In doing this, you are being loyal to Jehovah and kind to your friend or relative, for Christian elders will try to readjust such an individual with mildness.—Lev. 5:1. w16.02 4:14




Thursday, March 30

Consider what sort of people you ought to be in holy acts of conduct and deeds of godly devotion.—2 Pet. 3:11.



“Deeds of godly devotion” include your activities in the congregation, such as your meeting attendance and participation in the ministry. Also included are spiritual activities that others do not see, such as your private prayers and your personal study. A person who has dedicated his life to Jehovah will not consider these deeds to be chores. Rather, he will reflect the attitude of King David, who said: “To do your will, O my God, is my delight, and your law is deep within me.” (Ps. 40:8) Remember, as a dedicated and baptized Christian, you will stand before Jehovah on your own. Your service to him should not depend on others—not even your parents. Your holy acts of conduct and deeds of godly devotion give evidence that you have made the truth your own and that you are progressing toward baptism. w16.03 2:10, 12, 15




Friday, March 31

Before the faith arrived, we were being guarded under law. . . . So the Law became our guardian leading to Christ.—Gal. 3:23, 24.



The Mosaic Law acted as a protective wall against the degraded moral and religious acts of other nations. When Israel listened to God, the nation received his blessing. When they ignored him, they suffered dire consequences. (Deut. 28:1, 2, 15) Directions were needed for another reason. The Law pointed to an important development as to Jehovah’s will. That was the coming of the Messiah, Jesus Christ. The Law made it clear as never before that the Israelites were imperfect. It also impressed on them the need for a ransom, a perfect sacrifice that would fully cover sin. (Gal. 3:19; Heb. 10:1-10) Furthermore, the Law helped to preserve the genealogical line leading to the Messiah and to identify him when he appeared. Yes, the Law acted as a temporary tutor, or “guardian,” leading to Christ. w16.03 4:6, 7




