
May
Monday, May 1

They . . . [were] amazed at the gracious words coming out of his mouth.—Luke 4:22.



We can imitate Jesus’ gracious speech by being kind, courteous, and considerate of others’ feelings. Seeing the effort a crowd made to hear him speak, Jesus was moved with pity and “started to teach them many things.” (Mark 6:34) Even when he was being insulted, Jesus did not resort to harsh speech. (1 Pet. 2:23) Speaking with mildness and tact can be a challenge when our listener is someone whom we know very well. We might feel at liberty to be very frank. That can be true whether we speak with a family member or a close friend in the congregation. Did Jesus feel that his close relationship with his disciples granted him liberty to speak harshly to them? Not at all! When his closest followers continued to argue over who was greater, Jesus corrected them with kind words and an illustration of a young child. (Mark 9:33-37) Elders can imitate Jesus’ example by giving counsel “in a spirit of mildness.”—Gal. 6:1. w15 12/15 3:15, 16




Tuesday, May 2

Let your brotherly love continue.—Heb. 13:1.



Why is it vital that we let our brotherly love continue? The simple answer is that Jehovah requires us to show brotherly love to one another. We cannot claim to love God and at the same time refuse to love our brothers. (1 John 4:7, 20, 21) Additionally, we need one another. This is especially true in times of trouble. Paul knew that some of the Hebrew Christians to whom he was writing would soon need to leave their homes and material possessions. Jesus had described how difficult that time would be. (Mark 13:14-18; Luke 21:21-23) So more than ever before, those Christians needed to strengthen their affection for one another. (Rom. 12:9) Soon the destructive winds of the greatest tribulation of all time will be released. (Mark 13:19; Rev. 7:1-3) It is not enough for us just to meet together regularly. Paul reminded the Hebrew Christians that they should use such occasions to incite one another “to love and fine works.”—Heb. 10:24, 25. w16.01 1:6-8




Wednesday, May 3

They all became filled with holy spirit.—Acts 2:4.



The year was 33 C.E., and it was the day of Pentecost. In an upper room in Jerusalem, a group of about 120 Christians were gathered together, “persisting in prayer.” (Acts 1:13-15) What was about to happen to them fulfilled a prophecy uttered by the prophet Joel. (Joel 2:28-32; Acts 2:16-21) God’s holy spirit was poured out on that group of Christians who were gathered in the upper room. (Acts 1:8) They started to prophesy, or bear witness, concerning the wonderful things they had seen and heard. To a multitude that soon gathered, the apostle Peter explained the significance of what had happened. Then he told his audience: “Repent, and let each one of you be baptized in the name of Jesus Christ for forgiveness of your sins, and you will receive the free gift of the holy spirit.” Altogether about 3,000 accepted the invitation that day, were baptized, and received the promised holy spirit.—Acts 2:37, 38, 41. w16.01 3:1-3




Thursday, May 4

Whoever eats the loaf or drinks the cup of the Lord unworthily will be guilty respecting the body and the blood of the Lord.—1 Cor. 11:27.



What point is the apostle Paul here making? An anointed Christian would partake unworthily if he did not maintain a good relationship with Jehovah. (Heb. 6:4-6; 10:26-29) Such a warning helps anointed Christians to remember that they have not yet taken hold of the reward. They need to continue to press on “toward the goal for the prize of the upward call of God by means of Christ Jesus.” (Phil. 3:13-16) Under inspiration, Paul appealed to anointed Christians “to walk worthily of the calling with which [they] were called.” How should this be done? Paul goes on to say “with all humility and mildness, with patience, putting up with one another in love, earnestly endeavoring to maintain the oneness of the spirit in the uniting bond of peace.” (Eph. 4:1-3) Jehovah’s spirit promotes humility, not pride.—Col. 3:12. w16.01 4:5, 6




Friday, May 5

God put Abraham to the test.—Gen. 22:1.



Picture an elderly man trudging up a mountainside. He is making what must be the hardest journey of his life. It is not his age that makes this trek so daunting. Abraham may be about 125 years old, but he is still vigorous. Following him is a younger man, perhaps 25 years of age. It is his son Isaac, who is carrying firewood. Abraham has a knife and the means to start a fire. Jehovah has asked him to sacrifice his own son! (Gen. 22:1-8) Abraham was facing what was likely the greatest test of his faith. Abraham did not obey God blindly. Instead, he obeyed because he could see. With eyes of genuine faith, he saw that his heavenly Father, Jehovah, never asks His faithful servants to do anything that will result in their lasting harm. Abraham knew that if he obeyed Jehovah, his God would bless him and his beloved son. On what was that faith based? On knowledge and experience. w16.02 1:3, 4




Saturday, May 6

Look! Jehovah’s slave girl! May it happen to me according to your declaration.—Luke 1:38.



Mary was to conceive, give birth to, and raise the only-begotten Son of God! It is easy to think only of Mary’s wonderful privilege and fail to consider some of the practical concerns that might have seemed daunting. God’s angel Gabriel told her that she would become pregnant miraculously—without having relations with a man. Gabriel did not offer to go to Mary’s family and neighbors to explain the cause of her pregnancy. What would they think? Mary must have been concerned about her fiancé, Joseph. How could she convince him that, although she was pregnant, she had remained faithful to him? Moreover, what a responsibility it would be to raise, care for, and train the only-begotten Son of the Most High! We cannot know all the concerns that may have raced through Mary’s mind when Gabriel spoke to her. However, we do know that she answered with the words of today’s text.—Luke 1:26-37. w16.02 2:13, 14




Sunday, May 7

Hushai the Archite was there to meet him, with his robe ripped apart and dirt on his head.—2 Sam. 15:32.



A man named Hushai needed courage to be loyal to God. Hushai was a loyal friend of King David. However, his loyalty was tested when David’s son Absalom won the heart of many and sought to take Jerusalem and the throne. (2 Sam. 15:13; 16:15) David fled the city, but what would Hushai do? Would he switch his loyalty to Absalom, or would he follow the elderly king who was fleeing for his life? Resolved to be loyal to the king appointed by God, Hushai met David on the Mount of Olives. (2 Sam. 15:30) David asked Hushai to go back to Jerusalem, to pretend to be Absalom’s friend, and to frustrate the advice of Ahithophel. Risking his very life, Hushai proved loyal to Jehovah and did what David asked him to do. Just as David had prayed, the counsel of courageous Hushai did frustrate that of Ahithophel.—2 Sam. 15:31; 17:14. w16.02 4:15, 16




Monday, May 8

All these blessings will come upon you and overtake you, because you keep listening to the voice of Jehovah your God.—Deut. 28:2.



As Christians, we can benefit from the guidelines that were given in the Law to the nation of Israel. How so? We can stop and look at the underlying principles of the Law. Even though we are not under those laws, we can view many of them as trustworthy guides in our daily lives and our worship of our holy God, Jehovah. He had those laws recorded in the Bible so that we could learn from them, be guided by the principles, and appreciate the higher moral standards for Christians. Listen to what Jesus said: “You heard that it was said: ‘You must not commit adultery.’ But I say to you that everyone who keeps on looking at a woman so as to have a passion for her has already committed adultery with her in his heart.” Thus, we need to avoid not only the act of adultery but also the sexual craving to share in immorality.—Matt. 5:27, 28. w16.03 4:6, 8




Tuesday, May 9

Appoint for us a king to judge us.—1 Sam. 8:5.



Samuel was so reluctant to do what the people demanded that Jehovah three times saw the need to tell him to listen to them. (1 Sam. 8:7, 9, 22) Even so, Samuel did not allow bitterness or resentment against the man who would replace him to take root in his heart. When Jehovah told him to anoint Saul, the prophet obeyed, not reluctantly out of mere duty, but willingly out of love. Like Samuel, experienced elders today show a kind disposition toward those whom they train. (1 Pet. 5:2) Such elders do not hold back from training others for fear of having to relinquish certain congregation privileges to the learners. Bighearted teachers view willing learners, not as competitors, but as “fellow workers”—as precious gifts to the congregation. (2 Cor. 1:24; Heb. 13:16) And what satisfaction such unselfish teachers experience as they observe how the learners use their abilities to benefit the congregation!—Acts 20:35. w15 4/15 1:16, 17




Wednesday, May 10

I will discipline you to the proper degree.—Jer. 30:11.



King Azariah “continued to do what was right in Jehovah’s eyes.” Yet, “Jehovah afflicted the king, and he remained a leper until the day of his death.” (2 Ki. 15:1-5) Why? The account does not say. Should this disturb us or cause us to wonder whether Jehovah punished Azariah without due cause? Not if we have an intimate knowledge of Jehovah’s ways. King Azariah was also known as King Uzziah. (2 Ki. 15:7, 32) In the parallel account at 2 Chronicles 26:3-5, 16-21, we learn that although Uzziah did what was right in Jehovah’s eyes for a time, later in life “his heart became haughty to his own ruin.” Presumptuously, he attempted to perform priestly duties that were outside the scope of his authority. Eighty-one priests confronted him and endeavored to correct him. How did Uzziah respond? He demonstrated how proud he had become. He “became enraged” against the priests. No wonder Jehovah struck him with leprosy! w15 4/15 3:8, 9




Thursday, May 11

Down the great dragon was hurled, the original serpent, the one called Devil and Satan, who is misleading the entire inhabited earth.—Rev. 12:9.



As noted above, Satan is called Devil, meaning “Slanderer.” This reminds us that Satan has defamed Jehovah by calling him a liar. The words “the original serpent” bring to mind that tragic day in Eden when Satan used a snake to deceive Eve. The expression “the great dragon” brings to mind thoughts of a terrifying monster and aptly fits Satan’s savage craving to obstruct Jehovah’s purpose and destroy His people. Clearly, Satan poses the greatest threat to our integrity. For good reason, the Bible admonishes us: “Keep your senses, be watchful! Your adversary, the Devil, walks about like a roaring lion, seeking to devour someone.” (1 Pet. 5:8) Satan no doubt rejoices when one of God’s servants becomes stained with serious sin and may use such victories to taunt Jehovah.—Prov. 27:11. w15 5/15 1:3, 4, 10




Friday, May 12

The love of money is a root of all sorts of injurious things.—1 Tim. 6:10.



Jehovah wants us to live comfortably—a fact that becomes clear when we consider the beautiful surroundings that he provided for Adam and Eve. (Gen. 2:9) But Satan can exploit our desires with “the deceptive power of riches.” (Matt. 13:22) Many think that money will make them happy or that material possessions are the key to success. Such thinking is pure deception, and it can cause us to lose the most valuable possession we have—our friendship with Jehovah. Jesus warned his followers: “No one can slave for two masters; for either he will hate the one and love the other, or he will stick to the one and despise the other. You cannot slave for God and for Riches.” (Matt. 6:24) If we slave exclusively for Riches, we have stopped serving Jehovah, and that is precisely what Satan wants us to do! May we never let money or the things it can buy eclipse our friendship with Jehovah. To fight Satan, we must maintain a balanced view of material things.—1 Tim. 6:6-10. w15 5/15 2:12




Saturday, May 13

If one member suffers, all the other members suffer with it.—1 Cor. 12:26.



It is not always easy to understand the pain that others are experiencing. Many people face difficulties that we have never known. Some are challenged physically because of injury, disease, or aging. Others are coping with emotional trials because of depression, panic attacks, or the aftereffects of abuse. Still others are part of a religiously divided family or a single-parent household. Everyone faces some problem, and often it is one we ourselves have not experienced. In such a case, how can we imitate God’s love? By listening intently until we understand the other person’s feelings, at least to some extent. This will move us to imitate Jehovah’s love by acting according to the need. The need is different with each individual, but we may be able to provide spiritual encouragement and some other practical help.—Rom. 12:15; 1 Pet. 3:8. w15 5/15 4:6, 7




Sunday, May 14

Christ is the power of God.—1 Cor. 1:24.



The Source of Christ’s power is Jehovah himself, so we have reason to believe that Almighty God is fully capable of controlling the forces of nature. Consider a few examples. Before the Flood, Jehovah stated: “In just seven days, I will make it rain on the earth for 40 days and 40 nights.” (Gen. 7:4) Similarly, at Exodus 14:21, we read: “Jehovah drove the sea back with a strong east wind.” And we read at Jonah 1:4: “Jehovah hurled a strong wind at the sea, and there was such a violent storm on the sea that the ship was about to be wrecked.” It is encouraging to know that Jehovah can control the elements. Clearly, planet Earth’s future is in good hands. How wonderful it is to think of the time when no natural forces will kill or maim, for “the tent of God [will be] with mankind”! (Rev. 21:3, 4) We can be assured that the power of God exercised through Christ will control the forces of nature during the Millennium. w15 6/15 1:15, 16




Monday, May 15

Stay far away from [the immoral woman]; do not go near the entrance of her house.—Prov. 5:8.



The danger of disregarding this counsel is illustrated in Proverbs chapter 7, where we read about a young man who goes for a stroll near the house of an immoral woman. They engage in sexual immorality. If only he had stayed far away from her! (Prov. 7:6-27) Might we at times show a similar lack of good judgment, perhaps straying into dangerous situations that could awaken wrong desires? For example, at night, television networks may relax their restrictions on program content. What if we occasionally channel surf? Or perhaps we might aimlessly follow links on the Internet or frequent chat rooms and sites that carry invitations to view pornography or offer other sexual services. Could it be that in such circumstances we would be confronted with something that would arouse improper desires and undermine our fight to remain chaste? w15 6/15 3:8, 9




Tuesday, May 16

Forgive us our debts.—Matt. 6:12.



Why did Jesus use the word “debts,” whereas on a later occasion, he spoke of “sins”? (Matt. 6:12; Luke 11:4) Over 60 years ago, The Watchtower nicely explained: “A sin of transgression against God’s law puts us in debt to him. . . . For our sin God could demand and exact our lives. . . . He could withdraw his peace from us, breaking off all peaceful relations with us. . . . We owe him love, expressed in obedience; and when we sin we fail in paying our debt of love to him, for sin is unloving toward God.” (1 John 5:3) Our daily need for forgiveness highlights the only legal basis on which God can cancel our sins—Jesus’ ransom sacrifice. Though this ransom was paid nearly 2,000 years ago, we should cherish it as if it were a gift given today. “The ransom price” for our lives “is so precious” that nothing any imperfect human could do for us would come near to paying it.—Ps. 49:7-9; 1 Pet. 1:18, 19. w15 6/15 5:9, 10




Wednesday, May 17

I will glorify the place for my feet.—Isa. 60:13.



What a pleasure it is to offer practical, appealing, and attractive literature in the ministry! And when we use the latest technology to spread the truth, such as by means of the jw.org website, we reflect Jehovah’s interest in providing people everywhere with the guidance most of them lack but so desperately need. Not to be overlooked is the wisdom behind the adjustment that allowed us to have a Family Worship evening or more time for personal study. We also appreciate advances made in assembly and convention programs. We often say that they get better every year! And we certainly rejoice over the increased training being provided by our many theocratic schools. In all these adjustments, Jehovah’s hand is clearly seen. He progressively enhances the beauty of his organization and of the spiritual paradise that we enjoy even now! w15 7/15 1:16, 17




Thursday, May 18

You must love . . . your neighbor as yourself.—Luke 10:27.



If you are ever in doubt as to how you ought to behave in any given situation, it would be wise to ask yourself, ‘What would Jesus have done?’ The nation in which Jesus lived was made up of people from various regions—Judea, Galilee, Samaria, and others. Bible accounts reveal that there were tensions between people of these different areas. (John 4:9) Tensions also existed between Pharisees and Sadducees (Acts 23:6-9), between the people and the tax collectors (Matt. 9:11), and between those who had received a Rabbinic education and those who had not. (John 7:49) In the first century, Israel was ruled by the Romans, whose presence was deeply resented by the local people. While Jesus championed religious truth and acknowledged that salvation originated with the Jews, he never encouraged his disciples to foster rivalries. (John 4:22) On the contrary, he urged them to love all men as their neighbor. w15 7/15 3:5




Friday, May 19

Jehovah is on my side; I will not be afraid. What can man do to me? Jehovah is on my side as my helper.—Ps. 118:6, 7.



Humans were created with the need to love and be loved. It is easy to become discouraged if this need is not satisfied because of unexpected events or disappointments, loss of health, financial setbacks, or a lack of success in the ministry. If we begin to feel that Jehovah no longer loves us, we do well to remember that we are precious to him and that he is there, “grasping [our] right hand” and helping us. He will never forget us if we are faithful to him. (Isa. 41:13; 49:15) Brigitte, who raised two children alone after her husband died, states: “Raising children in Satan’s system is one of the most difficult challenges, especially for a single parent. But I am convinced of Jehovah’s love because he has guided me through tears and heartache, and he never let me experience more than I could endure.”—1 Cor. 10:13. w15 8/15 1:1-3




Saturday, May 20

Keep in expectation.—Hab. 2:3.



The prophet Habakkuk was commissioned to foretell the destruction of Jerusalem. By the time he arrived on the scene, warnings of that city’s desolation had already been sounded for years. Conditions had reached the point where ‘the wicked surrounded the righteous and justice was perverted.’ So it is not surprising that Habakkuk asked: “How long, O Jehovah, must I cry for help?” Jehovah assured his faithful prophet that the foretold destruction would “not be late.” (Hab. 1:1-4) Suppose Habakkuk had become discouraged and thought: ‘I have been hearing about Jerusalem’s destruction for years. What if it is still a long way off? It does not seem realistic to keep prophesying as if the city might suddenly be destroyed. I will leave that to others.’ If Habakkuk had entertained such ideas, he would have lost his favored position before Jehovah—and possibly his life during the destruction of Jerusalem by the Babylonians! w15 8/15 2:12, 13




Sunday, May 21

Bad associations spoil useful habits.—1 Cor. 15:33.



To avoid spoiling our useful habits, we must not have as close associates those who practice bad things. This applies not only to associating with unbelieving wrongdoers but also to associating with those who claim to worship Jehovah but who deliberately violate his laws. If such professing Christians engage in serious wrongdoing and do not repent, we do not continue to associate with them. (Rom. 16:17, 18) If we were to associate with those who do not obey God’s laws, we might have the tendency to do what they do in order to be accepted by them. For example, if we were to have close association with sexually immoral people, we might be tempted to practice immorality. That has happened to some dedicated Christians, and some of them were disfellowshipped because they were not repentant. (1 Cor. 5:11-13) Unless they repent, their condition can become like that described by Peter.—2 Pet. 2:20-22. w15 8/15 4:4-6




Monday, May 22

You are my friends if you do what I am commanding you.—John 15:14.



In choosing close friends, Jesus was selective. Jesus chose such friends from among those who loyally followed him and served Jehovah wholeheartedly. Do you similarly select your close friends from among those who serve Jehovah unreservedly? Why is this important? The warmth of our brotherhood can help you to progress to maturity. Perhaps you are a young person who is trying to decide what course you will pursue in life. How wise you are if you associate with fellow believers who have considerable experience in serving Jehovah and in contributing to the unity of the congregation! Over the years, they may have had some ups and downs in life and may even have faced challenges in serving God. Such ones can help you to choose the best way of life. Warm, upbuilding association with such brothers and sisters can help you to make your own wise decisions and to press on to maturity.—Heb. 5:14. w15 9/15 1:14, 15




Tuesday, May 23

Take your stand against [the Devil], firm in the faith.—1 Pet. 5:9.



By both word and deed, Jesus built up the faith of his disciples. (Mark 11:20-24) We should follow his example because helping others build up their faith also strengthens our own. (Prov. 11:25) In your preaching and teaching, highlight the proof that God exists, that he cares about us, and that the Bible is his inspired Word. Help your brothers and sisters bolster their faith as well. If any show signs of doubt, perhaps by starting to grumble against appointed brothers, do not quickly shun them. Instead, tactfully come to their aid, helping them take steps to restore their faith. (Jude 22, 23) If you are in school and the theory of evolution is discussed, boldly defend your faith in creation—you might be surprised at the effect your words have on others. Jehovah helps all of us to stand firm in the faith. (1 Pet. 5:10) The effort we put into building our faith is well worth it, for the rewards of faith are incomparable. w15 9/15 3:20, 21




Wednesday, May 24

The heavens are declaring the glory of God; the skies above proclaim the work of his hands.—Ps. 19:1.



Today, we are blessed with much knowledge of Jehovah’s works of creation and the outworking of his purpose. The world promotes higher education and advanced learning. Yet, the experience of many shows that pursuing such things often leads to loss of faith and loss of love for God. The Bible, however, urges us not only to love knowledge but also to acquire wisdom and understanding. That means to learn how to use the knowledge that God has given us so that we can benefit ourselves and others. (Prov. 4:5-7) God’s “will is that all sorts of people should be saved and come to an accurate knowledge of truth.” (1 Tim. 2:4) We demonstrate our love for Jehovah when we put our heart into telling everyone the Kingdom good news and helping people to understand God’s grand purpose for mankind.—Ps. 66:16, 17. w15 9/15 5:10, 11




Thursday, May 25

All the things that were written beforehand were written for our instruction.—Rom. 15:4.



Imagine the following scenes that reveal Elijah’s implicit trust in Jehovah. When Elijah informed King Ahab of Jehovah’s intention to bring about a drought, he confidently declared: “As surely as Jehovah . . . is living, . . . there will be no dew or rain except by my word!” (1 Ki. 17:1) Elijah believed that Jehovah would supply what was needed for him and for others during the drought. (1 Ki. 17:4, 5, 13, 14) He expressed confidence that Jehovah could raise a child from the dead. (1 Ki. 17:21) He had no doubt that Jehovah would send fire to consume his sacrifice on Mount Carmel. (1 Ki. 18:24, 37) When Jehovah’s time came to end the drought, even before there was any sign of rain, Elijah told Ahab: “Go up, eat and drink, for there is the sound of a heavy downpour.” (1 Ki. 18:41) Do not such accounts make us examine ourselves to see if our faith is that strong? w15 10/15 2:4, 5




Friday, May 26

Ponder over these things.—1 Tim. 4:15.



Man’s linguistic abilities are a miraculous gift designed by God. (Ps. 139:14; Rev. 4:11) Our God-given brain is unique in another important respect. Unlike animals, humans were created “in God’s image.” They have free will and can choose to use their linguistic skills to glorify God. (Gen. 1:27) To all who desire to honor the Creator of language, God has given a wonderful gift, the Bible. It is available in whole or in part in over 2,800 languages. When you absorb these holy writings, you are filling your mind with the thoughts of God. (Ps. 40:5; 92:5; 139:17) Thus you can enjoy meditating on things that “are able to make you wise for salvation.” (2 Tim. 3:14-17) To meditate means to focus your thoughts and to reflect on or ponder over something, be it good or bad. (Ps. 77:12; Prov. 24:1, 2) The two best subjects for meditation are Jehovah God and his Son, Jesus Christ.—John 17:3. w15 10/15 4:2-4




Saturday, May 27

If any man does not know how to preside over his own household, how will he care for the congregation of God?—1 Tim. 3:5.



By word and example, Jesus trained his disciples to serve others humbly. (Luke 22:27) He taught his apostles to be self-sacrificing in Jehovah’s service and in dealing with fellow believers. Through your example of humble self-sacrifice, you can teach your children the same lesson. “I never felt jealous because of the time my husband spent with others as an elder,” says Debbie, a mother of two. “I knew that whenever our family needed my husband’s attention, he would give it to us.” Her husband, Pranas, adds: “Later, our children were keen to be involved at assemblies and on theocratic projects. They flourished, made friends, and felt that they belonged!” The entire family now serves Jehovah in the full-time ministry. By the way you demonstrate humility and self-sacrifice, your children are likely to learn how to serve others. w15 11/15 1:9




Sunday, May 28

[God’s] invisible qualities are clearly seen from the world’s creation onward, because they are perceived by the things made, even his eternal power and Godship.—Rom. 1:20.



Jehovah’s great love has been displayed in many ways. For example, note the magnificence of the universe. There are billions of galaxies, each containing many billions of stars and planets. In our own Milky Way galaxy, one of those stars is our sun, without which the multitude of life forms on earth would not exist. All these creations give evidence of Jehovah’s Godship and of his qualities, such as his power, wisdom, and love. On earth, Jehovah created everything for the benefit of his creatures designed for earthly life. For humans, he made a beautiful paradise garden and gave them perfect minds and bodies capable of living forever. (Rev. 4:11) Moreover, “he gives food to every living thing, for his loyal love endures forever.”—Ps. 136:25. w15 11/15 3:7, 8




Monday, May 29

I am with you.—Matt. 28:20.



Over the years our King has given us tools to use to help prepare the hearts of millions to receive the Kingdom message. Some tools were useful for perhaps a decade or so, while others have proved to be of timeless value. But all these tools have allowed us to develop our skills as evangelizers in some way. One tool that helped many get started in the ministry was the testimony card, which Kingdom publishers began using in 1933. The card contained a brief Bible message. The testimony card was helpful in more ways than one. Although having a strong desire to share in the preaching work, some publishers were shy and did not know what to say. Others would tell the householder everything they knew in just a few minutes, but their presentation was not always tactful! In contrast, in a few concise, well-chosen words, the testimony card “did the talking” for the publisher. w15 11/15 5:3-6




Tuesday, May 30

Let them praise the name of Jehovah.—Ps. 148:13.



Countless Bible verses show the importance of God’s name and its sanctification. (Ex. 3:15; Ps. 83:18; Isa. 42:8; 43:10; John 17:6, 26; Acts 15:14) Jehovah God—the Author of the Bible—inspired its writers to use his name freely. (Ezek. 38:23) Omitting the name, found thousands of times in ancient manuscripts, shows disrespect for the Author. The evidence for retaining God’s name in the Bible has not diminished but grown. The 2013 revision of the New World Translation includes the name 7,216 times, which is 6 more than the 1984 edition. Five of the additional instances are found at 1 Samuel 2:25; 6:3; 10:26; 23:14, 16. These were restored primarily because the Dead Sea Scrolls, which predate the Hebrew Masoretic text by over 1,000 years, contain the name in these verses. Also, one occurrence at Judges 19:18 was restored as a result of further study of ancient manuscripts. w15 12/15 2:5, 6




Wednesday, May 31

Let your brotherly love continue.—Heb. 13:1.



We need to develop our brotherly love now, for it will help us during whatever tests and trials we may face in the future. Even now, before the outbreak of the great tribulation, we have a strong need for brotherly love. Many of our brothers have been adversely affected by earthquakes, floods, hurricanes, tsunamis, or other natural disasters. Some brothers are suffering because of opposition and persecution. (Matt. 24:6-9) Added to all of this are the economic woes we experience daily as a result of living in this corrupt system of things. (Rev. 6:5, 6) As such problems increase, so do our opportunities to demonstrate the depth of our brotherly affection. Even though “the love of the greater number [of people] will grow cold,” we need to prove that our brotherly love continues.—Matt. 24:12. w16.01 1:8, 9




