
November
Wednesday, November 1

Abraham breathed his last and died at a good old age, old and satisfied.—Gen. 25:8.



When we read that Abraham was “old and satisfied,” let us not conclude that he had had his fill of life, so to speak, and had no desire to live in the future. The Bible says of Abraham: “He was awaiting the city having real foundations, whose designer and builder is God.” (Heb. 11:10) Can you imagine how thrilled Abraham will be to live in the earthly Paradise and go on strengthening his friendship with Jehovah? How touched he will be to learn that his example of faith helped Jehovah’s servants throughout thousands of years after his death! In Paradise he will even learn that the way Isaac was restored to him was “illustrative” of something far greater. (Heb. 11:19) And he will learn that the pain he suffered as he prepared to sacrifice Isaac has helped millions of faithful people to imagine Jehovah’s own pain as he provided his Son, Jesus Christ, as the ransom.—John 3:16. w16.02 1:15, 16




Thursday, November 2

You son of a rebellious woman, do you think I do not know that you are choosing to side with the son of Jesse, to your own shame and to the shame of your mother?—1 Sam. 20:30.



Our loyalty to Jehovah may be challenged if someone in a responsible position misjudges us. Jonathan may have faced such a challenge. King Saul, the anointed of God, was aware of his son’s friendship with David, but he did not understand the reason for it. Saul humiliated Jonathan in an angry outburst. However, Jonathan did not retaliate. He did not waver in his loyalty to God or to David, who would in time become Israel’s king. (1 Sam. 20:31-41) In congregations of Jehovah’s people today, it is very unlikely that we would be treated unjustly. However, those taking the lead among us are imperfect men and could misinterpret our actions. (1 Sam. 1:13-17) If we are ever misjudged or misunderstood, let us remain loyal to Jehovah. w16.02 3:14, 15




Friday, November 3

If anyone wants to come after me, let him disown himself and pick up his torture stake.—Matt. 16:24.



Some might be confused about the difference between dedication and baptism. For example, some young people say that they have made a dedication to Jehovah but are not ready to get baptized. Does that make sense? Making a dedication means telling Jehovah that you will serve him forever. At baptism, a person shows others that he is dedicated. Therefore, baptism is a public expression of a private dedication that you have already made in prayer to Jehovah. Before you get baptized, you need to be sure that you understand what dedication means. Simply stated, when you dedicate your life to Jehovah, you give up ownership of yourself. You promise Jehovah that you will put the doing of his will ahead of everything else in your life. Any promise should be taken seriously, but how much more so a promise made to Jehovah God!—Matt. 5:33. w16.03 1:14, 15




Saturday, November 4

Let us by love grow up in all things.—Eph. 4:15.



Using the example of the human body, Paul focused on unity under the head of the congregation, Jesus Christ. The apostle spoke of cooperating “through every joint that gives what is needed.” (Eph. 4:16) How can each of us, whether young or old, strong or frail, contribute to the unity and spirituality of the congregation? A key is to submit ourselves to and respect those whom Jesus has designated to provide direction in the congregation, the elders. (Heb. 13:7, 17) We may not always find this easy to do. However, we can with confidence request God’s guidance. His active force can help us to support the congregation arrangements wholeheartedly. So if we on occasion do not feel inclined to follow the direction given, we should reflect on how our humbly cooperating will contribute to the unity in the congregation. Furthermore, cooperating in matters like these will likely help all of us to grow in love. w16.03 3:8, 9




Sunday, November 5

The word of God is alive and exerts power.—Heb. 4:12.



While they were growing up, some young brothers were not encouraged to pursue spiritual goals. The truth never came first in the life of such young ones. (Matt. 10:24) Therefore, an elder should take time to develop a friendly relationship with a brother he wishes to train for congregation privileges and let him know that he is needed in the congregation. Then, over the course of time, the elder should sit down with the brother to reason on specific scriptures and help him think about his dedication to Jehovah. (Eccl. 5:4; Isa. 6:8; Matt. 6:24, 33; Luke 9:57-62; 1 Cor. 15:58; 2 Cor. 5:15; 13:5) The elder might ask him, ‘What did you promise Jehovah when you dedicated yourself to him?’ He could try to stir his heart by asking, ‘How do you think Jehovah must have felt when you got baptized?’ (Prov. 27:11) ‘What were Satan’s feelings?’ (1 Pet. 5:8) Elders should never underestimate how deeply a brother can be affected by the reading of carefully selected Bible passages. w15 4/15 2:9, 11




Monday, November 6

Throw all your anxiety on him, because he cares for you.—1 Pet. 5:7.



Why does Jehovah not give us an immediate response to our every request? Recall that he likens our relationship with him to that of children with a father. (Ps. 103:13) A child cannot rightly expect a parent to grant every request or to do so right away. Some of a child’s requests may be mere passing whims. Others must wait till the time is right. Still others may not be in the child’s best interests or in the best interests of others involved. Furthermore, to concede immediately to a child’s every request would change the relationship to one of master and slave, the child being the master. Similarly, Jehovah may in our best interests allow time to pass before his response to our prayers becomes evident. That is his prerogative as our wise Creator, loving Master, and heavenly Father. Fulfilling all our requests right away would distort the proper relationship between us and him.—Isa. 29:16; 45:9. w15 4/15 4:6, 7




Tuesday, November 7

Oppose the Devil, and he will flee from you.—Jas. 4:7.



As we near the end of this system of things, Satan wants us to relax our guard, to “be kind” to ourselves by carving out a niche in this world, thus losing our sense of urgency. Do not let that happen to you! Instead, “keep on the watch.” (Matt. 16:22, 23; 24:42) Never believe Satan’s deceptive propaganda that the end is far off—or that it is not coming at all. Satan tries to have us believe that from God’s standpoint we are unlovable and our sins are unforgivable. That is all part of Satan’s deceptive propaganda. After all, who is particularly and really unlovable in Jehovah’s eyes? It is Satan. Who is really unforgivable? Again, it is Satan. But the Bible assures us: “God is not unrighteous so as to forget your work and the love you showed for his name.” (Heb. 6:10) Jehovah appreciates our efforts to please him, and our service is not in vain. (1 Cor. 15:58) So let us not be fooled by Satan’s deceptive propaganda. w15 5/15 1:16-19




Wednesday, November 8

They saw them from a distance and welcomed them.—Heb. 11:13.



Abraham had so much evidence to demonstrate the reality of what he hoped for that it was as if he could see what he had not actually beheld! Abraham’s faith in God’s promises strengthened his resolve to do the divine will. Acting in faith, he left the city of Ur and refused to take up permanent residence in any of the cities of Canaan. Like Ur, they had shaky foundations because of their ungodly governments. (Josh. 24:2) For the rest of his long life, Abraham “was awaiting the city having real foundations, whose designer and builder is God.” (Heb. 11:10) Abraham “saw” himself living in a permanent place governed by Jehovah. Abel, Enoch, Noah, Abraham, and others like them believed in the resurrection of the dead and looked forward to life on earth under God’s Kingdom, “the city having real foundations.” Reflecting on such blessings bolstered their faith in Jehovah.—Heb. 11:15, 16. w15 5/15 3:8, 9




Thursday, November 9

Christ is the power of God.—1 Cor. 1:24.



Jehovah displayed his power through Jesus Christ in extraordinary ways. The four Gospels provide faith-strengthening details about some of the miracles that Christ performed. Likely, he performed many other miracles. (Matt. 9:35; Luke 9:11) Yes, God’s power was manifested in Jesus. For good reason, then, the apostle Paul could say about him: “Christ is the power of God.” Yet, what bearing can Jesus’ miracles have on our life? The apostle Peter said that Jesus performed miracles, or “wonders.” (Acts 2:22) The powerful works that Jesus did on earth were foregleams of even grander blessings to come under his kingly rule. They foreshadow the miracles that Jesus will perform in God’s new world on a global scale! His miracles also give us tremendous insight into his personality and that of his Father. w15 6/15 1:1, 2




Friday, November 10

She kept saying: “If I touch just his outer garments, I will get well.”—Mark 5:28.



Realizing that it was his Father, Jehovah, who had healed the woman, Jesus treated her kindly, saying: “Daughter, your faith has made you well. Go in peace, and be healed from your grievous sickness.” (Mark 5:34) How kind Jesus is! We see that he has a warm place in his heart for those who suffer from illnesses. Satan wants to convince us that we are unloved and worthless. By his miracles, Jesus clearly proved that he truly cares about us and our problems. What a sympathetic King and High Priest! (Heb. 4:15) It may not be easy for us to understand the feelings of those who suffer from a chronic illness, especially if we have never experienced such. We can bear in mind that Jesus empathized with the sick even though he himself was never sick. May Jesus’ example move us to do the same, to the best of our ability.—1 Pet. 3:8. w15 6/15 2:11, 12




Saturday, November 11

The name of God is being blasphemed among the nations because of you.—Rom. 2:24.



What a privilege it is for us not only to know God’s personal name but also to bear it as “a people for his name.” (Acts 15:14; Isa. 43:10) We implore our heavenly Father: “Let your name be sanctified.” (Matt. 6:9) Your making such a request may move you to ask Jehovah to help you to avoid doing or saying anything that would dishonor his holy name. We do not want to be like some in the first century who did not practice what they preached, as mentioned in today’s text. What is needed for God’s name to be completely sanctified and cleared of all reproach? For that to happen, Jehovah must act to remove all who willfully reject his sovereignty. (Ezek. 38:22, 23) Mankind will gradually be brought to perfection. How we long for the time when all intelligent creation will treat Jehovah’s name as holy! Then, at last, our loving heavenly Father will “be all things to everyone.”—1 Cor. 15:28. w15 6/15 4:7, 10




Sunday, November 12

The heavens are my throne, and the earth is my footstool.—Isa. 66:1.



Besides referring to the earth, the term “footstool” is also employed figuratively in the Hebrew Scriptures to describe the ancient temple used by the Israelites. (1 Chron. 28:2; Ps. 132:7) Located on the earth, the temple served as the center of true worship. For that reason, it was truly beautiful in Jehovah’s eyes and its very existence glorified the place for Jehovah’s feet. (Isa. 60:13) Today the center of true worship is no longer a literal temple on earth. There is, however, a spiritual temple, which glorifies Jehovah far more than any building. This is an arrangement that makes reconciliation with God possible by means of the priesthood and sacrifice of Jesus Christ. It came into existence in 29 C.E. at Jesus’ baptism when Jesus was anointed as High Priest of Jehovah’s great spiritual temple.—Heb. 9:11, 12. w15 7/15 1:1-3




Monday, November 13

They will see the Son of man coming in a cloud with power and great glory.—Luke 21:27.



This will be a time for rewarding those who are faithful and for punishing those who are not. (Matt. 24:46, 47, 50, 51; 25:19, 28-30) According to Matthew, Jesus finished giving the composite sign with the parable of the sheep and the goats, saying: “When the Son of man comes in his glory, and all the angels with him, then he will sit down on his glorious throne. All the nations will be gathered before him, and he will separate people one from another, just as a shepherd separates the sheep from the goats. And he will put the sheep on his right hand, but the goats on his left.” (Matt. 25:31-33) What judgment will the sheep and the goats hear pronounced on them? The parable finishes with the words: “These [the goats] will depart into everlasting cutting-off, but the righteous ones into everlasting life.”—Matt. 25:46. w15 7/15 2:11, 12




Tuesday, November 14

Look! How good and how pleasant it is for brothers to dwell together in unity!—Ps. 133:1.



It is understandable that we might feel some affection for the land, the culture, the language, and the food of the country we were raised in. However, we must avoid the “mine is best” attitude. For our pleasure, Jehovah has created great variety in all things. (Ps. 104:24; Rev. 4:11) So why insist that one way of doing things is superior to another? God wants people of all sorts to come to an accurate knowledge of truth and to enjoy everlasting life. (John 3:16; 1 Tim. 2:3, 4) Open-mindedness toward a diversity of acceptable ideas enriches us and protects our Christian unity. As we maintain our loyalty to Jehovah, we must avoid involvement in the world’s controversies. Partisan allegiances have no place among us. How thankful we are to Jehovah for freeing us from the divisive, prideful, competitive practices that dominate Satan’s world! w15 7/15 3:17, 18




Wednesday, November 15

[God] cares for you.—1 Pet. 5:7.



There are many ways to express our love for Jehovah. For example, we show love for God and neighbor by having a zealous share in the Kingdom-preaching work. (Matt. 24:14; 28:19, 20) We show that we truly love Jehovah by enduring tests of faith as integrity keepers. (Ps. 84:11; Jas. 1:2-5) If our trials become severe, we can be sure that God is aware of our suffering and will help us, for we are precious to him. (Ps. 56:8) Our love for Jehovah moves us to meditate on his creative works and other marvelous deeds. We show that we love God and highly value his Word by diligently studying the Bible. Love for Jehovah draws us ever closer to him in prayer. And our love for God grows deeper as we reflect on the ransom sacrifice he provided for our sins. (1 John 2:1, 2) These are just some of the many reasons we have for loving Jehovah in response to his enduring love for us. w15 8/15 1:6, 17, 18




Thursday, November 16

[It is] better to be patient.—Eccl. 7:8.



In the new world, there may be times when we will need to exercise patience. For example, we may hear of individuals who, to the delight of their relatives and friends, have been raised from the dead. However, we ourselves may have to wait for the resurrection of our loved ones. If that is the case, will we rejoice with others and be patient? (Rom. 12:15) Learning to wait patiently for the fulfillment of Jehovah’s promises now will help us to exercise patience then. We can also prepare for life in the new world by exercising patience regarding revealed truth. Are we studious and patient as our understanding of Bible truth is progressively clarified today? If so, we will likely have no difficulty showing patience in the new world as Jehovah makes known his requirements for mankind.—Prov. 4:18; John 16:12. w15 8/15 3:9, 10




Friday, November 17

Attain . . . the measure of stature that belongs to the fullness of the Christ.—Eph. 4:13.



The apostle Paul wrote of the need for Christians in Ephesus to grow spiritually. He encouraged them to reach out to “attain to the oneness of the faith and of the accurate knowledge of the Son of God, to being a full-grown man, attaining the measure of stature that belongs to the fullness of the Christ.” (Eph. 4:13) When Paul wrote his letter, the congregation in Ephesus had already existed for some years. Many disciples there had reached a high level of spiritual development. Some, however, still needed to press on to maturity. The situation among Jehovah’s Witnesses today is much the same. Many brothers and sisters have long served God and have advanced to spiritual maturity. But obviously not all are at that point. For example, thousands of new ones are baptized each year, so some still need to strive for maturity. What about you?—Col. 2:6, 7. w15 9/15 1:2, 3




Saturday, November 18

Physical training is beneficial for a little.—1 Tim. 4:8.



Many have concluded that a measure of regular exercise promotes good health and refreshes the body and mind. If we want to enjoy exercise in a group, should we share in it with just anyone? Proverbs 13:20 tells us: “The one walking with the wise will become wise, but the one who has dealings with the stupid will fare badly.” Does this not suggest that we should be selective in our choice of recreation, guided by our Bible-trained conscience? There is also the question of when to engage in recreation. Do you plan recreation around theocratic activities, such as meetings, field ministry, and personal study? Or do you find yourself trying to fit theocratic activities between periods of leisure? What are your priorities? Jesus said: “Keep on, then, seeking first the Kingdom and his righteousness, and all these other things will be added to you.” (Matt. 6:33) Does your conscience prompt you to set priorities that line up with Jesus’ advice? w15 9/15 2:13, 15




Sunday, November 19

Why are you so angry and dejected? If you turn to doing good, will you not be restored to favor? . . . Will you get the mastery over [sin]?—Gen. 4:6, 7.



That was timely counsel coupled with positive direction. Jehovah thus warned Cain when it was apparent that Cain was on a very dangerous course. Sadly, Cain did not heed that warning, and he suffered for it. (Gen. 4:11-13) When Jeremiah’s secretary, Baruch, felt weary and despondent, Jehovah gave him counsel to help him see the reality of his problem. Unlike Cain, Baruch accepted Jehovah’s counsel, and this preserved his life. (Jer. 45:2-5) “Those whom Jehovah loves he disciplines, in fact, he scourges everyone whom he receives as a son,” wrote Paul. (Heb. 12:6) Discipline, however, is not limited to punishment. It takes various forms. There are many examples in the Bible of faithful servants undergoing extreme trials that may have involved discipline and that trained them. w15 9/15 4:12, 13




Monday, November 20

Your servants have come . . . out of regard for the name of Jehovah your God, because we have heard about his fame and about all he did.—Josh. 9:9.



The Gibeonites wisely recognized Israel’s backer to be the true God. Rahab too perceived God’s hand in the events of her day. After learning about how Jehovah rescued his people, she told two Israelite spies: “I do know that Jehovah will give you the land.” Even though taking such a stand was fraught with danger, she expressed faith that Jehovah could deliver her and her family. (Josh. 2:9-13; 4:23, 24) These and many other examples in the Bible help us to understand what it means to see God or to see his hand in matters. As we come to know him, we too can see his hand because we perceive his qualities and actions with “the eyes of [our] heart.” (Eph. 1:18) Surely we want to be like those past and present who have clearly seen Jehovah supporting his people. w15 10/15 1:6, 7, 9




Tuesday, November 21

Jesus loved Martha and her sister and Lazarus.—John 11:5.



Although Martha was the only woman mentioned by name as being one whom Jesus loved, he also had pure unselfish love for other godly women, such as his dear earthly mother, Mary, and Martha’s sister, Mary. (John 19:25-27) Why, then, is Martha mentioned in this way in the Gospel account? Jesus loved Martha not only for her hospitable and industrious nature but, no doubt, because of her spirituality. She was a woman who truly believed Jesus’ teachings. Martha had remarkable faith in Jesus as the promised Messiah. (John 11:21-27) At the same time, like all of us, she was not perfect. On one occasion while Jesus was being entertained in her home, Martha presumed to tell Jesus what he should do to correct a situation she thought to be wrong. “Lord,” said Martha, “does it not matter to you that my sister has left me alone to attend to things? Tell her to come and help me.”—Luke 10:38-42. w15 10/15 3:1, 2




Wednesday, November 22

Draw close to God, and he will draw close to you.—Jas. 4:8.



By continuing to ponder over spiritual things, we will maintain our enthusiasm for the truth. Thus we will be a source of refreshment to our brothers and to the interested ones we meet in the field service. Meditating deeply on God’s greatest gift, the ransom sacrifice of Jesus, will help us to cherish the privilege of having a close relationship with our Holy Father, Jehovah. (Rom. 3:24) Mark, a South African who spent three years in prison because of his Christian neutrality, said: “Meditation can be compared to an exciting adventure. The more we meditate on spiritual things, the more we discover new things about our God, Jehovah. At times when I’m feeling a little discouraged or anxious about the future, I pick up the Bible and meditate on a passage of Scripture. I feel that it really calms me down.” w15 10/15 4:15




Thursday, November 23

Give me understanding, so that I may observe your law and keep it with my whole heart.—Ps. 119:34.



When appropriate, explain to your children the reasons behind a rule or a decision you make. If a teenager understands your thinking on the matter, he is more likely to obey you from a willing heart. “Giving reasons helps teenagers to trust you because they see that your decisions are not arbitrary or capricious but reasonable,” says Barry, who raised four children. A teenager is also maturing into an adult with his own “power of reason.” (Rom. 12:1) Barry explains: “Teenagers need to learn to make sensible decisions based on reason rather than emotion.” When you humbly give reasons for your decisions, your adolescent can sense that you recognize that he is progressing toward maturity, and he learns to make his own decisions with his “power of reason.” w15 11/15 2:11




Friday, November 24

Let us work what is good toward all, but especially toward those related to us in the faith.—Gal. 6:10.



Throughout the earth, there are millions who worship Jehovah and bear witness to his name and purpose. How should each worshipper of Jehovah view his fellow Witnesses? (Rom. 12:10) The apostle Peter wrote: “Now that you have purified yourselves by your obedience to the truth with unhypocritical brotherly affection as the result, love one another intensely from the heart.” Peter also told fellow believers: “Above all things, have intense love for one another.” (1 Pet. 1:22; 4:8) Because we have intense love for our fellow servants of Jehovah, we make up a unique worldwide organization. Moreover, because we love Jehovah and obey his laws, he supports us with the most powerful force in the universe, his holy spirit, or active force. This enables us to enjoy wonderful unity as a truly international brotherhood.—1 John 4:20, 21. w15 11/15 4:8, 9




Saturday, November 25

Ten men out of all the languages of the nations . . . [will say]: “We want to go with you.”—Zech. 8:23.



Jehovah does not insist that we learn a specific language in order for us to get to know him or his purposes. (Rev. 7:9, 10) Has God’s communication with humans been hindered by the use of different languages and minor variations in translation? No. For example, we may be aware of only a few of the original-language words that Jesus used. (Matt. 27:46; Mark 5:41; 7:34; 14:36) However, Jehovah made sure that Jesus’ message was transmitted in Greek and, in time, in other languages. Later, Bible manuscripts were copied again and again by Jews and Christians, preserving the holy writings. These were translated into many more languages. John Chrysostom of the fourth/fifth century C.E. said that by his day, Jesus’ teachings had been translated into the languages of the Syrians, Egyptians, Indians, Persians, Ethiopians, and innumerable other peoples. w15 12/15 1:10, 11




Sunday, November 26

A word spoken at the right time—how good it is!—Prov. 15:23.



Our words may be just what our hearer truly needs, but unless we discern the best time to speak, their meaning could be lost. For example, in March 2011 an earthquake and tsunami devastated parts of eastern Japan, wiping out entire cities. More than 15,000 lost their lives. Although Jehovah’s Witnesses in the area suffered along with their neighbors, they took advantage of every opportunity to use the Bible to comfort those who were mourning. However, many of the local people have deep-rooted Buddhist beliefs and little or no knowledge of Bible teachings. Our brothers discerned that immediately following the tsunami was not necessarily the best time to tell the grief-stricken victims about the resurrection hope. Instead, they used their gift of speech to focus on giving emotional support and explaining from the Bible why such terrible things happen to innocent people. w15 12/15 3:7




Monday, November 27

The naive person believes every word, but the shrewd one ponders each step.—Prov. 14:15.



Sadly, in this greedy world, there are those who seize on people’s illness as an opportunity to make money. Other individuals or companies stress the use of products that are high-priced in order to make large profits. To a sick person who desperately seeks relief or a way to stay alive longer, these “cures” may seem appealing. “The shrewd one” will be particularly cautious if the “word,” or recommendation, comes from someone whose qualifications are questionable. “The shrewd one” might reason: ‘He says that this vitamin, herb, or diet supposedly helped someone, but are there adequate witnesses to establish the matter? People differ. Is there valid reason to trust that it will help me? Should I do more research or even consult with some who are known to be trained or qualified in this field?’—Deut. 17:6. w15 12/15 4:14, 15




Tuesday, November 28

The love the Christ has compels us.—2 Cor. 5:14.



Paul realized that we could not accept the extraordinary love of Christ without being compelled, or moved, to live for him. When our minds fully comprehend what Jehovah has done for us and our hearts are moved by his love, we desire to live our lives whole-souled for Christ Jesus. How do we show that desire? Those who love Jehovah are compelled to imitate Christ’s example, following his steps closely. (1 Pet. 2:21; 1 John 2:6) Through our obedience, we prove our love for God and Christ. Jesus said: “Whoever has my commandments and observes them is the one who loves me. In turn, whoever loves me will be loved by my Father, and I will love him.” (John 14:21; 1 John 5:3) So ask yourself: ‘In what areas am I doing well in following in the steps of Christ Jesus? In what areas could I improve?’ This self-examination is vital, as we are constantly being pressured to follow the ways of this world.—Rom. 12:2. w16.01 2:7-9




Wednesday, November 29

We will be like him, because we will see him just as he is.—1 John 3:2.



Do you feel that you have more than average zeal in the ministry? Are you a keen student of God’s Word who loves to delve into “the deep things of God”? (1 Cor. 2:10) Have you seen Jehovah’s special blessing on your ministry? Do you have a burning desire to do Jehovah’s will? Do you have a deep inner feeling of responsibility to help others spiritually? Have you seen proof that Jehovah has personally intervened in your life? If you answer these questions with a resounding yes, does this mean that you now have the heavenly calling? No, it does not. Why not? Because these are not unique feelings experienced only by those who have the heavenly calling. Jehovah’s spirit works with equal force in those who have the hope of living forever on earth. In fact, if you are wondering whether you have received the heavenly calling, that would in itself indicate that you have not received it. w16.01 3:14, 15




Thursday, November 30

I rejoiced before him all the time.—Prov. 8:30.



Jesus joyfully worked alongside his Father, rejoicing both in what he accomplished and in the knowledge that Jehovah was fond of him. What, though, about us? Jesus said that there is happiness both in giving and in receiving. (Acts 20:35) It brought us joy to receive the truth, and it brings us joy to share the truth with others. As we share Bible truths with others, we see spiritually hungry ones filled with delight as they begin to understand and appreciate our God and the precious truths contained in his Word. It touches our heart to see them make changes not just in their thinking but also in their way of life. We realize that the work of sharing the good news is vitally important. It opens the way to everlasting life for those who become reconciled to God. (2 Cor. 5:20) What more joyful, satisfying work could we engage in than that of helping people chart a course that will result in their living forever? w16.01 5:6, 7




