
October
Sunday, October 1

Those whom he foreordained are the ones he also called.—Rom. 8:30.



Jehovah began choosing anointed ones after Jesus’ death and resurrection, and it seems that all in the first-century Christian congregation were anointed. From the first century until the beginning of the last days, the vast majority of those who claimed to follow Christ were false Christians; Jesus likened them to “weeds.” Even so, Jehovah continued to anoint some faithful ones throughout that time, and they proved to be like the “wheat” Jesus described. (Matt. 13:24-30) During the last days, Jehovah has continued to select those who will make up the 144,000. If he chooses to wait until late into that period to select some for that privilege, who are we to question his wisdom? (Isa. 45:9; Dan. 4:35; Rom. 9:11, 16) We must be careful not to react like the disgruntled workers who complained about the way their master dealt with the 11th-hour workers.—Matt. 20:8-15. w16.01 4:15




Monday, October 2

Take, please, your son, your only son whom you so love, Isaac, and travel to the land of Moriah and offer him up there as a burnt offering on one of the mountains that I will designate to you.—Gen. 22:2.



God does not make such requests of us today. But he does ask us to obey him even when his commands are hard for us to comply with or we cannot comprehend the reasons for them. Can you think of something that God asks of you that you find difficult to do? For some, it may be the preaching work. Perhaps they struggle with shyness, making it hard for them to approach strangers with the good news. For others, it may be the challenge of standing out as different, perhaps at school or in the workplace. (Ex. 23:2; 1 Thess. 2:2) Do you ever feel like Abraham, as if you are trudging up that slope in Moriah, facing a task that seems beyond you? If you do, take courage from Abraham and his faith! Meditating on examples of faithful men and women can move us to imitate them and draw close to Jehovah as our Friend.—Heb. 12:1, 2. w16.02 1:3, 14




Tuesday, October 3

Saul . . . spoke to Jonathan his son and to all his servants about putting David to death.—1 Sam. 19:1.



Because Saul was determined to kill David, Jonathan faced a conflict of loyalties. Although he had made a covenant with David, Jonathan was also submissive to his father. But Jonathan knew that God was with David and not with Saul. Therefore, Jonathan put loyalty to David ahead of loyalty to Saul. He warned David to hide and then spoke well of him to Saul. (1 Sam. 19:1-6) If we are not careful, loyalty to a nation, a school, or a sports team can eventually choke out loyalty to God. For example, Henry enjoys playing chess. His school had a tradition of winning the championship, and he wanted to put forth his best effort. But he admitted: “Gradually, loyalty to the school began to take priority over my loyalty to God. Weekend chess matches were crowding out my Kingdom service. So I decided to give up being part of the chess team.”—Matt. 6:33. w16.02 3:10, 12




Wednesday, October 4

Your people will offer themselves willingly.—Ps. 110:3.



As a young person, there are ways in which you will be able to discern whether your decision to get baptized comes from your heart. For example, your heartfelt desire to serve Jehovah will be reflected in your prayers. How often you pray and how specific your prayers are may well reveal how close your relationship with Jehovah is. (Ps. 25:4) An important way that Jehovah answers our prayers is by directing our attention to his Word. Thus, our effort to study the Bible is yet another indication that we really want to draw closer to Jehovah and serve him from the heart. (Josh. 1:8) So ask yourself: ‘How specific are my prayers? How regular is my personal study of the Bible?’ And if your Christian family has a Family Worship evening, ask yourself: ‘Do I willingly share in that arrangement?’ Your answers to these questions will help you to see whether your decision to get baptized is your personal desire. w16.03 1:11, 13




Thursday, October 5

From him all the body is harmoniously joined together and made to cooperate.—Eph. 4:16.



What a thrill it is to read in the Yearbook the combined results of our activity! Think, too, of how we are united at regional, special, and international conventions, as we listen to motivating Scriptural talks and give attention to dramas and demonstrations. These parts often highlight God’s loving appeal to serve him with all our being. The commemoration of Jesus’ death also unites us. With appreciation for God’s undeserved kindness and in obedience to Jesus’ direction, we gather for that event yearly, after sundown on Nisan 14. (1 Cor. 11:23-26) And in the weeks before the Memorial, we cover as much of our congregation’s territory as possible, inviting others to join us for that important occasion. Our individual efforts might seem insignificant. But by working together, we are able to direct the attention of millions of people to the one who deserves all praise and honor, Jehovah! w16.03 3:4, 6, 7




Friday, October 6

This is my Son, the beloved, whom I have approved.—Matt. 3:17.



Brothers who are learning to serve in the congregation should be taught to think in terms of Bible principles. For example, suppose an elder asks a brother to keep the entranceway to the Kingdom Hall clean in appearance and safe for walking. He could consider Titus 2:10 and explain how the brother’s work to enhance the Kingdom Hall will “adorn the teaching of our Savior, God.” He could also ask the learner to think of the elderly ones in the congregation and how carrying out his assignment will benefit them. Having such conversations with the learner as part of his training will help him to focus more on people than on rules. He will experience the joy that comes from seeing how brothers and sisters in the congregation benefit from the service he renders. Further, the elder should commend the learner for the effort he makes to apply the suggestions. Sincere commendation does for a learner what water does for a plant—it makes him thrive. w15 4/15 2:7, 8




Saturday, October 7

The Lord will rescue me from every wicked work.—2 Tim. 4:18.



Have you at times felt all alone in dealing with a difficult situation? It could have been lack of employment, pressures at school, a health problem, or some other distressing circumstance. Perhaps you asked for assistance, but others disappointed you by falling far short of providing what you needed. Indeed, some problems simply cannot be solved by mere human help. Under such circumstances, is the Bible’s counsel to “trust in Jehovah” empty advice? (Prov. 3:5, 6) Is it meaningless? Certainly not! Divine help is very real, as illustrated by numerous Bible accounts. Therefore, rather than nurture resentment when human help appears to be limited, view such situations as the apostle Paul did—as opportunities to rely fully on Jehovah and experience firsthand his loving care. This will strengthen your trust in him and make your relationship with him ever more real. w15 4/15 4:3-5




Sunday, October 8

The god of this system of things has blinded the minds of the unbelievers.—2 Cor. 4:4.



Only by being deceptive can Satan turn people against the loving God, Jehovah. (1 John 4:8) Through deception, Satan keeps people from becoming “conscious of their spiritual need.” (Matt. 5:3) He has thus “blinded the minds of the unbelievers, so that the illumination of the glorious good news about the Christ, who is the image of God, might not shine through.” One of Satan’s greatest means of deception is false religion. How pleased he must be to see people worship their ancestors, or nature, or animals—anyone or anything other than Jehovah, “who requires exclusive devotion”! (Ex. 20:5) Even many who think that they are worshipping God properly are shackled to false beliefs and useless rituals. They are in a pitiable state, much like that of those whom Jehovah implored: “Why spend your earnings for what brings no satisfaction? Listen intently to me, and . . . find great delight in what is truly rich.”—Isa. 55:2. w15 5/15 1:14, 15




Monday, October 9

He will crush your head, and you will strike him in the heel.—Gen. 3:15.



Abel likely gave much thought to that promise and realized that someone would be ‘struck in the heel’ so that mankind could be lifted to perfection such as that enjoyed by Adam and Eve before they sinned. Abel had faith based on God’s promise, and Jehovah therefore accepted his sacrifice. (Gen. 4:3-5; Heb. 11:4) Noah survived the Deluge because of his faith. (Heb. 11:7) After the Flood, he was moved by faith to offer animal sacrifices. (Gen. 8:20) Like Abel, he undoubtedly had faith that mankind would eventually be released from bondage to sin and death. As he entered the dark post-Flood era during which Nimrod acted in opposition to Jehovah, Noah still had faith and hope. (Gen. 10:8-12) Very likely, he would have been heartened to think about mankind as being set free from oppressive rule, inherited sin, and death. We too can “see” such a wonderful time—and it is near indeed!—Rom. 6:23. w15 5/15 3:4, 6




Tuesday, October 10

Anxiety in a man’s heart weighs it down, but a good word cheers it up.—Prov. 12:25.



Uncontrolled anxious thoughts can cause us physical and spiritual harm. Let us trust in Jehovah and remember the words of today’s text. Good words of encouragement from someone who understands us can make our heart rejoice. Confiding in our parents, our spouse, or a trusted friend who views things from God’s standpoint may help to relieve our anxiety. No one understands our anxiety better than Jehovah does. “Do not be anxious over anything,” wrote Paul, “but in everything by prayer and supplication along with thanksgiving, let your petitions be made known to God; and the peace of God that surpasses all understanding will guard your hearts and your mental powers by means of Christ Jesus.” (Phil. 4:6, 7) Think about those who are helping to protect us from spiritual harm—fellow believers, elders, the faithful slave, angels, Jesus, and Jehovah himself. w15 5/15 4:16, 17




Wednesday, October 11

One man was there who had been sick for 38 years.—John 5:5.



Just north of the temple at Jerusalem was a pool known as Bethzatha. Large crowds of sick and infirm people would gather there, hoping that they would be miraculously cured. Moved with pity, Jesus approached a man who had been sick longer than Jesus had been alive on earth. (John 5:6-9) Jesus inquired if he wanted to get well. The response was immediate. The man wanted to be healed but he could not see how, for he had no one to help him into the pool. Jesus then commanded the man to do the impossible—to pick up his mat and walk. Taking Jesus at his word, the man picked up his mat and began to walk. What a heartwarming foregleam of what Jesus will do in the new world! In this miracle, we also see Jesus’ compassion. He sought out the needy. Jesus’ example should motivate us to continue to seek out people in our territory who are depressed about the terrible things happening in this world. w15 6/15 2:8-10




Thursday, October 12

You must pray . . . this way.—Matt. 6:9.



The expression “our Father,” not “my Father,” reminds us that we belong to an “association of brothers” who truly love one another. (1 Pet. 2:17) What a precious privilege that is! Anointed Christians, who have been begotten as God’s sons with heavenly life in view, rightly address Jehovah as “Father” in the fullest sense. (Rom. 8:15-17) Christians whose hope is to live forever on earth can also address Jehovah as “Father.” He is their Life-Giver, and he lovingly provides for the needs of all true worshippers. Those with this earthly hope will in the fullest sense become God’s children after they have reached perfection and have proved their loyalty in the final test. (Rom. 8:21; Rev. 20:7, 8) Parents give their children a fine gift when they teach them to pray and help them to view Jehovah as a caring heavenly Father. Parents can give their children no greater gift than that of helping them to develop a warm, close relationship with Jehovah. w15 6/15 4:4-6




Friday, October 13

Deliver us from the wicked one.—Matt. 6:13.



To live in harmony with the request “deliver us from the wicked one,” we must strive to be “no part of [Satan’s] world.” We must “not love either [Satan’s] world or the things in the world.” (John 15:19; 1 John 2:15-17) Doing so is an ongoing struggle. What a relief it will be when Jehovah answers this request by removing Satan and causing his wicked world to pass away! We must remember, though, that when Satan was hurled out of heaven, he knew that his time was short. Enraged, he does all he can to make us break our integrity. So we must keep praying for deliverance from him. (Rev. 12:12, 17) Do you desire such a happy outcome? Then continue to pray for God’s Kingdom to sanctify God’s name and cause his will to be done on earth. Look to Jehovah to supply your spiritual and physical needs. Yes, be determined to live in harmony with the model prayer.—Matt. 6:9-13. w15 6/15 5:12, 17, 18




Saturday, October 14

There will be great tribulation.—Matt. 24:21.



Although we do not fully understand all that will happen during that time of test, we can expect that it will involve some measure of sacrifice. In the first century, Christians had to leave behind their possessions and endure hardships in order to survive. (Mark 13:15-18) To remain faithful, will we be willing to experience material loss? Will we be ready to do whatever is required of us to prove our loyalty to Jehovah? Just think! At that time, we will be the only ones following the example of the ancient prophet Daniel by continuing to worship our God no matter what. (Dan. 6:10, 11) This will not be the time to preach the “good news of the Kingdom.” That time will have passed. The time for “the end” will have come! (Matt. 24:14) No doubt God’s people will proclaim a hard-hitting judgment message. This may well involve a declaration announcing that Satan’s wicked world is about to come to its complete end. w15 7/15 2:3, 8, 9




Sunday, October 15

They are no part of the world, just as I am no part of the world.—John 17:16.



We should not be surprised if the world hates us for our neutral stand; Jesus warned us that it would. Most opposers do not appreciate the importance of the issues involved in Christian neutrality. For us, though, these are matters of utmost importance. Loyalty to Jehovah requires that we be steadfast in the face of threats. (Dan. 3:16-18) Fear of man can affect people of all ages, but young people may find it especially difficult to go against the flow, so to speak. If your children are facing such issues as the flag salute or nationalistic celebrations, do not hesitate to assist them. Use Family Worship sessions to help your children understand the issues involved so that they can meet those challenges courageously. Help them to express their personal convictions clearly and respectfully. (Rom. 1:16) Take the initiative to speak with their teachers about these matters if necessary. w15 7/15 3:15, 16




Monday, October 16

God loved the world so much that he gave his only-begotten Son.—John 3:16.



The undeserved gift of Jesus’ ransom sacrifice was given so that “we might gain life.” (1 John 4:9) Referring to this superlative expression of God’s love, the apostle Paul wrote: “Christ died for ungodly men at the appointed time. For hardly would anyone die for a righteous man; though perhaps for a good man someone may dare to die. But God recommends his own love to us in that, while we were yet sinners, Christ died for us.” (Rom. 5:6-8) This greatest expression of God’s love opened to mankind the prospect of having a favored standing with Jehovah. By means of the ransom, Jehovah shows his love for the world of mankind. If we hope to live forever on earth and we continue to serve Jehovah faithfully, we can be assured that he will make life pleasant for us in the new world. How fitting it is that we view the ransom as the greatest evidence of God’s enduring love for us! w15 8/15 1:13, 15




Tuesday, October 17

Do not feel sad.—Neh. 8:10.



The privilege of living under Kingdom rule is well worth any effort we make to cooperate with Jehovah’s organization and care for theocratic assignments. Of course, our circumstances may change. For instance, some members of the Bethel family in the United States have been reassigned to the field and are now enjoying abundant blessings in other forms of the full-time ministry. Because of advancing age or other factors, others who were in the traveling work have now received special pioneer assignments. If we cultivate contentment, pray for God’s help, and do all we can in his service, we will experience joy and will receive many blessings even in these critical last days. (Prov. 10:22) What about our future prospects? We may have ideas about where we would like to live in the new world, but we may be asked to move to a different area. Regardless of where we will then serve and what we will do, we can be sure that we will be grateful and contented, brimming with joy. w15 8/15 3:8




Wednesday, October 18

[Noah] proved himself faultless among his contemporaries.—Gen. 6:9.



Noah lived in an evil world but had no desire to make its inhabitants his close friends. He did not seek the companionship of ungodly people. He and the seven members of his family occupied themselves with the doing of God-given work, which included building an ark. Meanwhile, Noah was also “a preacher of righteousness.” (2 Pet. 2:5) Noah’s preaching, his work on the ark, and his association with his family kept him busy doing good things that pleased God. As a result, Noah and his immediate family survived the Flood. We should be grateful to them because all of us today are the descendants of those who served Jehovah—faithful Noah, Noah’s wife, his sons, and their wives. Similarly, loyal and obedient first-century Christians kept themselves separate from ungodly people and survived the destruction of Jerusalem and the Jewish system of things in 70 C.E.—Luke 21:20-22. w15 8/15 4:17, 18




Thursday, October 19

[There is] a time to laugh . . . and a time to dance.—Eccl. 3:4.



Not every pastime is beneficial, relaxing, or refreshing; nor is it good to engage in recreation too much or too often. How can our conscience help us to enjoy upbuilding recreation and benefit from it? The Scriptures warn against certain behavior identified as “the works of the flesh.” These works include “sexual immorality, uncleanness, brazen conduct, idolatry, spiritism, hostility, strife, jealousy, fits of anger, dissensions, divisions, sects, envy, drunkenness, wild parties, and things like these.” Paul wrote that “those who practice such things will not inherit God’s Kingdom.” (Gal. 5:19-21) Accordingly, we can ask ourselves: ‘Does my conscience move me to shun sports that are aggressive, competitive, nationalistic, or violent? Does my inner voice warn me when I am tempted to view a film that features pornographic scenes or one that condones immorality, drunkenness, or spiritism?’ w15 9/15 2:11, 12




Friday, October 20

I well know, O Jehovah, that man’s way does not belong to him. It does not belong to man who is walking even to direct his step.—Jer. 10:23.



From the Bible we learn that humans are not created with the right of self-determination, to be independent of God, and that ignoring this fundamental truth will have sad consequences. This is critically important to our welfare. Only by recognizing God’s authority can we enjoy peace and harmony. How loving of Jehovah that he chooses to reveal this important truth! A loving father is deeply concerned about the future of his children, wanting them to have a real and meaningful purpose in life. Regrettably, most people are in the dark about the future, or they spend their life pursuing goals that bring no lasting benefits. (Ps. 90:10) As God’s children, we feel truly loved because Jehovah has promised us a wonderful future. That gives genuine meaning and purpose to our life. w15 9/15 4:10, 11




Saturday, October 21

There will be no dew or rain except by my word!—1 Ki. 17:1.



In Israel’s early history, people had the opportunity to see and hear about how God acted in Israel’s behalf. Jehovah miraculously delivered his people out of Egypt, and then king after king fell before them. (Josh. 9:3, 9, 10) Israel’s opponents refused to acknowledge that God was fighting for Israel, and that led to their defeat. Later, wicked King Ahab had every opportunity to see God’s hand in events. Ahab saw fire come down from heaven when Elijah prayed for his offering to be consumed. Elijah then indicated that Jehovah would bring the drought they were experiencing to an end, telling Ahab: “Go down so that the downpour may not detain you!” (1 Ki. 18:22-45) Ahab saw all of this happen but still refused to acknowledge that it was a mighty display of God’s power. This and other examples teach us an important lesson—we must recognize Jehovah’s hand when it is in action. w15 10/15 1:4, 5




Sunday, October 22

The righteous one will live by reason of faith.—Gal. 3:11.



We must never doubt that if we follow God’s direction, it will turn out for our good. It is vital that we put faith in the One who can really help. Paul reminds us that God is “the one who can, according to his power that is operating in us, do more than superabundantly beyond all the things we ask or conceive.” (Eph. 3:20) Jehovah’s servants do all they can to carry out the will of God, but knowing their limitations, they trust in Jehovah to bless the outcome. Are we not glad that our God is with us? Can we expect our requests for more faith to be answered? The Bible assures us that we can when “we ask according to [God’s] will.” (1 John 5:14) Clearly, Jehovah is pleased with those who put their complete trust in him. Jehovah will answer our request for more faith, and our faith will grow exceedingly, leading to our being “counted worthy of the Kingdom of God.”—2 Thess. 1:3, 5. w15 10/15 2:16-18




Monday, October 23

Never drift away.—Heb. 2:1.



Meditating on spiritual things will help a person grow to Christian maturity. (Heb. 5:14; 6:1) A person who spends little time thinking about Jehovah and Jesus will not maintain strong faith. Such a person is in danger of drifting away or drawing away from the truth. (Heb. 3:12) Jesus warned that if we do not hear, or accept, God’s Word “with a fine and good heart,” we will not “retain” it. Instead, we could easily be “carried away by anxieties, riches, and pleasures of this life, . . . and bring nothing to maturity.” (Luke 8:14, 15) Therefore, let us continue to ponder over God’s Word. This will motivate us to reflect Jehovah’s glory, qualities, and personality as revealed in the Bible. (2 Cor. 3:18) What more could we ask for? Growing in the knowledge of God and being allowed to reflect his glory are wonderful privileges, a never-ending process as we continue to learn how to imitate our loving heavenly Father.—Eccl. 3:11. w15 10/15 4:13, 14




Tuesday, October 24

Wisdom is good for you. If you find it, you will have a future.—Prov. 24:14.



As parents, you want your teenage children to remain spiritually healthy. And God wants you to bring your children up “in the discipline and admonition of Jehovah.” (Eph. 6:4) So use your God-given responsibility to establish and maintain a spiritual routine. To illustrate: You insist that your children be educated because their education is important and you hope to instill in them a love for learning. Loving parents likewise insist that their children benefit from the “admonition of Jehovah” at congregation meetings and through other spiritual programs. Because divine education is vital, you try to instill in your children love for spiritual things and appreciation for wisdom. As Jesus helped his disciples, you seek to help your teenage children to succeed in the ministry by developing in them a love of teaching God’s Word and by helping them stick to a good field service routine. w15 11/15 2:6




Wednesday, October 25

The head of every man is the Christ; in turn, the head of a woman is the man; in turn, the head of the Christ is God.—1 Cor. 11:3.



Because of the headship principle that exists throughout God’s arrangement of things, love is especially important. But headship is not to be exercised in a domineering way. Although a husband is the head of his wife, the Bible instructs him to ‘assign her honor.’ (1 Pet. 3:7) One way husbands can honor their wives is by taking into consideration their needs and giving them first choice in some matters. Indeed, God’s Word states: “Husbands, continue loving your wives, just as the Christ also loved the congregation and gave himself up for it.” (Eph. 5:25) Yes, Jesus even gave his life for his followers. When a husband imitates the loving way in which Jesus exercises headship, it is much easier for a wife to love and respect him and be in subjection to him.—Titus 2:3-5. w15 11/15 4:6, 7




Thursday, October 26

The Greek-speaking Jews began complaining against the Hebrew-speaking Jews.—Acts 6:1.



As Christianity spread, much communication among Christians was in Greek. In fact, the Gospels of Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John, which contain inspired records of what Jesus taught and did, were widely distributed in Greek. Thus, the language of many disciples was Greek rather than Hebrew. The letters of the apostle Paul and the other inspired books were also distributed in Greek. It is noteworthy that when writers of the Christian Greek Scriptures quoted from the Hebrew Scriptures, they usually did so from the Septuagint. These quotations, which at times vary somewhat from the exact Hebrew wording, are now part of the inspired Scriptures. Thus, the work of imperfect human translators became part of the inspired Word of God, a God who does not favor one culture or language over another.—Acts 10:34. w15 12/15 1:8, 9




Friday, October 27

O Jehovah, open my lips, so that my mouth may declare your praise.—Ps. 51:15.



Speech is part of our daily life, but we do not need to talk all the time. In fact, the Bible says that there is “a time to be silent.” (Eccl. 3:7) Maintaining silence when others are speaking can be a mark of respect. (Job 6:24) Controlling our tongue to keep quiet about a confidential matter gives evidence of discretion and discernment. (Prov. 20:19) Restraining our tongue when we are provoked is the course of wisdom. (Ps. 4:4) On the other hand, the Bible also says that there is “a time to speak.” (Eccl. 3:7) If a friend gave you a beautiful present, you would probably not store it out of sight. Rather, you would show your appreciation by putting it to good use. We show our gratitude for Jehovah’s gift of speech by using it wisely. That might include expressing our feelings, communicating our needs, sharing words of encouragement, and giving God praise. w15 12/15 3:4, 5




Saturday, October 28

Do not drink water any longer, but take a little wine for the sake of your stomach and your frequent cases of sickness.—1 Tim. 5:23.



We do not live at a time when a fellow Christian can use “gifts of healing” to cure us. (1 Cor. 12:9) But some well-intentioned brothers give unsolicited health recommendations. Granted, someone might simply offer general, practical suggestions. Paul did so when Timothy was experiencing stomach problems, perhaps because the local water was polluted. That, however, is quite different from trying to persuade a fellow Witness to use some herb, remedy, or diet that may not be effective or in some cases may even be harmful. At times, some have tried to persuade others with an explanation: ‘My relative had a similar disease, and he took . . . Then he got well.’ No matter how sincere the suggestion, we do well to keep in mind that there may be risks even with widely used medications and treatments.—Prov. 27:12. w15 12/15 4:13




Sunday, October 29

Christ died once for all time for sins, a righteous person for unrighteous ones.—1 Pet. 3:18.



Because of inherited sin, we are all facing the death penalty. (Rom. 5:12) Lovingly, Jehovah arranged for Jesus to come to the earth and “taste death for everyone.” (Heb. 2:9) Not only did Jehovah save our present life but he laid the basis for wiping out the cause of death forever. (Isa. 25:7, 8; 1 Cor. 15:22, 26) All who exercise faith in Jesus will receive everlasting life in peace and happiness as earthly subjects of God’s Kingdom by Christ or, for the anointed, as corulers in that Kingdom. (Rom. 6:23; Rev. 5:9, 10) What other blessings are included in this gift from Jehovah? Jehovah’s gift includes the curing of all our sicknesses, the transformation of our earth into a paradise, and the resurrection of the dead. (Isa. 33:24; 35:5, 6; John 5:28, 29) We surely love Jehovah and his dear Son for giving us what is an “indescribable free gift.”—2 Cor. 9:15. w16.01 2:5, 6




Monday, October 30

You people must be born again.—John 3:7.



Before receiving this personal witness from God’s spirit, anointed Christians cherished an earthly hope. They longed for the time when Jehovah would cleanse this earth, and they wanted to be part of that blessed future. Perhaps they even pictured themselves welcoming back their loved ones from the grave. They looked forward to living in the homes that they built and eating the fruitage of trees that they planted. (Isa. 65:21-23) Why did their thinking change? They did not become dissatisfied with that hope. They did not change their mind because of emotional stress or turmoil. They did not give up on this earth, as if they suddenly felt that they would find living forever on earth to be tiresome or boring; nor did they merely want to explore some new frontier in heaven. Rather, they changed because of the operation of God’s spirit that not only called, or invited, them but also changed their thinking and hope. w16.01 3:11, 13




Tuesday, October 31

Working together with him, we also urge you not to accept the undeserved kindness of God and miss its purpose.—2 Cor. 6:1.



Jehovah is the Supreme One, the Creator of all things, the One possessing infinite wisdom and power. Job came to understand that. After Jehovah questioned Job about His works of creation, Job replied: “I know that you are able to do all things and that nothing you have in mind to do is impossible for you.” (Job 42:2) Though Jehovah can accomplish whatever he sets out to do—without assistance—he has from the very beginning lovingly invited others to work along with him to achieve his purpose. God’s first creation was his only-begotten spirit Son. Jehovah allowed his Son to share in all further works of creation, both spirit and material. (John 1:1-3, 18) Thus, Jehovah honored his Son both by including him in the works of creation and by telling others about his Son’s important role.—Col. 1:15-17. w16.01 5:1, 2




