
September
Friday, September 1

[Abraham] traveled to the place that the true God indicated to him.—Gen. 22:3.



Before parting from the servants who accompanied Abraham and Isaac, Abraham said: “You stay here with the donkey, but the boy and I will go over there and worship and return to you.” (Gen. 22:5) What did Abraham mean? Was he lying to his servants, telling them that Isaac would return when Abraham knew that Isaac was to be sacrificed? No. The Bible gives us some insight into what Abraham was thinking. (Heb. 11:19) Abraham “reasoned that God was able to raise [Isaac] up even from the dead.” Yes, Abraham believed in the resurrection. He knew that Jehovah had revived his reproductive powers and those of Sarah in their old age. (Heb. 11:11, 12, 18) Abraham realized that nothing was impossible for Jehovah. So he was confident that whatever happened on that challenging day, his beloved son would be restored to him so that all of Jehovah’s promises could be fulfilled. No wonder Abraham is called “the father of all those having faith”!—Rom. 4:11. w16.02 1:3, 13




Saturday, September 2

For the sake of his great name, Jehovah will not abandon his people.—1 Sam. 12:22.



Although God had anointed Saul to be king, Saul later became disobedient and was rejected by Jehovah. (1 Sam. 15:17-23) Since God did not immediately remove Saul from the throne, his misconduct tested his subjects and all who were close to him. They faced the challenge of being loyal to God while the king, who sat on “Jehovah’s throne,” followed a wayward course. (1 Chron. 29:23) Yet, Saul’s son Jonathan proved to be loyal to Jehovah. We too can prove ourselves loyal to Jehovah by being in relative subjection to the superior authorities, as God requires, even if some seem unworthy of respect. For example, a government official may be corrupt, but we still respect his position because we are in relative subjection to governmental “superior authorities.” (Rom. 13:1, 2) In fact, all of us can prove loyal to Jehovah by respecting those to whom he gives authority.—1 Cor. 11:3; Heb. 13:17. w16.02 3:5, 6, 8




Sunday, September 3

Your people will offer themselves willingly.—Ps. 110:3.



The Bible says that Jehovah’s people, including young ones, “will offer themselves willingly” for his service. So a person who is contemplating baptism needs to be sure that this is his or her personal desire. That might call for self-scrutiny on your part. Why? Because your circumstance as a youth may be somewhat special. For example, you may have been raised in the truth. Over the years, you have likely seen many people get baptized—including some of your peers and perhaps even your siblings. If that is indeed your situation, what should you be careful about? Be alert that you do not come to view baptism as little more than a coming-of-age custom that all young people follow sooner or later. What can you do to make sure that you will keep the right view of Jehovah’s arrangement of baptism? Take time often to stop and think about the reasons why getting baptized is so important. w16.03 1:11, 12




Monday, September 4

Let anyone hearing say, “Come!” and let anyone thirsting come; let anyone who wishes take life’s water free.—Rev. 22:17.



As members of the Christian congregation, how can we succeed in giving this invitation? Only by being “harmoniously joined together and made to cooperate.” (Eph. 4:16) To share the message of the Kingdom good news with as many people as possible, we need to carry out our preaching work in an organized manner. Therefore, we receive directions. The guidance given through congregations around the globe prepares us for a united effort. After we meet for field service, we go forth to proclaim the Kingdom message to mankind. By word of mouth and through millions of copies of Bible-based publications, we spread the message. Do you strive to follow the direction to share in special preaching campaigns? By doing so, you are joining millions of others in unitedly heralding the message of the “angel flying in midheaven,” mentioned at Revelation 14:6. w16.03 3:4, 5




Tuesday, September 5

Scrolls were opened.—Rev. 20:12.



The Bible informs us that scrolls will be opened to give us directions in new world living. By studying these, all people, including resurrected ones, will be able to know God’s will for them. These scrolls will surely give us further insight into Jehovah’s mind. Guided by an ever-increasing understanding of God’s inspired Word along with what will be revealed in the new scrolls, inhabitants of the earthly Paradise will certainly treat their fellow man with love, respect, and dignity. (Isa. 26:9) Imagine the educational program that will be carried out under the direction of the King, Jesus Christ! Everlasting life awaits those who respond favorably to the “things written in the scrolls.” Those who maintain integrity to God through the final test will have their name written permanently by Jehovah in “the scroll of life.” That can be our lot! w16.03 4:19, 20




Wednesday, September 6

You are my hope, O Sovereign Lord Jehovah; I have trusted in you since my youth.—Ps. 71:5.



Experienced elders stress the importance of beginning to train brothers when they are young—in their early teens—by giving them assignments in the congregation that fit their age. Such early training will help young ones to keep their eyes on spiritual goals when they reach the late teens and are bombarded with many distractions. (Ps. 71:17) An elder will also stimulate a learner’s desire to serve by explaining to him not only what to do but also why to do it. By giving reasons, elders will be imitating the Great Teacher, Jesus. For example, before giving his apostles the commission to make disciples, Jesus gave them a reason why they should obey. He stated: “All authority has been given me in heaven and on the earth.” Then he added: “Go, therefore, and make disciples of people of all the nations.”—Matt. 28:18, 19. w15 4/15 2:5, 6




Thursday, September 7

The Lord stood near me and infused power into me, . . . and I was rescued from the lion’s mouth.—2 Tim. 4:17.



It was a dangerous time to be a Christian in Rome. Blamed for setting fire to the city in 64 C.E., Christ’s followers were objects of intense hostility. It was likely in this volatile situation that the apostle Paul was imprisoned in Rome for the second time. Would other Christians come to his aid? Paul may have had some initial concerns in that regard, for he wrote to Timothy: “In my first defense no one came to my side, but they all forsook me.” (2 Tim. 4:16) Even so, Paul acknowledged that he had not been entirely without help. He trusted that Jehovah would fortify him to endure his present trials and any future difficulties that might arise. In fact, he immediately went on to say: “The Lord will rescue me from every wicked work.” (2 Tim. 4:18) Yes, Paul had learned that even when human assistance is limited, the help that Jehovah and his Son provide is real! w15 4/15 4:1-3




Friday, September 8

He will crush your head.—Gen. 3:15.



When Jesus was born, Satan knew that this newborn child would grow up to become the promised Messiah. Would Satan reason that taking the life of a baby was going too far? Satan has no noble code of ethics. And with regard to the child Jesus, Satan did not hesitate to act. How? King Herod was greatly upset when astrologers inquired about “the one born king of the Jews,” and he was determined to kill him. (Matt. 2:1-3, 13) To make sure that the job was done, he ordered the execution of all boys two years of age and younger who were living in Bethlehem and its districts. (Matt. 2:13-18) Jesus escaped death in that unimaginable slaughter, but what does this tell us about our enemy Satan? It is evident that the Devil places no value on human life. He certainly does not have a soft spot for children. Satan truly is “a roaring lion.” (1 Pet. 5:8) Never underestimate his vicious disposition! w15 5/15 1:10, 12, 13




Saturday, September 9

They did not receive the fulfillment of the promises; but they saw them from a distance.—Heb. 11:13.



Our ability to form mental pictures of things we have not seen is a gift from God. It allows us to make wise plans and to look forward to good things. Jehovah can foresee future events, and in the Scriptures he often tells us ahead of time what will happen. We may be able to form mental pictures of what will occur. In fact, our ability to conceive of unseen things helps us to exercise faith. (2 Cor. 4:18) When Hannah spent time thinking about what it would be like when she took her son Samuel to serve at the tabernacle, she had a basis for her mental picture. It was based on what she had resolved to do, and this helped her to focus on her objective. (1 Sam. 1:22) If we visualize what God has promised to do, we are thinking about something that will definitely happen. (2 Pet. 1:19-21) No doubt, many faithful people of Bible times formed mental pictures of things God had promised. w15 5/15 3:1-3




Sunday, September 10

The wealth of the rich . . . is like a protective wall in his imagination.—Prov. 18:11.



It is a dangerous fantasy to imagine oneself becoming very wealthy while paying little attention to God. Jesus related a story to illustrate the sad state of a person “who stores up treasure for himself but is not rich toward God.” (Luke 12:16-21) Jehovah rejoices when we do things that please him. (Prov. 27:11) How happy we are when we have his approval because we have stored up “treasures in heaven”! (Matt. 6:20) And a good relationship with Jehovah is unquestionably the most valuable treasure we can have. Imagine the extent of our anxiety if we were consumed by efforts to store up “treasures on the earth.” (Matt. 6:19) Jesus used an illustration to show that “the anxiety of this system of things and the deceptive power of riches” can choke the word of the Kingdom.—Matt. 13:18, 19, 22. w15 5/15 4:15, 16




Monday, September 11

The crowd felt amazement as they saw the speechless speaking and the maimed being made sound and the lame walking and the blind seeing.—Matt. 15:31.



God’s power enabled Jesus Christ to perform a wide variety of astounding miracles. He cured not only leprosy but also every sort of disease and every sort of infirmity among the people. To perform such acts of compassion, Jesus needed no organ donors for transplants. He healed the very organs or body parts that were afflicted! And he healed people instantly, sometimes even from a distance. (John 4:46-54) What do these amazing examples show? That Jesus, now enthroned as heavenly King, has not only the power but also the desire to bring about permanent healing. Learning about the way Jesus treated people gives us confidence that in the new world, the Bible prophecy will be fulfilled: “He will have pity on the lowly and the poor.” (Ps. 72:13) Yes, Jesus will then act on his heart’s desire to help all afflicted ones. w15 6/15 2:6




Tuesday, September 12

Let your name be sanctified.—Matt. 6:9.



Many people can recite the Lord’s Prayer from memory. In our door-to-door ministry, we often refer to this prayer to help householders understand that God’s Kingdom is a real government that is going to bring wonderful changes to our earth. Or we may refer to the first request in the prayer to show that God has a personal name, which is to be sanctified, or “treated as holy.” (Matt. 6:9, ftn.) Did Jesus intend that this prayer be repeated word for word every time we pray, as is done by many in Christendom? No. Just before Jesus provided this prayer as a pattern, he said: “When praying, do not say the same things over and over again.” (Matt. 6:7) On a later occasion, he restated this prayer but used different wording. (Luke 11:1-4) Thus Jesus helped us know what sort of things we need to ask for and in what order of importance. Hence, it is fitting to call it the model prayer. w15 6/15 4:1, 2




Wednesday, September 13

Let the one who thinks he is standing beware that he does not fall.—1 Cor. 10:12.



Jehovah gives us his powerful holy spirit, which can strengthen us and help us to resist temptation. God also forewarns us through his Word and the congregation about situations that we must avoid, such as spending excessive time, money, and energy on nonessential material things. Former pioneers Espen and Janne have two children to care for. “We often pray to Jehovah,” says Espen, “that we may not fall into temptation now that we are unable to spend as much time as we previously did in theocratic activities. We ask Jehovah to help us maintain our spirituality and zeal for the ministry.” Another temptation that has come to the fore in modern times is the viewing of pornography. Some have given in to this temptation by allowing their minds to dwell on what is bad. But we can resist, even as thousands of our brothers have done.—1 Cor. 10:13. w15 6/15 5:15, 16




Thursday, September 14

The kings of the earth, the high officials, the military commanders, the rich, the strong, every slave, and every free person hid in the caves and among the rocks of the mountains.—Rev. 6:15.



What will happen after the destruction of false religious organizations? It will be a time to reveal what is really in our heart. The majority of mankind will seek refuge in human organizations that are likened to “the rocks of the mountains.” Figuratively speaking, however, God’s people will flee to the refuge that Jehovah provides. In the first century, the interval was not a time for a mass conversion of Jews to Christianity. It was a time for action and obedience on the part of those who were already Christians. Similarly, we cannot expect that the future interruption in the great tribulation will result in an influx of new believers. Rather, it will be an opportunity for all true believers to prove their love for Jehovah and give their support to Christ’s brothers.—Matt. 25:34-40. w15 7/15 2:7




Friday, September 15

It is agreeable when someone endures hardship and suffers unjustly because of conscience toward God.—1 Pet. 2:19.



Has your upbringing or environment exposed you to national or regional loyalties? Do any such feelings still linger in your heart? Christians should not allow nationalistic fervor to taint their view of others. But what if you realize that you do have negative thoughts toward people of other nations, cultures, languages, or races? Then it would certainly be profitable to meditate on how Jehovah views nationalism and prejudice. Researching these and related topics may prove to be a worthwhile project. Then petition Jehovah for help to embrace his point of view on these matters. (Rom. 12:2) We should do this because sooner or later, all of Jehovah’s servants will find themselves in situations in which their conscience obliges them to stand out as different from those around them—whether colleagues, classmates, neighbors, relatives, or others. Yet, stand out we must! w15 7/15 3:14, 15




Saturday, September 16

Jonah prayed to Jehovah his God from the belly of the fish.—Jonah 2:1.



Jehovah hears our pleas and understands us even when no one else does. His response to our prayers is a beautiful expression of his enduring love for us. We can learn much from prayers recorded in God’s Word. At times, therefore, we may find it very beneficial to consider such prayers during family worship. Reflecting on how Jehovah’s servants of the past expressed their deepest thoughts to God may help us to enrich our own prayers. For instance, consider Jonah’s contrite prayer from the belly of a huge fish. (Jonah 1:17–2:10) Review Solomon’s heartfelt prayer to Jehovah at the inauguration of the temple. (1 Ki. 8:22-53) Meditate on the model prayer that Jesus offered for our benefit. (Matt. 6:9-13) Above all, regularly “let your petitions be made known to God.” As a result, “the peace of God that surpasses all understanding will guard your hearts and your mental powers.”—Phil. 4:6, 7. w15 8/15 1:11, 12




Sunday, September 17

Be submissive.—Heb. 13:17.



It will be a pleasure to be under Jehovah’s arrangements in the new world as we work toward beautifying the earth, teaching resurrected ones, and doing Jehovah’s will for mankind. But what if we were directed to perform a particular aspect of the work that did not appeal to us? Would we submit to that direction by doing our best to carry out and even enjoy our assignment? Most of us would answer yes! Consistently, then, are we submitting to theocratic direction now? If we are doing so, we are preparing for everlasting life under Jehovah’s rulership. We can prepare for life in the new world not only by submitting to Jehovah’s present-day arrangements but also by working now to cultivate contentment and a spirit of cooperation. If we cooperate with those taking the lead today, perhaps finding contentment and joy in new assignments of service, we are likely to have the same attitude in the new world. w15 8/15 3:6, 7




Monday, September 18

His [pagan] wives inclined his heart to follow other gods, . . . and Solomon did what was bad in the eyes of Jehovah.—1 Ki. 11:4, 6.



Solomon’s bad associations undermined his wisdom and caused him to fall away from true worship. (1 Ki. 11:1-6) What a warning that is for Christians who might think about marrying someone who does not love Jehovah! What if someone becomes a worshipper of God while married to an unbeliever? The Bible says: “You wives, be in subjection to your husbands, so that if any are not obedient to the word, they may be won without a word through the conduct of their wives.” (1 Pet. 3:1) Those words are addressed to Christian wives, but the same words apply to a husband who becomes a worshipper of Jehovah while married to an unbeliever. The Bible’s counsel is clear: Be a good mate, and live up to God’s high standards for marriage. Many unbelieving mates have accepted the truth because of observing a husband or a wife who changed after complying with God’s requirements. w15 8/15 4:15, 16




Tuesday, September 19

The naive person believes every word, but the shrewd one ponders each step.—Prov. 14:15.



For some illnesses, there may be no known cure. So it is wise to be cautious when it comes to treatments that feature stunning claims but that are promoted merely with hearsay testimonials. Paul was inspired to write: “Let your reasonableness become known to all men.” (Phil. 4:5) Reasonableness also holds us back from devoting so much time to health care that spiritual matters are forced into the background. Were we to allow health care to become the main focus of our life, we would run the risk of becoming self-centered. (Phil. 2:4) Spiritual matters are most important, and with regard to health, our expectations should remain reasonable. (Phil. 1:10) On matters like health care, each of us should be willing to make a personal decision and accept the responsibility that comes with it. w15 9/15 2:8, 10




Wednesday, September 20

Send out your light and your truth. May these lead me.—Ps. 43:3.



Jehovah is “the God of truth.” (Ps. 31:5) He loves his children and delights in letting his light of truth shine forth to guide them in every aspect of their life, particularly in matters of worship. What truth has Jehovah revealed, and how does this show that he loves us? First of all, Jehovah reveals the truth about himself. He reveals his personal name, which appears more times in the Bible than any other name. In this way, Jehovah draws close to us, letting us know him. (Jas. 4:8) Jehovah also reveals his qualities, the kind of God he is. While the observable universe makes manifest his power and wisdom, Jehovah also reveals through the Scriptures his justice and especially his boundless love. (Rom. 1:20) He is like a father who is not only strong and wise but also fair and loving, making it easy for his children to have a close personal relationship with him. w15 9/15 4:8, 9




Thursday, September 21

The hand of Jehovah will become known to his servants.—Isa. 66:14.



Many people think that there is little connection between what they are doing and what God is doing. In fact, some believe that God has little interest in what is happening to humans. After Super Typhoon Haiyan wreaked destruction on the central Philippines in November 2013, the mayor of one large city said: “God must have been somewhere else.” Other people act as if God cannot see what they are doing. (Isa. 26:10, 11; 3 John 11) They are like those whom the apostle Paul described when he said: “They did not see fit to acknowledge God.” Such people “were filled with all unrighteousness, wickedness, greed, and badness.” (Rom. 1:28, 29) What about us? Unlike those mentioned above, we realize that Jehovah observes everything we do. But do we also perceive his interest and supporting hand in our life? w15 10/15 1:1-3




Friday, September 22

I will show you my faith by my works.—Jas. 2:18.



Sharing in the preaching work is an excellent way to demonstrate our faith. Why is that? This work requires that we have faith in God’s timing of the coming end of this system of things, believing that “it will not be late!” (Hab. 2:3) One way to measure our faith is to look at the extent to which we are willing to expend ourselves in the ministry. Are we doing all we can, perhaps even seeking ways to expand our share in the work? (2 Cor. 13:5) Yes, making “public declaration for salvation” is a powerful way to show that we have faith in our heart. (Rom. 10:10) We can also show faith as we grapple with the challenges of daily life. Whether we face illness, discouragement, depression, poverty, or other trying problems, we have confidence that Jehovah and his Son will “help us at the right time.” (Heb. 4:16) We show such confidence by praying for help that is not limited to our spiritual needs. w15 10/15 2:12-14




Saturday, September 23

Holy spirit . . . will . . . bring back to your minds all the things I told you.—John 14:26.



Although circumstances may deprive you of a Bible, you will never be deprived of the ability to meditate on what you have stored in your memory, such as your favorite scriptures and the words of Kingdom songs. (Acts 16:25) And God’s spirit can help bring back to your mind the good things you have learned. So prepare now by setting aside time to read and meditate on the weekly Bible reading. Time should also be set aside for meditating on what Jesus said and did. You will surely agree that among the better-known books of the Bible are the Gospel accounts of Jesus’ life and ministry. (Rom. 10:17; Heb. 12:2; 1 Pet. 2:21) God’s people have even been provided with a publication that puts Jesus’ experiences and time on earth in chronological order. It is a wonderful aid, especially if we carefully read and meditate on the parallel Gospel passages cited in each chapter.—John 14:6. w15 10/15 4:11, 12




Sunday, September 24

I have called you friends, because I have made known to you all the things I have heard from my Father.—John 15:15.



Jesus was a loving and loyal friend. In Bible times, a master did not normally share his private thoughts and feelings with his slaves. However, Jesus proved to be both master and friend to his faithful apostles. He spent time with them, shared his feelings with them, and carefully listened when they poured out their hearts to him. (Mark 6:30-32) Such loving communication created a warm bond between Jesus and his apostles and prepared them for future responsibilities in God’s service. Jesus wanted his beloved disciples and friends to experience the joy that comes from a busy life in Jehovah’s service. Therefore, he desired that they zealously participate in spiritual activities. Indeed, Jesus wanted them to be ardent disciple-makers! And he lovingly assured his disciples that he would help them to succeed.—Matt. 28:19, 20. w15 11/15 2:3, 5




Monday, September 25

You must love your neighbor as yourself.—Matt. 22:39.



Love is Jehovah God’s dominant quality. (1 John 4:16) His first creation was Jesus, who existed with him in heaven for many aeons and learned God’s loving ways. (Col. 1:15) By his entire course, including his life on earth, Jesus showed that he fully understands what a loving God Jehovah is, and he imitates that love. Thus, we can be confident that the rulership exercised by Jehovah and Jesus will forever be guided by the quality of love. When asked which was the greatest commandment in the Law, Jesus stated: “‘You must love Jehovah your God with your whole heart and with your whole soul and with your whole mind.’ This is the greatest and first commandment. The second, like it, is this: ‘You must love your neighbor as yourself.’” (Matt. 22:37-39) Notice that Jesus placed love of neighbor second only to love of Jehovah. This shows how important it is to display love in all our relationships. w15 11/15 4:1-3




Tuesday, September 26

All the things that were written beforehand were written for our instruction.—Rom. 15:4.



God did not restrict his communication with humans to Hebrew. After the Babylonian exile, Aramaic became the everyday language of some of God’s people. Perhaps to indicate what was to come, Jehovah inspired the prophets Daniel and Jeremiah and the priest Ezra to record portions of their Bible books in Aramaic. Alexander the Great later conquered much of the ancient world, and common, or Koine, Greek became an international language. Many Jews began to speak that language, leading to the translation of the Hebrew Scriptures into Greek. This translation, thought to have been done by 72 translators, became known as the Septuagint. It was the first translation of the Bible and one of the most important. The work of so many translators resulted in varied translation styles, from literal to rather free. Nevertheless, the Septuagint was viewed as God’s Word by Greek-speaking Jews and later by Christians. w15 12/15 1:4-6




Wednesday, September 27

See how small a fire it takes to set a great forest ablaze!—Jas. 3:5.



The point of James’ illustration is made clear in verse 6. “The tongue is also a fire.” The tongue represents our ability to speak. Like fire, our speech has the potential for causing great harm. The Bible even says that “death and life are in the power of the tongue.” (Prov. 18:21) Of course, we do not stop talking just out of concern that we might say something harmful, any more than we refuse to use fire because we fear the damage it might cause. The key is control. If we control fire, we can use it to cook our food, warm our bodies, and light up a dark night. If we tame our tongue, we can use its power to honor God and to benefit others. (Ps. 19:14) Whether we use sounds from our mouth or signs with our hands, the ability to communicate our thoughts and feelings is a marvelous gift from God. This gift, however, should be used to build up, not tear down.—Jas. 3:9, 10. w15 12/15 3:1-3




Thursday, September 28

Luke, the beloved physician, sends you his greetings.—Col. 4:14.



It is reasonable to believe that Luke gave Paul medical advice and rendered medical services to him and to others in his missionary group. Why would Luke need to do that? Because even Paul got sick while traveling. (Gal. 4:13) Luke could provide medical help that was in line with what Jesus had said: “Those who are healthy do not need a physician, but those who are ill do.” (Luke 5:31) The Bible does not indicate where or when Luke received his medical training. It has been suggested that Paul mentioned to Christians in Colossae the role of Luke as a physician because they knew him. Interestingly, there was a medical school in nearby Laodicea. In any event, Luke was not some untrained layman spouting health recommendations; he was a physician. That is evident both from the specific medical language that Luke used in his Gospel and in the book of Acts and from the way he focused on Jesus’ healings of others. w15 12/15 4:11, 12




Friday, September 29

Thanks be to God for his indescribable free gift.—2 Cor. 9:15.



When Jehovah sent his only-begotten Son to this earth, He gave what would become the greatest possible gift of love! (John 3:16; 1 John 4:9, 10) The apostle Paul called it God’s “indescribable free gift.” Paul knew that all the magnificent promises of God were guaranteed through the perfect sacrifice of Christ. (2 Cor. 1:20) Thus, that “indescribable free gift” would include all the goodness and loyal love that Jehovah would extend to us through Jesus. Indeed, that gift is so awe-inspiring that it cannot be fully described in human terms. How should receiving such an extraordinary gift affect us? And in what practical ways should this gift motivate us? Does it compel you to reconsider your actions and even change the way you have been living your life? Are you moved to be more generous and loving toward others and to forgive any who have wronged you? Remember, what Jehovah has given us through Christ is by far the greatest gift ever given.—1 Pet. 3:18. w16.01 2:1, 2, 4, 5




Saturday, September 30

The wind blows where it wants to, and you hear the sound of it, but you do not know where it comes from and where it is going. So it is with everyone who has been born from the spirit.—John 3:8.



Those who have been invited in such a manner may wonder: ‘Why have I been selected? Why me and not someone else?’ They may even question their own worthiness. But they do not question the fact that they have been invited. Their hearts are bursting with joy and appreciation. They feel much as did Peter when he said under inspiration: “Praised be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, for according to his great mercy he gave us a new birth to a living hope through the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead, to an incorruptible and undefiled and unfading inheritance. It is reserved in the heavens for you.” (1 Pet. 1:3, 4) When anointed ones read those words, they know without any doubt that their heavenly Father is speaking to them personally. w16.01 3:11, 12




