Do You Remember?
Have you appreciated reading the recent issues of The Watchtower? Well, see if you can answer the following questions:
▫ Why did early Christians not celebrate Jesus’ birthday?
According to The World Book Encyclopedia, “the Early Christians did not celebrate [Jesus’] birth because they considered the celebration of anyone’s birthday to be a pagan custom.”​—12/15, page 4.
▫ Should prayers be directed to Jesus?
No, because prayers are a form of worship that belongs exclusively to Almighty God. By addressing all our prayers to Jehovah God, we indicate that we have taken to heart Jesus’ direction to pray: “Our Father in the heavens.” (Matthew 6:9)​—12/15, page 25.
▫ Why was a different judgment rendered for the serious sin of King David as compared with the sins of Ananias and Sapphira? (2 Samuel 11:2-24; 12:1-14; Acts 5:1-11)
King David’s sin was due to fleshly weakness. When confronted with what he had done, he repented, and Jehovah forgave him​—although he had to live with the results of his sin. Ananias and Sapphira sinned in that they hypocritically lied, trying to deceive the Christian congregation and thus to ‘play false to the holy spirit and to God.’ (Acts 5:3, 4) That turned out to be evidence of a wicked heart, so they were judged more severely.​—1/1, pages 27, 28.
▫ What can help us to serve Jehovah with a joyful heart?
We should cultivate a positive and appreciative view of our blessings and God-given privileges of service, and we ought never forget that by following God’s Word, we are pleasing him.​—1/15, pages 16, 17.
▫ What two things must we keep in mind if we are to give effective encouragement?
First, think about what to say so that the encouragement is specific. Second, look for the opportunity to approach a person who deserves commendation or who needs to be built up.​—1/15, page 23.
▫ Why do the “great crowd” have “palm branches in their hands”? (Revelation 7:9)
The waving of palm branches indicates that the “great crowd” joyfully hail Jehovah’s Kingdom and his anointed King, Jesus Christ. (See Leviticus 23:39, 40.)​—2/1, page 17.
▫ What valuable lessons are found in the book of Job?
The book of Job shows us how to handle problems. It provides striking examples of how someone who is facing trials should​—and should not—​be counseled. Furthermore, Job’s own experience can help us to react in a balanced way when we find ourselves buffeted by adverse circumstances.​—2/15, page 27.
▫ What do the miracles of Jesus teach us?
Jesus’ miracles glorify God, setting a pattern for Christians to glorify God. (Romans 15:6) They encourage the doing of good, the showing of generosity, and the displaying of compassion.​—3/1, page 8.
▫ What purpose is served by the elders’ reviewing prepared questions with newly dedicated ones?
This confirms that each candidate fully understands the basic teachings of the Bible and is aware of what is involved in being a Witness of Jehovah.​—3/1, page 13.
▫ How can Biblical prayers benefit us?
By looking closely at Scriptural prayers, we can identify those said in situations similar to our own. Finding, reading, and meditating on such prayers can help to enrich our own communication with Jehovah.​—3/15, pages 3, 4.
▫ What is godly fear?
Godly fear is an awe of Jehovah, a profound reverence for him, coupled with a wholesome dread of displeasing him. (Psalm 89:7)​—3/15, page 10.
▫ What are three ways in which the Bible shows that we are precious in God’s eyes?
The Bible teaches that each of us has worth in God’s eyes (Luke 12:6, 7); it clarifies what Jehovah values in us (Malachi 3:16); and it relates what Jehovah has done to demonstrate his love for us. (John 3:16)​—4/1, pages 11, 12, 14.
▫ Why is Hebrews 10:24, 25 more than just a command that Christians meet together?
These words of Paul set a divinely inspired standard for all Christian meetings​—really, for any occasion when Christians associate together.​—4/1, page 16.

