“Ham” Radio​—A Hobby That Can Help Others
“HELP us, please,” pleaded an amateur 11 radio operator on the north coast of Honduras. “What is happening here is horrible! You just can’t imagine it!” Hurricane Fifi had struck his country with devastating fury. “Unconfirmed reports from amateur radio operators in the area indicated a death toll of about 200,” said the first news of the storm to appear in the New York Times.
Once again, radio amateurs, often called “hams,” were among the first to get word to the outside world. The unfolding story of that 1974 tragedy rocked the world for days thereafter. And “ham” operators played their usual helpful role by transmitting information and communicating word of survivors to anxious loved ones.
Thousands of cases on record attest to the valuable help of radio “hams” in times of emergency or national disaster, when their equipment may have been the only remaining way to contact the outside world. They also frequently assist in medical emergencies. Recently about ten different “hams” in at least three countries were involved in tracing down the location of an uncommon antibiotic and arranging for its delivery in an effort to save the life of a little Ecuadorian girl.
Who Are They?
Among the more than 750,000 persons world wide who find “ham” radio to be a fascinating and educational hobby are at least one American senator, a well-known entertainer, an astronaut and a middle-Eastern king. Some “hams” do have a technical background. But by far the majority are just average men, women and children from all walks of life, some as young as seven years old and others in their eighties. What they have in common is a fascination for communication​—talking to friends or complete strangers on the other side of town, or of the world—​with equipment that they alone control.
One enthusiast likened “ham” radio to “having access to the world’s largest party line. You never know who might be next to ‘pick up the phone,’ where he will be, or what he will say.” Amateurs can also learn much about how people live in faraway places. Most “ham” operators world wide know some English.
Many “hams” develop friendships all over the world and speak to one another regularly by radio though they have never met personally. One tells of regularly contacting ‘a young lady down in Houston, and then an old-timer in New York whose wife had recently died. He no longer sleeps much, but stays at his equipment day and night. Radio “hams” are about the only friends he’s got now.’ The generally warm, friendly atmosphere and spirit of helpfulness that prevails on the air can thus be a real boon to elderly and handicapped “hams” as they visit the world without ever leaving their chairs.
How It Started
Back in 1895, a man named Marconi first proved that messages could be sent by what came to be called “wireless” transmission. It was not long before enthusiastic, scientifically minded persons learned to build simple, homemade transmitters and receivers and started communicating with one another. Thus, at about the turn of the century, amateur radio got its start.
Soon numerous government and commercial stations were on the air, as well as hundreds of amateurs. Regulation became necessary to prevent interference between operators. Hence, the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) in the U.S., and the governments of most other countries, now require that every amateur station and operator be licensed. The radio frequency bands that they can use are also specifically designated.
FCC licenses also assign “call letters” to all “ham” stations, such as “WA2RIK.” The prefix “W” or “K” indicates an American station, while “J” is Japan, “F” is France, and so on. The number “2” represents one of ten amateur “call areas” in the U.S., taking in New York and New Jersey. So a “ham” operator knows just about where he has reached when he hears the call letters of a sending station.
Beginners can usually obtain a license without a great deal of technical knowledge. In the U.S., for example, the FCC requires only that a beginner learn to send Morse Code at five words per minute and pass a very simple written quiz. A Novice Class license is issued that restricts the new operator to sending only code until he gains enough experience to qualify for a more advanced license that allows voice transmission.
Equipment
Is expensive or elaborate equipment required to enjoy amateur radio? Well, originally, all amateur equipment was “homebrewed,” built by the hobbyist, and much equipment today is still built from kits. But it is possible for a novice to purchase new assembled code-only equipment for under $100.
Regardless of how good a receiver and transmitter may be, though, a good antenna is generally far more important. Some operators have talked to stations all over the world with a good antenna and no more than ten watts’ output from the transmitter​—hardly enough to make a 60-watt house lamp glimmer! In contrast, many commercial radio stations operate in the 5,000- to 50,000-watt range.
Communication also depends heavily on atmospheric conditions. Because radio waves “bounce” from the ionosphere (30 to 250 miles [48 to 402 kilometers] above the earth), they may travel much farther than a direct signal by overcoming the curvature of the earth in this way. Atmospheric changes at different times of the day, sunspot activity and even the aurora borealis can affect the quality of transmission and reception.
Operating a Station
But now you are seated at a desk with a receiver and transmitter in front of you​—what do you do? If you just want to talk to someone with no particular location in mind, tune up your equipment to a commonly used amateur frequency. Now say “CQ, CQ” several times into the microphone, followed by your station call letters, and then listen. “CQ” is one of numerous abbreviations that “hams” use. It means that the caller would like to talk to someone. After calling three or four times, you may hear another station respond, and learn with interest just how far your signal has reached​—1,000 or 2,000 miles (1,609 or 3,218 kilometers), even another country.
On the other hand, you may want to get a message through to someone specific-say a friend​—in Peru First, you would turn your antenna in that direction. Then tune your receiver across the selected amateur band to see if stations in that area seem to be coming through. If not, you may have to try at another time of the day. But if you hear call letter prefixes from the area you want to reach, then you can call “Ca” two or three times, mentioning the desired location, such as “CQ Lima.”
If you still get no response, you can also tune to the frequency of one of the international amateur “networks” that operate at various times of the day. These are a “ham” rendezvous arrangement to help handle radio traffic to all points, particularly out of the country. As a service, an amateur voluntarily operates as a control station, allowing any “ham” to check in with him for the purpose of getting a message through.
Helpful Features
Many amateurs have a “phone patch,” a device that can legally tie in their radio with a local telephone system. This often makes it possible to talk to friends and loved ones in distant lands though such ones are not themselves “ham” operators. Missionaries far from home are often contacted in this way for about the cost of a local telephone call.
When Hurricane Fifi struck Honduras, the worth of this system was illustrated. A “ham” operator, who also works at the Watchtower Society’s headquarters in Brooklyn, New York, was able to make contact with the Society’s Honduran branch office through a Tegucigalpa amateur’s phone patch. Thus, within just a day or two of the disaster, information on relief efforts could be exchanged and it was quickly learned that there were no known deaths among the approximately 2,500 Honduran Jehovah’s Witnesses.
Often other practical information can be obtained very quickly through “ham” radio communication. One Sunday evening a group of “hams” were conversing on the air when one in Colombia, South America, said he needed information on the design of column-type loudspeakers for a coming Christian convention. One of the amateurs in Texas telephoned a person experienced in that field and the information was immediately transmitted to Colombia.
Among the many “ham” radio networks world wide, there are now nearly 600 Jehovah’s Witnesses in over 30 countries and islands who regularly rendezvous to talk, exchange experiences and relay messages to other countries. The accompanying chart shows scheduled times and frequencies most often used by this “JW rendezvous” group.
Thus, when used in a balanced way so that it does not interfere with other obligations, amateur radio can indeed be a rewarding hobby that brings both pleasure and knowledge. Furthermore, it can be a real source of help in emergencies and to those who wish to talk with loved ones in faraway places.​—Contributed.
[Chart on page 22]
(For fully formatted text, see publication)
“JW RENDEZVOUS” “HAM” NETWORK SCHEDULE
VOICE
                                            Greenwich
          Eastern  Central Mountain Pacific Mean Time Frequency
Sun., Mon., Wed.          8:00 pm  7:00 pm  6:00 pm  5:00 pm   01:00  14.300 Mhz
Sat.      4:00 pm   3:00 pm  2:00 pm  1:00 pm   21:00  21.375 Mhz
Mon. to Fri.          7:30 am   6:30 am                     12:30   7.245 Mhz
Daily     6:00 am   5:00 am                     11:00   3.965 Mhz
Daily                        6:00 pm  5:00 pm   01:00   3.977 Mhz
Mon. (Europe-English)                                                18:00   3.660 Mhz
Mon. (Europe-English/​German)                                                20:00   3.745 Mhz
CODE
Sun., Mon., Wed.          9:00 pm   8:00 pm  7:00 pm  6:00 pm   02:00   7.110 Mhza
Sun., Mon., Wed.          9:30 pm   8:30 pm  7:30 pm  6:30 pm   02:30   3.710 Mhzb
Sat.      4:30 pm   3:30 pm  2:30 pm  1:30 pm   21:30   21.119Mhzc
[Footnotes]
Novice frequencies
Novice frequencies
Novice frequencies

