From Our Readers
Protect Your Children  I met a young woman who has taken in some children who were sexually abused. I offered her the October 8, 1993, issue with the series “Protect Your Children!” When I visited her again, she said: “The articles have helped me to deal with this new situation. I took the magazine with me when I had an appointment at juvenile court and showed it to the prosecutor. She, as well as the judge, was impressed with the articles and wanted to distribute them among the other lawyers.” This young woman asked for more literature and is now studying the Bible with us.
E. T. V., Brazil
Crossword Puzzles  A few days ago, my granddaughter and I were looking through the December 8, 1995, Awake! when we spotted the crossword puzzle. She exclaimed, “I love crossword puzzles!” So we looked up the scriptures together, and I let her figure out the answers herself. We spent the most enjoyable half hour or so together. Keep it up! We look forward to the next crossword puzzle.
M. G., Canada
I am nine years old. I love your magazine, but most of all I like the crossword puzzles because they help me remember Bible events and people. Thank you very much for this feature.
J. M. T., Brazil
Killer Diseases  Thank you for the extensive, clear, and accurate series “Killer Diseases—The War Between Man and Microbe.” (February 22, 1996) I never realized the immense complexity of the microbe and the amount of physical damage it can do.
C. L., United States
The magazine arrived at exactly the right time, since I had contracted pneumonia and had to take antibiotics. The articles helped me understand why I felt worse rather than better after first taking the medication. I am grateful for this material, which was presented in such an easy-to-understand manner.
I. W., Germany
Ethiopia  After reading the article “Fascinating Ethiopia” (February 22, 1996), my heart is filled with gratitude. I have many Ethiopian relatives who are not Jehovah’s Witnesses. This article was so beautiful that I am confident it will spark their interest in learning about our great God, Jehovah.
J. R., Luxembourg
Former Geisha  I was deeply moved by the article “The Child of a Frog.” (February 22, 1996) Because of the influence of my mother, I studied classical ballet from the time I was very small. When I became one of Jehovah’s Witnesses, I decided to give up ballet, although I adored it. This article encouraged me. It helped me to see that there are other Christians who have made similar sacrifices. I thank you with all my heart.
Y. S., Japan
My tears would not stop falling when I looked at the photograph of Sawako Takahashi with her happy, theocratic family. The sufferings I experienced in the past have long ruled my life, and a sense of victimization has brought me much misery. Realizing that Jehovah will forgive my past failings has given me the courage to work toward becoming a baptized Christian.
M. K., Japan
It was one of the most informative and pleasant stories I have ever read. It also helped me to understand what ancestor worship encompasses. I had never been able to comprehend this form of worship until I read this autobiography.
P. Y., United States

