Training for Life Now in Progress
GOD always makes preparation for any new arrangement that he brings about. This is true of the new order of things that he will establish after he destroys the present system that has brought so much distress. God will have a people survive who are prepared to live according to Bible principles and who are able to teach and direct others​—those resurrected—​in the way of truth. These will constitute a foundation for a “new earth,” a new human society.​—Rev. 21:1; Isa. 51:16.
Accordingly, a program of training for life is now in progress. Those being trained are voluntarily taking and enjoying this training. Of what does it consist?
It is a training through study of the Bible. Being a work God is having done, it is free, based on the principle Jesus set forth for his apostles when he said to them: “You received free, give free.” (Matt. 10:8) For persons desiring to look into God’s Word, Jehovah’s witnesses conduct free Bible studies in their homes. Just how is this done? With the use of your own Bible, a quiet, intelligent consideration is made of what God requires of those who want life. A six-month course usually equips a person to know who God is, what his purpose is toward the earth, why man was created and how sin and death came upon mankind, how this will be removed and how those who now order their lives according to God’s instructions can confidently look forward to everlasting life on a beautiful, unpolluted earth.
An Educational Program for Life
Those who love God also love people. Jehovah’s witnesses enjoy getting together. For this reason, and also for spiritual upbuilding, they arrange to gather every week at their meeting places called Kingdom Halls. These halls are clean, neat, attractive places where you can “feel at home.” They are not elaborate and imposing, as many churches are. You may ask, ‘What would I be getting into if I attended one of these meetings?’
First, you would find a friendly group of persons there. You could sit down peacefully to hear a simple, clear Bible talk or discussion free from emotional outbursts. You could learn. The reason for this is that Jehovah’s witnesses go to their Bible meetings for education, an understanding of the Bible. They believe that this is also what you want. Perhaps you are weary of the constant appeals for money, the unavoidable passing of the collection plate, the cold, formal atmosphere and, particularly, the failure to hear the Bible discussed, as is the case in most of the churches. Or you may have been turned away by the emotional displays and the efforts to make a convert of a visitor.
But when you attend a meeting of Jehovah’s witnesses, you are their guest. You are treated as a guest, warmly welcomed and seated. Your rights and beliefs as a person are respected. What you hear said you can weigh in your own mind. If you have questions, those attending are happy to discuss them, using the Bible. You are never asked to join, or to contribute. You may be asked if you would like to have someone call at your home to study the Bible with you, because Jehovah’s witnesses love their neighbors. They have found what they consider to be most priceless​—the truth. It is good news that they want to share with others.
You will find that the meetings are beneficial for the entire family. Much is said about keeping the family united, how all the members of the family can be happy, the responsibilities of the husband, wife and children, proper discipline, and so forth. In some of the meetings the children, as well as the adults, share in commenting. And in one meeting, the congregation’s school, anyone associated may enroll. The enrollees are assigned subjects for short talks to be presented before the audience, or, in the case of women, to be presented as a conversation with another individual, the audience listening. This is fine training that enables the person to express his or her faith to others, to answer Bible questions, to conduct Bible studies, and, in the case of the men, to give public Bible talks. Many of the younger ones have profited from the training in this school so that they have advanced remarkably in their public-school classes in language and in speaking ability.​—1 Tim. 4:15, 16.
The whole purpose of all these meetings is to enable each one to apply the Bible in everyday affairs, as a way of life, and to assist others to learn of the good news and to follow this way. They have benefited from the hope that God holds forth and they want others to benefit. They live, to the best of their ability, according to Bible principles now, and, as a result, they enjoy a fuller life even at the present time. But more than that, they have the sure hope of resurrection, looking forward to seeing those whom they love coming back from their graves to get on the way to life. They want training now to help these loved ones. They cordially invite you also to receive this training for life.
[Picture on page 15]
At weekly meetings of Jehovah’s Christian witnesses, hundreds of thousands assemble to benefit from instructive Bible teaching

