Announcements
A CHALLENGE TO THINKING PERSONS
Are you willing to accept a reasonable challenge, one that appears in the foreword of a most thought-provoking book? Here is how it is presented:
“In almost all countries throughout the world the doctrine of evolution is taught. School textbooks on biology and history present evolution as established fact. Evolutionary teaching saturates science, philosophy, history and even religion today. Whenever the subject of the origin of life and man is discussed, it is almost always presented in evolutionary terms. But what do you personally know of the evidence for or against the belief in evolution? Does it really harmonize with the facts of science? We invite your careful examination of this matter, as it has a direct bearing on your life and your future.”
This challenge is to be found in the book Did Man Get Here by Evolution or by Creation? Will you accept it? You can by obtaining and reading this revealing book. Here are a few of its chapter titles: “Does Life Come from Nonliving Matter?” “Do Mutations Result in New Life Forms?” “Are Apelike Men Our Ancestors?” “How Old Is Man?” The book concludes on such themes as “Why Has Wickedness Been Permitted for So Long?”, “How Much Longer Will It Be?” and “A Marvelous Future.”
This hardbound book of 192 pages is generously illustrated, thoroughly documented with a list of 248 references. Did Man Get Here by Evolution or by Creation? can be obtained for only 25c. Jehovah’s witnesses will be presenting this book from house to house during September, and you can get it from them. Or you may write to the publishers of this magazine and it will be sent postpaid.
ANNUAL MEETING, OCTOBER 1, 1970
On this date (Thursday) the annual meeting of the members of Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society of Pennsylvania will be held, 10:00 o’clock in the forenoon, at the Society’s office located at 4100 Bigelow Boulevard, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. The regular letters of notice will be sent to all the members of the corporation and it will be appreciated if at this time they will see to it that the Secretary’s office has their present mailing addresses so the letters and proxies will reach them shortly after September 1.
The proxies will be sent to the members along with the notice of the annual meeting and are to be returned so as to reach the office of the Secretary of the Society not later than September 15. As each member knows, he should complete and return his proxy promptly whether he is going to be at the meeting personally or not.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES FOR THE WEEKS
October 4: Looking Intently at the Chief Agent of Life. Page 524. Songs to Be Used: 118, 46.
October 11: How to Train Your Powers of Perception. Page 531. Songs to Be Used: 54, 63.

