Do You Remember?
Have you read the recent issues of The Watchtower carefully? If so, you should recognize these important points.
● What was pictured by Noah’s ark?
The Christian system of things.​—P. 267.a
● When did the harvest of Jesus’ parable of the sower (Matt. 13:24-30) begin?
1919 C.E.​—P. 272.
● In view of Matthew 28:19, why is infant baptism unscriptural?
Because those baptized are to be disciples, and babies cannot exercise faith and be disciples.​—P. 301.
● How does water baptism express a “request made to God for a good conscience”?​—1 Pet. 3:21.
By dedication one presents himself to God in full dedication, doing so through Jesus Christ, by means of whom forgiveness of sins is possible; thus his request for a good conscience before God can take full effect at symbolizing his dedication.​—Pp. 304, 305.
● How was Enoch “transferred so as not to see death”?​—Heb. 11:5.
While having a vision of the coming earthly paradise, God put him to sleep in death, safe from enemy hands and without his experiencing the failing health that so often leads to death.​—P. 327.
● What do newswriters overlook when commending the good morals of Jehovah’s witnesses?
That they are what they are because of what they believe, and because what they believe is God’s law, the TRUTH.​—P. 371.
● Why was ancient Israel no welfare state?
Because the poor, though amply cared for, had to work for what they got.​—P. 373.
● How did the observance of the Jubilee year, in relation to the sabbath year, call for faith?
The Israelites had to trust in God to provide in the forty-eighth year of each fifty-year cycle enough food to last until the harvest of the fifty-first year.​—P. 375.
● What are the main purposes of the congregation committee in handling cases of wrongdoing?
To keep the congregation clean in God’s eyes; to keep his spirit.​—P. 397.
● If a person violates God’s law and escapes detection by the Christian congregation, why will he not escape the consequences of his act?
Because all laws and principles of God are sure to be enforced, whether through natural processes, by an agency of God, or by God himself.​—P. 404.
● What is the “fear” that perfect love throws outside, as stated at 1 John 4:18?
Fear that inhibits one’s expressions to God in prayer.​—P. 415.
● What is the result with regard to obedience when there is too high an expectation of ourselves or others?
It can take the joy out of obedience.​—P. 434.
● What is the modern-day Egypt that is foreshadowed at Exodus, chapters 7-12?
The entire world of which Satan the Devil is god.​—P. 459.
● How is it true that “he that practices fornication is sinning against his own body”?​—1 Cor. 6:18.
It takes the body of the Christian away from being one with the Lord Jesus and makes it one with a harlot; it also exposes one to venereal disease, with terrible effects on the physical body.​—Pp. 511, 512.
[Footnotes]
All references are to The Watchtower for 1970.

