Preparing for the Approaching Millennial Peace
What assurances do the Scriptures give that there will be a millennial peace?
The Scriptures give us abundant basis for hope regarding this millennial peace. Thus we read that Jesus Christ bears the name “Prince of Peace,” and of his reign as the Greater Solomon we read: “In his days the righteous one will sprout, and the abundance of peace until the moon is no more.” (Isa. 9:6; Ps. 72:7) And that his Kingdom rule will be one thousand years long is made clear at Revelation 20:6.a
What evidences are there that the approaching peace of a thousand years is close at hand?
Fulfillment of Bible prophecies indicates that the end of this system of things is near at hand, to be followed by the millennial peace. Among these is Jesus’ great prophecy recorded at Matthew 24, 25; Mark 13 and Luke 21.
Further, Bible chronology indicates that we are at the close of six thousand years of human history. For Jesus to be “Lord of the sabbath,” his thousand-year reign would have to be the seventh in a series of thousand-year periods. Would not, then, the end of six millenniums of mankind’s laborious enslavement under Satan the Devil be the fitting time for Jehovah God to usher in a sabbath millennium for all mankind?
How can we prepare for the approaching peace of a thousand years?
To prepare for that peace one must make peace with Jehovah God and then keep at peace with him. This means to take in knowledge of Jehovah God and of his Word, exercise faith in him and in his Son as one’s Savior and Redeemer. It means repenting from one’s former wrong course of action and turning around and following a course of righteousness. It further means dedicating oneself to do Jehovah’s will and to follow in the footsteps of Jesus Christ. It includes symbolizing that dedication by water baptism.
Once having begun to follow in the footsteps of Jesus Christ one must continue to do so by bringing forth the fruits of God’s holy spirit such as love, joy, peace and self-control. Also, there is obligation to preach the good news of God’s kingdom and to make disciples. Further, one must keep separate from the world and keep seeking first God’s kingdom and his righteousness. In all such ways Christians can show that they are preparing for the approaching millennial peace.​—Matt. 24:14; 6:33; John 15:19; Gal. 5:22, 23.
[Footnotes]
For details see The Watchtower, October 15, 1969.

