From Our Readers
Lifesaving Salty Drink
I must say “Bravo!” and thank you so much for your marvelous article “A Salty Drink That Saves Lives!” (September 22, 1985) We made photocopies and sent them to a hospital in Africa. Their response to this article on how to save babies’ lives was most favorable. We are now operating a supply line to keep the hospital stocked with salt and sugar.
M. L., France
Catholics and the Bible
I want to thank you for the articles on “Catholics and the Bible.” (June 8, 1986) Growing up Catholic, I was led to believe that the church traditions did not conflict with Bible teachings. How happy I am to have learned the truth! I hope that these articles will encourage other sincere Catholics to read their Bibles and learn the truth for themselves.
T. B., United States
Reading to Enrich Your Life
I wish to express appreciation for your issue on “Reading​—It Can Enrich Your Life.” (September 8, 1985) The week of March 3-7, 1986, was selected by the state public school system as “Right-to-Read Week.” One of the purposes was to alert the public as to the need for every child to learn to read. Your issue on reading served nicely toward that end, with over 40 copies being distributed to local businesses and professional people.
K. K., United States
It seems you may inadvertently have done the toddlers and preschoolers of your readers a disservice in your article “Why Some Do Not Read.” (September 8, 1985) Children are so incredibly able to learn that even if we use nothing but the “see and say” method, they automatically intuit the phonetic rules regarding the letters and syllables. Since the above-mentioned article appeared, many parents are afraid to teach their little ones to read for fear they will do it “wrong.”
M. J., United States
Our comments on the “see and say” method were presented as one of a number of factors involved in the poor reading progress of school students. Tests indicate that the use of this method in the primary grades is not as effective as the “phonics first” method. We certainly would not want to discourage parents from teaching their children to read. On page 8 it is stated: “Mothers who are good readers may have success in teaching their children to read before they enter school.” The reader is referred to an article published in our issue of May 22, 1968, entitled: “You Can Teach Your Children to Read.” See also the article “Begin Teaching Your Baby to Read.” (September 22, 1982)​—ED.
How Important Are Looks?
Your article “How Important Are Looks?” (January 8, 1986) makes interesting reading. I personally have observed that most of those who are slaves to beauty have displayed a lag between their efforts on improving their looks and their achievement in such areas as learning, getting on with others, and so forth.
I. B. O., Nigeria

