When Cancer Will Cease
“By the year 2100 advances in basic research in biology may permit prevention of cancer by means now utterly unforeseen.”​—The Causes of Cancer.
ACCORDING to Bible prophecy, cancer will cease even sooner, and certainly “by means now utterly unforeseen” by the writers of the above-quoted book. Why do we make that assertion?
Because Christ Jesus, sent to the earth over 1,900 years ago, was empowered to restore life and health to mankind. On one occasion, without even seeing the patient, he cured a Roman army officer’s manservant who was “laid up in the house with paralysis, being terribly tormented.” (Matthew 8:5-13) On another occasion, he cured his disciple Peter’s mother-in-law, who was sick with fever. How did he do it? “He touched her hand, and the fever left her, and she got up.”​—Matthew 8:14-17.
An analysis of Jesus’ ministry shows that he healed a variety of sicknesses in people of both sexes and of differing age groups. He restored the health of the lame, maimed, blind, and dumb, of the epileptic, the paralytic, of a woman suffering from a hemorrhage, a man with a withered hand, and another man with dropsy. He also raised persons from the dead. How did he do it? Was it by some special kind of therapy?
In fact, it was not hypnotherapy, psychotherapy, or any other kind of medical approach. Neither was it due to Jesus’ personal wisdom, knowledge, or power. It was miraculous healing from a supernatural Source. (Matthew 8:17; Isaiah 53:4) It was his Father’s spirit and power that brought about the healing. However, it was only applied to a minority of the sick of Christ’s day, and it did not prevent the healed ones from dying later. Then what purpose did it really serve?
The healing that Jesus performed pointed to a day when all obedient humankind will benefit from the restoration of God-given gifts of health and life. Thus we have the Bible’s inspiring promise: “Look! The tent of God is with mankind, and he will reside with them, and they will be his peoples [here on earth]. . . . And he will wipe out every tear from their eyes, and death will be no more, neither will mourning nor outcry nor pain be anymore. The former things have passed away.”​—Revelation 21:3, 4.
Among those former things that will pass away is cancer, together with its causes. Under the rule of God’s Kingdom government by Christ, death-dealing environmental factors will be erased. Debilitating stress will be removed, and the human immune system will function as it was intended. Healthy bodies will cooperate with healthy minds, centered on true spiritual values.​—Isaiah 33:24; 35:5, 6.
Does all of this sound too good to be true? Yet, as the Bible states, we have God’s guarantee: “And the One seated on the throne said: ‘Look! I am making all things new. . . . Write, because these words are faithful and true.’” (Revelation 21:5) This is the living hope that sustains Jehovah’s Witnesses who endure the ravages of cancer, some even to death. They know that Jehovah God has promised “new heavens and a new earth.”​—Isaiah 65:17, 18.

