By Teaching, Make Disciples of Christ
WHAT many fine examples of how our brothers, by teaching, are making disciples of Christ are found in our 1967 Yearbook! Are you enjoying them? All this teaching, of course, is being done in obedience to the command Jesus gave his followers just before returning to his heavenly Father: “Make disciples of people . . . teaching them.”​—Matt. 28:19, 20.a
A disciple, we are told, is “one who receives instruction from another. One who accepts the doctrines of another and assists in spreading and implementing them.” The disciples of Jesus Christ, according to the Bible, are those who accept Jesus’ teachings, who understand them and who follow him closely in spreading them.​—John 8:31.
What is involved in making disciples? Jesus Christ set the example for us. He took the initiative, going to the people, preaching and teaching wherever he found those willing to listen.
In carrying on this work of making disciples by teaching, the emphasis is on a certain feature of our Christian ministry. We may do a little teaching when we offer Bible magazines on the streets; we may do a little more as we speak at the doorstep while preaching from house to house. But we do much more teaching when we call back on persons who have evinced a measure of interest in God’s Word and, most of all, of course, do we teach when we establish a regular home Bible study.
And not only must we carry on this teaching on a personal basis, we must help these prospective disciples to see the need of attending our five weekly congregational meetings. They need the help of these also if they would become Jesus’ disciples.
What a privilege to share in this work, to be “God’s fellow workers,” preaching and teaching the everlasting good news under the direction of Jesus Christ and his holy angels! What a blessing to be permitted to share in this work of making disciples by teaching! Appreciating it, may we serve to the full limit of our strength, time and ability!​—1 Cor. 3:9; Rev. 14:6.
[Footnotes]
For details see The Watchtower, April 1, 1966.

