Do You Remember?
Have you found the recent issues of The Watchtower to be of practical value? Then see if you can recall the following:
□ Why can it be said that the Bible is a book for all mankind?
Right from its beginning, the Bible presents a world view when it comes to mankind’s future. (Genesis 1:28) It transcends all racial prejudice, nationalism, and other divisive forces that plague mankind. It speaks to people of all nations and speaks of the earth as one large home for the entire human race. (Acts 17:26)​—4/15, page 5.
□ What did Jesus mean when he said: “If, then, your eye is simple, your whole body will be bright”? (Matthew 6:22)
The word “simple” is from a Greek word that basically means singleness of mind or devotion to a purpose. By making the doing of God’s will our goal in life, we will seek to reflect the glorious good news about the Kingdom in every aspect of our lives.​—5/1, pages 12, 13.
□ What is meant by Jehovah’s being omnipotent and omniscient?
Jehovah told Abraham: “I am God Almighty.” (Genesis 17:1) Being almighty​—omnipotent—​Jehovah can use his power to overcome any obstacle to the fulfillment of his promises and purposes. Jehovah is also all-knowing, all-wise​—omniscient. He thus can foresee whatever he wishes to foresee. These two qualities make it impossible for Jehovah to fail. (Isaiah 14:24)​—5/15, page 4.
□ How can we show humility when publicly praying on behalf of others?
We can show humility by the tone of our voice​—never sounding bombastic or theatrical. We should never demand that Jehovah do certain things. Rather, we should petition Jehovah in harmony with his will, and our expressions always ought to be respectful and dignified, recognizing our own insignificance. (Matthew 6:5; Isaiah 66:2)​—5/15, pages 21, 22.
□ How can a Christian maintain a positive attitude under persecution?
He should never allow his mind to dwell on negative things. Rather, he needs to meditate on what other faithful servants of Jehovah did in times of trial. They had complete faith and confidence in Jehovah, trusting in his ability to resurrect and reward them. (Revelation 2:10) Similarly, the persecuted Christian today can keep clearly in mind his hope in Jehovah’s righteous new system. (Compare Hebrews 12:2.)​—6/1, page 30.
□ On what one important matter did Hus, Wycliffe, and Luther agree?
They all agreed that God’s Word had to come first, no matter what the opinions of men. The first Christians held this same enlightened viewpoint because they had been taught by Jesus Christ himself. (Acts 5:29; John 17:17)​—6/15, page 31.
□ Is black skin color the result of a divine curse placed upon Canaan and his descendants?
No. The black race descended not from Canaan but from Cush and possibly Put. No curse was placed upon either of these two grandsons of Noah. (Genesis 9:24, 25; 10:1, 6)​—7/1, page 4.
□ What did Jesus mean when he spoke of hating one’s own family members and even oneself? (Luke 14:26)
Jesus meant that in comparison to one’s love for God and devotion to Christ, the relationship to one’s relatives might seem like hatred. (Compare Matthew 12:46-50.)​—7/1, page 27.
□ How was Jesus “Lord of the sabbath,” as stated at Matthew 12:8?
Jesus was referring to his peaceful Kingdom rule of a thousand years. This great Sabbath rule of Christ will be a time of rest from all suffering and oppression.​—7/15, page 9.
□ Why is it unwise for a child to set his own goals in life?
Children’s experience is too limited for them to set their own goals in life. If parents do not help them to set such goals, someone else will​—perhaps children at school or the school counselor. Christian parents can help their children to set goals that harmonize with their appreciation for spiritual things.​—8/1, page 28.

