Announcements
FIELD MINISTRY
It was the Lord Jesus Christ who put it into the hearts of his followers to expand, to spread world wide the teachings that he had heard from God. So the disciples of Jesus went out beyond the Jewish realm, and there was wonderful expansion, the good news being preached “in all creation that is under heaven.” (Col. 1:23) Today the good news of God’s kingdom is going to all corners of the earth, and Jehovah’s witnesses feel great urgency because of Jesus’ words at Matthew 24:14. They know this is the time to watch oneself and one’s teaching. (1 Tim. 4:16) They fully realize that they will not save themselves by being interested only in themselves; so they work in the interest of others, preaching and teaching them God’s truths. As they accomplish their ministry during September, they will be offering the book The Truth That Leads to Eternal Life, for only 25c.
ARE YOU REALLY PRACTICAL?
Are you viewed as “idealistic” because you would like to see a world at peace, a world where men are not opposed to one another because of differing skin color, national extraction or religious views? This is no idle dream. It has already become a reality among Jehovah’s witnesses around the world. That is because they have accepted God’s Word, the Bible, as true, and because they confidently rely upon God’s promise for the future. Do not the results prove the practicalness of this course? You can be practical too. The proverb says: “Safeguard practical wisdom and thinking ability, and they will prove to be life to your soul.” (Prov. 3:21, 22) Learn how. Read Life Everlasting—in Freedom of the Sons of God. It is only 50c. Send today and receive free the timely booklet “Look! I Am Making All Things New.”
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES FOR THE WEEKS
September 28: Return Evil for Evil to No One, ¶1-13, and Conquering the Evil with the Good in Modern Times, ¶1-3. Page 553. Songs to Be Used: 15, 34.
October 5: Conquering the Evil with the Good in Modern Times, ¶4-19. Page 559. Songs to Be Used: 37, 52.

