
Improving Our Skills in the Ministry—Laying the Groundwork for a Return Visit




Why Important: When we find someone who shows interest, we want to return when he will be home so that we can water the seed of truth that we planted. (1 Cor. 3:6) This often requires that before we leave, we lay the groundwork for the return visit by finding out when we may come back. In addition, it is good to leave a question that we will discuss the next time we visit. This will build the householder’s anticipation for the visit, and if the question is answered in the publication we left with him, he will be more likely to read it. Laying the groundwork for the next conversation also makes it easier to call back because the subject for the discussion has already been chosen, and the householder will know what to expect. When we see him again, we can explain that we returned to answer the question that we raised on the last visit and then proceed.
How to Do It:
             When preparing your house-to-house presentation, also prepare a follow-up question to be answered on the next visit. It could be based on a topic that is discussed in the literature you are offering that day, or it could be a question that is answered in one of our study publications, which you can introduce when you return.

            When concluding your conversation with a person who shows interest, let him know of your desire to talk to him again and then share the follow-up question you prepared. In some territories people are very busy and tend to be reluctant to make an appointment for you to visit them again. In those circumstances, you might say: “Is this usually a good time to find you at home? [Allow for response.] Next week, I’d like to stop by briefly and answer this question . . . If you are too busy when I come, you can just let me know.”

            If you tell the householder that you will return at a specific time, keep your appointment. (Matt. 5:37) At the conclusion of the return visit, lay the groundwork for the next one.




Try This During the Month:
 When preparing your presentation, also prepare a follow-up question to answer next time. Share it with other publishers with whom you are working.






