
Take as a Pattern the Prophets—Nahum




 1. What do we learn from the book of Nahum?
1 The ruins of ancient Nineveh give evidence that just as Nahum prophesied, Jehovah takes vengeance against His enemies and that even the fiercest of rivals is unable to take a stand against Him. (Nah. 1:2, 6) A closer look at Nahum’s prophecy provides lessons for us in our ministry.
 2. How can we keep our message positive?
2 Offer Comfort and Hope: At first glance, the book of Nahum appears to be only a pronouncement of doom against Nineveh, the proud capital of ancient Assyria. (Nah. 1:1; 3:7) However, this pronouncement came as welcome news to Jehovah’s people. Nahum, whose name means “Comforter,” reassured fellow Jews that their enemy would soon be no more! Nahum further confirmed that Jehovah is “a stronghold in the day of distress.” (Nah. 1:7) As we preach, we too share good news and encourage others to seek refuge in Jehovah.—Nah. 1:15.
 3. How can we imitate Nahum in using examples or illustrations?
3 Use Examples and Illustrations: Jehovah inspired Nahum to compare Nineveh’s end to that of the Egyptian city of Thebes (No-amon), which was previously destroyed by Assyria itself. (Nah. 3:8-10) As we speak to individuals about the end of this wicked system of things, we can highlight Bible prophecies that prove that Jehovah fulfills his word down to the very last detail. For example, when the Babylonians and the Medes came against the city of Nineveh in 632 B.C.E., heavy rains caused the Tigris River to overflow, collapsing a portion of the city’s impenetrable walls. Nineveh was then quickly captured, just as Jehovah foretold.—Nah. 1:8; 2:6.
 4. How can we be clear and understandable in the ministry?
4 Be Clear and Understandable: Nahum’s writing style was descriptive and dramatic. His points were clear. (Nah. 1:14; 3:1) Similarly, we want to use language that is easily understood. (1 Cor. 14:9) On the initial call, clearly explain the reason for your visit. As you study the Bible with individuals, help them to develop faith in Jehovah and his Word and to appreciate how the information applies to them personally.—Rom. 10:14.
 5. What assurance do we find in Nahum’s prophecy?
5 Nahum’s trust in the undeniable fulfillment of Jehovah’s word shines through clearly in the Bible book bearing his name. As the end of Satan’s system approaches, we find comfort in the divine decree: “Distress will not arise a second time.”—Nah. 1:9.




