What We Learn From Nature
“How many your works are, O Jehovah! All of them in wisdom you have made.”—Psalm 104:24.
MANY use the word “nature” to refer to the source of the design of living things. For example, in its issue of March 2003, the journal Scientific American stated: “Of all the body coverings nature has designed, feathers are the most various and the most mysterious.” Although that writer may think of nature as a mere force, he says that nature “designed” feathers. Can a force design things?
To “design” means to “plan (something) with a specific purpose or intention in mind.” (The New Oxford Dictionary of English) Only a person can design and invent. Just as inventors have names, the Creator has a name. Jehovah is the Author of nature. He alone is “the Most High over all the earth,” who “created all things.”—Psalm 83:18; Revelation 4:11.
What do we learn from creation? Its greatest lessons tell us about Jehovah and his wonderful qualities, including his wisdom. “His invisible qualities are clearly seen from the world’s creation onward, because they are perceived by the things made, even his eternal power and Godship.” (Romans 1:20) From nature we learn that God’s wisdom is superior to ours. If he can design things better than inventors can, does it not stand to reason that he can advise us better than human counselors can?
God’s advice is not principally to be found in the “book of nature,” but, rather, in his written Word, the Bible. In it you can find an abundance of practical wisdom. The Bible says: “All Scripture is inspired of God and beneficial.”—2 Timothy 3:16.
If you find that learning about inventors is interesting, you will find that learning about the Creator can be even more so. For example, you likely want to know answers to such questions as: Why do we experience suffering and then die? Is this really God’s purpose for man? If not, why does God allow suffering?
Whether they acknowledge it or not, scientists have learned design from Jehovah. You too can learn much from our Creator. For instance, you can learn how to enjoy a stable marriage, how to raise children successfully, what God’s purpose is for earth, and much more that can make your life meaningful. The book What Does the Bible Really Teach? published by Jehovah’s Witnesses, can help you to benefit greatly from God’s Word.

