Jehovah’s Witnesses in Russia
A Theologian’s Viewpoint
IN Rome, Jewish community leaders in the first century noted concerning Christianity: “As regards this sect it is known to us that everywhere it is spoken against.” What did those leaders do? Commendably, they went to the apostle Paul, who was then under house arrest, and stated: “We think it proper to hear from you what your thoughts are.” (Acts 28:22) They listened to an informed Christian rather than to those who spoke against Christianity.
Sergei Ivanenko, a respected Russian theologian, did similarly. Although he believed many of the negative reports about Jehovah’s Witnesses that were circulating in Russia, he decided to call the branch office of the Witnesses, located just outside St. Petersburg, for information. He accepted an invitation to visit there, ask questions, and observe the Witnesses firsthand.
When Mr. Ivanenko arrived in October 1996, the facilities that accommodate the nearly 200 members of the branch staff of Jehovah’s Witnesses in Russia were nearing completion. For the following three days, he was given the opportunity to observe the construction site, eat meals in the dining room, and interview any whom he wished.
An article that Mr. Ivanenko wrote about the Witnesses was published in the popular Russian weekly Moscow News of February 16-23, 1997. The article, entitled “Should We Be Afraid of Jehovah’s Witnesses?,” also appeared in the English edition of Moscow News, dated February 20-26. Since many Awake! readers are keenly interested in the activity of Jehovah’s Witnesses in Russia, we here reproduce, with permission, most of this article. Mr. Ivanenko began with the following experience, which appeared in prominent type:
“‘Sectarians, get out of Russia!’ read the poster being waved by members of Zhirinovsky’s LDPR party picketing a Jehovah’s Witnesses meeting. ‘What don’t you like about this organization?’ I asked one of those picketing. He handed me a copy of Megapolis-Express with the headline ‘Religious Syphilis Outbreak in Kamchatka.’ The paper said that in order to fill the organization’s cash boxes, Jehovah’s Witnesses were pandering and running prostitution rings, spreading venereal disease among sailors. ‘Are you also one of their victims?’ I asked sympathetically, ‘Do you believe this information?’ ‘It doesn’t matter,’ came the answer. ‘The main thing is that this American sect is destroying Russia’s spirituality and culture, and we must stop it.’”
The article Mr. Ivanenko wrote followed beneath the byline: “By Sergei Ivanenko, theologist, candidate of philosophy.”
“Honesty like this is rare indeed, although it is true that many Russians do not think very kindly of Jehovah’s Witnesses. Just one mention of this organization leads to a string of comments about its dismal fanaticism, its American origins, about the blind faith of ordinary members in the organization’s leaders, and the belief that the end of the world is upon us. In many Jehovah’s Witnesses provoke fear mixed with curiosity.
“What is This Religion, and Should We Fear It?
“In order to figure this out for myself, I visited the village of Solnechnoye in Kururtnoye district, St. Petersburg, where the administrative center of the Russian Jehovah’s Witnesses is located.
***
“[This is] on the site of a former summer camp. By 1992 the [original] building had become catastrophically dilapidated, and the children were replaced by vagrants and hordes of rats. Apparently it was the run-down condition of the area that helped Jehovah’s Witnesses receive the seven hectare plot of land to use for an indefinite period of time. They renovated the old structures and also started building new ones, including a four-story administrative building, a [Kingdom Hall] that seats 500, and a dining hall. Jehovah’s Witnesses are also planting new grass (specially ordered from Finland) and various kinds of rare trees. The work is expected to be completed this coming summer. The main task of the administrative center is organizing preaching activity and delivering literature to local congregations of Jehovah’s Witnesses. Solnechnoye does not have its own printing facilities, so the Russian literature is printed in Germany, then delivered to St. Petersburg, from where it is distributed to the regions. Approximately 190 people work at the center. They work on a voluntary basis and although they do not receive salaries, they are provided with all of the basic necessities, such as a place to live, food, and clothing.
“The center’s work is guided by a committee of 18 elders. Vasily Kalin has been the administrative center’s coordinator since 1992. He was born in Ivano-Frankovsk. In 1951, at the age of four, he and his parents were exiled to Siberia (in 1949 and 1951 about 5,000 families were persecuted by the authorities for being Jehovah’s Witnesses). He was baptized in 1965 and lived in the Irkutsk region. He worked as a foreman at a lumber processing plant.
“Apart from the administrative center volunteers there are also 200 volunteer construction workers from Russia, Finland, Sweden and Norway living in Solnechnoye: Most of them took time off from their regular employment. There are also plenty of Jehovah’s Witnesses from Ukraine, Moldova, Germany, the United States, Finland, Poland and other countries. (Jehovah’s Witnesses have no racial prejudices. In spite of the fact that Georgians, Abkhazians, Azerbaijanis and Armenians live side by side at the center, in four years there has not been a single conflict.)
“Most of the construction material and equipment was supplied by Scandinavian countries, and much was also provided free of charge by fellow believers. I was shown a bulldozer which a Swedish Jehovah’s Witness brought to Solnechnoye in 1993. He worked on it the whole time he was there, and before going home he gave it to his brothers in the faith. The construction workers are housed in comfortable boarding houses and cottages. Their day goes something like this: 7:00 a.m.—breakfast and prayers; they work from 8:00 a.m. until 5:00 p.m. with an hour for lunch. On Saturdays they work until lunch time, and Sunday is a day of rest.
“They eat well and there is always fruit on the menu. The religion does not observe any fasts or strict food restrictions whatsoever. After work, many go to the sauna and then grab a beer and just sit around listening to music. There are no drunks among Jehovah’s Witnesses, but alcohol is not forbidden either. Believers are allowed to drink moderate amounts of wine, cognac, vodka and so on. However, Jehovah’s Witnesses do not smoke.
***
“Three times a week there are Bible-study classes, which are mostly attended by young people. However, it is not uncommon to find those who have been Jehovah’s Witnesses for 30-40 years. Almost all of the older ones have spent time in prisons, labor camps and in exile. After the period of repression ended, many doctors, lawyers, engineers, teachers, businessmen, and students joined the ranks of Jehovah’s Witnesses.
“The congregations try to preserve an atmosphere of equality among their members. For example, even the coordinator of the administrative center washes dishes in the evening when it is his turn. Jehovah’s Witnesses address one another in an informal manner and will also add ‘brother’ or ‘sister’ when calling someone by their name.
“When a Jehovah’s Witness violates the Bible’s teachings and refuses to repent, he is subjected to the most serious form of punishment—he is expelled. The person can still attend meetings, but he is no longer greeted by his fellow believers. A less severe measure would be a reproof.
***
“I spent a long time observing Jehovah’s Witnesses trying to figure out what it is that brought so many different people to this religious organization. With all of the differences in their personalities, levels of education and personal likes and dislikes, [Jehovah’s Witnesses do not share in worship with] religions that compromise with the sinful world. They feel uncomfortable in places where [people] must blindly believe in authority, where there is room for mysticism, where the people are divided into the hierarchy and the obedient masses.
“Jehovah’s Witnesses are distinguished by their steadfast belief in living according to the Bible. They try to substantiate their every move with this or that Biblical principle, or by citing a passage from the Old or New Testament. Jehovah’s Witnesses believe that the Bible and only the Bible contains the answers to all questions. To Jehovah’s Witnesses, the Bible is the constitution, the civil code and the highest expression of truth.
“For this reason Jehovah’s Witnesses are known throughout the world as impeccably law-abiding people and particularly for their scrupulous attitude toward paying taxes. The tax inspection office regularly checks on them and is amazed each time to find no violations whatsoever. Of course, Jehovah’s Witnesses could, like many others, try to find a reason not to pay taxes, but the Bible says that one must be honest in paying taxes, and for Jehovah’s Witnesses this is the last word.
“However, their uncompromising attitude toward the Bible is often the source of some serious clashes between Jehovah’s Witnesses and the government. Their absolutely apolitical stand is a major bone of contention, and it manifests itself in their refusal to serve in the army.
“Jehovah’s Witnesses literally interpret Jesus’ words about how his disciples and his kingdom are no part of this world, and for this reason they refuse to participate in politics and war, no matter where and for what reason it is being waged. Because Jehovah’s Witnesses refused to cry out ‘Heil Hitler’ and serve in Hitler’s army, many thousands of believers were sent to Nazi concentration camps, and thousands died. Each German Jehovah’s Witness who paid with his life for refusing to take part in the aggression against the Soviet Union, is regarded by Russians as a person who committed a highly moral act. At the same time, however, many Russians are not inclined to feel compassion for those [Russian] Jehovah’s Witnesses who were executed for refusing to take up arms and take part in World War II, or who were condemned for refusing to serve in the army during times of peace. But in both cases Jehovah’s Witnesses were acting according to their religious beliefs and not political convictions.
“Not long ago a similar problem arose in Japan, where some students who were Jehovah’s Witnesses refused to study martial arts and ran the risk of being expelled from the university. In 1996 Japan’s Supreme Court passed a ruling supporting the rights of these students and allowed them to take alternative classes.
***
“What is it about Jehovah’s Witnesses that astounds modern thinkers? Above all it is their persistent preaching that the end of the world is upon us (they conduct missionary work on the streets and from door-to-door). Lately elders have advised preachers not to place so much emphasis on the ‘end of the world’ and the lamentable fate that will befall sinners, but rather that they explain to listeners that Jehovah is offering them the opportunity to have ‘eternal life in paradise on earth.’
“Another sore spot is the negative attitude of Jehovah’s Witnesses toward inter-religious contact, and their denial of ecumenism. They believe that the Christian world has betrayed God and the Bible, and that all other religions are a disastrous mistake. Jehovah’s Witnesses compare these religions to the ‘harlot of Babylon,’ and maintain that the same fate will befall them. A recent issue of ‘Awake!’ states that the end is near for various religions, and that the only religion that will remain is the one being preached by Jehovah’s Witnesses.
“Incidentally, Jehovah’s Witnesses acknowledge each person’s right to freedom of conscience.
***
“A number of countries have already expressed concern about whether or not the teachings of Jehovah’s Witnesses are a threat to society. The Supreme Court of the state of Connecticut, United States (1979) and New South Wales, Australia (1972), the Provincial Court of British Columbia, Canada (1986) and other courts have declared that there is no evidence that Jehovah’s Witnesses are a social threat, or that they are a threat to people’s health or emotional state. The European Human Rights Court (1993) defended Jehovah’s Witnesses right to freedom of religion, which was limited in Greece and Austria. Today Jehovah’s Witnesses experience persecution in 25 countries . . .
“Jehovah’s Witnesses can be regarded as an example to their fellow citizens for their devotion to Biblical truth and their willingness to stand up for their beliefs so selflessly. But the question arises: Is our society prepared to provide constitutional guarantees of freedom of conscience to organizations that assert their Biblical approach to all aspects of life in such a radical and uncompromising manner?”
In this last sentence, Mr. Ivanenko raised an important question. In the first century, the apostle Paul, chosen directly by Christ to serve as his representative, suffered unjust “prison bonds.” Thus, Paul wrote to fellow believers about his efforts in “the defending and legally establishing of the good news.”—Philippians 1:7; Acts 9:3-16.
Jehovah’s Witnesses today welcome all to examine their activities closely, as did Mr. Ivanenko. We are confident that if people do, they will find that the negative reports about the Witnesses are untrue, just as such reports about early Christians were also untrue. Outstandingly, the Witnesses obey the “new commandment” that Jesus gave his disciples: “Love one another; just as I have loved you.”—John 13:34, 35.
[Box on page 23]
MN File
  (The following information from the files of the Moscow News was printed along with this article by Sergei Ivanenko.)
  “The Russian Jehovah’s Witnesses are part of a world-wide Christian organization functioning in 233 countries and having 5.4 million members. Jehovah’s Witnesses follow the spiritual guidance of the Governing Body located in Brooklyn, New York. The modern-day organization of Jehovah’s Witnesses developed from a Bible study class formed in 1870 by Charles Taze Russell in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. The organization came to Russia in 1887. One of the first Russian Jehovah’s Witnesses, Semyon Kozlitsky, was exiled from Moscow to Siberia in 1891. In spite of the persecution the organization endured, in 1956 there were 17,000 Jehovah’s Witnesses in the Soviet Union. It was not until March 1991 that Jehovah’s Witnesses were recognized in Russia, after passage of the law ‘On Freedom of Religion.’ Today there are over 500 communities with approximately 70,000 members active in Russia. The organization distributes copies of the ‘Watchtower’ (published in 125 languages, circulation 20 million) and ‘Awake!’ (in 81 languages, circulation 18 million).”
[Picture on page 23]
Part of the branch office complex in Russia
[Picture on page 24]
The Kingdom Hall where the branch family in Russia meets for Bible study
[Pictures on page 25]
Witness families study and enjoy recreation together
[Pictures on page 26]
They share Bible knowledge with others

