





IRMA BENTIVOGLI | LIFE STORY
Serving the Giver of “Every Good Gift”



The air-raid warning sounded. With my little brother in her arms, my mom took me to a nearby orchard to hide under the trees. I was just six years old.

When the bombing ended, I went with my mom to look for her best friend. We were horrified to learn that she had died during the attack. When the next air strike occurred a few days later, my dad grabbed me, put me on the crossbar of his bike, and pedaled as fast as he could away from the city.
World War II had raged through Italy, and my memories of that era are still vivid. What has shaped my life, though, is the fact that since childhood I have been surrounded by people who know and love Jehovah deeply.
The Gift of the Truth
In the winter of 1936, a few months before my birth, my father worked on the railways with a man named Vincenzo Artusi. Vincenzo was not yet a baptized Witness, but he had a deep love for Bible truth. While they shoveled snow from the railway tracks, Vincenzo told my father about the things he was learning.
My father recognized the ring of truth immediately. He and a handful of others in our town, Faenza, wanted to learn more. In those days, during the Fascist persecution, the Witnesses couldn’t hold public meetings and a person could be arrested for possessing Bible literature. Some Witnesses were in prison. So my father and his friends met at isolated houses in the countryside to read the Bible and to study the publications that they had. Also, each week my father would gather our family for an evening of Bible study.
The Gift of Good Role Models
In 1943, the majority of the Witnesses who were imprisoned for their religious activity were released. Among them was a single sister, Maria Pizzato. On her way back to her home in northern Italy, Maria stayed with us overnight. She had played a crucial role in helping the Witnesses receive publications and maintain contact with the branch office in Switzerland, which oversaw the work in Italy at the time. Despite having a frail appearance, Maria was a strong, courageous woman. After the war, she occasionally came to Faenza, and her visits were always special occasions.





Another sister I remember fondly is Albina Cuminetti. When I was a teenager, this elderly widow lived in the building where we held our meetings. She was a colporteur (full-time evangelizer) in Italy beginning in the early 1920’s. Albina told me many fascinating stories about the work in those early years!
Albina had a collection of our publications and other artifacts. One day I saw a pin with a cross and a crown that the Bible Students (as Jehovah’s Witnesses were then known) used to wear. Knowing that the cross was of pagan origin, I couldn’t help but giggle in surprise. Albina then said something that I never forgot. Paraphrasing Zechariah 4:10, she said: “Do not despise the day of small things!”




When I was 14



Those words taught me a powerful lesson. Even though the early Bible Students didn’t have a full understanding of the truth, they deserved my respect. Also, because not all of the publications were available in Italian, it took time for some of the brothers to catch up with adjusted understandings. Nevertheless, Jehovah appreciated their efforts, and I should too.
Despite our age difference, I loved talking with Albina. She, Maria, and other zealous sisters who faithfully served Jehovah despite incredible challenges became my role models. I am grateful for the opportunities I had to associate with them.
The Gift of Bethel Service
In the summer of 1955, I traveled to Rome to attend the “Triumphant Kingdom” Assembly. On that occasion, I visited Bethel along with delegates from different countries. I thought to myself, ’How good it would be to serve here!’
On December 18, 1955, I got baptized. I was still in school, but I was determined to enter the full-time ministry. In 1956, at an assembly in the city of Genoa, I heard an announcement that volunteers were needed at Bethel. However, the branch representative said that there was no need for sisters at Bethel.
Later, I spoke with our circuit overseer, Piero Gatti,a about my goals. This enthusiastic and zealous evangelizer replied, “I will recommend you for the special pioneer service.”
In time, a letter came from the branch. I was sure it was an assignment to pioneer, but it wasn’t. It was an invitation to apply for Bethel service!




With Ilaria Castiglioni (standing), a fellow translator, at Bethel in 1959



I arrived at Bethel in January 1958. Back then, the Bethel family consisted of no more than 12 people. I was assigned to help the two translators at the branch. There was much work to do, and I had no translating experience. But with Jehovah’s help, I came to love my assignment.
Less than two years later, though, the translation work was reorganized and I was assigned to the field as a pioneer. I was stunned because by then I had made Bethel my home. In time, however, I came to view my new assignment as another gift from Jehovah.
The Gift of Zealous Preaching Companions
On September 1, 1959, I began special pioneering in the city of Cremona. My pioneer partner was Doris Meyer, who had moved from Denmark. She was only a few years older than me, but she was an experienced pioneer, whom I looked up to. Doris had initiative, did not scare easily, and was very determined. We both needed those qualities to preach in our territory, because we were the only Witnesses in the whole city.




I learned a lot from Doris (left) and Brunilde (right), my pioneer partners in Cremona



Doris arrived in Cremona before me, and she had arranged for meetings to be held in a rented apartment. The local Catholic priests quickly noticed our activity and became infuriated, thundering against us in their sermons.
One day we were summoned to the local police station. The officers did not detain us, but they made it clear that Doris, a foreigner, had to leave Cremona. Eventually, she returned to Denmark, where she continued serving Jehovah faithfully.
Before long, another single sister, named Brunilde Marchi, was assigned to Cremona. Brunilde had a mild, pleasant attitude, and she loved the preaching work. We started many Bible studies, some of whom made fine progress.
I thank Jehovah for the opportunity I had to be part of the small beginnings of the preaching work in Cremona. Today, there are five congregations in that city!
A Pleasant Surprise
I had been in Cremona for less than two years when I received a call from the branch. There was much translation work to be done in preparation for the “United Worshipers” six-day assembly, which was to be held in July 1961. So I was invited back to Bethel. I literally jumped for joy! I returned to Bethel on February 1, 1961.
We worked long hours, but it was a privilege to be occupied every day with producing Bible-based material. Those months went by quickly, and soon the time for the assembly arrived.
At that assembly, I heard the announcement that The New World Translation of the Christian Greek Scriptures would be translated into Italian. I thought, ‘That means there’s a lot of work ahead.’ And I wasn’t wrong. My assignment at Bethel was extended. In fact, I am still there today—over 60 years later!




In the Translation Department, 1965



Other Precious Gifts From Jehovah
Another gift that I have cherished over the years is my singleness. I don’t mean that I never considered getting married. In fact, for a time, the thought of remaining single made me very anxious. I turned to Jehovah. He knows me better than anybody. I asked him to help me understand what the best course was in my case.
Scriptures such as Matthew 19:11, 12 and 1 Corinthians 7:8, 38 took on new meaning for me, and I thanked Jehovah for the clarity and inner peace he gave me. I have never regretted my decision, and I’m grateful that I could use my singleness to give my best to Jehovah.
Throughout the years, I have witnessed many changes in the activities of the Translation Department, as Jehovah’s organization has progressively used new technology and other “milk of nations.” (Isaiah 60:16) These changes have strengthened the unity of the worldwide brotherhood. For example, in 1985 the Italian and English editions of The Watchtower began to be published simultaneously. Today, articles and videos are available in many languages on jw.org, and most appear at the same time as the English. Clearly, Jehovah makes sure that his people are united and that they receive timely spiritual food.
Jehovah has been very generous to me. He allowed me to enjoy a fruitful ministry as a special pioneer. He has satisfied my desire to serve at Bethel, where I have made friends with people of different ages and backgrounds. Additionally, a special blessing I had was to see my mother become a baptized servant of Jehovah at 68 years of age. I long to see her and the rest of my family when those in the memorial tombs are resurrected.—John 5:28, 29.
I can’t wait to see what Jehovah will do for his servants in the future, when he makes “all things new.” (Revelation 21:5) I am sure of this: Jehovah will never stop pouring down on us “every good gift and every perfect present.”—James 1:17.





At work in the Translation Department today



a Piero Gatti’s life story was published in the July 15, 2011, issue of The Watchtower, pages 20-23.

