The Frantic Search for Energy
“THE scope is nothing we can even imagine. . . . Almost surely it will bring about tremendous social chaos, in the developed countries more than elsewhere.” With these words oceanographer Jacques Cousteau spoke recently of a “drastic energy crisis in the 1980’s.”
On the other hand, many others can produce charts and statistics indicating that our earth still contains enough oil, coal and other resources to provide energy and provide it in abundance. Obviously, in reading about the “energy crisis” one soon realizes that there is disagreement and confusion.
But Why the Confusion?
Is there a valid crisis? Surely we can find out if we are running out of energy, can’t we? A housewife knows when the cupboards are bare. Why is it seemingly impossible to get a simple answer to this question of energy reserves?
Because the problem is not a single problem, but a combination of problems. The proposed solutions likewise are numerous. As one energy expert put it, the causes of the “crisis” are “partly physical, partly political and partly economic.”
Further, many solutions depend upon “Ifs.” If there is growing cooperation among nations, if man can develop a way to get energy economically from this or that source, if it can be transported and distributed where needed​—then we have an answer. Theoretically much is possible; in reality, the choices may be few.
In today’s world if a nation has cheap energy it can give greater economic security to its people. Many scientists believe that a whole way of life for hundreds of millions of people is at stake. As one U.S. energy official put it: “There will be no time for experimenting when the oil runs out.”
In addition, however, a nation that has energy has political and economic power over other nations. The frantic search for energy has more than one motive.
To understand the complexity, we might consider just one energy source​—crude oil. Rich, black oil looked like the solution to man’s energy needs on into time indefinite. But not so today. Why not? Because while there is still much oil within the earth, these deposits are not equally distributed. Most of the oil is in the Arabian peninsula and within the Soviet Union. So, a small number of nations can drastically affect the world’s economic balance by adjusting the price of oil. Large and powerful nations fear being economically manipulated because of their dependence on oil.
One answer is to develop other energy sources within their national boundaries. However, technology must be advanced so as to locate and efficiently use these. When we read the “fine print” of these conflicting views over new sources we discern that, in many cases, the energy potential is there but man does not know at present how to draw it out and economically “put it to work.” No one wants to buy power at many times its present cost.
Where Are They Looking?
Here are just a few of the experimental or limited energy systems being developed:
● Several countries are investigating geothermal heat, that is, heat from within the earth. (See “Awake!” of January 8, 1978.)
● Nuclear fusion​—not the same as present nuclear power plants (which split the atom). It is a fusing of the nuclei of two elements, creating a powerful burst of energy. Problems: Technology is extremely complex; the present cost is high. A projected date for a “commercial reality” is the year 2000.
● A renewed interest in coal, especially in turning coal into a gas or liquid fuel.
● Windmills and devices to “harness” the tides show ‘great promise’ but need further development to be practical sources.
In addition to the above, there are two other prominent sources for power now being developed by several countries. They are: nuclear power plants (fission) and solar (sun) power.
The problems and possibilities of these will be discussed in the following articles by Awake! correspondents in Germany and Japan. Although reflecting local situations, these reports give us a further look at our world’s struggle over energy.

