Idolatrous, Power-mad Athaliah
THE saying ‘like mother like daughter’ applied with full force to Athaliah, the daughter of Jezebel and Israelite King Ahab. Jezebel did not shrink back from shedding innocent blood to further her aims, and neither did Athaliah. Both were steeped in idolatry.
It was indeed a tragic mistake when faithful Judean King Jehoshaphat formed a marriage alliance with King Ahab, taking Athaliah as a wife for his son Jehoram. That alliance nearly cost Jehoshaphat his life when he joined King Ahab in a military venture against the Syrians. Though Jehovah God intervened to spare him, Jehoshaphat was reproved with the words: “Is it to the wicked that help is to be given, and is it for those hating Jehovah that you should have love?”​—2 Chron. 18:1-3, 30, 31; 19:1, 2.
After Jehoshaphat’s death, the effects of the marriage almost destroyed the royal line of Judah. Athaliah’s baneful influence contributed toward Jehoram’s following the bad course of the royal house of Ahab. To secure his position, he murdered his brothers and some of the princes. Abandoned by Jehovah for unfaithfulness, Jehoram faced internal and external troubles. The Arabs and the Philistines overran the Kingdom of Judah and, with the exception of the youngest boy Ahaziah (Jehoahaz), took all of Jehoram’s sons captive. Then the marauder band that came with the Arabs killed all the older sons. Finally, Jehoram died of a loathsome disease, during the progress of which “his intestines came out.”​—2 Ki. 8:16-19; 2 Chron. 21:4, 16-19; 22:1.
When Ahaziah succeeded his father as king, his mother became the counselor. Because she was the real power behind the throne, the short one-year rule of Ahaziah was marked by gross wickedness. After Ahaziah was mortally wounded at the command of King Jehu of Israel, Athaliah saw her opportunity to seize the throne of the Kingdom of Judah.​—2 Chron. 22:2-9.
Athaliah was so power-mad that she killed her own grandsons. However, the infant Jehoash escaped, being saved by his aunt Jehoshabeath. About six years later, the husband of Jehoshabeath, high priest Jehoiada, had Jehoash proclaimed king. On seeing this, “Athaliah ripped her garments apart and cried out: ‘Conspiracy! Conspiracy!’” But this was to no avail. Jehoiada ordered her execution. In this way, the last surviving member of the house of Ahab came to an inglorious end.​—2 Chron. 22:10-12; 23:11-15.
How can the power-mad action of Athaliah be explained? She was thoroughly entrenched in the worship of idols. Because of her influence, her sons broke into the temple of Jehovah, doubtless to plunder it. Items taken from Jehovah’s sanctuary were devoted to the fertility god Baal. (2 Chron. 24:7) As the Bible reveals, such idolatry leads to all kinds of other gross sins. We read:
“Just as they did not approve of holding God in accurate knowledge, God gave them up to a disapproved mental state, to do the things not fitting, filled as they were with all unrighteousness, wickedness, covetousness, badness, being full of envy, murder, strife, deceit, malicious disposition, being whisperers, backbiters, haters of God, insolent, haughty, self-assuming, inventors of injurious things.” (Rom. 1:28-30)
The fact that Athaliah murdered her own grandsons to secure power for herself reveals just how far into a mentally disapproved state idolatry can lead a person.
Athaliah’s case emphasizes the danger of involvement with idolatry. False worship can open the doors to all kinds of evil. Wisely, then, we should continue to heed the inspired words: “Guard yourselves from idols.”​—1 John 5:21.

