Psalms
“From Where Will My Help Come?”
WHERE do you look for help in a time of great distress? Is it to the same source as did the psalmist? This songwriter of ancient times declared: “I shall raise my eyes to the mountains. From where will my help come? My help is from Jehovah, the Maker of heaven and earth.”​—Ps. 121:1, 2.
When these words were recorded, the sanctuary of the Most High God was at Jerusalem. In a representative sense, therefore, that city was the place of his residence. So the psalmist raised his eyes to the mountains, evidently those of Jerusalem, and appealed to the grand Creator, Jehovah, for aid.​—1 Ki. 8:30, 44, 45; Dan. 6:10.
Voicing his unshakable faith in God’s ability to furnish needed help, the psalmist continues: “He cannot possibly allow your foot to totter. The One guarding you cannot possibly be drowsy. Look! He will not be drowsy nor go to sleep, he that is guarding Israel.” (Ps. 121:3, 4) It is simply impossible for the Almighty to allow those looking to him to totter, to experience a fall from which recovery is impossible. He will keep them standing before him as his approved servants. There is no danger that he will let them down during a period of drowsiness or sleep. The Most High is always at the zenith of his ability to give aid and is fully aware of everything that is happening. He is never drowsy, nor does he ever sleep. Therefore, those whom he is guarding are secure.
The psalmist says further: “Jehovah is guarding you. Jehovah is your shade on your right hand. By day the sun will not strike you, nor the moon by night. Jehovah himself will guard you against all calamity. He will guard your soul. Jehovah himself will guard your going out and your coming in from now on and to time indefinite.”​—Ps. 121:5-8.
When Jehovah guards persons, he is like protective shade that shields them from the burning rays of the sun. He is at the right hand, the best hand. This is significant, for in ancient warfare the sword was usually wielded with the right hand and, hence, was unprotected by the shield held in the left hand. Protection was generally furnished by a loyal friend standing on the warrior’s right. Like such a dependable friend, Jehovah God provides ‘shade on the right hand.’
With Jehovah as guardian, a person will be protected from adversity comparable to sunstroke during the day and freezing cold during the night, when the moon is seen in the sky. In fact, Jehovah will guard his servants from all calamities that could result in their lasting hurt. Both now and in the future, he will provide such protection when a person goes out of his home and when he returns.
Surely, then, all who have Jehovah as their Helper need not be anxious. They may experience difficulties, perhaps even face violent death. However, as long as they look to their Creator for aid, he will protect them from all things that could bring about their spiritual ruin. So they will continue standing firmly as his approved servants.

