Freedom Index
THE UNDP (United Nations Development Program) published a “Human Freedom Index” that indicated how much freedom is enjoyed by the populations of 88 different countries. Based on the 40 rights and freedoms laid down in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, the index awards a country one point for each freedom.
According to The Courier, a magazine published by the European Community, some of the freedoms the UNDP has measured are: the right to assemble and associate peacefully; freedom from compulsory religion or state ideology in schools; freedom for independent book publishing; freedom from arbitrary seizure of personal property; and the personal right to practice any religion. How do countries measure up?
Though no country scored 40 points, Sweden and Denmark came closest with 38 points, and the Netherlands came in third with 37 points. Toward the bottom of the list were countries that scored as few as one or two points. One country at the very bottom of the list was awarded no points at all. It should, however, be noted, says the UNDP report, that “the Index pertains to the situation in 1985” and that since then the world has gained much more freedom.
The Dutch magazine Internationale Samenwerking notes that “developing countries such as Costa Rica (18th place), Papua New Guinea (20th), and Venezuela (22nd) scored higher on this list than the European countries of Ireland (23rd) and Spain (24th).”
The report concludes that, as a general rule, there is a link between freedom and development. Most countries with a high degree of freedom appear to enjoy a high level of human development, while countries with little freedom are often burdened with poor development as well. Notes the UNDP report: “Freedom unleashes the people’s creative energy to seize economic opportunities for themselves and their communities.”
Of course, the 40 freedoms listed by the UNDP as desirable goals in human society did not include freedom from the corrupting effects of sickness, old age, and death. Only God’s Kingdom in the hands of his Son, Jesus Christ, will grant us such freedoms. The Bible promises that “the creation itself also will be set free from enslavement to corruption and have the glorious freedom of the children of God.”​—Romans 8:21.
[Picture on page 31]
Tearing down the Berlin Wall marked greater freedom in Eastern Europe

