From Our Readers
Universe  I must say thank you for the mind-boggling information in the series “Unlocking the Secrets of the Universe.” (March 22, 1992) But by what authority are we saying that red giants, pulsars, and black holes are stages in the life [and death] of stars? Isaiah 40:26 says of stars that “not one of them is missing.”
E. W., Sierra Leone
This Bible text is not discussing whether stars have a cataclysmic end. Rather, it is highlighting God’s unfathomable knowledge and wisdom. As Creator, God knows the situation of each individual star. None are “missing” as far as he is concerned. (See “The Watchtower” of September 15, 1989, page 31.)​—ED.
Teenage Romance  Thank you very much indeed for the article “Young People Ask . . . What’s Wrong With Talking to Each Other?” (August 22, 1992) I had been exchanging letters with a boy in my congregation. We had also been talking on the phone. However, since neither of us was old enough to get married, we had already decided to stop spending so much time talking to each other. It made me happy to see in print that we had made the correct decision.
M. N., Japan
It was as if you had read my mind! I had seriously considered corresponding with some boys. I guess I had fooled myself into thinking that these letters would be solely to encourage them. Your article came right in the nick of time.
D. B., United States
I am 12 years old and write to many people. One of them is a boy. I never thought I would have romantic feelings for him, but one day he wrote and said he loved me! Your article came at just the right time!
E. V., United States
Arthritis  Your article “Learning to Live With Arthritis” (June 8, 1992) was read with great interest. But as an arthritis sufferer, I felt that it did not fully depict the devastation this disease can cause through its various effects: stress, pain, fatigue, sleep disorders, and depression. You showed a picture of deformed hands as if this were the worst kind of arthritis. Visible deformities are not the only thing we must deal with. My right rib cage is down inside my right pelvic bone, and because no one can see the deformity, people do not acknowledge it. Your article encouraged us to “develop an optimistic outlook,” but it is sometimes difficult to do so without the support of others.
M. J., United States
We appreciate these frank comments. Our brief article was indeed limited in scope. Furthermore, it was directed primarily to arthritis victims themselves, who well know the effects of this disease. We agree, though, that friends and family members would do well to be aware of the devastating effects of arthritis and should endeavor to be helpful and supportive.​—ED.
Thank you so much for printing the article. I am 31 years old and suffer from severe arthritis pain. Fatigue has brought on depression, grief, and frustration. Yet I cope because I enjoy the spiritual health that is so precious to me.
T. R., United States
I have been waiting for you to deal with this subject for quite some time, and I was very happy to read it. I have been putting up with the pain of rheumatoid arthritis since I was nine. Despite the fact that we sometimes find ourselves in the company of others who do not fully understand our problems, Jehovah shows his interest and encourages us through articles like this.
P. C., Italy

