Kingdom Proclaimers Report
Endurance Leads to God’s Blessing in Malawi
JOSEPH was a faithful servant of Jehovah. (Hebrews 11:22) He was also a man of outstanding endurance. Even though he was betrayed by his own brothers, twice sold into slavery, and later thrown into prison under false charges, Joseph did not crumble. Rather, he patiently endured years of tribulation, humbly awaiting Jehovah’s blessing.—Genesis 37:23-28, 36; 39:11-20.
Likewise today, Jehovah’s Witnesses in Malawi have waited patiently for God’s blessing. For 26 years, these Christian Witnesses endured governmental bans, severe opposition, and many atrocities. But their endurance has paid off!
When persecution broke out in Malawi in late 1967, there were about 18,000 Kingdom publishers. Imagine the joy of the Witnesses when they learned that the 1997 service year began with a new peak of 38,393 publishers—more than twice as many as at the start of the ban! Moreover, attendance at the 13 “Messengers of Godly Peace” District Conventions held in Malawi swelled to over 117,000. Truly, Jehovah has blessed their faith and endurance.
An example of this blessing is the experience of a young man named Machaka. When Machaka accepted an offer to study the Bible with Jehovah’s Witnesses, his parents became very upset. They said: “If you want to become a Witness, you must move away from home.” This threat, however, did not discourage him from continuing his study. As a result, Machaka’s parents confiscated all his clothes. The brothers responded by buying him some more. When Machaka’s parents learned about this, they told him: “If the Witnesses are going to support you, you must leave and go live with them.” After considering the matter carefully, Machaka left home, and a Witness family in the local congregation took him in.
Machaka’s parents were so annoyed that they decided to move away from the area in order to avoid all contact with the Witnesses. Machaka, of course, was distressed by this, but he found much comfort when the brothers discussed with him Psalm 27:10, which states: “In case my own father and my own mother did leave me, even Jehovah himself would take me up.”
In time, Machaka’s parents softened in their position, and he decided to move back home. Apparently their son’s determination to serve Jehovah made a powerful impression on them because they too wanted a Bible study with Jehovah’s Witnesses! They also attended all three days of the “Messengers of Godly Peace” District Convention, after which they were moved to declare: “Truly, this is God’s organization.”
Yes, opposition may be trialsome, but God’s loyal messengers do not give up. They courageously press on, knowing that “tribulation produces endurance; endurance, in turn, an approved condition.” (Romans 5:3, 4) Jehovah’s Witnesses in Malawi can rightly attest that endurance leads to God’s blessing.

