Announcements
DAILY PRACTICING TRUE LOVE
There are those who sing of love a great deal but who do not practice it, because they do not know what true love is. They think of it as self-gratification instead of self sacrifice. (1 John 3:18) True love goes out to others with a desire to aid and do good to them. Jesus stressed to his followers the requirement that one deny himself. True love and service of God prompt one to aid others to a real appreciation of God and his purpose. To that end Jehovah’s witnesses during July will present to people a Bible study aid book and booklet on a contribution of 50c. Would you like to share? Contact the local Kingdom Hall or write this office.
BETTER THAN A BEST SELLER
The 320-page book “Let God Be True” now approaches a world-wide circulation of 13,000,000 copies. It is a fundamental Bible study aid that has helped unnumbered truth seekers to gain a better understanding and deeper appreciation of outstanding Bible teachings. Wasting no time on nonessentials, this helpful volume goes direct to the root of matters and shows what the essential things of the Bible really are. This book, together with the booklet, God’s Way Is Love, is available on a contribution of 50c.
“TRIUMPHANT KINGDOM” ASSEMBLIES AT HAND!
You have not let the time slip by, have you? It is just a week until the first “Triumphant Kingdom” assembly of Jehovah’s witnesses starts. On the twenty-second thousands of joyful conventioners will assemble in Chicago’s Comiskey Park for the first of this year’s outstanding assemblies. Then in rapid succession will be the assemblies in Vancouver, Los Angeles, Dallas, New York, London, Paris, Rome. Nuremberg, Stockholm and The Hague. It is high time that your plans were made! Do you have your rooming accommodation? Are all your transportation arrangements made? You say you will be an international traveler? Then do you have your tickets, passport and vaccination certificate? The blessings to come from these assemblies will be tremendous. Do not miss out.
BROOKLYN BETHEL VACATION
The Society’s offices, factory and Bethel home in Brooklyn, New York, will be closed from July 30 to August 14, inclusive. Orders and correspondence sent in during that period will not be handled until some time after the reopening of the offices. Please anticipate your needs and place your orders in ample time for attention before the vacation period.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES FOR THE WEEKS
July 24: Dedication to Jehovah, and The Reassuring History of Dedication, ¶1-4. Page 369.
July 31: The Reassuring History of Dedication, ¶5-19. Page 374.

