VOL. XXX JULY 15 NO. 14 
A.D. 1909-A.M. 6037 



CONTENTS 

Views from The Watch Tower 211 

Evolution and Character 21 1 

An Unsectarian Presentation 212 

"I Will Call for the Grain and Increase It" 212 



"My Grace is Sufficient for Thee" 213 

Heroism (Poem) 215 

Wresting the Scriptures 215 

The Things no Longer Seen 216 

The Blood of the Covenant 217 

The Dual Feature in Rachel 219 

Proper and Improper Statements 220 

Like Unto Jannes and Jambres 221 

"Weep Not for Me," but "Watch and Pray" 222 

Abraham's Three Wives 222 

Samples of Interesting Letters 223 

page 210 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY 
CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N.Y., U.S.A. 

Foreign Agencies:— British Branch: 24 Eversholt St., London, 
N.W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, Barmen. Australasian 
Branch: Equitable Building, Collins St., Melbourne. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:— All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the Studies, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N.Y., POSTOFFICE 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA 



THE WEEKLY SERMONS 

We trust that our readers who are taking newspapers 
which publish "Pastor Russell's Sermons" weekly will not 
forget to encourage the editors by post-card, referring briefly 



to some feature specially enjoyed or to the sermons in general. 
If you miss a paper or if a sermon fails to appear, send a post-card 
at once stating your disappointment and explaining that 
you subscribed solely for the sake of Pastor Russell's sermons, 
which are so different from all other sermons. 

PEOPLES PULPIT IN FOREIGN LANDS 

We do not advise friends in Canada, Great Britain, etc., 
to subscribe for "Peoples Pulpit." The sermons which appear 
in it can for most part be had in advance in the newspapers 
which publish the sermons. Send orders for the latter to us; 
we can usually supply them cheaper than the publishers would. 

British readers will find a sermon weekly in The Red Rose 
Magazine. Recommend it to your friends, send samples 
and drop an encouraging word at times to the editor. 

CONVENTION EXPENSES AS DONATIONS 

After conventions please send us a memorandum of the 
amount expended by the Church and it will be treated as a 
Church Donation and credited on the Tract Fund as though 
sent us in cash. Follow the same course as respects public 
meetings arranged for the Pilgrims. 

Dawn-Studies, Vol. I, Spanish, is in stock. 
Dawn-Studies, Vol. Ill, Greek, just received; paper covers. 

SUBSCRIBERS FOR PEOPLES PULPIT 

A convenient way for the friends desiring to subscribe for 
Peoples Pulpit would be by classes. Moneys intended to be 
sent us as Tract Fund donations might be so used if agreeable 
to you. One member of the class could act as its agent 
and order the papers for the class, but all to be sent to one 
address. His letter should be addressed to PEOPLES PULPIT 
and should enclose subscription money and be a business 
letter such as could be understood by the Postoffice Examiner. 

Subscriptions in Canada and Foreign countries are not 
solicited, as the rates would be double on account of postage. 

Prices will be as follows:— Single copies, per year, 12 cts. 
Club rate, to one address, 3 copies, 25 cents; 12 copies, $1.00; 
25 copies, $1.50; 50 copies, $2.50; 100 copies, $4.00; 300 copies, 
$10. 

NEW MISSIONARY ENVELOPES 

New envelopes are now to be had at the same price— 25 
cents per 100, postpaid. These are of excellent paper and 
have half-tone cut of all six volumes of SCRIPTURE-STUDIES 
on the front, and cut of the HEAVENLY MANNA on the back. 

CLOTH "HELPS" 

The Berean Bible Students' Manual is now in stock, uniform 
in size and binding with the SCRIPTURE STUDIES. Price, 



50 cents, postpaid. 

NEW SUPPLY OF WATCH TOWER BIBLES 
(Nos. 1918 and 1928) 

For description and prices see October 1, 1908 TOWER 

Greek Spiritism Booklet is also in stock at 10 cents. 

Italian Volunteer Supply temporarily Exhausted. 



"STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES" 

(SIX VOLUMES) 
INDISPENSABLE IN BIBLE STUDY 
WHOLESALE RATES TO WATCH TOWER SUBSCRIBERS: 

1st Set, Volumes I, II, III, 25 cents per volume, postpaid 
2d Set, Volumes IV, V, VI, 30 cents per volume, postpaid 



TRANSLATIONS IN VARIOUS LANGUAGES 



WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY 
13-17 HICKS ST., BROOKLYN, N.Y., U.S.A. 



R4430 : page 211 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER 
EVOLUTION AND CHARACTER 



IN his book on "The Wonderful Century," published 
ten years ago, Alfred Russel Wallace, the distinguished 
scientist and co-discoverer with Charles 
Darwin of the theory of Evolution, asserted his conviction 
that, in the matter of mechanical discovery, the 
human race had made more progress in the nineteenth 
century than in all the preceding eighteen centuries. It 
is somewhat difficult to reconcile this statement with the 
attitude he takes in his latest article on "Evolution and 
Character" in The Fortnightly Review. He has evidently 
grown more pessimistic. He declares now that it is 
doubtful if there has been "any considerable improvement 
in man's average intellectual and moral status during 
the whole period of human history"; and he says 
further: 
"In comparing a savage with a civilized race, we must 



always remember that the amount of acquired and applied 
knowledge which we possess is no criterion of mental 
superiority on our side, or of inferiority on his. The average 
Zulu or Fijian may be very little lower mentally than 
the average Englishman; and it is, I think, quite certain 
that the average Britain, Saxon, Dane and Norseman 
of a thousand years ago— the ancestral stocks of the 
present English race— were mentally our equals. For 
what power has been since at work to improve them? 
There has certainly been no special survival of the more 
intellectual and moral, but rather the reverse.... When 
we consider further that the effects of education and the 
arts are not hereditary, we shall be forced to the conclusion 
that we are today, in all probability, mentally 
and morally inferior to our semi-barbaric ancestors!" 

The Romans and the Greeks, Mr. Wallace reminds us, 
looked down on their ancestors with just as much contempt 
as we look down on Kaffirs and Red Indians. It 
is quite superficial to conclude that because people are 
in a savage or barbarian state as regards knowledge and 
material civilization, they are necessarily inferior intellectually 
or morally. "I am inclined to believe," says 
Mr. Wallace, "that an unbiased examination of the question 
would lead us to the conclusion that there is no good 
evidence of any difference in man's average intellectual 
and moral status during the whole period of human history 
at all corresponding with differences in material 
civilization between civilized and savage races today.... 
There is good reason to believe that some of the lowest 
savages today (perhaps all of them) are the deteriorated 
remnants of more civilized peoples." 

MENACE OF YELLOW JOURNALISM 



One of the severest and keenest indictments of yellow 
journalism ever written has lately appeared in The 
American Magazine from the pen of Prof. W. I. Thomas, 
of the University of Chicago. He takes the ground that 
the yellow papers published and spread broadcast in our 
American cities today are "a positive agent of vice and 
crime," making for all kinds of immorality. Our failure 
up to the present time to regard the yellow press as an 
immorality and to take steps to exterminate it is due, 
he thinks, in part to the fact that we have been reluctant 
to lose a time-honored faith in the printed page, and in 
part to the slowness with which we carry generalizations 
into practice. In connection with this last point he 
writes: 

"Moral exactions never, in point of fact, reflect the 
most advanced states of consciousness. Our practices 
run behind our judgments by a generation or two, but 
that we do slowly and surely carry our generalizations 
into practice is indicated by the fact that society has 
since the beginning been constantly changing the content 



of its commandments, and practices which at one time 
were not the objects of moral judgment (slavery, polygamy, 
blood-vengeance) have come to be classed as immoral. 
At the present moment there is a focus of consciousness 
containing commandments in the making. In 
it are located questions of political graft, monopolistic 
manipulation, the tyranny of labor, patent medicine fakes, 
impure foods, the race question, the woman question, and 
the question of the yellow journal. These are now being 
agitated and revalued by public opinion and the legitimate 
press, and when we have made our reconstruction 
we shall have some new commandments and some new 
crimes; and among them will be: Thou shalt not have 
the perversion of truth for a gainful occupation." 

Professor Thomas' first and fundamental objection to 
yellow journalism is based on its appeal to what he calls 
the "hate attitude" in men. This attitude exists in all 

R4431 : page 211 

of us. It dates back to the days when human beings 
spent most of their time killing animals or fighting with 
their fellow creatures. It partakes of the nature of impulse 
or appetite, and is almost as blindly elemental as 
hunger itself. During centuries of civilization this hate 
instinct has been modified and controlled, but under the 
surface it slumbers yet. A murder trial, a prize fight, a 
slanderous bit of gossip, an exciting game, have still the 
power to call it into play. 

In the light of these facts, says Professor Thomas, it 
becomes plain that the yellow journal owes its existence 
to the persistence in men of a primitive feeling of essentially 
anti-social character, and to the fact that a revival 
of this feeling brings a sense of pleasure. He 
continues: 

"Pleasurable shocks may be classified with some reference 
to their social significance. We have, first, the 
emotional interest of the reflex type represented by the 
whole gamut of competitive games from marbles to chess, 
which are pleasant, recreative and valuable— to the child, 

R4431 : page 212 

in developing a normal organism, and to the adult (in a 
society where the division of labor prevails), in taking 
the strain off certain overworked nerve centers and equilibrating 
the organism. A second form of shock is associated 
with horrors, misfortunes, detractions and slanders. 
Railroad wrecks, fires, murders and domestic 
scandals are types of this interest, which, as in games, 
is primarily of the nature of a blind reflex. Artistic 
presentations, of which tragedy is an example, are conflict 
situations of a generalized and reflective type, presented 
with such technique and perspective as to give an added 
significance to life. Scientific and business 'pursuits' are 
really of the hunting pattern of interest, involving the 



same emotional strains as the chase, though the emotion is 
subordinated to the reflective processes involved." 
—Current Literature. 

TURKEY ASKS JEWS TO COME 

Offers to Confer Full Citizenship Upon Immigrants on Arrival. 



"They shall bring all your brethren for an offering unto 
the Lord out of all nations."— Isa. 66:20. 

The Jewish Morning Journal gave out recently a special 
cable dispatch from Constantinople saying that the 
Turkish Government had invited the Jews of Russia and 
Roumania to settle in Turkey, agreeing to remove all restrictions 
and to grant full citizenship to them. Here is 
the text of the cablegram: 

"Ahmed Riza, President of the Chamber of Deputies 
visited to-day Hahm Pasha, the ritual head of the Jews 
in Turkey, and on behalf of the Turkish Government extended 
an invitation to the Jews of Russia and Roumania 
to migrate to Turkey. As proof of the good faith of the 
Turkish Government Ahmed Riza informed Hahm Pasha 
that the Government would abolish all restrictions against 
Jewish immigration, and, what is still more significant, 
will confer full citizenship on Jewish immigrants immediately 
on their arrival in Turkey." 

AN UNSECTARIAN PRESENTATION 



Dr. H. S. Pritchett, President of the Carnegie Foundation 
for the advancement of teaching, speaking recently 
on Leadership in the Colleges, said:— 

"Church membership is no test as to whether a man is 
a religious man or not; nor is it any criterion by which 
religious men may be chosen. The constant use of this 
criterion has served to impose upon young men both in 
and out of college the idea that the obligations of the 
religious life are binding only on those who have assumed 
membership in religious organizations. No more unhappy 
impression could have been created. The obligations 
of the religious life are the same upon every 
human being. The idea that he can escape the working 
out of the great laws which the Maker of the Universe 
has set up by declining to belong to a human organization 
is a grotesque one, and yet this is an idea common 
among young men. I believe, therefore, that the man of 
sincere religious life, outside any formal organization, 
has a notable opportunity today for religious leadership 
in college, and that he escapes some of the limitations 
which lie in the way of his brother who is part of a 
definite religious organization. No man has the right to 
evade the duties of leadership or of service by reason 



of his belonging to, or of his not belonging to a religious 
organization. To advance such a claim is like insisting 
that a man is not an American unless he belongs to the 
Republican or the Democratic party." 



R4431 : page 212 

"I WILL CALL FOR THE GRAIN AND INCREASE IT" 

-EZEKIEL 36.- 

OURS is the "day of God's preparation" for the glorious 
abundance of the Millennium and its blessings. 
Fresh proofs of this come to us daily. The 
electric light has superceded the tallow dip; the steamship, 
1000 feet long, has succeeded the canoe; the railway train 
has succeeded the pack -mule and the stage-coach. Already 
we live in a new world, which, in many respects, would be 
Paradise were it not for our fallen condition— our mental, 
moral and physical imperfections— our dying state. Still, 
however, the necessities of life require labor, toil, sweat 
of face; but how great a blessing is in this fact few seem 
to appreciate. Without necessity, idleness would soon 
breed vice and crime still more abundantly. 

Statistics tell us that the wood supplies of the world are 
running short and that already there is little to spare for 
fuel. They tell us also that the coal supply will last only 
about one hundred and fifty years more. They wonder 
whether or not mankind will soon freeze to death. God's 
people, however, looking from the standpoint of the Divine 
promises, may have full assurance of faith that the Divine 
foreknowledge has provided for every emergency. Already 
we know that the air that we breathe contains the 
very elements necessary to supply us adequately with heat, 
if we could but learn how to separate its component parts. 
Science has long been striving to accomplish this end. 
Faith tells us that when the Father's due time shall have 
arrived the problem will be solved simply enough, furnishing 
oxygen for fuel and nitrogen for the enrichment of the 
soil. 

Similarly scientists tell us that the earth cannot much 
more than provide food for its present number of inhabitants. 
They are in trepidation as to what kind of farming 
will be necessary to feed the world five hundred years 
hence. Through the Word of God the eye of faith may see 
that the time for human productivity is drawing to an 
end, that soon after the inauguration of the Millennium, 
conditions will change gradually— until finally human 
propagation will cease entirely. Still, however, according 
to the Scriptures, the world will gradually become filled 
with people; as our Lord's words declare, "All that are in 
their graves shall hear the voice of the Son of man and 
come forth." "Every man in his own order," says St. Paul. 

There will be an abundance of room for all of this population, 



but where their food supply will come from would 
be an astounding proposition to scientists. The child of 
God, whose eye of faith has already seen some of Jehovah's 
mighty power, may rest assured that he who planned all 
this has made necessary provision for the successful carrying 
out of its every feature. 

In the light of God's Word the eye of faith has assistance, 
and perceives that humanity's present fallen condition 
involves a great waste of food, which will be rectified 
as the race rises out of its imperfection and learns more 
thoroughly how to use blessings which are now comparatively 
wasted. Then again the eye of faith sees in the 
divine promise at the head of this article, and in other 
assurances of the Scriptures, that "the earth shall yield 
her increase"— sees the Divine provision for the needs of 
humanity. Already we have evidences of how these Scriptures 
may be fulfilled. In the once arid deserts of the 
United States artesian wells and irrigating canals are 
causing "the wilderness to blossom as the rose and the 
solitary places to be glad." Similar developments will 
doubtless later on extend to other desert lands. Contrariwise 
the marshes are being drained, and the eye of faith 
can see how the world will eventually be made all that is 
implied in God's promise of Paradise restored; that Jehovah 
"will make the place of his feet [his footstool] 
glorious." 

MIRACLE WHEAT -MIRACLE CULTIVATION 

A year ago we called attention to the miracle wheat, 
which was developed in Virginia, seemingly by accident. 
We know not to what extent it has been sown elsewhere, 
nor whether any wonderful results have been obtained. 
However, it gives to the eye of faith a suggestive lesson 

R4431 : page 213 

as to how God could "Call for the wheat-corn and increase 
it" many fold. Now we learn of some wonderful experiments 
which have recently been made by the Russian Government, 
which serve to show that in soil that is at least 
twenty inches deep a new method of cultivating wheat, 
gives promise of almost miraculous results. Even if only 
one-tenth of the results claimed can be obtained the advantage 
seemingly would be considerable. Even if the 
method be at present found impracticable for any reason, 
the suggestion to the eye of faith would be valuable everyway 
as showing God's people something of the hidden 
powers Divine, which are held in reservation for man's 
time of need. 

PLANTING WHEAT INSTEAD OF SOWING IT 

The new method of cultivating wheat, based upon these 
experiments, is the making of pits or trenches, twelve to 
twenty inches deeper than the surface level and forty-two 



inches wide. One grain of wheat planted at the bottom 
of each pit or forty-two inches apart in the trenches is 

R4432 : page 213 

covered lightly with two inches of soil. Every three weeks 
the covering process is repeated about two inches more 
each time, until ten coverings have been put on. The grain 
gives forth three shoots with the first covering. With the 
second covering each of these shoots "bushknots" and 
gives forth three more shoots, so that with the final covering 
the total amounts to 59,049 stalks or heads of grain. 

The ten coverings will require about thirty weeks or 
less, according to the climate. It is said that this method 
of cultivation requires no watering, that the air, having 
free access to the roots, provides the moisture and gases 
necessary for the growth of the plant. It is difficult to 
believe all this— that a single seed could thus produce 
seventy pounds of grain, and that at the same ratio an 
acre of land be made to produce forty-five tons of grain. 
Assuredly, as our text suggests, when the Lord's time shall 
come he will be well able to call for the increase of the 
grain for the benefit of the world of mankind, whom he so 
loved as to redeem and for whom the blessings of restitution 
are shortly to be made available.— Acts 3:19-21. 



R4432 : page 213 

"MY GRACE IS SUFFICIENT FOR THEE" 

-ACTS 19:23; 20:1. -AUGUST 22- 

Golden Text:— "And he said unto me, my grace is 
sufficient for thee; for my strength is made perfect 
in weakness."— 2 Cor. 12:9. 

FOR two years and three months St. Paul had actively 
engaged in the service of the Truth at Ephesus, 
the Gateway or Eye of Asia Minor. He was about 
ready to leave and had already sent word to the Churches 
enroute, which he had established, informing them of his 
journey and of the fact that a famine had recently prevailed 
in Palestine and that he purposed taking to the 
Christians at Jerusalem a present of money from their 
fellow-believers in the Gospel and fellow-members in the 
Body of Christ in Gentile lands. However, the Lord was 
pleased to permit the great Adversary to stir up persecution 
and riot against the Truth and especially against the 
Apostle just on the eve of his departure. As the Apostle 
declares, "We know that all things work together for good 
to those who love God, to the called ones according to his 
purpose;" hence, we may be sure that God saw some good 
that could be accomplished by permitting this panic of 
persecution and that otherwise he would not have permitted 



"FAITH MAY FIRMLY TRUST HIM, COME WHAT MAY" 

Ephesus was one of the greatest cities of that time. This 
may be judged from the fact that just at the entrance of 
the harbor stood one of the "seven wonders of the world," 
an immense statue of "Diana of the Ephesians"— the deity 
of Ephesus and indeed of Asia Minor. To her shrine 
thousands of people came, as opportunity offered, believing 
that they received a special blessing from her, which 
affected favorably the prosperity of their homes. Her 
blessing was supposed to greatly increase the flocks and 
herds and the birth of children. Unlike the other (virgin) 
Diana, this one was represented to be the mother of all 
things living, fecundity being her special blessing. Of 
course, the fame of this great idol attracted general attention, 
and those who could not go to Ephesus to worship 
at the shrine of this image were pleased to purchase from 
merchants certain charms or amulets, which consisted of 
small copies of her shrine wrought in silver. The business 
of making these shrines grew as the people of that region 
learned to desire her blessing and to offer her worship. 
In the Apostle's day the business of making these shrines 
of various sizes out of silver was immense, employing 
hundreds, perhaps thousands. 

A man named Demetrius was the representative or head 
of a silversmith's guild or union. He, becoming incensed 
against the propaganda of the Apostle and the early Church 
at Ephesus, aroused his fellow-craftsmen by a stirring 
speech, in which he pointed out the great prosperity of 
their city through this idol, and how they themselves had 
prospered by the making of her shrine. Then he painted 
a black picture of how the prosperity would shortly die, 
as a result of the preaching of this man Paul. He called attention 
to the fact that it was not merely at Ephesus that 
this new religion, opposed to the worship of Diana, was 
spreading, but that it prevailed throughout all Asia Minor 
amongst people who might be expected to place orders 
with them for shrines. With a wonderful cunning, he combined 
with this thought of the duty of supporting their 
city religion that of the duty also of looking out for their 
pocketbooks. Who can think of stronger grounds of argument 
with people in general? That he was successful in 
arousing the prejudices and creating a riot causes us no 
wonder. The whole city was in an uproar in the very tenderest 
spots, religion and worldly prosperity. 

The Adversary, no doubt, helped on the matter, with the 
result that the people were shortly in a frenzy of despair, 
as though the feared collapse for their religion and their 
prosperity were already upon them. The home of Paul was 
known; so thither the mob rushed, seeking the chief factor 
in the impending troubles. In the Lord's providence St. 
Paul was absent. Aquilla and Priscilla, who kept the home, 
were there and, although not arrested, evidently were loyal 
to the Apostle and to the cause to the very last degree. 



Thus the Apostle, subsequently writing respecting them, 
remarked that they endangered their necks for the sake of 
the Truth. As working people and home-keepers they were 
not molested; but two assistants of St. Paul found in the 
home were taken by the mob. They hurried them to the 
theatre, or place of public entertainment, whose capacity, 
we are told, was 56,000 persons, indicating that Ephesus 
must have been an immense city. St. Paul, learning of the 
commotion, would have courageously entered into the thick 
of the trouble in defense of his friends and, above all, in 
defense of his Master and his message. But wiser counsels 
prevailed and St. Paul remained away. The brethren 
suffered him not, believing that his presence would have 
accomplished nothing with people in so unreasonable a 
state of mind and St. Paul agreed with them, because no 
other course would have been the wise or proper one. 

The Lord, however, did not neglect the two brethren who 
were arrested, Gaius and Aristarchus. The town clerk 
came to their assistance and with words of wisdom dispersed 
the mob. This official was not interested in the 
Gospel of Christ and its service, but he was interested in 
the doing of his duty as an officer of the city. He pointed 
out to the mob that they had become unduly excited; that 
they and everybody knew the greatness of Diana, and that 
one Jew or many Jews could not injure her great fame. 
And then he concluded, Seeing that these things cannot be 

R4432 : page 214 

gainsaid, ye ought to be quiet and to do nothing rash, for 
ye brought hither these men, which are neither robbers of 
temples nor blasphemers of our goddess. If, therefore, 
Demetrius or his companion have any matter against these 
men, the law courts are open. Let them accuse one another. 
In other words, let us mind our own business and 
not allow ourselves to be unduly excited over a matter of 
no moment. Besides, he pointed out to them that, while 
there were lawful assemblies provided for them, the present 
one was an unlawful one, which if it were reported to 
the Government at Rome, might bring disrespect to the 
city and perhaps cause it to lose some measure of its 
eminence. With this he dismissed the assembly. 

PRINCIPLE AND LACK OF PRINCIPLE 

Notice the contrast between the chief actors in the 
account of this lesson and those mentioned in the preceding 
one. In that case many people, realizing that they 
had been working in conjunction with the powers of evil— 
of demons— brought their books of magic, etc., and burned 
them, as a result of the influence of the Gospel message 
upon their hearts. They not only stopped the practice of 
the black art; they not only refused to use the books 
of magic; but they refused to sell them to others, lest they 
should do injury to them. They were willing, glad, to 
suffer financial loss and be thought foolish by their neighbors, 



rather than to do injury to others, after they had 
come to a true realization of the situation. On the contrary, 
the chief actors in this lesson were moved to a 
frenzy and to riotous conduct by their love of money— their 
fear lest they should suffer loss. Evidently it was not their 
respect for religion, but their love for filthy lucre which 
prompted their actions. Moreover, the religion of this 
goddess was a demoralizing one. Hence we see the 
stronger contrast between those who raised a riot in order 
to perpetuate idolatry and sensuality and to bring money 
to their own purses and those, on the contrary, who are 
ready to sacrifice their earthly interests rather than do 
harm, and in order that they may do the more good. 
Verily there is a power, a wonderful power, in the religion 
of Jesus, our Redeemer. 

It is to be noted that the Apostle and his co-laborers 
were not guilty of the charge of which they were accused 
—blaspheming the goddess of Ephesus. Here we have 
a point of importance and a valuable lesson. St. Paul elsewhere 
said, "Let none of you suffer as an evil-doer nor as 
a busy-body in other men's matters." It was not necessary 
for the Apostle to say one unkind word in reference to the 
goddess Diana. His commission was to preach the good 
tidings of great joy— not to quarrel with false gods, or 
their worship. The persecution was therefore for right-doing. 
There is a lesson here for us, too. It is not necessary 

R4433 : page 214 

for us to do or say a single unkind word or act towards 
our friends in Babylon. It is not necessary for us 
to tirade against their systems or doctrines. We have 
plenty to do in setting forth the Gospel message. Of 
course, the Apostle did not fail to call attention to the fact 
that Diana was merely the work of men's hands and not, 
as claimed, a divinity. So we may properly enough set 
forth to our friends that there is but the one true Church, 
which was organized by our Lord, established at Pentecost, 
and that all other churches, therefore, are merely human 
systems. But it is not our privilege to tirade against these 
churches, as we learn some of the dear friends are inclined 
to do. The command, "Speak evil of no man," may properly 
be applied also to religious systems. Particularly 
those who recognize the foundation of Christianity in the 
redeeming merit of the death of Christ, and that favor and 
teach morality, if nothing more, should be let alone by us. 
In Divine providence the appointed hour will come, the 
Scriptures assure us, when everything which can be shaken 
will be shaken and overthrown in the great "time of 
trouble." Against that evil day we warn men that they 
repent and develop meekness and righteousness; "it may 
be that they shall be hid in the day of the Lord's anger." 
Undoubtedly the Lord has permitted sectarianism for some 
wise purpose, even as he has permitted the Gentile governments 
to hold sway until the end of the times of the Gentiles. 
Let us not interfere with the fulfillment of the 



Divine purposes. Let us be content to fulfil our mission 
of assisting the brethren, building them up in the most 
holy faith and telling the good tidings to the meek and 
such as manifest an ear to hear. 

THE LESSON OF OUR GOLDEN TEXT 

This is a wonderful text. Our Lord's words therein expressed 
applied, we may be sure, not only to St. Paul, but 
to all of us who are of the one Body and energized by its 
one spirit. Doubtless St. Paul's experiences in connection 
with his thorn in the flesh were given to him and recounted 
in the Scriptures largely for the benefit of ourselves and of 
all who, from his day until now, have been suffering under 
peculiar experiences, trials, whose necessity and value 
were not clearly discerned. 

When St. Paul, blinded by the great light which accompanied 
his conversion, finally received the Lord's forgiveness 
and the restoration of his sight in considerable 
measure, he doubtless bore patiently with the continued 
weakness of his eyes, considering it a proper chastisement 
for his wrong course as an opponent of the Anointed One 
and an injurious person in respect to the Body of Christ, 
which is the Church. The measure of his afflictions which 
remained helped the Apostle, doubtless, to appreciate very 
distinctly how close is the relationship between the Church 
and her Lord, as members of the one sacrifice, as explained 
in the Lord's Words, "Why persecutest thou me?" 

However, as weeks and months and years passed, and 
the Apostle found his defect of vision a great burden, he 
doubtless wondered why the Lord should permit any 
measure of the ailment to continue. Well did he know 
that it would be as easy for Divine power to give him 
perfect sight as not. Indeed, he had evidence along this 
line continually— the power of God in healing the sick- 
so that handkerchiefs and napkins which he had blessed 
were sent for from far and near, and carried with them 
Divine blessing and healing. Evidently the Apostle reasoned 
that after he had suffered awhile in this affliction 
it would be removed. He may even have surmised that 
God wished to bring him to the point of humbly asking for 
its removal. 

St. Paul explains to us that he did request healing— the 
removal of this grievous affliction or "thorn." He tells us 
that he did this three times. There is a point in connection 
with the matter which apparently up to that time he 
had not discerned clearly, namely, that the healing of his 
eyes would be so much of restitution blessing. But St. 
Paul, like the others of us, had been called of the Lord not 
to restitution, but to sacrifice; as he himself explained the 
matter to others, "I beseech you, therefore, brethren, by 
the mercies of God, that ye present your bodies a living 
sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto God, which is your reasonable 
service." (Rom. 12:1.) Knowing that the blessings 
of God were passing through him to others, he wondered 
that some might not have been for himself. He had yet 



to learn that the gifts conferred to him were for the 
worldly and not for the saints, who had consecrated to 
sacrifice. He had yet to learn that, if permitted of the Lord 
to take back his consecration to sacrifice, it would mean 
his letting go proportionately of the spiritual blessings and 
favors which God bestows upon us when we sacrifice 
earthly things. 

TWO WAYS OF ASSISTING US 

It would not have been right for St. Paul to have been 
encouraged in a wrong course, in harmony with his prayers 
for healing. Hence, those prayers were refused. True, 
the Lord has granted similar requests from many who 
knew no better than to ask such favors. But with the great 
Apostle the matter was different. Like his Lord he was 
an example to the flock and hence it was not appropriate 
to grant his petition. However, what God did do not only 
furnished a lesson to St. Paul, but a blessed lesson to us, 
his brethren, throughout the Gospel Age. 

While it was not proper to remove the burden from the 
Apostle in answer to his prayer; while God saw a special 
way in which this thorn in the flesh would be specially 

R4433 : page 215 

helpful to him in the development of the holy Spirit, nevertheless 

his prayer could receive an answer still more effective, 

still more blessed, in a different way. Instead of removing 

the difficulty, the Lord promised the more grace, 

the more strength, the more endurance to meet the difficulty, 

to overcome it, to compensate for it. This was 

really much better for St. Paul in every way than if his 

prayer had been answered. We do not know, neither did 

he know, how necessary to the preservation of his humility 

and usefulness in the service was that "thorn in the flesh." 

We may know assuredly, however, that the giving to him of 

more grace was the greater blessing; because the grace of 

the Lord is helpful in all things, in all of life's interests, 

while the taking away of the thorn would have been merely 

a relief in the one line. No wonder the Apostle, when he 

understood the situation, cried out, "Most gladly therefore 

will I rather glory in my infirmities, that the power 

of Christ may rest upon me."— 2 Cor. 12:9. 

There have been blessed lessons for all of the Lord's 
dear people throughout the Gospel Age in these experiences 
of St. Paul. We have various thorns in the flesh, 
various difficulties, various trials; some of them mental; 
some physical; some well understood by others; others 
unknown except by ourselves. What a comfort it has been 
to many to have the Lord's assurance that what trials and 
difficulties he does not remove from us, he permits for 
wise and loving purposes. These, he assures us, will all 
work together for our good. Of these he declares, "My 
grace is sufficient for thee; my strength is made perfect 
in weakness." 



Taking this, the Apostle's viewpoint, dear fellow-servants 
of the cross, let us take all of our experiences in good 
faith, realizing the truth of these words, that our weaknesses, 
our imperfections, our frailties, so far from working 
injury to us, will, under the Lord's supervising care, enable 
him to supplement the more our willing endeavors 
with his strength. 



R4438 : page 215 

HEROISM 

It takes great strength to train 
To modern service your ancestral brain; 
To lift the weight of the unnumbered years 
Of dead men's habits, methods, and ideas; 
To hold that back with one hand, and support 
With the other the weak steps of new resolve! 
It takes great strength to bring your life up square 
With your accepted thought, and hold it there, 
Resisting the inertia that drags back 
From new attempts to the old habit's track. 
It is so easy to drift back— to sink- 
So hard to live abreast of what you think! 

It takes great strength to live where you belong 
When other people think that you are wrong; 
People you love, and who love you, and whose 
Approval is a pleasure you would choose. 
To bear this pressure, and succeed at length 
In living your belief— well, it takes strength- 
Courage, too. But what does courage mean 
Save strength to help you face a pain foreseen; 
Courage to undertake this life-long strain 
Of setting yourself against your grandsire's brain; 
Dangerous risk of walking alone and free, 
Out of the easy paths that used to be; 
And the fierce pain of hurting those we love 
When love meets truth, and truth must ride above. 

But the best courage man has ever shown, 
Is daring to cut loose, and think alone. 
Dark are the unlit chambers of clear space 
Where light shines back from no reflecting face. 
Our sun's wide glare, our heaven's shining blue, 
We owe to fog and dust they fumble through; 
And our rich wisdom that we treasure so, 
Shines from a thousand things that we don't know. 
But to think new— it takes a courage grim 
As led Columbus over the world's rim. 
To think— it costs some courage— and to go- 
Try it — it taxes every power you know. 

It takes great love to stir a human heart 



To live beyond the others, and apart; 

A love that is not shallow, is not small; 

Is not for one or two, but for them all. 

Love that can wound love for its higher need; 

Love that can leave love though the heart may bleed; 

Love that can lose love, family and friend, 

Yet steadfastly live, loving to the end. 

A love that asks no answer, that can live 

Moved by one burning, deathless force— to give! 

Love, strength and courage; courage, strength and love- 

The heroes of all time are built thereof. 

-C. P. S. Gilman. 



R4433 : page 215 

WRESTING THE SCRIPTURES 

"They that are unlearned and unstable wrest... the 
Scriptures to their own destruction."— 2 Pet. 3:16. 

AN instance in point is found in the columns of a 

journal, the editor of which was once an earnest 

co-laborer with us in the promulgation of the 

Harvest Truth. While still assenting to the fact that we 

have been in the Harvest for thirty-five years and that it 

will shortly end, he tells his readers that he apologizes to 

God that for nearly eighteen years he has been preaching 

what he now believes to be serious error, namely, that 

the Church of Christ has a share in her Redeemer's sufferings, 

a share with him in his sacrifice as members of 

his Body, filling up that which is behind of the afflictions 

of Christ— suffering with him that they may also reign 

with him, becoming dead with him that they may also 

live with him on the spiritual or heavenly plane. 

This Editor now calls all this darkness, and evidently 
thinks that just at the close of the Harvest he has struck 
the match and lighted a fresh lamp which shows that the 
path he was previously traveling was a wrong one and 
the light which previously shone on his pathway was of 
the Adversary. He has not yet given up all of the beautiful 
Harvest Truths, but we may reasonably expect that 
with this repudiation of the foundation of all spiritual 
hopes he will shortly conclude that everything that he 
saw on coming out of Babylon was a delusion, and that 
he will return fully to the "outer darkness" of Babylon. 
"If the light that is in thee become darkness, how great 
is that darkness," said our Master. 

Said Editor seems to have become sour towards us 
personally, for some reason unknown to us. The alienation 
or bitterness of spirit presumably led to a desire to 
find fault with us. And since our personality is sunk in 
the service of the Truth, personal antagonism finding no 
other course led to an attack upon the truths which we 
present. How much the Adversary had to do with twisting 



and warping of judgment we do not know. How 

much others may be responsible by reason of over-encouragement 

or evil suggestions we do not know. But 

R4434 : page 215 

we do believe that the Lord will not allow any outside 
influence to separate from himself and his Truth any 
whose hearts are loyal to him. 

This case is not parallel to the one of which our Lord 
said, "Forbid him not: for there is no man which shall 
do a miracle in my name, that can lightly speak evil of 
me. For he that is not against us, is on our part." 
(Mark 9:39,40.) This is a case of direct opposition— a 
direct attack upon the Harvest Work, which he had been 
serving for years— a direct attack upon the very doctrine 
which, next to the Ransom, lies close to the foundation of 
our hopes. This erstwhile Brother is now seeking to 
disrupt the Harvest Work to the best of his ability. He 
would have the Lord's people everywhere follow him into 
outer darkness under the delusive cry, "We were all 
blinded and misled by 'The Watch Tower;' but now, 
Eureka! I have fortunately found the true light which 

R4434 : page 216 

the Lord was anxious to give us earlier in the Harvest 
but did not succeed in getting to us until now near the 
close." 

But, dear readers, we need have no fear of any disruption 
in the Lord's work from that quarter, or from 
any other. If this Harvest message and its service be of 
God it cannot be overthrown. If it be not of God we 
would be glad to have it overthrown, that we and others 
might be delivered from error. Oh, how the Adversary 
would like to convince us that our present Lord had 
served us with poisonous food and that we should straightway 
leave his table and go elsewhere to satisfy our 
hunger and thirst for righteousness and Truth. These 
and other efforts will be successful merely to the extent 
of sifting out those not worthy of the Truth. The 
others who remain will be stronger than ever, by reason 
of the agitation of the subject of the Covenants, Sin-offerings, 
etc. 

THE COMMUNION CUP 

Twenty-nine years ago we were publishing some features 
of Present Truth respecting the Second Coming of 
our Lord, the time of Harvest, the Millennial Age, the 
Times of Restitution; but up to that time we had been in 
a measure of confusion, darkness, respecting the heavenly 
and the earthly promises. We saw that the Church 
had promise of heavenly and spiritual nature and glory. 
We saw also that the promises to the world were seemingly 
of an earthly nature, that they would build houses 



and inhabit them, plant vineyards and eat the fruit of 
them, etc. We had not fully discerned why this distinction 
of natures and were inclined to wonder why we 
could find nothing in the Scriptures to intimate that at 
the close of the Millennium the world would be granted 
the heavenly nature. 

It was about that time, 1880, that the Lord drew our 
attention to other features of his plan previously unseen 
by us and, so far as we are aware, unseen by others 
since the days of the Apostles. We realized that this 
further light was Harvest light for the ripening of the 
wheat, and by no means an evidence of greater wisdom 
or ability in Bible interpretation on our part. The due 
time had come and the unfolding came with it. The 
Master who had already been serving us brought forth 
from the storehouse "things new and old," respecting 
the Covenants and the Atonement sacrifices. We were 
astonished at the length and breadth and height and 
depth of the Divine Plan and set them forth in a pamphlet 
entitled Tabernacle Shadows of the Better Sacrifices. 

It was through those Tabernacle Shadow blessings that 
the Lord showed us how and why the Church of this 
Gospel Age has been called to heavenly glory while the 
Divine purpose respecting mankind in general is restoration 
to human perfection with everlasting life to all the 
willing and obedient— to be granted to the faithful in 
the close of the Millennial Age, when they shall have 
reached human perfection and the "paradise restored" 
shall have been extended to the whole earth. 

We then understood for the first time the meaning of 
the Apostle's words respecting the "Hidden Mystery," 
namely, that close, intimate relationship between Christ 
and his faithful followers, the "more than conquerors." 
It was then that we understood the Apostle's words, 
"God hath given Christ to be the Head over the Church, 
which is his Body," and "We are members in particular 
of the Body of Christ." "This is a great mystery; but I 
speak concerning Christ and the Church." Oh, yes, this 
is indeed a hidden mystery— that the Church is completely 
separated from the world and offered a great 
prize of glory, honor and immortality, the Divine nature. 
But we came to see, also, that this prize was offered on 
certain sacrificing conditions— not merely upon condition 
of faith, though faith is the basis of all our hopes. This 
"high calling" proffered is justification from sin as the 
reward of faith, but it additionally held out the promise 
to the justified that if they would suffer with Christ as 
his members, they should also be glorified together with 
him in his heavenly Kingdom and be with him and sit 
upon his throne and share his glory. 

Now we began to understand why the way during this 
Gospel Age should be made so "narrow," so difficult, 
while the Lord promised to make the way to eternal life 
a broad, "high way" during the Millennium. Ah, yes! all 
is clear from this standpoint, and the Apostle's words 
were full of meaning to us as we read, "I beseech you, 



therefore, brethren, by the mercies of God, that ye present 
your bodies a living sacrifice, holy and acceptable 
unto God, which is your reasonable service." (Rom. 12:1.) 
Now we saw the two steps; first, justification by 
faith, and secondly, an entrance into this grace of the 
"high calling" by being begotten of the holy Spirit. As 
expressed by St. Paul, "Therefore being justified by faith, 
we have peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ: 
by whom also we have access by faith into this grace 
wherein we stand, and rejoice in the hope of the glory 
of God," which is to be revealed in our Lord and in us 
as his members in his Kingdom. Now we know why St. 
Paul was so anxious to fill up a measure of the afflictions 
of Christ and we were stimulated also to follow his example, 
filling up a share of Christ's afflictions, which he 
left for us. Now we know what St. Paul meant when he 
said, "Let us go forth therefore unto him without the 
camp, bearing his reproach."— Heb. 13:13. 

We perceived from this last text that he referred to the 
sacrifices of the Day of Atonement mentioned in the context 
and in which he says that the bodies of those beasts 
whose blood accomplished sin atonement were burned 
outside the camp. The type shows that the first of 
these sacrifices was the bullock and the second the Lord's 
goat (Levit. 16); that the priest first killed the bullock 
provided by himself, and afterward killed the goat provided 
by the Congregation of the Children of Israel. We 
saw clearly enough that the bullock represented our 
Lord's sacrifice and that the only other sacrifice burned 
outside the camp was the goat, and hence that the Apostle 
must have referred to us, the Church, the members of 
the Body of Christ. 

This has been the basis of our presentations to the 
Church for these twenty-nine years. We consider it the 
only key to all the wonderful harmonies of the Divine 
Word, as they are now in our possession by the Lord's 
favor. We have no doubt whatever that our great Adversary 
would like to take from us this valuable key to 
the Divine Plan, which alone explains the "mystery" of 
this Gospel Age, which is the Church and her special call 
—to the privileges of sacrifice now and the privileges of 
glory by and by. The Apostle made no mistake. 

Not anything of the merit belongs to us. Now, and 
first and last and all the time we have shown that the 
merit belongs to our dear Redeemer, who, by reason of 
the "body prepared" for him for the sacrifice of death, 
was able to become the justifier of all who trust in him. 
Our justification came by faith in his blood, and hence 
any merit and all merit would be his, not merely on that 
account, but also because our begetting of the holy Spirit 
was based upon our full consecration to be dead with 
him. 

THE THINGS NO LONGER SEEN 

These are the things said Editor tells us that he no 



longer sees— that our sufferings as members of the Body 
of Christ are part of His sufferings. All this he now 
claims is a mistake. That we are to reign with him because 
we suffer with him is claimed to be an error. Some 
day if he will tell us we shall be glad to know any other 
reason why we do suffer and with whom else we suffer; 
what we do sacrifice and for what we sacrifice and what 
useful purpose our sacrifice will ever accomplish. Possibly 
some may find ways of applying these Scriptures, but 
we are sure they will find no interpretations satisfactory 
to our minds other than that we have already found connected 
with the "mystery." Our friends in the nominal 
churches have wrestled with these Scriptures for centuries 
in a kind of hazy bewilderment, not knowing 

R4434 : page 217 

how to intelligently apply them and not understanding 
the "mystery," because the due time for its unfolding did 
not come prior to the Harvest. 

THE BLOOD OF THE COVENANT 

This erstwhile co-laborer now assaults us and charges 
that we have committed the sin unto death, in connection 
with this application of the Scriptures— because we claim 
that we suffer with him; that we share in his sufferings 
(Christ's) and not some other suffering. If this position 
is true we have been under the Second death condemnation 
for twenty-nine years and this co-laborer has been 
under it for eighteen years. Yet those years were the 
most blessed of our experience and, we presume, also of 
his. And this doctrine during these years has been the 
"key" to the "Mystery of God," which has brought more 
Christians to a full and deep consecration to the Lord 
than anything else ever known since the Apostle's day. 

There certainly is plenty of inconsistency connected 
with the position of this Brother, and with that of all 
others who ever leave the light of Present Truth. For 
instance, the Scriptures intimate clearly enough that any 
who ever commit this sin unto death cannot be renewed 

R4435 : page 217 

unto repentance, seeing that they have crucified the Lord 
afresh and put him to an open shame. (Heb. 6:6.) If, 
then, this doctrine of the Church's participation with our 
Redeemer in his sacrifice as his "members" is the "counting 
of the blood of the Covenant an unholy thing," how 
could this Brother claim that, after eighteen years of such 
delusion and Second Death worthiness, he has now escaped 
such a condemnation and obtained a special blessing 
from God and a special privilege to light a new torch 
and to call the Lord's sheep in an opposite direction? 

But let us examine the ground of this serious charge 
respecting which this Editor waxes eloquent, saying, "We 



do not know any consideration on which we would occupy 
their position. Oh, that we had ten thousand trumpet 
tongues to warn those who accept this latest of the last-day 
delusions. It is a test! Who will be on the Lord's 
side?" We agree that it is a test and that it will fully 
discover those who are on the Lord's side; those who will 
share of his cup, share in his sufferings— none others will 
share in his glory. 

Notice the Scriptures which this new light-bearer assures 
us condemn all who have been believing that they 
were sharing the sufferings of Christ as the condition by 
which they might hope to share his glory future. It 
reads, "If we sin willingly after that we have received a 
knowledge of the Truth, there remaineth no more sacrifice 
for sins, but a certain fearful looking for of judgment, and 
fiery indignation, which shall devour the adversaries. He 
that despised Moses' law died without mercy under two 
or three witnesses; of how much sorer punishment, suppose 
ye, shall he be thought worthy who hath trodden 
under foot the Son of God, and hath counted the blood of 
the Covenant wherewith he was sanctified, an unholy 
thing, and hath done despite unto the Spirit of grace."— 
Heb. 10:26-29. 

This marvelous exegete lifts his hands in horror and, 
pointing at this Scripture and then at us and the thirty 
thousand or so who similarly believe, he intimates that he 
has gotten out of this Second Death condition and that he 
is willing to help all of us out, if we will follow him, and 
subscribe for his Journal. On the contrary, the very 
Scripture he quotes tells that there is absolutely no hope 
for the class described in these verses, because "there remaineth 
no more sacrifice for their sins." They consumed 
their share in the merit of Christ's sacrifice. 

The Apostle speaks of wresting or twisting the Scriptures 
and it may easily be surmised that a considerable 
amount of wresting and twisting of this Scripture needs to 
be attempted in the endeavor to make it serve this Editor's 
purposes. He lays all his stress upon the words, 
"Counted the blood of the Covenant wherewith he was 
sanctified an unholy thing." To serve his purpose he 
has twisted the Scripture thus, "Has counted the blood of 
the Covenant wherewith he was sanctified a thing shared 
by a number." The attempt is to prove that all who 
claim to have fellowship with Christ in his death or, as 
the Apostle says, "to be dead with him," "to be baptized 
into his death," thus participate in the blood of the New 
Covenant, which Jesus is sealing with his own blood 
and in which he invites us to be partners and share— all 
these are guilty, according to this indictment, based upon 
this Scripture, of "treading under foot the Son of God 
and counting the blood of the Covenant wherewith they 
were sanctified an unholy thing." 

This expositor has lost his bearings altogether. The 
Apostle tells us that we were justified through faith in 
the blood of Jesus and he here speaks of those who had 
gone on after justification through the blood of Jesus to 



sanctification through the blood of the Covenant. What 
is the difference between justification and sanctification 
and between the blood of Jesus which justifies and the 
blood of the New Covenant which sanctifies? 

We answer that there is a great difference— two distinctly 
separate transactions are thus brought to our 
attention. Nowhere in the Scriptures are we said to be 
justified by a New Covenant or by any Covenant; nor 
by the blood of the New Covenant; nor by the blood of 
any other Covenant. We are justified by faith— faith 
in the blood of Jesus as our Redeemer. Our justification 
comes as soon as we accept the great fact that we were 
sinners and that Jesus gave his life for our redemption 
and accept our share in that redemption by faith. It is 
only those who are thus justified by faith in his blood 
that are invited to become his disciples, his followers, his 
joint-sacrificers and his joint-heirs in glory, as members 
of the great Prophet, Priest, King, Judge and Mediator, 
who will come in power with great glory as soon as the 
last member of his Body shall have been perfected 
through a participation in the sufferings of Christ. Let 
us keep in memory the fact that only the justified are 
called to this "high calling," this great privilege of participation 
in Christ's Covenant, the blood of the New 
(Law) Covenant. This being true, it will be readily 
seen that the Apostle is referring to this consecrated 
class— "sanctified through the blood of the Covenant." 

Get the thought that our Redeemer, "the man Christ 
Jesus," laid down his life that he might seal the New 
(Law) Covenant with Israel and through Israel with the 
world. He consecrated his earthly life and laid it down 
in death with this in view. His ignominy and death are 
symbolically called his cup, of which he drank. He 
offers a portion during the Gospel Age to justified believers, 
proposing that if they drink the cup with him, 
if they suffer with him, he will accept such as "members of 
his Body." The Father will beget them of the holy Spirit 
and in due time they shall be born from the dead in "his 
resurrection," as his glorious Body and sharers with 
him in the work of dispensing the New (Law) Covenant 
blessings to Israel and to the world. 

All who accept his proposition are counted in with 
him as messengers of the Covenant or servants of the 
Covenant— those whose lives have been devoted, consecrated, 
sacrificed with a view to the establishment of 
this New (Law) Covenant, by which the Christ, including 
the Church, as the Seed of Abraham, will bless Israel and 
all the families of the earth. The Apostle says, "We are 
made able ministers of the New (Law) Covenant"— that 
is to say, qualified servants of that Covenant. Part of 
our service we perform at the present time in serving our 
great Head and the fellow-members of his Body, "edifying 
one another and building one another up in the most 
holy faith." (Jude 20.) But in a larger sense of the word 
we are being qualified or made able servants of the 
New (Law) Covenant by present experiences, which we 



shall put to effective service when the New (Law) Covenant 
shall go into force and the Millennial Age be 
inaugurated. 

We trust that we have made clear the fact that our 
consecration, our sanctification, our acceptance of the 
Lord, our sacrificing with him, and our final glorification 
with him, are all in connection with the great Work 

R4435 : page 218 

which he has undertaken, namely, the mediating of the 
New (Law) Covenant between God and mankind in general. 
We were called out from mankind in general, from 
the world, for these very purposes— that we might be 
made members of this "mystery" class, the Mediator's 
Body. Hence our sanctification was in connection with 
"the blood of the New (Law) Covenant." Had it not 
been for the New Covenant and our invitation to share 
in its mediation with our Redeemer, there would have 
been no present Call to glory and honor and immortality 
and joint-heirship in the Kingdom. Hence, when 
the Apostle is speaking of those who "count the blood 
of the Covenant a common thing," we should understand 
that he meant that some who desert the Lord, renounce 
his teachings, renounce their consecration, do disrespect 
to this special call to joint-heirship. The Apostle explains 
that this is because they do not sufficiently appreciate 
the value of this consecration, the value of this 
"blood," the privilege of sharing with Christ in his sacrifice. 
They count the statement, To be dead with him, an 
ordinary thing. They lose sight of its real value. They 
lose sight of what they really undertook to do when they 
made a consecration unto death. They lose sight of what 
it meant to present their bodies living sacrifices. Having 
changed towards the Lord, they no longer count their 
covenant to be dead with him as a sacred obligation, 
but rather as an ordinary matter, a common thing. 

PROVING IT BY THE GREEK 

The Brother whose inconsistency of argument we are 
criticising tells us that his contention is supported by the 
Greek text— that the Greek word rendered unholy in 
Heb. 10:29, koinos, really should be translated "a thing 
shared by a number." He would apply this to us and all 
who see with us; because we say that the blood of Christ, 
the cup of Christ, is shared by a "little flock" of Christ's 
disciples, who become dead with him, suffer with him 
during this Gospel Age. Our answer is that the Brother 
has not dipped deeply enough into the Greek. The Greek 
word which would have suited his purpose is koinonia, 
which signifies partnership, or literally, participation, as 
defined by Strong's Unabridged Dictionary. The same 
dictionary defines koinos to mean common, defiled, unclean. 
In other words, while the thought of participation 
is in both of these words, the one has the unclean thought 



connected with it, while the other has the clean and pure 
thought of partnership. Manifestly the thought we present 
of participation with Christ in the sufferings of this 
present time and his glory to follow is not the common 
or unclean thought of koinos, but the partnership and 
participation thought of the other Greek word, koinonia. 
This is our answer to the charge and to the misinterpretation 
of the Scriptures to support it. 

But let us look a little further in the same direction and 
see what we find. We turn to 1 Cor. 10:15-17 and hearken to 
the Apostle saying, "I speak as to wise men; judge ye 
what I say. The cup of blessing which we bless, is it not 
the communion of the blood of Christ? The bread which 

R4436 : page 218 

we break, is it not the communion of the Body of Christ? 
For we, being many, are one bread and one Body; for we 
are all partakers of that one bread." This passage is very 
plain and clear as it stands in the English, but when we 
point out the Greek word twice rendered communion, in 
respect to the blood and in respect to the Body of Christ, 
the passage becomes doubly forceful. This Greek word is 
koinonia, which signifies partnership, literally, 
participation. 

Here the Apostle tells us that all the members of the 
Body of Christ have koinonia, participation in the blood of 
Christ, of the one cup, and in the Body of Christ, the one 
loaf now being broken, that through the operation of the 
New (Law) Covenant sealed with his blood, Israel and the 
world may be fed with the bread of life. Of course no 
one can be convinced against his will, but we hold that all 
of the Lord's people enlightened under his Spirit should 
be able to see that the Apostle commends, approves, endorses, 
that which said Editor condemns and by twisting 
of the Greek, endeavors to make out to be the basis of his 
own Second Death condemnation and yours and ours. 

BLINDED BY WILFULNESS 

We have pointed out for years that on the same night in 
which our Lord was betrayed he instituted a Memorial of 
his own death, substituting it for the Jewish Passover 
Supper and setting forth the bread and cup, as representing 
his flesh and blood, as instead of that of the 

passover lamb, saying, This do as often as ye do it in remembrance 
of me— not in remembrance of the lamb, nor 
of the type, as in Egypt, but looking forward and recognizing 
the antitype. He wished them to realize him as 
the lamb and the Church as the first-born saved during 
the night of this Gospel Age, and ready to go forth in the 
morning of the Millennium, typified by Aaron, the high 
priest, his sons, the under-priests and the tribe of Levi, 
their servant-associates, typified on the other hand by 
Moses, the great Law Giver and Mediator. As it is written, 
"For Moses truly said unto the fathers, A prophet 



shall the Lord your God raise up unto you of your 
brethren, like unto me; him shall ye hear in all things, 
whatsoever he shall say unto you. And it shall come to 
pass, that every soul, which will not hear that prophet, 
shall be destroyed from among the people."— 
Acts 3:22,23. 

God raised up Jesus to be the Head of this great antitypical 
Mediator. And during this Gospel Age he is 
raising up the Church of the First-borns as members of 
his Body. Shortly the whole will be complete, and then, 
as the great Mediator of the New (Law) Covenant, this 
antitypical Mediator will seal that Covenant with his 
blood, with the merit of his sacrifice, which he is now 
passing through the Church, which is his Body, permitting 
us to share in his sufferings, that we may also share 
in his glory. 

This share of Christ's sufferings is symbolically represented 
in his "cup," styled the blood of the New Covenant, 
New Testament, New Will. By his death the 
Lord surrendered his earthly rights to seal that New 
Covenant and by permitting justified believers to join 
with him in his sufferings, he permits us to share as his 
Body members in this sealing of the New (Law) 
Covenant. 

Consequently when he passed the disciples the "cup" 
he did not mean them to understand that the drinking of 
that cup meant their justification. They were already 
justified. Already he had said to them, "Now ye are 
clean through the word I have spoken unto you." "Ye are 
not of the world, even as I am not of the world." By 
passing the "cup" to them, saying, All of you drink of 
it, and, Drink ye all of it, he meant, I thus symbolically 
give you the privilege of sharing in my sufferings, which 
are symbolically represented in this cup. I am laying 
down my life to seal that New (Law) Covenant long 
promised of the Father and, if you would be members of 
the Spiritual Seed of Abraham, now is your opportunity. 
You are already justified by faith. My death will make 
that effective to you and you will be sprinkled from all 
consciousness of evil. All that was preparatory, and 
with a view to giving you this opportunity of sharing in 
my cup of ignominy, of death, of woe, of sacrifice. If 
you suffer with me, if you drink of my cup, you shall sit 
with me in my throne. If you do not drink of my cup 
you shall not sit with me in my throne. 

All Christ's faithful members who partake intelligently 
of the bread, understand it to mean not only our Lord's 
broken body, but also the broken body of his Church, as 
St. Paul explains. And similarly the "cup" was both 
Christ's blood or sacrifice and ours if we accept it at his 
invitation and partake with him. As to our argument in 
respect to our sharing the Lord's cup, this Brother was 
apparently so anxious to get rid of it that he declared in 
so many words that our Lord did not drink of it. Let 
us see whether Jesus drank of one cup representing one 
set of sufferings and gave his followers another cup representing 



a different kind of sufferings. Is this true? 

R4436 : page 219 

What say the Scriptures? We read particularly, "The 
Lord Jesus, the same night in which he was betrayed, 
took bread, and when he had given thanks, he brake it, 
and said, Take, eat; this is my body, which is broken for 
you; this do in remembrance of me. After the same 
manner also he took the cup, when he had supped, saying, 
This cup is the New Testament in my blood: this do ye, 
as oft as ye drink it, in remembrance of me."— 
ICor. 11:23-25. 

The records in the four Gospels leave the matter of our 
Lord's drinking of the cup indefinite, though they clearly 
intimate that he first drank and then gave to his disciples. 
But the Apostle Paul, as above, makes the matter 
positive. 

Furthermore, notice our Lord's words to the two disciples 
who requested special nearness to himself on his 
Throne in the Kingdom. He said, "Can ye drink of the 
cup that I shall drink of? and be baptized with the 
baptism that I am baptized with?" When they assented 
their willingness he assured them that he would see to 
it that they should have the opportunity and thus gain a 
seat in the Throne, though he could not tell them how 
near to himself they would be, since this would be arranged 
of the Father. Have we any doubt as to what 
cup he meant and what baptism? Surely not, because 
the Master's cup was that of suffering, ignominy and 
death. Ours must be the same "cup," his cup, else we 
shall have neither part nor lot in his Kingdom glory. ~ 
Mark 10:38-40. 



R4436 : page 219 

THE DUAL FEATURE IN RACHEL 

IN our February 15th issue, page 63, questions re the 
Covenants, 6-8, we did not, it seems, express ourself 
so that all could understand our meaning; hence we 
now add a few words. 

The Sarah Covenant represents the Divine promise in its 
entirety as a Grace or Faith Covenant. As St. Paul explains 
in Gal. 4:22-28 her child of promise represented The 
Christ, Head and Body, the great antitypical Prophet, 
Priest, King, Judge and Mediator between God and men— 
the world of mankind in general. Sarah had but the one 
child, and hence the earthly seed of Abraham or any other 
could not be represented by her. But God had promised 
Abraham an earthly seed, as well as a heavenly. His seed 
was to be "as the stars of heaven and as the sands of the 
sea," the Apostle explains: "that the promise might be 
sure to all the seed, not to that only which is of the Law, 



but to that also which is of the faith of Abraham." Abraham's 
seed according to the Law was cut off entirely, and 
must get its blessing through the spiritual seed— The 
Christ, Head and Body. The Spiritual Seed lays down in 
sacrifice all earthly rights, bequeathing these or willing 
them by testament or covenant to natural Israel— thus 
sealing for natural Israel the "New (Law) Covenant." 
This was in order that the natural seed may, during the 
Millennial Age, become the Seed of Abraham— as the sands 
of the seashore. And into the same Covenant as members 
of Israel, may come whosoever will of the Gentile nations. 
Thus the Apostle declares that eventually, according to 
Divine promise, Abraham will be "a Father of many nations." 
All of these will be blessed by The Christ, the 
Mediator of the New (Law) Covenant, under which they 
will be permitted to come back into harmony with God 
and obtain eternal life through obedience to its Law. It is 
in accord with this that we read in the same epistle, 
Romans 11:27-31, that fleshly Israel, under that New 
(Law) Covenant, will "obtain mercy through your mercy" 
—the mercy of The Christ, the mercy of the Spiritual Seed 
of Abraham.-Gal. 3:29. 

The Apostle gives us to understand that after the Abrahamic 
Covenant was confirmed through Isaac, his two 
sons became in a measure typical characters, Esau, the 
elder, representing natural Israel, and Jacob, the younger, 
representing spiritual Israel of this Gospel Age, to whom 
the Abrahamic blessing has come. Similarly Jacob in due 
time had the Abrahamic Covenant confirmed to him; and 
his two children, by his wife Rachel, seem to typify the 
fact that there will be two classes of spiritual Israelites, 
represented by Joseph and his younger brother Benjamin. 
We need not rehearse the various evidences that Joseph 
was a type of The Christ, Head and Body. We remember 
how he was hated of his brethren, sold into captivity, 
suffered various abuses for righteousness sake, yet took 
all of his trials faithfully. We remember how he was taken 
from the prison to be next to Pharaoh in the throne, and 
there became the dispenser of the food which kept the 
Egyptians and the Israelites alive through the seven years 
of famine. We have already noticed how beautifully many 
of these features fit as types to the antitype, which will 

R4437 : page 219 

soon be revealed. Christ, both Head and Body, must be 
brought out of the great prison-house of death before the 
exaltation to the Kingdom and glory and honor will be 
effected and the work of feeding the world with the bread 
of life will begin. Joseph, the life-giver of Egypt through 
that bread of life, was unquestionably a type of the greater 
Life-Giver, The Christ, Head and Body. 

Joseph had but one brother of the same mother, but he 
had ten half-brothers. Our thought is that those ten half-brothers 
represent the Jewish people, who will very shortly 
be brought before the exalted Christ and be given a share 



in the great feast which will come to them from his table. 
It will be remembered that Benjamin, Joseph's full brother, 
was with the other ten when the feast was made, but that 
Joseph sent to Benjamin as his portion five times as much 
as any of his brethren received. Benjamin, to our understanding 
represents the "great company," the foolish virgins, 
otherwise called the virgins, the Bride's companions, 
who will follow her into the presence of the King.— 
Psa. 45:14,15. 

There is another reason for considering Benjamin a 
prefigure of the "great company." It is this: his name, 
Benjamin, signifies "son of my pain." He was born in sorrow 
and travail, even as the "great company" will "come 
up out of great tribulation." His mother died in giving 
him birth, as we expect the spiritual feature of the Abrahamic 
Covenant to pass away entirely with the change of 
those who will constitute the "great company." It is our 
thought that the Ancient Worthies belong to this same 
class and, as already suggested, that they will reach the 
spirit plane in the time of trouble at the end of the Millennial 
Age. 

We are loath to give any explanation of types not directly 
or indirectly referred to in the New Testament. 
These types seem to us to be not directly but indirectly 
implied by the New Testament teachings already referred 
to. Those who cannot receive this interpretation are entirely 
welcome to have as their own any better interpretation, 
or none at all, as they see fit. Indeed, we might remark 
that this is true of all that we write. Hence, should 
any cease to see eye to eye with us, they have full right 
to their own opinion, without any need for a quarrel with 
us. If they find new and better light our sentiment towards 
them is, God bless you. We are glad if you have 
something that will do you more good than that which we 
present. If we thought that there were anything better, 
we, too, would want it. But, on the contrary, we are fully 
content with the leadings and blessings, the enlightenments, 
the spiritual food and refreshments which our present 
Lord has spread before us as his family. It is so 
satisfactory a portion that we could not think of looking 
for anything more or different. For long years we hungered 
and thirsted and searched and finally, when we found the 
satisfactory portion, we knew it. It satisfied our longings 
as nothing else could do. The time we have to spare 
from the eating of such food and the dispensing it to 
others we have full use for in giving thanks to the Father 
of Light, who has brought us out of darkness into his 
marvelous light, wherein we greatly rejoice. 



R4437 : page 220 

PROPER AND IMPROPER STATEMENTS 
A subscriber to this Journal writes us inquiring, Is this 



right? and quotes a recent utterance of one of the Pilgrims 
in the following words: 

"I can endorse Brother Russell's views on the New Covenant, 
but cannot see that the term 'Mediator' has the 
restricted significance he attaches to it. He probably 
thought the term applicable only to one who would mediate 
a Covenant, whereas the Greek word really means one 
in the middle. Thus Young gives it, 'a middle man,' 
and Strong, 'a go-between.' This surely describes Christ's 
position towards us in justification. (Rom. 5:1,2; Heb. 7:25.) 
It even looks to me as if an Advocate was a mediator, 
a go-between. 

"However, Christ does not mediate a Covenant for his 
Church. He mediates the matter of making their sacrifice 
a possibility, just as the Jewish priest acted as a mediator 
when the sacrifice was brought to him; he stood between 
God and offerer in the presentation. 

"I really think Brother Russell has the thought in his 
mind this way, even though he limits the meaning of the 
term. And I cannot but believe that if the broad meaning 
of the word mesites was brought to his attention he would 
acquiesce." 

We answer, No! such a statement was not right! It was 
wrong! It produced a false impression! We are much 
surprised that any Pilgrim would so express himself. Such 
an expression would certainly have the effect of arousing 
the suspicion of our friends, while no doubt the opponents 
of the Harvest Work would appreciate it. Instead of 
stating himself as opposed to Brother Russell's presentations 
on the Mediator and being sure that by and by 
Brother Russell would see his expressed position and 
surely agree with it, the Pilgrim should have realized that 
this was neither the wise nor the truthful presentation. 
What he hoped to gain by such an expression we know not. 

According to his own statement he should more wisely 
and more truthfully have expressed himself about as 
follows:— 

"I fully agree with Brother Russell's presentation in the 
'Watch Tower' respecting the Mediator. He therein stated 
that our English word Mediator is quite broad enough to 
cover the work done by our Redeemer for the Church; 
but that the Scriptural usage of the word Mediator confines 
it to a mediator of a Covenant. Hence, to be in accord 
with the Scriptural usage we will do wisely to use the word 
Mediator in the same restricted sense— only in connection 
with a Covenant. It is wise for us to use the Bible term 
Advocate when referring to our Lord's work for the Church. 
See the 'Watch Tower' April 1, '09, page 106, column 2, 
paragraph 3." 

Again we repeat that the usage of a word in the Bible 
should guide us in our use of it. If the word Mediator were 
loosely used in the Bible in respect to any and all kinds 
of service between God and the Church, then we, too, 
might so use it. But as soon as we find out that it is not so 
used, we should desist from such a use of it and use it 
only in harmony with the Biblical usage. This is why we 



no longer use the word Mediator in respect to our Lord's 
various and valuable services for the Church, and refer to 
him as the Bible does— as "the Mediator of the New 
(Law) Covenant," but as our "Advocate with the Father." 

That New (Law) Covenant is for natural Israel and the 
remainder of the world, and not for the Church of this 
Gospel Age, which Church is the Body of Christ, the Body 
of the great King, Mediator, Judge and Priest. 

Only one text containing the word Mediator could be in 
doubt, and it only until the right interpretation is suggested. 
The text is— "There is one God and one mediator 
between God and men, the man Christ Jesus, who gave 
himself a ransom for all, to be testified in due time."— 
1 Tim. 2:5,6. 

The Apostle does not here refer to the Church, but to the 
world. Of the Church Jesus said, "Ye are not of the world, 
even as I am not of the world." The Apostle tells us that 
Jesus is the Mediator between God and the world— men. 
He is not mediating now, but, as the Mediator is getting 
ready to deal with the world in the Father's stead. He is 
now performing the sacrifice of atonement— accepting the 
willing offerings of believers and counting their sufferings 
as his own, even unto death. Shortly, with these his members, 
added, this great Mediator will present the blood 
which will seal the New (Law) Covenant. And then the 
blessing of Israel and all the nations by restitution opportunities 
will begin. Note the context. The Apostle is not 
discussing the Church, but the world— "kings and all in 
authority." 

When did our Lord become the Mediator of the New 
(Law) Covenant or a mediator in any sense? Not when he 
was born the babe of Bethlehem! Not when baptized at 
Jordan! but when he had sacrificed to the finish and was 
raised from the dead to be a Prince and a Savior, as the 
Head of the Spiritual Seed of Abraham. That entire Seed 
will be the Mediator when all the sacrificing will be finished 
and the entire Church glorified. 

But look again! In the Old Testament this "Messenger 
of the Covenant" is mentioned in Malachi 3:1. And the 
mention of a New (Law) Covenant in Jeremiah 31:31 implies 
a mediator for it. Nevertheless the scroll of Divine 
purpose was still sealed and in the hand of Jehovah, up to 
the time that the Lamb had been slain. Not until after he 
was slain was it proclaimed, Worthy is the Lamb that was 
slain to receive glory and honor, etc., and the scroll.— 
Rev. 5:1-12. 

The explanation is that God prophetically foretold that 
he would find one worthy of this great honor of being 
Abraham's Seed and Mediator of the New (Law) Covenant. 
However, it was left to our Lord still to demonstrate his 
worthiness to be that one— that Mediator. Nor was his 
trial a mere farce! He was in an agony in Gethsemane 
lest he had failed to make his calling and election sure. 
Do we not read, "He offered up strong crying and tears 
unto him who was able to save him out of death, and was 
heard in regard to the thing which he feared"? (Heb. 5:7.) 



And is it not the same with his members— the members 
of the Mediator? He who foreknew Jesus foreknew us also 
by Jesus. Were we not "chosen in him from before the 
foundation of the world"? Hence the exhortation to us, 
also, to make our calling and election sure. 

R4438 : page 220 

Nor does the Church need either a mediator or a Covenant 
for her justification. She is justified by faith, not by 
works of the Law either under the Old Law Covenant or 
under the New (Law) Covenant. As it is written, "Abraham 
was justified by faith"— and so were all the Ancient Worthies, 
of whom it is written, "They had this testimony, that 
they pleased God." This testimony to their justification 
was given long before Jesus was born. And similarly, before 
Jesus died, he testified, "The Father himself loveth 
you." If God loves us and we love God, what need is there 
for a mediator between lovers? See how we were justified. 
-Rom. 4:22-24; Gal. 3:14. 

Indeed our Lord's testimony is that all called during this 
Gospel Age come first to the Father and then to the Son. 
We read: "No man can come unto me, except the Father 
which sent me draw him." 

Let us settle the matter in our hearts that our call is to 
become members of the Mediator between God and the 
world— the antitype of Moses, the mediator of the Law 
Covenant. This antitypical Moses has been in process of 
raising up for nearly nineteen centuries. (Acts 3:22,23.) 
Our Redeemer's death is the "surety" for us, his members, 
and for the New (Law) Covenant.— Heb. 7:22. 

If our correspondent is in communication with the Pilgrim 
Brother whom he quotes, we trust that he will call his 
attention to this, our reply. We prefer not to inquire for 
his name. 



R4438 : page 221 

LIKE UNTO JANNES AND JAMBRES 

"NOW as Jannes and Jambres withstood Moses, so 
do these also resist the truth: men of corrupt 
minds, reprobate concerning the faith. But 
they shall proceed no further: for their folly shall be 
manifest to all men, as theirs also was. But thou hast 
fully known my doctrine, manner of life, purpose, faith, 
long suffering, charity, patience, persecutions, afflictions, 
which came unto me at Antioch, at Iconium, at Lystra; 
what persecution I endured; but out of them all the Lord 
delivered me. Yea, and all that will live godly in Christ 
Jesus shall suffer persecution. But evil men and leaders 
astray shall wax worse and worse, deceiving and being 
deceived. But continue thou in the things which thou hast 
learned and hast been assured of, knowing of whom thou 



hast learned them."— 2 Tim. 3:8-14. 

We are asked whether or not this Scripture is applicable 
to the present time; and, if so, how we shall understand 
the expression, "Men of corrupt minds"? Shall we look 
for these amongst moral reprobates? 

We reply that we should understand this Scripture to 
be applicable at the present time. We should be able to 
find classes today corresponding to Jannes and Jambres. 
The Apostle distinctly says in introducing these words, 
"This know also that in the last days [of the age] perilous 
times shall come." Undoubtedly the Apostle meant that 
we should look for the fulfillment of his declaration in 
the "harvest" or end of the Gospel Age. 

We are not to expect these leaders astray in the Church 
to be moral lepers, reprobates. Assuredly Satan would 
be too wise to use such as his tools, knowing that he could 
effect his purposes better through those who outwardly, at 
least, would be moral and religious. Notice that the 
Apostle did not say reprobate as respects morals, but 
reprobates as respects the faith. It does not say men of 
corrupt morals, but does say men of corrupt minds— men 
whose minds have become perverted, changed, altered, as 
respects the Truth. He who does not see any fulfillment 
of this prophecy and who yet believes that we are living 
in the close of the Gospel Age should certainly at once begin 
to look for them and endeavor to locate them. 

This passage, in harmony with many other Scriptures, 
assures us of the trials of faith to be expected in this, our 
day. Remember the Apostle's words respecting the fire of 
this day, which shall try every man's work, of what sort 
it is— gold, silver, precious stones, wood, hay, stubble. Remember 
the Prophet Malachi's declaration that in this 
time the special Messenger of the New Covenant would 
sit as a refiner and purifier of silver. Remember the 
Prophet David's explanation of our day with its arrows, 
pestilences, stumbling blocks, etc., and the declaration that 
a thousand would fall at our side. 

Let us not forget either our Lord's positive assurances, 
that he would keep his very own, his elect— those making 
their calling and election sure. Remember the declaration 
respecting this elect Body of Christ that a thousand 
shall fall at thy side, ten thousand at thy right hand, but 
it shall not come nigh thee, because thou hast made the 
Lord thy refuge and habitation. The shielded ones will be 
those who live very near to the Lord— not only outwardly, 
but in their heart experiences. These very elect have the 
assurance that God will give his messengers charge concerning 
them, so that the feet shall not be dashed against 
the stumbling stone, but be borne up, lifted higher by the 
Divinely appointed agencies of Jehovah.— Psalm 91. 

Remember again the assurance of the Apostle that although 
this day shall come upon many "as a thief and as a 
snare," and that they should not escape the snares, nevertheless 
the faithful would not be in darkness. Remember 
our Lord's assurances that although trials and difficulties 
are to be expected which would deceive, if it were 



possible, the very elect, yet it will not be possible to deceive 
the very elect. So close will they be in sympathetic 
fellowship with the great Shepherd that they will discern 
his voice and not be deceived by others, of the Jannes and 
Jambres class.— Mark 13:22. 

Remember also the Apostle's words, "Take unto you the 
whole armor of God, that ye may be able to withstand in 
the evil day, and, having done all, to stand." (Eph. 6:13.) 
He pictures the armor, the protection that would be granted 
to a certain class— the helmet, the breastplate, the shield, 
the sword of the spirit. He expressly indicated that these 
defences would be provided for "the evil day" with which 
our age would close. He specially advised that while this 
armor was available to all of God's people and to be had 

R4439 : page 221 

for the putting on, nevertheless only those who will put it 

on will be safe. Why so, is it asked? We reply that this 

is one of God's tests by which he would prove our love, 

our devotion, our loyalty to him. Those of little love will 

be careless respecting the details of the Divine Plan of 

the Ages. "They will not have time" to search the Scriptures. 

They will not be disposed to make use of the agencies 

which God will use for providing this armament in 

this evil day. They will have preference for some sectarian 

brand of armor or insist that it must come from 

some particular quarter, or refuse to wear any armor that 

they have not manufactured for themselves, or refuse assistance 

in putting on the armor of light. 

All such objections, we may be sure, would mean to the 
Lord disloyalty, headiness, self-will, lack of humility, etc., 
incompatible with the conditions of his "call." He is looking 
for those who humble themselves, and who are glad to 
have his Truth at any cost, and whose hearts, long famished, 
hunger and thirst for the Truth, and who know the 
Shepherd's voice, and who find in his message that which 
"satisfies their longings as nothing else could do." These 
will gladly accept the armament and by becoming faithful 
students will make it their own— will put it on. These 
will be kept while others will fall at their side. 

Those who fall away after once having been partially enlightened, 
for the most part, are those who never properly 
applied themselves to know, to understand the Divine Plan. 
Their disobedience to the words of the Lord through the 
Apostle, their neglect to put on the armor, proved that they 
are not of the class whom the Lord prefers in the present 
"election." 

On the other hand it must not surprise us either, that 
some, after wearing the armor, they tell us for eighteen 
years and preaching to others its value and necessity, 
should put it off now, in the closing hours as it were. And 
now, while the Enemy is about and the fight in progress, 
they assure us that this armor is proving unreliable, that 
they themselves have been deceived and have deceived 
others and that they now have taken it off, exchanging it 



for a new kind of their own make and brand. We are 
sorry for such. 

Doubtless there were many people in Moses' day who 
were not at all in sympathy with him and his presentations, 
but who let him alone and hindered him not. Jannes 
and Jambres, on the contrary, specially opposed Moses and 
sought to bring to naught the force of his presentations to 
Pharaoh and the Egyptians, by imitating his doings to a 
certain degree. It is not known if these two men were 
Hebrews or not. Their names are nowhere else mentioned 
in the Scriptures, though they are mentioned in the Jewish 
Talmud, where the Hebrew names given justify the inference 
that they were Hebrews who, to curry favor with 
Pharaoh or to add to their own fame, resisted Moses and 
his presentations of Divine Truth, seeking to nullify the 
influence of the latter. Have we not some similarity in 
the conditions of the present day? Are there not some 
whom St. John describes as having gone out from us because 
they are not of us? Do not these, instead of assisting 
with the Harvest Work, now seek by every power they 
possess to oppose it, to nullify it, to belittle its influence? 
But St. Paul declares that they shall not go far in this 
opposition until "their folly shall be made manifest," as 
that of Jannes and Jambres was— by their failure to hinder 
the Lord's work. 

Let us leave such matters with the Lord to reward and 
to rectify in his own time and way. Let us seek by patient 
perseverance in well-doing, loyalty, faithfulness, to make 
our calling and election sure. 



R4439 : page 222 

"WEEP NOT FOR ME," BUT "WATCH AND PRAY" 

We give an extract from a letter just received from a 
brother who was active in opposing the Vow, and our 
answer, for the benefit of all our readers. We are glad 
to note the loving solicitude of our friends on our behalf, 
and surely deeply appreciate the fact that more prayers 
ascend for us daily than probably were ever received at 
the throne of heavenly grace for any other person who 
ever lived. The knowledge of this is a constant source 
of strength and encouragement for which we continually 
thank God, making mention of all of his dear Israel in 
our prayers. However, dear friends, do not become so 
absorbed in thought and prayer for us that you will 
neglect to follow the Master's advice to also Watch and 
Pray for yourselves. 

EXTRACT FROM A LETTER 

(a.) A Test of Faith— that this time of inspection was 
being delayed; 
(b.) A Test of Brotherly Love— a tendency to smite or 



lord it over his fellow-servants; 

(c.) A Test of Loyalty— eating and drinking with the 
drunken, becoming drunk as Luke says. 

Brother, are you being tested along those lines? If 
that is too blunt or embarrassing a question, I rescind it, 
but the matter weighs pretty heavily upon my heart, and 
if you are, I want to let others know and exhort them 
to special prayer along those lines. 

We replied as follows: 
DEAR BROTHER KELL:- 

Your favor of the 1 1th reaches me on my return. 
Thanks for its words of caution and kindness. I occupy 
a peculiar position, dear brother— opposed by the hosts 
of Babylon and surrounded by a small company of friends 
who, by reason of the Truth, have their senses exercised 
to such an extent as makes them the most critical people 
in the world. The world, the flesh, the devil and Babylon 
I make no particular effort to please. I am delighted 
to use every legitimate opportunity to serve and to please 
the "brethren." But I must not wonder at it if I fail 
to please all of them all the time. My resolution, therefore, 
is and has long been, to do my best to please the 
Lord and to leave it to him to keep all his true sheep 
from stumbling over my imperfections or through their 
own awkwardness and combativeness. 

I note your three queries and am happy to tell you 
that none of them is embarrassing. My faith, my brotherly 
love and my loyalty to the Lord and his Word, I 
would not boast of, though I rejoice that, by the grace 
of God, I am what I am in this respect. 

Having so little trouble along these lines myself, yet 
having them brought to my attention frequently by dear 
and well-meaning brethren, has led me to philosophise 
upon the subject. My conclusion is that these dear brethren 
are judging me by themselves and that, knowing 
their own trials and difficulties, they sympathetically suppose 
that I am similarly afflicted. Indeed some of them 
have plainly intimated that if they occupied my position 
they would surely be away off on all of these points, and 
hence marvel if I would not be. 

I take no credit to myself, dear brother. I had the 
good fortune to be born with the organ of self-esteem 
very small and, whatever my character is, I am pleased 
to credit any good to the grace of him "who loved us 
and bought us with his precious blood." 

Hastily your brother and servant in the Lord. 



R4439 : page 222 

ABRAHAM'S THREE WIVES 

A CORRESPONDENT objects to our suggestion that 

Keturah, Abraham's third wife, represented the 

New Covenant, as his secondary wife, Hagar, represented 



the Law Covenant, and his primary wife, Sarah, 
represented the Covenant of Grace, "the New Jerusalem, 
the mother of us all," the mother of the promised seed, 
Isaac, typical of Christ Jesus the Head and the Church his 
Body, as the Apostle declares in Galatians 3:29; 4:28. 

The objection is that Keturah was not a wife, but a concubine 
or secondary wife, and that Abraham had several 
of these, according to Genesis 25:5,6, where we read, 
"Abraham gave gifts to the sons of his concubines." The 
claim further is that Abraham was already old at the time 
of Isaac's birth and that the probabilities are that he had 
several concubines while Sarah was still living. 

We reply that there is always room to speculate in contradiction 
to the plain statements of Scripture; so that the 
worldly-wise and all who lack faith in the Divine record 
will have abundant opportunity to stumble themselves. 
The Scripture record is clear to the effect that Abraham's 
companion, fully recognized as his wife and joint-heir, was 
Sarah, and that her son was specially recognized as Abraham's 
heir. As for Hagar and Keturah, the record is similarly 
explicit— that they bore children to Abraham— the 
former with Sarah's consent and as her special representative, 
the latter after Sarah's death. Whether these two 
women be termed secondary wives or concubines matters 
nothing and we need not quibble over a point of no consequence. 
Evidently concubine is the name which preferably 
describes the relationship of these two women to 
Abraham. And this was eminently proper, since it was 

R4440 : page 222 

evidently the Divine intention, as declared by the Apostle, 
that Abraham himself should be a type of the Almighty, 
Sarah a type of the Abrahamic Covenant, and her son 
Isaac a type of The Christ, the Messiah, the Prophet, 
Priest, Mediator, King, Judge, through whom the blessing 
of the Almighty should ultimately proceed to all the families 
of the earth. The Apostle carries out this figure by 
showing that Hagar, the bondwoman or concubine, represented 
the Law Covenant, and that her child Ishmael represented 
the Jewish people, born under that Law Covenant. 
The Apostle shows that they could not be both children 
of the bondwoman and children of the free woman. He 
shows that the Jews, in order to become united to Christ 
and members of the spiritual Isaac, the heir of all, must 
become dead to the Law Covenant and be married to 
Christ, begotten of the holy Spirit; otherwise they could 
have neither part nor lot in the spiritual Seed of Abraham. 
The Apostle does not carry the figure on and declare that 
Keturah typified the New (Law) Covenant. We believe 
that this omission was of Divine intention, because the 
time for this particular feature of the Divine program to 
be clearly understood was not yet due. 

One thing, however, can be clearly seen by all who have 
the eyes of their understanding open and their spiritual 
senses exercised, and that is that Isaac did not have two 



mothers. It was the same Sarah who from the first was 
recognized by Abraham as his mate and only full and 
proper wife, who for so long was barren, but who finally 
bore Isaac, the seed of promise. Similarly the Sarah Covenant, 
which was barren for centuries, at our Lord's First 
Advent bore him as the Antitypical Seed of Abraham. 
Then also the Hagar or Law Covenant and her child, the 
Jewish nation, were "cast out." In the Apostle's figure of 
Galatians 4:28 he represents the spirit-begotten, faithful 
overcomers of the Church, as members of the Antitypical 
Isaac, the Spiritual Seed of the Sarah Covenant. "We, 
brethren, as Isaac was, are the children of the promise." 
In the picture he gives us in Galatians 3:29 the Apostle 
presents the Church as the Bride of Isaac and his joint-heir 
—now betrothed and in the end of the age to be married 
to him, and to enter into his mother's tent— to 
enter into all the blessings and privileges that belong 
specially to this great Covenant which God made with 
Abraham and which he confirmed with an oath. 

The record in Genesis 24:67 and 25:1 shows that after 
Sarah's death Abraham took Keturah as his wife— not, 
however, as taking the full place of Sarah as his joint-heir, 
as the word wife in olden times evidently signified. She 
was accepted as his companion in a secondary sense without 

R4440 : page 223 

disparagement to the first wife Sarah and her son 

Isaac, to whom Abraham "gave all that he had." We submit 

that Keturah is a very proper figure of the New (Law) 

Covenant, as Hagar was of the old Law Covenant. It is 

not the Oath-bound Covenant, which relates to the Spiritual 

Seed, which becomes heir of all. As the Law Covenant was 

no part of the original one, but merely an addition to it— 

so likewise the New Covenant is an addition to the Oath-bound 

Sarah Covenant. As the children of Hagar and the 

children of Keturah did not inherit the original promise, 

so neither will those who inherit the New Covenant be 

fellow-heirs with those who inherit as members of Isaac 

or as his bride and joint-heir. 

We therefore deny that it is possible for anybody to be 
logically, truthfully or Scripturally a child of two Covenants 
or two mothers at the same time. And on the other 
hand we urge the reasonableness of the proposition that 
if the Law Covenant was represented as a mother and a 
concubine wife the New (Law) Covenant, to take its place, 
should also logically appear as a concubine wife. We also 
urge upon the attention of all that the word "New" implies, 
as the Apostle suggests, that another had become old 
and ready to vanish away. It was not the original Oath-bound 
Covenant which vanished away, but the Law Covenant. 
Hence the New Covenant did not take the place of 
the original or Sarah Covenant, but is to take the place of 
the old Law Covenant as a New (Law) Covenant under a 
new Mediator, superior to Moses.— Acts 3:22,23. 

The query is raised, Was not our Lord the child or seed 



of two Covenants or two mothers, since we read that he 
was "born under the Law (Hagar) Covenant" and the 
Apostle teaches that he was the Seed of the original or 
Sarah Covenant? 

We answer, No ! If our Lord Jesus had kept the Law 
Covenant merely and had not consecrated his life, had not 
sacrificed it, he might thus have had eternal life as an 
earthly being. Then truly he might have claimed to be 
Abraham's seed and heir of all earthly things. But, then, 
he could not have been the promised seed; for the promised 
seed was to "bless all the families of the earth"— implying 
the resurrection of the dead. This blessing ability 
could be our Lord's not by keeping the Law and becoming 
Hagar's wonderful son, but by sacrificing all of the 
earthly blessings proffered by the Hagar Covenant, accepting 
instead the spiritual privileges of the Sarah Covenant. 
Let us get clearly in mind that it was not the "man Jesus," 
but the "new creature" Jesus who became heir of all and 
who liveth to bless Israel and all nations. Similarly only 
such believers as have become New Creatures, begotten of 
the holy Spirit, are members of the great Prophet, Priest, 
King, Mediator and Judge which God is now raising up as 
the Seed of Abraham to bless the world. 



R4440 : page 223 

SAMPLES OF INTERESTING LETTERS 

BELOVED BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

I want to express to you the rejoicing in my heart 
in that you are safely back from your European trip, 
and that you were so richly blessed amongst our dear 
brethren across the water. I could almost fancy myself 
there with you from the vivid presentations of your letters 
as published in "The Watch Tower." 

Also I want to tell you of the great blessing I have 
experienced from the renewal of the Vow. When I took 
that Vow last year I had not given much thought to the 
matter and consequently took it in rather a half-hearted 
way. I took it more in the sense of a resolution on my 
part than as a promise or covenant. I read in the "Tower" 
of great blessings coming to the hearts of those who had 
taken the Vow and wondered why I was not much happier 
too. Thinking over the matter carefully and prayerfully, 
it occurred to me that there is a difference between a 
resolution and a promise; that a resolution involved only 
myself, whereas a promise involves two parties— the Lord 
and myself. As I have said, I had taken the Vow with 
more or less half-heartedness, thinking I did not need to 
concern myself about certain parts of it, which I felt 
quite confident did not apply in my case. 

Dear Brother, it was those certain parts I needed most 
to be on guard against and did not know it. Where I 
felt especially strong there was I weakest, and I thought 



of the similarity in Paul's case. The Lord allowed me to 
come into a severe mental chastisement. For days I was 
most miserable, most unhappy. Finally it dawned on my 
mind that I had not rightly taken the Vow. I prayed 
earnestly for divine guidance and took the Vow anew, and 
this time with whole-heartedness and went to sleep peacefully. 
Early on the morrow— before breakfast— my 
prayer received answer. God's blessing came suddenly 
and pronouncedly. My heart gave as it were a mighty 
bound. My soul filled with rejoicing. I felt like shouting 
aloud. I never was so happy in my life. There is now in 
my heart a peace that passes all previous comprehension 
of heavenly bliss. I know of a surety now that God wants 
his children to take that Vow. Nothing in the nature of 
argument or reasoning to the contrary could have any 
effect on my mind. As Paul of old has said, "I know." 
My experience in this connection is wonderful. Such a 
change of blessing from comparative misery I could not 
have believed possible. Oh, that all the dear saints could 
realize the blessedness resulting from the proper taking 
of the Vow that I have realized from its renewal in the 
proper attitude of heart. 

Pray for me, brother, as I pray for you and the Bethel 
family and all of like faith. The Lord bless you for 
giving me the opportunity to get so close to the Lord. 
Thank God for the Vow. 

Your brother in Christ, 

J. A. BOHNET. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

I have been feasting on the fat things God has been 
providing for the "household of faith" out of his storehouse, 
things both new and old in this harvest time. 
When I first came to the table which God has been 
pleased to appoint you steward of I was spiritually 
starved. I had sat at many other tables, and while I 
had been stimulated by the wine of Babylon I was 
hungry for solid food, and, thank God, I found just 
what I was hungering for when I received Present 
Truth. I am now able to "give a reason for the hope 
that is within me." 

Dear Brother, the spiritual food God has empowered 
you to provide the "household of faith" in due season 
satisfies me fully, and I have come to realize that God 
is using one channel through which he is serving us 
who have made a covenant with him by sacrifice. 

R4441 : page 223 

So when the Vow came out, although I had never 
realized any danger to myself from the fallen angels, I 
did not hesitate in making it mine, knowing that it 
must be "meat in due season"; and so it has proved to 
me. Within a month after taking the Vow I was tried 
along those very lines, and if it had not been for my 



Vow I should very likely have had my curiosity 
awakened and perhaps have fallen into a snare of the 
Evil One. 

Although I may not fully understand some of the 
deep spiritual things being served us, I know God is 
providing the food through his own appointed way and 
it must be good and wholesome. 

Dear Brother, there are thousands like myself who 
are feasting and growing strong on the good things God 
is providing us through you; many you may never hear 
from or of until we all meet beyond the vail. We pray 
for you. 

I am your brother in his service, 

FRANK W. MAIN,-Mich. 



page 224 

PUBLIC MINISTRIES OF THE TRUTH 

UNDER THE AUSPICES OF PEOPLES PULPIT 
ASSOCIATION OF BROOKLYN, N.Y. 



ONE-DAY LOCAL CONVENTIONS ADDRESSED BY THE 
EDITOR OF THIS JOURNAL AS FOLLOWS: 

RE RATES TO ST. JOSEPH (MO.) CONVENTION 

As yet the railroads have declined to grant any reduction 
in the fares to St. Joseph, but we still hope to receive some 
concessions from the Southwest. If none is granted in the 
end, we suggest that friends in parties purchase mileage books 
which will give them a two-cent per mile rate. This will be 
equivalent to fare-and-one-third in three-cent per mile territory. 

TOLEDO, OHIO, AUGUST 3-5 

Sessions in Memorial Hall, Cor. Ontario and Adams Sts. 
Program provided for Tuesday and Wednesday; Brother 
Russell to be present on Thursday the 5th, with meeting for 
the Public at 8 p.m. Subject, "Man's Past, Present and 
Future in the Light of the Bible." 

BROOKLYN, N.Y., AUGUST 8 

SANDUSKY, OHIO, AUGUST 15 

SYRACUSE, N.Y., AUGUST 22 

WATERTOWN, N.Y., AUGUST 29 



page 226 

STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES 
"MILLENNIAL DAWN" 
THESE STUDIES ARE RECOMMENDED TO STUDENTS AS VERITABLE "BIBLE KEYS. 
PRICES ARE NET AND BARELY COVER THE COST OF PRODUCTION. 
WHEN DELIVERED BY COLPORTEUR THE COST AND PRICE ARE INCREASED. 

SERIES L, The Plan of the Ages, gives an outline of the divine plan 
revealed in the Bible, relating to man's redemption and restitiution: 
386 pages, in embossed cloth, 25c. (IS. l/2d.). India paper edition, 75c. 
(3S. l-l/2d.). 

This volume has been published as a special issue of our journal— 
at the extremely low price of 5c a copy, in any quantity, postage included. 
(To foreign countries, 9c.) This enables people of slender 
purse to herald far and wide the good tidings in a most helpful form. 

SERIES II., The Time is at Hand, treats of the manner and time of 
the Lord's second coming, considering the Bible Testimony on this 
subject: 370 pages, in embossed cloth 25c. (IS. l/2d.). India paper 
edition, 75c. (3S. l-l/2d.). 

SERIES III., Thy Kingdom Come, considers prophesies which mark 
events connected with the "Time of the End," the glorification of the 
Church and the establishment of the Millennial Kingdom; it also contains 
a chapter on the Great Pyramid, showing its corroboration of the dates and 
other teachings of the Bible: 384 pages, in embossed cloth 
25c (IS. l/2d.). India paper edition, 75c. (3S. I-l/2d.). 

SERIES IV., The Day of Vengeance, shows that the dissolution of the 
present order of things is in progress, and that all the panaceas offered 
are valueless to avert the predicted end. It marks in these events the 
fulfilment of prophecy, noting specially our Lord's great prophecy of 
Matt. 24, and Zech. 14:1-9: 660 pages, in embossed cloth 30c. (IS. 3d.). 
India paper edition. 85c (3S. 6-l/2d.). 

SERIES V., The At-one-ment Between God and Man, treats an all-important 
subject— the hub, the center around which all the features 
of divine grace revolve. Its topic deserves the most careful and 
prayerful consideration on the part of all true Christians: 507 pages, in 
embossed cloth 30c. (IS. 3d.). Indea paper edition 85c (3S. 6-l/2d.). 

SERIES VI., The New Creation, deals with the Creative Week, Genesis 
1 and 2, and with the Church, God's "New Creation." It examines 
the personnel, organization, rites, ceremonies, obligations and 
hopes appertaining to those called and accepted as members of the 
body under the Head: 740 pages, in embossed cloth 30c. (IS. 3d.). 
India paper edition, 85c (3S. 6-l/2d.). 

The above prices include postage. 

IN FULL LEATHER BINDING, gilt edges, the set (6 vols.) $3.00, 
(12S. 6d.), plus postage 60c (IS.). 

Is also published in foreign languages as follows: in German, six vols., 
in Swedish Vols. 1, 2, 3, 5 and 6; in Dano-Norwegian, three vols.; 
in Greek three vols; in French, two vols.; in Hollandish, Spanish, 
and Italian, one vol. each; bound in cloth, uniform with English edition, 
prices the same; in Polish, condensed edition, one vol., 10 cents. 



page 225 

SEMI-MONTHLY 


