Praise Jehovah Daily
1 Our God, Jehovah, is a marvelous, loving Creator, the Source of all life and happiness. In view of his greatness, he truly is deserving of praise from all his creation. Individually, we wish to say as did the psalmist: “I will add to all your praise. My own mouth will recount your righteousness, all day long your salvation.” (Ps. 71:14, 15) To do this, we must seek ways to praise Jehovah day by day and be motivated to speak well of him, his righteousness, and his provisions for salvation.
2 The early Christians set a fine example in praising Jehovah. In reference to the 3,000 baptized at Pentecost, we read at Acts 2:46, 47: “Day after day they were in constant attendance at the temple with one accord, . . . praising God and finding favor with all the people. . . . [And] Jehovah continued to join to them daily those being saved.” They were learning wonderful truths about Jehovah and his Messiah. Their joy was contagious, encouraging still others to listen and learn and to praise Jehovah.
3 Opportunities Are Available Every Day: Today many find that they can praise Jehovah daily by informal witnessing. Advance planning helps them to be more productive. A sister who had resolved to share in informal witnessing found that someone had smashed two windows and broken into her car. She called a repair service and then prepared to witness to the serviceman. Her preparation included praying for Jehovah’s direction. As it turned out, she witnessed to the serviceman for an hour and placed the Live Forever book with him.
4 Another sister regularly met a neighbor while they were walking their dogs. During one encounter, they had a serious conversation about life’s problems, and that led to more discussions. In time, a Bible study was started. Interestingly, the neighbor later confessed that she would not have listened to Jehovah’s Witnesses if they had called at her door, since she did not believe in God or the Bible.
5 Some find it possible to give a witness when salesmen or others call at their door. A sister in Ireland received a call from a man selling life insurance. She explained that she is looking forward to enjoying everlasting life. This was an entirely new thought to this man, who had been raised as a Roman Catholic. He accepted the Live Forever book, attended a meeting the following week, and agreed to have a Bible study. Now this salesman is a baptized brother.
6 All of us should be alert to opportunities to praise Jehovah daily. It is helpful to keep a few magazines or tracts where they can be seen and can be readily offered to visitors. In some areas a little time spent on a park bench might give you several chances to witness to others who stop to relax for a few minutes. Some Witness youths in school keep Bible literature on their desk as a way to initiate a conversation with someone who notices it and asks questions. Have in mind one or two Scripture references that you can use. Ask Jehovah to help you. You will be blessed for doing so.​—1 John 5:14.

