Prepare for and Enjoy Congregation Meetings
1 As an association of brothers, we wisely congregate regularly for our weekly meetings. (1 Tim. 4:15, 16) How can we enjoy and derive the most benefit from them?
2 Time should be set aside on a regular basis to prepare for the meetings. Some may be able to spend more time in preparation than others. However, no matter how busy we are, it is wise to find some time to prepare for meetings. Preparing together as a family is especially beneficial.​—Eph. 5:15, 16.
3 For the Theocratic Ministry School: Strive to keep up with the weekly Bible reading schedule. (Josh. 1:8) Review the material that will be covered, and bring the necessary publications so that you can follow along with the speakers. Think about ways you can use this information in your ministry.
4 For the Service Meeting: Look over the program outlined in Our Kingdom Ministry. Read the articles that will be discussed. If material from a Watchtower article or some other publication will be considered, look that up and read it too. If field service presentations will be demonstrated, review these in advance so that you will be ready to use them in your ministry.
5 For the Watchtower Study: Read over the lesson in advance, noting the answers to the questions. Looking up the cited scriptures will help you to get a better understanding. Meditating on how the lesson fits in with what you already know will broaden your knowledge. Plan to participate during the study by preparing brief comments on at least one or two paragraphs. This is an important way to make “public declaration of our hope.”​—Heb. 10:23.
6 For the Congregation Book Study: First, survey the material; consider the chapter title and subheadings. Then, as you read, take note of the key ideas. Review the supporting Bible verses. Try to answer the questions in your own words. When you have prepared the lesson, review it in your mind. Try to recall the main points and lines of reasoning.​—2 Tim. 2:15.
7 Enjoy the Meetings: To enjoy the meetings to the full, it is important to be on time in order to share in the opening prayer, asking for Jehovah’s spirit. You also benefit from the refreshing Kingdom songs. If you do not have young ones or some other reason for sitting in the back of the hall, likely you will find that if you sit toward the front, there will be fewer distractions and you will get more out of the program. Parents with little ones who may have to be taken out during the meeting can minimize the distraction by sitting close to the aisle and toward the rear.
8 Endeavor to look up the scriptures that are read. This will help you remember what you hear. Talking to your family and friends about what you learn will impress the information on your mind. Applying these suggestions will make the meetings more meaningful and enjoyable, and they will truly “incite [us] to love and fine works.”​—Heb. 10:24, 25.

