Service Meetings for December
Week Starting December 4
Song 181
10 min: Local announcements. Selected Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry.
15 min: “Praise Jehovah Daily.” Questions and answers. Have paragraphs read. Have one or two publishers relate encouraging experiences enjoyed while witnessing informally.
20 min: “Offering the Book Knowledge That Leads to Everlasting Life.” Enthusiastically recommend offering the new book, especially to those who have manifested interest in the past. Review the suggested presentations, and have one or two of these demonstrated. Include appropriate explanations of how householder can make donation to worldwide work.
Song 224 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting December 11
Song 201
13 min: Local announcements. Accounts report. Briefly review some reasons why we should plan for a full and meaningful share in field service. Rather than limit ourselves to an hour or so when we go out, why not arrange to stay out for two hours or more if possible? Success usually depends on lining up return visits in advance and arranging to work with others who plan to stay out for two hours or more.
15 min: Local needs. Or a talk based on the article “The Rewards of Persistence,” from the August 1, 1995, Watchtower, pages 25-9.
17 min: “Prepare for and Enjoy Congregation Meetings.” Talk and discussion. Invite one or two publishers to relate what they do that helps them to enjoy the meetings and get the full benefit from them.
Song 28 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting December 18
Song 139
10 min: Local announcements. Offer some suggestions on how to respond tactfully to holiday greetings. Announce special witnessing arrangements for December 25.
15 min: “Make Your Advancement Manifest.” Questions and answers.
20 min: “Return to Those Who Showed Interest.” Review suggested presentations, and have two brief demonstrations. Encourage all to make return visits with the goal of starting studies in the Knowledge book.
Song 44 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting December 25
Song 88
5 min: Local announcements. If your meeting times are due to change January 1, give encouragement for all to give full support by making any needed adjustments. (See December 1994 Our Kingdom Ministry, page 2.) Announce special witnessing arrangements for January 1.
15 min: Question Box. Two elders discuss value of health-care power of attorney (proxy) forms used locally, which the congregation received from the Society last year. Use information from the December 1994 Our Kingdom Ministry announcement; the November 15, 1994, letter to all congregations; and the question-and-answer folder that accompanies the power of attorney form in use in your area. Highlight the headings, some of the questions and answers, and the checklist with references from the question-and-answer folder. (All bodies of elders should follow the instructions in the September 20, 1995, letter from the Society about supplying copies of these materials to the publishers.)
25 min: “Letting Our Light Shine Continuously.” Base brief introduction on paragraphs 1-5. Paragraphs 6-16 to be covered by questions and answers. Read paragraphs 6-9, 15, and 16. Use paragraphs 17-19 for conclusion. Handled by service overseer if possible.
Song 3 and concluding prayer.

