Economic Problems​—What Solution?
“FROM what source are there wars and from what source are there fights among you?” asked the Bible writer James. “Are they not from this source, namely, from your cravings for sensual pleasure that carry on a conflict in your members? You desire, and yet you do not have. You go on murdering and coveting, and yet you are not able to obtain. You go on fighting and waging war.” (James 4:1, 2) Does this not ring true? Is not the real problem man himself? Does not his insatiable desire to possess things cause economic conflicts?
It is greed for profit, not unselfish concern for one’s fellowman, that has caused bankers to lend such enormous funds to countries that cannot pay them back. And the Bible roundly condemns such profiteering. (Nehemiah 5:1-11; see also Exodus 22:25.) It is greedy self-interest that prevents the nations from cooperating together and working out a solution.
Since the Bible has so accurately described the emotional factors that lead man into such difficulties, it should not surprise you that it also predicts the outcome of the problems, economic and other, that beset the nations today​—the complete demise of the present world system. This will come right on the heels of a proclamation of “Peace and security!” A nightmarish period of time called the “great tribulation” will expose, among other things, the worthlessness of trusting in the material goods that people have feverishly accumulated. “Into the streets they will throw their very silver, and an abhorrent thing their own gold will become.” Imagine! Even gold and silver being viewed as worthless. But will this merely be because of inflation? No, for the prophecy continues: “Neither their silver nor their gold will be able to deliver them in the day of Jehovah’s fury.”​—Matthew 24:21; Ezekiel 7:19.
True Christians, however, do not fear that day of execution of divine judgment, nor any accompanying economic collapse. They know that the “great tribulation” will culminate in the destruction of this wicked system of things, which will be replaced by a righteous new government of God. (Revelation 21:1-4; see also Daniel 2:44.) This government will bring real economic security to all earth’s inhabitants.​—Isaiah 65:21-23.
Faith in this coming government helps Jehovah’s Witnesses to cope with these harsh economic times realistically. They recognize that pursuing a materialistic course can make one forgetful of Jehovah God. (Deuteronomy 8:10-17) Instead, they are aware of the importance of pursuing the values espoused in the Bible. This acts as a protection for them. During times of unemployment many are willing to take on more menial jobs that others might disdain. (Ephesians 4:28) Persons who really apply Bible principles are comfortable with a simple life-style. And like the writer of Proverbs 30:8, they pray: “Give me neither poverty nor riches.” So, rather than living beyond their means, they are happy to have merely the necessities of life. They know the Bible condemns excessive debt, and they thus use self-control with credit cards and charge accounts.​—Psalm 37:21.
Please allow us, then, to share our faith with you by a study of the Bible. In this way not only will you be prepared for the world’s coming tribulation, including economic collapse, but you can find joy and contentment now!
[Blurb on page 11]
Greedy self-interest prevents the nations from cooperating together and working out a solution
[Blurb on page 11]
Pursuing a materialistic course can make one forget about God

