From Our Readers
Overcoming Shyness
Being the only African, having a poor background and being among 15 fresh students from developed and superpower nations, you can just imagine how shyness was going to drown me due to inferiority complex, and the impacts it could have had on my studies in Sweden. But then I came across the articles “Why Am I So Shy?” and “What Can I Do About My Shyness?” (October 22 and November 8, 1982) Those two articles helped me to overcome a great heap of shyness.
M. K., Sweden
Alcoholism
I must thank you for the articles “An Alcoholic in the Family” and “Living With Alcoholism.” (December 8, 1982) Although my husband doesn’t drink anymore, I realized that I still have some feelings of bitter resentment toward him. For many years I also resented the feeling that I was handling this alone. But how can you feel alone when you see your problems and feelings written all over the pages of Awake!, along with helpful suggestions and scriptures that so fittingly apply? How can you feel alone when you know that everyone who reads those articles will now understand what you’re going through and be better able to support you? I’m glad my husband overcame his problem. Thank you for helping me to overcome mine more completely.
C. J., Oregon
I am so grateful for these articles because alcoholism is very difficult for those not living with it to comprehend. Thank you for all the research and time you must have put into those eight pages. I will always keep that encouraging magazine handy, especially the box on page 20.
P. M., Louisiana
As a social worker employed in a state psychiatric hospital, I can state that your articles were absolutely correct in identifying the first step for the family of an alcoholic, namely, to determine how it has affected them. I am planning to share this timely material with the rest of our treatment team.
M. D., Georgia
Avoiding Robbery
In your article “There Are Ways to Avoid Robbery” (January 22, 1983) you advised, “When vacationing, be sure to notify mailing or paper delivery services.” I recently attended a meeting of apartment-house tenants arranged by the police, after two robberies, to enlighten us on protecting our property. One outstanding point made was NOT to interrupt mail or paper deliveries. Paper boys especially were not to be told of vacations. The officer said that while your paper boy might not be dishonest, in the group where they prepare their papers for delivery there could be one who is and who might note the address and a robbery would follow. Have a trusted friend pick up all deliveries and save them for your return.
R. M., Oregon
Good suggestion. The idea in the article was not to show everyone passing by that you were away.​—ED.

