Imprisoned, yet Free!
By Awake! writer in Mexico
SIXTY miles [90 km] off the central western coast of Mexico lie the Islas Marías.a One of these Pacific islands, María Madre, has served as a Mexican federal penal colony since 1905. At one time, banishment there was a dreaded punishment, but now prisoners with a record of good conduct may actually ask to go there!
For one thing, some prisoners are allowed to have their family live with them. Instead of living in cells with bars, convicts live in small houses. The settlements have many of the services you would find in any small town. Telephone, telegraph, television, and mail all help to connect prisoners with the outside world. Children can attend elementary school there, although they must return to the mainland for high school. And while access to the islands is strictly controlled, once a week a naval ship arrives bringing supplies and visitors.
What about rehabilitation? The prisoners—who call themselves colonos, or settlers—are required to work at a job for a few hours a day. Not only does this help them later to adjust to life in the outside world but it helps pay for their keep. The colonos are also at liberty to pursue personal activities, such as gardening and manufacturing handicrafts for profit. This is not to say that prison discipline is entirely lacking. Inmates must answer to a morning roll call and observe a 9:00 p.m. curfew.
Spiritual Freedom Comes to the Marías
About 1985 a colono, whose family were Jehovah’s Witnesses, requested spiritual help. A Bible study was begun by mail. In time, a group of Bible students was formed, and they began holding Christian meetings. Upon obtaining permission from the government, Jehovah’s Witnesses began making regular visits to the island—a 13-hour overnight trip from Mazatlán, on the mainland. Over the years some 40 prisoners have learned the truth of God’s Word, been baptized, and after fulfilling their sentence, been released. As of this writing, there are 6 baptized Witnesses still on the island, and an average of 25 people attend Christian meetings.
Jehovah’s Witnesses are admired by the authorities for their efforts, and prisoners who become Witnesses are respected by all. Recently the assistant director of the penitentiary commented to a visiting Witness: “How good it is that you have a common interest with us in seeing to the physical and moral welfare of the inmates, that you are concerned about them! You have our full support.” He offered to repair the building where the brothers are allowed to meet.
One baptized Witness—an inmate for ten years—said: “When the brothers who visit us ask if I want to leave, I tell them that I want to continue serving here; I consider it my assigned territory, as there is a great need. Of course, I would like to be able to go to assemblies and enjoy Christian fellowship.” He is due to be released next year for good conduct.
The penal system in the Islas Marías has reportedly had a measure of success in rehabilitating prisoners. However, the Kingdom message has brought true spiritual freedom and rehabilitation, a ‘release to captives’ and a ‘wide opening of the eyes to prisoners.’—Luke 4:18; Isaiah 61:1.
[Footnote]
Although also called Islas Tres Marías, meaning the “Three Marías,” the archipelago officially comprises four islands, three of which are uninhabited.
[Box/Pictures on page 21]
From Drug Addict to Christian Elder
  Guillermo was imprisoned for both selling and using drugs. After being sent to the Islas Marías, he continued to be addicted to drugs. But he noticed that some inmates who had long sentences for things like drug trafficking were well-groomed, had a happy outlook, and were model prisoners. When he found out that they were studying the Bible with Jehovah’s Witnesses, he accepted an invitation to their meetings. Later a formal Bible study was started with him.
  Guillermo made big changes in his life and was released shortly thereafter. He immediately looked for Jehovah’s Witnesses in order to continue his study. Today he serves as an elder in the Christian congregation, and 17 members of his family are now Jehovah’s Witnesses. He comments: “It is a great privilege to know Jehovah and to have left all those vices behind. Many of my former friends are dead because of drugs. Drugs had affected my brain, making it difficult for me to retain information. But the method of study the Witnesses used helped my mind to improve a lot. The doctors were amazed because they thought I would never recover. What the Bible’s truth has done for me and for my family is incredible. We had never shown love to one another, but now we are united.”
[Maps on page 20]
(For fully formatted text, see publication)
Mazatlán
Islas Marías
María Madre
[Picture on page 20]
“Colonos” and their families attend meetings at the Kingdom Hall on María Madre

