Do You Remember?
Have you read the recent issues of The Watchtower carefully? If so, you should recognize these important points. Check yourself.
● What is a career? So what must one do in the ministry if it is to be his career?
A career is a course of constant progressive achievement in a certain field or pursuit. For the ministry to be one’s career, he must make it his primary occupation and continually make progress in it.—P. 261.a
● Why was it that Jesus never made a mistake, while Adam and Eve, who were also perfect, did err?
Jesus never made a mistake because he had strong love for Jehovah and always obeyed Him, and God’s way is always right. Further, Jesus exercised his perceptive powers, considering the outcome of any course before pursuing it, and then chose the way that would glorify God. Adam and Eve failed on all these counts.—P. 264.
● Are the Ten Commandments any longer of concern to Christians?
Yes. While it is true that Christians are no longer under the Mosaic law code, of which the Ten Commandments are part, the principles embodied in those commandments are ever valid and they have been recorded for our instruction.—P. 281.
● Does the Bible ever speak with approval of tradition?
Yes. At 2 Thessalonians 2:15 and 2Th 3:6 reference is made to valid tradition by the apostles, which tradition was committed to writing under inspiration. This, of course, is not the same as uninspired human tradition that conflicts with God’s Word.—P. 287.
● Is it right to pray for joy? What else is required to obtain it?
Yes, it is right to pray for joy. Then, consistent with our prayer, we must cultivate joy by filling our minds with the truths from God’s Word that are proper cause for happiness and tell others about them, so benefiting from the greater happiness of giving; regularly associate with God’s New World society; look to Jehovah for guidance in all things and conduct ourselves in the way that he shows to be right; also make it a point to do things that contribute to the happiness of other persons.—P. 297.
● In what way should a Christian overseer give counsel?
Lovingly, in such a way as to upbuild and encourage, and at the same time giving practical aid in overcoming difficulties.—P. 303.
● From what district did nearly all the apostles of Jesus Christ come?
Galilee.—P. 309.
● What quality might cause one, for the sake of others, to refrain from drinking or eating certain things that are not disapproved by God?
Love.—P. 332.
● Why is it important for a Christian to have good manners?
They are an expression of loving consideration for others. They contribute to good relations with others. Others are inclined to look with more favor on the message borne by a well-mannered person and the organization of which he is a part.—Pp. 362, 367.
● What did the seventh-day Jewish sabbath foreshadow?
The millennial reign of Jesus Christ.—P. 380.
● What is the “sin that easily entangles,” to which reference is made at Hebrews 12:1?
Lack of faith.—P. 401.
● Name three outstanding Biblical examples of traitors.
Ahithophel. Judas Iscariot. The “evil slave” class.—P. 407.
● Above all else, what purpose was served by the early Jewish synagogues?
They were schools, places of instruction, exhortation and encouragement.—P. 413.
● What is the holy spirit?
It is Jehovah’s invisible active force; not just the power residing within himself, but his energy when projected out from himself for the accomplishing of his will.—P. 429.
● How can one keep from letting evil harden him?
By keeping in mind Scriptural examples of those who allowed evil to soften them. Praying to God and maintaining strong faith. Being humble, patient, long-suffering. Cultivating love. Keeping in mind why God permits evil: for the vindication of his name and the salvation of his creatures.—P. 444.
● Name a few suggestions that will help to make your Bible reading most beneficial.
Have the right mental attitude, looking humbly to Jehovah for instruction. Seek understanding, taking time for meditation and to look up explanations of portions not understood. Get the over-all view of what you read, perhaps even digging out background material. Give attention to prophetic fulfillment. Isolate principles that affect your own life and scriptures to use in the ministry. Visualize or mentally outline what you read.—Pp. 472, 475.
● What is one’s conscience? Is it an infallible guide?
Conscience is that faculty of mind that tells us whether we are doing right or wrong. For the conscience to give proper guidance it must be trained by the Word of God.—Pp. 485-487.
● Is “saving face” compatible with Christian principles?
No; it endangers one’s relationship with Jehovah God.—P. 496.
● What is “greediness,” against which the Bible warns?
Extreme selfishness, an intense craving for more of something than is reasonable or needed or for what rightfully belongs to someone else. It manifests itself in love of money, extreme fondness for food and drink, honor and fame, power and sex.—P. 504.
[Footnotes]
All page references are to The Watchtower for 1961.

