Haran—An Ancient Hive of Activity
TO THOSE familiar with the Scriptures, the mere mention of the name Haran immediately brings to mind the faithful patriarch Abraham. On his journey from Ur to the land of Canaan, he and his wife, Sarah, as well as his father, Terah, and his nephew Lot stopped at Haran. There, Abraham accumulated much in the way of material possessions. After his father died, Abraham continued on his journey to the land that the true God had promised. (Gen. 11:31, 32; 12:4, 5; Acts 7:2-4) Later, Abraham sent his oldest servant to Haran or a nearby area to find a wife for Isaac. Abraham’s grandson Jacob also lived there for a number of years.—Gen. 24:1-4, 10; 27:42-45; 28:1, 2, 10.
The ultimatum presented by Assyrian King Sennacherib to King Hezekiah of Judah lists Haran among “nations” conquered by the kings of Assyria. The designation “Haran” here referred not only to the city but to the surrounding district as well. (2 Ki. 19:11, 12) Ezekiel’s prophecy mentions Haran as one of Tyre’s main trading partners, confirming Haran’s role as an important commercial center.—Ezek. 27:1, 2, 23.
Haran is now only a small town located near Şanlıurfa, in eastern Turkey. But at one time, the ancient city of Haran truly was a hive of activity. Haran is one of very few ancient settlements still retaining the name used for it in the Bible. Its Assyrian form, Harranu, can mean “Road” or “Caravan Road,” thus indicating that Haran was situated on major trade routes between larger cities. According to inscriptions unearthed in Haran, the mother of King Nabonidus of Babylon was the high priestess at the temple of Sin, the moon god of Haran. Nabonidus reportedly restored this temple. Thereafter, Haran witnessed the rise and fall of various empires.
Today, Haran is vastly different from what it was in the past. Ancient Haran was a highly developed and important city, especially during certain periods. Present-day Haran, however, is only a collection of houses with domed roofs. Surrounding it are the ruins of ancient civilizations. In the new world of God’s making, many who once lived in Haran—including Abraham, Sarah, and Lot—will be resurrected. Very likely, they will be able to tell us much more about Haran, an ancient hive of activity.
[Picture on page 20]
Ruins of Haran
[Picture on page 20]
Houses with domed roofs
[Picture on page 20]
Panoramic view of Haran today

