From Our Readers
Kidnapping  Thank you very much for the article “Don’t Do Anything Stupid, or I’ll Kill You.” (November 22, 1991) I was moved to tears. I have never experienced anything like what Lisa Davenport went through, but having been depressed for some time, I have at times felt that I wanted to die. The article, though, made me think deeply about the strong support Jehovah God gives and how he always gives help when necessary.
N. O., Japan
Families Draw Close  I am so happy about the series of articles “Families​—Draw Close Before It’s Too Late.” (September 22, 1991) My eyes filled with tears when I saw the beautiful cover. Also, every word and phrase was chosen so carefully and written with so much tenderness! Thank you for reminding us of the importance of having a close-​knit family.
K. E., United States
The articles were among the most touching that I have ever read. Many of us have believed that if we simply studied the Bible with our children, took them to Christian meetings, and participated together in the preaching work, we would have success as parents. I have found, though, that successful parents also have a close personal relationship with their child​—a bond that assures the child of the parents’ love. This point has been made in previous articles, but its impact on me now has never been greater.
T. H., United States
Before getting married, I was a bookkeeper. I enjoyed my work a great deal. After having children, I decided to stop working and stay home with the children. At times, though, I have felt very useless and longed to go back to work. After reading your article, I feel a renewed sense of responsibility toward my children.
S. M., United States
Gambling  Thank you for the article “Young People Ask . . . Is Gambling Really So Bad?” (November 8, 1991) In our school, gambling is very popular. One gambling game pays 20 yen to the winner; some classmates bring 2,000 yen to school! Once I was invited to join in. I began to wonder if gambling was really so bad, and I was tempted to try it just once. But after reading the article, I now know that gambling is not a good thing and that if you try it just once, you may want to do it again and again.
N. N., Japan
Honesty  I am writing regarding the article “Does It Pay to Be Honest?” (October 22, 1991) Since Jehovah’s Witnesses discourage after-​school sports activities, I felt this article sent out a confusing message.
C. P., United States
The article told how a young boy playing in a baseball game was rewarded for being honest. However, the experience was credited to the magazine “Sports Illustrated.” The youth involved was therefore not one of Jehovah’s Witnesses. In any event, the article was published, not to promote sports participation, but to illustrate the value of honesty.​—ED.
From Our Readers  I always look forward to reading the feature “From Our Readers.” I’m just amazed at the tactfulness you show in your responses. If there is a misprint or error, you humbly admit it. Yet, no matter how upset a reader may become, you never back down from the truth of God’s Word. And you even have a sense of humor! I got a nice chuckle from your response under the item “Mistaken Identity” in the February 22, 1991, issue.
C. W., United States

