Legally Recognized in Most Countries
During 1980 Jehovah’s Witnesses were able to carry on their preaching work legally in 187 countries. In many of the countries local corporations are formed in harmony with governmental regulations. In others the earlier major corporations of Jehovah’s Witnesses are legally registered to permit owning of property, sending in of missionaries and receiving shipments of Bible literature.
The major legally recognized corporations that represent Jehovah’s Witnesses and the dates when they were organized are as follows:
1884  Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society of Pennsylvania, U.S.A.
1909  Watchtower Bible and Tract Society of New York, Inc., U.S.A.
1914  International Bible Students Association, London, England,  and affiliated corporations in Canada and other British Commonwealth nations.
1953  Monomi-no-Tō Seisho Sasshi Kyōkai (Japan)
1956  Wachtturm Bibel- und Traktat-Gesellschaft (Germany)
1979  Association Chrétienne Les Témoins de Jéhovah de France
OPENING OF WORK IN SOME COUNTRIES
During the service year of 1980 it was good that the new government of Central African Republic removed the ban against Jehovah’s Witnesses, on September 27, 1979. While there had been no ban on our work in Zaire, on April 30 the government granted legal recognition, which will enable a further expansion of the work in that country.
We regret to report, however, that on July 24, 1980, our work was legally dissolved in Iran and all our religious teachers were expelled and evacuated to Europe for reassignment to other countries.
PERSECUTIONS AND IMPRISONMENTS CONTINUE
Jesus said: “A slave is not greater than his master. If they have persecuted me, they will persecute you also.” (John 15:20) So it is that some hundreds of our brothers remain in prisons. Jehovah’s Witnesses know that when they suffer as Christians it is for a righteous cause. (John 17:16; Isa. 2:4) It is not for taking sides in politics, or for being involved in a seditious conspiracy, or some crime of violence. (1 Pet. 4:15, 16) So it is not for any such wrongdoing that Jehovah’s Witnesses face persecution in these days but, rather, for zealously observing the commandments of God and sharing in the work of bearing witness to Jesus.​—Rev. 12:17.
APPEARING BEFORE COURTS
Legal cases continue to come up before the courts of the land, involving Jehovah’s people because of their faithful stand as Christians. There have been cases in Canada that involve the blood issue. In the United States there have been court cases involving the right to preach from house to house. The victory over the City of Ladue (Missouri) in 1979 fortified the many United States Supreme Court decisions that were won by Jehovah’s Witnesses more than 30 years before, confirming that Jehovah’s people have a legal right to perform the house-to-house ministry of evangelism.
Also in this year the Supreme Court of India confirmed that one of Jehovah’s Witnesses had a right to desist from becoming involved with nationalistic exercises as to his secular work. In 1980 the Supreme Court of Argentina in mid-July confirmed that one of Jehovah’s Witnesses, an alien, could not be denied a permanent residency in the country on the basis of his religious affiliation. Those who appear before courts and rulers for Christ’s sake do not stand without a helper.​—Mark 13:9-11.
GRATEFUL TO JEHOVAH FOR ANOTHER FRUITFUL YEAR
The Governing Body has deemed it a privilege to present this stewardship report of the worldwide work of Jehovah’s people during 1980. The current number of 16 members have served as a unified Governing Body and also as members of its several committees as described in detail in the 1977 Yearbook, pages 258 and 259.
We are deeply grateful to Jehovah for using his people yet another year as workers in his global vineyard in this time of the end. (Matt. 13:39) The number of harvest workers has increased to 2,272,278, which brings us joy. Yet we pray as Jesus instructed. We “beg the Master of the harvest to send out workers into his harvest.” (Luke 10:2) So for 1981 many more associates are anticipated to assist in this happy preaching service.
As stewards of what has been entrusted to our care, we express appreciation to all the brothers worldwide for their cooperation in making this annual report possible. With full hearts we also give thanks to Jehovah our God and to his wifelike heavenly organization under the leadership of our King and High Priest, Jesus Christ, for their loving care, protection and unfailing provision for our spiritual nourishment. Joyfully we join in singing the song of Moses and the song of the Lamb:
“Great and wonderful are your works, Jehovah God, the Almighty. Righteous and true are your ways, King of eternity. Who will not really fear you, Jehovah, and glorify your name, because you alone are loyal? For all the nations will come and worship before you, because your righteous decrees have been made manifest.”​—Rev. 15:3, 4.
Your brothers,
Governing Body of Jehovah’s Witnesses

