Upper Volta
Upper Volta was also one of the eight territories in West Africa that formed the federation called French West Africa. In 1960 the country gained its independence after being governed by France for over 60 years.
Most of the country is watered by the upper tributaries of the Volta River, hence the name Upper Volta. The country is a vast inland plateau​—from about 650 feet (200 m) to more than 2,300 feet (700 m) above sea level—​and is covered for the most part by wooded grassland. Upper Volta is landlocked, being bordered to the south by Ivory Coast, Ghana, Togo and Benin, and to the west, north and east by Mali and Niger.
Upper Volta is somewhat smaller than the Ivory Coast, having about 106,000 square miles (274,000 km2). The population is proportionately less, there being some 6,000,000 inhabitants. It is estimated that over 10 percent of the Voltaic people work in neighboring Ivory Coast.
About 95 percent of the people in Upper Volta live in some 7,000 villages. Most of them make their living by farming and raising cattle. The capital, Ouagadougou, is the largest city, with a population of over 100,000. Other principal towns are Bobo-Dioulasso, Koudougou and Ouahigouya.
For centuries the Mossi people dominated the area. From the 12th century onward they developed a powerful organization and supplanted the earlier inhabitants, the Nyonyose and the Gurunsi. Now about half Upper Volta’s population are Mossi, and they speak the Moré language. French, however, is the official language, although Dyula is the language of commerce.
Christendom’s religions have not been as active in this more remote area as they have in the Ivory Coast. About 5 percent of the people are nominal Catholics, while only a few are Protestants. Most of the population is animist in religion, attaching great importance to ancestor worship. Only recently, in June 1963, did Jehovah’s Witnesses first become active in the country of Upper Volta.
THE PLANTING OF KINGDOM SEED
The preaching work was opened up when seven brothers, originally from Togo, Benin and Congo-Brazzaville, moved to Ouagadougou. They sought employment here so that they could serve where the need is indeed great. They took a small supply of literature with them and soon distributed it among the people. Some of it was like seed sown on fertile ground.
Emmanuel Johnson, a Togolese resident of Upper Volta, was working as a medical assistant for a large company in Ouagadougou. One day in 1963 a friend visited him, throwing down two books and saying, “They’re yours, you book-worshiper. They’re not expensive.” He went on to explain that he had bought them from some people who had recently come to town. “They have other nice ones too,” he added.
One of the books was From Paradise Lost to Paradise Regained. Right away Emmanuel began reading it. The more he read, the more he wanted to meet the people who were distributing these books. Then one day they were visiting his house! Brother and Sister Dinga showed him how to study the book, and started a regular Bible study.
“I tried always to be ready for the study,” explains Emmanuel. “I really drank in the truth. Why, they even said that they had never studied with anyone who showed such interest. They came to see me many times, apart from the regular Bible study we had.” But then the brothers were arrested. Why?
The Roman Catholic clergy misrepresented the Witnesses before the authorities and published papers against the Christian work they were doing. Thus, in February 1964, all the publishers were arrested and detained for 13 days without food. Under the influence of the clergy, the officials expelled them from the country because, as they said, “the government does not like Jehovah’s Witnesses’ religion in Upper Volta.”
Before Brother Dinga left by train, Emmanuel was able to contact him. It was arranged to continue their study by correspondence. So as soon as Brother Dinga arrived in Abidjan, he sent the first list of questions, which Emmanuel answered and returned. Brother Dinga corrected it and sent more questions. And so it went for the next five years.
THE SEED BEARS FRUIT
“After the expulsion of the brothers,” Emmanuel wrote, “I came to realize the role that the Catholic Church had played in the matter. So I collected together all my Catholic books, booklets, magazines and even some Gramophone records of hymn-singing. I made a pile out of them and doused them with plenty of paraffin and burned them. I prayed to Jehovah that he help me to serve him. Two days later, I received through the mail my first copy of The Watchtower in French. I felt that was really an answer to my prayer.”
For a few months during 1968 a brother from France came to live in Ouagadougou. He was a real help to Emmanuel, but soon he had to leave. So Emmanuel carried on alone preaching the Kingdom message. He was strengthened by letters from brothers and sisters in several countries who had seen in the Yearbook that there was just one publisher in Upper Volta, and had written to encourage him. In December 1969 Emmanuel traveled to Abidjan for the “Peace on Earth” assembly, where he was baptized.
THE ARRIVAL OF HELP
When Herbert Jennings, the branch servant of Ghana, visited Abidjan in 1969, he asked if there were any volunteers to serve as special pioneers in Upper Volta. “I put up my hand,” James Kwakye remembers. “But I was the only one who did!” Later, in May 1970, another pioneer also volunteered. So the two teamed up, and on July 1, 1970, they left on the train for Ouagadougou. Emmanuel was there at the train to meet them, and had a room ready where they could stay. But the newcomers were in for a surprise, as Brother Kwakye explains:
“The next morning, while on our way to the National Security Department, we were arrested by the police. That same morning there had been reports in the newspaper of the work of Jehovah’s Witnesses being banned in Cameroon. We were questioned about Jehovah’s Witnesses not paying their taxes, as the newspaper wrongly reported. Quickly I took out a copy of the ‘Truth’ book and showed the officer the chapter ‘Christian Obedience to Law.’ I studied through the appropriate paragraphs with him right then and there, and he soon realized that the press reports about us were inaccurate. However, he told us not to preach from house to house until further notice. So we only did informal witnessing. How glad we were that the publications were pocket-sized! Out we would go, pockets bulging somewhat, to contact people informally and tell them the good news of the Kingdom.
“Three weeks later we were summoned to the National Security Department again. We were told, ‘All right, you can continue preaching now!’ We applied for a Resident’s Permit, and we received permission for a ten-year stay. By way of saying thank you for this, we decided to witness to all the ministers in the government and other high officials, which we did beginning in January of 1971. Among those contacted was a police chief. He was very interested in the truth and subscribed for the ‘Awake!’ magazine.
“In May of 1971 we traveled back to Ivory Coast to attend a fine circuit assembly in Dimbokro. On our return to Ouagadougou we were arrested again, this time by a policeman. I was taken by car to the Police Department, and on arrival I was taken before five senior officers. To the astonishment of the policeman who arrested me, one of these senior officers greeted me, ‘Hello, James. I am sure these colleagues of mine here would also like to subscribe to your magazine.’
“I had a fine time witnessing to them all and I was able to place two books and five magazines. One of the officers told the policeman who had arrested me to take me back home by car because, as he said, ‘It is too hot outside, and besides we do not have any case against him!’”
FOUNDATION FOR A CONGREGATION
Brother Kwakye soon afterward contacted the headmaster of a school who showed particular interest in the truth. A study was started and his whole family came into the truth. This new brother, Jean-Baptiste Yago, was one of three persons contacted by Brother Kwakye who soon became Witnesses.
Meetings began to be held in Emmanuel Johnson’s house. Some boys would throw stones at the house whenever meetings were held. But James had enough friends among the police to have these young hooligans quickly discouraged!
GILEAD GRADUATES ARRIVE
In March 1972 Joseph Crawford and his wife came from Abidjan to Ouagadougou. Their objective was to find a missionary home. No, not for themselves, but for the six Gilead graduates who had been assigned to Upper Volta. The Crawfords were on hand to welcome Wayne and Paula Almost, Bob and Fern Hurd and Jay and Gloria Martin. Arrangements were made for Brother Crawford to give these new missionaries a six-week language course and help them get established in their new assignment.
Brother Martin was appointed home overseer. Resident permits were granted, and the missionaries were well installed in Ouagadougou. For a time the work continued only there in the capital. But special pioneers were soon sent to Bobo-Dioulasso, and then, in 1973, a missionary home was established there. Robert and Lana Oliver and Brian and Jacqueline Pearce, who had previously served in Kenya, were assigned to Bobo-Dioulasso. After the lush, green fertile area of Lake Victoria in Kenya, it was a real contrast for them to come to the savanna of Upper Volta with its dryness for most of the year.
KINGDOM PREACHING EXPANDS
Shortly thereafter, in December 1973, the brothers in Upper Volta were invited to attend the “Divine Victory” assembly in Abidjan. In the group that made the long journey south were several Voltaic people who had learned the truth from the special pioneers. Three of these were Bernard Bakoi, Norbert Ouedraogo and Jules Tapsoba, who symbolized their dedication by water baptism at the assembly. On return to Upper Volta their joy at having attended the large gathering of Jehovah’s people was manifested in zeal for the preaching of the good news.
Later Bernard Bakoi served as a special pioneer. His assignment was the town of Ouahigouya, in the north of the country in the Sahel region. Now there is a small congregation there. Special pioneers were also assigned to open up the work in the country’s third largest town, Koudougou.
Wayne Almost served as the circuit overseer until 1978, making visits to the congregations and isolated groups of Upper Volta. He has seen the work really open up. Witnessing is now going on in five of the major towns, Ouagadougou, Bobo-Dioulasso, Koudougou, Ouahigouya and Banfora. And the government has granted permission for us to move out into two other towns, Kaya and Fada N’Gourma. We now have five congregations in the country.
MISSIONARY ROLE IN PREACHING
As each class of Gilead School graduated we were happy to receive news of more workers assigned to Upper Volta. At present there are 25 missionaries in the country, and they have had a prominent share in the expansion of the Kingdom preaching here. Many of them first, though, had to learn French. And one of the best ways to learn is to use the language. This resulted in a number of amusing experiences, especially in a country where newcomers are not always familiar with local customs.
Renée and Philip Alderson are Gilead graduates from the United States. Soon after they arrived in 1974, Renée and Sister Almost were out preaching. Renée, still taking her language course, was prepared to deliver her presentation in French. Plucking up courage she approached the man of the family and valiantly spoke to him. Throughout her presentation of the Kingdom message he gazed raptly at her.
When the ‘sermon’ was over, the man asked if he could buy Renée as a wife and inquired about the dowry. Renée thought that at last she was beginning to get a grasp of what people were saying to her. She decided to risk a direct reply to him. However, she had mistaken the question and thought the man had asked her how long she had been married. So she replied, “I have been married for five ânes (donkeys),” poorly pronouncing the word for “years,” which is ans. To which the man dejectedly replied, “Wives cost a lot where you come from!”
THE FIRST KINGDOM HALL
Philip Alderson, along with missionaries Roy Makin and Wayne Almost, took the initiative in building a new Kingdom Hall in Ouagadougou. Philip tells about the project:
“At first we held our meetings in the living room of the missionary home, but this quickly became too small as the attendance rapidly grew. So we considered making a ‘hangar’ or ‘lean-to’ outside in the compound of the missionary home. Eventually, though, we settled on constructing a separate building, but still within the compound of the home.
“The local brothers were very enthusiastic. They assured us that they had a lot of experience at building the local-style houses, and were confident that we would be able to build a suitable Kingdom Hall. It was decided to construct a large rectangular building, with three open walls and a thatched roof supported by beams and poles.
“We started in November 1975. But what we had not realized, and what the local brothers failed to mention, was that all the buildings they had put up were small round huts. Now, faced with a rectangular construction, quite a few problems were encountered. However, by working together, these were solved. In fact, the whole project had a fine unifying effect on the congregation.”
On weekends, in particular, the whole compound was the scene of great activity. Brothers were squatting on the ground weaving the straw for the matting and thatching of the roof. The sisters prepared the meals. What a thrill to see such a group of people not only from many racial backgrounds, but more especially from differing tribal backgrounds all there together accomplishing a work that resulted in a Kingdom Hall to the praise of Jehovah’s name!
Where did the money come from for purchasing the bricks, cement and other essentials for this project? Much of it came from donations of the local brothers. However, when the missionaries went home on leave they were able to show slides of the project to their home congregations, and many brothers volunteered to contribute to help with the expenses.
For example, when Margarita Königer returned on a visit to Germany she spoke about the Kingdom Hall construction. By this time the hall was well under way, and it was seen that a metal roof would be more practical and durable. On hearing this, one brother in Germany wrote out a check to cover the full amount to buy the metal sheeting.
An 80-year-old sister in California, although confined to a rest home, sent $5. Sound equipment was built specially by a German brother and donated to the congregation. Indeed, the project was finished with the help of the worldwide family of Jehovah’s people.
With hearts overflowing with gratitude to Jehovah and their brothers worldwide, 94 persons met in the newly completed Kingdom Hall on Saturday, May 1, 1976, to dedicate the building to Jehovah. Sam Gilman from the branch office in Abidjan gave the dedication talk and Wayne Almost showed slides of the expansion of the Kingdom work throughout Upper Volta.
SHARING IN “VICTORIOUS FAITH” ASSEMBLY
What a grand experience it was for the brothers in Upper Volta in December 1978 to travel south for the “Victorious Faith” International Assembly! Jean-Baptiste Yago and his whole family saved their money for over a year to make the trip on the specially arranged train coach from Ouagadougou to Abidjan. Brother Yago’s eldest son serves as a special pioneer. His next child, Matthias, 12 years old, said he will never forget this assembly because he was baptized there that Saturday morning.
The brothers from Upper Volta delighted the assembly audience with their experiences. Matthias gave a demonstration of how he witnesses, with his younger brother serving as householder. The missionaries told how every week Brother Yago’s children accompany them in the service.
Although Brother Yago himself auxiliary pioneered, he was not able to spend as much time as Matthias did in the field service. Matthias’ youthful enthusiasm has served as a fine witness. Even adults who mocked him were astonished. One man scoffingly asked Matthias, “What is faith?” To the man’s surprise, the answer was quickly forthcoming as Matthias thumbed through his Bible and read to him the definition given at Hebrews 11:1.
This Christian zeal among the young and old alike is producing marvelous results in Upper Volta. From just the one publisher, Emmanuel Johnson, back in 1969, a peak of 137 active Kingdom publishers was reached in December 1979. Then in March 1980 a crowd of 691 persons met together in the country’s seven congregations for the Memorial. What potential for further increase in the number of praisers of Jehovah! The brothers and sisters in Upper Volta are determined to work hard to help these many new ones onto the road that leads to eternal life.
[Map on page 196]
(For fully formatted text, see publication)
upper volta
MALI
NIGER
IVORY COAST
GHANA
TOGO
BENIN
Ouahigouya
Kaya
OUAGADOUGOU
Koudougou
Fada N’Gourma
Bobo-Dioulasso
Banfora
[Picture on page 197]
Emmanuel Johnson, the only witness of Jehovah in Upper Volta for many years
[Picture on page 199]
James Kwakye (left) contacted Jean-Baptiste Yago, headmaster of a school. He and his whole family became Witnesses
[Picture on page 202]
Building the first Kingdom Hall in Ouagadougou

