Daily Spiritual Food​—Essential for a Christian Family
1 “Man must live, not on bread alone, but on every utterance coming forth through Jehovah’s mouth.” (Matt. 4:4) How true those words are! Even as we need physical food every day, so we daily need to take in spiritual food. To assist us in regularly feeding on God’s Word, the Society has published the booklet Examining the Scriptures Daily. As a Christian family, are you setting aside time each day to consider the day’s text?
2 Parents Must Set the Example: With a busy routine, it is easy to put off a consideration of the text, thinking that it can be done at another time. But if parents are conscious of their family’s spiritual need, they will find time, yes, make time, each day to do so when the family is together. (Matt. 5:3) They will take the initiative by not only reading the daily text with their children but also highlighting points in the Watchtower comments and discussing what practical application can be made of the information and counsel. True, it may take effort and practice to get into the habit, but the benefits are worth it. (Compare Acts 17:11, 12.) So, parents, work hard to set a fine example!
3 Find a Convenient Time: When is the best time for the whole family to come together for the text discussion, not letting it become a hit-​or-​miss affair? There is an advantage in starting the day with consideration of a Bible text. At Bethel and missionary homes around the world, the day begins with morning worship, which includes a brief discussion of the day’s text. This helps the brothers get their day off to a good start, daily reflecting on Jehovah’s reminders.​—Ps. 1:1, 2; Phil. 4:8.
4 Christian families can likewise benefit from morning Bible discussions. Children can be helped to deal with threats to their spirituality that they experience in school. If for a time it is not possible for the entire family to sit down for a discussion of the day’s text, parents could think about alternative arrangements so that this important spiritual nourishment is not missed. For example, when a father must go to work before the children get up in the morning, perhaps the mother can devote some time to discussing the text with the children. On the other hand, some families arrange to discuss the text in the evening because they are together then. Each family can work out a schedule that best suits its circumstances.
5 Daily spiritual nourishment is essential for a Christian family. Give priority to considering the daily text. (Phil. 1:10) Discussing a Bible text each day will help us hold fast to Jehovah’s righteous principles and laws. Cooperation on the part of each family member will make this arrangement most beneficial for all.

