Encourage the Pursuit of Spiritual Goals
1 Never before have so many young people participated in preaching the good news of the Kingdom! Tens of thousands are embracing the counsel at Ecclesiastes 12:1: “Remember, now, your Grand Creator in the days of your young manhood.” What moves these young ones to have a regular share in the ministry, and why do so many of them engage in the pioneer service?
2 No doubt many are imitating the conduct of the outstanding young man Timothy. His mother and grandmother gave him the benefit of a spiritual education from infancy and encouraged him to pursue spiritual goals. (2 Tim. 3:14, 15) Thus, when the opportunity arose for increased privileges of service, he was qualified and ready.​—Acts 16:1-3.
3 How can more young ones be encouraged to pursue spiritual goals? What kind of foundation must be laid? How can parents build in their children appreciation for the truth and help them set long-​term goals for themselves?
4 Lay a Scriptural Foundation: Parents must make certain that what they are teaching their children is from Jehovah so that it can make their children “wise for salvation.” (2 Tim. 3:15) Strive diligently to cultivate in them a deep love for God’s Word, the Bible. This requires a regular, meaningful Bible study tailored to their needs, along with regular meeting attendance. For youths to have strong faith that will motivate them to pursue spiritual goals, they must have their own personal study program and develop their own relationship with Jehovah.​—1 Thess. 5:21; Heb. 11:1.
5 Christian youths will more readily pursue spiritual interests if their parents and other mature ones in the congregation set a fine example and radiate “the joy of Jehovah.” (Neh. 8:10) By manifesting joy, all of us can help young ones appreciate that the requirements of true Christianity are not burdensome.​—1 John 5:3.
6 Many young ones have been greatly influenced by pioneers, missionaries, and traveling overseers who worked with them in the field service or who shared a word of encouragement with them. Parents can assist by inviting exemplary full-​time workers to their homes for a meal or at other times for Christian fellowship. Jesus Christ provided the finest example of giving balanced attention to younger ones.​—Mark 10:13-16.
7 Setting Goals: With proper parental guidance, children often set spiritual goals for themselves early in life. Once young ones have decided what worthy spiritual goal they wish to achieve, whether pioneer service, serving where the need is greater, Bethel or missionary service, and so forth, parents and other mature ones can warmly encourage them to keep working toward their goal, providing practical suggestions to spur them on.
8 Each congregation is like a family. So each of us should be interested in helping young ones to continue walking in the truth and making spiritual advancement. We can do this by confirming our love for them and encouraging them to pursue spiritual goals.

