Make Effective Return Visits
1 Making return visits is an important part of our service as “God’s fellow workers.” (1 Cor. 3:6-9) There is no need to be apprehensive about the householder’s reaction, since we are calling on someone who has already manifested interest in the truth. Good preparation on our part will reflect a sincere personal interest in the one being called on as we discuss an appealing Bible subject.
2 Be specific; ask tactful questions.
From your notes on the initial call, you might ask:
▪ “Have you given further thought to God’s promises to rule over the earth in righteousness?”
Another question might be:
▪ “Do you feel that your prayer for God’s Kingdom to come is more meaningful since our Bible discussion last week?”
A friendly facial expression and tone of voice go a long way in demonstrating our sincere interest when asking such questions.
3 Do Not Be in a Hurry; Listen to What the Householder Says. If we listen to what the householder says and give serious thought before replying, our genuine interest in him as an individual will be obvious. Based on what he says, you can offer a Scriptural thought related to your first visit. Be prepared to teach the householder something each time you call. If an unexpected subject is raised, use the opportunity to take out your Reasoning book to find the needed information.
4 If you placed the May 1, 1992, “Watchtower,” you could say:
▪ “Last time, we talked about the year 1914. The war that began in that year brought about changes in many governments. Since then many changes continue to be made. But have any or all of these changes really satisfied the needs of the people, or can they guarantee permanent peace? [Allow for comment.] Notice how Jesus taught his followers to pray for a government that could really solve the big problems we face today. [Read Matthew 6:9, 10.] What do you think God’s Kingdom will accomplish? [Allow for comment.] The Bible’s explanation is also very interesting.” Then read Daniel 2:44. You may want to use the illustration on pages 12 and 13 of the Live Forever book to show the kind of conditions to expect under God’s Kingdom.
5 If you placed the May 8, 1992, “Awake!,” you could say:
▪ “When I visited you the last time, we spoke about people who have left their home country in order to escape injustice and suffering. Do you think God really cares about what humans must endure at the hands of their fellowman?” Depending on the response, you could share with the person Ecclesiastes 4:1 or Psalm 72:12-14. Then you could turn to page 15 of the “Look!” brochure and read or summarize the three paragraphs on that page, asking the questions for each paragraph.
6 Let us continue to demonstrate personal interest and have in mind appealing Bible subjects to discuss so that our return visits are successful.

