Offering The Watchtower in May
1 The purpose of The Watchtower is concisely stated in each issue at the top of page 2. What can we do in harmony with that declared purpose in order to help as many people as possible? During May, we will make a special effort to encourage all who show interest in the Kingdom message to read The Watchtower regularly.
2 We can say to someone who says he is a Christian:
▪ “We are asking our neighbors a question and would appreciate your comment on it. Since Jesus taught us to pray for God’s Kingdom to come and for His will to be done on earth as it is in heaven, do you think that God’s will really is going to be done here on earth?” Allow for a reply, and then turn to Isaiah 55:10, 11 and invite the householder to note how all promises of God will be fulfilled.​—rs, p. 12, second introduction under “Kingdom.”
3 If the householder shows interest, you might continue by saying:
▪ “One of the purposes of the Watchtower magazine is to call attention to the fulfillment of Bible prophecy. Notice this article.” Then direct attention to the first article in the May 1 issue of The Watchtower, “1914​—The Year That Shocked the World” and say: “You might be wondering, ‘Why be interested in 1914?’ Notice what paragraph 2 says about 1914 and The Watchtower.” Then read that paragraph.
4 You should be able to tell from the householder’s reaction or from what he says if he is interested in what you have pointed out. If he is, then you could offer the latest copies of the magazines. If he is familiar with our literature and displays a real appreciation for it, perhaps saying, “I always read your magazines,” you might explain how he can receive The Watchtower regularly as a subscription.
5 If you want to have a longer discussion, the same presentation could be expanded to include the text at Revelation 21:3-5, as pointed out in the Reasoning book.
In this case, after reading Isaiah 55:10, 11, you could say:
▪ “A wonderful prophecy concerning God’s will for the earth will soon be fulfilled. It will affect your life and mine. Just listen to what is written at Revelation 21:3-5.” Then you could read the verses and discuss the blessings that will come under God’s Kingdom rule. Point out how The Watchtower announces God’s Kingdom government.
You might say:
▪ “The May 1 issue features the article ‘Who Will Escape the “Time of Distress”?’ It will help you to see how you can live in the righteous new world under God’s Kingdom that we read about in Revelation 21.”
6 Use The Watchtower as a Stepping-​Stone to a Bible Study: Our goal is to help others learn the truth so that they too can become fellow workers of Jehovah and share in announcing Jehovah’s Kingdom. So then, when we find people who are interested, we want to make note and call back soon.
7 As we share the truth with others with the aid of The Watchtower, may we always seek Jehovah’s direction on our work so that we can find and feed sheeplike ones.​—John 21:15-17.

