Service Meetings for May
Week Starting May 4
Song 72
10 min: Local announcements and selected Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry. Encourage publishers to be out in service this weekend.
20 min: “Offering The Watchtower in May.” Question-and-answer coverage of article. Include a discussion of the purpose of The Watchtower as expressed at the top of page 2 of each issue. Additional presentations may be suggested, based on the magazines to be used in field service this week. Publishers should discern genuine interest before offering the subscription. Initial interest may be cultivated by calling back a few times with new issues of the magazine.
15 min: “Opening Remarks Can Make a Difference.” Discuss article with audience. Have they tried some of the introductions suggested in recent issues of Our Kingdom Ministry, most of which have been taken from the Reasoning book? Which introductions have they found most effective in the local territory? When do publishers prepare and practice their introductions for field service? Have two or three brief demonstrations of introductions that have been effective locally.
Song 32 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting May 11
Song 9
 5 min: Local announcements.
20 min: “Make Effective Return Visits.” Discuss with audience key points in article, perhaps including a brief recent experience where a return visit resulted in stimulating further interest. Use final six to eight minutes to demonstrate how a Congregation Book Study conductor helps two or three publishers prepare to call back on interested persons recently found in local territory. If at all possible, use actual return visits that the publishers will later make.
20 min: “1992 ‘Light Bearers’ District Convention”​—Part 1. Audience discussion of paragraphs 1-14. Publishers may want to discuss appropriate points with their Bible students who will be attending the convention.
Song 65 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting May 18
Song 202
10 min: Local announcements, including accounts report and donation acknowledgments. Commend congregation for financial support of local congregation as well as Society’s worldwide work. Outline special field service arrangements for May 25, where appropriate.
20 min: “Encourage the Pursuit of Spiritual Goals.” Audience discussion to be handled by an elder. After considering paragraph 6, interview exemplary publisher who as a youth responded to encouragement to reach out for spiritual goals. How was he or she encouraged? When considering paragraph 7, point out practical benefits that will accrue to both parents and youths from reviewing chapters 22, 38, and 39 of the Young People Ask book.
15 min: “1992 ‘Light Bearers’ District Convention”​—Part 2. Audience discussion of paragraphs 15-23 and a brief review of “District Convention Reminders” as time permits. Include appropriate reminders based on information in The Watchtower of June 15, 1989, pages 10-20. Encourage family groups to review points in these articles before attending the convention.
Song 213 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting May 25
Song 220
10 min: Local announcements and Theocratic News. Experiences from subscription campaign (these should be lined up in advance with help of brother who handles subscriptions in congregation).
15 min: Protect Yourself From Apostasy. Discussion between an elder and a publisher seated at a table. Publisher explains that he met someone in service who has been reading apostate literature. Publisher tells elder he feels householder was sincere in questions he raised. Publisher refused householder’s offer of apostate publication but would like to try to answer householder’s questions. Elder commends publisher for his good attitude and actions. Rather than discuss what apostates have written or said, it is wise to concentrate on Scriptural viewpoint of matters as set forth in Reasoning book. Elder invites publisher to open his Reasoning book, and together they review pages 34-7. Discussion should be warm and encouraging as they consider definition of apostasy, each bold subhead, and selected key texts as time permits. Conclude discussion with positive comments on all the upbuilding and encouraging material we have available for study. Share upbuilding message with householder. If he is sincere, he will see difference between the positive approach of truth and the negative, critical approach of apostates. By our rejecting apostate thinking and material, we display our loyalty to Jehovah and to his visible organization.
20 min: “Daily Spiritual Food​—Essential for a Christian Family.” Question-and-answer discussion of material.
Song 108 and concluding prayer.

