R990 : page 1 

VOL. IX. ALLEGHENY, PA., DECEMBER, 1887. NO. 4. 



R996 : page 1 



NEW POSTAL RULINGS require that our 
lists shall be composed of bona fide [actual] 
subscribers. We are obliged to be 
more strict than formerly, and all who 
wish to continue receiving the TOWER 
must send at least a request for it. All 
too poor to pay 50 cts. will be paid for 
out of the Tract Fund, supplied by those 
more able. 



R996 : page 1 

OUT OF BABYLON. 



Charles H. Spurgeon, the notable Baptist 
minister of London, has left Babylon; 
he has withdrawn from the Baptist Association 
and now stands a free man, untrammeled 
by human organizations, free 
to believe and to teach whatever he may 
find in God's Word, without either permission 
or hindrance from others. 

We know not what has led Brother 
Spurgeon into this liberty wherewith 
Christ hath made us free. We know not 
how much truth he has imbibed, but feel 
sure that this indicates some increase of 
the knowledge of the truth; for it is written 
"Ye shall know the truth, and the 
truth shall make you free." Soon we 
doubt not the knowledge or truth which 
led Mr. Spurgeon to this step, will manifest 
itself in his preaching. May he, now 
that he is free, make rapid strides from 
grace to grace and from knowledge to 
knowledge. 

This, which seems to us a grand step, of 
course seems correspondingly bad to 
others, and evil motives are attributed by 
those who worship sectarian organization 
rather than the great Head of the Church, 
and who obey men rather than God, and 
sectarian conferences, creeds, etc., rather 
than the Word of God. All sectarianism 
should fall, and each consecrated follower 
of Christ should be free to grow in grace, 



knowledge and love, and to co-operate 
with each other, not to bind one another's 
conscience but to assist each other in the 
study of the one guide and rule of faith 
and practice— the Bible. 

To-day, then, Mr. Spurgeon stands with 
us, in and of no sect, responsible to no 
man nor set of men, but to God and his 
Word only. We welcome Brother Spurgeon 
to the ranks of the free. He now 
stands with us on the only proper platform 
for Christian union— Christ only and the 
liberty which he grants to each. 

A MISSIONARY FREE. 

A Brother who for years has been a 
missionary, a minister in the M.E. 
Church in Africa, writes that the truth 
has made him free, and ten of his congregation 
also. They are all subscribers 
to the TOWER. He has resigned the ministry 
of Methodism and is now preaching 
under the higher commission of Christ 
and the apostles, in the Bible. We sent 
on Thanksgiving day a box of fifty more 
Dawns, besides Concordance, Diaglott, 
etc. May his labors be greatly blessed 
of the Lord. 

A BROTHER IN CHRIST HEARD FROM. 

You will all be glad to know of the 
firmness and promptness of the Brother 
whose questions were answered in the 
October TOWER. The courage and success 
of one soldier of the cross, should and 
does encourage others. His brief letter, 
[which reminds us of Caesar's famous 
short letter, "veni vidi, vici," I came, I 
saw, I conquered] is as follows:— 

Just a moment to say that I have written to my 
Rector at Janesville announcing the severing of my 
connection with the Church. It was a hard and 
painful step, and it seems as though everything 
opposes me in it— old relations and pleasant ones, 
my family and even my business seem to unite to 
keep me in Babylon. But the step has been taken, 
the letter is gone. Hastily, but very truly yours, 
WM. M. WRIGHT. 

A SISTER FREE WRITES: 

DEAR BROTHER IN CHRIST: 

I write to thank you for your published letter in 
answer to Mr. Wm. Wright's on "Coming out of 



Babylon." (I only commenced receiving the 
TOWER in July.) You will understand my interest 
when I tell you, that on the 26th day of September 
last, I asked that my name be taken from the 
Baptist Church list, because I realized that its 
teachings were not in harmony with the inspired 
Word, which I was led to study after afflictions 
came upon me and I was led to see that I could 
not in all good conscience stand before my Saviour 
and the church at the same time. It cost me something 
for in its fold were some of my dearest 
earthly friends and it might mean a sacrifice of 
them; but I decided like Mary to choose the better 
part. I have seen so much that was ungodly passed 
by with a wink, that I came to feel like just Lot 
in Sodom, and I do rejoice that the Lord has led 
me out. I feel happy and contented with my name 
among the "little flock." I desire to use and be 
used for the honor and glory of the Master, and 
believe there is a work for me somewhere, in some 
humble way, and that I shall be and am now being 
fitted for it. Will you and Mrs. Russell pray specially 
for me? A humble servant, 

JULIETTE CHURCHILL. 



R990 : page 1 

VIEW FROM THE TOWER. 

ANARCHISM. 

November witnessed at Chicago the execution 
of four avowed and defiant anarchists. 
There were found at their funeral 
thousands who considered them heroes 
and martyrs, who denounced their execution 
as "legalized but atrocious murder," 
and their conviction by all the courts as 
tyranny, as a victory of the ruling class 
over the laboring class, and swore over 
the graves of their adored comrades that 
they would yet "avenge this foul murder." 

Even a lawyer, a man whom we might 
expect would appreciate law and order, 
was present at that funeral, and comforted 
the Godless company [for avowed anarchists 
are almost always avowed atheists] 
as follows, as reported in the Press 
dispatches:— 

He told his hearers that they had come 
to do honor to the soldiers and martyrs to 
truth. They had lost their lives in her 
service and they were numbered with 
those that in all history had died for the 



same cause. They were kind hearted and 
tender, manly, noble men. They loved 
humanity. They worshiped God by striving 
their utmost to benefit their fellow 
men, and it was in this strife that they 
offered up their lives. They were not 
standing there by the bodies of felons. 
There was nothing disgraceful about their 
death. They died for liberty, for the 
sacred right of untrammeled speech, for 
humanity, and his hearers should be proud 
that they had been their friends.— Times, 
Nov. 14, 1887. 

And other thousands actuated some by 
fear of the results of the already made 
threats of anarchists, and some by a conscientious 
timidity, begotten of a false 
idea of God's provisions for these men, 
—fearful of putting them into God's hands, 
fearful lest He would not give them "a 
just recompense" for their evil deeds, 
fearful that He would plunge them into 
everlasting torment,— signed lengthy petitions 
to the Governor of Illinois for the 
commutation of the death penalty. 

Since this matter has excited such general 
attention, particularly since other similar 
cases will come forward again, and 
because the church should as far as possible 
hold correct ideas on this as well as 
other subjects, we rehearse the matter as 
it appears to our View in the TOWER. 

The riot at the Chicago hay-market 
meeting May 4th, 1886, was precipitated 
by the throwing of a death-dealing bomb 
among the police, present upon the occasion 
to preserve peace and order. The 
murderers of those properly appointed representatives 
of the majority of Chicago's 
citizens, were sought, and though it could 
not be ascertained positively whose hands 
had lighted and thrown the bomb or by 
whom it and other similar bombs found 
were made, it was proved that it was 
thrown from the wagon in which the leaders 
of the meeting stood, and that the 
men convicted and hanged were those 
leaders, who for months previous, at meetings, 
and through circulars and papers, 
and at this very hay-market meeting, had 
urged their followers to acts of riot, violence 
and murder, had advocated the use 
of just such bombs, and had given in detail 
particulars as to how such could be 
made, and what would make them most 
deadly. 



A brave court and jury impartially selected 
from among their neighbors (with 
great difficulty because of natural timidity 
inspired by loud threats, secretly uttered, 
that any man brave enough to stand 
up for the law and order and bring in a 
true verdict in accordance with the law 
and the facts, would be assassinated), after 
hearing all the evidence and all the arguments 
which the able counsel for the anarchists 
could present in their favor, 
brought in its sworn verdict, that according 
to their honest conviction, the law 
and evidence proved these men guilty of 
murder— of premeditated murder— and 
that the death penalty provided in the 
law, should be inflicted. Appeals to the 
Supreme Courts of the state, and of the 
United States, confirmed the truthfulness 
and righteousness of that verdict. 

It is a credit to Chicago that her citizens 
refrained from lynching those enemies 
of her laws and liberties: that cool 
deliberation and true manliness prevailed, 
and that the condemned had every possible 
opportunity to be legally cleared. It 
is no less a credit to them that, after 
making the best laws they knew how to 
make for the government of such cases, 
and for the protection of the people 
against the devilish piracy of a comparatively 
small number of lawless, godless, 
heaven and earth defying enemies of all 
order, all peace and all righteousness, 
they had men of sufficient moral courage 
to execute those laws. 

But we must say a word on behalf of 
members of the trades unions which took 
part in the funeral parade, and thereby 
gave their assent to the principles of anarchy 
and to the terrible lawless deeds for 
which those men suffered. They are duped 
by blatant leaders, whose specious arguments 
are as follows:— 

These men are, say they, martyrs in a 
grand cause, the cause of liberty, free 
speech, and elevation of the laboring 
classes; it was not proved that any one of 
them threw the bomb; hence instead of 
regarding them as felons, convicts, murderers, 
every working man should recognize 
in them the champions of his rights, 
of which FREE SPEECH is chief. 

They appeal to prejudice and seek to 
awaken spite and hatred of government 
by such words as the following, used by 



anarchists at the cemetery:" 
"Ruling class over the laboring class." 
There is a specious deception about all 
this, which some do not quickly detect. 
Take the last sentence. Which is the 
ruling class in this land of freedom, where 
the majority rules and the ballot-box determines 
who shall represent that majority 
in the execution of its own laws? Just so 
surely as the majority of the people in this 
land are laborers— some laboring with the 

R990 : page 2 

plow, some with the pick, some with machinery, 
and some with their pens, just 
so surely the working class is the ruling 
class, and the windy orator should have 
expressed himself rather that it was a victory 
of the practical working class over 
work-talkers who labor not at all, but seek 
to cover themselves with glory and pose 
as ultra freemen when in reality they are 
a small minority, who, conscious that they 
can never convince a majority of the people 
that anarchy [lawlessness and destruction] 
is better than thrift and true liberty 
(liberty to do right and to permit each 
other to do the same), seek to overturn 
the freedom of the land which welcomed 
them to enjoy the blessing of her blood-bought 
liberties, when they fled as convicts 
and outlaws from the lands that gave 
them birth. 

As to freedom, can it not be carried 
too far? Did not these "martyrs for freedom" (?) 
carry it too far— farther than 
the working class, the ruling class, is prepared 
to permit? Freedom to murder 
whom you please, or to burn whose house 
you please, is too much freedom to grant 
to any one until we are sure that the 
grace of God has so thoroughly refined 
the heart that this freedom would never be 
used. 

Freedom of speech should be permitted; 
it is one of the strong bulwarks of liberty, 
which every true man should love and 
appreciate. There should be full freedom 
to criticize public officers and laws, to 
show their injustice or inefficiency if it 
can be shown, and thus to move the majority, 
the ruling and working class, to 
effect any change which can be shown to 
be for the benefit of the majority. But 
no well balanced mind, properly informed 



of the institutions of this land, could 
possibly urge that it is a proper use of the 
word FREEDOM which would permit men 
in the name of the liberty, guaranteed to 
all under the Constitution, to set at nought 
the will of the majority and the laws they 
have made, and publicly threaten the 
life and property of the masses, and of 
their servants and representatives appointed 
to enforce those laws. The true 
meaning of freedom is untrammeled liberty 
to do anything that is right. Does any 
one claim that murder is right? Yes, 
anarchists claim that. They claim that by 
any means, and at any cost of life and 
happiness to others, their theories should 
be carried out. They know that they 
constitute a hopeless minority. They have 
no hope of ever convincing a majority 
that their theory is desirable: hence they 
argue We must use force— We must force 
the majority to obey the minority. And 
strangely enough they call that a battle 
for LIBERTY. Despotism, we should call 
it, the bondage of the majority, of nine-tenths 
of society, of the working class, to 
the vicious class, who could not if they 
would, rule as well as the better educated 
despotic classes of the old world. 

As to the sentence of death executed 
upon these men, we believe that society 
(i.e. the majority) did perfectly right in 
putting out of their midst those misguided 
and injurious members, who even if they 
did not throw the bomb, were the real 
perpetrators of the crime, having undoubtedly 
incited others to do that which perhaps 
they themselves were too cowardly 
to do. If it could be shown conclusively 
that another threw the fatal bomb, we 
could not excuse them on any ground 
but cowardice. No pity for the fearless 
men who represented the people, nor pity 
for their wives and babes, hindered those 
anarchists from each throwing bombs by 

R991 : page 2 

the dozen; their words over and over 
again prove this; only their cowardice 
prevented. Nothing else hindered that we 
can think of. So then, if a poor ignorant 
deluded wretch could to-day be found 
whose ignorant mind and courage they 
had talked up to the point of action, we, 
and we believe the people (the ruling working 



class) would say, More guilty far and 
more worthy of death were the cowardly 
talkers than the duped one who obeyed 
them— their tool. 

But, is society (the people) justified in 
taking the life of such enemies of its life 
and peace? We answer, yes; far more so 
than they generally think. In taking 
away the life of such as these, it merely 
hastens (for the good of the whole) the 
death penalty under which the whole 
world rests. [Only believers have even 
reckonedly escaped that condemnation 
which came upon all through Adam's disobedience.] 
Society does not do more 
than this; it has no right to torture him. 
Neither can it go beyond the present life 
to interfere in any degree with that future 
resurrection life, which our Lord's ransom 
has made secure to every man. These 
men who have so misused the present 
brief spark of life, were no doubt deluded 
egotists who vainly supposed they knew 
far better than the people what is advantageous 
and beneficial for all, and in the 
next age (the Millenium) when they get 
their share of the ransom which our Lord 
gave for all, they will be enabled to see 
clearly, under the Great Teacher's instructions, 
the ways of righteousness, wisdom 
and peace, and some of them we 
may hope will be converted by that knowledge 
into servants of God and supporters of 
divine law and order. 

The Law of God given to Israel directed 
and commanded them to visit capital punishment 
in such serious cases. Some, however, 
will perhaps remark— The TOWER's 
teaching is that the Law was for the Jewish 
nation, and that we are under the law 
of love during the Gospel age. Very true, 
we answer, and in our reference to "society", 
"the people", "the masses", etc., 
we had no reference to the little minority, 
the virgin of Christ, the church, the sanctified 
in Christ Jesus. These are "not 
of the world." In our consideration of 
the world, the people, and what they are 
justified in doing, viz., making laws, electing 
executors of those laws, prosecuting 
wars in defence of liberties etc., trying 
and executing anarchists, and all such 
business, we exempt and except the church 
(real) entirely and always, as the Lord and 
the apostles did. As consecrated new creatures, 
representatives of Christ our Lord 



in the world, we have nothing to do with 
such things, but are to leave those things 
to the world, while we follow the Master 
and exemplify his teachings, which are 
totally unsuited to the world under the 
evil conditions of the present. And not 
the least embarrassing feature of our case 
is that we must be misunderstood by many 
of our neighbors, who know us not, even 
as they knew not our Master and his 
course.— 1 John 3:1. 



R991 : page 2 

THE REAL DANGER. 



"Pride goeth before destruction, and a haughty 
spirit before a fall."— Prov. 16:18. 

The real danger to society at present is 
not from an uprising of a small handful 
of anarchists to overthrow law and order, 
but to the surprise of many let us say, 
the real danger now, is from friends of 
the law and order. The success of the 
law and its servants in properly and deliberately 
putting down these enemies of 
the law, will tend toward haughty austerity 
on the part of many, who feeling, that a 
large majority favor the law, will be less 
conciliatory in their dealing, less cautious 
and considerate of the feelings and equitable 
rights of others, and more disposed 
to invoke the arm of the law to their aid 
whenever possible. 

It will be conceded that all the wealthy 
and all those mechanics and artisans in 
"comfortable circumstances," are on the 
side of law and order, and with them are 
the masses of meagerly educated peace-loving 
laborers, whose well balanced 
minds grasp the fact that the educated 
and skilled artisan and capitalistic energy 
are necessities, without which they would 
sink back from present comfort, and advantages, 
and opportunities of advancement, 
into the comfortless barbarism of 
our ancestors. The present victory at 
Chicago, is the victory of all these over 
their common enemy, anarchism. But so 
surely as the feeling of strength shall 
harden the hearts of the capitalists or employing 
element of this class, and make 
them less considerate of the other members 



of the same class— employees— so 
surely will the majority of these laborers 
be gradually driven into opposition, not 
only to their employers, but also to all 
laws which do not favor their own selfish 
interests. 

In order that laws shall be respected by 
the majority, they must be based, not on 
selfishness, but on justice. And as from 
time to time, under changing circumstances 
and increasing knowledge, laws are 
found to be unjust toward any, all should 
submit to justice, and such laws should be 
changed. But as already pointed out in 
chapter XV. of Millennial Dawn, selfishness 
will rule on both sides, and will divide 
the at present law abiding masses of 
the people and result in the very anarchy 
now seemingly throttled. 

While admitting that labor strikes are 
generally evils, which oftenest bring loss 
rather than gain to those who engage in 
them, and to others dependent upon them, 
and while admitting that selfishness and 
injustice often lie at the bottom of trades-unions, 
we are ready to admit that sometimes 
they may be necessary, to obtain justice.* 

The employing class, blinded partially 
by selfishness so that they are unable to 
see the necessity and justice of self-protection 
by organization, on the part of 
the employed class, associates in mind 
and in private conversation (though not 
often publicly) all trades-unionists with 
anarchists; and they think of the victory 
over anarchism at Chicago, as a victory 
over trades-unionists in general. They 
think they see in the very general failure 
of strikes during this year, and finally the 
hanging of the anarchists, evidence of 
the power of capital over all opposition, 
and many now claim that the 
"heroic treatment" of crushing out opposition, 
strikes, etc., is the only sure, and 
the best plan, and that the holding of conferences, 
attempts to arbitrate or conciliate 
etc., only stimulate the employed to 
ask more and unreasonable things. (And 
this last point is too true.) 

The splitting of labor organizations into 
factions, and contentions between these 
now imminent, threatens two dangerous 
results: First, the effect will be to 
strengthen the hand of capitalists, permitting 
selfishness to have the greater control 
of their consciences and conduct, 



making them sometimes haughty and inconsiderate 

of the interests and rights of 

others: Secondly, the effect upon laborers, 

artisans, etc., will be to discourage them 

from present hopes of legally, at the ballot-box, 

by united effort, obtaining such 

changes of laws as changing circumstances, 

conditions, inventions, etc., may dictate 

to be just. The result of this despair 

will be bad. It will change many of these, 

at present law-upholding people, into law-opposers 

—anarchists. Thus we see the 

danger of the present moment, from an 

opposite quarter to that from which it is 

generally looked for. 

In proof of what we here predict, we 
cite a few instances which have come under 
our own observation here in Pittsburg, 
which surely we are justified in considering 
as samples of the general sentiment of 
the land. 

(1) On the day of the execution of the 
anarchists a prominent banker remarked 
to the writer, that he was glad to see law 
and order vindicated. To this we assented, 
but when he proceeded to class as part 
and parcel of the same victory the political 
defeat at the polls of the "United 

Labor Party" in New York, we had to 
differ. So positive were the gentleman's 
expressions that discussion on that subject 
seemed to be useless, and only calculated 
to make him regard any who might differ 
with him as anarchists also. 

(2) The Sunday following the execution 
of the anarchists at Chicago, witnessed 

a conflict between various political 
and labor societies, and the police and 
military authorities in the city of London, 
England, occasioned by the prohibition 
of a public meeting, which according to 
custom the labor societies attempted to 
hold, and which they evidently thought 
they had a right to hold under the existing 
English laws. Without discussing the 
merits of this case we wish merely to note 
that in referring to it some of the journals 
of this city gave evidence that their views 
on the subject of labor organizations and 
anarchism are warped in the manner indicated 
above. They declared that Chicago 
had given London a practical lesson 
in how to deal with anarchists, and that 
the firmness of the police and military at 
London showed that they were equal to 
any emergency. And we doubt not these 



journals voiced the sentiments of their 
owners and of a very large class of readers. 
Others would read in the telegraphic 
column, that many of those who attempted 
to hold the London meetings were there 
as labor organizations, who carried banners 
claiming that they were almost starving, 
and wanted not charity, but work, 
whereby to honestly provide for their families; 



*To protect each other's interests under existing 
conditions it seems as proper for men to combine 
their talents in a trade union as to co-operate 
in a joint stock company for trade or manufacture; 
but for either a trade union or a joint-stock company 
to attempt selfishly to serve its own interest 
by forcing others out of trade, or out of employment 
is contrary to both human and divine laws, 
and is grossly unjust. For this reason conscientious, 
righteousness-loving children of God must 
there draw the line and have no part in intimidating 
or injuring others, however necessary or expedient 
for their own interests such a course might 
appear. 

R992 : page 2 

and urging upon the government to 
enact some laws or start some public 
works, whereby they might be kept from 
starvation, without being compelled by 
necessity to violate law and order, by 
confiscating a part of the surplusage of 
the luxurious aristocracy, to obtain life's 
necessities for those in need.* As the 



*We are convinced that this is not a fancy sketch 
as some here might be inclined to think, for a letter 
written a few days before this conflict by a WATCH 
TOWER reader living in England who himself has 
been out of work for some time and is selling 
"Dawn" wherever he can, to spread the truth and 
help sustain his family until he can get paying work, 
says that the destitution is very great among the 
poor, many of whom he says can get no work 
and have no idea where the next meals victuals 
will come from. He can sell but a few copies a 
week, and the rich will not purchase nor even receive 
him. 

[Continued on 8th page.] 



R992 : page 8 
[From Second Page.] 



THE REAL DANGER. 

comfortable American mechanic and laborer 

reads this, and the editorial comment 

on it which speaks of artisans as 

anarchists, he against his will is forced to 

conclude that in the opinion of his fellow 

citizens, as voiced by the Press, all wage-workers 

are counted as anarchists. This 

is what the executed anarchists tried to 

instill into them, viz.: that all physical 

laborers are of one brotherhood, and all 

mental laborers of another; and that the 

former should all be anarchists and oppose 

the latter. They resisted the imputations 

and doctrines of anarchy only 

to find that many of their law-abiding 

fellow citizens more comfortably fixed in 

life, are in array against them, and name 

and treat them as anarchists. They are 

not slow to feel an angry resentment rising 

within them against those who would perforce 

classify and name them with anarchists, 

and they quickly draw the inference, 

that should business here become depressed 

as it is in England, and should they desire 

to use lawfully their right of free 

speech, to make known their necessities, 

they too would be dispersed by force, publicly 

branded "anarchists," and ultimately 

forced— by necessity perhaps— to 

aid the anarchy of which at first they 

were unjustly accused. 

(3) Another illustration of the haughtiness 
which the triumph of law over the 
anarchists has called forth, is reported in 
the secular journals of this city from the 
pulpit. It but illustrates the spirit which 
has always been at the bottom of intolerance 
and persecution— that "might makes 
right." It was under this same spirit 
that thousands of lives were sacrificed in 
the past, and illustrates how willingly the 
speaker would, if he could, not only be 
a pope to decide what men must think, 
but how he would forcibly silence, excommunicate, 
and anathematize, all who 
would not harmonize with his ideas. Rev. 
N. Woodside, of the First Reformed Presbyterian 
church, of Pittsburg, was the 



speaker, and his subject was "Protection 
from Ecclesiastical Anarchists." 

He said, as reported in The Times:— 

"Ecclesiastical anarchists should not 
be allowed to come in and change the existing 
order and laws of the Church. They 
have undertaken to authoritatively preach 
the Gospel without being ordained. In 
this they are impeaching the wisdom of 
Jesus Christ. They administer the sacrament 
in direct opposition to divine law. 
The speaker did not care who these expressions 
hit." 

"These ecclesiastical anarchists must 
be suppressed, for, there is an effort being 
made on the part of some to destroy the 
good order that has existed in Christ's 
Church." 

"I want you to stand out against all 
this anarchy. We must publish the names 
of these Church anarchists through the 
newspapers so that all the world may 
know them— these men who go about 
from church to church ingratiating themselves 
into the good graces of leading 
members and destroying the good order 
of the Church." 

We know not to whom this gentleman 
referred, nor does it matter; it is the 
principle that we are discussing. Seeing 
the arm of the law successful against the 
anarchists, he greatly desires to use the 
same, or any other power against those 
who dare to think for themselves, or to 
read the Bible without his glasses or his 
permission. To begin this persecution, 
and lay a foundation for some further 
steps, when action may be more possible, 
he brands those he hopes yet to destroy 
or silence for ever, as anarchists. 

We are not personally acquainted with 
the gentleman, but from his use of the 
word we doubt if he appreciates the meaning 
of the word anarchists, or understands 
upon what grounds the political anarchists 
were condemned and executed. The 
anarchists were executed, not because 
they held different views on political economy, 
from the majority— that is not a 
crime in this age— nor because they expressed 
their views,— which all have a perfect 
right to do in this age and land— but 
they were executed because they went beyond 
these rights, and threatened and took 
the lives of others. So, if the lives of 
members of Mr. Woodside's church have 



been threatened or taken, or if their property 
has been destroyed or menaced, let 
the guilty persons be treated as felons and 
anarchists, and let them upon similar conviction, 
be dealt with according to law. 

But this is not the trouble; no, we understand 
the gentleman perfectly. Thank 
God we have not met many with such 
sentiments, but we read of them in 
history. The gentleman has merely adopted 
a new name for his enemies, those 
whom he regards as heretics, stigmatizing 
them as "ecclesiastical anarchists," that 
thereby he may draw upon them some of 
the deserved reproach which attaches to 
that name in the estimation of all order-loving 
people, and thus to awaken an uncharitable, 
unchristian, persecuting spirit. 

The same heart and tongue if in the 
place of influence a few centuries ago, 
instead of saying "These ecclesiastical 
anarchists must be suppressed," would 
have worded it, "Burn the heretics!" 
—"Establish an Inquisition!" 

Using the gentleman's newly applied 
name "ecclesiastical anarchist," as the 
synonym for "heretic," let us remind him 
of a little scrap of church history, which, 
if he ever knew, he has evidently forgotten, 
viz:— that when his forerunners 
started to think for themselves and left 
the "Covenanters," calling themselves 
"Reformed Presbyterians," they were 
counted "ecclesiastical anarchists" (heretics); 
and were also accused of "destroying 
the good order of the church." To go 
back still further, we find that the "Covenanters" 
also began, by a few men 
thinking and teaching contrary to the 
teachings of the Episcopal Church from 
which it broke off, and these too were 
counted "ecclesiastical anarchists" (heretics) 
by those whom they left. Going 
further still into the past (and that not 
three and a-half centuries ago), the Episcopal 
Church, or Church of England, 
broke off from the Roman Catholic 
Church, and all its members were cursed 
as (heretics) "ecclesiastical anarchists." 

Each of these in turn, has been told by 
those they left, that they were "in direct 
opposition to the divine law," and that 
they were "destroying the good order of 
the church" etc. And the Episcopal and 
Roman Catholic churches from which 
they came out, to this day declare that no 



one can "authoritatively preach the gospel 

without being ordained" by them. Thus 

we see that Mr. Woodside is an "ecclesiastical 

anarchist" of the very sort his 

words condemn. Scraps of history are very 

useful as antidotes for pulpit-rabies. 

Thus we have shown evidence from 
the Press, the Pulpit and the Bank, 
that the danger is not from present real 
anarchists, but rather that over-confidence, 
pride and tyranny on the part of some will 
ultimately force the issue and compel anarchism. 
As for the ecclesiastical intolerance 
we have long ago pointed out the 
probability of an offensive and defensive 
combination of all the large denominations 
of Christendom for the suppression 
of "growth in grace and knowledge" beyond 
their lines— somewhat on the order 
of the present "Evangelical Alliance." 
Our study of the Scriptures which are 
"able to make us wise," prepares us for 
the time and events Mr. Woodside longs 
for, when, by an ecclesiastical combination, 
all small companies of independent 
thinkers will be "suppressed." In the 
Scriptures we read the fact that the great 
ones in politics, finances and ecclesiastical 
affairs, will consolidate their power for 
a time, but the haughty, proud and unjust 
shall fall, and terrible will be the fall. 

The events of our day show that these 
things are drawing nigh, and though we 
pen these words of warning, we have no 
hope of altering the course which God 
has foretold, but will be satisfied, if we 
shall help the few, the little flock scattered 
abroad, to discern the times and be on the 
Lord's side, the side of right; and prepare 
them to endure hardness as good 
soldiers of our Master, who indeed peaceable 
as a lamb, was also considered an 
"ecclesiastical anarchist" by the Chief 
Priests and "orthodox" religionists of his 
day. He too whom God had anointed 
with his spirit also, to preach the gospel, 
was demanded of the Pharisees, "Who 
gave thee this authority?" (Matt. 21:23.) 
The Apostles' authority also was questioned 
by the same class, and they were 
cast into prison for daring to preach without 
permission of the Chief Priests.— 
Acts 5:17,18,26-28,41,42. Should the 
time of persecution ever again come, let 
all continue to preach as did the early 
church, asking no other authority than the 



command of the Lord. Acts 11:19. All 
the spirit anointed are members of the 
"Royal Priesthood." "Ye should show 
forth the praises of him who called you out 
of darkness into his marvelous light" 
(1 Pet. 1:9) and "ought to be teachers." 
-Heb. 5:12. 

But it is not needful here, to go to the 
Scriptures to prove that all who have the 
Spirit of Christ, are not only authorized and 
commanded by him, the true head of the 
Church, to preach, but having the spirit 
of the gospel within them, they cannot 
refrain from declaring the gracious goodness 
of God and his glorious plan of 
salvation. 



R993 : page 3 

THE FAITHFUL SERVANT'S PRAYER. 

Lord, speak to me, that I may speak 
In living echoes of Thy tone; 

As Thou hast sought, so let me seek 
Thy erring children, lost and lone. 

O lead me, Lord, that I may lead 

The wandering and the wavering feet; 

O feed me, Lord, that I may feed 

Thy hungering ones with manna sweet. 

strengthen me, that while I stand 
Firm on the Rock, and strong in Thee, 

1 may stretch out a loving hand 

To wrestlers in the troubled sea. 

O teach me, Lord, that I may teach 

The precious things Thou dost impart; 

And wing my words, that they may reach 
The hidden depths of many a heart. 

O give thine own sweet rest to me, 

That I may speak with soothing power 

A word in season, as from Thee, 
To weary ones in needful hour. 

O fill me with Thy fullness, Lord, 

Until my very heart o'erflow 
In kindling thought and glowing word, 

Thy love to tell, Thy praise to show. 

O use me, Lord, use even me, 

Just as Thou wilt, and when, and where; 
Until Thy blessed face I see, 



Thy rest, Thy joy, Thy glory share. 
— Havergal. 



R993 : page 3 

SONS OF GOD AND DAUGHTERS OF MEN. 

"The sons of God saw the daughters 
of men that they were fair, and they took 
them wives of all, which they chose.... 
And they bear children to them, the 
same became mighty men, which were of 
old, men of renown."— Gen. 6:2,4. 

The Scriptures not only point us to the 
future age and call the spiritual government 
of Christ which shall then exist a 
"new heavens," and earthly society and 
institutions under it a "new earth;" but 
the present spiritual rulership [under Satan, 
"the prince of this world"] and 
earthly institutions under it are termed 
"The present evil world," dispensation 
or epoch. Moreover, we are informed 
that the present dominion of evil has not 
lasted forever, but that it was preceded 
by a still different dispensation or epoch 
spoken of as "the world that was before 
the flood," which also had a heavens or 
spiritual ruling power, and an earth, or 
condition of men subject to that spiritual 
dominion. 

The three worlds mentioned by Peter 
(2 Pet. 3:6,7,13) designate these three 
great epochs of time, in each of which, 
God's plan with reference to men has a 
distinct and separate outline, yet each is 
but a part of the one great plan which, 
when complete, will exhibit the divine 
wisdom, though considered separately 
these parts would fail to show their deep 
design. 

Since that first "world" (heavens and 
earth," or that order of things,) passed 
away at the time of the flood, it follows 
that it must have been a different order 
from the present, and hence the prince of 
this present evil world was not the prince 
of that which preceded this— of the 
world or dispensation before the flood. 

Several scriptures seem to throw light 
on God's dealings during that first dispensation, 
and we think give a further 
and clearer insight into his plan and purpose 



as a whole. The thought suggested 
by these is, that the first world (the dispensation 
before the flood) was under the 
supervision and special ministration of 
the angels; that these were man's governors 
and overseers commissioned to 
communicate God's will and to rule over 
the fallen and degenerating race, which, 
because of sin, needed this government. 

That angels were the rulers of that 
epoch is not only indicated by all references 
to that period, but may be reasonably 
inferred from the Apostle's remark 
when contrasting the present dispensation 
with the past and the future. He endeavors 
to show both the righteousness and 
the enduring character of the future rulership 
of the world, saying, "The world to 
come hath He not put in subjection to 
the angels." No, it is put under the control 
of Jesus and his joint-heirs, and 
hence it shall not only be more righteous 
than the present rule of Satan, but it shall 
be more successful than was the previous 
rule by the angels.— See Heb. 2:2,5. 

In their original estate all the angels 
seemed to possess the ability to appear in 
earthly forms— Satan appeared to Eve as 
a serpent; other angels frequently appeared 
as men, thus performing their ministry, 
appearing or disappearing, as the 
work demanded. 

It was at this time it seems, that the 
fall of some of the angels occurred. It 
is a common supposition, though we 
think without foundation, that the fall 
of Satan's angels occurred before man's 
creation. We are told that Satan was 
a murderer [man killer] from the beginning. 
(Jno. 8:44.) Certainly not 
the beginning of his own existence, for 
every creation coming from God's hand 
is perfect, nor can we think any other 
beginning referred to than man's beginning, 
in Eden. But so far as we are informed 
he was alone then and had no followers 
or angels. 

The ambition of Satan to become a 
ruler seems to have developed as he beheld 
the first human pair with their procreative 
powers. He probably reasoned that 
if he could obtain the control of this man 
he should have the dominion over all his 
offspring, and be in power and influence 
above others, a rival of Jehovah; and his 
growing ambition said, "I will be like the 



Most High. "--Isa. 14:14. 

Measurably successful, Satan gained a 
great influence over the race, but not 
complete, for in competition with him 
was the great company of angels, who, as 
guardians, instructed and ruled mankind 
for a time in harmony with the will of 
God. But presently came a great degeneracy 
among those rulers of men. Man's 
corruption was contagious, and some of 
the angels left their own habitation, or 
condition as spiritual beings, keeping not 
their first or original estate. They misused 
the powers which they possessed of 
assuming a human form, and became of 
a reprobate and licentious mind, copying 
after degenerate man, and started a new 
race of men in the world, as the above 
text (Gen. 6:2,4,) affirms. 

Some have endeavored to apply this 
scripture to two classes of men— one class 
more righteous than the other, called 
"sons of God," but such a position is 
untenable, for it is not a sin for one man 
to take for a wife, another man's daughter. 
Marriage among men is never condemned 
as sinful in the Scriptures. Again, if it 
were merely a union of two classes of the 
same race, why should the offspring be 
"GIANTS," and specially "MEN OF RENOWN?" 
If the righteous and the wicked 
marry to-day, are their children therefore 
giants or more renowned men? 

Through the deterioration of several 
hundred years, mankind had lost much of 
its original vigor and perfection of mind 
and body, but with the angels it was 
different. Their powers were still perfect 
and unimpaired, hence it is clear that 
their children would partake of that vitality 
and much more resemble the first perfect 
man than those around them, among 
whom they would be giants both in physical 
and mental strength. 

Those angels which kept not their first 
condition, but sought the level of sinful 
men, and left their own habitation, or 
spiritual condition, God placed in age-lasting 
chains. That is, God restrained 
or limited their powers, taking from them 
the power and privilege of appearing in 
an earthly form, human or other. Hence, 
though we know that they thus did appear 
before the flood, there is not one 
instance recorded in which they have been 
able to free themselves from this restraint 



or chain since. On the contrary, the 

angels who left not their first estate are 

not so restrained, and have appeared frequently 

as men, as a flame of fire and as 

a pillar of cloud, etc., as recorded in both 

the Old and New Testament Scriptures. 

Having become depraved in their tastes 
and being given over to a reprobate mind, 
and being debarred from all association 
with God and his works and his plans, 
these fallen angels have no longer any 
pleasure in things on the spiritual plane, 
but crave association with depraved mankind 
and a participation with him in sin. 
How wise and kind the Almighty hand 
which has restrained their power and influence 
over men, by preventing their personal 
intercourse. Now, they may indeed 
enter and act through any who invite their 
companionship, but no more can they do. 
Thus far shalt thou go, saith the Almighty, 
but no farther. 

Some of this class, possessed by devils, 
Jesus and his disciples met in their ministry. 
Out of one he cast a legion of devils, 
(Mark 5:1-15). Anxious in some manner 
to become associated with humanity, 
yet unable to assume human form because 
restrained, when they found a man willing 
to have such company, a legion crowded 
into him, thereby making him a maniac. 
Even when they perceived that Jesus 
would release the man from their possession, 
they in despair requested as a favor 
that they might be permitted to inhabit 
and use the bodies of a herd of swine 
near by. But the swine were crazed 
thereby, and madly rushed into the sea. 

Jude (vs. 6,7,) gives conclusive evidence 
on the subject, and clearly shows 
the nature of the sin for which the fallen 
angels were condemned and restrained, 
when, after mentioning the angels who 
sinned, he says, "Even as Sodom and 
Gomorrah. ..IN LIKE MANNER giving 
themselves over to fornication and going 
after strange flesh." 

That God deprecates any mixture or 
blending of human and spiritual natures, 
and designs that each should keep its own 
original or first estate, we need scarcely 
remark is clearly taught here. (See also, 
Lev. 18:23, and 20:15,16.) And that 
our race as it exists to-day, coming 
through Noah, is purely Adamic stock, 
and contains no mixture, is shown by the 



expression— "These are the generations 
of Noah: Noah was a just man and perfect 
in his generation,"— i.e., not contaminated 
in the manner before described. 
-Gen. 6:9. 

Glancing back, then, we see the first 
epoch under angelic control, and the result, 
man's continued degradation, and 
degrading influence upon some of the 
angels. The angels were utterly unable 
to accomplish the great work of man's 
recovery. Doubtless they were anxious 
to do it, for they sang and shouted for 
joy at his creation. And God let them 
try it, and it was doubtless part of their 
trial and discipline, but sadly they failed. 
Some joined the ranks of evil and the 
rest stood by and witnessed the terrible 
course of sin. Later we find them still 
interested and desiring to look into the 
plan which God has since been working 
out, and ever ready to do his bidding 
in our service. (1 Peter 1:12.) Thus 
was proven both to men and angels the 
futility of angelic power to save men, 
though they thus showed interest. 

In the beginning of "this present evil 
world," notwithstanding Noah's endeavor 
to serve God and to teach his posterity 
to follow his example, and the exhibition 
of God's anger at the deluge, the tendency 
was still downward, and soon the 
wickedness of Sodom brought its destruction. 
Mankind was bent on an evil course, 
and God permitted them to take it. Then 
the ministration of angels, except to the 
few of God's children, was withdrawn. 

In this second dispensation God permits 
the world to select and obey the prince 
of its own choosing, to feel his galling 
yoke and to realize the real character of 
evil, while He is selecting from among 
them a little flock, whose desire to do the 
will of God has led them to sacrifice the 
human interests and present things, to 
share as joint-heirs with Christ the glories 
and honors of the new ruling power (new 
heavens). And when the prince of this 
world is cast out, and he whose right it is 
shall take his power and reign, then 
in him shall all the families of the earth 
be blessed. 

God has now demonstrated to all his 
creatures that his plan is the only one 
which could accomplish the great work; 
and his plan has, ever since the fall, been 



gradually and quietly developing, and in 
due time will bear abundant fruit unto 
eternal life. It selects and tests first of all 
the "little flock," the Royal Priesthood 
and then reaches out to lift up and restore 
all who will accept the favor upon God's 
conditions. 

THE SPIRITS IN PRISON. 

"Christ also hath once suffered for sins, the just 
for the unjust, that he might bring US to God, being 
put to death in the flesh but quickened [in] spirit. 
By which also, [in addition to this work done for 
us] he preached to the spirits in prison; which 
sometime [before] were disobedient, when once 
the long-suffering of God waited in the days of 
Noah."-l Pet. 3:18-20. See Diaglott, footnote. 

A satisfactory interpretation of this 
Scripture has long been sought, and but 
few have found a solution perfectly consistent 
and satisfying even to themselves. 
But in view of the truth gleaned from the 
suggestions of the preceding article, the 
above statements of the apostle Peter become 
luminous. 

The two views of this passage commonly 
held we state first, and then give our present 
view of it. 

The most common view is, that during 
the time that Jesus was entombed he was 
off on a missionary tour preaching to the 
antediluvian sinners who were suffering 
torture in a place called hell. 

If its advocates would consider it, they 
would find that their interpretation favors 
a view of future probation for the antediluvians, 
a thing which they strenuously 
oppose. For if Christ preached to them 
it must have been for some purpose, and 
surely it was not to merely mock and deride 
them; and consequently he must 
have preached a message of hope— a part 
of his blessed "good tidings of great joy." 
And if there is a future probation for the 
antediluvians, why not accept our position 
as correct— that in Christ "all the families 
of the earth shall be blessed?" 

This is the objection which consistency 
would urge against this view, from the 
standpoint of those who hold it. But if 
we view it from the Scriptural standpoint, 
and with the correct idea of death, we 
must reason that if Jesus was really dead 
during those three days, as the Apostles 



declare, then he could do no preaching; 

for "the dead know not anything," (Eccl. 9:5), 

and "there is no work, nor device, 

R993 : page 4 

nor knowledge, nor wisdom, in the grave." 

(Eccl. 9:10.) Secondly, If Jesus had 

been an exception to the rule, and could 

have preached, the antediluvians could 

not have heard, for certainly they have no 

wisdom, nor knowledge, in the grave. 

Hence this view is found generally unsatisfactory 

and out of harmony with the 

Scriptures. 

The second view, and the one which 
seemed most reasonable to us until the 
considerations of the preceding article 
threw light upon this scripture also, is to 
refer the preaching to that which Noah 
did under the direction of the Spirit of 
God to the antediluvians, who at this time 
were imprisoned in death. The objection 
to this view is, that the preaching was 
not to men, nor to the spirits of men, but 
to spirits, spirit beings; and the preaching 
was not done by Noah, nor by the Spirit 
of God, but by the death and resurrection 
of Jesus. 

It seems very clear therefore, that the 
spirits are those spirit beings who were 
disobedient during the days of Noah, 
and whom God therefore imprisoned or 
restrained in some of their former liberties 
and privileges, even "those angels 
who kept not their own principality, but 
left their own habitation [or normal condition] 
he has kept in perpetual chains, 
[restraints,] under thick darkness, for the 
judgment of the great day." Jude 6. 
-Diaglott. 

This interpretation seems to meet all 
the circumstances of the case thus far. 
Now we inquire, In what way could Jesus 
preach to these during the time he was 
dead? We answer that it is not so stated. 
It was by the facts that he preached, as 
we sometimes say that "actions speak 
louder than words." It was by his sufferings, 
death and resurrection that the 
preaching was done. Thus, as Jesus went 
from step to step in his work, his course 
was preaching a good sermon to those 
angels who once had been placed in control 
of man, and had themselves fallen 
instead of lifting up mankind. In Jesus 



they saw exemplified obedience even unto 
death, and its reward— resurrection— to 
spiritual being of the divine nature. Such 
was the great text, and the lesson from it 
is stated by the Apostle in verse 22, viz., 
that Jesus was now highly exalted and 
given a name [title] above every name, 
that he was "gone into heaven, and is at 
the right hand of God [the position of 
highest favor]; ANGELS and authorities 
and powers being made subject to him." 
They knew Jesus before he left the glory 
of the heavenly condition and became 
a man. They knew the object of his 
self-sacrifice as a man. They saw him 
obedient even unto death, and then that 
his high exaltation came as a reward 
(Phil. 2:9). They must have felt keenly 
their loss through disobedience, being cut 
off from communion with God, restrained 
as unworthy of former liberty and communion 
with the purer minded of mankind, 
and their own future an unsolved 
mystery. We can but imagine that sorrow 
and chagrin filled their hearts as they 
contrasted their course of disobedience 
and its results, with Jesus' obedient course 
and its grand results. We can fancy them 
saying, Would that we had realized before, 
as fully as we now do, the wide contrast 
between the results of obedience and 
disobedience. Would that we might have 
another trial: with our increased knowledge, 
our course would be very different. 

A clear distinction should be borne in 
mind, as between Satan and these angels. 
Satan evidently sinned against great light, 
so that infinite wisdom finds no place to 
do more for him. His was not a temptation 
to sin from bad example in others, 
as was the case with the "angels who sinned" 
in the days of Noah, being led in to 
evil by their contact with fallen man; 
for Satan is the father of lies and was a 
sinner prior to man's fall, and was man's 
tempter. With reference to Satan nothing 
is stated in Scripture to indicate a 
future trial; but, to the contrary, it is 
expressly stated that he is to be "destroyed." 
Heb. 2:14; Rom. 16:20; 
Rev. 20:10. 

Here we start the inquiry: Is it possible 
that there may be probation for these 
spirits in prison who were formerly disobedient 
in the day of Noah, being led 
into sin through man's bad example? We 



answer that God's loving care over and 
for man, while we were yet sinners, and 
his impartiality, would lead us to hope 
that he might as well have some provision 
for the spirits imprisoned alive, as for 
mankind imprisoned in death. Though 
because of the different penalties upon 
the two classes the means of recovery may 
not necessarily be the same in all particulars: 
for instance, these angels not 
being condemned to death, need not be 
redeemed from death. 

If those angels which sinned are to have 
a future trial— during the day or age of 
judgment [or trial], which is expressly 
stated, it follows that there is hope for 
them. If then, under the able instruction 
and assistance of the glorified church, 
they forsake sin and lay hold upon righteousness, 
they shall be accounted worthy 
of everlasting life and happiness. 

Since we find no Scripture statement 
contradictory of this, no statement telling 
of their destruction, we have reasonable 
ground of hope for them, and may 
search further for Scripture statements favoring 
that hope? 

We find but two statements apparently 
contradictory; The first reads: "Art thou 
come to destroy us?" (Mark 1:24; Luke 4:34; 
Matt. 8:29). This shows that 
these imprisoned spirits had in mind destruction 
as their final doom, but it no 
more proves that their suppositions were 
correct, than the fact that the so-called 
"Orthodox" believe that nine-tenths of 
humanity will be everlastingly tormented, 
proves that to be so. The fact is we find 
Satan, who taught men to thus blaspheme 
God's character through misrepresentations 
of his plans, was the master and 
chief over these cast-down spirits; and 
evidently he had misrepresented Jehovah's 
plans to the imprisoned spirits as he has 
to men. He is the father of lies. 

The second text (Matt. 25:41), mentions 
"everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and 
his angels." This cannot be used as an argument 
against a hope for a probation for 
the imprisoned spirits, for though by force 
of circumstances and restraint from any 
other service, they are now Satan's angels 
—messengers or servants— yet they may 
not always be such, if an opportunity 
were granted for them to return to God's 
service and be angels of God. This passage 



relates to the "lake of fire," or destruction, 
into which, at the close of the 
Millennial age, all are to be cast, who are 
out of harmony with God. Satan will be 
of those cast into that everlasting destruction, 
and with him all who do unrighteousness 
or have pleasure therein— all 
of whom, spirits or men, are reckoned to 
be on his side, his angels or messengers 
—evil doers, shall be cut off from life. 
To cut off such and such only, was God's 
plan from the beginning. The wilfully 
wicked and not the merely ignorant, misled, 
blinded or deceived are meant when 
it is said, "All the wicked will God 
destroy." 

THE PROBATION OF ANGELS. 

The above considerations naturally suggest 
the inquiry, Will those "spirits in 
prison," "those angels which kept not 
their first estate," and who received such 
a powerful lesson from the ministry, death 
and resurrection of Jesus, ever have an 
opportunity to profit by those lessons? will 
they ever have a chance to repent of their 
sin, to leave Satan's service, and return 
to loyalty to God? 

If at first we thought the Scriptures 
were silent on the subject, we have found 
that to be a mistake, and when God speaks 
we may reasonably conclude there is something 
profitable for us to learn. Hence 
let us give ear that we may learn whatever 
our Father deems expedient to communicate. 

Jude (verse 6) informs us that those 
angels which committed fornication and 
went after strange flesh "also" "in like 
manner" to the Sodomites (verse 7), God 
is keeping under restraint, (their penalty 
or punishment) "unto the judgment of 
the great day." The "great day" is the 
Millennial Day, and mankind is also waiting 
for this judgment [krisis— trial]. 
Peter's testimony is in harmony (2 Pet. 2:4). 
And Paul settles the matter that these 
fallen and now imprisoned spirit beings 
will have a trial as well as mankind, under 
the reign of Christ— the Church, the 
kingdom of God in exalted power. Speaking 
of the propriety of our deciding 
earthly difficulties, he says, "Do you not 
know that the saints shall judge the 
world?. ..Know ye not that we shall 
judge angels?" (1 Cor. 6:1-4). The 



Greek word here rendered judge, is krino, 
of the same root as krisis, rendered judgment 
in Jude 7, and signifies, to govern, 
to test, as to mete out to each individual 
blessings or stripes, according to the 
merit of their course when brought fully 
into the light of truth, and under all the 
blessings of the reign of Christ. Thus it 
is seen that it will be part of the work of 
the Christ to rule over and direct both 
human and angelic sinners— "to judge 
the world" of fallen men, now restrained 
in death, from which they have been redeemed 
—and also fallen spirits, restrained 
alive until this judgment or trial of the 
Great Millennial Day, when the saints 
under the headship of Jesus shall try their 
cause also, giving everlasting life and favor 
to those who shall then prove themselves 
worthy of it, and everlasting destruction 
to those unworthy. 

Besides, we find frequent references to 
a work Christ is to do in subjecting 
heavenly or spiritual, as well as human 
powers, when the church which is his body 
has been selected and the work of judging 
and blessing commences. For instance, 
we read (Eph. 1:10), "In the dispensation 
of the fullness of times, to re-establish 
[under God's dominion and law] all 
things in Christ [the disordered things] 
that are in heaven [spiritual] and on earth 
[human], in him."— Douay translation. 
Again, "In him it hath well pleased the 
Father that all fullness should dwell, and 
through him to reconcile all things unto 
himself, making peace by the blood of 
his cross, both as to the things on earth, 
and the things in heaven"— earthly and 
spiritual transgressors— Col. 1:20 Douay. 

In Eph. 3:8-10, it is shown that the 
length and breadth of God's redemptive 
plan, has been hidden by God until the 
Gospel Age, when the Apostles were commissioned 
to declare to men, the conditions 
upon which they might become 
sharers with Jesus in the execution of 
God's loving plans, and the intent is, ultimately 
to have all the heavenly or spiritual 
beings know, through the instrumentality 
of the Church, the boundless wealth 
that is in God's great gift— His Son— and 
the different methods and steps his wisdom 
marked out for all his creatures. We 
quote the passage from the Diaglott 
translation:— 



"To me, the very lowest of the saints, 
was this favor given— To announce among 
nations the glad tidings-the BOUNDLESS 
WEALTH of the Anointed One: even to 
enlighten all as to what is the [method 
of] administration [or operation] of that 
secret [plan] which has been concealed 
from the ages, by that God who created 
all things; in order that now [henceforth] 
may be made known to the governments 
and the authorities in the heavenlies, 
through [the instrumentality of] the congregation 
[church] the much diversified 
wisdom of God, according to the plan of 
the ages," "which he purposed in Christ 
Jesus our Lord." 

It would appear, then, that God's bountiful 
plan and diversified wisdom contains 
something of interest to the angels, and 
if of interest to any, of special interest 
to those confined or restrained, and awaiting 
a trial in the judgment of the great 
day. They see the saints and seek to 
look into things revealed by the spirit 
and Word to these, but in no other way 
can they learn of their future, or of what 
provision has been made for them in the 
boundless wealth and diversified wisdom 
of God, because it is to be "made known," 
"through the church." 

These condemned angels have been 
learning much since the first text and sermon 
—the lesson of Jesus' obedience and 
exaltation (1 Pet. 3:18-20 and 1 Tim. 3:16); 
for we read that "we are made a 
spectacle to both angels and to men." 
(1 Cor. 4:9— Diaglott.) The spectacle 
and lesson is both to men and angels for 
the reason that both men and angels will 
shortly be judged by the church, and 
blessed by it, if found obedient and worthy 
of life. When the testimony in due 
time is given, all things, both in heaven 
(the spiritual condition) and on earth (the 
human) shall bow to Jehovah's Anointed 
and confess him their Lord and Ruler; 
and those who refuse his righteous authority, 
shall be cut off as unworthy of life. 
-Isa. 45:23. Rom. 14:11. Matt. 25. 
Acts 3:33. 

The angels that sinned in the days of 
Noah, have had a bitter experience since, 
no doubt death would have been preferable 
in many respects. Cut off from association 
with good angels and placed in 
the companionship of each other and Satan, 



without God and having no hope, 

they must have had a terrible experience, 

with sin's demoralizing effects, while their 

observation of mankind dying on account 

of sin, would lead them to surmise that 

such might ultimately be their portion. 

Surely, many of them will be prepared for 

a return to their former estate and its privileges 

and blessings, on whatever terms a 

just God may prescribe. 

We cannot forget, too, their respectful 
conduct toward our Lord and his apostles, 
and the message they delivered; far 
more respectful indeed than that of the 
strictest sect of the Jewish church. While 
the latter scoffed and said, "Is not this 
Jesus the son of Joseph?" (John 6:42) 
the former exclaimed "Thou art the Son 
of God," (Mark 3:11.) While the former 
said, "Thou hast a devil and art mad," 
the latter said, "I know thee who thou 
art, the HOLY ONE of God. "--Mark 1:24. 

While they respected the true, they opposed 
the false, saying to some who pretended 
to exercise power— "Jesus I know, 
and Paul I know, but who are ye? And 

R993 : page 5 

the man in whom the evil spirit was, 
leaped on them and overcame them." 
-Acts 19:15. 

The Jews and Gentiles beat and stoned 
the messengers of God when they came 
among them with the glad tidings of salvation, 
but some of these fallen angels 
seemed desirous of spreading the glad 
tidings. One followed the Apostles, saying: 
"These men are the servants of the 
most high God which show unto us the 
way of salvation."— Acts 16:17. 

THE BASIS OF THEIR HOPE. 

But an important question now arises. 
The Scriptures show us that our hope centres 
in the fact that a ransom price was 
given for our sins, but what is the basis of 
hope for these fallen angels? On what 
ground can they have a trial and hope of 
future everlasting life? Did our Lord die 
for them? 

We are not so informed: The ransom-sacrifice 
was human, a ransom for men. 
"Verily," says Paul, "he took not on him 
the nature of angels," etc. (Heb. 2:16.) 



Furthermore, they were not under condemnation 

of death, and hence have 

never lost their life in any measure, and 

would need no ransom from death, when 

they were not in, nor condemned to it. 

It was because the sentence of DEATH had 

passed upon men that a ransom was necessary 

in order that we might regain life. 

Those angels which kept not their first 

estate, were condemned, not to death, but 

to restraint and confinement, until a day 

of trial, when God will judge both men 

and angels in righteousness by that man 

whom he hath ordained. (Acts 17:31.) 

They are therefore undergoing their penalty 

as truly as man is suffering his, though 

they be very different in kind— "according 

to the much diversified wisdom of 

God." 

And yet they had a great interest in 
our Lord's sacrifice; for though they were 
not being redeemed, bought by the precious 
blood, as was man, and did not need 
to be, not being under condemnation to 
death, yet their hope centered in the power 
which he should gain through his exaltation 
to the divine nature, in consequence 
of his obedience even unto death, to judge 
and restore them in due time. 

Again, if we have a correct view of the 
matter, that these angels had been tempted 
and seduced by evil in men, which had 
become very great (Gen. 6:5) then we 
see how the reconciliation accomplished 
by the blood of the cross for man would 
apply to and cancel both direct and indirect 
guilt, which resulted from the one 
man's disobedience. So that now, in the 
words of the Apostle, "It pleased the 
Father... having made peace [propitiation 
—satisfaction] by the blood of his 
cross, by him to reconcile all things unto 
himself, by him, whether things [out of 
harmony] in earth, or things in heaven." 
-Col. 1:20. 

GOD'S COMPREHENSIVE LAW. 

God's wisdom, love, and justice decide 
on what is best, and that decision is his 
will or law. But strictly speaking, only 
so much of God's will as he expresses to 
his creatures is law to them. Hence while 
his laws never conflict, they may be more 
or less fully expressed on one occasion 
than on another. 



All of God's intelligent creatures are 
under instruction, being taught those laws 
which his infinite love, wisdom and justice 
have enacted for the well-being of all. 
Though created perfect, each in his plane 
of being, yet they all lack that scope of 
knowledge and wisdom which belongs in 
full measure only to the divine nature. 
They all lack experience: hence in giving 
them instruction in the wisdom and propriety 
of his laws, it has pleased Jehovah 
to make an illustration which would manifest 
and practically exemplify his own 
character and prove to his creatures the 
wisdom and righteousness of his laws. 

It is evident, that the spirit of his law is 
not to take advantage of some transgressive 
slip, occasioned by lack of experience 
on the part of his creatures, but that he 
intends it to apply to the thoughts and 
intents of the hearts. That this is the 
real intent of God, we shall see illustrated 
by his dealings with those who have from 
lack of knowledge become sinners. 

His law in full, as we now see it in the 
light of His Word, is, "The soul that 
sinneth, it shall die;" that no being shall 
be permitted to live, who, when fully informed 
of God's righteous will, and enabled 
to obey it, shall not conform thereto; 
that all such shall be cut off from 
life. But this is as it may be seen NOW. 
Once it was not so clearly expressed, nor 
so clearly seen. 

To exemplify this law fully, God caused 
man to be used as an illustration before 
this extreme penalty was placed upon the 
angels. So, God placed on man the full extreme 
penalty of his law— death, knowing 
that through inexperience he would violate 
that law and come under its penalty. 
But God proposed to make an illustration 
to all his creatures of the exceeding sinfulness 
of sin and its sure consequences, 
while at the same time his love and wisdom 
so marked out the plan, that mankind, 
the illustration, might not suffer 
loss, but be fully recovered from the penalty, 
and be blessed by being everlastingly 
guarded against sin, by the lessons 
learned. 

Nor should we forget that God's dealing 
with man was perfectly just. He had a 
perfect right to demand perfect obedience 
from a perfect creature; and the fact that 
he has not required it at first of the angels, 



was a favor toward them, permitting them 

to acquire by observation of mankind, a 

knowledge of sin and its dire results, before 

being placed liable to its extreme 

penalty; even as toward man he has displayed 

his favor also, though in a different 

manner— through a ransom, and Savior, 

and restitution, and future trial for life, 

more favorable than the first, because of 

the knowledge of sin and its effects, meanwhile 

acquired by experience. This was 

a masterly stroke of wise economy on 

God's part; for had the death penalty 

been pronounced on the angels who sinned, 

a redeemer of their own kind would 

have been necessary for their recovery; 

and not only one, but many; for they 

were not representatively, but individually 

on trial. By the method chosen the grand 

result is accomplished through the instrumentality 

of the one sacrifice and the benefits 

which flow therefrom. Let us briefly 

VIEW THE EXHIBITION 

of God's character as displayed in his 
dealing toward mankind whom he made 
a spectacle to angels. (1 Cor. 4:9.) In 
so doing, let us guard against the common 
error which judges of God's actions 
exactly as of our own. Let us remember 
that justice, love, wisdom, and power, as 
commonly displayed by the fallen race, 
in dealing with each other, and by human 
parents with their children, are far from 
being perfect, as at first— the image of 
those qualities in Jehovah. In consequence 
of the fall these qualities are constantly 
at war with each other, in our experience. 
Sometimes love has a victory over justice, 
and sometimes justice has a victory over 
love. 

But with Jehovah there can be no conflict; 
and neither ever gains a victory or 
ascendancy over the other. Both are perfect, 
and work only in perfect harmony. 

Before man was created, the justice, 
wisdom, love, and power of God held 
conference on the subject, and devised the 
plan which has since been developing. 
The plan was suggested by wisdom and 
concurred in by the other attributes, the 
arrangement and execution of it being 
left in Wisdom's hands. 

Wisdom designed to have the largest 
returns of experience and benefit to man, 



and the most valuable illustration of God's 
character to all his creatures, on every 
plane of being. Accordingly Wisdom 
said, Let the man come under the control 
of Justice, Love, and Power, separately, 
that the force and operation of each 
may be the more forcibly illustrated. Let 
Justice first have complete control, let the 
man be dealt with by the strict law, "Thou 
shaltnot"— . "In the day that thou 
dost.. .dying thou shaltdie." And 
so it was. 

Man, inexperienced and unused to self 
control and liberty, violated the law, and 
experienced the full weight of Justice, as 
Wisdom had foreseen and prepared for. 

The lesson under Justice has been long 
and severe, but the lesson must be thorough, 
so that it shall never need repeating. 
Men and angels must learn that Justice is 
relentless, irrevocable and unalterable. 
Then, too, before it could be realized that 
the remedy for man lay only in Jehovah and 
nowhere else, an opportunity was offered 
for the trial of other methods for his recovery. 
First, the angels were given rulership, 
(during the age before the flood), 
and made a miserable failure; for while 
man became more and more corrupt himself, 
his evil influence led to the fall of 
some of those who attempted his assistance 
—"those angels which kept not their 
first estate." 

With the Deluge that order of affairs 
passed away. Then, under the law, given 
to one selected nation, another and a 
different opportunity was offered, to prove 
to man that even if God should cancel all 
enmity, or resentment, and receive the 
world into covenant relations, yet they 
would require a Restorer so that they could 
continue in harmony with God, even after 
being brought back. Hence sacrifices and 
offerings for sin were instituted, and God 
treated that nation as though original sin 
and guilt had been removed, and then 
placed them under law to prove to them, 
to us and to all, their inability (as degenerate 
creatures) to keep his law without 
a restitution to perfection— to his 
likeness. 

Meanwhile Love stood ready to manifest 
itself at the moment Wisdom should 
give the word. Love would have done so 
at once, but for two reasons: First, it 
could not oppose or interfere with the 



action of Justice in condemning man and 

delivering him over for the execution of 

the prescribed penalty. Secondly; Though 

Love might have acknowledged Justice 

and approved its action by promptly providing 

a ransom (an equivalent price), 

Wisdom objected and did not permit 

this course at that time, because it saw best 

to make the lesson complete and thorough. 

Hence for over four thousand years 
Love was not permitted to manifest itself, 
and might only speak in shadowy sacrifices 
and ceremonies, and more or less obscure 
promises. But finally, when the right time 
had come, "in due time," "in the fullness 
of time," Wisdom gave the word, 
and Love began to manifest itself for 
man's relief. The first act was to produce 
a perfect and sinless man to be a 
suitable "ransom for all," and it must be 
one not under the Adamic curse, who 
would lay down his life for the race, and 
whose sacrifice would meet all the requirements 
of justice, and therefore be acceptable 
as a ransom and propitiation for our 
sins. And Love's great exhibition was 
seen in the gift of the grandest, and greatest, 
and first of all God's creation, who 
became a man to redeem men: and "they 
called his name Jesus" when he became a 
man. 

Ah! says one who judges by his own 
habits and feelings, Now comes Love's 
victory over Justice. We shall see that 
God is more loving than severe. But not 
so; God is not more loving than severely 
just: he is perfect in both respects. It 
will be indeed a victory for Love, but not 
over Justice. It will be much grander 
than that. It will prove a victory for 
both Justice and Love; for it will be 
gained by Love's paying the price demanded 
by Justice— a RANSOM, "an equivalent 
price." 

Thus did the love of God magnify the 
justice and law of God, and "make it 
honorable," by acknowledging its claims 
in the payment of the very penalty demanded 
—man's death.— Rom. 5:19. 

We need scarcely say, that the love of 
God so long veiled from sight, was manifested 
in the gift of his Son to be our 
Redeemer and Saviour. The record is: 
"Herein is love, not that we loved God, 
but that he loved us and sent his Son to 
be the propitiation [satisfaction or appeasement] 



for our sins." "In this was 

manifested the love of God toward us, because 

that God sent his only begotten Son 

into the world, that we might LIVE through 

him."-l Jno. 4:9,10. 

When Love had RANSOMED man, and 
was ready to reveal itself by restoring mankind 
to perfection and harmony with 
God, Wisdom postponed it on the ground 
that a further development of the plan 
would ultimately enhance Love's glory, 
and perfect the work: that an interlude 
[the Gospel age] must occur in which 
should be selected some from among the 
redeemed; some sharers in Christ's sufferings 
and reproach, who should be counted 
worthy to share his glory, and to be his 
associates in the execution of Love's triumph 
in "the restitution of all things 
spoken by the mouth of all the holy 
prophets." 

Long and faithfully has Love labored, 
yet all her labor will yet be lost, unless in 
due time Wisdom shall commission Power 
to do its special part in the great plan. 

Power thus far has stood in the background, 
doing nothing directly in man's 
relief, save in the resurrection of our 
Lord and in the miracles, which shadowed 
forth its coming work. 

Now, we are living in the day when 
Power begins to act, not in opposition to 
Justice, but in harmony with Wisdom, 
Justice, and Love, in crushing out sin and 
evil, and in legally removing the penalty 
of sin and the dominion of evil, cancelled 
through the ransom, paid by Jesus. 
Oh, blessed day! The Lamb that was 
slain and who redeemed us by his blood 
is now invested with Power to restore and 
bless all whom he bought, and he is now 
about taking unto himself his great power, 
and shall reign until he hath put all enemies 
in subjection.— Rev. 20:6; and 
1 Cor. 15:25. 

Thus, God has chosen the plan which 
most fully and grandly exemplifies his 
unalterable justice, and exhibits the exceeding 
riches of his grace— his love; and 
in the restoration of man from destruction 
from death, to life and perfection, will 
God's power be illustrated far more forcibly 
than even in man's creation. And as 

R993 : page 6 



men and angels come to recognize the full 
fruition of God's plan in the ages to come, 
will they not with one consent exclaim 
with our brother Paul, as he caught a 
glimpse of it: "O the depths of the riches 
both of the wisdom and knowledge of 
God! how unsearchable are his judgments 
and his ways past finding out! For who 
hath known the mind [plan] of the Lord? 
or who hath been his counsellor?. ..Because 
out of him, and through him, and 
for him are all things. To him be the 
glory for ever."— Rom. 11:34-36. 

THE DIVERSIFIED WISDOM OF GOD. 

"The much-diversified wisdom of God" 
(Eph. 3:10. Diaglott) pursued one course 
with reference to men, and another with 
reference to the angels, not delivering them 
over to justice under the extreme penalty 
of the law, but pronouncing a lesser penalty 
until they should learn of evil and 
its consequences from the "spectacle" furnished 
them in mankind. 

But the result of wisdom's course in 
either case is the same. The angels being 
perfect, and having had an example of the 
extreme penalty of the law, will be able 
and doubtless glad to conform to God's 
law when again offered the opportunity. 
Man, who experienced the extreme penalty 
of the law, when restored, will be able to 
appreciate forever good and evil, and to 
rightly choose that which is good. While 
both will then be liable to the extreme 
penalty— death— neither need come under 
it, because of perfection and knowledge. 
They will then, as God does, love righteousness 
because it is good and hate unrighteousness 
because it is wrong. 

Though the experience of angels might 
at first appear less severe than man's, yet 
when it is remembered that man's dying 
experience was limited to an average of 
three-score years and ten, while the angels 
who sinned experienced over four thousand 
years of living restraint under Satan's 
rule, it will generally be conceded that 
their experience was not less severe than 
man's. 

In view of the great work to be accomplished, 
how necessary is the elevation of 
the Christ (head and body) to the DIVINE 
nature, since his mission is to govern, 
direct, and bring to perfection "whosoever 



will," both of spiritual and human 
beings. And does not the selection of 
this class, made different both from angels 
and men— of the divine nature— illustrate 
yet further the much diversified wisdom 
of God, whereby he is able to work all 
things according to the counsel of his own 
will? 



R994 : page 6 
ROMANISM SPOTTED. 



Roman Catholicism seems to adapt 
itself to every circumstance. It is black 
in one place, and white in another, and 
grey in another, just as the civilization of 
the people will permit. In thoroughly 
ignorant Catholic countries, as Cuba, 
Spain and Mexico, it openly sells indulgences 
for sin covering almost every crime 
conceivable, and in many instances these 
are printed and for sale at regularly 
graded prices. These are some of the 
black spots, and the shaded influence of 
priest-craft has kept those nations over 
which it has obtained control, far behind 
other nations in progress and civilization, 
though at one time they had superior 
advantages. In civilized lands 
where it comes in conflict and comparison 
with liberty and general intelligence, 
Romanism wears a garment of light (2 Cor. 11:13-15); 
and repudiating indulgences 
by that name, she has a more 
refined way of collecting the same revenue. 
Here she demands more priestly 
prayers and masses for some sins than 
others, and can thus run up the bill of 
charges for forgiveness as well as in the 
case of the printed indulgences of other 
lands. 

ROMANISM AND THE PUBLIC SCHOOLS. 

Long has Rome realized that intelligence 
is her foe; and hence in priest-ridden 
countries such as we have named, 
the population is ignorant in the extreme; 
as for illustration, the Catholic districts 
of Ireland, and in Spain, Portugal, Italy, 
etc. In none of these countries where 
Romanism has had a strong foothold for 
centuries, has she shown any disposition 



or energy to educate the masses of the 
people. But in civilized lands where 
Protestants predominate, the Church of 
Rome is full of zeal for the education of 
the masses. She conceals the real cause of 
her animosity to the public school system 
of this country, which thus far she has 
failed to overthrow, by establishing parochial 
schools for the children of Roman 
Catholics, claiming that a secular education 
from which religious instruction is 
excluded, is a serious evil, and that therefore 
they cannot send their children to the 
public schools. 

By religious instruction they evidently do 
not mean, such as comes from the good 
example of moral teachers; for such most 
of the public schools have. Nor do they 
mean the simple lesson of reverence for 
God; for they objected to the reading of 
a chapter from the Bible, though the 
Bibles used by Catholics and Protestants 
are practically alike. And they object 
too, to the repetition of the Lord's Prayer 
by the school: hence we must conclude 
that when they say that the children 
should have a religious training, they 
mean by that, a course of instruction in 
Catholic doctrines, and histories specially 
prepared to deceive relative to the past 
and present attitude of the Church of 
Rome. They do not wish to have the 
rising generations instructed in the plain 
facts of reliable history, which reveals 
the true character of the Church of Rome, 
the dawn of the Reformation, etc. These 
facts, if they must be alluded to, must 
first receive the gloss of Catholic writers. 

We mention these matters that it may 
be seen as a very peculiar change of front, 
that recently in one of the public school 
wards of Pittsburg, a Roman Catholic 
Priest, of St. Malachi's Church, was 
elected and installed as Principal. What 
a strange procedure! How well the symbol 
"leopard", applied to that system in 
holy writ, illustrates its spotted or varied 
character.— Rev. 13:2. 

It was not strange that a ward in which 
Roman Catholics predominate should prefer 
a Catholic to a Protestant for Principal, 
all other conditions, education, etc., 
being equal, but it was strange, that a 
man should be thought capable as a school 
Principal whose time may well be supposed 
to be urgently needed in pastoral 



services over a large flock of deluded and 
ignorant sheep and goats, for whose ignorance 
and that of their parents for centuries 
past, the Church of Rome is directly 
chargeable. 

But the most strange fact of all is, that 
this gentleman would accept the position; 
and that the church he represents, should 
permit his course, after so long and so 
bitterly crying out against these very 
schools as her enemies, and as institutions 
of the devil. This priest is too well educated 
to be ignorant of the objections all 
along urged by his church against the public 
schools. He must also have been aware, 
before accepting the office of Principal, 
that he would have no power either to 
introduce Roman Catholic instruction, or 
even to change the text-books and routine 
of studies. So then, these "wicked" 
"infidel" public schools which Roman 
Catholics have so often cursed, are really 
unchanged by the election of a priest for 
Principal, yet as soon as the priest was 
installed, Catholic children were ordered 
to attend them. This was merely another 
evidence of the "leopard," or scheming 
[spotted] policy of Roman Catholicism. 
The next stealthy step, designed no doubt, 
was to get the entire control of each 
school into the hands of local boards, 
and then change text-books, exercises, 
studies, etc., to suit themselves. 

But the scheme miscarried for the present, 
by reason of the failure of the nuns 
selected by this Principal to be the new 
teachers under him, to pass the rigid examination 
to which public school teachers 
are subjected here. Rather than carry on 
the schools without the nuns as teachers, 
the priest resigned the Principalship and 
started the Catholic schools as before. 
The plan is not considered dead, but 
merely sleeping until a more convenient 
season, when preparations will be more complete. 
We might as well add that we favor 
purely secular schools, from which all religious 
teaching and worship would be excluded. 
Less than thirty hours each week, 
and that for but a few years, is spent in 
the school room, and surely priests, nuns 
and others, have plenty of time to pour 
into childhood's ears their confusing mixtures 
of truths and errors, without intruding 
upon these few precious hours, or upon 
each other's sectarian prejudices. 



The Church of Rome is assiduously endeavoring 
to make herself popular and 
to commend herself to liberty lovers, 
trusting that they will forget the past and 
present of her despotic rule of ignorance 
and superstition in other lands. It is 
for this reason that she now appears to 
favor free schools, whereas the fifteen 
centuries of the past emphasize the fact 
that she is the bitterest enemy of everything 
which even looks toward liberty of 
conscience. She lays her clammy hand 
caressingly and patronizingly upon America's 
free institutions, that at an unsuspected 
moment she may throttle them 
and use them to her own unchanged purposes 
and schemes. She therefore for the 
moment changes her policy to suit the 
circumstances and seeks to pose before the 
public as the champion of true Christian 
liberty, even going so far as to put the 
Bible (which once she condemned and 
prohibited, except for the "clergy") into 
the hands of the people. This she did 
at the last Plenary Council in Baltimore, 
in Oct. '86. Could we see in these changes 
real reform, we would rejoice, but since 
it is ever Rome's boast that she is infallible 
and never changes, we are forced to 
believe that she is really the same as ever, 
and that merely her policy is now changing 
for purposes of expediency. 

Hear again the real sentiments of the 
unchangeable Church of Rome, not from 
the remote past, but within comparatively 
recent years:— 

"We declare, affirm, define, and pronounce it 
necessary to salvation, for every human creature to 
be subject to the Roman Pontiff."— Cardinal 
Manning. 

"Accursed be those very crafty and deceitful societies, 
called Bible Societies, which thrust the 
Bible into the hands of the inexperienced youth." 
-Pope Pius IX. 

"What Father Walker says (i.e., that he would 
as soon administer the sacraments to a dog as to 
Catholics who send their children to the public 
schools) is only what has been said over and over 
again by the bishops in their pastorals all over the 
world, and we heartily indorse it."— N.Y. Tablet. 

"No Bible shall be held or read except by priests. 
No Bible shall be sold without a license, except 
upon the pains and penalties of that mortal sin 
that is neither to be forgiven in this world nor in the 
next."— Council of Trent. 

"Moreover we confirm and renew the decrees 



delivered in former times by apostolic authority, 
against the publication, distribution, reading and 
possession of books of the Holy Scriptures translated 
into the vulgar tongue."— Pope Gregory XVI. 

The following is from the bishop's oath.— "Heretics 
(Protestants), schismatics and rebels to the 
Pope or his successors, I will, to the utmost of my 
power, persecute and wage war with." 

Rome has no new love for the Bible, 
which she has learned to fear, as the "Sword 
of the Spirit," from whose wound in the 
hands of the early Protestants, she has 
not yet fully recovered. (Rev. 13:3.) 
But she has learned that that sword is 
comparatively harmless when there are so 
few brave defenders of "the faith once 
delivered to the saints," to wield it. She 
has learned that even the "two-edged 
sword" of God's Word, when sheathed 
in the scabbard of human tradition, is not 
to be feared even in the hands of the 
masses. She has seen the children of 
those early Protestors— Lutherans, Methodists, 
Presbyterians, etc., sheath this 
Sword of the Spirit to smite with merely 
the scabbards of human tradition, and 
though they bear it continually, that thus 
they appear more like soldiers of the cross, 
though in fact they are not. And this appearance 
is another element of power 
Rome desires, and therefore she adds this 
to her policy. She thinks that in the 
same way, she can handle the Bible as 
safely as do the Protestants. 

If all the Protestant sects can with a 
show of liberty put the Bible into the 
hands of their followers, and yet make 

R995 : page 6 

void the Scriptures through their traditions, 
cannot she as safely as Protestants 
use the Bible and appear to study it, without 
permitting its truths to destroy her 
false system, traditions, and doctrinal errors? 
This is the reason why Papacy 
has finally concluded to appear as liberal 
as Protestantism. And so, the Bible may 
now be read by Catholics, and the Church 
of Rome thus quietly makes another move 
representing herself as the friend of the 
Bible and of freedom. This is necessary 
for her hold upon her subjects here, who 
are used to the air of freedom, and could 
not be trampled upon as in Roman Catholic 
countries, for instance Spain, where 



recently an American citizen was assaulted 

by a priest in the streets of Madrid, because 

he would not remove his hat and 

salute one of the numerous Catholic processions. 

It is the same in Mexico, and 

in the Central and South American countries, 

where all who will not manifest reverence 

for those processions are obliged 

to dodge into by-streets, to avoid being 

mobbed for their exercise of that slightest 

of liberties. 

The Church of Rome is seeking to favorably 
impress the worldly irreligious 
classes— which includes most of the 
wealthy, that in the troublous times already 
begun, she may pose before them as the 
only Church capable of controlling the 
people. She desires thus to turn present 
and coming labor troubles to her own 
advantage. Already she requests donations 
from large manufacturing firms, and 
gets them, as we have learned from their 
own lips, on the ground that she has more 
influence with the ignorant classes than 
any other power and can best conserve 
the interests of the wealthy. 

By and by, as Romanism rises in apparent 
love of liberty and progress, under 
the growing feeling that so many sects 
of so-called Christians is a weakness, and 
under the pressure of the growing desire 
of religionists, and the apparent necessity 
in the minds of capitalists and kings for 
a STRONG RELIGIOUS POWER to hold the 

R994 : page 7 

people down to the old laws and customs 
of the past, favorable to those now in 
power financially and socially, the aspirations 
of the Church of Rome will again 
begin to be realized; and she will begin to 
gather to her fold the wealthy and the 
conservative, convincing them that her 
influence is necessary to the preservation 
of their interests, financial and political, 
just as she long ago conquered Italy and 
then all Europe, on the same terms. 

And this is sound logic; it certainly 
appeals to business men as such. No other 
power on earth can and will, so successfully 
and so long, resist the spirit and rule 
of the new incoming dispensation of justice, 
equal rights, fullest liberty of conscience, 
and the general diffusion of truth 
and righteousness as the Church of Rome. 



Whether she will seek to stand entirely 

alone or whether she will affiliate to 

some extent with leading Protestant systems, 

is at present difficult to determine. 

It seems however from the views given in 

Revelation that she will stand separate, 

and yet be allied in interest with Protestants. 

Already we see tokens of the growing 
popularity of Romanism, and a desire for 
one strong church, among men of influence. 
At the recent celebration of the Constitutional 
Centennial in Philadelphia, the 
"cradle of liberty," a representative of this 
old and implacable foe of liberty took the 
most prominent religious part: Cardinal 
Gibbon, who, as previously announced, 
offered prayer and pronounced a benediction 
in his official robes, was the FIRST 
dignitary called upon by the President of 
the United States, upon his arrival; and 
they were afterward as representatives of 
the CHURCH and the NATION publicly introduced 
upon the platform, "amid the 
deafening applause of the immense throng 
present, which lasted unusually long." 

Let us not be misunderstood. We do 
not claim that the President had not the 
right to visit the Cardinal; for though 
his office gives him no privileges not enjoyed 
by all citizens, neither does it rob 
him of any liberties possessed by others. 
He had a right to visit whom and when 
he pleased, but we merely note this as one 
of the straws which indicate the tendencies 
of our times. Mr. Cleveland's courtesy 
to the Cardinal does not indicate 
that Mr. Cleveland is at heart a Romanist, 
but merely that he was shrewd enough 
to remember the political influence of the 
large class of voters represented by the 
Cardinal. 

Nor should we be understood as believing 
that choice should have been made 
of a minister from some other sect, or 
without official robes, instead of Cardinal 
Gibbon, to offer the Centennial prayer. 
On the contrary, we hold that the mixing 
of religion and politics is wholly wrong. 
The church and its sacred services should 
be kept entirely separate from the world 
and its political trickery, and misrule. 
The Master said: Ye are not of the world. 
If ye were of the world the world would 
love his own; but I have chosen you out 
of [to be separate from] the world; therefore 
the world hateth you. (John 15:19.) 



The world does not love God, nor his 
faithful children; for their ways and teachings 
reprove the world.— John 15:22. 

The idea of opening political Conventions 
with prayer, and appointing Chaplains 
to offer regular prayers in Congress, 
and before Legislative Assemblies, is farcical 
and hypocritical in the extreme. The 
politicians, "children of this age," do 
not want God's will done, and do not 
really consult God's will. No one will 
gainsay the statement, that if there be any 
really consecrated children of God, any 
real saints in politics, they are surely but 
few. The majority are unbelievers, though 
profiting by Mr. Ingersol's experience, in 
losing office, they do not parade their 
unbelief. 

Under the instructions first given by 
Papacy, and never fully escaped from by 
Protestants, the world has been taught to 
hypocritically ape Christianity— Kings, 
Queens, Emperors, etc., each claims to 
reign by Divine appointment, because 
Papacy authorized such rulers, under 
the claim that she represented God, and 
that her appointment or recognition of a 
ruler, was a divine recognition. If the 
kingdoms of this world call themselves 
Christian Kingdoms (Kingdoms authorized 
and governed by Christ), it is but 
natural that they should carry out that 
deception— that they should formally 
acknowledge God in their official acts, 
especially if thereby they can strengthen 
their governments, and the more firmly 
hold the people under them. Hence no 
matter how wicked and selfish the wars 
in which they engage, no matter whose 
rights and liberties they seek to subvert, 
chaplains are always sent along to pray 
with the men who go forth to murder 
others, and to steal from them their God-given 
rights, to give to the soldiers and 
sailors the idea that they are engaged in a 
Christian warfare, waged for righteousness' 
sake by a Christian nation. 

Politicians generally abominate such 
hypocritical shams, and continue them, 
not for their influence upon God, but for 
their influence upon the people. It is 
time that true Christians should know that 
such Pharisaical worship with lips while 
the heart is far from him, is an abomination 
to the Lord. 

Calling earthly and often sensual and 



devilish people and governments by the 
name Christian, has already worked great 
mischief, and made that holy name Christian, 
almost a synonym for hypocrisy and 
double-dealing. However, the poor world 
does not see the delusion under which it 
labors, and the Church of Rome, with a 
master policy, stands ready now to take 
advantage of the situation and to hold up 
before politicians and financiers her strong, 
powerful system, as the one best suited to 
the present and prospective emergency. 

Statesmen and financiers are looking 
with anxiety "after those things coming 
upon the earth" [society] as they see that 
a great shaking, a great storm is brewing 
in the heavens [among the ruling powers, 
civil and ecclesiastical]; "for the powers 
of the heavens shall be [and are being] 
shaken." Statesmen fear the result of the 
breaking up of the ecclesiastical control: 
they see what the masses do not see— that 
with the removal of religious bigotry and 
superstition, will come a reaction which 
will lead to an excess of freedom for a 
time— to lawlessness and anarchy. It is 
this "fear," as she sees this tendency, 
that is leading Protestant Prussia (so 
called) to strengthen her relations with 
the Church of Rome— the strongest power 
in the ecclesiastical heavens, and the 
one which will withstand the shaking 
longest. The same influence is at work 
in Italy and in every nation, tending to 
strengthen the hands of Papacy for the 
moment, as the power most able and most 
willing to assist in any scheme which 
seems to forward her own influence, and 
increase her own power. 

Protestants generally, having dropped 
the original ground of protest— the right 
of individual private judgment in the 
understanding of the Scriptures— and having 
adopted church governments copied 
largely after that of Papacy, are not far 
from even being good Catholics now. 
Since Papacy now advocates the use of 
the Bible in the same manner that Protestants 
do— granting liberty to read but 
not to believe it, except where it agrees 
with the Confession of Faith handed with 
it— what is now to prevent harmony 
if not union, between Catholics and (so 
called) Protestants? Nothing but the 
pictures and images, and the worship of 
the Virgin Mary, and doubtless these can 



be explained out of the way to many ere 
long. 

Recall now a fact to which we have 
heretofore directed attention— that not 
long since many Episcopalians were moving 
for a change of name, preferring the 
name Catholic, and that they entertained 
a motion looking to the offer of what is 
termed the right of Apostolic benediction 
and succession, to other Protestants. Remember 
also the trend of thought among 
Presbyterian and Methodist ministers as 
represented by the words of Bishop Foster, 
of the M.E. Church, and Rev. E. 

R996 : page 7 

R. Donehoo, Presbyterian, of this city, 
which we here repeat. Mr. Donehoo said 
in a discourse before his congregation: 
"Wince as you will, you must admit that 
this [the Catholic Church] is the Mother 
Church. She possesses an unbroken history 
extending back to the times of the 
Apostles. For every fragment of religious 
truth which we prize, we are indebted to 
her as the depository. If she has no claims 
to being the true church, then are we 
bastards and not sons.... Talk about missionaries 
to labor amongst Romanists! 
I would as soon think of sending missionaries 
amongst Methodists and Episcopalians 
and United Presbyterians and Lutherans, 
for the purpose of converting 
them into Presbyterians." 

And Bishop Foster before the M.E. 
Conference, Nov. '86, addressing twelve 
bishops and forty lay delegates together 
with a large audience, said, and that without 
creating a ripple of opposition, "The 
popular idea is that the Church of Rome 
is antichrist. I don't agree with the popular 
belief. I regard that wonderful institution 
as a GREAT CHRISTIAN CAMP." 

We do not expect a complete union 
between Catholics and Protestants, but a 
fraternization by which the majority of 
Protestants (measurably consolidated) will 
stand shoulder to shoulder in aim and profession 
with the Church of Rome, embracing 
generally the capitalists, kings and great 
ones of earth, while the true liberty lovers 
and saints will be shaken out. But great 
Babylon shall never recover her former 
power and prestige. Only for a little moment 
shall she seem to succeed and be able 



to say— I sit a queen and shall see no sorrow; 
for "Strong is the Lord God who 
judgeth her." (Rev. 18:8.) The true 
Christ and his Kingdom shall supplant 
anti-christ and the Kingdoms of this world, 
falsely called Christendom. 

The Lord shall smite the nations and 
slay anti-christ with the truth— the sword 
which proceedeth out of his mouth. It 
is TRUTH, on various subjects, which is now 
stirring up the masses of the people to 
demand their natural rights and liberties. 
[Often, too, they ignorantly make unreasonable 
demands.] And many who mentally 
recognize their rights, through fear 
and selfishness will not acknowledge them, 
but often oppose them. Nevertheless, in 
this battle, truth and right shall come off 
victorious, though at great cost to all engaged. 
God will judge the hypocritical 
Christian Kingdoms of the earth by 
their professions, and with what measure 
they have measured out justice and 
consideration to the people, with that 
same measure shall their judgment be 
measured to them in this day of the judgment 
of the nations. They all shall fall, as 
tried in the balances they are found wanting; 
but with some the fall will be intensified 
to a dashing to pieces. 

While the gathering of Babylon as tares 
for the burning is progressing thus, the 
true wheat must also be gathering— and 
they are being gathered, not into a sect, 
nor into one place, but into harmony and 
oneness with the Lord, and with one another 
as members of his body. And so 
the Prophet was caused to write concerning 
the peculiar people, the royal priesthood, 
the holy nation," saying:— 

"Gather yourselves together, yea gather 
together, O nation not desired [despised 
by the world because of your faithfulness 
to God and the truth]. Before the decree 
bring forth [its results] for the day will 
pass [quickly, as when] chaff [burneth]; 
before the fierce anger of the Lord come 
upon you, before the day of the Lord's 
anger come upon you, Seek ye the Lord, 
all ye meek of the earth, which have 
obeyed his commands; seek righteousness 
[the right, the truth,] seek meekness; 
it may be ye shall be hid in the day of 
the Lord's anger.... Wait ye upon 
me, saith the Lord, until I rise up to the 
prey: for my determination is to gather 



the nations, that I may assemble the kingdoms, 
to pour upon them mine indignation, 
even all my fierce anger; for all the 
earth shall be devoured with the fire of 
my jealousy. For then will I turn to the 
people a pure language [unmixed with 
falsity and error as now] and they shall 
all call upon the name of the Lord to 
serve him with one consent." (Zeph. 2:1-3 
and 3:8,9.) Thus we have the two 
gatherings, the one for favor and blessing, 
the other for national destruction. To 
what standard and with what class am I 
being gathered? each should ask himself. 
See the right and seek it meekly— the 
time is short. 

R993 : page 7 

A VATICAN COUNCIL FOR PROTESTANTS. 

To illustrate the growing sentiment unfavorable 
to growth in knowledge of the 
truth, and the desire to have some pope 
or something like a Vatican Council to 
positively pronounce the doctrines held by 
various large sects, as all truth, and the 
whole truth— neither to be added to nor 
diminished, (just what Papacy claims to 
be able to decide,) we quote some of 
the remarks made at a meeting of the 
"American Board of Foreign Missions" at 
Springfield, Mass., Oct. 5, 1887, as reported 
in the daily Press. 

"During the debate a returned missionary 
from Turkey said, 'The effect on the 
missionary field would be terrible, if men 
were sent there with loose ideas of Bible 
interpretation'. Dr. Eddy, of Detroit, 
said: 'Don't send out any more creeds, 
for the Lord's sake! We could wish there 
were a Vatican Council in Boston to SETTLE 
all difficult questions.'" "It was decided 
not to call Councils to deal with 
difficult cases," and "the present" was 
characterized as "a period of THEOLOGICAL 
UPHEAVAL." 

How significant are these wishes, so 
publicly expressed, in such prominent official 
bodies of Protestantism, and by their 
leading men, for a strong statement of 
doctrines and defining of heresies which 
would authorize and appear to justify the 
silencing of all independent thought in 
the study of God's word, as thoroughly 
as Papacy ever did, even though a higher 



civilization might not permit the terrible 
tortures and vile indignities of the Inquisition, 
once heaped upon those whom the 
truth makes free by the "Mother." The 
desire is for the power and authority to 
bind upon men in the name of God and 
the Bible, doctrines of devils; such as 
the doctrine of the everlasting torture of 

R993 : page 8 

the great majority of God's creatures— of 
all who are not believing saints. Many 
do not and cannot believe the "good 
tidings of great joy" because it has been 
covered and made to appear bad tidings of 
great misery to all people, by the preaching 
of human traditions, largely obtained 
by Protestants from what Luther termed 
"the dunghill of Roman decretals." 

Protestants see that divisions are contrary 
to the Bible, but they do not see 
where the fault lies. They vainly suppose 
that the fault is a lack of organization 
—that they should have a stronger organization 
with a more rigidly fixed creed, 
like Rome has. This is their great mistake; 
in this they are ignorantly striving 
against God. Instead of having too 
little organization and an insufficient 
creed, they already are too much organized 
and have creeds a hundred fold too 
strong already; especially since they lack 
the support of the Bible or reason. 

The various degrees of growth in knowledge, 
cause men to have various stages of 
belief; and God intended that the organization 
should be very loose, and so arranged 
for the early church through the 
Apostles, so that in the Church of believers 
all might be able to stand, who believe 
in our Lord's ransom-sacrifice for their 
sins, and who are consecrated to his service. 
This simple creed would keep out 
none who have a right to be among the 
redeemed sheep, but would afford room 
for growth in grace and knowledge built 
upon this foundation, to all grades of mental 
endowment, so that while there might 
be wide differences as to attainments in 
the lengths and breadths, the heights and 
depths of knowledge, each would still 
recognize the other as a member of the 
one Church which Christ purchased with 
his own precious blood. This Church 
which is the only, the ONE CHURCH recognized 



by God, includes all the truly consecrated 
believers in Christ as our Redeemer, 
wherever they may be. Alas! many 
of them, starved and lean, are in Babylon's 
narrow streets (sects) instead of being 
outside in the liberty of the green pastures 
of God's Word. He is now calling 
to such saying, "Come out of her, my 
people, that ye be not partakers of her sins 
and that ye receive not of her plagues." 
He is now gathering together such in 
heart-union with himself and each other. 
He is sealing them in their foreheads, giving 
them an intellectual appreciation of 
himself and his plan. The Master saith 
"My sheep hear [obey] my voice and follow 
me," and by this we may be able to 
recognize them. 



R989 : page 8 

ARP SLIPS FOR W.VA. AND MD. 

Brother Weber, who lives near the border 
between Md. and W.Va., thinks the 
plan started by the Penna. sister last 
month a good one to follow, and sends 
in forty dollars to pay for Arp slips for 
free distribution in these two small states. 
See plan in last TOWER, and let brethren 
and sisters in these states send in plenty 
of orders. We have printed and on the 
press, over one hundred thousand already, 
and are ready to make it a million, with 
your co-operation. Brethren here are 
preaching thus to the various churches 
every Sunday. 



page 8 

NO MORE SOILED DAWNS. 

Our supply of 200 was ordered several 
times over. We have none but clean now, 
but plenty of them, paper bound 25 cts. 
Those who wish them for loaning or giving 
away, are welcome to the ten cents each, 
allowed by the tract fund to colporteurs 
as "expense money," if they will ask for it. 


