Train Your Children to Be Ministers
 1. What does Psalm 148:12, 13 compel Christian parents to do?
1 Jehovah invites young ones to praise him. (Ps. 148:12, 13) Christian parents, therefore, do more than teach their children Bible truths and God’s moral laws. They also train them to be ministers of the good news. How can this be done progressively?
 2. How can a parent’s good example affect his children?
2 Good Example: Judge Gideon told his 300 men: “Learn from watching me.” (Judg. 7:17) Children naturally watch and imitate their parents. One father works at night, but instead of going to sleep when he comes home Saturday morning, he takes his children in the ministry even though he is very tired. Without saying a word, he is teaching them that the ministry is a priority. (Matt. 6:33) Do your children observe you joyfully engaging in various forms of worship, such as praying, reading the Bible, commenting, and preaching? Of course, you will not be a perfect example. But your children will be more inclined to respond to your efforts to teach them to worship Jehovah if they see your diligence in serving him.—Deut. 6:6, 7; Rom. 2:21, 22.
 3. What progressive spiritual goals should parents help their children to set and reach?
3 Progressive Goals: Parents tirelessly train their children to walk, to talk, to dress themselves, and so forth. As children reach milestones in their growth, new goals are put before them. If the parents are Christians, they also help their children set and reach spiritual goals in accord with their age and abilities. (1 Cor. 9:26) Are you teaching your children to give comments in their own words and to prepare their own talks in the Theocratic Ministry School? (Ps. 35:18) Are you training them to engage in various aspects of the ministry? Are you setting before them the goal of baptism and full-time service? Are you actively bringing them into contact with joyful, enthusiastic evangelizers who will encourage them?—Prov. 13:20.
 4. How do children benefit from having parents who begin training them in the ministry at an early age?
4 The psalmist said: “O God, you have taught me from my youth on, and until now I keep telling about your wonderful works.” (Ps. 71:17) Begin training your children at an early age to become ministers. The spiritual foundation that you help them lay is sure to benefit them into adulthood!—Prov. 22:6.

