From Our Readers
Credit Cards  I especially enjoyed the article “Plastic Money​—Is It for You?” (December 8, 1993) Some years ago my wife and I found ourselves with a depressing credit-​card debt that took a long time to pay off, even after we destroyed our cards. However, for the sake of convenience, we have just recently obtained a new card. Your timely reminders about plastic money and its dangers have helped us to be determined not to misuse it this time.
M. B. and D. B., United States
Animal Tales  Thank you for the article on polar bears entitled “Impressive Giants of Canada’s North.” (December 8, 1993) It was such a beautifully written article. The facts that were brought out really made me appreciate how loving it was of Jehovah to create the animals for our enjoyment.
D. C., United States
Your article “A Kudu Makes Lions Lose Face” (November 22, 1993) was hilarious. I could just picture in my mind the enraged and humiliated kudu bull trying to ram this unmovable bronze kudu. And the way it put a pride of lions to flight​—it was too funny! It shows that Jehovah loves laughter.
A. L., United States
I was thrilled at the way you scrutinized the subject “Probing the Secrets of the Eel.” (October 22, 1993) These creatures demonstrate the truthfulness of the Bible’s creation account and refute all efforts to prove the theory of evolution.
C. S. S., Brazil
I’m 11 years old, and I really liked the item in “Watching the World” called “Rat Worship.” (November 8, 1993) The article explained that priests at a temple in India believe that when they die, they obtain salvation by being reborn as rats! They say they’re not really rats but they’re messengers from God. Weird!
E. L., United States
Holidays  I want to thank you so much for the series “Holidays​—Why Some Children Do Not Celebrate Them.” (November 22, 1993) The section “We Are Not Deprived!” moved me to tears. Many times I feel that I am alone in expressing my beliefs to schoolmates, and this article helped me to realize that I never have been alone and I never will be.
B. P., United States
For as long as I can remember, I have not celebrated Christmas. There have been times when I felt envious of other children. And just before this article came out, I was invited to a Christmas party. I turned it down and tried, from what I already knew, to explain why. But seeing how Christmas, which has become an annual celebration even in Japan, is a pagan celebration with demonic associations, I feel confident that I did the right thing.
K. I., Japan
Double Life  Thank you for publishing the article “Young People Ask . . . Live a Double Life​—Why Not?” (December 22, 1993) I am 15 years old and have been raised as a Christian. But I haven’t been doing very well, and I constantly feel that I am slowly drifting away. One of the reasons is that my parents are extremely strict, and I often feel the need to do something they have prohibited, even though I know it is wrong. As I read the article, I realized that Jehovah God was sending me help. I knew that I wasn’t the only one who did things behind my parents’ backs. But as I read on, I was surprised at how others felt exactly as I felt. I know it won’t be easy, but I am hoping to change my life-​style with Jehovah’s help.
K. J., United States

