Mexico Changes Its Laws on Religion
ON JULY 16, 1992, THE NEW LAW OF RELIGIOUS ASSOCIATIONS AND PUBLIC WORSHIP WAS PUT INTO EFFECT IN MEXICO. WHY WAS THIS NECESSARY, AND WHAT DOES THIS NEW LAW CONVEY? LET US TAKE A LOOK INTO THIS MATTER THAT HAS AROUSED MUCH ANTICIPATION.
WITH Spain’s conquest of what is now Mexico, the Catholic religion was imposed by force on the people. When the time came to legislate religious matters, a law of Spain, the Constitución de Cádiz (1812), was applied in part; Article 12 stated: “The religion of the Spanish Nation is and will forever be Catholic, Apostolic, Roman, the one and only true religion.” Later on, in 1824, a Constitution was established for Mexico, and it stated: “The religion of the Mexican Nation is and will forever be Catholic, Apostolic, Roman. The Nation protects it by wise and just laws, and prohibits the exercise of any other.” Although there were several revisions of the law of the country, the same idea was expressed even until 1843, granting the Catholic religion priority and, in fact, excluding any other religion.
It was in 1857 that Benito Juárez, a Mexican statesman, started a revision of the laws of the country introducing what was called Laws of the Reformation. This was to “nationalize the real estate of the church” and “to increase the political and economic power of the State and to decrease that of the [Catholic] Church.” (Historia de México, Volume 10, page 2182) In this group of laws of 1859, the Law of Nationalization of Ecclesiastical Properties was promulgated, as well as a law requiring that marriages be performed by the State in order for them to be legal. In 1860 the Law for Religious Freedom was promulgated.
The reformation laws granted a certain amount of religious freedom to the people, stipulating that the Catholic religion would no longer be the only one that could exist in the country. However, this new freedom was quite limited and conditional. The laws recognized that religions existed in Mexico but did not accord them any legal recognition or rights. Reformation laws were specially designed to limit the Catholic religion but incidentally also limited all religions in the country. Nevertheless, religions apart from Catholicism could then function more freely, and Protestant religions from the United States started an evangelization campaign in the country.
The reformation laws were reinforced in 1917, with the same anticlerical spirit, which caused persecution of the priests and Catholic people. This gave way to the Cristeros war in 1926, a Catholic war against the government that was an attempt to cancel the restrictive laws governing religion. This war concluded in 1929 with some agreement of tolerance by the government, but the laws continued without modification.
In a commentary about these laws, the book Una Ley Para la Libertad Religiosa (A Law for Religious Freedom) mentions: “We realize that originally our Constitutional Article 24 in its second paragraph, and the other reformed constitutional articles, were clearly an infringement of religious freedom, since they limited the external practice of every individual’s religion and subjected the practice thereof to regulation dictated by the authority.
“Furthermore, these constitutional dispositions were clearly contradictory to what was established in the United Nations Universal Declaration of Human Rights (Article 19) and to the American Convention of Human Rights (Article 12), which international instruments the Mexican State has endorsed.”
In 1988, when the new president of Mexico started his six-​year term, the Catholic hierarchy was invited to the presidential inauguration. In his message, President Carlos Salinas de Gortari announced the need to modernize the relations between Church and State. This new approach led to the conclusion that a revision of the laws relative to religion was mandatory. Besides that, the country was developing into a more democratic society, and negotiations were started for a free trade agreement with the United States and Canada. So it was essential to revise the law to make it consistent with freedom of religion.
The New Law
The new law, as stated in its first article, is “founded on the historic principle of separation of Church and State, as well as on freedom of religious beliefs . . .” The second article guarantees freedom for the individual “to have or to adopt the religious beliefs that he prefers and practice, collectively or individually, the acts of worship or rites of his preference . . . , to profess no religious beliefs . . . , not to be an object of discrimination, coercion, or hostility because of one’s religious beliefs . . . , to associate and meet together peacefully for religious purposes.” Through this law, “churches and religious groups will have legal status as religious institutions as soon as they obtain the corresponding required registry before the Ministry of Government.” Also, “religious institutions formed according to the present law may have their own patrimony that allows them to fulfill their objective.”
Jehovah’s Witnesses Are Registered Legally
In accord with this new law, Jehovah’s Witnesses in Mexico presented an application to the Office of Religious Affairs on April 13, 1993, to be registered as a religion. Before that time Jehovah’s Witnesses, as any other religion in the country, existed de facto but had no legal personality. Jehovah’s Witnesses had been present in the country since early in the 20th century. Although there was no legal recognition, on June 2, 1930, the government of Mexico authorized the International Association of Bible Students. On December 20, 1932, this name was changed to La Torre del Vigía (The Watchtower). But in 1943, because of laws that limited religious activities in the country, a new entity was registered as a civil association. In this way Jehovah blessed the work that Jehovah’s Witnesses had been carrying out throughout the years. At present, in accord with a document dated May 7, 1993, which was forwarded to them on May 31, 1993, Jehovah’s Witnesses are registered as La Torre del Vigía, A. R., and Los Testigos de Jehová en México, A. R., both of them religious associations.
Under these new provisions, Jehovah’s Witnesses in Mexico, as in 230 other lands in the world, continue working hard in preaching the Kingdom of God. There is a big program of expansion in Mexico, which includes the construction of new Kingdom Halls and new Assembly Halls. With more than 380,000 publishers and some 30,000 new ones getting baptized each year, there is a lot of work to do, as manifested in the 530,000 home Bible studies that are being conducted at present.
This does not mean that all the problems are solved for Jehovah’s Witnesses in Mexico. Their children still have to face pressures in school because of the neutrality issue. The authorities, however, seek to apply the new law in an equitable way in dealing with the different religions in the country. Mexico has indeed taken a big step in the defense of human rights and religious freedom with the new law concerning religion.
[Pictures on page 13]
Documents of registration for Jehovah’s Witnesses in Mexico
[Picture on page 14]
New center for Bible education being erected by Jehovah’s Witnesses in Mexico

