Pornography Goes to College
THE “Matier & Ross Report” in the San Francisco Chronicle, November 1, 1993, highlighted a controversial class offered at San Francisco State University. It is conducted by Professor John DeCecco on the subject of human sexuality. Matier and Ross comment on it as follows:
“What a class it is. If you’re looking for a hot three credits toward a SFSU degree, just check out the steamy (and sometimes politically correct) subjects listed in the class syllabus.”
The report then lists masturbation, transvestism, male homosexuality, lesbianism, bestiality, sadomasochism, along with others. The lectures on some of these activities include videotapes.
Such activities may be compared with “the detestable customs” that Jehovah hates, as enumerated in the Mosaic code at Leviticus chapter 18. After condemning incestuous acts, adultery, and other sexual perversions, Le 18 verses 22 and 23 state: “You must not lie down with a male the same as you lie down with a woman. It is a detestable thing. And you must not give your emission to any beast to become unclean by it, and a woman should not stand before a beast to have connection with it. It is a violation of what is natural.”
The practice of these things that Jehovah detests results in his condemnation: “Do not make yourselves unclean by any of these things, because by all these things the nations whom I am sending out from before you have made themselves unclean. Consequently the land is unclean, and I shall bring punishment for its error upon it, and the land will vomit its inhabitants out. In case anyone does any of all these detestable things, then the souls doing them must be cut off from among their people.”​—Leviticus 18:24, 25, 29.
One student taking the SFSU course praised DeCecco for “breaking down stereotypes and showing that these people are like everyone else.” Like everyone else? Certainly people in general are not involved in the sexual perversions of homosexuality, lesbianism, and sadomasochism, nor are they practicing sexual intercourse with animals. Admittedly, there is a moral breakdown of alarming dimensions in society today, but these activities portrayed in this university class are blatant pornography performed under the guise of scholarly study and research.

