From Our Readers
Ozone Shield  Thank you for your informative article. (January 22, 1989) I have become acquainted with this problem through earlier issues of your magazine and have decided that wherever possible, I will avoid using substances that aggravate this problem, such as aerosols and articles made of foamed plastic.
G. C., Republic of South Africa
Christians today should respect mankind’s common environment. However, it is not always practical or even possible to avoid entirely the use of polluting products. The only long-term solution to the problem of pollution is the management of earth by God’s Kingdom. (Revelation 11:18)​—ED.
Kingdom Recordings  I thought I should point out an error in your article. (January 8, 1989) One of the musicians quoted therein said that their efforts fell short musically of what could be done by a professional symphony orchestra. I have to disagree. It may not be professional, but it sounds like it​—truly a work of art.
R. L., United States
Christmas  Awake! raised the question as to whether Christmas is Christian. (December 8, 1988) Some, who are Christians in name only, celebrate it by drinking bouts and revelry, and I agree that in this way Christmas is pagan. But for many, Christmas is celebrated by fraternizing in church with friends. Is this wrong?
E. L. L., Brazil
No doubt many endeavor to celebrate the supposed date of Jesus’ birth in a dignified way. Nevertheless, the article gave clear evidence that (1) Jesus never authorized any such celebration, (2) Jesus’ birth must have taken place in September/​October (not December), and (3) many of the customs associated with Christmas are clearly of pagan origin. So the issue confronting those desiring to please God in their worship is, not how such a celebration might be carried on, but whether Christmas in any form has God’s approval.​—ED.
Violence  Please do not encourage your readers to install deadbolts that require a key to open from the inside. This is potentially life-threatening in case of fire when the occupant cannot reach the key and/​or does not have the time to use it before being engulfed in flames or smoke.
R. M., Bureau of Building Inspection, San Francisco, California
R. M.’s comments, in reference to our April 22, 1989, issue, pages 9 and 10, are well-taken. We agree that the danger of being trapped during a fire generally outweighs the danger of violent crime. No doubt this is why locks requiring a key in order to exit a room or a building are prohibited by most building codes in the United States. We also thus erred in showing this type of lock in our photo. Readers are advised that it is safer to obtain a deadbolt lock that can be unlocked from the inside without a key.​—ED.
Battered Wives  Thank you for that series of articles. (November 22, 1988) As a staff member of a shelter for battered women, I have shared this magazine with the counselor, who is now using these articles in her work with the victims. I especially liked the part “God’s Law and the Christian View.” Many of the victims are concerned about how God views their situation. I have ordered enough copies of this magazine to distribute to all the domestic violence shelters in this state.
M. W., Ohio, United States

