Do You Really Appreciate the Blessings of Jehovah?
KENICHI, a middle-aged gentleman, visited a pharmacy to obtain medicine for a slight cold. When he took the medicine, he developed an allergic reaction causing an itchy rash and watery blisters over his entire body. Not surprisingly, Kenichi began to doubt whether the pharmacist had paid enough attention to his needs.
Some might think of Jehovah God in the same way that Kenichi viewed the pharmacist. They doubt that the almighty God, Jehovah, is really interested in us as individuals. Although they recognize that God is good, they are not convinced that he cares for us personally. Especially is this true when things do not go well for them or when their adherence to Bible principles is followed by difficult problems. Because of lack of discernment, they view their problems like the itchy rash and blisters that Kenichi unexpectedly developed, as if somehow they are God’s fault.—Proverbs 19:3.
Jehovah is not to be compared to imperfect humans. Humans are limited in knowledge and ability. They fail to discern fully the real needs of others, as did Kenichi’s pharmacist. On the contrary, nothing escapes Jehovah’s eyes. Jehovah often helps us without our discerning and appreciating that fact because we have a tendency to focus on what we do not have and to overlook the many blessings we do have. Rather than being quick to blame Jehovah for any problems we face, we should try to discern the blessings from Jehovah that we enjoy.
According to Webster’s Ninth New Collegiate Dictionary, a “blessing” can be defined as “a thing conducive to happiness or welfare.” Do you appreciate that this is especially true of blessings from Jehovah?
Matchless as a Provider
When a wife says that her husband is a good provider, she generally means that he cares adequately for the needs of the family, providing sufficient food, shelter, and clothing for the family’s happiness and welfare. How good is Jehovah as our Provider? Take a closer look at our planet Earth, man’s home. It is situated 93,000,000 miles [150,000,000 km] from the sun, just the right distance for the moderate temperatures that make life possible on earth. The 23.5-degree tilt of our globe is designed perfectly, resulting in the varying seasons that contribute to abundant harvests. As a result, the earth feeds more than five billion people. Jehovah is indeed a wonderful Provider!
Moreover, the Bible assures us that Jehovah is deeply interested in us as individuals and in our welfare. Just think, Jehovah knows each of the billions of stars by name, and not even one sparrow falls to the earth without his knowledge. (Isaiah 40:26; Matthew 10:29-31) How much more does he care for humans who love him and were bought with the precious blood of his beloved Son, Jesus Christ! (Acts 20:28) Well did the wise man proclaim: “The blessing of Jehovah—that is what makes rich, and he adds no pain with it.”—Proverbs 10:22.
Blessings That Make Us Rich
We have in our possession something of great value for which we should be deeply grateful. What is it? The Bible identifies it when it says: “The law of your mouth is good for me, more so than thousands of pieces of gold and silver.” (Psalm 119:72; Proverbs 8:10) Valuable as choice gold may be, the law of Jehovah is much more to be desired. An accurate knowledge of his law together with the insight and discernment that Jehovah imparts to sincere truth seekers are things to be treasured. They equip us to protect ourselves, to cope with difficult situations, to deal with problems successfully, and thus to be content and happy.
This is true of even the very young. Consider how a little girl worked out her problems by following the law of Jehovah. The girl, Akemi, lives near Tokyo. Her father and mother applied Bible principles in training her and by word and example helped their daughter to develop a love for Jehovah and for neighbor. Foreseeing the problems she would encounter at school, they tried to prepare her as best they could. When Akemi entered elementary school, however, she was viewed by some of her classmates as being “different” because she prayed before meals and conscientiously abstained from certain unscriptural activities. Soon she became the target of a group of bullies who would corner her after school and slap her on the face, twist her arms, and make fun of her.
Little Akemi did not retaliate, neither did she cower before her tormentors. Rather, she tried to apply what she had learned. As a result of her fine conduct and courage, she won the respect of many of her fellow pupils. They brought the matter to the teacher’s attention, and since that day, Akemi has experienced no further abuse at school.
What helped Akemi to deal successfully with a difficult situation? The accurate knowledge, insight, and wisdom from Jehovah that her parents had inculcated in her. She was well acquainted with Jesus’ endurance, and that moved her to imitate his example. The Bible helped her to discern that some people do wrong things out of ignorance, and it encouraged her to hate the wrong those bullies did while not hating the people themselves.—Luke 23:34; Romans 12:9, 17-21.
Of course, no parents would want to see their child subjected to ridicule and abuse. Still, you can imagine how proud Akemi’s parents felt when they heard all the details of what had happened. Such children are truly a blessing from Jehovah.—Psalm 127:3; 1 Peter 1:6, 7.
Patiently Waiting on Jehovah
Before you receive Jehovah’s blessings, though, sometimes you must wait for his time. Jehovah knows your situation and provides for each need when it will do you the most good. (Psalm 145:16; Ecclesiastes 3:1; James 1:17) You may be fond of fruit, but what would you think of a host who served you fruit before it was ready to be eaten? Whether an apple, an orange, or something else, you would prefer your fruit ripe, juicy, and sweet. Similarly, Jehovah provides what you need at the right time—not too early and not too late.
Recall the experience of Joseph. Through no fault of his own, he found himself in an Egyptian dungeon. A fellow prisoner, the cupbearer of Pharaoh, hoped to be released and promised to bring Joseph’s case to the attention of Pharaoh. But after his release he forgot all about Joseph. It seemed as if Joseph were forsaken. However, two full years later, he was finally released from prison and was eventually made the second ruler in Egypt. Rather than being impatient, Joseph waited on Jehovah. For this, he was blessed in a manner that meant preservation of life both to Israelites and to Egyptians.—Genesis 39:1–41:57.
Masashi was an elder in a congregation in northern Japan. He was not in a dungeon, but he had to wait on Jehovah. Why? Ever since the Ministerial Training School, a school for training qualified Christian ministers, was instituted in Japan, he made it his fervent goal to attend. He prayed intensely about the privilege. His pioneer partner was invited, but despite his eager desire, Masashi was not. He was extremely disappointed.
Nevertheless, he took steps to cope with his feelings. He studied the Bible and publications published by the Watch Tower Society, focusing on such subjects as being humble and controlling one’s emotions. He readjusted his thinking and thus experienced more satisfaction in his assignment. Then, when least expecting it, he received an invitation to attend the school.
Having developed such qualities as patience and humility, he benefited much more from the school. Later, Masashi was given the privilege of serving his brothers as a traveling overseer. Yes, Jehovah knew what Masashi needed and provided it just when it would accomplish the most good.
Seek His Blessings
Hence, Jehovah is not like the pharmacist. Although we may fail to discern Jehovah’s care and concern, his kindnesses come in various forms—at times and in ways that do us the most good. So continue to seek his blessings. Remember that you already have many reasons for being thankful. You have been blessed with basic provisions to continue living on earth. You have been given a knowledge of Jehovah and of his perfect ways. You have been given insight. And you have acquired discernment. These all contribute to your welfare and happiness.
To experience even more fully the blessing of Jehovah, continue to study the Bible regularly. Petition Jehovah to help you to understand and apply the jewellike teachings in his inspired Word. They will make you truly rich, so that you will lack nothing. Yes, they will mean your happiness and contentment now and life in abundance in the new world to come.—John 10:10; 1 Timothy 4:8, 9.
[Picture on page 23]
Jehovah’s blessing is more precious than gold

