From Our Readers
Help With Herpes
My family and I wish to thank you very much for the article “Is the End of Disease in Sight?” in the French edition. (English, September 22, 1983) The very day we took our year-old baby to the hospital with a serious eye infection, your magazine came in the mail and we took it along with us. How happy we were to have just read the information on herpes type I when his condition was diagnosed to be just that! We immediately started to treat his eye with a solution of warm water and Epsom salts, as the article suggested. (Page 9) Within two days the swelling had gone down and a lot of poison had come out. During his checkup the chief of staff for the department said that this was the best thing to do. Without your fine instructions, we are sure that he may have developed serious complications.
R. B., Canada
Drugs and Alcohol
I am a retired judge and I feel that I should tell how useful your magazine was to me while I exercised my profession. In one criminal case dealing with the traffic and use of drugs, I was greatly aided by the facts presented in your magazine to make my decision, enabling me to sentence the drug peddler and to have him interned for treatment. On another occasion the magazines were of much assistance to me in preparing a discourse to be presented to Alcoholics Anonymous in my city on behalf of a campaign to recuperate alcoholics. Thank you very much.
J. A., Brazil
School Projects
In my last year of studies in accounting, I received notice saying that because of my low marks, I would have to receive a mark of at least 90 in research on the subject of the worldwide economic crisis if I were to graduate. I decided to use as a basis for my research the series of articles on “The World Economy​—Where Is It Heading?” (April 22, 1983) Imagine my joy and surprise when the professor praised my research highly. She said it was contrary to policy to give a perfect mark, so she would give me 9.8 out of 10​—more than enough to graduate!
P. R., Brazil
Thank you for the article “Young People Ask . . . What Future Is There for Any of Us?” (November 22, 1982) Several days before the exams were to be held, our teacher told us that we would have a choice of three subjects upon which to write our final German exam paper. One of them, she said, would deal with our future. I read through the above-mentioned article the night before the exams. The next morning we were presented with the choice of three subjects. The third one could not have been better: “No Future​—Is That the Way You Feel?” Three weeks later I found out my grade. My teacher told me it was the first time in her life she had given an “A” on a German final exams paper. My composition was also passed around to the other teachers. Please continue to publish excellent articles like this in the future.
M. H., Federal Republic of Germany

