From Our Readers
How Important Are Looks?
I would like to thank you for your article “Young People Ask . . . How Important Are Looks?” (January 8, 1986) I am 15 years of age and I am very tall, 5 feet 8 inches to be exact. I have always complained because of being so tall, but your article made me realize that my height does not interfere with my personality. After all, it’s what’s on the inside that counts, not the outside.
J. D., Louisiana
Down’s Syndrome
What a joy to read such a heartwarming story of parents who lovingly help their handicapped child. (“Thirty Years of Love and Devotion,” February 8, 1986) My heart goes out to them for their devotion. For several years I worked in an institution where these children were placed. After reading this article, I thought of these children who were placed there because the parents were ashamed of them or felt there was no hope for them to learn. Since children with Down’s syndrome need so much attention and care, an institution isn’t the answer in helping these ones. There isn’t enough staff to work with each one on an individual basis, so the children are placed on medication to keep them tranquil so as to sleep most of the time. The children are better off at home in their own natural surroundings.
D. H., Maryland
Circumstances vary, but we do agree that where the family has the emotional strength and can care for a child with Down’s syndrome, it is a far better solution than putting the child in an institution.​—ED.
When the Teacher Is Boring
Your article “Young People Ask . . . How Can I Learn When My Teacher Is So Boring?” (March 8, 1986) presented excellent information and sound advice for anyone in school. You showed that learning requires effort, and students can create a better learning atmosphere by class participation and questions presented respectfully.
M. C., Minnesota
Thank you for the article “Young People Ask . . . How Can I Get Along With My Teacher?” (October 22, 1985) In elementary school my friends had spoken badly about the teachers, so when I started secondary school I was very hostile toward them, especially my teacher in Italian. Since I read your article, I have changed my attitude. I not only get along well with her but I do my homework willingly and I pay attention in school.
D. M., Italy
When Someone You Love Dies
My wife and I wish to express our heartfelt thanks for that marvelous article “When Someone You Love Dies . . . ” (April 22, 1985) It truly helped us a great deal. Our son had suffered from leukemia for nine years when that article came out, and my wife and I had already shed many tears. Then last December our son died in his 14th year. This brings me to what I want to say so much: “Merci beaucoup.” All our Witness brothers and sisters put into practice the suggestions given in the article “How Others Can Help.” We now feel able to help our companions in such times of distress. Thank you so much.
C. L., France

