To Tip​—Or Not
THE lights are low, the music is soft, and the food is delicious. But that tranquil mood of dining in a fine restaurant can turn into one of puzzlement when the check arrives. ‘Should I tip the waiter?’ ‘How much?’ Many a person’s self-confidence has melted under the imaginary stare of the expectant waiter.
Some restaurant goers, on philosophical grounds, staunchly oppose tipping. They will not leave a penny. Their opposites just as strongly believe that it is necessary and proper to tip. They will be generous. But what many fail to consider is that in some countries tips and gratuities are expected. They are considered part of the bill.
Why Tip?
“Without tips, I’d starve!” is the usual protest of waiters and taxicab drivers. So in certain countries, the United States for one, tipping is more than a thank-you for extra service rendered. It is the principal part of a person’s income.
Oscar, a waiter at a famous New York City restaurant, has a wife and three children to feed, clothe, and shelter. Why are tips important to him? “If I didn’t get enough money in tips, I would have to get an additional job,” he answers. Oscar, like most waiters and waitresses in the United States, is paid the minimum wage​—hardly enough to support one person, let alone five. In addition, the waiter does not keep the whole tip. “We have to divide it between the busboy, the bartender, and the maître d’,” he explains. Oscar realizes that the rising cost of restaurant meals cuts into the amount of money customers leave as tips, yet “my own bills keep going up too,” he says.
Other people besides waiters​—bellhop, doorman, concierge, hotel maid, cloakroom and washroom attendants, hairdressers, taxi drivers—​also depend on tips for their living.
Consider Judith, a young woman who lives in a small German town. She works part-time as a beautician in order to support herself in her career in the ministry. She says: “Our wages are really low because the employers expect customers to give us tips.” Because of the increased cost of living, she has found that people leave smaller tips and many do not give anything at all. “Most people giving a tip do so because we have been friendly to them,” Judith explains, “not realizing that we depend on tips for our living.”
Interestingly, the U.S. government assumes that customers will leave a certain percentage of the bill as a tip in restaurants and in certain other places. Waiters and others who perform personal services must pay the government taxes on that estimated tip whether they get it or not!
What to Do When Visiting
If you are visiting a foreign country, it is wise to keep in mind the exchange rate as well as the inflation rate. One visitor who had formerly lived in Brazil returned there after many years. She was unprepared for the small purchasing power of the local currency, which had devalued about 200 percent annually during her absence. Without thinking, she tipped a man a 500-cruzeiro bill, which was a good tip when she left Brazil. The man frowned. So to be generous, she gave him a 1000-cruzeiro bill. Wearily, the man said: “Aw, forget it!” Imagine her embarrassment when she found out later that her tip was worth about ten cents in United States money!
What Tipping Tells About You
Tipping can certainly be perplexing. But when in doubt about how much to tip, do what Hugh of Nigeria does. “Ask,” he says. “I ask at information desks of airports or hotels for their suggestions.”
There is good reason for following that advice. Why? Consider this: If you are in a tour group or attending a convention, what you do personally reflects on the whole group. People will judge the group by your behavior. So regardless of your personal views about tipping, when you are with a group, if you tip just a little or not at all, others may conclude that your group is stingy or lacks social grace.
Also, remembering this ancient Biblical maxim may help you through the maze of tipping customs: “Always treat others as you would like them to treat you.” Imagine yourself in the other person’s shoes. Wouldn’t you appreciate an appropriate tip if that is the custom where you live?​—Matthew 7:12, The New English Bible.
Finally, knowing how, when, and how much to tip will make you feel more at ease. Moreover, it will, no doubt, bring a smile to the recipient’s face. “It means a lot to me,” said one waitress who prides herself in giving good, polite service. When a meal is concluded on such a pleasant note, how much more enjoyable it is to all!

