Announcements
“THEOCRACY’S INCREASE” WITNESSING PERIOD
Zechariah’s vision of the man with the measuring line in his hand, approaching Jerusalem to ascertain its expansion (Zech. 2:4), is prophetic of the growth of the Theocracy in our day and the incident increase in lifegiving knowledge among those of good will toward God and man. Prominent in the means used to bring about this desirable increase is the Watchtower magazine. An opportunity world-wide for people to subscribe for The Watchtower, in any of 36 languages, will continue during “Theocracy’s Increase” Witnessing Period in February, for the aid of those hungering and thirsting for righteousness. The offer of The Watchtower for one year, at the rate of $1, includes a premium of three booklets for each new subscriber. If desired, The Watchtower and Awake! may be presented together, with a premium of six booklets, for $2, or, where the person is already taking The Watchtower, the Awake! alone may be offered with three booklets. You may have a part in presenting to others this means of gaining theocratic knowledge. Write for further information today. Just address the Watchtower Bible and Tract Society, Inc., 117 Adams Street, Brooklyn 1, N. Y.
YEARBOOK AND CALENDAR
During the year 1951, in 121 lands, over 442,000 persons engaged in the most important work on the face of the earth today—acting as ambassadors of the most high and almighty God, Jehovah. Their ministerial work of serving mankind with a message of hope from God’s Word has been carried on among all kinds of men, rich and poor, and in every imaginable circumstance, from the huts of the jungles to the luxurious apartments of the great cities of the world. An account of this ministerial work and the good accomplished has been compiled, and is found in the 1952 Yearbook of Jehovah’s Witnesses. Included in this volume are Bible texts for every day in the year with appropriate comments on them taken from the Watchtower magazine. A 1952 Calendar, specially prepared for those interested in the spread and advancement of the knowledge of God’s Word throughout the earth, is also available. The Yearbook will be sent on a contribution of 50c, and calendars are 25c each, or 20c each if 5 or more calendars are sent to one address.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES
Week of February 17: Training Children for Life in the New World, ¶1-20.
Week of February 24: Training Children for Life in the New World, ¶21-23; also, Counteracting Old World Influences on Children.

