Insight on the News
“Only One Solution”
● “To Avoid a Nuclear War Within 25 Years, American Experts Have Found Only One Solution: That of Jehovah’s Witnesses!” reads a recent headline in “La Nouvelle Gazette” of Charleroi, Belgium. How so?
Well, the newspaper noted that five prominent arms-control experts of Harvard University and the Massachusetts Institute of Technology are convinced that rapid stockpiling of nuclear weapons and their probable spread to irresponsible parties make atomic conflict inevitable. “A reasoned evaluation of where we may be in 25 years suggests that we will not be able to regulate nuclear weapons . . . any better than we can control [handguns], heroin or pornography today,” they said in a recent issue of “Harvard” magazine.
According to the “Nouvelle Gazette,” these experts believe that “the only remedy would be a major relinquishment of sovereignty by each country, a radical change in the life-style of mankind . . . in favor of a world government.” “The American experts,” continues the newspaper, “thus exactly unite with the proposition upheld by Jehovah’s witnesses!” Jehovah’s witnesses’ “proposition” is the one held forth in the Bible: That God’s universal Kingdom government​—not man-made government—​is “the only remedy.” This world government “will shatter . . . all the previous kingdoms, and itself last forever.”​—Dan. 2:44, “Jerusalem Bible.”
Church Support Backfires
● Mozambique “was never far from the minds of delegates at the WCC’s [World Council of Churches] Nairobi assembly,” notes “Christianity Today” magazine, “since the Marxist government there is one which the council helped bring to power.” Church funds were channeled to the now-ruling FRELIMO “when it was a liberation movement.” Is the FRELIMO grateful for this past church support?
Apparently not. “The FRELIMO government has taken a hard line toward the churches and especially toward foreign missionaries,” reports the magazine. A recent document circulating among Mozambique political leaders states: “The masses will be protected against all pressure or any obligation to attend church service, of practising religion . . . Once religion is no more a duty or an obligation, it will be slowly forgotten. . . . religion will be no more than an episode of the past, worthy of mention in the history of the world Communist movement.”
Having shamelessly violated Jesus’ command to be “no part of the world,” the Church Council now finds herself much like a rejected prostitute in Mozambique. The Bible predicts a similar fate world wide for all spiritually adulterous religion: “The time will come when [all the beastlike nations] will turn against the prostitute, and . . . will eat her flesh and burn the remains in the fire.”​—Rev. 17:16, “Jerusalem Bible.”
Race and IQ
● New evidence further supports the view that racial differences have little effect on a person’s average measured intelligence or IQ. “Psychology Today” magazine reports on a recent study of adoptive children that indicates that “a culturally rich environment closes most of the black-white gap.”
This study involved black children adopted by 101 white families of above-average education. It showed that these children “scored well above the national averages of both blacks and whites, especially if they were adopted early in life.” The small remaining difference in average IQ scores between adoptive black and adoptive white children was said to be accounted for by the fact that the black children, on the average, were older when adopted. Consequently they missed some of the important personal care so necessary during early formative years. In the study, black children who were adopted at an early age scored almost identically with white youths.
Of course, this comes as no surprise to those who accept the scientifically accurate viewpoint on race found in the Bible: “[God] created every race of men of one stock, to inhabit the whole earth’s surface.” Hence, genuine Christians view other races as does “God [who] has no favourites, but . . . in every nation the man who is godfearing and does what is right is acceptable to him.”​—Acts 17:26; 10:34, 35, “New English Bible.”

