VOL. XXIV. DECEMBER 15, 1903. No. 24 



CONTENTS. 

Views From the Watch Tower 451 

Humility at a Discount 451 

Hebrew, Infidel, Preacher 451 

Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society 

Annual Report 452 

Christmas Review 456 

The Boyhood of Jesus 457 

Requests for Pilgrims, 1904 460 

John the Baptist and the Promised 

Elijah 460 

In the Winepress Alone (Poem) 462 

Special Item: Vol. VI. Not a Special 

Tower Issue 450 

page 450 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-24 EVERSHOLT ST., LONDON, N.W. 



GERMAN BRANCH--MIRKER STR., 45, ELBERFELD. 

PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE, 5c (2-l/2d.) A COPY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER, will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



R3293 : page 450 

VOL. VI. NOT A SPECIAL TOWER ISSUE. 



Owing to the postal ruling which deprived us of the 
privilege of mailing paper-bound DAWNS at second-class 
rates, as special issues of the WATCH TOWER, we cannot 
send Vol. VI. to our WATCH TOWER subscribers in the 
same manner as formerly. There will be no paper bound 
edition issued, and all subscribers who want the sixth volume 
should remit at the rate of 30c per copy for cloth-bound 
books. This price covers postage. 

R3294 : page 450 

VOL. V. IN GERMAN. 



This translation is in good stock, and orders will have 
prompt attention. 

page 450 

MOTTOES IN GERMAN. 



We can fill orders for German mottoes. A packet of 
three large and two small mottoes of pretty design will be 
sent for $1.00, postpaid. 

"WHAT SAY THE SCRIPTURES ABOUT HELL?" 



We can supply this effective booklet in the Swedish 
language at 10c per copy, $1.00 per doz., postpaid. 

The English and German booklets still remain at the 
price of 50c per doz., postpaid. 



R3286 : page 451 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 
HUMILITY AT A DISCOUNT WITH CLERGY. 



THE louder a man boasts of himself and the more 

domineering over others he becomes the more will 

he be reverenced. This is true in all religious circles 

to-day amongst the "clergy." It was so, too, in St. 

Paul's day. He pointed it out to the Corinthians, saying, 

in substance: The more a religious teacher brow-beats 

you and the more he exacts from you of money and reverence, 

the more you will esteem him. (2 Cor. 1 1:20.) This 

still seems to be the trend of unbalanced human nature. 

It is exemplified in every church organization except the 

true one, where alone meekness, gentleness and patience 

are recognized as the proper adornments of 

Christ's representatives. 

As an extreme example note the following proclamation 
of John Alex. Dowie to his deluded followers, clipped 
from his own publication: 

"The time has come when the world shall no longer 
make money out of Zion investments, for Zion can now 
invest more profitably in Zion industries, through Zion's own 
Financial Institutions. Therefore I say to you, are you loyal 
to Zion when you are backing up worldly institutions outside 
when Zion needs your resources and your strength 
and can use these to God's glory, and to your increased prosperity? 
I say to you, and I say to Zion everywhere, that you 
will have to recognize fully the tremendous fact that I was 
within my rights and only fulfilling my Divinely imposed and 
positive duty when I issued the Command of September 21st. 
After due time given for the prayerful consideration of that 
Command, every man or woman throughout the world who 
says, I will not obey,' is asked to send in his or her resignation. 
If you will not obey, then I will know that you are 
outside of Zion. My responsibility as your leader, under God, 
will cease; for you will have found another leader, or be 
a 'wandering star. '...I do not want you in Zion. You 
are a curse to Zion and the quicker you get out the better off 
Zion will be." 

HEBREW, INFIDEL, PREACHER. 



Felix Adler, rabbi and D.D., has been discoursing on 
prayer to New Yorkers. He said,— 

"Prayer also gives vent to that instinct in the human 
heart to worship God. But here, too, in regard to worship, 
I cannot sympathize with the kind of worship of which we 
do so much nowadays— characterized by the posture in praying 
—by kneeling. When a congregation falls on its knees I 
recoil. I find it repugnant to my whole nature. 

"Prayer is said to have the effect of putting before us 
a divine model. But the idea of God, when it rises in the 
mind, fills it with a kind of nebulous light, but doesn't present 
the clear outlines of a model. 

"I think men are really better and abler examples for 
behavior and serve us better as models than deity— such men, 
for instance, as Socrates, Brutus and Lincoln. They furnish 
definite models, not a vague notion of perfection; they do us 
good. Let us have moral heroes, human exemplars." 



Mark how vain Evolutionists speedily become. Pluming 
themselves on their humility in acknowledging protoplasm, 
jellyfish and monkeys as their progenitors, they 
pride themselves on having attained so high a dignity 
that it causes a shudder to see others bow to him whom 
they acknowledge as their Creator. 

As for Mr. Adler's preference for a human rather 
than a divine model, let us remember that he rejects the 
human model provided by Jehovah— "the man Christ Jesus." 
Let us remember, too, that the horrible "doctrines 
of devils" promulgated by Satan (through Heathen, Jewish 
and Christian "Doctors of Divinity") so misrepresent 
the plan and character of God as to make any half-decent 
man a "model" of justice in comparison. 

Thank God that Satan is soon to be "bound," that he 
may deceive the nations (peoples) no more. Then Felix 
Adler's eyes and all the other blind eyes shall be opened, 
and they shall see the glorious character of the great 
Creator. Then Felix Adler and all others will bow the 
knee: as it is written, "Unto me every knee shall bow." If 
he bow willingly and adoringly he may then go up the 
"highway of holiness" to everlasting life under the guidance 
of the wonderful teachers of the Millennium. If he 
refuse to bow his heart he, with all such, will "perish" in 
the Second Death. 

REV. DR. DIX WARNS THE GREEDY RICH. 



In the pulpit of the richest church in America 

R3286 : page 452 

Dr. Dix preached a Thanksgiving Day discourse 
of which the following is an extract: 



"The account between God and man is still open, 
our debt to Him still unpaid. True, there is ample 
material whereof to bring a thank offering to Almighty 
God. 

"Peace is within our borders. The horrible nightmare 
of the past winter induced by the coal strike 
no longer makes heads sick and hearts faint. The 
spirit of anarchy has done no more murder in high 
places. The state is secure from foreign assaults and 
domestic disaffection. For these and countless other 
instances of the Divine favor and goodness we do give 
thanks." 

Then the eloquent preacher drew the other side of 
the picture and surprised his hearers with these words: 

"Still, shadows fall, and under them we add intercession 
to thanksgiving. What casts some of those 
shadows? Class alienation. The insolence of wealth 
and the angry discontent of the poor, the growth of 
riotous living, the misuse of money and its reckless 
squandering on pleasure and pride; education without 
religion; the steady breaking up of homes by divorce 
and remarriage; the appearance of vast systems of religious 
imposture and their success in making converts; 
the spirit of gambling in every place where it can be 
practiced. 

"Others are the cold-blooded assaults on private 
property by those who attack corporations and drag 
them down to bankruptcy in order to enrich themselves; 
the insecurity of life through contempt of the 
law, and the freedom of assassins, whether sane or insane, 
to wreck their will upon their innocent victims; 
the steady decline of womanhood from its old ideals 
and its deterioration through copying the ways and 
invading the sphere of men. These are some of the 
things that cast a shadow on the years. No one sees 
how they are to be stopped, and no one who thinks it 
over from a Christian standpoint can doubt that if they 
are not stopped the harvest will be frightful beyond 
telling." 

HIGHER CRITICS CONTRADICT EACH OTHER. 



Rev. Sheraton of Wycliffe College, Canada, recently, 
defending the Pentateuch, said: 

"One good reason for rejecting the radical theory 
of the higher critics is that their criticisms have been 
nothing less than a series of speculations since 
their inception, each one contradicting all those that 
preceded it. Originally the crude objection was made 
that Moses could not have written the Pentateuch, because 
of the illiterate character of the age in which he 
lived. Discoveries in Bible lands, however, make it 
abundantly plain that there was a regular mania for 
writing and recording in ancient Egypt; and that tablets 



were erected and correspondence took place in 

R3287 : page 452 

Canaan before the Exodus. Moreover, recent research 

makes it evident that such an accurate knowledge was 

had by the sacred writer of the geography, arts, social 

and religious customs of Egypt, that no one but an eye-witness 

could have so described the conditions. No one 

living at a remote age could have drawn upon his imagination 

for the facts. 

"It was objected at a later date, in 1866, that the 
body of laws in the middle books were placed there 
after the Babylonian exile; and this was a portion that 
the critics had hitherto declared to be the oldest. 
No unanimity was shown on their part. Objection 
was also made to the diversity of style appearing 
in Deuteronomy and by a process of vivisection thirty-six 
verses in that book were actually attributed to 32 
authors. Almost all great literary works have been 
attacked in the same way, and in just as plausible a 
manner. Homer's authorship of the Iliad and Caesar's 
production of Commentaries were disputed for years 
because of the diversity of style. Sir Walter Besant, 
who finished a novel commenced by a dead friend, said 
no one had ever pointed out the place where he took 
up the work. The critics were captious and magnified 
differences, as the result of their restless analyses was 
fruitless, tedious and repulsive.— Toronto News." 



R3287 : page 452 

WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY. 
-ANNUAL REPORT.-DEC. 1ST, 1902, TO DEC. 1ST, 1903. 



"ONWARD, Christian Soldiers," seems to be our 
Great Captain's command to our Society— in its 
every department. When recording the year's 
results each December we have been amazed at "what God 
hath wrought," so great results from so imperfect instrumentalities. 
We are continually reminded of the feeding 
of the five thousand on five barley loaves and two small 
fishes, and the twelve baskets full of fragments left over. 
Each yearly report we have feared would be our best; not 
seeing how the following year could be a favorable. And 
just so is this year's report: Excellent, splendid, better 
than we could have surmised. The Lord be praised! We 
do not see how 1904 can equal or surpass 1903, but past 
experiences lead us to expect greater and still greater 
blessings from the great Chief Reaper in his service. 
One of the encouraging features of the work is, that 



the newly interested seem to grasp the Truth quickly, 
thoroughly, and with a self-consuming zeal which stimulates 
afresh those who have been longer in the way. As 
an instance we mention a young woman of less than 
twenty years who, during the Eaton-Russell Debates in 
October, fully consecrated her life to the Lord, set about 
a systematic study of the Dawn volumes, and so on, resolutely 
sacrificing the comforts of an elegant home, became 
a Colporteur, and began to carry the water of life to 
others fainting by the way. She realized herself to be an 
"eleventh hour" laborer, and besought the Lord for privileges 
and blessing in the vineyard. The language of her 
heart was expressed in the words of the hymn: 
"The hour is come to do and dare, 
To win a heavenly prize." 
Did she succeed, you ask? Surely; where faith and 
zeal go hand in hand to the Lord for service he rarely if 
ever rejects them; guidance, direction, alone was needed, 

R3287 : page 453 

and we were privileged to supply it. As a result that sister 
is circulating from fourteen to forty volumes of Millennial 
Dawn daily— delivering from 200 to 600 sermons 
daily, reckoning each chapter a sermon. 

Some seem to get a worldly view of this matter of 
Colporteuring, and think of it as unworthy the time and 
service of the well-to-do and educated;— well enough for 
those who have no other business or trade, or who have no 
capital wherewith to engage in "something better." The 
contrary view is the proper one, namely, that this in God's 
esteem is one of the most honorable services rendered in 
his name to the household of faith. As the "Pilgrim" 
brethren do the service of Elders, so the "Colporteurs" 
and "Volunteers" are doing the service of Deacons and 
Deaconesses. And the more education, refinement and 
natural ability are brought to the service, the greater number 
of talents invested, the greater are the possibilities 
of grand results to the glory of our King and the assistance 
of his "brethren." Those who feel that their talents 
are too many or too valuable to be used in the Lord's service, 
but not too valuable to be used in law or medicine or 
merchandising or other money-winning employment, do 
not properly value the privilege of laboring in the Vineyard 
—do not rightly value the great rewards promised to 
those who forsake all to have the privilege of Kingdom 
service and self-denial now, and of Kingdom glory by and 
by. 

True, many long for such service, but are so handicapped 
by earthly obligations that they cannot do as they 
would— cannot engage in colporteuring— should not so engage. 
We doubt not that with these the Lord, who 
knoweth the heart, reckons to their credit all the self-sacrifices 
of this sort they would be glad to make if the conditions 
favored. But such will be active along some other 
lines of service for the Truth and the Brethren. Faithfulness 



in all possible ways will doubtless bring them eventually 
new doors of opportunity. 

While increase of interest is to be noted all along the 
line, we accord first place to the Colporteur branch of the 
service. The figures given in the summary following will 
no doubt astonish all of our readers, the total sales of 
Dawns being nearly three times last year's total. These 
were nearly all in cloth binding, too, whereas last year the 
majority were in paper covers. The cloth binding is much 
better appreciated, better cared for and displayed; and 
thus does more good. 

We have one hundred and forty-three Colporteurs at 
work now, with many additions promised as soon as they 
can arrange their affairs. They are a noble band, laboring 
not for the meat that perisheth merely, but specially for 
the present and the prospective joys of the Lord. 

Many of the great men in history, who won fame and 
renown as statesmen, soldiers, authors and scientists, or 
gained a world-wide reputation in commercial life, laid 
the foundation of their greatness, perhaps gained that 
knowledge of men and human nature which is such a 
factor in great minds, by acting as canvassing agents. 
Napoleon Bonaparte, when a poor lieutenant, took the 
agency for a work entitled "L'Histoire de la Revolution." 
In the foyer of the great Palace of the Louvre can be seen 
to-day the Emperor's canvassing outfit, with the long list 
of subscribers he secured. George Washington, when 
young, canvassed around Alexandria, Va., and sold over 
two hundred copies of a work entitled "Bydell's American 
Savage." Mark Twain was a book agent. Longfellow sold 
books by subscription. Jay Gould, when starting in life, 
was a canvasser. Daniel Webster paid his second term's 
tuition at Dartmouth by handling "De Tocqueville's 
America," in Merrimac County, New Hampshire. Gen. 
U. S. Grant canvassed for Irving's "Columbus." James 
G. Blaine began life as a canvasser for a "Life of Henry 
Clay." Bismarck, when at Heidelberg, spent a vacation 
in canvassing for one of Blumenbach's handbooks. None 
of these, however, labored thus for the King of kings. 
None of these carried to their fellow creatures so precious 
a gospel. None of these invited saints in the name of the 
Lord to prepare for a share in the throne with their Redeemer, 
or sought thus by faithfulness to make their own 
calling and election sure by attesting their loving devotion 
to the Lord and his cause, to the sacrifice of some 
earthly privileges;— esteemed in comparison as but "loss 
and dross." 

ZION'S WATCH TOWER CIRCULATION INCREASING. 

While the work has increased greatly during the past 
year and the Watch Tower's regular issues are now over 
20,000, this, although very gratifying, seems less important 
to us, as we believe it is less important in the Lord's 
esteem than the evident increase in deep spirituality witnessed 
in so many ways— by the letters we receive, by the 



energy displayed, etc. We remark, by the way, that we 
continually receive evidences that there are thousands of 
interested Dawn readers who are not on the Tower list. 
Surely this ought not to be so. We should be in constant 
touch with all who are of like precious faith. Generally 
the reason given is scarcity of money. We know not how 
to tell these dear brethren and sisters that they are as 
welcome to the Watch Tower as to the air they breathe; 
but they must request it, even as they must inhale the air. 
Those who do not like to ask for it as "the Lord's poor," 
may, if they prefer, ask it on credit year after year, and if 
never able to send the money they may at any time so inform 
us and have the debt cancelled. What can we say 
more than this? We merely add that we are convenienced 
by those whose renewals (whatever their kind) come to 
the office before January 1st each year. 

We are expecting great things for the next few years 
in the spread of the Truth. We expect that the regular 
issues of the Watch Tower will be 40,000 copies (representing 
80,000 readers) before 1908. We want the cooperation 
of all of the Lord's people to this end. As the 
editor can do a part in this not open to others, so others 
can do a part which is not open to the editor. Let us continue 
to co-labor, hoping by and by unitedly to hear the 
Chief Reaper say, "Well done! good, faithful servants. 
Enter into the joys of your Lord." 

THE VOLUNTEER WORK. 

If space permitted we would enjoy giving details respecting 
this great work— explaining the practical methods 
adopted, by which in some large cities practically 
every house was visited— especially in Boston, Washington, 
Pittsburg and Allegheny, and their suburbs, for ten 
miles or more in every direction. Over three millions of 
tracts were thus used; besides the ordinary circulation of 
about two millions of other assorted tracts. Great as this 
work is, and far beyond all other tract distribution in the 
world, it can be more than doubled next year, if the 

R3288 : page 454 

friends in all other cities can arouse the same zeal displayed 

by some of those mentioned. For instance, at 

Washington practically the entire church, of about sixty 

engaged in the work. The trouble there was that with so 

many hands this much enjoyed service was too quickly accomplished. 

We are preparing "ammunition" for next 

year, and hope to be ready to supply orders in April. Let 

all prepare carefully and prayerfully for the opportunities 

of 1904. Remember that much depends on the selection 

of earnest-hearted and wise-headed captains and lieutenants, 

as well as on the zeal of the Church. Surely those 

who know no better way to use their time or to render 

service to the Truth, should be careful how they disregard 

this grand opportunity. The tracts are provided free; 



and the more of respectability, education and good address 
anyone can put into the service, the greater is likely 
to be the favorable impression to read and consider these 
messages from our King to nominal "Christendom" to select 
the "wheat" class. 

THE TOWER-DAWN A SUCCESS. 

The special issue of Dawn I. in Watch Tower form 
has been well received. Its price (5c per copy, including 
postage) is so cheap that it permits many to send it to 
their friends. One brother has sent about 300 to his 
friends and is still sending us large lists. A fund has been 
provided, by means of which this edition may be sent to 
every English-speaking minister and missionary in the 
world. We already have the lists, and about 50,000 have 
been sent out. 

The cheapness of this edition and also of the handsome 
cloth-bound edition makes unnecessary the old paper-bound 
edition, which will be discontinued soon as 
present stock is exhausted. 

OUR CORRESPONDENCE BIBLE SCHOOL. 

Letters come to us from all parts of the world making 
inquiries on the lines of Bible study and for assistance 
in applying the teachings of the Word to the affairs 
of daily life;— as well as business correspondence. We 
take pleasure in replying to these as lengthily as the questions 
seem to demand— frequently referring the inquirers 
to the more convenient and elaborate treatises of Dawn 
and the Watch Tower. We rejoice in such opportunities 
for service, and trust that any of the Lord's children who 
so desire will freely appeal to us for willing assistance 
along these lines. 

Letters and cards received from Dec. 1, 1902, to 

Dec. 1, 1903 41,079 

Letters and cards sent out from Dec. 1, 1902, to 
Dec. 1, 1903 37,810 

THE PILGRIM SERVICE INCREASED. 

The Lord's guidance in regard to the "Pilgrim" service 
is continually in evidence; not only in the words of 
appreciation coming constantly from those who have been 
blessed, but also in the evidences showing an increasing 
zeal and spirituality in their wake. This is not merely the 
result of the excellent discourses delivered by the "Pilgrims," 
but also, and, in large part, a result of the exercise 
of energy necessary to the making of the arrangements 
for the "Pilgrim" and for the meetings. The activity 
and comminglings incident to the preparations, 
bring a blessing, according to the divine promise that he who 
assists in watering others gets watered also himself. 

Elsewhere we ask for brief postal card answers to 



questions useful to us in connection with this service, 
from those desiring visits during the year 1904. Please 
respond promptly. 

During the past year 25 persons took part in this 
"Pilgrim" work; 2,647 parlor meetings and 1,702 public 
meetings were held;— total 4,349. The distance traversed 
in connection with these services (the editor's trip to Europe 
included) was 154,214 miles. The expense was 
$7,956— a very modest amount for so extensive services. 
The One Day and Annual Conventions are also reckoned 
in account; but not the convention expenses, which are 
borne by the inviting churches. 

CONVENTIONS OF THE YEAR. 

These we have reason to believe were appreciated and 
profitable. The One Day Conventions are chiefly for the 
benefit of those "brethren" yet in Babylon, who are hungering 
for and seeking Present Truth; the General Conventions 
are chiefly for those already fairly established in 
it. Both are proving so helpful that we consider it the 
Lord's will that they be continued, as per regular 
announcements. 

THE SOCIETY'S FOREIGN MISSIONS. 

"Darkness covers the earth [civilized] and gross 
darkness the heathen." Our Society is making no effort 
to reach those in grossest darkness, believing that to be 
the work designed of the Lord for the Millennium. We 
have more than enough to do in dispelling the darkness 
prevalent in Christendom. For these are our labors and 
prayers, as were those of the Apostles.— Eph. 1:13. 

The British Branch is well established, though by no 
means self-sustaining yet. A splendid work is in progress 
everywhere in Great Britain, and it is extending 
and broadening and deepening. Evidently, the Lord has 
"much people" in those islands. (Acts 18:10.) The editor 
was much refreshed by the manifestations of love and 
zeal everywhere encountered during his brief Pilgrim trip 
thither last Spring. Indeed, we know that all Watch 
Tower readers shared this through our reports, as was 
abundantly testified by your letters to us subsequently. A 
separate report of the British Branch is subjoined. 

Work is commenced at Copenhagen and Stockholm 
for the benefit of our Scandinavian brethren;— to put 
into their hands the Present Truth and to co-operate with 
those who have already been blessed with the opening of 
the eyes of their understanding. We hope to have more 
to report in the way of works a year from now. 

The German Branch has opened under fairly prosperous 
conditions, yet not what we had hoped for. The 
oneness of the "body" and of the "harvest" work does not 
seem to be sufficiently appreciated by the German brethren. 
It is proposed, however, to continue the mission during 
1904, giving the field a fair trial and looking to the 



Lord for guidance as to whether or not there are more 
favorable fields for the use of consecrated time and 
money. Meantime Brother Koetitz has succeeded Brother 
Henninges as the Society's representative at Elberfeld, 
and the latter has passed to a new field, as below. 
The work in French and Italian now centered at 
Yverdon, Switzerland, is being given a push, and promises 
well for the time. We are spending considerable money 
for free reading matter to be scattered all over Germany, 

R3288 : page 455 

Switzerland, France and Italy, as the Lord may stir up 
the hearts of his people to co-operate in the "harvest" 
work. We will do some witnessing. The Lord will use the 
Truth to gather the "wheat" and permit Satan to sift it 
clean. Experience seems to teach that the principal crop 
of ripe "wheat" will be gathered in Great Britain and 
America, where freedom has more or less prepared the 
way for the Truth amongst all nationalities. We must 
"harvest" while it is called day and where the wheat 
principally is. 

THE AUSTRALIAN MISSION. 

Little has yet been accomplished in Australia, yet 
everything we are able to learn about it seems to imply 
that it should be ripe for the sickle of Truth. Its population 
is chiefly British and we believe intelligent and liberal-minded. 
Its claims appealed to us as being in line 
with the leadings of the Lord, and accordingly Brother 
Henninges has been dispatched thither to open a Melbourne 
Branch or Mission. 

Brother Henninges has had a large experience in Allegheny, 
and later in London, and is, we believe, every 
way competent to push the work there. He will doubtless 
make it a success if the conditions are as favorable as we 
hope— if the Lord has "much people" there. Although 
this is in the nature of an experiment, we have already 
shipped nearly eight tons of literature there— chiefly 
Dawns— so great is our confidence. 

We bespeak for all the dear "Yoke-fellows" (Phil. 4:3) 
in foreign fields, as well as in the home Pilgrim service 
and in the Colporteur service afar and near, the prayers 
and co-operation of all who recognize the one Lord, 
one faith, one baptism, and one harvest work, and who 
see that the time for co-operation is short. Yea, as we see 
how few there are loyal to the Truth, and how many are 
their opponents, "within and without," let it draw us the 
closer to all whom the Lord has counted worthy to receive 
the Truth and worthy to permit to remain in its light. 
Let us pray for one another and in every way assist one 
another to "stand" and to "fight a good fight." Love of 
the brethren is classed in Scripture as one of the evidences 
of the new life— with what propriety each who has 
this love can judge. 



Our continued prayers ascend daily, for all the dear 
co-laborers and for all the Lord's true sheep— known to us 
as well as unknown. Brethren, pray for us. Under the 
Lord's providence our position in this "harvest" work 
specially draws the fire of the great enemy and his blind 
and misdirected servants. It is a comfort to us to know 
of your Christian love and prayers in behalf of the editor 
and his faithful co-laborers. And amongst these do 
not forget the 32 loyal office helpers at Allegheny. 

THE FINANCIAL END. 

With the opening of wider ranges of labor and influence 
the Lord sent an increase of the necessary means;— 
our money receipts for the past year will surprise you. 

R3289 : page 455 

This is another evidence that the Lord's hand is guiding 

the "harvest" work;— grace sufficient to endure added 

trials; and money sufficient for the increased expenses, 

and that without either direct or indirect appeals for 

money. The Truth stirred the willing-hearted to do what 

they could, and the Lord gave the increase. We dare 

scarcely hope for as large opportunities or as ample 

means for next year, but we leave all in the Lord's hand 

and will seek to do with our might according to the opportunities 

and means the Lord will supply. All who have 

participated in the results summarized below, either 

through active service of the Truth or by money contributions 

in its aid, or both (and this includes almost every 

Watch Tower subscriber), may well join us in giving 

thanks to the Lord for the showing. 

It will be noticed that while the work more than 
doubled the expenses did not double. We believe it to be 
a part of our stewardship to see that not one dollar of 
these consecrated funds is wasted. The dear co-laborers 
join heartily in this spirit. None here receives wages— 
merely expenses— and all rejoice to keep these at the lowest 
notch, and each feels that he cannot do too much for 
our King and his "brethren." We are entirely safe in 
saying that no such work was ever before done, nor at so 
relatively small a cost. But then neither was such a gospel 
ever before proclaimed. "What manner of persons 
ought we to be?" 

SUMMARY OF THE YEAR. 

Receipts. 

Surplus on hand Dec. 1, 1903 $3,938.11 

From Good Hopes and all other sources 39,526.08 



Total $43,464.19 

Expenditures. 



For "Pilgrim" expenses $ 7,956.65 

For publishing matter circulated free,— 

tracts, etc 21,678.02 

For expenses, postage, etc., on same 5,026.49 

For loss on Dawns incidental to rise in cost and 
our desire to keep retail price low and give 

Colporteurs every opportunity 2,014.71 

For Foreign Mission accounts, on which there 
may be partial returns later on 5,694.21 

$42,370.08 
Surplus remaining $ 1,094.11 

SUMMARY OF LITERATURE CIRCULATED FREE. 

Old Theology Tracts sent out, 5,487,700, representing 
81,211,600 tract pages,— various languages. 
Sample copies of Zion's Watch Tower, 198,590. 

BOOKS AND BOOKLETS SOLD AT COST OR LESS. 

Millennial Dawns, all volumes and languages 210,961 

Sundry booklets 63,057 

MISCELLANEOUS. 

Letters and cards received 41,079 

Letters and cards sent out 37,810 

"Pilgrims," regular and special, 25. Visits, 1,411; 
Public meetings, 1,702; Parlor meetings, 2,647; Miles 
traveled, 154,214. 



Praising God for past mercies, let us begin the service 
of the New Year with a renewal of our consecration 
vows; and with the thought that we are a year nearer to 
the glorious "change" and "well done" for which we hope. 
"Now is our salvation nearer than when we first believed." 

REPORT OF BRITISH BRANCH. 



We give below Brother Hemery's Letter and Report. 
We all rejoice that the British Branch prospers, and hope 

R3289 : page 456 

that in another year there will be something to report respecting 
the "harvest" work in the lands afar. 

Lest there should be some misunderstanding, we note 
the fact that the Financial Report takes no account of 
the cost of the tons of tracts sent from Allegheny, but 
merely of its circulation. We propose having the reports 



next year include cost of paper, printing, etc. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

We are gratified in being able to send a report showing 
increase in the various branches of the work. The 
sale of Dawns has advanced upon last year's figures by 
3,000, while that of the lesser booklets also shows an increase. 
But notable progress is shown in the account of 
tract circulation— we have sent out 1,033,000 free tracts 
and Towers. Of this number 700,000 represent the Volunteer 
matter; the new method of distribution lending 
itself to more extended opportunities of service than the 
previous one did. But while much has been done, much 
more remains. The increases plainly indicate further 
possibilities, telling us that "The fields are white unto the 
harvest." We pray the "Lord of the Harvest that he will 
send more laborers into His vineyard." 

We believe your visit to us in the Springtime has, in 
the Lord's providence, done much to give a general impetus 
to the work in this part of the field. The brethren 
were stimulated to further assurance and zeal, and many 
new friends were made. Indeed, in view of the possibilities 
in these countries, it would appear that your early return 
is desirable. You will be glad to know that the work 
prospers in Ireland: the friends in Dublin especially 
were enthused by your visit there, and have, since then, 
sold a good many Dawns. The change of the British depot 
to its present address— brought about in harmony 
with your thought that this locality would be more desirable 
—already promises much advantage. 

It has been our pleasure to have a Pilgrim visit from 
Brother Henninges this fall. He reports that the meetings 
have been well attended, and the usual good interest 
maintained. We are sorry to have to say "good-bye" to 
him and Sr. Henninges, though we are glad the work in 
Australia is to be helped forward by them. We are grateful 
to the Lord for all His favors to us— for the privilege 
of knowing His Truth, and for that of serving each other. 
We thank Him for all that He has done, and are hopeful 
concerning that which remains. Continue to pray for us 
here, as we do for you, that His purposes may be worked 
out in us and that we may all be good "laborers" in the 
vineyard. 

Your fellow-servant, in the Lord, 
J. HEMERY. 

EXPENDITURES. 

L. s. d. 

Deficit from last year 542 18 8 

Postage, Rent, Labor, Gas and sundry 

expenses 105 1 5 

"Pilgrim" work expenses 86 4 9 

734 4 10 

Tract fund receipts from Great Britain 411 2 

Deficit 323 2 10 



Dawns sold, chiefly by colporteurs 20,590 

Booklets sold, chiefly by colporteurs 3,851 

Tracts circulated free, chiefly by "Volunteer" 

method 1,033,700 

These represented in pages 18,368,600 

Letters and cards received 4,649 

Letters and cards sent out 9,842 



R3289 : page 456 

CHRISTMAS REVIEW 

--READING LESSON, PSALM 103. -DECEMBER 27.- 

THE lessons of the last quarter, dealing with Saul, 

David and Solomon, are fresh in our memories. 

Saul's great but wasted opportunities have impressed us 

with the thought that we also have great opportunities, 

and need to be on guard lest these should be wasted. 

Saul's opportunities were of an earthly kind, in connection 

with an earthly kingdom; ours relate to the everlasting 

glorious Kingdom. His mistake was in failure to give 

his heart entirely to the Lord. Instead of doing this 

he sought to serve the Lord but to maintain a will of his 

own. Seeing how great was his mistake impresses upon 

us the importance of making our consecration full, complete, 

and then seeing to it that, by the Lord's assistance, 

we faithfully carry out the provisions of that 

consecration. 

In David, Saul's successor, we have a man 
after God's own heart— not in respect to all the affairs 
of his life, but in respect to his heart, his intentions, his 
holiness of will, of purpose. Seeing what God appreciated 
in David helps us to understand the better what he 
appreciates in all those who would please him. Not 
that we could hope to please God of ourselves,— but 
having accepted his grace in our hearts, having come 
under the robe of the Redeemer's imputed righteousness, 
and having realized ourselves accepted in the 
Beloved, then it must be the desire of our hearts to 
attain as nearly as possible to the divine standard in 
thought, word and deed. By so doing we are making 
our calling and election sure, for the Lord seeks only 
those to be his servants who worship him in spirit and 
in truth. He accepts us under Christ's merit because 
we have declared that we desire to be like Christ and 
to fulfil the Father's will. Our acceptance is with the 
view of giving us an opportunity to demonstrate the 
truthfulness of our assertions— to fulfil the covenant of 
self-sacrifice in obedience to the principles of righteousness. 
Failures surely will from time to time mark our 
very best endeavors, but so surely as we are of the David 
class, the beloved of the Lord, so surely our failures will 
cause us regret and pain, and lead us to the Lord to 



entreat his forgiveness in the name and merit of him who 
loved us and bought us with his precious blood. 

David's warfare with the enemies of the Lord, and 
with the enemies of the Kingdom and Law which the 

R3290 : page 457 

Lord had established in Israel, were continued through 
David's career, and these very properly represent the 
warfare which all the Lord's beloved ones must endure 
faithfully if they would abide in his favor. Loyalty to 
the principles of the divine government is of prime importance; 
the royal banner must be lifted high; our lives 
must be risked and be given in defence of the divine 
character and teachings if we would be counted worthy 
of the Kingdom of glory, if we would belong to the 
house of David, the beloved, which the Lord has promised 
shall be established forever— the house of Christ, 
the house of sons. 

We review Solomon's peaceful reign and note how 
its opening years were typical of the blessings of the 
noontide of the Millennial Kingdom. The glories and 
wisdom and wealth of Solomon were but trifles in comparison 
to the wisdom, honor and riches which God has 
promised to those who love him. Respecting the faithful 
overcomers, we remember it is declared that they 
shall know even as they are known by God, that they 
shall share the glory, honor and immortality of their 
glorious Head and Master. 

We remember, too, the typical temple, and its construction 
from materials previously prepared during the 
Levitic reign, and how this prefigured our preparation 
as living stones for the glorious temple of the future, in 
which God shall make his presence known to all the 
families of the earth for their blessing and uplifting, and 
for the joy of all those who shall respond to the blessed 
influences of the Millennial Kingdom. The thought of 
the preparation of these stones causes us much comfort 
and joy respecting the trials and difficulties of this present 
time, as we realize that they are working out for us 
and in us preparation for the far more exceeding and 
eternal weight of glory which will be ours if we are faithful 
when we shall be brought together in glory as the 
spiritual temple of the Lord. 

This review is perhaps as appropriate a lesson for 
the closing Sunday of the year as any, especially when 
we remember that all of these glories and blessings and 
privileges are ours because of the great redemptive work 
accomplished by him whose entrance upon the work is 
celebrated by Christmas day. Although we cannot 
agree that this is the proper day for celebrating the birth 
of our dear Redeemer, but must insist that it was about 
October first, nevertheless since he did not intimate his 
desire that we should celebrate his birthday it is quite 
immaterial upon what day that event, of so great importance 
to all, is celebrated. Upon this day, so generally 



celebrated, we may properly enough join with all whose 
hearts are in the attitude of love and appreciation toward 
God and toward the Savior. 

The habit of giving little remembrances one to another 
at this time of year seems to us specially appropriate. 
God is the great giver of every good and perfect 
gift. He is continually giving and we are continually 
receiving from him; but amongst all his gifts the one 
of greatest importance to us is the gift of his Son to be 
our Redeemer. While, therefore, thanking the Lord for 
this great gift and for the great plan which centered in 
it, it is appropriate that we cultivate in our hearts the 
spirit of liberality, generosity, and that we allow this 
spirit to exercise itself to some extent— according to our 
conditions and circumstances— toward those with whom 
we have contact, especially to the members of our own 
households. We recommend that every little gift on 
this occasion should, so far as possible, represent or be 
accompanied by some little remembrancer of the great 
gift— something to draw the mind of the recipient to the 
fact that the great gift of God in Christ is and should 
be in the minds of all who give or who receive the trifling 
exchanges of the season. 



R3290 : page 457 

THE BOYHOOD OF JESUS. 

-LUKE 2:40-52.-JANUARY 3.- 

FOR the first six months of the new year the International 
Lessons turn again to the New Testament, 
beginning appropriately enough with the 
childhood of Jesus. 

The more we think of it the more marvellous it 
seems that the Gospel narratives record so many of the 
particulars of our dear Redeemer's ministry— miracles, 
teachings, etc.— yet never once descend to the discussion 
of commonplace events, nor of our Lord's sayings 
or doings other than those directly connected with his 
ministry. This is one of the strongest internal evidences 
that these books were written under divine 
supervision. Our experience with the writings of men 
in all ages assures us that it would be almost impossible 
for four men to write biographies of one person, 
such as these four Gospels are, without entering into 
social features and events. Our Lord's mother is 
barely mentioned, and this only where her life touched 
particularly with that of Jesus. Her husband, Joseph, 
was probably dead at the time our Lord's ministry began, 
yet no mention is made of this fact either. 

Respecting our Lord's life, previous to his consecration 
at thirty years of age, we know scarcely anything. 
The four Gospels merely bring to our attention 



his miraculous birth, Herod's jealous fury, and the 
escape of the child before the massacre of the innocents, 
followed by the little incident of our lesson, 
which occurred in his twelfth year, and the declaration 
that he increased in wisdom and stature and favor with 
God and man. How brief the record, yet how suggestive! 

R3291 : page 458 

It would have been no part of the Gospel to 
have explained the details of his life as a boy, as a 
young man, etc. It might, indeed, have satisfied the 
curiosity of some to have told us whether he was a 
farmer or a fisherman or a carpenter, matters about 
which people seem inclined to dispute. Undoubtedly 
the Lord's way in this matter was the better one. Our 
minds are more drawn to the important features of the 
Lord's work by reason of the brevity of the sketch 
given us of his earthly life and interests. 

The important thing for us to know is simply 
stated, namely, that he was the beginning of the creation 
of God— the first born of every creature; that in 
his preexistent condition he had glory with the Father 
before the world was, and was the Father's instrument 
in the creation of angels, principalities and powers and 
men, everything that was made. (John 1 .) The 
necessary particulars are also given us respecting the 
transference of this great spirit being to earthly human 
conditions— that he might become man and redeem 
man, the world; that he might be born under the 
Law and thus redeem those who were under the Law, 
the Jews. Let us then thank God heartily for the simplicity 
of the narrative, and for the fact that no item 
necessary to our comfort and peace and joy has been 
omitted therefrom, and that no needless items pertaining 
merely to earthly things have been permitted 
to intrude themselves and thus to dim in any measure 
the glorious record of the great love wherewith the 
Father loved us and the great redemption effected 
thereby. 

Coming more particularly to the appointed lesson: 
We see that the boy Jesus, although miraculously begotten, 
not of the will of the flesh, nor of man, but by 
the holy Spirit, was permitted to grow after the ordinary 
manner, gradually getting stronger physically 
and mentally, being filled more and more with wisdom, 
and giving evidence that God's favor was upon him. 
Quite probably Joseph, his foster father, was a carpenter, 
and if so the boy Jesus unquestionably, like other 
boys, would have more or less association in the carpenter 
shop, its tools, etc. It has been wondered by 
some that our Lord never referred to carpenter tools or 
work in any of his teachings or parables, and this has 
been urged as an objection to the thought that he was 
reared in contact with such work and tools. It matters 
not, so far as we can see. Our Lord addressed, 



not classes, but the masses; and quite probably the 
majority of the people at the time knew little about 
the carpenter's trade, tools, etc., even less than in our 
day. Hence it was not necessary or appropriate that 
our Lord should use as figures and parables that which 
would not be common to the experiences of all or nearly 
all of his hearers. 

In verse 41 Joseph is evidently referred to as one 
of his parents. This is not in conflict, however, with 
the previous statements of the same writer, to the effect 
that Jesus was begotten, not by Joseph, but by the 
holy Spirit. (Luke 1:30-35.) We would consider it 
proper enough today that any child should speak of 
his foster-father or stepfather as father without explaining 
the particulars of the relationship, and likewise it 
would be proper for the friends to speak of both father 
and mother as the parents of the child, as in this verse 
under consideration and previous verses.— Vs. 27. 

The narrative passes over the twelve years of Jesus' 
earthly life to tell of the incident of his tarrying 
behind after having been with his parents at the Passover 
Feast. The religious Jews from all parts of the 
country went to Jerusalem upon these feast occasions 
according to the directions of the Law, and naturally 
enough close relatives traveled in each other's company 
considerably. Thus it was that in the large concourse 
returning from Jerusalem after the feast a whole day 
elapsed before the boy Jesus was missed by those who 
properly had guardianship over him. Although admonished 
by the angel Gabriel that Jesus would in due 
time be greatly honored of God, and that he was born 
differently from others of the human family, nevertheless 
neither Mary nor Joseph seemed to have caught 
any considerable view of the greatness of the one 
whom they called their son Jesus. The prophecies 
spoken respecting him, like all the prophecies of olden 
times, were more or less vague, and could not be comprehended 
except by the aid of the holy Spirit, which 
had not yet been given. His mother Mary, however, 
we are told, kept all these things pondering in her 
heart, wondering what would be the consummation- 
little dreaming, we may be sure, how great her son 
must ultimately be made, according to the divine 
arrangement. 

The story of the boy of twelve amongst the Doctors 
of the Law, discussing the various types of the 
Law and what these probably signified, and what would 
be expected to be their antitypes, furnish us a very 
interesting picture, especially when we remember 
that the one who was asking the questions was the one 
who ultimately would give correct answers to those 
questions in his own experiences. We are not to assume 
that this precocious boy of twelve was unduly 
bold or forward; we are not to presume that he undertook 
to teach the Doctors of the Law. He was not yet 
anointed to preach, and was therefore not yet qualified. 



The narrative is that he was found hearing the doctors 
and asking them questions, and not attempting to 
teach them. There is a good suggestion here— especially 
for such as are not permitted to teach, by reason 
of sex or insufficient years— namely, that even a child 

R3291 : page 459 

can ask questions, and in asking the questions may 
suggest wonderful and powerful answers. 

We may reasonably assume that Jesus had previously, 
after the manner of the Jewish boys, attended 
the synagogue worship at his home, and that hearing 
there the Law and the prophets, the Scriptures of the 
Old Testament, read Sabbath after Sabbath, and having 
a perfect memory and an active mind, because not 
blemished by sin and the fall, the various questions of 
the Law and the various declarations of the prophets 
would greatly interest him— especially as he realized 
that he had left the Father and had come into the 
world to do a redemptive work. 

The Doctors of the Law doubtless remarked that 
they had never had such pointed questions asked them 
respecting the Law and the prophets, even by wise men 
of their day and by each other; hence they evidently 
noticed the precocity of this boy. As he asked 
questions which apparently showed that some of their 
interpretations were faulty and inconsistent, they in 
turn considered it not beneath themselves to ply the 
boy with questions. Doubtless they thought that after 
his questions had confounded them their questions 
would likewise confound the boy, but, according to 
verse 47, so far from confounding him they got their 
questions answered in such a manner as amazed 
them. Nevertheless we are to remember that our 
Lord Jesus could not have himself understood the full 
meaning of the Law shadows and the prophecies 
at that time— nor until after his anointing with the 
holy Spirit. (1 Cor. 2:14.) This little item gives us 
a suggestion respecting the ability of mind that would 
belong to a perfect boy. It gives us a suggestion respecting 
what we may expect of the ancient worthies 
when they shall be resurrected to human perfection, 
and the same suggestion also of what we may expect of 
the perfection of the Church in the glorious condition 
promised in the First Resurrection. 

It was natural enough that after missing the boy 
for four days his mother should upbraid him somewhat, 
and, taking Jesus' answer in its simplicity, we 
must suppose that he had been so absorbed with the 
opportunities and studies that the time had passed 
without his appreciating the trouble and inconvenience 
he was causing to others. 

"Wist ye not that I must be about my Father's 
business?" must have seemed strange enough even 
from so remarkable a boy. His parents did not fully 



comprehend the meaning of the words, but Mary set 
these apart with the other peculiar things to treasure 
up, hoping ultimately to see something that would 
fully justify the words, as she did afterwards see. 
After making this protest respecting his desire to be 
engaged in the heavenly Father's mission, studying 
his Word and teachings, and realizing that his sentiments 
were not understood or appreciated, and that 
really he was still properly under subjection to his 
parents, Jesus said no more, but went quietly with 
them to Nazareth and doubtless to his accustomed 
vocation. 

Our Lord could not begin his ministry because he 
was under the Law and bound by its every restriction. 
We note, however, his promptness to engage in his 
heavenly Father's business at the very earliest moment, 
as we read, "Now when Jesus began to be about 
thirty years of age he came to Jordan to be baptized." 
We who are not under the restraints of the Law Covenant 
but, on the contrary, are under grace, are not thus 
limited as to the time we may present our bodies living 
sacrifices upon the Lord's altar to be used in his 
service; hence we rejoice the more if we can find that 
at an early date we can give our hearts and our all to 
him who loved us and bought us with his precious 
blood. 

It was not the babe of Bethlehem that was to bless 
the world, nor the boy of Nazareth, nor the young 
man of Capernaum, but it was to be a full-grown man, 
a mature one, whose sacrifice would offset the sin of 
Adam, redeem him and his posterity and satisfy the demands 
of divine justice against the condemned race. 
So, then, while interested in everything pertaining to the 
divine character and plan, while interested to know 
how Jesus grew in stature and in wisdom as he approached 
the maturity of manhood at thirty years, 
while interested to know about his miraculous birth, 
our chief interest in all of these things is that they 
established our faith in him as the man Christ Jesus— 
that he was holy, harmless, undefiled and separate 
from sinners, and therefore able to make the atonement 
sacrifice— to give his own life a ransom, a corresponding 
price for the life of Adam, and thus for the 
life of the whole race of Adam, in his loins at the 
time of his transgression and thus sharers with him 
in his condemnation. 

We do well, therefore, to dwell less upon the birth 
and infancy of Jesus and more and more to grasp the 
precious themes set before us in the Gospel, of which 
the cross is the great point or center of interest. Similarly 
we regard all the followers of the Lord— not 
according to the flesh but according to the Spirit. 
True, we are glad to know of some that even before 
their consecration and baptism of the Spirit were noble 
minded, virtuous and irreproachable, and we have a 
measure of regret when we hear of some who had 



a contrary disposition to this; nevertheless our interest 
centers around the fact that they did turn from sin, 
did become the Lord's followers and that they have 
been begotten of his holy Spirit. In this we rejoice. 

R3292 : page 460 

Thus we know each other according to the Spirit as 
New Creatures in the Lord, and thus we know our 
Lord as the New Creature, as the Apostle suggests, 
"Though we have known Christ after the flesh, henceforth 
know we him so no more." Our special interest 
centers in our Lord from the moment of his anointing 
of the Spirit until he completed the work there begun 
three and one-half years later on the cross, crying, "It 
is finished." Our interest still holds beyond that 
point in the resurrection of our Lord from the dead, and 
the evidence thus given us that the begetting of the 
Spirit at his baptism became the birth of the Spirit at 
his resurrection, and that he was thus the first born from 
the dead, born of the Spirit to spirit conditions. Then 
our hope is to follow in his steps, and thus realize the 
promise that if we suffer with him we shall also be 
glorified together and share his Kingdom and his nature 
in glory. 



R3290 : page 460 

REQUESTS FOR PILGRIM VISITS, 1904. 

THE following information is very important in 
connection with arrangements for "Pilgrim" 
services. There is no charge for these services, 
nor for the traveling expenses; nor are collections 
ever to be taken up. We expect that all friends of 
the Truth will be glad to entertain the "Pilgrims," 
during their brief stays, with "such things as ye 
have;" but where circumstances do not permit this, 
the "Pilgrims" are prepared to pay their way. If you 
desire to be remembered by us when we lay out the 
routes for these "Pilgrims," please answer the following 
questions— on a postal card or on separate paper 
from your letter. You need not repeat the questions, 
but merely number the answers, thus: No. 1— Yes 
(or No). No. 2— Twice a week— Sunday and Wednesday 
(or whatever may be the truth). No. 9— 
Sunday at 3 p.m. at Bible House, 610 Arch Street; 
Wednesday 8 p.m., same place (or whatever may be 
the facts of your case). And thus with each question. 

If you cannot answer all the questions reply to as 
many as possible. Neglect to send in such requests 
will be understood to mean that the "Pilgrim" visits 
of 1903 were not appreciated, and that you think it 
undesirable to have them continued so far as possible 



in 1904. Requests of 1903 hold good until Jan. 31, 
'04. "Pilgrim" routes are laid out sometimes several 
months ahead and cannot well be altered; hence the 
necessity for our having full information and in 
time. 

ANSWER AS MANY AS POSSIBLE OF THESE QUERIES. 

(1) Are regular meetings now held in your vicinity? 

(2) How frequently? 

(3) What is the present average attendance? 

(4) Is request for Pilgrim visits the publicly expressed 
wish of those who usually attend meetings? 

(5) Will suitable places be secured for parlor meetings? 

(6) Can suitable room for a public meeting be secured? 

(7) At what date are leaders or elders chosen? 

(8) Give full name and address of regularly elected 
elders,— that arrangements for Pilgrim visits 

may be committed to them. 

(9) Give addresses of meeting-places and hours. 

(10) To whom should the Pilgrim be referred for 
entertainment? 

(1 1) If no regularly chosen elders, give at least one 
address in full, beside your own. 

(12) Give your own name and address in full (state if 
colored) and any other information likely to be 
useful. 

(13) If not on the railroad give name of proper station 
and your distance from it, and the direction. 

State also if a conveyance would meet the Pilgrim 
at station and return him to it. 



R3292 : page 460 

"JOHN THE BAPTIST AND THE PROMISED ELIJAH." 

-MATT. 3: 1-12. -JANUARY 10.- 

Golden Text:— "Repent ye: for the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand. 

IN the first three verses of our lesson are summarized 
the mission and work of John, our Lord's cousin, 
respecting whom the Master said, "Verily I say unto 
you, there hath not arisen a greater prophet than John 
the Baptist: and yet I say unto you that the least in 
the Kingdom of heaven is greater than he." John's mission 
was to announce that Kingdom, but it was not his 
privilege to become a member of it. He was the friend 
of the Bridegroom, as he expressed it. He heard his voice 
communing with the prospective betrothed, and he rejoiced 
as his friend, but not as a member of the betrothed 
class— the bride, the church of this spirit dispensation, 
the least one of whom enjoys a higher privilege and station 
than did this noble prophet: because even hereunto 



were they called and he called not. 

John from his birth was specially prepared to be a 
servant of the Lord in the capacity he filled, and on reaching 
the age of maturity he, being fully consecrated, at 
once began the service. He was six months older than 
our Lord, and hence began his ministry that much sooner. 
Abstaining from earthly comforts, he subsisted on the 
plainest of food, and was attired merely with a camel's 
hair girdle about his loins. His entire time and attention 
were thus left free for the mission before him. 

We do not advocate that all the Lord's people follow 
the example of John the Baptist in respect to their food 
and raiment, but we do believe that a good lesson of simplicity, 
consecration and zeal may be drawn from his 
course. We do believe that our Lord's faithful followers 
might copy John's example to the extent of avoiding the 

R3292: page 461 

extremes of social custom, not only in their clothing but 
also in their food. We advocate "things decent" and 
"things honest," as the Apostle expresses the matter— a 
simplicity of diet and wardrobe. Those who have consecrated 
their time and energy and influence to the Lord, and to 
the service of the Truth, will do well for their spiritual interests 
to be on guard against the fashions and follies of 
this world in these matters; and whether they eat or 
drink, or whatsoever they do or wear, that all may be 
done to the glory of the Lord— with a view to their own 
greatest usefulness in the divine service and in the service 
of the household of faith. 

John's mission was heaven-directed, and exactly at the 
right time to introduce the Lord Jesus to the Jewish nation, 
which had been waiting for him for centuries to fulfil 
in and through their nation the promise made to Abraham, 
"In thy seed shall all the families of the earth be 
blessed." Under divine guidance the affairs of Israel 
were, outwardly at least, more prosperous than they had 
been for centuries, and they were as a nation hoping that 
this return of God's favor might culminate in the sending 
of the promised King for the exaltation of their nation, 
and through its establishment in power the blessing of 
Israelitish rule in the name of the Lord should be extended 
to all the families of the earth. We are told that 
amongst the Jews "all men were in expectation of the 
Messiah."— Luke 3:15. 

No wonder then that so striking a figure as John the 
Baptist made an impression when he announced that 
God's Kingdom was soon to be established, and that he 
had been sent as an advance minister to proclaim it and 
to sanctify the hosts of Israel, that they might be prepared 
to be the hosts of the Messiah in the fulfillment of the 
long-expected promise to Abraham. By a new method 
those who accepted John's teaching were required to 
mark their reformation of life, namely, by an immersion 
of water, which symbolized their putting away of sin, 



their return to full covenant relationship with God, already 
established through Moses, the mediator of the Law 
Covenant. All who did this with true sincerity of heart, 
and not merely an outward form, undoubtedly were 
Israelites indeed, of the very kind that the Lord would be 
pleased to accept and own and bless under the spirit dispensation 
soon to be inaugurated. 

And thus we find that not only many of the disciples 
of Jesus were previously disciples of John, but also that 
many of those who received Jesus had previously received 
John. Nevertheless the majority of those baptized by John 
evidently had not been touched to the heart by his preaching, 
but merely nominally repented and instituted some 
slight reform. 

The movement became a popular one, and drew to it 
many who loved publicity and notoriety, and who are always 
foremost in the promise of godliness but are without 
its power, therefore without the sincerity, without the 
heart interest. John recognized the hypocrisy of many of 
the leading Pharisees and Sadducees who came to his baptism, 
and by some prophetic power was enabled to read 
their hearts in a manner which would be improper for us 
to do. This prophetic insight not only permitted John to 
call these false ones a brood of vipers, but permitted him 
also to intimate to them the great day of wrath that was 
soon to come upon that nation; "wrath to the uttermost," 
as the Apostle Paul speaks of it (1 Thess. 2:16)— the 
wrath of God which entirely swallowed up the nation and 
left the land almost desolate, scattering the people 
amongst all the nations. John would not baptize these 
until they showed by outward conduct a change of life, 
a change of heart and not merely a changed profession. 
He realized that this class in particular was stumbling 
over the promise made to Abraham, because they were his 
natural children without having Abraham's faith. John 
inspiredly warned them to the contrary, that God was 
quite able to establish his Kingdom in due time and to 
ignore them entirely. 

Verse 10 is a further part of his prophecy, declaring 
that fruitage was necessary on their part, and that any 
who did not bear the fruitage required would be cut off 
from divine favor and cast into the fiery trouble with 
which the Jewish age ended. 

Prophetically John realized that his mission was 
merely a preparatory one, and that somehow— how he 
could not understand— the coming one would have the 
power to immerse the faithful in the holy Spirit, in holy 
power, and the unfaithful with a baptism of fire, of trouble. 
Again he likened the ministry of Christ to that nation 
as that of a reaper who, with a winnowing fan, would 
separate the true wheat from the chaff, gathering the 
wheat to the garner of the Gospel age at Pentecost and in 
due time thereafter permit the fires— confusion, anarchy 
and the Roman legions— to entirely consume the chaff 
of that people in an unquenchable fire, a trouble that 
would not be extinguished, that the Lord would not help 



them out of, but that would utterly destroy their national 
polity. 

ELIJAH THE ARCHETYPE. 

Elijah the Tishbite, who in the days of King Ahab 
was used of the Lord to produce a reformation in Israel 
by which the priests of Baal and their power over the people 
were overthrown, was declared to be a type or likeness 
of a greater reformer who would precede Messiah to announce 
him and to make ready for his reign. Our lesson 
(verse 3) declares that John the Baptist was an antitype 
to Elijah. We see that he did do a work of reformation 
amongst the Lord's people at the first advent, the work of 
introducing the Messiah. Moreover, we remember that 
the disciples asked Jesus respecting this very prophecy 
saying, If you are the Messiah what answer should we 
give to the Jews who say that Elias (Greek for Elijah) 
must first come? Our Lord's answer was that Elias had 
already come (John the Baptist, the antitype of Elijah), 
and that the Jews knew him not, recognized him not, but 
had done to him whatsoever they pleased— imprisoning 
him and ultimately beheading him in prison. Our Lord 
further added "likewise shall also the Son of man suffer 
of them." "Then the disciples understood that he spoke 
unto them of John the Baptist. "-Matt. 17:10-13. 

As it was a surprise to the disciples that John, the 
Lord's forerunner and the antitypical Elijah, should be 
put to death, so likewise it was a surprise to them that the 
Master himself, instead of reigning, should be crucified. 
It took them some little time to understand that the Lord's 
coming as Messiah had two phases— one in humiliation, a 
suffering ending in death and apparent defeat, the other 
to follow later in power and great glory, to reign, to uplift, 
to bless Israel and all nations, thus fulfilling on the 
richest possible scale all the precious promises through all 
the holy prophets since the world began. It was appropriate 

R3293 : page 462 

also that the Lord should explain that there should be 
a second coming of Elijah— an antitypical Elijah on a 
still higher plane, of as much larger proportions than 
John the Baptist as the second coming of Messiah will be 
grander and more glorious than his first coming. 

John the Baptist himself understood that he was not 
fulfilling all the features of the antitypical Elijah— he 
evidently understood that there would be still a larger fulfilment 
by an archetype. This is evidenced from his 
own words when asked, Art thou Elias? And he saith, I 
am not. Art thou that prophet? And he answered, No. 
(John 1:21.) Our Lord's words explained the matter, 
showing that he was the antitypical Elijah in a certain 
measure, to a certain extent, to that the nation of Israel. 
Jesus said "This is Elias if ye will receive it." That is to 
say, to those who recognized his message and who obeyed 



it and who became the Lord's disciples, to these John fulfilled 
the work of Elijah (Matt. 11:14.)* Likewise Jesus 
is already the Christ, the Messiah, the King, to those few 
who have ears to hear and hearts to receive the message— 
the household of faith, the Church; but as John was not 
the Elijah promised to the world in general, so Jesus was 
not yet come as the Messiah. This coming of Jesus to the 
world as the world's King, to take unto himself his great 
power and reign, is the grand event toward which all 
prophecy points, and before that event takes place the 
an ti typical Elijah of still larger proportions than John 
the Baptist must bear a witness and message to the world. 

As we have already pointed out, Christ, the Messiah 
of the divine plan, includes not only Jesus glorified, the 
Captain of our salvation, the High Priest of our profession, 
Head over the Royal Priesthood, the glorious 
Church, but it includes also the Church which is his body, 
the under priests, the faithful which shall sit with him in 
his throne, be like him and share his glory and his divine 
nature. And as the anointed Christ of glory is a composite 
one of many members under one glorious Head 
(Eph. 1:18), so the antitypical Elijah is a multitudinous 
one. Jesus in the flesh was the Head of this great Elijah, 
bearing witness to and preparing the way for the coming 
of the great Messiah and Deliverer in due time. The 
Church, the body of the Christ in the flesh all down 
through this Gospel age, has been the body of the antitypical 
Elijah bearing witness all down through these centuries 
to all the families of the earth that God is to set up 
a Kingdom, and urging preparation therefor, urging a repentance 
from sin and reformation toward God, and being 
used of God as the instrumentality for the anointing of 
the most holy ones. Soon this work of the Church, of announcing 
the Kingdom and calling upon men everywhere 
to repent and reform, will be at an end, and the Kingdom 
will be introduced with power and great glory. Soon the 
work of baptizing the anointed ones and witnessing to 
their relationship to God will be at an end. Soon this 
antitypical Elijah, like John, will be restrained from further 
proclamation— and ultimately be cut off. Soon thereafter 
the Kingdom will be revealed. The faithful overcomers, 
as the wheat gathered from the sowing of this 
Gospel message of the Kingdom, will be gathered into the 
Kingdom, glorified with their Lord and Head, and soon 
thereafter the Kingdom itself will be manifested— "revealed 
in flaming fire"— in judgments, in troubles, distress 
of nations, etc. Soon the Messiah, Head and body, in 
glory, will so overrule in the affairs of men, that the nations 
of earth shall be broken to shivers as potters' vessels; 
and soon thereafter, on the ruins of the present 
reign of sin and selfishness under Satan, who shall be 
fully brought to naught and bound for a thousand years, 
all the blessed influences of righteousness, justice, truth 
and love will be set at liberty amongst the people, that the 
whole world may be blessed according to the divine promise. 
-Gal. 3:16,29. 



That the Church is the true antitype of Elijah is beyond 
question to those who have an understanding of the 
divine plan. As the Christ is composed of many members, 
and as the man of sin is a system of many members, 
so the antitypical Elijah is composed of many members. 
The three years and a half of no rain under the prophesying 
of Elijah the Tishbite are shown in Revelation to 
have their larger fulfillment in connection with the great 
Elijah archetype, the Church in the flesh. Those three and 
one-half years, a time, times and a half-time, or forty-two 
months or 1260 days, represent just that many years in 
the archetype, namely, the 1260 years that the true 
Church was persecuted and in a wilderness condition because 
of the power of papacy, which, in Revelation, is likened 
to the woman Jezebel who persecuted Elijah.— 
Rev. 12:14. 



'■•Millennial Dawn, chap. 8, Vol. II. 



R3293 : page 462 

"IN THE WINEPRESS ALONE." 

In the dusk of the sorrowful hours, 

The time of our trouble and tears, 
With frost at the heart of the flowers, 

And blight on the bloom of the years,— 
Like the mother voice, tenderly hushing 

The sound of the sob and the moan, 
We hear, when the anguish is crushing, 

"He trod the winepress alone." 

And, therefore, he knows to the uttermost 

The pangs that the mortal can bear: 
No mortal has pain that the Master 

Refuses to heal or to share. 
And the cries that ascend to the Loving, 

Who bruised Him for us to atone, 
Are hushed at the gentle reproving,— 

"He trod the winepress alone." 

How sudden so e'er the disaster, 

Or heavy the hand that may smite, 
We are yet in the grace of the Master, 

We are never out of his sight. 
Though the winnowing winds of temptation 

May forth from all quarters be blown, 
We are sure of the coming salvation— 

The Lord will remember his own! 

From him, in the night of his trial, 
Both heaven and earth fled away; 



His boldest had only denial, 
His dearest had only dismay. 

With a cloud o'er the face of the Father, 
He entered the anguish unknown; 

But we, though our sorrows may gather, 
Shall never endure them alone. 


