Another Milestone in Bible Education
THURSDAY, October 1, 1987, was another milestone in Bible education as offered by the worldwide Society of Jehovah’s Witnesses. It marked the inauguration of the new Ministerial Training School. The first class of 24 single brothers had reported for specialized training at the spacious Pittsburgh Assembly Hall at Coraopolis, Pennsylvania. Warmhearted householders among the Witnesses in the area had opened their homes to house these students for their eight-week period of training.
The students were registered in the morning, receiving their textbooks as well as opening instructions. At 7:30 that evening, the Assembly Hall was packed with 1,518 excited Witnesses eager to share in the official opening of this new school.
Albert Schroeder, a member of the Governing Body of Jehovah’s Witnesses, served as chairman. After song and prayer, he introduced Robert Dawson, city overseer of Pittsburgh. Brother Dawson warmly welcomed the 24 students to Pittsburgh and commended the 13 households that had volunteered to provide accommodations for them. He reminded the hosts that it would be their privilege to show the love that bears, believes, hopes, and endures all things. (1 Corinthians 13:7) He reminded the students that, as guests, they should manifest gratitude, humility, and helpfulness. In this way, friendships could result that could last a lifetime.
The students were then introduced, each giving his name and telling where he was from and what had been his career in Jehovah’s service. Some had come from Puerto Rico, Argentina, Canada, and Hong Kong, the rest being from the eastern part of the United States. Besides English, some of them speak Spanish, French, Italian, or Chinese.
The chairman next introduced James Hinderer as one of the instructors. Basing his remarks on Matthew 7:24, 25, Brother Hinderer stressed the importance of following through by doing things, by practicing what was learned. Thus, the students would be building their “house” on a rock-mass instead of shifting sands.
Randall Davis, the other instructor, next addressed the students. Basing his remarks on Isaiah 54:13, he noted that they would be taught by Jehovah so that they would be able to impart instruction to others. They would need to lean heavily on the true “helper,” Jehovah God’s holy spirit.​—John 14:26.
Albert Schroeder next spoke about how the evening reminded him of another milestone in Bible education. He recalled February 1, 1943, when a hundred students, four instructors (including him), and guests from Brooklyn assembled at South Lansing, New York, for the opening of the Watchtower Bible School of Gilead. Over the 44 years since then, Gilead School has had Jehovah’s blessing, as seen in the scattering of over 6,000 Bible-trained missionaries all over the earth. Brother Schroeder then noted the various subjects to be taught in the Ministerial Training School. Among these are Bible Teachings, Theocratic Organization (which focuses much attention on responsibilities of overseers and ministerial servants), God’s Administration, and Public Speaking. He also called attention to the various textbooks, including Reasoning From the Scriptures. In conclusion, Brother Schroeder noted the fulfillment of Isaiah 45:23, stating that religious opposers were, in effect, bending their knees to God because they have had to acknowledge that Jehovah’s Witnesses are right in the fields of medicine, law, and Bible chronology.
“Become Imitators of Paul” was the theme chosen by the next speaker, Karl Klein of the Governing Body. He showed how the apostle Paul repeatedly asked others to imitate him. He could do this, for he was imitating Christ. (1 Corinthians 11:1) The students were counseled to imitate Paul in his knowledge and skillful use of the Scriptures, in his bold and zealous preaching, in his unselfishness, in his modesty and humility, and in his patient endurance.
Theodore Jaracz, also a member of the Governing Body, then gave the inauguration talk, “A New School​—For What Purpose?” He began by observing that those who volunteered for this school agreed to serve wherever they would be needed in the worldwide field. With over three and a quarter million Witnesses in more than 54,000 congregations, there is a great need for qualified men to shepherd, teach, and take the lead in the great evangelizing work. Long ago, Jehovah foretold that he would provide “gifts in the form of men.” (Psalm 68:18) He did this in apostolic times, even as expressed by the apostle Paul at Ephesians 4:8-11. Today, Jehovah is also providing ‘gifts in men’ and is training some of them by means of this new school.
Brother Jaracz further noted that while all the students have natural abilities, Christ can enhance these. But that takes effort, and the speaker expressed confidence that the 24 students would make that effort. He pointed out that there can be no deviation from Jehovah’s righteous standards and said that those taking the lead can help by their personal example and influence. In many parts of the earth, there is a great need for qualified men to accept organizational responsibility. This need involves even large congregations that may have only one or two elders and a limited number of ministerial servants. So it is clear why a Ministerial Training School needed to be established​—to train unmarried elders and ministerial servants to serve anywhere in the worldwide field. As a result of their training, they will be better equipped to take care of the increase as shepherds.
All of Jehovah’s Witnesses can give thanks to God for making the Ministerial Training School possible. In conclusion, Brother Jaracz stated: “I am sure that all of us are united in the thoughts and feelings toward Jehovah as expressed at Psalm 79:13: ‘As for us your people and the flock of your pasturage, we shall give thanks to you to time indefinite; from generation to generation we shall declare your praise.’” Then, with song and prayer, this very memorable and happy occasion came to an end.

