Sounding Forth the Truth in the Austrian Alps
AUSTRIA is justly famous for its alpine meadows, the Vienna Woods, and the beautiful blue Danube. These and other well-known sights attract visitors from all over the world to this little country in the middle of Europe.
At the height of the tourist season last August, one group of nearly a hundred visitors from 17 foreign countries came to see something entirely different. They came to Vienna to attend the dedication of the new Austrian branch office of the Watch Tower Society, which directs the Kingdom-preaching work of Jehovah’s Witnesses in Austria.
From a Small Start
The Society’s first branch office in Austria was established in Vienna in 1923. That was less than ten years after an initial visit on four Watchtower subscribers in that city. By that time, the number of Kingdom proclaimers had grown to about a hundred. Then came World War II and Nazi occupation, a period of severe trials and hardship for the faithful brothers. But they persevered, and by the end of the war, their ranks had grown to over 700.
To look after the expanding work, a building at Gallgasse 44 was purchased in 1957. Over the years, several alterations were made to the building to accommodate the steady growth of the Kingdom work in the land. By 1973 the number of Kingdom publishers passed the 10,000 mark. Thus, in the early 1980’s, plans were made for expansion. Legal obstructions were eventually cleared away, and properties adjacent to the branch were obtained. In March 1983 an outside firm started on the framework. After that, the brothers took over and completed the building.
“Building Our Bethel”
Witnesses from all parts of Austria volunteered for the work. “We are building our Bethel” was the slogan. They came in cars and buses, up to 190 on one weekend. It was estimated that one in every five publishers in the country had a share in the work. Some were professionals​—architects, plumbers, and so forth. Others provided materials or offered the use of their workshops. Some even left their jobs and came to work for the entire construction period.
One brother who spent part of his vacation at the building site wrote: “I would like to thank you again for the wonderful week of vacation. It was like being on a tranquil island surrounded by the agitated sea of humanity. It was marvelous to enjoy such physical and spiritual refreshment without cost.” Even the little ones had a share. An eight-year-old wrote: “I have heard that you need money for the Bethel construction. I would like to send you some of the money I have saved. I enclose 200 shillings [about $16, U.S.] with this letter.” Others baked bread or picked berries and made juices for the volunteers. Publishers in the 36 congregations in Vienna provided refreshments every Saturday throughout the entire construction period.
Equipped for Further Increase
With the renovation of the original building and the addition of the surrounding new structures, the branch facility now is more than three times as large as before, with a total floor space of 58,000 square feet [5,400 sq m]. The facility includes 38 rooms, a dining hall for 80 persons, a new kitchen, and a laundry. A new Kingdom Hall is directly behind the original building. The administration offices and various other departments occupy the remainder of the buildings.
August 22, 1987, was the dedication day for the new branch facilities. Among the 282 guests were about one hundred visitors from 16 European branches and one from Korea. Also present were about a hundred Austrian old-timers who had survived the trials of World War II. The oldest among them was 102-year-old Maria Hack from Graz. An audience of 6,810 persons in seven other locations also heard the dedication program via telephone hookups.
Principal speakers on the dedication program included T. Jaracz and M. G. Henschel of the Governing Body of Jehovah’s Witnesses in Brooklyn, New York. Speaking on the theme “Branches That Bear Fruit to Jehovah’s Glory,” Brother Jaracz used John 15:2, 8 to show that ‘branches’ serve to Jehovah’s glory when they bear much fruit. The new branch facilities will contribute much toward producing fruit to Jehovah’s glory.
In the dedication discourse, Brother Henschel emphasized that Jehovah is a God of purpose. He has not only made known his purpose in advance but has also demonstrated that he has the ability to carry it out. In spite of Satan’s opposition, we can be confident that God’s purpose will be fulfilled.
As the program came to a close, all present felt encouraged to carry on the preaching work with renewed vigor. Clearly, the fine new facilities will equip the Austrian Witnesses to sound forth the Kingdom good news to an even greater extent in this alpine country, to the glory and praise of the Grand Creator, Jehovah.
[Pictures on page 23]
New building, viewed from the garden
Kingdom Hall
Main entrance
New building, with renovated structure on the right

