Be Versatile in Your Ministry
1 It has been said that variety is the spice of life. Often, a different approach to a subject can make it more interesting. This is no less true of our ministry. If we are not careful, our door-​to-​door presentations can easily become stereotyped. Repeating the same introductions over and over can become tiresome both to us and to the householders. Therefore, be versatile in your ministry. But how can you accomplish this?
2 Rather than saying something like, ‘Good morning. We are calling on our neighbors with the good news of the Kingdom,’ why not think of ways to vary your opening words? The Reasoning book contains a wealth of information about introductions. On pages 9-15, there are introductions on 18 different subjects. And there are two, three, or more possible introductions for most subjects.
3 If you are using the brochure “Does God Really Care About Us?,” this introduction from the section “Life/​Happiness” on page 13 may be helpful:
▪ “We’re speaking with people who are truly concerned about the quality of life today. Many wonder, Is a genuinely happy life possible? This brochure provides an encouraging and thought-​provoking point of view.” Open the brochure to page 25, and read one or two highlights from paragraphs 15 and 16.
4 Some Kingdom publishers​—younger and newer ones especially, but older ones as well—​have found that an interesting approach at the doors can be made using the tracts.
A young publisher might use the tract “Enjoy Family Life” and say:
▪ “I have a brief message for you about how God can bring families together in happiness. I would like to give you this tract entitled Enjoy Family Life.” The older publisher working along with the young person can then determine whether to add further thoughts or comments, depending on the reaction of the householder.
5 If the householder shows interest, the older publisher may say:
▪ “The Bible provides instruction on the proper role of the husband, the wife, and the children in the family arrangement. Since God is the Originator of the family, would you not agree that he is in the best position to tell us how the family should function? I would like to hear your opinion on the Bible’s frank counsel to family members.” Then read Ephesians 5:22, 23, 28-31.
6 If you feature the Revelation Climax book, why not highlight the positive view of the future set out at Revelation 21:3, 4? Then read paragraph 7 on page 303 of the book. Ask the householder if it is realistic to believe that God will fulfill these promises. A brief discussion of Bible prophecies that have already been fulfilled should strengthen the householder’s confidence in God’s ability to bless the human race.
7 All Kingdom proclaimers want to share in advancing theocratic interests, planting the seeds of truth where possible and cultivating the interest shown. Having done our part, we can happily leave any future growth in Jehovah’s hands. We have the best of news to share with our neighbors. By always being prepared, we can be versatile in presenting the Kingdom message and discerning in offering our publications.

