Celebrating the Death That Gives Hope of Everlasting Life
1 After sundown on April 6, 1993, we will celebrate the death of the Chief Agent of life. (Acts 3:15) Indeed, it is most fitting to commemorate the life and death of Jesus Christ. Our very hope of living forever rests on Jesus’ shed blood.
2 The Memorial underscores the significance of the death of Christ in the outworking of Jehovah’s purpose. That purpose includes providing the perfect human sacrifice needed to ransom Adam’s offspring, making it possible for billions to exercise faith and live forever on a paradise earth.​—John 3:16.
3 All lovers of truth and life look forward to celebrating the Lord’s Evening Meal in obedience to Jesus’ command. (Luke 22:19) What can we do individually to show our appreciation for the provision of Christ’s ransom sacrifice? In recognition of the significance of this celebration, good organization is very important. What preparations are you making for this special event?
4 Advance Preparation Necessary: Of course, we will ensure that every member of the family will be present. We should also prepare mentally by reading and meditating on the Bible passages noted on the 1993 Calendar for April 1-6. It would be appropriate to include information on the significance of the Memorial in our personal and family Bible study just prior to April 6. Plan to arrive early and stay a little while after the Memorial celebration is concluded so that you will be on hand to welcome new ones who may be attending for the first time.
5 In the weeks before the Memorial, invite all the interested persons you know to this celebration. Printed invitations have been included in the congregation’s yearly shipment of forms. When using these, remember to inform interested persons of the address and time of the local celebration. Prepare a list of those you wish to invite. Do all who wish to attend have transportation? If not, what can you do to assist them? If you have extra room in your car, why not ask the elders if someone needs transportation?
6 Because this is the most important celebration of the year and a large attendance is expected, the elders will need to make special advance preparations. (1 Cor. 14:40) A week or so before April 6, the elders will arrange for a special meeting with the brothers who will assist with the celebration, making sure that they understand the seating arrangements and how the emblems are to be passed. If you are assigned to assist during the celebration as an attendant or a server, be sure to follow the elders’ directions closely with regard to these matters. By checking the reminders in the box on page 7, the elders can make sure that all arrangements for the attendants, servers, emblems, and speaker are cared for well in advance.
7 Only a few of Christ’s brothers remain on earth today, and in the not-​too-​distant future, the celebration of the Lord’s Evening Meal will have come to its completion. (1 Cor. 11:25, 26) As long as it is our privilege to do so, may we fittingly keep celebrating the death that gives hope of everlasting life.

