Helping All Who Have Shown Interest
1 Our faith and our love for others will move us during March to help and invite to the Memorial all who have shown interest in the Kingdom message. Such ones need to be led to Jehovah’s provision of salvation, which centers on Christ’s ransom sacrifice.​—Heb. 9:28.
2 It is a good idea to make a list of those you want to invite to the Memorial. Include any who attend meetings occasionally as well as those who have previously studied or in other ways shown interest. Do not forget unbelieving mates and other family members. After making your list, put forth a special effort to call on each one. You may wish to ask the elders to assist you in making certain calls.
3 What can you say on the call?
After a warm greeting, you can say something like this:
▪ “In the past, you have shown an interest in spiritual things, and I thought that you would appreciate this invitation to a special event. [Hand householder the printed invitation to the Memorial.] The Memorial of Christ’s death is the only event that the Lord Jesus Christ commanded his followers to commemorate. We look forward to reviewing what Christ accomplished by his death and how we can gain everlasting life by means of it. Last year, over 11 million were in attendance at this special meeting. It would be a pleasure to have you join me in attending this year.” Be sure to write down the time and place your congregation will celebrate the Memorial. Also, offer to provide transportation if that is needed.
4 When newcomers attend the Memorial, they should be made welcome. Help them get acquainted with local publishers and introduce them to any interested persons who may live near their home. It will encourage them to learn that a number of people in their own neighborhood are interested in the truth. Invite them to sit with your family during the Memorial celebration if that is possible.
5 Of course, simply attending the Memorial will not assure them of salvation. But for many you invite, it could be their first step in exercising faith in Jesus’ shed blood. On the way home from the meeting, ask the visitor if he would like to attend the Public Meeting and Watchtower Study the following Sunday. Be warm and accommodating. Let him know that you are willing to help in any way you can. The sooner he begins to associate with us on a regular basis, the faster his spiritual progress will be. What joy and satisfaction we will have to survive “the great tribulation” along with many others we may have been able to help!​—Rev. 7:9, 14.

