Keep On Saying: “Come!”
1 What a marvelous provision Jehovah has made through Jesus’ ransom sacrifice! In this we find the basis for all that is needed to make people really happy. (John 3:16) Sad to say, however, very few have come to know and believe this truth firmly. Still, in his loving concern for mankind, Jehovah has arranged to make this good news known to people everywhere. Through his Son, Jesus Christ, he has extended to all the opportunity to find happiness and the hope of everlasting life.​—John 17:3.
2 For thousands of years, the identity of the One who would ransom mankind from sin and death was unknown. It was a “sacred secret” until Christ Jesus came and “shed light upon life and incorruption through the good news.” (Rom. 16:25; 2 Tim. 1:10) Jesus’ followers took up the proclamation of this good news in the first century; now we who are living in modern times have the exalted privilege of declaring this same good news. When we preach the Kingdom message, we are sharing with Jehovah God, Jesus Christ, and the brothers of Christ, who invite people of all walks of life by saying: “Come! . . . take life’s water free.”​—Rev. 22:17.
3 Of course, not everyone will listen to this good news. Very few pay close attention. Some rudely reject God’s servants, who invite them to benefit from life-​giving waters of truth. Even so, with strength from Jehovah, we persevere in this work. We know that our willingness to speak the truth and to help any who will hear is pleasing to Jehovah and brings his blessing.
4 In our ministry for March, we will encourage seekers of truth to read the Revelation Climax book and rejoice in the hope it sets forth. They will reap many blessings from doing so. After all, the book of Revelation is about the future​—their future and ours. Some who are now dedicated servants of Jehovah first became interested in the truth after reading explanations of the book of Revelation in one of the Society’s publications. Having recently made a detailed study of the Revelation Climax book ourselves, we can appreciate its importance to those of honest heart who are hungering for the truth. As we find such ones in our ministry, we will endeavor to point out one or two highlights from the Revelation Climax book to show them its value. Among other things, we can point to its clear explanations of Bible prophecies that have been fulfilled in this 20th century, such as the remarkable ride of the symbolic horsemen described in the sixth chapter of Revelation.
5 It is most appropriate for us to talk about Jehovah’s loving provisions for mankind as we prepare to celebrate the Memorial of Christ’s death on April 6. Whether people choose to listen or not, we persevere in our God-​given assignment to extend the heartening invitation to anyone that wishes: “Come! . . . take life’s water free.”

