Service Meetings for March
Week Starting March 1
Song 9
15 min: Local announcements and Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry. Call attention to New Publications Available on page 6. Point out any that may be of particular interest to local congregation. Highlights from Theocratic News, stressing how Jehovah’s blessing has been upon his servants in various parts of the earth. Local congregation experiences may also be included as appropriate.
15 min: “Keep On Saying: ‘Come!’” Question-​and-​answer coverage. When discussing paragraph 4, have well-​prepared publisher highlight a few points from chapter 42 of the Revelation Climax book, paragraphs 6-10, dealing with Revelation 21:4-6.
15 min: “Be Versatile in Your Ministry.” Talk, with some audience participation. Include two brief demonstrations when discussing paragraphs 3-5. When demonstrating the point in paragraphs 4 and 5, show how an older publisher and a younger one can work together in the door-​to-​door ministry as outlined in the article. Stress need to find joy in the ministry regardless of the results.
Song 114 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting March 8
Song 128
 5 min: Local announcements. Mention number of auxiliary pioneers already approved for April. Encourage those planning to pioneer to turn in applications early.
20 min: “Can You Do More to Honor Jehovah?” Question-​and-​answer discussion of paragraphs 1 to 10.
20 min: Assisting Our Bible Students. Audience discussion stressing need to render additional assistance to Bible students beyond just conducting the study. (1 Thess. 2:8) Take additional time to stimulate heartfelt desire to attend and participate at meetings. Build appreciation for organization and international brotherhood by explaining circuit assemblies, special assembly days, and district conventions. May view together the videos Jehovah’s Witnesses​—The Organization Behind the Name, Purple Triangles, and The Bible—​Accurate History, Reliable Prophecy, drawing students out on what they have learned from these. Progressively show how to share with others informally what they learn. Bible students who meet the requirements outlined on pages 98 and 99 of the Our Ministry book and who desire to participate in the public ministry should be helped to become unbaptized publishers. It is important to spend time during the study and afterward to help students develop a desire for dedication and baptism. Could show students pictures or newspaper articles about baptisms at our conventions. Demonstration: Publisher assists Bible student with informal witnessing. Selects field point from Live Forever book and says: “It would be good to share that point with some of your relatives or neighbors. You might mention to them that you learned from the Bible something that you did not know before.” Encourage publishers to assist Bible students, extending loving care even after baptism.
Song 123 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting March 15
Song 72
10 min: Local announcements, including accounts report and donation acknowledgments. Refer to “A Timely Message” at bottom of this column. Encourage all to take note of the title of the special talk on March 28 and to invite interested ones to attend.
15 min: “Helping All Who Have Shown Interest.” Talk with some audience participation. Consider the cited scriptures as time permits. Demonstrate suggestion in paragraph 3. Highlight the need to follow up on interest of those attending for the first time.
20 min: “Can You Do More to Honor Jehovah?” Question-​and-​answer discussion of paragraphs 11 to 22.
Song 32 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting March 22
Song 66
10 min: Local announcements. Question Box. Encourage all to plan for increased participation in the ministry during April.
20 min: Caring for the Elderly. Discussion and interviews by two brothers. At the “Light Bearers” District Convention last summer, a symposium presented on Sunday morning featured the theme “Caring for One Another in the Christian Household.” The concluding part “By Caring for the Elderly” emphasized the valuable contribution that older persons make to the family and the congregation. (Prov. 16:31) In what ways can we assist the elderly? The family has the primary responsibility. (1 Tim. 5:3, 4, 8, 16) Patience and compassion are needed. Grown children and grandchildren have the opportunity to show appreciation for the years of love, work, and care that parents and grandparents provided in the past. (w87 6/1 13-18) The congregation can also assist the older ones. Some may need help in qualifying for government assistance. Show hospitality by inviting them to meals and gatherings. (Rom. 12:13) Assist them in the field ministry. Provide transportation to meetings and assemblies. Help with their shopping and the care of their homes. (w87 6/1 4-7) Always show respect for older persons. (1 Tim. 5:1, 2) Interview one or two older persons who are good examples. Highlight how they benefited from kindness shown by their families and congregation.
15 min: Elder interviews three or four publishers who will be auxiliary pioneering in April or who have done so in the past. What has motivated them to pioneer? What plans have they made for April? How has auxiliary pioneering helped them personally? Encourage all who plan to auxiliary pioneer next month to obtain an application and turn it in soon.
Song 172 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting March 29
Song 105
10 min: Local announcements. Remind all to invite interested persons and Bible students to the celebration of the Memorial. Make good use of the printed invitations. Encourage publishers to print neatly on invitations the time of the Memorial and the address where it will be celebrated.
25 min: “Celebrating the Death That Gives Hope of Everlasting Life.” Question-​and-​answer coverage by presiding overseer. Include material in box “In Preparation for the Memorial.” After considering paragraph 5 of the article, have demonstration in which publisher invites Bible student to the Memorial. Publisher explains arrangement to read selected Bible texts during period of April 1-6 and offers to provide transportation.
10 min: Featuring The Watchtower during April. Highlight specific talking points and subjects that may be featured during month. Be alert to direct attention to points in the magazines on every occasion.
Song 87 and concluding prayer.

