Translating the Bible​—A Hazardous Task
BIBLE translating has an ancient history. Back in the third century B.C.E. Jewish scholars (seventy-two, according to tradition) began translating the five books of Moses, the Pentateuch, from Hebrew into Greek. Since then Bible translators have at times faced stiff opposition, often from ecclesiastical authorities. They have had to be willing to suffer and even to die for their work.
How the Bible came to be translated into one of the many languages in which it is now available, the whole or in part, is a story that would fill many pages. Therefore, we shall consider but a fraction of that story as it relates to the hazardous initial efforts in translating the Bible into two major languages​—English and Chinese.
THE BIBLE IN ENGLISH
It was in the late fourteenth century that the first English-language translation was produced. The name Wycliffe is attached to that version based on the Latin Vulgate. Just how much John Wycliffe actually translated is unknown today. It is certain, however, that there was fierce opposition to the translating work. Wycliffe and his associates incurred the bitter hatred of the religious authorities. Surprisingly, however, Wycliffe did not perish at their instigation but died of paralysis.
Thereafter the ecclesiastical authorities persisted in opposing the making of copies of Wycliffe’s translation. Finally, in 1408, a synod of clergy meeting in Oxford at the direction of Archbishop Arundel prohibited the use of the Holy Scriptures in English. Despite the clergy’s ban, the only English translation then available continued to be produced. Proofs of this are the nearly 200 copies of the translation (many of which were made after 1420) still in existence today. So hated was Wycliffe that his remains were dug up in 1428 and burned and then the ashes were cast into the river Swift.
Not until the early sixteenth century did Bible translation from the original languages (not the Latin Vulgate) into English have its beginning. William Tyndale undertook this task. Hoping to gain the backing of Bishop Cuthbert Tunstall, Tyndale went to London. But he failed to get the bishop’s support.
Though he remained in London, Tyndale soon realized that the attitude of the clergy was such that he could not translate the Bible in England. So he left for Germany in 1524. There, in Cologne, printing of his translation of the Christian Greek Scriptures (the so-called “New Testament”) began. When news of this reached them, the magistrates of Cologne put a stop to the work. Tyndale quickly left for Worms, where the printing of the Christian Greek Scriptures was successfully completed. Soon copies of this translation were being sold in England. Meanwhile Tyndale was continuing with his revising and translating work.
The ecclesiastical authorities in England were enraged. On May 4, 1530, copies of Tyndale’s translation were burned at St. Paul’s Cross in London. Toward the end of May a royal decree, backed by the ecclesiastical authorities, listed Tyndale’s translations of Scripture from Hebrew and Greek among pernicious books and stated: “Detest them, abhor them; keep them not in your hands, deliver them to the superiors such as call for them.” Regarding those not obeying this, the decree continued: “The prelates of the church, having the care and charge of your souls, ought to compel you, and your prince to punish and correct you.” Extensive efforts were put forth to destroy the translations in England and abroad.
One of the reasons that Tyndale faced such bitter opposition was that he did not stick to ecclesiastical terms but used words that conveyed the flavor of the original language. For example, he used “congregation,” not church; “overseer,” not bishop, and “love,” not charity. The fact that Tyndale’s choice of words was closer to the original Greek held no weight with the ecclesiastical authorities. Tyndale had even declared his willingness to change anything that might be found to be wrong or that could be more clearly translated. The religious authorities, however, simply did not want the Bible to be read by the common people, who would then be led to reject their ecclesiastical interpretations.
Not long thereafter Tyndale’s labors were cut short. A certain Phillips feigned friendship and then betrayed him to his enemies. Tyndale was then imprisoned in the castle of Vilvorde, near Brussels. In September of 1536 he was executed by strangling and burned.
Thus ended the life of a great scholar whose labors influenced Bible translation into English for almost the next 400 years. Tyndale had worked at the risk of his life, not for honor or personal recognition and position, but to make God’s Word available to the common man.
THE BIBLE IN CHINESE
It was in 1807, about 271 years after Tyndale’s execution, that Robert Morrison, a Protestant missionary, arrived in Canton, China. He was soon at work in translating the Bible into Chinese. Morrison had some knowledge of Chinese but needed further help with the language. Such help was not readily available, for translating the Bible into Chinese was a hazardous undertaking, punishable by death. Yet Morrison succeeded in getting the help of two Chinese scholars. One of them was so fearful of being apprehended and then put to death by slow torture that he carried poison in order to take his own life should he be caught.
The city of Canton was then open to foreigners only six months out of the year, requiring Morrison to leave every six months. During this time Morrison lived on the island of Macao. Having accepted a job as translator in the East India Company, he was able to return to Canton.
During the day, while working for the East India Company, Morrison cared for the routine business of trade and labored on a Chinese-English dictionary and a Chinese grammar. At night he and his Chinese helpers worked on translating the Bible.
In 1810 the book of Acts in Chinese was printed from handmade wooden blocks. Not wanting these blocks to fall into the wrong hands, Morrison buried them when he left for Macao. Great was his disappointment when, upon his return six months later, he discovered that termites had consumed the blocks.
Despite problems and setbacks, in 1814, Morrison, with the help of another missionary, William Milne, finished translating the Christian Greek Scriptures. By 1818 the whole Bible was translated.
Truly Bible translating has been a hazardous task. Translators like Tyndale and Morrison were dedicated, courageous men who were willing to persevere despite tremendous obstacles. What they did was in harmony with God’s will that all peoples have the opportunity to come to an ‘accurate knowledge of the truth.’​—1 Tim. 2:3, 4.

