From Our Readers
Merchants of Death  What sheer madness it is to give out one million million dollars per year for arms, while letting 14 million children die from the effects of hunger! (June 8, 1989) Awake! is doing a good job in exposing the monstrous crimes of arms dealers, while showing how the Creator will soon usher in a new world where peace and security will reign.
C. G. P., Federal Republic of Germany
Safe Food  I read with interest the article “Make Your Eating Safe” in the June 22, 1989, Awake! Nearly a year and a half ago, we traveled to a foreign country. I was amazed to learn that they washed dishes with hot, soapy water but never rinsed the soap suds off before drying the dishes. Since your article did not mention rinsing, does this mean that you do not think that this is necessary?
S. B., United States
Rinsing soapy dishes is an important hygienic step, and we appreciate your mentioning it.​—ED.
It’s surprising how many people leave food sitting at room temperature for hours at a time or don’t do simple things like washing their hands before cooking. I’ve been to your headquarters in New York, and I am always impressed with their extreme cleanliness. We all need to copy that example in our homes.
M. B., United States
Spectacular Sky-Shows  A short while ago, my four-year-old daughter asked me where thunder and lightning come from. I gave her a rough answer but couldn’t satisfy her curiosity. I turned to books on science but found the explanations too technical. Your article (May 22, 1989) answered my questions in a clear and understandable way. And what an impression those pictures made on my children! For several days afterward, their bedtime story was ‘thunder and lightning.’
P. G., Federal Republic of Germany
Genetic Revolution  I am studying horticulture and have just obtained my technician’s certificate. The subject for my exam was “Genetic Manipulations.” Imagine my surprise the next day when I read your article (July 22, 1989) on that very subject. The information you furnished was clear and up-to-date.
A. L., France
Tobacco  You explained the dangers of smoking in an articulate manner. (July 8, 1989) I am a smoker, and I find nothing objectionable in the habit. What’s wrong with smoking in a responsible manner? As the apostle Paul wrote, ‘I want to do one thing but cannot stop doing the other.’ Simply to point to the Scriptures on this question is, I believe, not enough.
S. S., Federal Republic of Germany
Medical research clearly shows that there is no “responsible” way to smoke. And the habit certainly is objectionable to most nonsmokers who are forced to breathe in noxious fumes. The article therefore gave both the Scriptural view of the matter and realistic, practical steps to help smokers overcome nicotine addiction. Taken in context, the apostle Paul’s words referred to above show that with divine help, one can be ‘rescued’ from wrongdoing. (Romans 7:21-25)​—ED.
National Parks  I really enjoyed reading the article “How to Enjoy Your National Parks.” (June 22, 1989) I now appreciate that the trails in national parks are for our safety. Someday, we will be able to go anywhere without fear because our Grand Creator has promised to make the earth a safe and beautiful paradise.
M. L., United States

