Announcements
HEAL SICKNESSES OF MIND AND HEART—Isa. 61:1-3.
Sicknesses of mind and heart—how common they are! Comparatively few are in “good health” spiritually. The words of the ancient prophet aptly apply to Christendom, so called: “The whole head is sick, and the whole heart faint.” (Isa. 1:5, AS) The plight of heathendom is even worse. The people have been given no help by their spiritual advisers, who have proved to be “physicians of no value.” (Job 13:4) The afflicted ones are put to many pains by these physicians, and though they spend all their resources they are not benefited but only get worse. However, increasing numbers are turning to the true Physicians, Jehovah God and Christ Jesus. They have been and are being benefited by Jehovah’s great healing program, and, in turn, are directed to bring healing to others, as outlined in Isaiah 61:1-3. This month Jehovah’s witnesses will share in the healing work by presenting good spiritual medicine in the form of a Bible-study aid book on a contribution of 50c. For additional information as to how you may share in the work contact the local Kingdom Hall of Jehovah’s witnesses.
HOPE OF LIFE FOR THIS GENERATION
Jehovah God has promised to bring into existence a new, righteous world. (2 Pet. 3:13; Rev. 21:1, 4) To gain that new world it is absolutely necessary to gain knowledge of Jehovah now, before the end of this present evil world. In proof of this we have God’s warning that he will bring “due punishment upon those who do not know God and those who do not obey the good news about our Lord Jesus. These very ones will pay the penalty of everlasting destruction.”—2 Thess. 1:6-9.
Why be destroyed at Armageddon for lack of knowledge? Why fail to realize the fondest hope of all honest-hearted persons—peace, contentment and radiant health in a friendly world? Lifesaving and life-giving knowledge is at hand for you. Where? In the Bible, the only source of true knowledge and wisdom. But to help you find those texts that reveal this vital information you need the inspiring bound book “New Heavens and a New Earth”. It will convince you of the reality of God’s promise of this righteous new world for our generation. Send only 50c for your copy today.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES FOR THE WEEKS
December 1: Wise Sayings for the Modern Day, ¶1-20. Page 657.
December 8: Wise Sayings for the Modern Day, ¶21-24, and Safeguarding the Heart with Wisdom. Page 663.

