Heal Sicknesses of Mind and Heart
“THE whole head is sick, and the whole heart faint. From the sole of the foot even unto the head there is no soundness in it.” Those words, first spoken regarding the professed people of God in Isaiah’s time, apply with even greater force to Christendom today. Its sorry condition of false worship and selfishness can well be described as sickness of mind and heart.—Isa. 1:5, 6, AS.a 
Who is responsible for this diseased condition? None other than Satan the Devil. Like a sinister, fiendish physician, he uses every means at his disposal to blind all minds to the truth and to corrupt all hearts. Especially does he use false religion, and he appeals to selfishness to bring about spiritual sickness. And worst of all, most of his victims are not even aware of their spiritually sick condition.
However, there are true physicians who have a sure remedy for all this spiritual sickness, Jehovah God and Jesus Christ. They know what ailing mankind needs to get well, and that is why the psalmist could exclaim: “Bless Jehovah, O my soul, and do not forget all his doings, him who is forgiving all your error, who is healing all your diseases.”—Ps. 103:2, 3.
As Christian ministers in the New World society we have received spiritual healing of mind and heart. How have these great spiritual physicians brought about our healing? By means of the light of truth, which makes clear the meaning of God’s Word and which is shining ever brighter and brighter, even as foretold at Proverbs 4:18. It is spiritual “eyesalve” that restores our vision; it is a powerful spiritual medicine.—Rev. 3:18; John 8:32.
As we well know, this spiritual healing of mind and heart did not take place miraculously overnight. No, it took a long time to make our minds over and to fortify our hearts with truth. Actually, years of spiritual healing were involved, necessitating much study and spiritual refreshment under the loving direction of these Master Physicians.—Rom. 12:2.
Once having been healed, we must keep up with this great spiritual rejuvenation program now under way. We may not deceive ourselves, thinking we are fully restored and can therefore cut loose from Jehovah’s spiritual healing organization; otherwise, in no time, we will have a relapse into still worse spiritual sickness.
Nor is that all. Having been healed ourselves, we have the obligation to extend spiritual healing to others, even as we read at Isaiah 61:1-3 (AS): “The Spirit of the Lord Jehovah is upon me; because Jehovah hath anointed me to preach good tidings unto the meek; he hath sent me to bind up the broken-hearted,” “to comfort all that mourn,” and “to give unto them a garland for ashes, the oil of joy for mourning, the garment of praise for the spirit of heaviness.”
Jesus applied these words to himself and fulfilled them by zealously preaching at every opportunity. As his dedicated followers we must likewise faithfully use every opportunity to heal sicknesses of mind and heart in others. And in endeavoring to do so, let us show patient endurance, not expecting miracles, but thankful for any manifestation of gradual healing of mind and heart. Thereby we not only bring spiritual health to others but aid ourselves to remain spiritually well. There is no work on earth bringing greater happiness. As a dedicated Christian minister of Jehovah, are you realizing the blessings of this work to the full?
[Footnotes]
For details see The Watchtower, March 1, 1956.

