From Our Readers
Tolerance  I am 22 years old, and I want to thank you for the series “Tolerance—Has the World Gone Too Far?” (January 22, 1997) Young Christians have to face many challenges. These articles encouraged me not to go to extremes and strengthened my determination to serve Jehovah despite the world’s pressures.
M. B., Italy
The Raven  I simply loved the informative article “The Raven—What Makes It Different?” (January 8, 1997) I am 18 years old and was just hired as a part-time naturalist at a local nature center. Among the animals we house are two beautiful ravens. I have found them to be exactly as your article described—very intelligent. I plan to share the article with my coworkers.
J. C., United States
The information you provided was very factual and interesting. That birds of the crow family are notorious thieves is well-known here on the campus of the university that I attend in Ghana. It is on record that the crows here will steal anything—from fish to soap. It has even been reported that crows have opened some students’ saucepans and eaten their food!
F. A. A., Ghana
Kitchen Fun  Thank you for the article “The Kitchen Can Be Fun.” (January 8, 1997) I too have benefited from conversations held in the kitchen. While peeling onions and potatoes, my mother would teach me to love Jehovah and encourage me to serve him fully. These kitchen conversations proved especially valuable during a difficult period in which my father opposed us religiously. Now my mother and I have had the joy of seeing my father become a servant of Jehovah. Also, I’ve learned how to cook several tasty dishes!
A. M. M., Italy
I work as a residential cook for an employer who is in the entertainment industry. I have thus had many opportunities to share spiritual food with visitors—including some celebrities—while working in the kitchen. I keep some Bible literature in a kitchen drawer. On one occasion I got into a Bible discussion with a visitor. He later came back into the kitchen for further discussion. While I was busy frying a chicken, he read out loud from my copy of the book Revelation—Its Grand Climax At Hand! Yes, you are right. The kitchen can be fun!
A. R., United States
Confessing Sins  I serve as a congregation elder, and I want to express my appreciation for the article “Young People Ask . . . Should I Confess My Sin?” (January 22, 1997) This article moved a number of youngsters to confess serious transgressions committed some time ago. It was a joy to see that after receiving loving help, these young people reestablished their relationship with Jehovah. They are determined to keep themselves clean.
O. B., Italy
The article helped me to realize that keeping silent can be very harmful. Confessing may cause shame and embarrassment, but when you confess your sin to Jehovah and to your parents, you experience a stronger, closer relationship with them.
B. K., Guyana
The article came exactly when I needed it. It helped me to see that I had to tell my parents and the congregation elders what I had done. I felt as if the article were written for me. When I finally told them about my problems, I felt so much better!
A. A., United States

