The Memorial Season—An Opportunity for Increased Activity!
 1. What reasons do we have to consider increasing our activity during March, April, and May?
1 Can you increase your share in the ministry during the upcoming Memorial season? Many places will experience good weather and longer hours of daylight. Some publishers will have vacation from work or school that they can use for the ministry. Beginning on April 2, we will enjoy a special campaign to invite interested ones to attend the Memorial with us on April 17. Thereafter, we will endeavor to develop the interest of those who attended and invite them to the special talk that will be given during the week of April 25. Indeed, there are many reasons to consider increasing our activity during March, April, and May.
 2. What is one excellent way to do more in our ministry?
2 Auxiliary Pioneering: One excellent way to do more is to auxiliary pioneer. Since we are all busy, this generally requires planning ahead and making adjustments in our schedule. (Prov. 21:5) Perhaps you can postpone some nonessential activities in your normal routine. (Phil. 1:9-11) Why not express your desire to pioneer to others in the congregation to see if they can join you as an auxiliary pioneer?
 3. How may families arrange to increase their activity?
3 During your next Family Worship evening, it would be good to discuss your goals as a family. (Prov. 15:22) With cooperation, perhaps some members of the family can auxiliary pioneer one or more months. What if you determine that this is just not possible? The family can still arrange to increase their activity by sharing in the ministry on some evenings or by staying out longer on the weekends.
 4. What blessings will result from increasing our activity in the ministry this Memorial season?
4 Jehovah takes note of all we do to serve him and appreciates our sacrifices. (Heb. 6:10) Joy results from giving to Jehovah and to others. (1 Chron. 29:9; Acts 20:35) Could you increase your activity this Memorial season and reap the increased joy and blessings that result?

