
Improving Our Skills in the Ministry—Making a Record of the Interest




“Pay constant attention to yourself and to your teaching.” (1 Tim. 4:16) This inspired counsel from the apostle Paul to Timothy indicates that, whether we are new or experienced, we should endeavor to make progress. To help us do that, a new series entitled “Improving Our Skills in the Ministry” will appear in Our Kingdom Ministry. Each article will discuss an important skill and provide some suggestions on how to develop it. During the month, all are encouraged to give that skill special attention. After the month concludes, a Service Meeting part will give us an opportunity to comment on how we benefited from concentrating on that skill. This month we are encouraged to work on making a record of the interest.
Why Important: To fulfill our commission, we must do more than preach. We must return to those who show interest and teach them, watering the seeds of truth that we have planted. (Matt. 28:19, 20; 1 Cor. 3:6-9) This requires finding the person again, talking about his concerns, and building on our previous conversation. Therefore, when we find interest, it is necessary to make a record of it.



How to Do It:
Make sure that you have tools in your witnessing case for recording interest. Keep your records neat, well-organized, and up-to-date. Make a record as soon as you finish the call.

Write down information about the householder. What is his name and contact information, such as his address, phone number, or e-mail address? What did you observe about him and his family that may be significant?

Write down the details of your conversation. What scriptures did you read? What did he say about his beliefs? What literature did you leave? Record the time, the day of the week, and the date of the visit.

Write down what you plan to do next time. What did you promise to discuss? When did you say you would return?

Update your record each time you return. No harm is done if you write down more information than you need.




Try This During the Month:
When making a record, tell those with whom you are working what you are writing down.



