
Make This Memorial Season a Joyful One!




 1. What is one way to increase our joy during this Memorial season?
1 Would you like to increase your joy during March, April, and May? One way to do that is to expand your ministry and, if possible, auxiliary pioneer. How will this add to your joy?
 2. How will expanding our ministry result in increased joy?
2 Increase Your Joy: Jehovah created us with the capacity to experience joy and satisfaction from worshipping him as we fulfill our inborn spiritual need. (Matt. 5:3) He also designed us in such a way that we can gain happiness from giving to others. (Acts 20:35) The ministry allows us to do both—to worship God and to help people. It stands to reason that having an increased share in the ministry results in even greater joy. In addition, the more we preach, the more skillful we may become. As we gain skill, we build our confidence and minimize our nervousness. We will have more opportunities to give a witness and to start Bible studies. All of this makes the ministry more enjoyable.
 3. Why will March and April be especially good months to auxiliary pioneer?
3 March and April will be especially good months to auxiliary pioneer because we can choose either a 30- or a 50-hour requirement. In addition, beginning Saturday, March 22, and continuing until the Memorial on Monday, April 14, we will participate in an enjoyable campaign to invite others to attend the Memorial. Congregations will be abuzz with excitement, as many will be working “shoulder to shoulder” to cover as much of the territory as possible in the allotted time.—Zeph. 3:9.
 4. If we want to auxiliary pioneer, what should we do?
4 Prepare Now: If you have not already done so, take time to review your schedule and see what adjustments you can make to expand your ministry during one or more months. Make it a matter of prayer. (Jas. 1:5) Talk about it with your family and others in the congregation. (Prov. 15:22) You may find that despite health challenges or a full work schedule, you too can experience the joy that comes from auxiliary pioneering.
 5. What will result if we expand our ministry this Memorial season?
5 Jehovah wants his servants to be joyful. (Ps. 32:11) By exerting ourselves to expand our ministry this Memorial season, not only will it increase our joy but it will also bring joy to our heavenly Father.—Prov. 23:24; 27:11.




