Announcements
LORD’S EVENING MEAL
In obedience to the instructions given by Jesus Christ, Jehovah’s faithful servants will be assembling on March 22, after 6 p.m. Standard Time, to commemorate the 1937th anniversary of his death. You are invited to be present at this most important occasion, known as the Lord’s Evening Meal or Lord’s Supper. (Luke 22:19, 20; 1 Cor. 11:20-34) Though there will be relatively few who, as heirs of the heavenly kingdom, will partake of the emblematic bread and wine, those of the “other sheep” who are present as respectful observers will be benefited spiritually by the discussion that will take place and by the wholesome association with others of like precious faith.
AN ALL-TIME HIGH!
Since the beginning of their publication, The Watchtower and Awake! have been growing in popularity, as evidenced by their mounting circulations. Now, the combined circulation of these companion magazines is 12,100,000 copies each issue. This growth has paralleled a mounting interest in the Bible on the part of honest-hearted persons who are concerned with the rising tide of delinquency and immorality and the failure of the orthodox religions to provide an adequate solution. For many years The Watchtower has warned of the approach of these unparalleled conditions, citing Bible prophecies in support, and Awake! has repeatedly produced factual evidences of the dissolution of the present system of things, while both magazines have consistently maintained a unique position as true champions of the Bible and of God’s Messianic kingdom as the only hope for beleaguered mankind. Read them regularly. Both for one year, $2. Send now and receive free six timely booklets on Bible subjects.
FIELD MINISTRY
When a building is constructed, diligent effort is exerted to make certain that there is a good foundation. Likewise a solid, right kind of foundation is necessary on which to build Christian faith. Thus what Jesus Christ taught and did for us serves as the primary foundation for true faith. (Eph. 2:20) Ever since this journal was first published in 1879, The Watchtower has endeavored to help others build upon this right spiritual foundation. To build up faith in others during the month of March, Jehovah’s witnesses will happily offer a year’s subscription for The Watchtower, along with three booklets, for $1.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES FOR THE WEEKS
March 22: What Is the Future of Today’s Youth? Page 140. Songs to Be Used: 77, 73.
March 29: Youths, Prove Yourselves Christ’s Disciples. Page 147. Songs to Be Used: 8, 18.
April 5: Youths, Do You Respect Your Parents? Page 153. Songs to Be Used: 26, 14.

