What Are You Doing About What You Have Learned?
AN OFFICE worker was asked whether any letters of appreciation had been received from people who have read the book The Truth That Leads to Eternal Life, released by the Watch Tower Society in June 1968. His response was enthusiastic. The book has been received with extraordinary appreciation.
Interest in it has been so great that it has been difficult to keep the book in stock. More than 23,095,000 bound volumes in thirty-one languages have been printed in just the first year and a half. Already, in number of copies published, it is second only to the Bible in the Western world. And this represents just a beginning!
Readers’ reactions are overwhelmingly favorable. They say: “The Truth book is a gold mine of information”; “an eye-opener”; “the best book I have ever read on the Bible”; it “helps one very quickly to see the difference between true religion and false religion”; “it presents the information so clearly and right to the point that I was just compelled to arrange my life to serve Jehovah”; “this is the truth!”
The Truth book was not designed mainly for sheer pleasure in reading, although much pleasure can be gained by simply reading it. The book is primarily a Bible-study aid. Its purpose is to make plain what true religion is in this world of little faith and many religions. The book sets forth from the Bible the right way to worship God. It is written in a simple, clear and pointed way so that any sincere reader can see whether his own religion or way of worship is right or not.
But, doubtless, the book’s most outstanding feature is the way it lends itself to home Bible study and family Bible study. In fact, when Jehovah’s witnesses offer it to the public, they also invite the contributor to accept a free, six-month systematic course of Bible study with the aid of this book in the householder’s own home. To date, literally hundreds of thousands of people have availed themselves of this provision, with rewarding benefits to themselves.
THE REWARDING EFFECT OF BIBLE STUDY
The blessings of a Bible study can be seen in the changes for good that it makes in people’s lives. (Heb. 4:12) For example, a woman, after only three studies in the Truth book, became aware that God is to be worshiped “with spirit and truth.” (John 4:23, 24) She noted particularly such Scripture texts as “guard yourselves from idols” and “flee from idolatry.” (1 John 5:21; 1 Cor. 10:14) The very next week she removed the religious pictures from her walls, pictures that she and her family had idolized for years. Why did she do this? Her reply: “Only God is to be worshiped.”​—Matt. 4:10.
A Catholic woman who was very active in church affairs went to her priest and asked him about the use of God’s name. “He acknowledged God’s name to be Jehovah,” she said, “but he felt it was not necessary to use it. What about images and medals? He said they were all superstitions. He encouraged me to read the Bible, as he said, ‘there is power in it. If it puts the love of Jesus Christ in your heart to become one of Jehovah’s witnesses, then you must do it.’ Two weeks later I dropped completely out of the Roman Catholic Church when I realized I couldn’t worship in a hypocritical way.”
A Sunday-school teacher, after a few studies in the Truth book, went to her minister and informed him of her desire to become one of Jehovah’s witnesses. She resigned as the Sunday-school teacher and asked that her name be removed from the church membership rolls. Her husband also had his name removed.
A drug addict tells about living communally with six other addicts when a minister of Jehovah’s witnesses began to study the Bible with him. “What a wonderful change it made in our lives!” he says. “The so-called drug-induced ‘spiritual experiences’ look hollow when compared to any hour of our present lives. Now eight months have passed and my wife and I are eagerly approaching baptism, and are participating in the Theocratic Ministry School and the field ministry.”
These are but a few of many instances of the marvelous good that results from a Bible study. But before reaping the benefits, there had to be spiritual growth. Each student had to manifest a sincere desire to bring his life into harmony with God’s will, and then the blessings followed.
WHAT PROGRESS HAVE YOU MADE?
What about you? What have you done with the book The Truth That Leads to Eternal Life since you received it? If you have read the book, you have done fine and, no doubt, you have enjoyed it. But the book has infinitely more to offer. It holds out the Bible’s promise of the grand rewards for a life lived in harmony with God’s will and purpose. This can mean rich happiness to you now and eventually everlasting life.​—John 17:3.
If you are having a study in the Truth book, what has been your progress? Are you satisfied with what you are learning? Has it made a change in your life? The Christian apostle Paul encouraged the young man Timothy to ponder over the things he learned: “Be absorbed in them, that your advancement may be manifest to all persons. Pay constant attention to yourself and to your teaching. Stay by these things, for by doing this you will save both yourself and those who listen to you.” (1 Tim. 4:15, 16) Are you following this inspired advice? Are you pondering over the things you have learned and are learning? Are you absorbed with their meaning to you and your way of life? These are important questions, because they reveal to what extent one is allowing the truth of God’s Word to activate his life.​—2 Cor. 13:5.
If one is dissatisfied with the progress he is making spiritually by means of his Bible study, what, then, might be the problem? Quite often the difficulty lies in the matter of personal interest and preparation. If anyone does not prepare his lessons beforehand, underlining the answers and thinking of ways to express in his own words the thoughts learned, then progress will be slow. Says a minister concerning a young couple with whom he began a home Bible study: “Each week they studied their lesson carefully and discussed the information with each other in preparation for our study.” This couple made rapid progress spiritually, and you can see why.
Ministers of Jehovah’s witnesses who offer their time and services freely to conduct Bible studies in the homes of people, do so because they believe that people who request such studies sincerely desire to worship and serve the true God, Jehovah. But if the student does not prepare his lessons in advance, what is a minister to think? Can he believe that such one is sincere? Does such a student fully appreciate the effort and sacrifice that the minister is making in his behalf? One might even doubt the student’s awareness of what a unique and precious privilege it is to learn about the Creator of the universe. If one’s progress is slow, reflect on these thoughts. Be absorbed in them.
When persons respond wholeheartedly to a Bible study, few things in life are more enjoyable to a minister than that. He literally thrills in the privilege of helping others grow in spiritual understanding. When the student prepares in advance and freely comments in his own words, what joy is generated! For this reflects interest, advancement and spiritual growth.​—1 Thess. 1:6, 9, 10.
ARE YOU APPLYING WHAT YOU LEARN?
Often progress is hindered, not because of a failure to learn, but because some lack the will to apply to their lives what they learn. They fail to realize that there must be a close relationship between God’s Word and the way they live. Are you applying in your life the things learned from God’s Word? Remember, there will be little or no progress unless this is done. “Indeed, as the body without breath is dead, so also faith without works is dead.”​—Jas. 2:26.
What are some of the things you should find yourself doing? Having learned who God is and that it is possible to approach him in prayer, are you really taking advantage of this marvelous provision? Are you praying to Jehovah?
Having learned what the Bible says about the use of images and idolatry, what have you done to bring your life into harmony with these requirements for pure worship?
Chapter seven in the Truth book is entitled “Are There Wicked Spirits?” Are you applying what you have learned by avoiding those practices that the demons use to mislead mankind?
And, too, if you as a result of your study of the Bible have found that the church with which you have associated has not been teaching you the truth of God’s Word, are you still attending church or allowing your membership to stand? If so, why? Can remaining a part of such an organization be pleasing to God? (Jas. 1:6-8) In the examples cited earlier, in each instance those persons applied to their lives the truth learned from their Bible study. They made the necessary changes. Then advancement was made manifest.
ARE YOU ATTENDING MEETINGS?
A minister writes about a young woman he had met in the door-to-door ministry and with whom he began studying the Truth book: “The very first study was just amazing! It was very evident this person was going to make rapid spiritual progress! On the second study we covered two chapters. By the time the third study was conducted she was attending all the Thursday and Sunday meetings. This was the truth, she knew it and she wanted it.”
Those who make fast spiritual progress invariably are those who attend congregation meetings. They take pleasure in the association of God’s people and look forward to being with them at their local Kingdom Halls. This is a fine thing, because it is in fulfillment of the Scriptural injunction that says: ‘Do not forsake the gathering of yourselves together, as some have the custom, but encourage one another, and all the more so as you behold the day drawing near.’ (Heb. 10:24, 25) Those who follow this advice unquestionably have God’s blessing.
Have you attended a meeting of Jehovah’s witnesses yet? If not, why? Has it been inconvenient for you to do so? Do you think you might feel out of place? Are you perhaps concerned about what others in the community might think? Really, there is no valid reason to hold back. If Jehovah’s witnesses are truly God’s people, then it is vital that you associate with them. And certainly there could be no better way to find out precisely what kind of people they are than by going to their meetings where it is possible to come in direct contact with a cross section of them.​—Mark 8:38; Matt. 25:40.
ARE YOU SHARING THE GOOD NEWS WITH OTHERS?
Jesus Christ said: “There is more happiness in giving than there is in receiving.” (Acts 20:35) Now, what have you learned that you could freely share with others? The truth of God’s Word. And what could be more pleasant and precious to give to relatives, friends and neighbors than words that can mean everlasting life to them?
If you have enjoyed what you have learned, have you tried as yet to share it with anyone? Why not do so? “For with the heart one exercises faith for righteousness, but with the mouth one makes public declaration for salvation.” (Rom 10:10) Sharing the good news of God’s kingdom is that vital.
THE PRINCIPAL POINTS TO REMEMBER
There are primarily four things to keep in mind: the first has to do with your preparation for your home Bible study. How much of it are you doing? The Bible principle applies here: “He that sows sparingly will also reap sparingly; and he that sows bountifully will also reap bountifully.” (2 Cor. 9:6) If one does not put forth much effort, then he should not expect much in return. The greater the effort, the greater the spiritual blessing received.
The second point is that things learned from God’s Word must also be applied in one’s daily life. As the disciple James says: “If one knows how to do what is right and yet does not do it, it is a sin for him.” (Jas. 4:17) So applying the things learned plays a great part in Christian growth and living.
Thirdly, there should exist a desire to associate with God’s people. One should want to attend the meetings provided by the local congregation. Such association shows that one desires to identify oneself with the people of God.​—Ps. 22:22.
And lastly, if what is learned leads to everlasting life and is available to all, the unselfish Christian thing would be to share it. And the most logical persons with whom to start sharing it would be one’s loved ones, relatives and neighbors.​—John 1:35-42.
Now ask yourself, “What am I doing about what I have learned from my study of God’s Word the Bible?” Are you pleased with the progress you have made? If Yes, happy are you! If adjustments need to be made, then make them. “Exert yourselves vigorously to get in through the narrow door,” said Jesus, “because many, I tell you, will seek to get in but will not be able.” (Luke 13:24) That narrow door leads to everlasting life. Do all in your power to realize the promised hope of eternal life.

