From Our Readers
Hyperactive Children
Thank you for writing the article about hyperactive children. (June 8, 1984) I have a 15-year-old son who is hyperactive. I am grateful that this subject was discussed because people who don’t live with this situation can’t fully understand the child, and they believe that he is spoiled and should be disciplined more severely. In my case, I am a single parent and this makes it more difficult to cope with the problem. My son has overcome some of the symptoms of hyperactivity but is still struggling with others, though they are not as severe as they were years ago.
A. H., New York
Children of Divorced Parents
My name is Claudia (13-14 years old), and I read in Awake! (Italian edition) that children whose parents are divorced are so miserable! (‘We Loved You Even Before You Were Born,’ July 8, 1984, English edition) My parents are divorced, but I do not feel like a “parcel.” Both of them have another family, and I’m living with my mother, but Saturday and Sunday I stay with my father. First of all, I accept their decision on divorce; second, even if sometimes I have to make sacrifices, I make them because I love my parents. Maybe there are children who are worse off than I am, but do you think that they are better off living with parents who quarrel all the time?
C., Italy
We commend you for being able to cope with your situation. However, as you suggest, there are many children of divorced parents who are not as well off as you are. In fact, the weight of evidence shows that children of divorced parents have many more hardships to contend with than do those whose parents stay together. Our stand on divorce is based on Jesus’ words: “I say to you that whoever divorces his wife, except on the ground of fornication, and marries another commits adultery.” (Matthew 19:3-9) We do not believe that the only options for a family are for the parents either to get a divorce or to live together and quarrel all the time. There is a desirable third option​—that of the parents applying the principles of God’s Word in their marriage, unselfishly making adjustments and staying together, putting up with one another in love and thus building a happy, united family.​—ED.
Missing Children
I am nine years old. I am writing to compliment you on the article “My Child Is Missing!” (April 22, 1984) I really enjoyed the tips on what to do. We went over it as a family, and the very next day a stranger drove up to me on the street and asked if I wanted a ride. I could not hear him because it was raining, and I said, “What?” He asked again if I wanted a ride, and I said, “NO!” He put an angry look on his face and drove away. I ran home and told my mother, and she called the police. The policeman came to our home and asked for a description of him. Everyone we told was alarmed. But I want to thank you for saving us with the pages of Awake!
A. R., New Jersey

