From Our Readers
Color Blindness  My husband has undergone an eye operation and presently cannot read. As soon as we received the article on Daltonism [color blindness] in the February 22, 1991, issue, he asked me to read it to him. As a child, he could not distinguish a black-and-white TV image from a color image, but no one in his family was concerned. Only when he later took his driver’s license exam did he learn that he was color-blind. My husband therefore expresses his gratitude for your article. Had it been available before, he could have avoided many awkward situations!
M. D., Italy
Religiously Divided Homes  Your article “Young People Ask . . . How Can I Live in a Religiously Divided Home?” (January 22, 1991) really helped me cope. Sometimes my dad would like me to stay home from Christian meetings just to watch TV. Your article helped me and my mom to keep praying and hoping that Jehovah will reach my dad’s heart. Thank you!
C. E., United States
My father is not a Christian, and that sometimes makes me sad. I plan to use your helpful points to try to win him over.
L. M., United States
Doctor-Patient Cooperation  Thank you for the article “Bridging the Gap Between Doctors and Witness Patients.” (November 22, 1990) I have a little boy who was born with hydrocephalus and spina bifida. He had six operations before he was a year old. Although his condition has improved, he still needs medical attention. Because of our stand on blood [as Jehovah’s Witnesses], I live with uncertainty as to whether doctors will cooperate. We hope the arrangement of having trained Christian brothers to help us deal with doctors will soon come to Argentina.
A. M., Argentina
Hospital Liaison Committees are being established in Argentina.​—ED.
Eastern Europe  Since the recent changes in Eastern Europe began, I have been curious about Jehovah’s Witnesses living in that part of the earth. Little information could be found in our publications. You can thus imagine my satisfaction when I received the January 8, 1991, issue with the article “Jehovah’s Witnesses in Eastern Europe.” I hope you will continue to inform us about the advancement of the preaching work in that part of the world.
E. S. L., Brazil
Immune System  I want you to know how excellent a piece of medical research the articles on the immune system (November 22, 1990) were. I work in hematology-oncology and have really appreciated the scholarly but clear way in which the material was presented. I have distributed copies of the magazine to the doctors and nurses with whom I work.
G. T., United States
I am a science teacher, and as it happened, we were discussing immunology in class when this issue of Awake! was published. I distributed a copy to each student, and we had an advanced science session based on it.
R. I., United States
Drugs  When I read the article “Drugs? Just Shake Hands With Satan!” (November 8, 1990), I was moved to tears. The report was sad but, at the same time, strengthening. The article made it clear that it does not pay to trade Jehovah for anything this old world may offer.
M. C. P., Brazil

