A Doubly Joyous Occasion
MARCH 3, 1985, was a doubly joyous occasion, especially for the 42 students of the 78th class of the Watchtower Bible School of Gilead. It was not only graduation day​—reason enough to be joyous—​but also the first time that a Gilead graduation was held at the new Brooklyn Assembly Hall, dedicated only the day before.
By 10:00 a.m., the 2,400-seat hall was filled by a capacity crowd consisting of the graduating students, their families and friends, and, for the first time in many years at a Gilead graduation, the entire Brooklyn Bethel family. The air was charged with excitement. And the conversation was dominated by comments on how beautifully the brothers had remodeled the hall. It was very evident that no one was holding back the joy and gratitude with which his heart was overflowing.
Promptly at 10:00 a.m., Theodore Jaracz, chairman for the day, called the audience to order. He drew a thunderous round of applause when he simply remarked: “It’s fine to be here, isn’t it?” Clearly, he struck a responsive chord with those words.
The topic of happiness appeared to be much on the minds of the speakers for the day. George Gangas of the Governing Body spoke on the subject “Enjoy Happiness in the Missionary Field​—How?” He told the graduating students that as Jehovah used the angels in the past, “Jehovah will use you to deliver people from bondage in Satan’s prison.” Imagine the happiness that will bring them! Then Daniel Sydlik advised the students to “take along a close friend” as they go to their foreign assignments. The Bible is that friend. They can depend on it in their hour of need, he told them. It is so powerful that only a sentence, or even a word, from it is at times enough to help someone. Read it and listen to it daily, he exhorted the students, and help others to do the same.
Elaborating on the theme of happiness, Robert Wallen of the Bethel Home Committee urged the students to maintain the “Here I am! Send me” attitude, and Joel Adams of the Service Department Committee told the class: “To enjoy happiness in its fullest measure, we must be completely devoted to doing God’s will. The two are inseparable.”
The students also received some parting counsel from their two instructors. Ulysses Glass reminded them that “missionary life is not all going to be sunshine and light.” Recounting the prophetic drama of Elijah and Elisha, he urged them to imitate the modern-day Elisha class and stick to their work to the finish. Jack Redford surprised everyone by saying: “Last year I met a man who had not made a mistake in 4,000 years.” He was referring to an Egyptian mummy in a museum. The point, of course, was that only dead men do not make mistakes. But when we are confronted with our mistakes, do we act like Saul, who tried to justify his errors, or like David, who readily admitted his? Thought-provoking questions indeed!
The final speaker of the morning was the president of the Watchtower Bible School of Gilead, F. W. Franz. Calling the establishment of Gilead School “a magnificent exemplification of faith,” he recounted how the school has spearheaded the work of proclaiming the Kingdom good news worldwide. Now the 42 students of the 78th class have the privilege of going forth to 14 lands to assist in this grand work.
After receiving their diplomas, one of the students, Gordon Grant, came forward and read a letter of appreciation from the class. “We came as needy men and women, although we didn’t realize it at the time,” he said. “Today, at the end of just five months, we are leaving rich and full.” They are resolved to put their training and spiritual riches to good use in their new assignments.
The afternoon program began with the students participating in an abbreviated Watchtower Study conducted by Calvin Chyke of the Factory Committee. Then the students put on a spirited revue of experiences and musical numbers, highlighting what they had learned simply through observation and association with the Bethel family and others. Finally, they enacted a touching Bible drama, based on the eventful account of Joseph and his brothers. There were many moist eyes in the audience.
As the chairman brought the day’s proceedings to a close, everyone in attendance wholeheartedly agreed that it had been fine for them to be there. Yes, it had been a day filled with spiritual good things​—a doubly joyous occasion!

