Kingdom Proclaimers Report
Search for the Truth Rewarded
THE Bible tells us to “search for Jehovah, . . . call to him.” (Isaiah 55:6) Solomon was informed by Jehovah: “If you search for [Jehovah], he will let himself be found by you.” (1 Chronicles 28:9) A young girl in Finland searched for the truth about Jehovah and was richly rewarded.
She belonged to the State Church of Finland and attended Confirmation School, hoping that she would find the truth about God. She was disappointed, however. They did not read the Bible very much in school. In fact, the priest warned her not to read it, as it would upset her mental balance.
Nevertheless, she started to read the Bible after finishing the school. She also went to church, but she found no contentment there. Then she went to the Pentecostal Church where she “entered the faith.” They prayed for her and told her that she had now gained faith. But she did not feel any closer to God than she had previously felt.
She wrote to the “Gang and Street Service Center” for help, but they gave her only a phone number. When she called, the phone was answered by a Methodist who said a prayer for her and told her that it did not matter which church she attended as long as she did not join Jehovah’s Witnesses or the Mormons!
She attended the People’s Mission and was given tracts to distribute entitled Jehovah’s Witnesses, the Deception of the Time of the End. This still did not satisfy her search for the truth or give her a purpose in life.
Then she visited her aunt who shocked her by telling her that she believed that Jehovah’s Witnesses were teaching the truth. The aunt calmly read scriptures from the Bible that proved it was God’s purpose to make this earth a paradise, and she gave her the book The Truth That Leads to Eternal Life. The girl read the book with the purpose of finding fault with it​—to disprove it—​but instead she soon realized that it contained the truth, showing her the purpose in life for which she had been searching. She wrote to the publishers for other books and asked for someone to visit her. Only two days later, two pioneer sisters arrived at her doorstep. A Bible study was arranged and the girl started attending meetings at the Kingdom Hall, where she was deeply impressed and touched by the loving atmosphere that existed there. She continued her Bible study, was baptized a year later, started to pioneer, and attended the Pioneer Service School. “At last I can be happy,” she said. Her search for the truth was rewarded.
Similar experiences have been repeated thousands of times during ‘the conclusion of this system of things,’ when Jesus, the Fine Shepherd, is gathering his “other sheep” as foretold in John 10:16. (Matthew 24:3) Happy, then, are those who search for the truth of the Bible and whom God rewards.​—Matthew 7:7.

