Walk With Confidence in Jehovah’s Leadership
“Be courageous and strong. Do not be afraid or suffer a shock before them, because Jehovah your God is the one marching with you. He will neither desert you nor leave you entirely.”​—DEUTERONOMY 31:6.
 1. How did Jehovah prove to be a matchless leader of the Israelites?
JEHOVAH proved to be a matchless leader when he brought the Israelites out of slavery in Egypt. Not only did he guide them through the wilderness but he also provided their food and drink and gave them flawless instruction. Thus the Levites of Nehemiah’s day could say: “You, even you [Jehovah God], in your abundant mercy did not leave them in the wilderness. The pillar of cloud itself did not depart from over them by day to lead them in the way, nor the pillar of fire by night to light up for them the way in which they should go. And your good spirit you gave to make them prudent, and your manna you did not hold back from their mouth, and water you gave them for their thirst. And for forty years you provided them with food in the wilderness. They lacked nothing. Their very garments did not wear out, and their feet themselves did not become swollen.”​—Nehemiah 9:19-21.
 2. Why could Moses urge the Israelites to “be courageous and strong”?
2 By discipline administered with fatherly kindness, the Divine Teacher taught the Israelites what it meant to be just and righteous. Everything he did was in their best interests. Even when they murmured and rebelled, he was long-suffering and did not abandon them. Particularly when overwhelming enemy armies confronted them did Jehovah give evidence of skillful leadership and wreak havoc upon the ranks of the attackers. Moses spoke the truth when he encouraged the Israelites with these words: “Be courageous and strong. Do not be afraid or suffer a shock before them, because Jehovah your God is the one marching with you. He will neither desert you nor leave you entirely.” (Deuteronomy 31:1, 6) God would be “marching” with them if they exercised faith. What an incentive for us to walk with confidence in Jehovah’s leadership!
Warnings From the Past
 3. Soon after being released from Egyptian bondage, how did the people of Israel show ingratitude and lack of confidence in Jehovah?
3 Yet, the experiences of the Israelites provide warnings for us. Although they had been free of Egyptian bondage only a short time, they repeatedly sinned against their invisible Leader. While Moses was on Mount Sinai receiving the Law, they showed ingratitude for all that God had done for them. They prevailed upon Aaron to make a golden calf and worshiped it in what Aaron called “a festival to Jehovah.” (Exodus 32:1-6) Ten of the 12 spies sent to search out Canaan proved faithless, only Joshua and Caleb urging the people to go on into the land and take it. But Israel did not act with faith in God, who therefore decreed that all males “from twenty years old upward,” excluding the tribe of Levi and faithful Caleb and Joshua, would die during a 40-year period in the wilderness. (Numbers 13:1–14:38; Deuteronomy 1:19-40) Surely, all of this should warn us against similar ingratitude and lack of confidence in Jehovah’s leadership!
 4. How did Israel’s history justify the calamity that befell Judah, Jerusalem, and the temple in 607 B.C.E.?
4 Though the Israelites wandered in the wilderness for 40 years, Jehovah did not forsake them. He continued to fight their battles. After the death of Moses and Joshua, God raised up judges to deliver his people from oppressive enemies. But at that time the people of Israel did what was right in their own eyes, and lawless violence, immorality, and idolatry began to abound. (Judges 17:6–19:30) Later, when they wanted a human king so as to be like surrounding nations, Jehovah granted their request but warned them of the consequences. (1 Samuel 8:10-18) However, even the kingship of David’s house did not satisfy the people, and ten tribes rebelled in the days of Rehoboam. (1 Kings 11:26–12:19) More and more, the very idea of having God lead them faded in the minds of the majority. The destruction of Jerusalem and the temple as well as the overthrow of the kingdom of Judah at Babylonian hands in 607 B.C.E. were well-deserved judgments upon a people who had failed to walk with confidence in Jehovah’s leadership. What a warning for us!
Jehovah’s Leadership of a New Nation
 5. What did Jehovah provide in the person of Jesus, and what would Jesus do?
5 Like the Israelites of old, Jehovah’s later servants walked through changing circumstances, but he unfailingly directed them. When Jesus of Nazareth submitted to water baptism in 29 C.E., God provided a Prophet and Leader greater than Moses. As the Messiah, he would lead people out of this wicked world lying in Satan’s power. (Matthew 3:13-17; Daniel 9:25; Deuteronomy 18:18, 19; Acts 3:19-23; 1 John 5:19)  But what people? Why, those Jews and others who would exercise faith in the Messiah provided by the great heavenly Leader, Jehovah God!
 6. (a) Why were Jesus’ followers able to preach and to care for a growing organization? (b) Why did it later appear that the light of Bible truth had been extinguished?
6 Jesus taught his followers the marvelous truth of God and gave them needed instruction for the ministry. (Luke 10:1-16) Thus when Christ completed his ministry and presented himself as a sacrifice on behalf of sinful mankind, he left behind followers trained to carry on the preaching work and to administer the affairs of the growing organization of those believing in him. During the apostolic period, there was fierce persecution. But Jehovah’s hand was with his people, and their hardships were balanced by marvelous increases in the number of believers. (Acts 5:41, 42; 8:4-8; 11:19-21) After Jesus’ apostles and their immediate co-workers died, the professed followers of Christ came under the rulership of cruel and arrogant clergymen and kings. (Acts 20:28-30) Since this condition continued for some 15 centuries, it appeared that the light of Bible truth had been extinguished.
 7. When and how did Jehovah again assert his leadership, and what did he reveal to his modern-day servants?
7 Then, however, like ‘a voice crying in the wilderness,’ came the announcement: ‘The Kingdom is at hand!’ (Compare Isaiah 40:3-5; Luke 3:3-6; Matthew 10:7.) In the latter part of the 19th century, Jehovah again asserted his leadership and began calling his genuine worshipers out of this wicked world and its Babylonish religious systems. (Revelation 18:1-5) By means of his written Word and the holy spirit, God revealed to his modern-day servants that the year 1914 marked the end of uninterrupted rule by Gentile nations and also the heavenly enthronement of the glorified Jesus Christ, God’s choice as King over all mankind.​—Luke 21:24; see 1975 Yearbook of Jehovah’s Witnesses, pages 34-37.
 8. (a) Subsequently, what was organized? (b) Jesus’ anointed followers have been joined by whom, and how has the leadership of God and Christ become evident?
8 Subsequently, a new nation comprised of the remnant of spiritual Israel was organized, further enlightened as to God’s purposes and fully trained for the ministry. Later, these anointed followers of Christ were joined by a multitude of believers with earthly hopes. Now, together, all of these witnesses of Jehovah are joyfully proclaiming his name and Kingdom to the ends of the earth. (Isaiah 66:7, 8; Galatians 6:16; Revelation 7:4, 9, 10) In the Witnesses’ organized activity, the leadership of Jehovah and his royal Son has been very evident, particularly in the response of millions of honest-hearted people who have become staunch advocates of Kingdom rule. Are you part of this happy throng walking with confidence in Jehovah’s leadership?​—Micah 4:1, 2, 5.
 9. What worldwide association has come into existence, and with what attitude toward God’s leadership and theocratic rule?
9 Eventually, Jesus’ followers were to be witnesses of him “to the most distant part of the earth.” (Acts 1:6-8; Mark 13:10) Accordingly, Jehovah’s Witnesses are now proclaiming the good news of the Kingdom around the earth, and those “rightly disposed for everlasting life” are embracing the truth with joyful hearts. They are becoming part of a worldwide association of spiritual brothers and sisters who have gladly accepted God’s leadership and have subjected themselves to theocratic rule. (Acts 13:48; 1 Peter 2:17) Like them, do you have complete confidence that Jehovah God and his King-Son, Jesus Christ, are directing this organization of Kingdom proclaimers?
Guard Against Loss of Confidence
10. What warning should move each Christian to examine himself very carefully?
10 Can recipients of all the blessings resulting from Jehovah’s leadership fall into the snare of lack of faith and confidence in him? Yes, for we are warned: “Beware, brothers, for fear there should ever develop in any one of you a wicked heart lacking faith by drawing away from the living God; but keep on exhorting one another each day, as long as it may be called ‘Today,’ for fear any one of you should become hardened by the deceptive power of sin.” (Hebrews 3:12, 13) Therefore, each Christian should examine himself very carefully.
11. (a) In what ways may a person’s conscience become hardened? (b) What happened to some in the first century C.E.?
11 A person’s conscience can become so hardened that he sees nothing wrong with some course of action that is out of harmony with the spirit of Christianity and that betrays a lack of faith and confidence in Jehovah. For instance, some could fall into the snare of placing materialistic pursuits and fleshly pleasures on a par with or even ahead of their service to God. Others may become immoral or may speak disparagingly of responsible men in the congregation. In the first century C.E., “ungodly men” who had slipped into the congregation were “defiling the flesh and disregarding lordship and speaking abusively of glorious ones” shouldering congregational responsibility. (Jude 4-8, 16) Those false Christians had lost true faith in Jehovah and in his leadership. May that never happen to us!
12. (a) An independent and rebellious spirit ignores what? (b) What contrast was there between Korah and David?
12 Often coupled with ‘disregard for lordship’ is an independent and rebellious spirit that ignores the fact that Jehovah is directing his organization. This spirit had dire consequences for Korah and others who challenged the God-given authority of Moses and Aaron. (Numbers 16:1-35) But what a contrast we find in David! Content to wait on God to rectify wrongs, David would not slay his wicked enemy King Saul because he was “the anointed of Jehovah.” (1 Samuel 24:2-7) Yes, Jehovah appointed Moses, Aaron, Saul, David, Jesus Christ, and others. Similarly, in God’s organization today service appointments are made in harmony with Scriptural requirements and under the direction of Jehovah’s holy spirit.​—1 Timothy 3:1-13; Titus 1:5-9; Acts 20:28.
13. (a) Why should we be grateful for Jehovah’s leadership? (b) Like whom should we be walking, and with what attitude?
13 Since ‘it does not belong to man to direct his step,’ we should be grateful for Jehovah’s leadership. (Jeremiah 10:23) Abraham and his devoted wife Sarah obeyed God and acted with faith. Boaz and Ruth complied with divine arrangements. Yes, and many other faithful men and women gladly accepted Jehovah’s guidance. (Hebrews 11:4-38; Ruth 3:1–4:17) Like earlier servants of God, then, we should shun an independent spirit, joyfully cooperate with God’s theocratic organization, and walk with complete confidence in Jehovah’s leadership.
Confidently “Throw Your Burden Upon Jehovah”
14. What can help us to guard against a rebellious spirit?
14 What can help us, as Jehovah’s loyal witnesses, to guard against a rebellious spirit? Well, first we need to acknowledge that it is wrong to be rebellious and presumptuously ignore God’s direction. (Nehemiah 9:16, 28-31; Proverbs 11:2) We can pray to our heavenly Father as did David, who pleaded: “From presumptuous acts hold your servant back; do not let them dominate me. In that case I shall be complete, and I shall have remained innocent from much transgression.” (Psalm 19:13) It will also be helpful to remember how much love Jehovah has shown for us. This ought to increase our love for him and should motivate us to accept his leadership at all times.​—John 3:16; Luke 10:27.
15. What course is recommended if a brother thinks he has not been appointed as a ministerial servant or an overseer because the elders have something against him?
15 We must not lose sight of the fact that God is directing his organization, although walking with confidence in Jehovah’s leadership may not be easy at times. To illustrate: Suppose a brother thinks that he has not been appointed as a ministerial servant or an overseer because the elders have something against him. Instead of reacting in a way that could disturb the congregation’s peace, he should remember that Jehovah is directing the theocratic organization. Hence, the brother may seek some explanation in a humble, peaceful manner. (Hebrews 12:14) Then how wise it would be for him to acknowledge any weaknesses called to his attention and prayerfully strive to make improvement! Thereafter, he can leave matters in God’s hands, in keeping with the words: “Throw your burden upon Jehovah himself.” (Psalm 55:22) In time and as we qualify spiritually, Jehovah is sure to give us plenty to do in his service.​—Compare 1 Corinthians 15:58.
16. Even if we have suffered some real wrong inside the congregation, what course should we not take, and why?
16 Even if we have suffered some real wrong at the hands of a brother or a sister, would that give us just cause to stop associating with the congregation? Would we thus be justified in ceasing to render sacred service to Jehovah? No, for such a course would be one of unfaithfulness to God and ingratitude for his leadership. It would also indicate that we did not love our loyal fellow believers earth wide. (Matthew 22:36-40; 1 John 4:7, 8) Moreover, if we were to break our integrity to Jehovah, that would give Satan a basis for taunting God​—something we surely do not desire!​—Proverbs 27:11.
17. (a) What should help us to maintain our confidence in Jehovah’s leadership of his organization? (b) What will be the experience of those who continue to walk with confidence in Jehovah’s leadership?
17 So, then, let us ‘bless Jehovah and never forget all the doings of the One who crowns our life with loving-kindness and mercies.’ (Psalm 103:2-4) If we always remember our loving God and act in harmony with his Word, we will maintain strong confidence in his unfailing leadership. (Proverbs 22:19) To turn away from Jehovah and his organization, to spurn the direction of “the faithful and discreet slave,” and to rely simply on personal Bible reading and interpretation is to become like a solitary tree in a parched land. But in contrast, a person whose confidence is in our Great Leader, Jehovah, “will certainly become like a tree planted by the waters, that sends out its roots right by the watercourse; and he will not see when heat comes, but his foliage will actually prove to be luxuriant.” Moreover, “in the year of drought he will not become anxious, nor will he leave off from producing fruit” to God’s glory. (Matthew 24:45-47; Jeremiah 17:8) That can be your blessed experience if you resolutely continue to walk with confidence in Jehovah’s leadership.
Can You Answer?
□ In what ways did Jehovah prove to be a matchless leader of the Israelites?
□ As to God’s leadership, ancient Israel provides what warnings?
□ Over whom is Jehovah exercising leadership today?
□ What can help us to guard against loss of confidence in Jehovah’s leadership?
□ Even if we suffer some wrong inside the congregation, what attitude should we have toward Jehovah’s leadership?
[Picture on page 17]
In 607 B.C.E. calamity befell those who did not walk with confidence in Jehovah’s leadership. How wise to heed the warning!
[Picture on page 19]
Abraham, Sarah, David, Jesus, and others walked with confidence in Jehovah’s leadership. Is that how you are walking?

