Kingdom Proclaimers Report
The Good News of the Kingdom Will Be Preached
FOR centuries God’s chief enemy, Satan the Devil, has craftily used the political governments and false religion in his efforts to impede the spreading of true Christianity. But these methods will fail. Jesus foretold that the “good news of the kingdom will be preached [not, “might be preached” or, “could be preached”] in all the inhabited earth for a witness to all the nations.”​—Matthew 24:14.
Satan’s failure has been evident in Greece. In that land the Greek Orthodox Church has attempted to restrict Jehovah’s Witnesses from preaching the good news of the Kingdom. But, as highlighted by the following experience, in due time Bible truths reach honesthearted people despite opposition.
Some 30 years ago, a Greek Orthodox priest accepted the good news and even expressed a desire to become one of Jehovah’s Witnesses. However, his relatives strongly opposed this step and pressured him into giving up his association with the Witnesses. To please his family, he continued to pursue his career as a priest; yet, he always recognized that Jehovah’s Witnesses had helped him to learn the truth and that he had given it up in exchange for a position of prominence in a false religion.
Nonetheless, he sometimes spoke in favor of Jehovah’s Witnesses when the opportunity arose. On several occasions he even admonished people that if they wanted to learn Bible truths, they should study with the Witnesses. Over the years some actually followed his recommendation.
Recently the priest became very ill and realized that he might soon die. While in the hospital, he summoned his children, and they all gathered at his bedside.a He then explained to them that if he died, they might meet him again. He spoke to them about the Bible’s teaching of humans’ being resurrected by Jehovah to live in a paradise on earth, but if they really wanted to see that occur, they had to learn the truth from the Bible and disassociate themselves from false religion. He entreated them to associate with Jehovah’s Witnesses and learn from them how to become genuine Christians.
Shortly afterward, the priest died. However, his parting counsel to his children reaped good results. His daughter, like most of his relatives, had been very much opposed to Jehovah’s Witnesses and their work. But she could not ignore the sincere appeal of her dying father, so she soon got in touch with Jehovah’s Witnesses and began studying the Bible. Recently she herself became a Witness, dedicating her life to Jehovah God and symbolizing her dedication by water baptism.
In Greece and in over 230 other lands, Jehovah’s Witnesses rely on the power of God’s holy spirit. It is with the full support of holy spirit that they share in the fulfillment of Jesus’ prophecy: “You will receive power when the holy spirit arrives upon you, and you will be witnesses of me both in Jerusalem and in all Judea and Samaria and to the most distant part of the earth.”​—Acts 1:8.
[Footnotes]
The Greek Orthodox Church allows its priests to marry.

