Kingdom News No. 38 to Be Distributed in November!
 1. What questions do people have about the dead, and how will these concerns be addressed in November?
1 Death is an enemy of all people, regardless of their beliefs. (1 Cor. 15:26) Many wonder where the dead are and whether they will see them again. Therefore, congregations around the earth will participate in a month-long distribution of Kingdom News No. 38, entitled “Can the Dead Really Live Again?” This special campaign will begin on November 1. After the special distribution, Kingdom News No. 38 will be used in the ministry as a tract.
 2. How is Kingdom News No. 38 designed?
2 How It Is Designed: Kingdom News No. 38 is designed to be folded lengthwise so that the front shows the intriguing title along with the words “Would you say . . . yes? no? maybe?” When the reader opens the Kingdom News, he will see what the Bible says in answer to the title question and what the Bible’s promise can mean for him. He will also see reasons why he can believe the Bible. The back of the Kingdom News poses an interesting question for him to think about and invites him to learn more.
 3. How will Kingdom News No. 38 be distributed?
3 How It Will Be Distributed: This campaign will be similar to campaigns for distributing Memorial and district convention invitations. The elders will provide direction on how the local territory will be covered, in harmony with the letter they received dated April 1, 2013. Congregations with limited territory can offer to help nearby congregations that have more territory. When obtaining your supply of Kingdom News No. 38, remember to take only the amount that you will need for one week. During the campaign, copies may be distributed in public witnessing after all the house-to-house territories have been worked. If all copies are placed before the end of the month, the literature offer should be featured. On the first Saturday, we will focus on participating in the special campaign rather than on starting Bible studies. On weekends, we should also offer the magazines when appropriate. Are you making arrangements to have a full share in this special campaign?

