Use Our Web Site to Teach Your Children
 1. What is the objective of the section of our Web site entitled “Children”?
1 Our Web site, jw.org, is designed to appeal to people of all ages. The section of the Web site entitled “Children” (go to Bible Teachings > Children) helps young children and their parents to draw close to one another and to Jehovah. (Deut. 6:6, 7) How can you use this section to teach your children?
 2. How can you select age-appropriate material to study with your children?
2 Be Adaptable: Each child has unique needs. (1 Cor. 13:11) How, then, can you select age-appropriate material to study with your children? Ask yourself: ‘What will capture my children’s interest? How much will they understand? How long is their attention span?’ With children who are three years of age or younger, you might discuss the stories found under “My Bible Lessons.” Other families enjoy the Bible stories in the section “Teach Your Children.” Also, consider the following options.
 3. How can parents effectively use the stories and activities found under “Family Worship Projects”?
3 Family Worship Projects: These projects are tools to help family heads study with their children. To learn how to use the stories and activities, click the download button, and read the “Parents’ Guide” for each project. Use picture activities, such as coloring pages, to teach younger children. Help older children to complete the study activities. All the activities in each project relate to the same Bible story or lesson, so children of all ages can participate in the same family worship project.
 4. What can be found in the section “Become Jehovah’s Friend”?
4 Become Jehovah’s Friend: The videos, songs, and activities in this section of our Web site help parents to inculcate God’s Word into their little children. (Deut. 31:12) Each short animated video teaches an important lesson. Activities such as search-and-find games underscore those lessons. Since children often like to sing—and songs help children to remember what they have learned—Kingdom songs and songs written especially for children are posted regularly.
 5. Why should parents ask Jehovah to help them to teach their children the truth?
5 Parents, Jehovah wants you to be successful mothers and fathers. So ask him to help you teach your children the truth. (Judg. 13:8) With Jehovah’s support, you can train your children to become “wise for salvation through the faith in connection with Christ Jesus.”—2 Tim. 3:15; Prov. 4:1-4.

