Hong Kong’s New Kind of Prosperity
THE story of Hong Kong has been one of steady growth, progress and material prosperity. Situated on China’s southern coast, this British colony is one of the world’s most significant ports. From a humble beginning with some 23,000 inhabitants in 1842, Hong Kong has grown into a bustling commercial center of about four and a half million people.
Hong Kong is one of the most densely populated areas on earth, and its people live in very crowded quarters. However, over the years the standard of living has improved considerably. Today even those residing in the huge housing estates have some of the modern conveniences​—telephone, refrigerator, television set and electric rice cooker. Yes, Hong Kong is enjoying material prosperity.
NEW KIND OF PROSPERITY
As the 1970’s began, however, a new kind of prosperity became very evident in Hong Kong. This was a spiritual prosperity. By then, Jehovah’s Witnesses had been preaching patiently in the colony for some twenty years, declaring the good news of God’s kingdom. During July 1973, 271 shared in this preaching work. The “Divine Victory” International Assembly held here that month clearly showed that spiritual prosperity had come to Hong Kong. As the assembly opened, 462 persons were present.
By 1974 Hong Kong was feeling the crunch of the worldwide recession. News of currency devaluations around the world caused widespread concern. Prices went up and continued to rise. Many people here began to realize that their material prosperity really was not sound, and this resulted in a more favorable climate for Kingdom preaching.
INDUSTRIOUS EFFORTS TO AID OTHERS
By early 1976, Jehovah’s Witnesses in Hong Kong numbered more than 500, associated with seven congregations. In view of the colony’s large population, of course, these faithful Christians were few indeed. Interestingly, when one clergyman was asked about their work, he brushed them off with the comment, “They’re just like a few ants on an anthill.” Nevertheless, ants are known for their industrious work.​—Prov. 6:6-8.
The Chinese people are well known for their industriousness and determination to get things done. These fine qualities have come to the fore as the few Jehovah’s Witnesses in Hong Kong have taken advantage of their opportunities to preach the good news. Just consider what they have done.
In order to have a greater share in declaring the Kingdom message to others, many of Hong Kong’s Witnesses take up the full-time preaching work for at least a month at a time. Some of these temporary pioneers, as they are called, work in factories from 8:00 in the morning until 5:00 in the afternoon. Upon finishing their secular work for the day, they quickly get a snack at a nearby food stall, then head right for their preaching territory. They joyfully spend up to three hours in house-to-house or other preaching activity. Then these zealous Kingdom proclaimers go home, have their evening meal and enjoy their rest, satisfied that they have sought to aid others spiritually that day. In this way, many persons are contacted who work daily and might otherwise fail to hear the Kingdom message.
One of the first Chinese men to accept the truth of God’s Word years ago has remarked that what has impressed him so much is the willingness of so many Christians to spend much time in the Kingdom-preaching activity after working secularly in a factory for six days a week. Surely, such industriousness and concern for the spiritual welfare of others is noteworthy.
YOUTH’S CONTRIBUTION
Industriousness and concern for others certainly are being manifested by young persons here who are embracing true Christianity in growing numbers. It is not unusual for visitors from overseas to remark, “You have so many young ones in your congregations.” Yes, there are many in their twenties who rejoice that they can serve Jehovah God so early in life.​—Eccl. 12:1.
Certain factors have promoted spiritual prosperity among the young. In the late 1960’s Hong Kong entered the television age and this has had a marked effect on the populace. Those of the younger generation have become more exposed to the rest of the world and are thinking about the meaning of present woes. They are more receptive to new ideas and will listen when Jehovah’s Witnesses tell them what the Bible has to say about world distress. Yet, the older generation still clings tenaciously to the traditional Chinese way of life.
So, young persons here have had to overcome problems to serve Jehovah. For example, one sixteen-year-old girl heard about Bible truth from a friend and began studying the Scriptures with one of the Witness missionaries. Before long, the girl was attending Christian meetings. At first, her mother would lock the iron gate, and, upon returning from meetings, the girl could not get into the home. She would sit patiently on the steps in the dark stairway until her mother decided to let her in, sometimes as late as two o’clock in the morning. Nevertheless, the girl persevered in pursuing true worship. Then came that happy evening when she returned home from a meeting and her mother served her a cup of hot tea. The girl could hardly believe it! Recently, she told her mother that she was going to be baptized in symbol of her dedication to Jehovah God. Though the mother did not actually approve, there was no more opposition. Grateful for Jehovah’s blessing, this young girl now shares in spreading the good news and so contributes to the growing spiritual prosperity in this field.
Consider also the experience of a young man, a schoolteacher. He told his parents that he intended to leave his secular job and take up the full-time preaching activity, known as pioneer service. Though the parents voiced their disapproval, nothing more was said until two months later, when the young man actually began his full-time preaching work. The father bitterly opposed his son and ordered him to leave the home with all his belongings. Accordingly, the young man left and found temporary lodging with good friends. Confidently, he stood firm and began his pioneer work. After only a day, however, his mother could not bear having her son away from home and began quarreling with the father. The end result was that the son was asked to return home. He did so with complete freedom to pursue his desired vocation.
THE CHALLENGE TO REACH ALL
Whether young or old, Jehovah’s Witnesses in Hong Kong have “plenty to do in the work of the Lord.” (1 Cor. 15:58) The lifesaving activity of Kingdom-preaching now is reaching out into the small towns and villages of the countryside, known as the New Territories. A zealous missionary couple was assigned to the growing township of Yuen Long to cultivate the interest in Bible truth that was springing up there as a result of preaching work done by visiting Witnesses. Soon a congregation was established, and within a year twenty-four proclaimers of the good news were associated with it. As a result of such work, villages and settlements close to the border with China are hearing the good news of Jehovah’s promised new order.
Off the coast of Hong Kong there are some fairly large inhabited islands. Most of the time, the homes are deserted, with only a few elderly illiterate persons caring for them. The rest of the family are away working in Hong Kong or are out fishing for days at a time. Others are busy tending their fields. How might these people be told the good news?
Well, what about special feast days and public holidays? These afford excellent opportunities to reach such islanders. On January 31, 1976, the first day of the Chinese New Year celebrations, the Hong Kong Congregation of Jehovah’s Witnesses arranged to visit the island of Cheung Chau. Ninety-five Kingdom proclaimers made the trip and visited all the homes of the island. Besides having many fine Bible discussions, the ninety-five Witnesses placed with the islanders nearly 2,000 copies of the Watchtower and Awake! magazines, as well as 120 books.
REACHING INTO CHINA
During the recent Chinese New Year celebrations, thousands of persons flocked back to mainland China to visit relatives and friends there. Some of Jehovah’s Witnesses took advantage of this opportunity to call on their relatives. Bible literature cannot be taken into that country because of the thorough search made by customs officials at the border. But when a Christian is with relatives in their quiet home, he can use his Scriptural knowledge to show the reason for world woes. Reports indicate that the way of life there is very rigid and controlled, the populace having just the bare necessities.
One Witness who had the opportunity to visit her relatives in China says that they could not understand why life was so oppressive. When she told them that there is a living God, the Creator, who cares for mankind and this earth, she found listening ears. She told them that unhappy conditions exist world wide, but that these are a sure sign that Jehovah God soon will act and bring about a change. This Witness feels that these persons, and perhaps many like them, would accept Bible truth if given the opportunity to hear it. Yes, Jehovah’s Witnesses are speaking about the Kingdom hope even when going into China. Time alone will tell what will happen respecting true Christianity in that land.
Time also will reveal the extent to which spiritual prosperity will reach in Hong Kong. One of the missionaries remarked that much hard work has been done through the years. A great deal of time has been spent calling on the people and much Bible literature has been placed with them. He likened this hard and patient work to that of the hardworking farmer, who patiently “keeps waiting for the precious fruit of the earth.” (Jas. 5:7) Similarly, Jehovah’s Witnesses cheerfully work on in this field, patiently waiting for God to make things grow and grant further spiritual prosperity.​—1 Cor. 3:5-9.

