From Our Readers
Getting a Job
I followed your suggestion in the article “How to Cope With Unemployment.” (July 22, 1984) Being the mother of a toddler, I needed a job that didn’t take up too much time and that was close to home. After reading your article I decided to do general housekeeping in other people’s homes. I advertised in local grocery stores. I now have three housecleaning jobs that are very close to home. Thanks so much for the fine suggestion.
P. S., Illinois
“Young People Ask”
Thank you for the articles “Young People Ask.” Does that sound strange coming from a 47-year-old woman? I had a very troubled childhood and teen years, and I didn’t understand why I felt as I did until you published these articles.
N. W., Texas
Your timely articles “Young People Ask” have been a great help to me as parent of a 17-year-old son. I know what I require of him but have difficulty in articulating my reasons to him. Your articles give me the needed words to guide him during these troublesome years. Though the articles are directed to the young folks, we mature ones are also helped. What I would give to have had this counsel when I was 17!
S. S., Alabama
Respect for the Handicapped
I was really impressed with the article “Don’t See the Wheelchair​—See Me!” (June 8, 1984) I have a friend who is confined to a wheelchair. Your article showed me the importance of treating everyone who has a handicap with respect and talking directly to them. Thank you for the advice.
L. L., Washington
College or Trade Education
In your article “Go to College . . . or Learn a Trade?” (October 22, 1984) I sense the misimpression that you can only learn white-collar professions in college. This is not true. Any kind of blue-collar trade you can think of has to be learned in a school. In many college programs the students are taught anything from fast-food cooking to welding or electronics. It is a lot cheaper to attend these programs than to go to a trade school. College can be an inexpensive tool to learn a skill or a trade.
P. M., California
The article in question did not particularly criticize a college education, but it emphasized that there can be many advantages to learning a trade rather than being prepared for a white-collar profession. While some college-certificate programs may provide good training in various trades, it seems that often the main thrust of college or university teaching programs, as well as the college environment, tend to work against good spiritual goals as outlined in the Bible, such as increasing one’s faith in God and his purposes and maintaining fine, chaste conduct. The decision as to whether to get a college education or not is a personal one, but we believe it advisable to warn of the potential dangers involved.​—ED.

