
A Direct Invitation




 1. When will the invitation campaign for the convention begin?
1 If you were planning a special meal for family or friends, one that required much effort and expense to prepare, you would likely be enthusiastic when extending invitations. Similarly, much work has gone into preparing the spiritual feast that will be presented at our upcoming convention. Beginning three weeks before the start of our convention, Jehovah is allowing us the privilege of inviting others to attend. What will help us to extend the invitations with enthusiasm?
 2. What will move us to have a full share in the campaign?
2 We will be moved to have a full share in the campaign if we reflect appreciatively on how much we personally benefit from the refreshing instruction that Jehovah provides at our conventions. (Isa. 65:13, 14) We should remember, too, that our annual campaign yields results. (See the box “It Gets Results.”) Some people we invite will attend the convention with us, while others will not. Regardless of how many respond, however, our diligent efforts during the campaign bring praise to Jehovah and reflect his generosity.—Ps. 145:3, 7; Rev. 22:17.
 3. How will the invitations be distributed?
3 Each body of elders should determine how they can give the invitations wide distribution, including whether to leave them at not-at-homes or offer them in public witnessing within their territory. On weekends the magazines should be offered along with the invitation when appropriate. After the campaign concludes, how happy we will be to know that we participated enthusiastically and that as many people as possible joined us at the spiritual banquet that Jehovah provided!



What Will You Say?
After giving a customary greeting, you might say: “We are involved in a global campaign to distribute this invitation to a very important event. The date, time, and address are printed on the invitation.”


It Gets Results
            Several years ago when one sister was participating in the invitation campaign, she wondered if all the effort was worthwhile. She thought, ‘Will people actually respond and attend the convention with us?’ On Saturday morning of the convention, she noticed a Sikh gentleman sitting nearby, so she decided to introduce herself. It became apparent that he was at the convention because he had received one of our invitations. He had a number of questions that the sister was able to answer. He commented on how much he was enjoying the program and how impressed he was by the appearance and conduct of the delegates. Later on the same day, the sister struck up a conversation with a couple sitting near her. They too had received an invitation and had come to the convention by bus. They were enjoying the convention and planned to attend on Sunday. The sister then realized how important our annual campaign is.

            At a recent convention, a husband and wife who are regular pioneers introduced themselves to an older couple. The couple explained that they were there for the first time. “Who invited you?” the pioneers asked. “When we came home one day, we found the invitation under our door,” was the reply. They read the invitation and even filled out the coupon on the back. Other delegates at the convention shared their lunch with the couple. They enjoyed the program so much that they made plans to return the next day. Arrangements were made to visit them and follow up on the interest.





