
Convention Reminders




              Program Times: The doors to the convention site will open at 8:00 a.m. The introductory music will begin at 9:20 a.m. all three days. At that time, all of us should go to our seats so that the program can begin in a dignified manner. The program will conclude at about 5:00 p.m. on Friday and Saturday and at about 4:00 p.m. on Sunday.

             ‘Praise Jehovah With Song’: God’s people in ancient times praised Jehovah in song, and music continues to be an important part of true worship today. (Ps. 28:7) Each session of our regional convention begins with a musical interlude. This is not merely background music but is prepared so that we may learn about and worship Jehovah. Thus, when the chairman announces that the musical interlude is about to begin, that is the time to be seated and listen with appreciation to the music, rather than to converse. Our doing so shows that we value the efforts of the members of the Watchtower orchestra. Twice a year these brothers and sisters travel at their own expense to Patterson, New York, in order to produce beautiful music for our enjoyment. After listening intently to the musical interlude, everyone should join in praising Jehovah by singing our Kingdom songs.

           Parking: At all convention sites where we control the parking, the spaces will be available at no charge on a first-come, first-served basis. Parking is usually limited, so carpooling should be done to the extent possible. Only those with a license plate or placard for the disabled will be allowed to park in the area reserved for such ones.

              Seat Saving: When the doors to the facility are opened each morning, please do not rush to the seating area, as if competing with fellow attenders. Please be considerate of others, even sacrificing our preferences for the sake of our brothers. A self-sacrificing spirit identifies us as true Christians and moves onlookers to praise God. (John 13:34, 35; 1 Cor. 13:5; 1 Pet. 2:12) Seats may be saved only for those traveling with you in the same vehicle, living with you in the same home, or currently studying the Bible with you. Please do not store things on seats that you are not saving. Your cooperation in this regard will allow others to see that those seats are available. Special seating has been provided for the elderly and the infirm. Since this seating is limited, only one or two persons who are directly assisting the elderly or infirm individual may sit with him or her.

              Modest Dress: Our dress during the convention should be appropriate and modest, not reflecting the extreme styles common in the world. (1 Tim. 2:9) Even when checking in and out of the hotel and during times of leisure before and after the sessions, we want to avoid an overly casual or slovenly appearance. Thus we will be proud to wear our convention badge and not be embarrassed to give a witness when we have an opportunity. Our appearance and fine conduct while attending the upcoming conventions will not only attract honesthearted people to the Bible’s lifesaving message but it will also bring joy to Jehovah.—Zeph. 3:17.

              Good Manners With Electronic Devices: We show good manners during the program by adjusting our cell phones or other electronic devices to a setting that will not disturb others. If using a camera, video recorder, electronic tablet, or other such device, we want to be considerate by not disturbing others or blocking their view. We also display good manners by not texting or e-mailing needlessly during the program.

            Noon Meal: Please bring a lunch rather than leave the convention site to obtain a meal during the noon break. A small cooler that can be placed under a seat may be used. Large family-size picnic coolers and glass containers are not permitted in the convention facility.

              Donations: We can show our appreciation for the convention arrangements by making voluntary contributions to the worldwide work at the convention. Any checks should be made payable to “Christian Congregation of Jehovah’s Witnesses.” Donations can also be made by means of a debit or credit card.

              Medication: If you require prescription medication, please be sure to bring an adequate supply with you, since none will be available at the convention. Diabetic syringes and needles must be disposed of properly as hazardous waste and not in trash receptacles at the convention facility or hotel.

            Safety Precautions: Please be especially mindful of preventing injuries that can be caused by slipping and tripping. Each year injuries occur that are related to footwear, especially high-heeled shoes. It is best to choose modest, well-fitting shoes that will allow one to walk safely on ramps, stairs, gratings, and so forth.

              Hearing Impaired: The program will be broadcast in the auditorium on an FM radio frequency. To hear the program, you will need to bring a small battery-operated FM receiver with earphones.

               Baby Strollers and Lawn Chairs: Baby strollers and lawn chairs should not be brought to the convention site. However, child-safety seats are acceptable if they can be secured in a seat next to the parents.

              Fragrances: Most conventions take place in enclosed areas with mechanical ventilation. Therefore, it would be loving on our part to limit the use of strong fragrances, colognes, and perfumes that may cause reactions in people with respiratory or related problems.—1 Cor. 10:24.

               Please Follow Up (S-43) Forms: A Please Follow Up form should be used to provide information regarding any interest found through informal witnessing during the convention. Completed forms may be submitted to the Book Room or given to your congregation secretary on your return home.

            Restaurants: Honor Jehovah’s name by your fine conduct at restaurants. Dress in a way that befits a Christian minister. Leave a tip if this is customary.

               Hotels:
               Please do not reserve more rooms than you will actually use, and do not have more people stay in your room than what is allowed.

               Do not cancel your reservation except for an emergency situation, and notify the hotel as soon as it occurs so that others needing accommodations can use the room. (Matt. 5:37) If you do have to cancel, be sure to get a cancellation number. If you cancel a room less than 48 hours ahead of time, your deposit will not be refunded.

               Please note that if you use a debit or credit card when registering at a hotel, it is standard practice for the hotel to place a hold on funds in your account to cover your total room cost, plus any possible damages or incidentals during your stay. You will not be able to use any of those funds until your account is settled within a few days after you depart.

               Take a luggage cart only when you are ready to use it, and return it immediately so that others may use it.

               If it is the custom in your country, tip hotel workers when they carry your luggage and leave a tip for the housekeeper.

               Cook only in rooms where cooking is permitted.

               Do not abuse any complimentary breakfast, coffee, or ice provisions that are made available for guests to consume while they are at the hotel.

               At all times, display the fruitage of the spirit when dealing with the hotel staff. They are caring for a large number of guests and appreciate our kindness, patience, and reasonableness.

               Parents should supervise their children at all times around the hotel, including the elevators, swimming pool, lobby area, exercise room, and so forth.

               The room rate shown on the Recommended Lodging List is the full price per day, excluding tax. If you are overcharged, refuse these charges and inform the Rooming Department at the convention as soon as possible.

               If a problem arises with your hotel room, inform the Rooming Department while at the convention so that they can assist you.



               Volunteer Service: Any who wish to volunteer should report to the Volunteer Service Department at the convention. Children under 16 years of age can also make a fine contribution by working under the direction of a parent, guardian, or other adult approved by a parent or guardian.






