
How to Witness Using a Literature Display




Witnessing with a mobile cart or a table display is proving to be very effective in drawing honesthearted ones to the truth. (John 6:44) Therefore, elders have been encouraged to organize public witnessing in areas of the congregation’s territory where there is high pedestrian traffic. Since mobile displays are not stationary, generally there is no need to ask permission from the authorities. Who are qualified to participate? Publishers who demonstrate good judgment, present themselves in a dignified way, and have good conversation skills. The following are some dos and don’ts that will help publishers have more success.



Do:
           Be friendly, welcoming, and helpful to passersby. Some publishers give a warm, genuine smile and say a friendly greeting. If someone looks at the display as he passes by, you might say, “You can take something if you like.”

            Stand at an appropriate distance from the display. In some places publishers experience success when they stand within a few feet of the display. Others find that this method makes passersby hesitant to stop, so they stand a little farther away and wait until someone stops at the display. Once a person approaches the display, try to engage him in conversation, perhaps by asking, “Have you ever thought about that question before?”

            Use the Bible as often as possible.

            Explain the Bible study arrangement to anyone who takes one of our study publications, such as the Bible Teach book. Offer to play the video Why Study the Bible? on an electronic device.

            Obtain contact information from interested ones when possible. If the person does not live in your territory, fill out a Please Follow Up (S-43) form, and give it to the secretary as soon as possible.




Don’t:
            Be aggressive, insistent, or pushy or stand next to the display like a sentinel.

            View this form of witnessing as simply a way to distribute literature. When we are in the ministry, our goal is to start Bible studies, so we should try to engage individuals in conversation.

            Block the display or become too engrossed in conversation with your partner. If you must use your cell phone for a personal call, it is usually best to step away from the display.

            Get involved in debates with opposers. If an opposer becomes abusive, it may be necessary to move to another location.





