
Make the Best Use of Your Time in the Ministry




Jehovah’s Witnesses spent 1,945,487,604 hours in the ministry during the 2014 service year—clear evidence that we are resolved to stay busy in Jehovah’s service! (Ps. 110:3; 1 Cor. 15:58) Since “the time left is reduced,” is it possible to use our precious hours in the ministry to contact even more people?—1 Cor. 7:29.
Making the best use of our time in the ministry requires flexibility. For instance, if you regularly spend an hour or more in a particular aspect of the ministry without speaking to anyone, could you make adjustments in order to find and talk to more people? Circumstances vary from place to place. However, the following suggestions may help you to make better use of your time so that you can avoid “striking the air.”—1 Cor. 9:26.
             House-to-House Witnessing: For many decades, publishers have customarily started their day in the ministry by preaching from house to house. However, since many individuals work during the day, why not try preaching from house to house in the late afternoon or early evening, when more people are at home and relaxed? During the day, street or business witnessing may yield better results.

             Public Witnessing: Tables and mobile displays should be set up in high-traffic areas within the congregation’s territory boundary. (See the July 2013 Our Kingdom Ministry, p. 5.) If pedestrian traffic diminishes in an area designated for public witnessing, the Congregation Service Committee may decide that the mobile display or table should be relocated to an area with higher pedestrian traffic.

             Return Visits and Bible Studies: Is it possible to schedule your return visits and Bible studies during times when other features of the ministry are less productive? For instance, if the house-to-house ministry is productive on Saturday mornings, could you have your Bible study in the afternoon or in the evening? When making return visits, could publishers split into smaller car groups so as to accomplish more in the ministry?


While it is true that we can count our time whenever we engage in the ministry, our joy increases when we are productive. If you find that participating in one feature of the ministry is not effective at a specific time, try another feature. Pray to Jehovah, “the Master of the harvest,” for his direction so that you can make the best use of your time in the ministry!—Matt. 9:38.




