Announcements
▪ Literature offer for August: Any of the following 32-page brochures may be used: Does God Really Care About Us?, Enjoy Life on Earth Forever!, “Look! I Am Making All Things New,” Should You Believe in the Trinity?, The Divine Name That Will Endure Forever, The Government That Will Bring Paradise, What Happens to Us When We Die?, What Is the Purpose of Life​—How Can You Find It?, and When Someone You Love Dies. The brochures A Book for All People, Our Problems​—Who Will Help Us Solve Them?, Spirits of the Dead​—Can They Help You or Harm You? Do They Really Exist?, and Will There Ever Be a World Without War? may be offered where appropriate. September: Life​—How Did It Get Here? By Evolution or by Creation? October: The Watchtower and Awake! magazines. Where interest is found on return visits, subscriptions may be offered. November: What Does God Require of Us? or Knowledge That Leads to Everlasting Life. If people already have these, Mankind’s Search for God or another older publication may be offered.
▪ The presiding overseer or someone designated by him should audit the congregation’s accounts on September 1 or as soon as possible thereafter. When this has been done, make an announcement to the congregation after the next accounts report is read.
▪ Congregations should begin requesting the 2002 Calendar of Jehovah’s Witnesses with their September literature request. The calendars will be available in Afrikaans, Albanian, Arabic, Armenian, Chinese, Croatian, Czech, Danish, Dutch, East Armenian, English, Finnish, French, German, Greek, Hebrew, Hindi, Hungarian, Italian, Japanese, Korean, Norwegian, Polish, Portuguese, Romanian, Russian, Serbian, Slovak, Spanish, Swedish, Turkish, and Ukrainian.
▪ An adequate supply of forms for use during the 2002 service year is being sent to each congregation. Please use these forms with discretion. They should be used only for their intended purpose.
▪ Beginning this year, regular pioneers will not be eligible to attend Pioneer Service School unless they are at least 16 years of age by September 1 of the year they attend the school. An exception would be made if a minor’s pioneer parent qualifies to attend the same class.
▪ The annual inventory of all literature and magazines on hand should be taken on or as close to August 31, 2001, as possible. This inventory is similar to the actual count taken monthly by the literature coordinator, and the totals should be entered on the Literature Inventory form (S-18). The total number of magazines on hand can be obtained from the magazine servants in each congregation in the literature group. Each coordinating congregation will receive three Literature Inventory forms (S-18). Please mail the original to the branch office no later than September 6. Keep a carbon copy for your files. The third copy may be used as a work sheet. The secretary of the coordinating congregation should supervise the inventory. He and the presiding overseer of the coordinating congregation will sign the form.
▪ From August 31, 2001, to September 1, 2001, an inventory will be taken of all literature on hand at Brooklyn Bethel. Because of this, no congregation literature requests will be processed for shipment or for pickup during those days.
▪ Awake! in Japanese is now available on audiocassette.
▪ The Watchtower in Swahili will be available as a large-print edition beginning with the September 1, 2001, issue.
▪ New Publications Available:
2001 Yearbook of Jehovah’s Witnesses​—Malayalam
“All Scripture Is Inspired of God and Beneficial”​—Tamil, Thai
How to Find the Road to Paradise (for Muslims)​—Tamil
How to Improve Your Speaking and Teaching Ability​—East Armenian, Tongan
How to Start and Continue Bible Discussions​—Tongan
Isaiah’s Prophecy​—Light for All Mankind I—​Georgian, Hebrew, Iloko, Papiamento, Punjabi
Knowledge That Leads to Everlasting Life​—Mizo, Wallisian
Life in a Peaceful New World (Tract No. 15)​—Lingala
My Book of Bible Stories (Small size)​—Latvian, Tamil
Questions Young People Ask​—Answers That Work—​Turkish
Should You Believe in the Trinity?​—Tongan
Sing Praises to Jehovah (29 songs)​—Tigrinya
Spirits of the Dead​—Can They Help You or Harm You? Do They Really Exist?​—Tongan
The Guidance of God​—Our Way to Paradise—​Hindi, Macedonian
What Does God Require of Us?​—Acholi, Kirundi, Lingala, Oromo
What Happens to Us When We Die?​—Yoruba
What Is the Purpose of Life​—How Can You Find It?​—Niuean
When Someone You Love Dies​—Latvian, Tongan
You Can Be God’s Friend!​—Bengali, Cebuano, Hiligaynon, Marshallese
▪ New Audiocassettes Available:
Appreciating Our Spiritual Heritage (Drama, single cassette)​—Korean, Portuguese
Families​—Make Daily Bible Reading Your Way of Life! (Drama, single cassette)​—Romanian
Marked for Survival (Drama, single cassette)​—Spanish
The Good News According to Luke (set of three cassettes)​—Chinese (Mandarin)
The Good News According to John (set of two cassettes)​—Chinese (Mandarin)
Warning Examples for Our Day (Drama, single cassette)​—German, Italian, Japanese, Polish, Ukrainian
What Does God Require of Us? (single cassette)​—Navajo, Urdu
When Someone You Love Dies (single cassette)​—Italian, Japanese, Slovak

