Do You Want to Do More?
1 Jesus likened the Kingdom to priceless treasures. (Matt. 13:44-46) The work of spreading the news of the Kingdom is also a valuable treasure. This ministry deserves top priority in our lives, even if having a full share in it involves a measure of self-denial. (Matt. 6:19-21) Do you want to do more in Kingdom service?
2 Consider These Essentials: Several things are necessary in order to expand our personal share in the ministry: (1) being determined to put Kingdom interests first in life (Matt. 6:33); (2) exercising faith and relying on Jehovah (2 Cor. 4:1, 7); (3) seeking God’s help through sincere and persistent prayer (Luke 11:8-10); (4) following through and acting in harmony with our prayers.​—Jas. 2:14, 17.
3 Ways to Expand Our Ministry: All of us can set the basic goal of regularly spending some time in the ministry each month. But have you also considered seizing every opportunity to witness informally, striving to make your presentations more meaningful, increasing the effectiveness of your return visits, and endeavoring to conduct progressive home Bible studies? Might you be able to auxiliary or regular pioneer or to serve where the need is greater? If you are a baptized brother, could you reach out to qualify as a ministerial servant or an elder? (1 Tim. 3:1, 10) Could you expand your ministry by applying for Bethel service, Ministerial Training School, or missionary training at Gilead School?​—Luke 10:2.
4 A brother who had a full-time job and spent much time in sports activities was encouraged to become a regular pioneer. He began auxiliary pioneering and then adjusted his circumstances to enter the full-time ministry. He later attended the Ministerial Training School, which helped prepare him for his present assignment as a circuit overseer. He is very glad that he responded to the encouragement he received, and he is confident that he is much happier as a result of his decision to do more in Kingdom service.
5 Jehovah blesses those who make themselves available. (Isa. 6:8) Let nothing hold you back from expanding your ministry and enjoying even greater satisfaction and refreshment as a result.

