How Important Is Christian Fellowship?
1 “No man is an island.” That statement by a 17th-century poet merely echoes what the Bible says about a basic human need​—fellowship. (Prov. 18:1) Our Christian association fills this need. In what beneficial ways?
2 In the Ministry: One of the foremost benefits is the way our brothers strengthen and support us in the public ministry. Jesus sent his disciples “two by two” to preach. (Mark 6:7; Luke 10:1) In line with this pattern, when we work with others in the field service, we experience the truthfulness of Ecclesiastes 4:9, 10. As we carry out our ministry together, the faith, obedience, and love of our companions infuse us with courage and renew our zeal.
3 For Personal Help: Our brotherhood is also a source of encouragement and guidance for coping with pressures and resisting temptations. Our Christian associates may call to our attention scriptures that address our personal concerns. They may even pray in our behalf, just as we do for them. (2 Cor. 1:11) And certainly their good example motivates us in right works and strengthens us.
4 At the Meetings: The blessing of Christian fellowship is enjoyed when we regularly attend congregation meetings. (Heb. 10:24, 25) The program is rich in spiritual instruction, and our presence at the meetings keeps us close to our fellow believers. These gatherings give us opportunity to hear our brothers and sisters express their faith, whether from the platform or from the audience. (Rom. 1:12) Our bond of fellowship deepens as we visit before and after meetings. Such occasions afford us opportunities to relate our own faith-building experiences. Our personalities are affected in a positive way when we associate freely with those who love Jehovah, his Word, his work, and his people.​—Phil. 2:1, 2.
5 We need our Christian associates. Without them, walking on the cramped road leading to life would be more difficult. With their love and encouragement, however, we can continue on toward Jehovah’s righteous new world.​—Matt. 7:14.

