Service Meeting Schedule
Week Starting August 13
Song 30
13 min: Local announcements. Selected Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry. Encourage everyone to view the video The New World Society in Action in preparation for the discussion at the Service Meeting the week of August 27. Discuss “New Special Assembly Day Program.” Announce date of the next special assembly day, and urge all to attend the entire program. Encourage publishers to invite newly interested ones and Bible students.
17 min: “Do You Want to Do More?”a Include suggestions about doing more to witness to people in your territory who speak a foreign language. Briefly comment on June 15, 1997, Watchtower, pages 26-9.
15 min: “Keep Leisure in Its Proper Place.” A book study conductor converses with a couple after the study. He kindly mentions that lately he has not seen them in field service or at the weekend meetings. The couple explain that vacationing and other summertime activities have kept them occupied. The elder reviews main points in the article, helping the couple to see that spiritual interests should always take first place. They express appreciation for the good reminders. They agree that they will set better priorities in the future.​—See the October 1, 2000, Watchtower, pages 19-20.
Song 68 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting August 20
Song 33
 8 min: Local announcements. Accounts report.
15 min: “You Are ‘a Theatrical Spectacle’!”b Mention some local incidents when people made favorable statements about the work or conduct of Jehovah’s Witnesses.​—See The Watchtower, March 15, 1998, page 10, and January 15, 1999, page 32.
22 min: “Good Manners​—A Trait of Godly People.” Elder gives a five-minute talk on paragraphs 1-5. Then he discusses the remainder of the article on stage with another elder and a ministerial servant. They talk about how to overcome some thoughtless habits that can detract from our meetings and minimize the benefits we receive. They highlight how our association with one another is truly encouraging when we show loving concern for the interests of others.​—Phil. 2:4.
Song 72 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting August 27
Song 40
10 min: Local announcements. Remind publishers to turn in field service reports for August. Briefly share a suggestion or two on how the Creation book can be offered in the ministry during September.​—See examples in Our Kingdom Ministry, September 1996, page 8, and June 1995, page 4.
10 min: Local needs.
25 min: “A Historical Look at The New World Society in Action.” Audience discussion and interviews. After discussing the questions provided, interview any who saw the original film or who attended the international conventions in the 1950’s. Have them express what they remember about those events, the impact on them spiritually, and their conviction that this is Jehovah’s organization. In October we will review the video United by Divine Teaching.
Song 74 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting September 3
Song 80
 8 min: Local announcements.
17 min: “How Important Is Christian Fellowship?”c Include comments under the subheading “Through the Congregation” in the January 15, 1996, Watchtower, page 22.
20 min: If Someone Says. Discussion and demonstrations. In the ministry, when people make statements or raise questions that we do not anticipate, we should endeavor to reply instead of changing the subject or ending the conversation. The Reasoning book will often be helpful in this regard. Point out some common remarks, and have publishers demonstrate how to respond with the comments in the Reasoning book. For example: ‘I don’t believe in God.’ (pages 150-1) ‘Why don’t you get involved in efforts to improve the community?’ (pages 207-8) ‘It doesn’t matter what church you belong to.’ (page 332) Encourage all to use this feature of the Reasoning book when unexpected situations arise in the ministry.
Song 121 and concluding prayer.
[Footnotes]
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.

