VOL. XV. JANUARY 15, 1894. NO. 2. 



"ARE THERE FEW THAT BE SAVED?" 



EMERGING from that blackness of error 
called Calvinism, with its heaven of blessing 
for the "little flock" and its eternal torment 
of all others, as taught by good but sadly deceived 
men— John Calvin, Jonathan Edwards, 
Charles H. Spurgeon and others— into the glorious 
light of the goodness of God, shining in 
the face of Jesus Christ our Lord and revealed 
in the divine Plan of the Ages, the writer was 
subjected to the same attacks of Satan (the great 
Enemy of God and man) to which all others 
seem to be exposed. Coming as an angel of 
light, he seemed to welcome us into the light 
out of the gross darkness which he himself had 
brought upon the world. And while our heart 
trembled with joy, and yet with fear also, lest 
after all we should find some evidence that God 
would do some terrible and unjust thing, to at 
least some of his creatures, the suggestion came, 
God will not permit any to be lost. 

At this time the word lost still had associated 
with it that unscriptural, wicked and awful 
meaning of eternal torment; for, although 
we had gotten rid of that misbelief, and 
saw that lost means dead, destroyed, the influence 
of that old error still gave a false coloring 
to the words formerly supposed to teach it. 
Hence the greater force in the suggestion that 
God would not permit any to be lost;— for 
surely no enlightened mind can candidly imagine 
the eternal misery of a solitary individual 
in all of God's universe. 

Reason and judgment swayed for a time, first 
to one side and then to the other, according 
to circumstances and moods, until we learned 
that our reasoning powers are not to be relied 
upon to settle such questions; that they are 
imperfect as well as liable to be prejudiced; 
and that for this cause God had given us his 
inspired Word to guide our reasoning faculties 
into proper channels. Then, appealing to the 
Scriptures, we found abundant proof that unless 
God therein trifles with his children's 
confidence (and as men would say "bluffs" 
them, with suggestions and threats which he 
knows he will never execute) there surely will 
be some lost as well as some saved. 

Among these Scriptures are not only those 
similes which speak of the salt which lost its 
value, and was thenceforth good for naught, 
but to be trodden under foot, and of the destruction 



of those servants which would "not 
have this man to rule over" them (Matt. 5:13; 
Luke 19:14,27), etc., but the following 
plain statements:— 

Some "wrest the Scriptures to their own destruction. 
--2 Pet. 3:16. 

"Pride goeth before destruction."— 
Prov. 16:18. 

"The Lord preserveth [saves] the souls of his 
saints."-Psa. 97:10. 

"The Lord preserveth all them that love 
him, but all the wicked [not the ignorant] will 
he destroy."-Psa. 145:20. 

"False teachers... bring in damnable 
heresies,. ..and bring upon themselves 
swift destruction."— 2 Pet. 2:1. 

Some are "vessels of wrath fitted to destruction." 
-Rom. 9:22. 

R1611 : page 20 

"Them that walk after the flesh. ..shall 
utterly perish in their own corruption."— 
2 Pet. 2:10-12. 

"The destruction of the transgressors and of 
the [wilful] sinners shall be together, and they 
that forsake the Lord shall be consumed."— 
Isa. 1:28. 

The Lord will "destroy them that corrupt 
the earth. "-Rev. 11:18. 

"The way of the Lord is strength to the upright: 
but destruction shall be to the workers 
of iniquity."-Prov. 10:29,30; 21:15. 

Some fall into "many foolish and hurtful 
lusts [desires], which drown men in destruction." 
-1 Tim. 6:9. 

"For many walk,. ..the enemies of the 
cross of Christ, whose end is destruction."— 
Phil. 3:18,19. 

"Who shall be punished with everlasting 
destruction."— 2 Thes. 1:9. 

"If any man defile the temple of God, him 
will God destroy."- 1 Cor. 3:17. 

"The judgment of God [is] that they who 
do such things are worthy of death." "Because 
that, when they knew God, they... 
became vain in their imaginations, and their 
foolish heart was darkened."— Rom. 1:32,21. 

"Let us therefore fear, lest, a promise being 
left us of entering into his rest, any of you 
should seem to come short of it."— Heb. 4: 1. 

"For it is impossible for those who were 
once enlightened, and have tasted of the heavenly 
gift, and were made partakers of the holy 
Spirit, if they should fall away, to renew them 
again unto repentance; seeing they crucify to 



themselves the Son of God afresh and put him 
to an open shame."— Heb. 6:4-6. 

"See that ye refuse not him that speaketh; 
for if they escaped not who refused him that 
spake on earth [Moses, the typical teacher], 
much more shall not we escape, if we turn 
away from him that speaketh from heaven." 
"Looking diligently, lest any man fail of the 
grace of God. "--Heb. 12:25,15. 

"The soul that will not hear that prophet 
shall be destroyed from among his people."— 
Acts 3:23. 

"By one offering he [Christ] hath perfected 
forever them that are sanctified. ...Let 
us [therefore] draw near with a true heart, in 
full assurance of faith. ...Let us hold fast 
the profession of our faith without wavering, 
...exhorting one another, and so much the 
more as ye see the [Millennial] Day drawing 
on. For if we sin wilfully, after that we have 
received the knowledge of the truth, there remaineth 
no more [part for us in the] sacrifice 
for sins, but a certain fearful looking for of judgment 
and fiery indignation, which shall consume 
the adversaries. "-Heb. 10:14,22-27. 

If "he who [in the typical nation] despised 
the law of Moses [the typical lawgiver] died 
without mercy, of how much sorer [more serious] 
punishment shall he be thought worthy 
who hath trodden under foot [disgraced] the 
Son of God, and hath counted the blood of the 
[New] Covenant an unholy [ordinary] thing, 
and hath done despite unto the spirit of grace?" 
Surely the wages of such conduct would be 
everlasting, while that in the type was not, but 
was covered by the great sacrifice for sins once 
for all. "It is a fearful thing to fall into the 
hands of the living God."-Heb. 10:28,29,31. 

"He that believeth on the Son hath everlasting 
life; and he that believeth not the Son 
shall not see life; but the wrath of God abideth 
on him."— John 3:36; 1 John 5:12. 

"His servants ye are to whom ye render 
service; whether of sin unto death, or of obedience 
unto righteousness."— Rom. 6:16. 

"The end of those things is death."— 
Rom. 6:21. 

"To be carnally minded is [to reap the 
penalty] death; but to be spiritually minded 
is [to reap the reward] life and peace."— 
Rom. 8:6. 

"Sin, when it is finished, bringeth forth 
death."— Jas. 1:15. 

"There is a [kind of] sin unto death;... 
and there is a [kind of] sin not unto death." 
-1 John 5:16. 



"Fear not them which kill the body, but 
are not able to kill [destroy] the soul [being]: 
but rather fear him which is able to destroy 
both soul and body in Gehenna [the second 
death]. "--Matt. 10:28. 

"The wages of sin is death."— Rom. 6:23. 

"As I live, saith the Lord God, I have no 
pleasure in the death of the wicked; but that 
the wicked turn from his way and live. Turn 
ye, turn ye from your evil ways; for why will 
ye die?"--Ezek. 18:32; 33:11. 

"All the wicked will God destroy."-Psa. 145:20; 
147:6. 

What could be more explicit than this testimony 
of God's Word! And how reasonable 
it all is. Torment might properly be objected 
to as unjust as well as unmerciful; but taking 
away the life of those who will not conform 
their lives to the just and holy and kind regulations 
of the New Covenant which God has 

R1611 : page 21 

opened to our race, through Christ's great 
atoning sacrifice, is reasonable, just and 
merciful. 

It is reasonable: why should God continue 
his blessings, of which life is the chief, to those 
who, after knowing and being enabled to conform 
to his just requirements, will not do so? 

It is just: because God is under no obligation 
to man. Man is already his debtor ten 
thousand times; and if he will not render loving 
respect to his Creator's wise and good 
commands, Justice would demand that those 
blessings be stopped. 

It is merciful on God's part to destroy the 
incorrigibly wicked— those who, after full 
knowledge and opportunity have been enjoyed, 
refuse to be conformed to the lines of the law 
of God's Kingdom— the law of love. (1) Because 
all who will live ungodly— out of harmony 
with God's law of love— will always be like 
the restless sea, more or less discontented and 
unhappy. (2) Because such characters, be 
they ever so few, would mar the enjoyment of 
those who do love peace and righteousness. 
And to these God has promised that the time 
shall come when sin and its results, weeping 
and pain and dying, shall cease (Rev. 21:4), 
when he will destroy out of the earth those 
who corrupt it. (Rev. 11:18.) (3) Because God 
has promised that there shall yet be a clean 
world (Isa. 11:9; Rev. 21:5), in which the 
unholy and abominable and all who love and 
make lies shall have no place. (Rev. 21:8.) 



"Thou shalt diligently consider his place and 
it shall not be."-Psa. 37:10. 

Only such as have preferred their own wisdom 
to that of the Bible can read the foregoing 
words of God, and yet believe that all 
men will be everlastingly saved. 

Only such as are puffed up with a sense of 
their own benevolence can hold that God 
never would be satisfied or happy if one of the 
race perished. God has gotten along very 
well without the sinners thus far, and could 
do so forever. It was not for selfish reasons 
that he redeemed all, and is about to restore 
all who will accept his favor in Christ. 

But some attempt to evade the foregoing 
statements of Scripture with the claim that 
they refer to wickedness, and not to wicked 
people; that they mean that all wicked people 
will be destroyed by their conversion—by having 
their wickedness destroyed. We ask those 
who so think to read over these words of God 
again, carefully, and see that they could not, 
reasonably, be so construed. Notice that even 
though the Word mentioned nothing about 
the destruction of wicked doers, but merely 
mentioned the destruction of wickedness and 
wicked things, this would nevertheless include 
wicked doers; because, of all wicked things, 
intelligent, wilful evil-doers are the worst. But 
the Word does specify wicked persons; and 
all who are familiar with rules of grammar 
covering the question know that when the 
person is specified the destruction of his wickedness 
merely could not be meant. 

"The lake of fire, which is the second 
death" (Rev. 20:14), is "prepared for the devil 
and his angels [messengers or servants]." 
(Matt. 25:41.) And all who, with Satan, 
serve sin are his servants or messengers. (Rom. 6:16.) 
For such, yes, for all such, and for 
such only, God has prepared the penalty of 
"everlasting destruction from the presence of 
the Lord and from the glory of his power." 
And from Satan their chief down to the least 
one of his children who, notwithstanding 
knowledge and opportunity to the contrary, 
cling to evil, and choose it rather than righteousness, 
this tribe will be blotted out to the 
praise of God's justice, to the joy and welfare 
of the holy and to their own real advantage. 

It will not do to judge others by ourselves, 
in all respects. The fact that God's saints do 
not feel opposition to God's will, and cannot 
understand how others can entertain such sentiments, 
sometimes leads to the false conclusion 
that if all others enjoyed a similar knowledge 



of God they too would delight in his 
service. That such a conclusion is false is 
evident, from the fact that Satan, who knew 
God thoroughly, "abode not in the truth," 
but became "the father of lies" and "a 
murderer." And, after six thousand years witness 
of sin and its results, he is still the Adversary 
of righteousness. After nearly two 
thousand years knowledge of the love and 

R1611 : page 22 

mercy of God manifested in Christ's sacrifice 
for sin, he is still as unmoved by that love as 
he is unmoved by pity for human woe. And 
more than this: God, who knows the future 
as well as the past, shows us, unquestionably, 
that after being restrained (bound) for a 
thousand years by the power of Christ's Kingdom, 
and during that time witnessing the 
blessings of righteousness, he will, when granted 
liberty at the close of the Millennium, still 
manifest a preference for the way of sin and 
opposition to God's arrangements. Surely this 
proves that intelligent beings, and perfect beings, 
too, can know God and yet choose a way 
of disobedience,— whether or not our minds 
can grasp the philosophy of their course. 

But the philosophy of the matter is this: A 
perfect being, angel or man, is a blank page 
upon which character must be engraved. 
Knowledge and a free will are the engravers. 
Pride, Selfishness and Ambition may be engraved, 
or Love, Humility and Meekness. 
The latter is the blessed or God-like character; 
the former is the sinful or devilish character. 
According to which is engraved will be the 
character. If the will decide for sin and cultivate 
the wicked character, the result will be 
a wicked being. If the will decide for righteousness 
and God-likeness, the result will be 
a holy being. 

The same principles in a general way apply 
also to fallen men. No matter how fallen and 
weak they may be, they have free-wills. They 
can will aright, even when they cannot do 
aright. And under the New Covenant God 
accepts, through Christ, the imperfect deeds, 
where the wills are perfect. 

For some who are now evil doers and lovers 
of sin, our hope is, that they are such because 
of blinding of the devil (2 Cor. 4:4), which 
leads them to make a choice they would not 
make if they had a full, clear knowledge. 
God's guarantee to all, through Christ, is, that 
all shall come to an accurate knowledge of the 



truth, and thus to a full opportunity to choose 
between righteousness and sin. We have no 
hope for any who, after coming to a clear 
knowledge, choose sin, wilfully: neither in 
this age nor in the next is there hope for such, 
according to God's Word. 



R1611 : page 22 

THE FUTURE-SOCIAL AND RELIGIOUS. 

AS SEEN BY A CONGREGATIONAL MINISTER. 



REV. Dr. C. I. Scofield, pastor of a large 
Congregational church in Texas, recently 
preached a sermon on unfulfilled prophecies as 
interpreted by the signs of the times. He said: 

I am to speak to you to-night upon unfulfilled 
prophecy as interpreting the signs of the 
times. As pertinent to that theme, I ask you 
to look with me at the passage found in Luke 12:54-56: 
"And he said also to the people, 
when ye see a cloud rise out of the west, straitway 
ye say, There cometh a shower; and so it 
is. And when ye see the south wind blow, ye 
say, There will be heat; and it cometh to pass. 
Ye hypocrites! Ye can discern the face of the 
sky, and of the earth; but how is it that ye do 
not discern this time?" 

As a matter of fact, the ancient people of 
God did not discern the time of their visitation, 
the presence of their long expected Messiah, 
simply and only because they did not 
study the signs of their own times in the light 
of the prophets. From Genesis to Malachi 
the spirit of prophecy had been painting, broadly 
at first, but stroke upon stroke in ever fuller 
detail, the portrait of a coming one. His biography, 
to change the figure, was written 
beforehand. 

In due time he came, and prophecy began 
to be changed into history. For three years 
he filled the earth and air with the very marks 
of identity which the prophetic portrait required. 
To this day the absolutely unanswerable 
proof of the messiahship of Jesus is the 
unvarying literalness of his fulfillment of the 
prophecies. The prophets and the evangelists 
answer to each other as the printed page answers 
to the type, as the photograph answers 
to the negative. And these predictions, be it 
remembered, were so minute and specific as to 



exclude the possibility of imposture. It is 
open to any man to say, "I am the Christ;" 
but it is not possible for any man to arrange 
his ancestry for two thousand years before his 
birth, and then to be born at a precise time, in 
a particular village, of a virgin mother. 

Looking back upon all this, we marvel that 
the men of Christ's own time did not hit upon 

R1611 : page 23 

the simple expedient of testing his pretensions 
by the prophetic Scriptures. More than once 
he challenged the test, but they remained to 
the end discerners of the sky and of the earth, 
but absolutely blind to the tremendous portents 
of their time. 

But is it not possible, at least, that we are 
equally blind to equally evident signs? We 
have the prophetic word "made more sure," 
says Peter, who calls it a "light shining in a 
dark place," and warns us that we do well to 
take heed to it. But are we walking in that 
light? Rather, is it not true that the prophetic 
Scriptures are precisely the portions of the 
sacred book least studied? Of this we may be 
sure: there is nothing occurring which has not 
been foreseen and foretold; and of this, too, 
that the things foretold will surely come to pass. 
Is it not possible, therefore, that our Lord is 
saying of us: "How is it that ye do not discern 
this time?" 

Let us proceed after this manner: First, let 
us look at the prophecies which describe the 
closing events of this dispensation and usher 
in the next. Second, let us look about us to 
see if our sky holds any portent of those things. 

The first great word of prophecy, solemn, 
repeated, emphatic, is that this age ends in 
catastrophe. 

"In the last days perilous times shall come. 
There shall be signs in the sun and in the 
moon and in the stars, and upon the earth distress 
of nations with perplexity; the sea and 
the waves roaring; men's hearts failing them 
for fear and for looking after those things 
which are coming on the earth, for the powers 
of heaven shall be shaken. And then shall they 
see the Son of Man coming in a cloud with 
power and great glory." (Luke 21:25-27.) 
"But as the days of Noah were, so shall also 
the presence of the Son of Man be. For, as in 
the days that were before the flood, they were 
eating and drinking, marrying, and giving in 
marriage, until the day that Noah entered into 
the ark, and knew not until the flood came 



and took them all away; so shall also the 
presence of the Son of Man be." (Matt. 24:37-39.) 
"For yourselves know perfectly that the 
day of the Lord so cometh as a thief in the 
night. For when they shall say, Peace and 
safety, then sudden destruction cometh upon 
them, as travail upon a woman with child; and 
they shall not escape." And then, referring to 

R1612 : page 23 

the abundant prophetic testimony in our hands, 
the apostle adds, "But ye, brethren, are not 
in darkness, that that day should overtake you 
as a thief."— 1 Thess. 5:3,4. 

It is useless to multiply references when all 
are to the same purport. The notion that we 
are to pass, by the peaceful evolutionary processes 
of a broadening culture, by the achievements 
of discovery and inventions and by 
the universal acceptance of the gospel, into the 
golden age of millennial blessedness is, in the 
light of prophecy, the baseless fabric of a 
dream. True, the prophet's vision takes in 
that day; but it lies beyond the awful chasm of 
blood and tears and despair which yawns between. 
Toward that chasm this age is hastening 
with accelerated speed: this age ends in 
catastrophe. 

So much for the broad and obvious prophetic 
testimony which he who runs may read. Now 
the book of the Revelation (and to some extent 
Second Thessalonians) takes up these prophecies 
of the end time, and enters into the detail 
of them. By this we know not merely that the 
end is calamitous and catastrophic, but also of 
what elements the calamitous catastrophe is 
made up. Observe, I do not say that the Revelation 
tells us what precedes the catastrophe, 
but of what the catastrophe itself consists. 

And first it is war, and war such as this world 
has never seen, war colossal, universal and desperate. 
"Peace shall be taken from the earth." 
Not only organized combat of nation against 
nation, but the murderous passions of men 
shall be unchained, and "they shall kill each 
other." The natural results of such a condition 
are depicted as following famine, consequent 
upon unsown fields, and then pestilence. 

And, second, this awful condition is to be 
followed by bloody anarchy— the overthrow of 
all settled government. 

Now, it is evident that if we are indeed near 
the end of this age, some unmistakable signs 
of these coming horrors must be discoverable. 
Wars on the apocalyptic scale require long 



years of preparation. In primitive conditions, 
tribe springs to arms against tribe; but we are 
not living in primitive conditions. If, therefore, 
we find the nations of the earth steadily 
reducing their armaments, selling off their war 
material, sending regiments back to the forge 
and the plow, and dismantling fortresses, we 
may be sure, not indeed that the prophecies 
will fail, but that they will not reach their fulfillment 
in our time. 

Similarly, anarchy in any universal sense is 
not the product of an hour. The conservative 
instincts are too strong, love of home and property 
and security too deep-seated. Men may, 
as they have, overturn a government; but it is 
only to establish another which they prefer. 
But anarchy, pure and simple, is not a spontaneous 
possibility. If, therefore, we find men 

R1612:page24 

everywhere growing in love of order and veneration 
for law; if we find lynchings and riots 
becoming infrequent, and discontent with the 
settled order disappearing, we may be sure that 
the end of the age is far removed from us. We 
may go on with our buying and selling, confident 
that our accumulations will represent 
some fleeting value for yet a few transitory 
years. 

Nor need we be specially apprehensive if, 
upon a survey of the times, we find but a nation 
or two here and there in readiness for 
war; or a few anarchic socialists noisily venting 
their theories. But what are the facts- 
facts so conspicuous, so obtrusive, so inconsistent, 
that all the world feels itself under the 
shadow of impending calamity? 

Take the war shadow first. Have armaments 
been decreasing? On the contrary, Europe, 
the east, everything within the sphere anciently 
ruled by Rome (which is the especial sphere 
of prophetic testimony), is filled as never before 
with armed men. All the nations, with 
feverish haste, are increasing their armaments. 
Practically bankrupt, they are hoarding gold 
and piling up material of war, though perfectly 
aware that the strain is simply insupportable 
for any long continued period; and they are 
doing it because they all feel that a tremendous 
crisis is at hand. 

Within two years Bismarck and Gladstone, 
the most experienced and sagacious of living 
statesmen, have said that the situation does 
not admit of a peaceful solution, that the 
world is hastening toward the war of wars, the 



outcome of which no man may predict. This is 
also the expressed opinion of that singular man 
whose only position is that of Paris correspondent 
of the London Times, but whose wisdom, 
judgment and prudence are such that he is 
consulted by every cabinet and trusted by every 
sovereign— De Blowitz. And all are agreed 
that the war, when it comes, must involve the 
earth. 

Eleven millions of men are armed and drilled 
and ready to drench the prophetic earth in 
seas of blood. The Emperor William has said 
to his friend, Poultney Bigelow: "We live 
over a volcano. No man can predict the moment 
of the eruption. So intense is the strain 
that a riot the other day between French and 
Italian workmen at Aigues-Mortes— a mere riot 
—came near to precipitating the awful conflict." 

So much for the war sign of the end. What 
of the anarchic portent? We all know that 
now for the first time in the history of the 
world is there a socialist propaganda. Socialism 
is a fad with dreaming doctrinaires, a desperate 
purpose with millions of the proletariat 
of Russia, France, Germany, England, Italy. 

From the philosophic socialism of Bellamy 
and the idealists to the anarchic socialism 
of Spies, Schwab and Neebe may seem a far 
cry. How long in 1790-93 did it take France 
to traverse the distance from Rousseau and 
Diderot to Robespierre? Yes, my hearers, the 
anarchy sign blazes in our heavens alongside 
the baleful war sign. But there is more. Two 
groups among the sons of men are especially in 
the eye of prophecy— the Christian church and 
ancient Israel. What, let us ask, is the prophetic 
picture of the end of the Church age? 
The answer is in large characters, and none 
need miss it. The Church age ends in increasing 
apostasy, lukewarmness, and worldliness on 
the part of the many; of intense activity, zeal 
and devotedness on the part of the few. 

What now are the signs? Look into our 
Churches. The world has come into the Church 
and the Church has gone into the world, until 
the frontier is effaced. Moral and honorable 
men of the world point the finger of scorn at 
the life of the average professor of religion. 
But in all our Churches are the faithful few 
who do the praying, the giving, the home and 
foreign mission work; and these have never 
been excelled in any age in zeal, piety and 
consecration. Verily, this sign, too, of the 
catastrophe is here. 

What of Israel? As all Bible students know, 
the great burden of the unfulfilled prophecy 



concerning the Jew is his restoration to his 
own land. This does not mean that every Jew 
must return, but only that the nation must be 
reconstituted upon its own soil. Is there any 
sign of this? Every reader of the newspapers 
has his answer ready. In a word, there are 
more Jews in Palestine now than returned 
under Ezra and Zerrubabel to reconstitute the 
nation after the Babylonian captivity. More 
have returned in the last ten years than within 
any like period since the destruction of Jerusalem 
—more in the last three years than in the 
previous thirty. The great bulk of the Jewish 
people are in Russia, where now they are undergoing 
persecutions so infamous as to move 
to indignation and grief every generous soul. 
Moved with pity, Baron Hirsch is seeking to 
deport his suffering brethren to South America; 
but the Russian Jews themselves, moved by 
undying faith in the prophets, have organized 
the great Choveir Lion association to promote 
the colonization of Palestine. This will succeed; 
the other, in large measure, will fail. 

And so, my friends, looking through the 
vision of the prophets on to the end-time for 

R1612:page25 

conditions, and then sweeping our own sky 
for signs, we find the four great portents- 
preparation for universal war, universal anarchy, 
a worldly Church and regathering Israel lifting 
themselves up into a significance which the 
world dimly apprehends, but which we, who are 
not of the night that that day should overtake 
us as a thief, know means that the end is just 
upon us. How glorious that this lamp of 
prophecy not only casts its rays into the awful 
abyss upon the brink of which the age hangs 
poised, but also lights up the fair Millennial 
shore just beyond, where the nations of the 
redeemed shall walk in light and peace under 
Messiah's rule, with restored Israel the manifestation 
of his earthly glory. And even beyond 
that golden age we are permitted to see 
the new heavens and the new earth— eternity. 



R1615:page25 

A SAVIOR AND A GREAT ONE! 



A ghastly sight shows in the shivering air 



On Calvary's brow: 
The Savior of mankind, in love, hangs there; 

While followers bow 
The head low on the breast and sadly sigh, 
"How can he be Messiah— if he die?" 

A jeering mob surrounds the cursed knoll 

And mocks the Lord; 
Yet to his lips comes from his stricken soul 

The precious word— 
"Father, forgive; they know not what they do—" 
E'er o'er his face creeps dissolution's hue. 

"Tis finished," rings in triumph through the sky; 

He bows his head. 
And; while the querying soldiers mark the cry, 

The Lord is dead. 
All anguish past, his triumph doth begin, 
The world is saved, a death blow dealt to sin. 

Jerusalem, amazed, hears soldiers tell 

(With terror cold) 
How Christ has vanquished Satan, death and hell, 

As he foretold. 
And feeble fishers forcefully proclaim, 
"There is salvation in no other name." 

A Sabbath's journey from the city gate, 

With sorrow shod, 
Two sad disciples bear their sorry weight 

To their abode. 
The Christ appears, while holden are their eyes, 
And doth expound wherefor Messiah dies. 

Emmaus reached, the Lord would further go. 

They gently chide— 
"Thou hast beguiled our weary tears, and so 

With us abide." 
He brake their bread,— then vanished from their sight. 
Their hearts did burn with holy joy that night. 

Still thus he comes; and though the faulty sight 

Of clouded eyes 
Perceives him not, he makes the burden light, 

And stills our cries: 
For, like weaned babes, we mourn, the while he would 
Our hearts sustain with stronger, richer food. 

The tale is old, but ever sweetly new, 

Why Jesus died. 
The nail prints, doubting one, he shows to you, 

And in his side 
A spear thrust gapes— a passage rent apart, 
For easy access to your Savior's heart. 

It was for you, my brother, that he shed 



His life so free. 
For you, for me, he bowed his godlike head 

On Calvary's tree; 
That, trusting in the merit of his name, 
We might be saved from sorrow, sin and shame. 

The past sufficeth, surely, to have spent 

In sinful deeds. 
Come, join our band; and be our footsteps bent 

Where Jesus leads. 
So in his righteousness serenely dressed 
We'll meet him face to face among the blest. 
--H. HARDIE. 



R1612:page25 

ECHOES FROM THE PARLIAMENT OF RELIGIONS. 

A GLIMPSE AT THE SOCIAL AND RELIGIOUS LIFE OF INDIA. 



[Continued from our last.] 

HAPPY HINDOO MARRIAGES. 

"Happiness is not to be confounded with 
palatial dwellings, gorgeously fitted with soft 
seats and yielding sofas, with magnificent costumes, 
with gay balls or giddy dancing parties, 
nor with noisy revelries or drinking bouts and 
card tables; and as often, if not oftener, in 
that distant lotus land, as in your own beloved 
land of liberty, you will come across a young 
and blooming wife in the first flush of impetuous 
youth who, when suddenly smitten with 
the death of the lord of her life, at once takes 

R1612 : page 26 

to the pure and spotless garb of a poor widow, 

R1613 : page 26 

and with devout resignation awaits for the call 
from above to pass into the land which knows 
no parting or separation. But these are cases 
of those who are capable of thought and feeling. 
What sentiment of devoted love can you 
expect from a girl of twelve or fourteen whose 
ideas are so simple and artless and whose mind 
still lingers at skipping and dollmaking? What 
sense and reason is there in expecting her to 
remain in that condition of forced, artificial, 



lifelong widowhood? Oh, the lot of such child- widows! 
How shall I depict their mental 
misery and sufferings? Language fails and 
imagination is baffled at the task. Cruel fate 
—if there be any such power—has already reduced 
them to the condition of widows, and 
the heartless, pitiless customs of the country 
barbarously shave them of their beautiful hair, 
divest them of every ornament or adornment, 
confine them to loneliness and seclusion- 
nay, teach people to hate and avoid them as 
objects indicating something supremely ominous 
and inauspicious. Like bats and owls, on 
all occasions of mirth and merriment they must 
confine themselves to their dark cells and close 
chambers. The unfortunate Hindoo widow is 
often the drudge in the family; every worry 
and all work that no one in the family will 
ever do is heaped on her head; and yet the 
terrible mother-in-law will almost four times 
in the hour visit her with cutting taunts and 
sweeping curses. No wonder that these poor 
forlorn and persecuted widows often drown 
themselves in an adjoining pool or a well, or 
make a quietus to their life by draining the 
poison-cup. After this I need hardly say that 
the much-needed reform in this matter is the 
introduction of widow marriages. 

SOME HINDOO REFORMERS. 

"The Hindoo social reformer seeks to introduce 
the practice of allowing such widows 
to marry again. As long ago as fifty years one 
of our great pundits, the late pundit V.S. of 
Bombay, raised this question and fought it out 
in central and northern India with the orthodox 
Brahmans. The same work, and in a 
similar spirit, was carried out in Bengal and 
Northern India, by the late Ishwar Ch. V. 
Sagar of Calcutta, who died only two years 
ago. These two brave souls were the Luther 
and Knox of India. Their cause has been 
espoused by many others, and until to-day 
perhaps about two hundred widow marriages 
have been celebrated in India. The orthodox 
Hindoos as yet have not begun to entertain 
this branch of reform with any degree of favor, 
and so anyone who marries a widow is put under 
a social ban. He is excommunicated; that 
is, no one would dine with him, or entertain 
any idea of intermarriage with his children or 
descendants. In spite of these difficulties the 
cause of widow marriage is daily gaining 
strength both in opinion and adherence. 

"The position of woman. A great many 



reforms in the Hindoo social and domestic 
life cannot be effected until and unless the 
question as to what position does a woman occupy 
with reference to man is solved and settled. 
Is she to be recognized as man's superior, 
his equal, or his inferior? The entire 
problem of Hindoo reform hinges on the position 
that people in India will eventually ascribe 
to their women. The question of her position 
is yet a vexed question in such advanced 
countries as England and Scotland. Here in 
your own country of the States you have, I 
presume to think, given her a superior place 
in what you call the social circle and a place 
of full equality in the paths and provinces of 
ordinary life. Thus my American sisters are 
free to compete with man in the race for life. 
Both enjoy the same, or nearly the same, rights 
and privileges. In India it is entirely different. 
The Hindoo lawgivers were all men, and, 
whatever others may say about them, I must 
say that in this one particular respect, viz., 
that of giving woman her own place in society, 
they were very partial and short-sighted men. 
They have given her quite a secondary place. 
In Indian dramas, poems and romances you 
may in many places find woman spoken of as 
the 'goddess' of the house and the 'deity of 
the palace,' but that is no more than a poet's 
conceit, and indicates a state of things that long, 
long ago used to be rather than at present is. 

WOMEN'S BATTLE FROM BIRTH. 

"For every such passage you will find the 
other passages in which the readers are treated 
with terse dissertations and scattering lampoons 
on the so-called innate dark character 
of women. The entire thought of the country 
one finds saturated with this idea. The Hindoo 
hails the birth of a son with noisy demonstrations 
of joy and feasting; that of a female 
child as the advent of something that he would 
most gladly avoid if he could. The bias begins 
here at her very birth. Whatever may be 
the rationale of this state of things, no part of 
the programme of Hindoo social reform can 
ever be successfully carried out until woman is 
recognized as man's equal, his companion and 
co-worker in every part of life; not his handmaid, 
a tool or an instrument in his hand, a 
puppet or a plaything, fit only for the hours of 
amusement and recreation. To me the work 

R1613:page27 



of social reform in India means a full recognition 

of woman's position. The education 

and enlightenment of women, granting to them 

liberty and freedom to move about freely, to 

think and act for themselves, liberating them 

from the prisons of long-locked zenana, extending 

to them the same rights and privileges, 

are some of the grandest problems of Hindoo 

social reform. All these depend on the solution 

of the above mentioned problem of the 

position of woman in India. 

EDUCATION OF THE MASSES. 

"The masses or the common people in India 
are very ignorant and quite uneducated. 
The farmer, the laborer, the workman and the 
artisan do not know how to read or write. They 
are not able to sign their own names. They 
do not understand their own rights. They are 
custom bound and priest-ridden. From times 
past the priestly class has been the keeper and 
the custodian of the temple of knowledge, and 
they have sedulously kept the lower class in 
ignorance and intellectual slavery. Social reform 
does not mean the education and elevation 
of the upper few only: it means inspiring 
the whole country, men and women, high and 
low, from every creed and class, with right 
motives to live and act. The work classes 
need to be taught in many cases the very rudiments 
of knowledge. Night schools for them 
and day schools for their children are badly 
wanted. 

FAILURE OF FOREIGN MISSIONS. 

"Government is doing much; but how much 
can you expect from government, especially 
when that government is a foreign one, and 
therefore has every time to think of maintaining 
itself and keeping its prestige among foreign 
people? It is here that the active benevolence 
of such free people as yourselves is 
needed. In educating our masses and in extending 
enlightenment to our women you can 
do much. Every year you are lavishing— I 
shall not say wasting— mints of money on your 
so-called foreign missions and missionaries sent 
out, as you think, to carry the Bible and its 
salvation to the 'heathen Hindoo,' and thus 
to save him! Aye, to save him! Your poor 
peasants, your earnest women and your generous 
millionaires raise millions of dollars every 
year to be spent on foreign missions. Little, 
how little do you ever dream that your money 



is expended in spreading abroad nothing but 
Christian dogmatism and Christian bigotry, 
Christian pride and Christian exclusiveness. I 
entreat you to expend at least one-tenth of all 
this vast fortune on sending out to our country 
unsectarian, broad learned missionaries that 
will spend their efforts and energies in educating 
our women, our men and our masses. 
Educate. Educate them first, and they will 
understand Christ much better than they would 
do by being 'converted' to the narrow creeds 
of canting Christendom. 

"The difficulties of social reformers in India 
are manifold. Their work is most arduous. 
The work of engrafting on the rising Hindoo 
mind the ideals of a material civilization, such 
as yours, without taking in its agnostic or 
atheistic tendencies, is a task peculiarly difficult 
to accomplish. Reforms based on utilitarian 
and purely secular principles can never 
take a permanent hold on the mind of a race 
that has been essentially spiritual in all its 
career and history. Those who have tried to 
do so have failed. The Brahmo-Somaj, or the 
church of Indian Theism, has always advocated 
the cause of reform, and has always been the 
pioneer in every reform movement. In laying 
the foundations of a new and reformed 
society the Brahmo-Somaj has established every 
reform as a fundamental principle which must 
be accepted before any one can consistently 
belong to its organization. 

"Acting on the model of ancient Hindoo 
society, we have so proceeded that our social 
institutions may secure our religious principles, 
while those principles regulate and establish 
every reform on a safe and permanent footing. 

PLAN OF BRAHMO-SOMAJ. 

"Social reform merely as such has no vitality 
in our land. It may influence here and 
there an individual; it cannot rear a society 
or sway a community. Recognizing this secret, 
the religion of the Brahmo-Somaj has from 
its very birth been the foremost to proclaim a 
crusade against every social evil in our country. 
The ruthless, heartless practice of suttee, 
or the burning of Hindoo widows on the funeral 
pile of their husbands, was abolished through 
the instrumentality of the great Raja Ram Rohan 
Roy. His successors have all been earnest 
social reformers as much as religious reformers. 
In the heart of Brahmo-Somaj you find no 
caste, no image worship. We have abolished 
early marriage, and helped the cause of widow 



marriage. We have promoted intermarriage; 

we fought for and obtained a law from the 

British government to legalize marriage between 

the representatives of any castes and any 

creeds. The Brahmos have been great educationists. 

They have started schools and colleges, 

societies and seminaries, not only for 

R1614:page27 

young men, but for girls and young women. 

In the Brahmo community you will find hundreds 

R1614:page28 

of young ladies who combine in their 
education the acquirements of the east and the 
west; oriental reserve and modesty with occidental 
culture and refinement. Many of our 
ladies have taken degrees in arts and sciences 
in Indian universities. The religion of the 
Brahmo-Somaj is essentially a religion of life 
—the living and life-giving religion of love to 
God and love to man. Its corner-stones are 
the fatherhood of God, the brotherhood of man 
and the sisterhood of woman. We uphold reform 
in religion and religion in reform. While 
we advocate that every religion needs to be 
reformed, we also most firmly hold that every 
reform, in order that it may be a living and 
lasting power, needs to be based on religion. 
"These are the lines of our work: we have 
been working out the most intricate problems 
of Hindoo social reform on these lines. We 
know our work is hard, but at the same time 
we know that the Almighty God, the father of 
nations, will not forsake us; only we must be 
faithful to his guiding spirit. And now, my 
brethren and sisters in America, God has made 
you a free people. Liberty, equality and fraternity 
are the guiding words that you have 
pinned on your banner of progress and advancement. 
In the name of that liberty of 
thought and action, for the sake of which your 
noble forefathers forsook their ancestral homes 
in far-off Europe, in the name of that equality 
of peace and position which you so much prize 
and which you so nobly exemplify in all your 
social and national institutions, I entreat you, 
my beloved American brothers and sisters, to 
grant us your blessings and good wishes, to 
give us your earnest advice and active cooperation 
in the realization of the social, 
political and religious aspirations of young 
India. God has given you a mission. Even 
now he is enacting, through your instrumentality, 



most marvelous events. Read his holy 
will through these events, and extend to young 
India the right hand of holy fellowship and 
universal brotherhood." 

Would that America, with all its advantages 
of the gospel, were able to give the needed 
help; but no, in common with all "Christendom," 
she has fallen short of her privileges, 
and is unable to save India from the ditch toward 
which she herself is blindly drifting. 
But, thank God! help is coming, and that right 
speedily, in the glorious establishment of the 
Kingdom of God over all the earth; and our 
blessed Christ, the Prince of peace, shall himself 
"speak peace unto the heathen; and his 
dominion shall be from sea to sea, and from the 
river to the ends of the earth."— Zech. 9:10. 

A HEATHEN POEM. 

[The following lines, from a recent journal of Madras, 
India, show what some of the best Hindoo minds are 
thinking at the present time.] 

"Weary are we of empty creeds, 

Of deafening calls to fruitless deeds; 

Weary of priests who cannot pray, 

Of guides who show no man the way; 

Weary of rites wise men condemn, 

Of worship linked with lust and shame; 

Weary of custom, blind, enthroned, 

Of conscience trampled, God disowned; 

Weary of men in sections cleft, 

And Hindoo life of love bereft, 

Woman debased, no more a queen, 

Nor knowing what she once hath been; 

Weary of babbling about birth, 

And of the mockery men call mirth; 

Weary of life not understood, 

A battle, not a brotherhood; 

Weary of Kali yuga years, 

Freighted with chaos, darkness, fears; 

Life is an ill, the sea of births is wide, 

And we are weary; who shall be our guide?" 



page 28 

STUDIES IN THE OLD TESTAMENT. 

--INTERNATIONAL S.S. LESSONS.- 

SUGGESTIVE THOUGHTS DESIGNED TO ASSIST THOSE OF OUR 
READERS WHO ATTEND BIBLE CLASSES WHERE THESE 
LESSONS ARE USED; THAT THEY MAY BE ENABLED TO 



LEAD OTHERS INTO THE FULNESS OF THE GOSPEL. 



R1614:page28 

THE MURDER OF ABEL. 



I. QUAR., LESSON III., JAN. 21, GEN. 4:3-13. 

Golden Text— "By faith Abel offered unto God a more 
excellent sacrifice than Cain."— Heb. 1 1:4. 

VERSES 3-5. Coupled with the first promise 
of deliverance from sin and death through 
the seed of the woman, was the typical foreshadowing 
of the great sacrifice of "the 
Lamb of God which taketh away the sin of 
the world," when God substituted the garments 
of skin, which required the sacrifice 
of life, for the fig-leaf garments of Adam 
and Eve. Whether more plainly told them 
or not, we know that the idea of typical 
sacrifices for sin was received, and offerings 
were made at certain intervals of time- 
probably yearly, as subsequently commanded 
under the Jewish dispensation, and also 
as indicated by the sacrifices of Cain and 

R1614 : page 29 

Abel— Cain's offering being of the fruit of 
the ground, a part of his harvest, and Abel's 
a firstling or yearling of his flock. 

The offering of Abel was, according to 
the divine institution, a sacrifice of life, and 
therefore a true type of the promised redemptive 
sacrifice, while Cain's offering was 
not. Hence the offering of Abel was acceptable 
to God, while that of Cain was 
rejected. 

VERSES 6,7. "And Jehovah said unto 
Cain, Why art thou angry? and why is thy 
countenance fallen? If thou doest well, shalt 
thou not be accepted? and if thou doest not 
well, sin croucheth at the door, and unto 
thee is its desire; but thou canst rule over it." 

VERSE 8 shows that Cain disregarded the 
counsel received and allowed his anger to 
burn unchecked. He failed to resist the 
enemy Sin, here figuratively represented as 
a devouring beast, and it gained control of 
him, and drove him, first to unkind words, 
and finally to murder. 



VERSE 9. One sin leads to another unless 
promptly acknowledged. Here the sin 
of murder was followed by those of lying 
and insolence— "I know not. Am I my 
brother's keeper?" 

VERSES 10-12. The blood of Abel cried 
for vengeance upon the murderer. That is, 
Justice insists that he who takes the life of another 
thereby forfeits his own right to live. 

VERSE 13. When Cain began to realize 
the deep remorse of a guilty conscience, in 
his agony of mind he cried out, "My punishment 
is greater than I can bear;" and in 
connection with the unbearable load he 
mentions regretfully the hiding from him 
of Jehovah's face, showing thus an appreciation 
of God's favor to which he would 
fain return. This evidence of penitence was 
quickly responded to by the Lord, who 
graciously set a mark upon Cain, that no one 
finding him should slay him, declaring that 
any such transgressor should receive sevenfold 
punishment. Thus the Lord guards 
the penitent. A bruised reed he will not 
break, and smoking flax he will not quench. 
(Isa. 42:3.) If there be even a slight disposition 
to penitence, he fosters and cherishes 
it. This merciful course with Cain 
foreshadowed God's similar course with the 
whole guilty world: when his chastisements 
shall have brought them to repentance, then 
his arm will be extended for their recovery. 

The Golden Text shows that it was not 
by custom nor by accident that Abel chose 
his sacrifice, but by faith. Evidently he 
had been seeking the mind of the Lord, and 
had found it; and thus was enabled to offer 
acceptably. So with God's children now: 
it is to those who exercise faith, and who 
seek and knock, that the mind of the Lord 
is revealed, and they can see that nothing 
short of the great sacrifice, our Redeemer's 
life, could be acceptable before God. 

The Apostle in speaking of Christ institutes 
a comparison (Heb. 12:24) which seems to 
imply that Abel was in some degree a type 
of Christ;— in that he offered an acceptable 
sacrifice, and was slain therefor. But while 
Abel's death called for vengeance, Christ's 
life was sacrificed for us and calls instead 
for mercy, not only upon those who slew 
him (Luke 23:34), but also upon the whole 
world. Not only was he slain by men, but 
he was slain for men; and by his stripes all 
may be healed who will penitently come 
unto the Father by him. 



R1614:page29 

GOD'S COVENANT WITH NOAH. 



I. QUAR., LESSON IV., JAN. 28, GEN. 9:8-17. 

Golden Text— "I do set my bow in the cloud, and it 
shall be for a token of a covenant between me and the 
earth."-Gen. 9:13. 

With the deluge the Apostle Peter says 
the first world, the first heavens and earth, 
passed away— i.e., that dispensation, that 
order of things came to an end. (2 Pet. 2:5.) 
That was the dispensation in which the 
angels were permitted to mingle with men, 
assuming the human form for that purpose, 
the object being to influence and help mankind 
to retrieve their great loss by the fall. 
This, God knew they could not do; but in 
his wisdom he permitted the endeavor, foreseeing 
the ultimate utility of such an 
experiment. 

R1615 : page 29 

The immediate result was the corruption 
of some of the angels (Jude 6,7), who, leaving 
their first estate, took to themselves wives 
of the daughters of men; and by these mixed 
marriages a mongrel race of "giants" was 
produced, who, having the unimpaired vitality 
of their fathers and the human nature 
of their mothers were indeed "mighty men 
of renown"— "giants" in both physical 
and intellectual strength, especially as compared 
with the fallen and rapidly degenerating 
human race.— Jude 6,7; Gen. 6:2,4. 

The account of the deluge is not merely 
a Bible narrative, but is corroborated by 
the traditions of all races of the human family 

R1615 : page 30 

except the black race. It is found in 
India, China, Japan, Persia, among the native 
Indians of America and the natives of 
the Pacific Islands. What are known as 
the Deluge Tablets were found not long 
since among the ruins of the great stone 
library of Nineveh. The accounts given 
by these harmonize in many respects with 
the Scriptural account. 



The extreme wickedness of these men 
and of the world in general, as described by 
the inspired writer, seems indicative of almost 
total depravity— "And God saw that 
the wickedness of man was great in the 
earth, and that EVERY imagination of the 
thoughts of his heart was ONLY EVIL, CONTINUALLY. 
(Gen. 6:5.) So God determined 
to wipe them all from the face of the earth, 
saving Noah, who "was perfect in his generations," 
and his family; that is, he was not 
of the mixed race, but was of pure Adamic 
stock; and his heart was right before God. 
--Gen. 6:9. 

With Noah, after the flood, God again 
established his covenant, as he had done 
with Adam at the beginning, giving to him 
dominion over the earth, as he had done with 
Adam. (Gen. 9:1-12.) And here again, as 
at the beginning, he indicates the true nature 
of the marriage relation— a union of 
one man and one woman as husband and 
wife, which order began to be violated very 
early in the world's downward history. -- 
Gen. 4:19. 

The rainbow in the clouds was given as 
a sign of God's covenant with man, that the 
earth should never again be destroyed by a 
flood of waters. So ended the first dispensation, 
or the first world, the heavens and 
earth that then were, as Peter describes it 
(2 Pet. 3:6); and so began the second dispensation, 
"this present evil world" (2 Pet. 3:7; 
Gal. 1 :4), the heavens and earth which 
now are, which are soon to pass away 
with a great noise, which are to be burned 
up with the fire of God's jealousy, and whose 
elements are to melt with fervent heat; for, 
like that first great dispensation, it also has 
become corrupt. (2 Pet. 3:10-12; Zeph. 1:18.) 
And when this present evil world will 
have thus passed away, then the new heavens 
and the new earth, wherein dwelleth 
righteousness, shall appear.— 2 Pet. 3:13. 

In this destruction of worlds it will be 
seen, as the Prophet also declares (Eccl. 1:4; 
Psa. 104:5; 119:90); that "the earth abideth 
forever." The same physical earth remains, 
and is the scene of all these great 
revolutionary changes, which so completely 
destroy the preceding order of things as 
to justify the mention of them under the 
significant symbols of a new heavens and 
a new earth. See MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. 
I., Chap. iv. 

While the present world— this present 



order of things— is also doomed to pass 
away, and will be replaced by another new 
dispensation, the new heavens and earth, 
God's promise, of which the bow in the 
clouds was a pledge, will be kept: he will 
never again destroy the world with a flood 
of waters; but it is written that all the earth 
shall be consumed with fire: not a literal 
fire, but the fire of God's jealousy (Zeph. 3:8) 
—a symbolic fire, a great calamity, which 
will completely destroy the present order 
of things, civil, social and religious. 

R1615 : page 30 

BEGINNING OF THE HEBREW NATION. 



I. QUAR., LESSON V., FEB. 4, GEN. 12:1-9. 

Golden Text— "I will bless thee, and make thy name 
great; and thou shalt be a blessing."— Gen. 12:2. 

VERSE 1. The Lord had commanded 
Abraham to leave his native land, etc., while 
he was yet in Haran (verse 4); and later, 
when his father was dead, and when he arrived 
in the land of Canaan, God showed 
him the land and gave him the title to it for 
himself and his seed after him for an everlasting 
possession. (Verse 7; 17:8.) Thus 
we have a very important point in chronology 
established, viz., the date of the Abrahamic 
covenant. See MILLENNIAL DAWN, 
VOL. II., pages 44-47. 

VERSES 2,3. In partial fulfilment of this 
promise, the nation of Israel has indeed become 
a great nation— a nation unique in its 
separation from other nations, and in its 
peculiar history under the divine guidance. 
And the promises and threatenings of verse 3 
will in due time be dealt out to those who 
bless and to those who oppress her. 

The blessing of all the families of the 
earth through Abraham and his seed— which 
seed is Christ, head and body, as the Apostle 
Paul explains (Gal. 3:16,29)— is a promise 
which few Christians have duly considered. 
All the families of the earth must 
certainly include the families that have died, 
as well as the families that are living. And 
it points forward, therefore, to the grand 
millennial reign of Christ, when, according 
to his Word, all that are in their graves will 



R1615:page31 

hear the voice of the Son of Man, and shall 
come forth.— John 5:25,28. 

Nor is God's dealing with this nation yet 
ended; for the gifts and callings of God 
are not things to be repented of or changed. 
In God's due time, after the full completion 
and glorification of the elect Gospel Church, 
the mercy of the Lord shall again turn toward 
the seed of Jacob. And so all of 
fleshly Israel shall be saved from present 
blindness, as it is written, "There shall come 
out of Zion the deliverer [the Gospel Church, 
the spiritual seed of Abraham— Gal. 3:29], 
and shall turn away ungodliness from Jacob;" 
for this is God's covenant with them. 
-Rom. 11:25-33. 

The remaining verses of the lesson show 
that Abraham obediently followed the Lord's 
direction, walking by faith in his promise. 
Thus his acts attested his faith, and his 
faith, thus attested, was acceptable to God. 
-Jas. 2:22. 



page 3 1 

ENCOURAGING WORDS FROM FAITHFUL WORKERS. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I came into possession 
of the truth so recently, that I feel that 
I should work with might and main, day and 
night, for the remnant of my days. Oh, how 
blessed to come to the thousand three hundred 
thirty and five days! 

I have given some lectures, and have invitations 
to lecture at other points; but I am 
sure it does not spread the truth as effectively 
as the blessed DAWNS have and will spread it. 
I am sure it was through the DAWNS that meat 
in due season was served to me, and I now rejoice 
with joy unspeakable. 

My dear Brother, I pray that all the saints 
may make themselves ready for the glorious 
union with their Lord and Head, and specially 
for you and your helpmeet, Sister Russell, 
that you may be faithful in your work of labor 
and love. 

I always receive the WATCH TOWER as a 
friend that has been absent and returned with 
joyful news. 

Your brother in Christ, A. F. BINKLEY. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:--The TOWER has 
come regularly to hand, each number filled to 
overflow with the "Gospel of Peace." "The 
poor in spirit"— the "humble" and "meek"— 
are indeed refreshed, yea, filled, after reading 
the many spiritual subjects treated in the pages 
of the various issues of that welcome guest. 
Often have I turned from the burdens, sorrows, 
cares and temptations of the world, and sought 
comfort, consolation and peace, and found 
them, in their pages, as the Editor, through 
the holy Spirit, unfolded the spiritual meaning 
of the different texts from the standpoint of 
the "Plan of the Ages." You and Sister 
Russell have my earnest prayers for the divine 
blessing in your efforts to obey the injunction 
—"feed my lambs," "feed my sheep"; and as 
each presses quietly and persistently along the 
narrow way to glory, honor, immortality, eternal 
life, may the indulgent Father tender the 
"helping hand"; knowing that the way is rugged, 
steep, difficult and beset with many 
dangers. 

"Oh! how beautiful are the feet of them 
that preach the Gospel of Peace." Kindly 
and lovingly yours in the Master's service, 
W. P. DEBOLT. 



TOWER PUBLISHING CO.:-I received the 
Diaglott and the two Swedish DAWNS, and am 
exceedingly well pleased with all. I had feared 
that the Swedish translation would not be 
equal to the original; but I am indeed agreeably 
disappointed. The force and clearness 
of tone, the lucidity and charm of language, 
are so happily transferred as to make it a literary 
treat, beside its innate, inestimable worth 
as a help to Bible study and a luminary in the 
dense darkness that has so long vailed the 
many precious truths of God's Word. May 
God richly bless its author. 

Very gratefully yours, C. EDLUND. 



DEAR BROTHER:-I am having quite a struggle 
of it here, in the territory in which I have 
been canvassing for a few days past, running 
only six, seven or eight books a day. This is 
the hardest experience I have yet encountered 
for so many days at once. However, if I can 



manage to meet my actual expenses through 
the winter, and can endure the cold weather, 
I shall be satisfied. 

When I entered this particular phase of the 
harvest work, it was not with the motive of 
becoming wealthy. Had that been the desire, 
I would have taken up some more lucrative 
employment. At the same time, of course, I 
want to scatter as much of the "good seed" 
as is possible, in the hope that thereby some 
precious wheat may be found, to the glory of 

page 32 

the Lord of the harvest. It has been my purpose 
(and I trust I have thus done) to give 
myself altogether to him who has bought me 
with his precious blood; and, if I understand 
aright what this giving means, it is to be his 
through good report and through evil report, 
in failure or in success, in sorrow or in joy, in 
the dark, or in the light, in life or in death, 
his only, wholly and forever. Pray that this 
may ever be my happy condition— kept through 
the "riches of grace" in Jesus Christ. If I 
try to do this in my own strength, I shall always 
fail. But if he accept me, and keep me, 
I shall then be kept indeed. 
Yours in faith and fellowship, 

J. A. MITCHELL. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:--In the past few 
days I have succeeded in getting several persons 
thoroughly interested in the DAWN, and 
am in the hope that at least some of these will 
come into the light and prove wheat. One is 
a Methodist minister who has been not altogether 
satisfied with his belief. I have his 
promise to read the DAWN carefully, which I 
trust he will do. 

I feel the dear Lord is using me to his honor 
and glory. Working for him is such a pleasure: 
such blessing I derive from it that meeting 
with opposition and taking the cross are not 
at all hard for me. I am again reading the 
DAWNS, and find more good things, and see 
more and more into the truth. 

I have just read in the December TOWER 
your views in regard to the annual convention; 
and I fully agree with you. It seems to 
me your time should be given to the many 
rather than to the few. While I am very grateful 
for the opportunity of meeting you at the 
last one, I feel as if it had been at the expense 



of others to whom you could have given 
your time. We who are in the faith do not 
need conventions as much as we need to impart 
to others the blessed truths. We are, I 
think, willing to forego convention pleasures 
if doing so will hasten the publishing of other 
volumes of the DAWN series. 

Wishing you a Happy New Year, Yours in 
Christian love and fellowship, 

J. A. BOHNET. 



DEAR BROTHERS:--Enclosed find $1.00 to 
continue the WATCH TOWER. The grand news 
received from it last year has, praise God, 
filled my heart with love that I cannot find 
words to express. May God still continue to 
bless you in the work. 

Yours in Christ, A. SIMPSON. 



DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:-This is Brother 
A's home, and I came here to do some 
"reaping." I sold forty-seven books in 
about two days— twenty-eight the first day. 

Last Sunday by arrangement we met a 
few friends, to whom I explained our chart. 
I have not enjoyed a talk so well for many 
a day. Every one present was ripe for truth, 
and had not a word of opposition. 

One had begun to read DAWN with a 
strong and firm determination to fight it 
from the beginning. So she read on and 
on and on, and, as a result, she began to see 
God as a God of love, and is now rejoicing 
in freedom and the truth. It did us much 
good to be of use to these few friends, and 
we hope for increased usefulness. Accept 
love in our Head. F. B. UTLEY. 



MY DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I have 
been confined to the house for some time, 
after having canvassed only one day; I am 
not discouraged, however, for my faith 
grows stronger day by day; and, if I cannot 
work in one way, I will try another, 
until convinced that the Master wants me 
to leave the field; and then he will surely 
show me what he would have me do. May 
the Master lead and give me strength to 
follow is my prayer. 

Yesterday I was reading an account in 



the American Baptist of St. Louis, of the 
trial for heresy of J. M. Carter, pastor of a 
Baptist church. Some of the charges are 
as follows: (1) He denies the immortality 
of the soul. (2) He denies the consciousness 
of the soul between death and the resurrection. 
(3) He holds the restoration and 
possible salvation of the dead and the final 
annihilation of the incorrigible. It seems 
that the major part of the church went with 
him, and still retains him as pastor. 
Yours in Christ Jesus, A. L. TUPPER. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-What a great 
blessing it is to us to be able to understand 
the things coming to pass at present, so as not 
to be fretting and complaining about these 
hard times, but, "having necessary food and 
clothing, therewith to be content." "Godliness 
with contentment is great gain." Jesus 
is indeed a satisfying portion. 

Pray for us, that the Lord will graciously 
protect us through this evil time, or as far into 
it as he shall in his wise pleasure permit us 
to live— until our change come. 

Yours in the one faith, W. L. KELLEY. 



page 34 

ZION'S WATCH TOWER 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED TWICE A MONTH. 



TOWER PUBLISHING COMPANY, 

"BIBLE HOUSE" 

ARCH STREET, ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

C. T. RUSSELL, EDITOR; MRS. C. T. RUSSELL, ASSOCIATE. 



SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 
By Express Order, Postal Money Order, Bank Draft, or 
Registered Letter. Foreign only by Foreign Money Order. 

FREE TO THE LORD'S POOR. 

N.B.— Those of the interested, who by reason of old 
age or accidents, or other adversity, are unable to pay, 
will be supplied FREE, if they will send a Postal Card each 
December, stating their case and requesting the paper. 



R1616:page34 

SENATOR PEFFER'S FOREVIEW. 



Speaking in the United States Senate, on 
January 21st, Senator Peffer gave evidence of 
having the eyes of his understanding somewhat 
open, respecting what is coming. He is 
reported to have used the following language: 

"A day of retribution is coming— a day of 
reckoning is nigh at hand. The people will 
smite their enemy. In their wrath this great 
crime will be avenged. Standing as I do in 
the night of the Nineteenth century, and looking 
toward the dawn of the Twentieth, I see 
coming a wave of fire and blood. I pray 
God that it may spend its force on the sea. 
Behind me is Rome, and before, God alone 
in his infinite wisdom knows." 



page 34 

THE WORK IN ENGLAND. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:--In my work at 

S (a town of 30,000 inhabitants) I found 

some who are likely to be greatly blessed by 

the truth. I put out about ninety DAWNS in 

the seven days I had at that place, and sold 

about 253 of the Old Theology tracts. While 

my idea in going there was principally to get 

a better knowledge of the smaller cities of 

England, the Lord perhaps brought it about 

in order to send the truth to some of his sheep 

there, who seemed to be very hungry. And I 

must say that the Lord's hand can be seen in 

so many of the movements in connection with 

the work here that it is very encouraging, 

although the results in some ways have not been 

quite what I expected. For instance, in a neighboring 

city, a little company of "holiness" 

people had, for a year or more, been working 

very earnestly in their way till a few months 

since, when the Lord led them to see that 

they were not in the right way. For two or 

three months they had been waiting to know 

the Lord's will; and about a month or six weeks 

since they began to feel that the Lord was going 

to send them the truth through "some 

man" as one of his messengers. Then, shortly 

before leaving, entirely unbeknown to these 

waiting ones, it was arranged to hold two 

meetings at the home of Brother and Sister 

Bivens who knew of the attitude of these friends, 

and afterwards invited them to the meetings. 

After the first meeting two or three of these 
said that, as soon as they heard the voice of 
the speaker, they felt sure that he had what 
they had been waiting for. There are six of 
this little company in particular that I met, 
and they availed themselves of every opportunity 
to hear the message. After the second 
meeting I put the DAWNS in their hands, and 
trust that they are now entering into the joys 
of present truth. 

I reached the great metropolis on Dec. 26th. 
At my request the brethren had appointed the 
evenings of the 28th and 29th for special 
prayer and communion in the interests of the 
harvest work in London and Great Britain 
generally. Together we thanked the Lord for 
the many favors of the past, and asked for 
more love and wisdom and strength, both for 



ourselves and all who have entered into the 
secret of his presence and the knowledge of 
the Kingdom to which we are called. The 
dear brethren here seem rejoiced to see me, and 
I need hardly say that you and Sister Russell 
and all the saints in America are much spoken 
of in their prayers. 

Could you tell all the colporteurs through 
the TOWER of the possibilities and privilege of 
disposing of the Old Theology tracts at two 
cents or one penny each, in many places where 
the DAWNS can not be sold? 

With greetings of love and good wishes, 
Yours in our Redeemer, S. D. ROGERS. 



R1616:page35 
