Is God’s Name in Your Bible? Should It Be?
ON Sunday morning, May 8, 1977, Jack Siebert, a minister, was busy in speaking about the Bible to families in a New York City apartment building.
One woman in her early twenties enjoyed hearing the Bible’s message and said that she would like to get a Bible for herself. Mr. Siebert offered her a copy. “Is this a real Bible?” she asked. When assured that it was a complete modern-language Bible, she happily accepted it and contributed for it.
Later the minister and a friend returned. The woman invited them in, but said: “You deceived me last week. This is not a real Bible!” What did she mean?
She continued: “In this Bible the name Jehovah occurs over and over. It made me so angry that, as I read it, I crossed the name out in every place I found it!”
Do you think that this sincere woman had reason to be upset? Is it true that “Jehovah” is not God’s name and should not be in the Bible? Is it in the Bible that you use? Should it be there? Do you use a personal name for God?
In this case, the minister brought out some information about God’s name that surprised the woman. In fact, she became disturbed, saying: “Why didn’t I learn that in my church? Why didn’t they teach me that?”
Indeed, everyone who reads the Bible should know some of the things that Mr. Siebert pointed out. And so should every person who uses the Model Prayer, saying: “Our Father which art in heaven, Hallowed be thy name.”​—Matt. 6:9, Authorized Version.
What really is that name? Is your answer “the Lord,” “God,” “Jehovah,” “Yahweh,” or something else? In the King James or Authorized Version, “Jehovah” appears just four times,a whereas other versions use “Yahweh” or “Jehovah” many thousands of times. What is correct? And a few translations have the divine name in what is called the “New Testament.” Does your Bible? Should it?
In recent times, some exciting new information has come to light on God’s name! You will find it in the following articles. Look into them, for you personally are involved. How so?
The Bible speaks of God’s taking special note of those who revere him and who speak about him. Then it adds: “A record was written before him of those who feared him and kept his name in mind.” (Mal. 3:16, New English Bible) Is that true of you? Has God made a record of you, because you fear him and keep his name in mind and use it? The material to follow will relate both to his name and to yours.
[Footnotes]
Exodus 6:3; Psalm 83:18; Isaiah 12:2; 26:4.

