Theologians Stumble Over God’s Name
HOW could clergymen and theological authorities have stumbled over God’s name?
First, a major doctrinal mistake seems to have resulted from taking God’s name out of the Bible. As was pointed out in the last article, evidently “somewhere around the beginning of the second century” the divine name began to be replaced in the “New Testament” with “Lord” or “God.” This caused a problem of identification: Which Lord was meant?
There are verses in the Hebrew Scriptures about Jehovah that are quoted in the “New Testament” in a context speaking about the Son. (Isa. 40:3​—Matt. 3:3​—John 1:23; Joel 2:32​—Rom. 10:13; Ps. 45:6, 7​—Heb. 1:8, 9) This is understandable, for Jesus was the Father’s foremost representative. In fact, in a similar way even an angel was spoken of as if he were Jehovah, because he was serving for Jehovah in a representative capacity. (Gen. 18:1-33) What, however, may have been the effect of removing God’s name?
The Journal of Biblical Literature says:
“In many passages where the persons of God and Christ were clearly distinguishable, the removal of the Tetragram must have created considerable ambiguity. . . . Once the confusion was caused by the change in the divine name in the quotations, the same confusion spread to other parts of the NT where quotations were not involved at all.”
Apparently realizing that this could have contributed to the development of the Trinity doctrine, the article asks:
“Did such restructuring of the text give rise to the later christological [about the nature of Christ] controversies within the church, and were the NT passages involved in these controversies identical with those which in the NT era apparently created no problems at all? . . . Are [current christological] studies based on the NT text as it appeared in the first century, or are they based on an altered text which represents a time in church history when the difference between God and Christ was confused in the text and blurred in the minds of churchmen?”
So, removing God’s name from the “New Testament” could have aided later acceptance of the Trinity doctrine, which was not taught at all in the original Bible.
For theologians, a second stumbling block has to do with pronouncing the Name. It is written in Hebrew with four consonants, usually transliterated YHWH or JHVH. In ancient Israel a person would learn the pronunciation as it came down from earlier times. But evidently at some point after 70 C.E. the exact pronunciation was lost. When later Jewish copyists put vowel markings with the consonants to aid the reader, they used signs for Adonay (Lord) and Elohim (God), leading to the form “Jehovah.”
Many Hebrew scholars now favor the pronunciation “Yahweh.” Yet no one today actually can say with certainty how Moses, for example, pronounced the divine name.
In Vetus Testamentum (Oct. 1962) Dr. E. C. B. Maclaurin stated: “It should be repeated that there is no conclusive early evidence that the name was ever pronounced Yahweh but there is plenty of early evidence for Hū’, Yah, Yo-, Yau-, -yah and perhaps -yo.” Dr. M. Reisel, in The Mysterious Name of Y.H.W.H., said that the “vocalisation of the Tetragrammaton must originally have been YeHūàH or YaHūàH.” Still, Canon D. D. Williams of Cambridge held that the “evidence indicates, nay almost proves, that Jahweh was not the true pronunciation of the Tetragrammaton, . . . The Name itself was probably JĀHÔH.”​—Zeitschrift für die alttestamentliche Wissenschaft, Vol. 54.
Most languages have a customary way of spelling and pronouncing God’s name, and it varies from language to language. In Italian it is Geova, in Fijian it is Jiova, and in Danish the name is Jehova. Why need anyone insist that all persons today should strive to imitate some ancient Hebrew pronunciation on which even authorities cannot agree? As the Tübingen professor Gustav Oehler said in a book after discussing various pronunciations:
“From this point onward I use the word Jehovah, because, as a matter of fact, this name has now become more naturalized in our vocabulary, and cannot be supplanted, any more than it would be possible for the more correct Jarden to displace the usual form Jordan.”
This is a sensible view, for it allows persons to use a widely known pronunciation that still clearly identifies the Creator and God who urges us to use his name. (Isa. 42:8; Rom. 10:13) Many theologians, though, have, instead, chosen to quibble over technicalities and fallen into the trap of shunning God’s name.

