A Work for Those Who Understand
1 Understanding originates with Jehovah. He created man, not like unreasoning beasts, but in his own image, able to take in knowledge, understand and use it wisely. We are especially interested in understanding his will and purpose, including the book of Revelation. Just recall the joy we had in studying together the “Mystery” book at our congregation book studies and how spiritually strengthened we were in feasting on the strong “meat” of the Word.
2 But Daniel 11:33 indicates something additional for those who now understand. It says, “And as regards those having insight among the people, they will impart understanding to the many.” Having these precious truths in our heads is not enough. Heart appreciation that motivates us to show loving concern for others is included.
3 “But that is not the easiest book to place,” one might think. Possibly, but consider what a special pioneer writes concerning one woman: ‘Back-calls were made, additional literature was placed at each call, but for some reason we could not start a study. She read and enjoyed the “Mystery” book, but we realized she needed a basic knowledge of the truth. On one call we studied several paragraphs in the Truth book and she agreed we could return and continue. But it was the “Mystery” book that really moved her to see the difference between Jehovah’s witnesses and the churches. She appreciated the understanding of the deep, solid, complicated portions of the Bible like Revelation that were studied. She began attending the Tuesday night study in the “Mystery” book, and has missed very few since. At the end of three months she is our sister.’ It is obvious that the “Mystery” book is doing a needed work, not only within the congregation but in the field.
4 While we will want to feature the “Mystery” book, those who desire to do so may offer any other fifty-cent publication the congregation may have in stock. Many persons having home Bible studies may not have heard about these books and they may want copies of some to complete their personal libraries. Remember, too, that thousands of new studies have been started with interested persons who have made progress since we offered the “Mystery” book last July and these should have the opportunity to obtain it.
5 The April Kingdom Ministry of last year on page two contained two suggestions for presenting the “Mystery” book. This might be reviewed for ideas that you could use. Simplicity was stressed. Read again the suggestions on page eight of the February Kingdom Ministry of this year for ideas on starting studies with the “Good News” booklet.
6 To understand means to see a thing as a united whole, or to see a matter in its related parts. Thus each publisher should see himself as a part of an organization of hundreds of thousands of wise and understanding ones contributing to a great shout of praise to the One who gave us the book of Revelation and who has now opened its meaning to appreciative ones. Our zeal for and devotion to this work will surely be instrumental in putting others on the road to becoming wise and understanding.
[Blurb on page 1]
While acquiring wisdom, acquire understanding.

