Announcements
◆ Literature offer for July and August: “Mystery” book and a booklet (not the question booklet, but any booklet for general distribution to the public) on a contribution of 50 cents, or any other 50-cent publication in stock. September: Evolution book on a contribution of 25 cents.
◆ A supply of monthly report cards, magazine distributors’ order blanks and congregation field ministry charts is being sent out to each congregation. However, congregation servants should order regular pioneer supplies for the 1972 service year. Include 12 pink monthly report cards for each regular pioneer; also Weekly Record Sheets for those needing them. There is no need to order supplies for vacation pioneers, but be sure that you have application blanks on hand.
◆ Subscriptions may now be accepted for addresses in Spain in all languages.
◆ The Watch Tower Publications Index for 1966 through 1970 will be ready early in July. Orders for it may be submitted after July 1. This is a cumulative index. It covers the Society’s publications for 1970 as well as including the entries from all the annual indexes back through 1966. Additionally, this Index provides a comprehensive key to the fine information contained in the complete volume of Aid to Bible Understanding (A-Z) being produced by the Society. In the Index there are over 10,000 subject entries and more than 120,000 scripture entries for the excellent material in Aid to Bible Understanding. You will find the Index very helpful in any research that you do with the Society’s publications. The cost is $1 for congregation publishers, 50c for pioneers. The same prices now apply to the 1930-1960 Index. (Please do not order Aid to Bible Understanding until notified that it is available.)
◆ New Publications Available:
Saving the Human Race​—In the Kingdom Way—​Italian
◆ Again Available in U.S.A.:
Basis for Belief in a New World​—Turkish
◆ Out of Stock in U.S.A.:
“Make Sure of All Things; Hold Fast to What Is Fine”​—English
Man’s Rule About to Give Way to God’s Rule​—English, Spanish

