Presenting the Good News​—The Value of Preparation
1 Do you remember a recent public talk that you listened to during which the hour just flew by? How about a student talk in the Theocratic Ministry School that gripped your attention? We all have enjoyed such presentations. But, to be that effective, do you know what they all had to have in common? That’s right​—preparation!
2 To be effective in any feature of the ministry, preparation is vital. Even those favored with unusual natural ability need to prepare in order to avoid rambling or failing to get quickly to the point. In many instances the amount of time granted us by the householder is very limited. How satisfying it is to present the truth with telling effect, using choice words to convey the precious truth with conviction. Often this leads to an extended testimony then and there, but, if not, possibly you will put across a point that will not be forgotten by the householder and might cause him to listen much more attentively the next time.
3 Preparation shows respect. On the platform it shows respect for the audience, and on the doorstep it shows respect for the householder who agrees to listen. At all times it shows respect for Jehovah, whom we represent.
4 We enjoy very much the freedom of choice we have in what we will present and how we will present it at the doors. But because of the uncertainty of what might develop, does this mean less preparation? No, it really requires more preparation in order to be ready for various situations.
5 How and when can we prepare? Some preparation can be done in the quiet of your home in personal study. The Scriptural presentation can be gone over privately. Determine where questions can be asked to involve the householder. Then discussion and practice sessions can be held within the family circle. One of the best ways for a servant or mature publisher to aid a new one is to ask, “May I stop by your home and show you how I prepare?” If the mature one accepts the responsibility for teaching the new one and just lovingly shows how he goes about preparing, there need be no embarrassment in a discussion and practice session.
6 Preparing to serve Jehovah in the field is a joy. We are all busy and may find it difficult to set aside the time we would like, but even a few minutes here and there will make for marvelous improvement. On a day when one cannot be in the field, it is a pleasure to pick up the Bible and review a Scriptural presentation, silently or aloud. It keeps us service-minded.
7 Some brothers keep a little looseleaf notebook with brief outlines of their favorite sermons, common objections found in their territories and ways of overcoming them, also Kingdom Ministry suggestions for starting home Bible studies. It can be kept in your witnessing case. Do you?
8 The apostle Paul asked the brothers to pray for him, “that ability to speak may be given me with the opening of my mouth, with all freeness of speech to make known the sacred secret of the good news.” (Eph. 6:19) We, too, have need for that same ability to speak. Preparation is valuable to that end.

