Your Service Meetings
(Note: As mentioned in June “Kingdom Ministry,” since all congregations will likely miss one service meeting during July because of the assemblies, we will leave it to the brothers locally to decide which service meetings should be scheduled for certain weeks.)
WEEK STARTING JULY 11
See note above. If most of the publishers will be attending an assembly this week, likely the meeting will not be held. Otherwise, transfer another meeting to this week.
WEEK STARTING JULY 18
Theme: A Work for Those Who Understand. (Dan. 11:33) Song 53.
 4 min: Introduction, text and comments.
15 min: Branch Letter. Questions and answers.
30 min: Blessings We Enjoyed at the “Divine Name” District Assembly. Congregation servant should outline this part. He should make assignments and give instructions before brothers leave for their assembly so those assigned can be prepared to report on certain days or certain parts of program. If brothers assigned know prior to their going to the assembly what is expected of them, their reports will be far more complete and interesting. They can then take appropriate notes. In fact, encourage all publishers to take notes. They can then contribute better to these discussions.
11 min: Concluding comments. Local report for June. “How Did We Do in May?” A few Theocratic News items. Song 97.
WEEK STARTING JULY 25
Theme: ‘That They Should Turn to God.’ (Acts 26:20) Song 98.
10 min: Introduction, text and comments. A study servant whose group has Kingdom Hall cleaning discusses with some of these brothers first the text and then “Question Box” material.
15 min: “A Work for Those Who Understand.” Questions and answers. When paragraph 3, 4 or 5 is considered, get comments from brothers on what is working best in local territory for placing “Mystery” book. Talk to some publishers beforehand so these comments will be practical and helpful for the field ministry.
10 min: ‘That They Should Turn to God.’ Talk.
12 min: “Presenting the Good News​—The Value of Preparation.” Family group considers this article together. Different members of family make personal application of certain points to themselves. Father, of course, leads the discussion and mentions what he feels is good arrangement for family in following various suggestions given for preparation. If time permits, brief demonstrations may be presented on how one might prepare by himself in personal study and also how simple, helpful practice session can be held.
 3 min: Accounts report.
10 min: Make brief concluding comments and include items from Announcements that apply to congregation. Then discuss major points in May 1, 1971, “Watchtower” article, “Rendering Our Best to Jehovah,” so meeting ends on encouraging Scriptural note. Song 114.
WEEK STARTING AUGUST 1
Theme: Declare Jehovah’s Name in All the Earth. (Ex. 9:16) Song 4.
 5 min: Introduction, text and comments.
10 min: Placing the “Mystery” Book. Enthusiastic and encouraging report on how “Mystery” book campaign is going. Let publishers know how many placements have been made, how many studies have been started, which presentations have proved to be most effective in local territory; maybe a brief instructive experience can be related, if time permits.
15 min: “Making Advancement in Your Ministry.” Questions and answers. Chairman will make appropriate comments occasionally to emphasize certain major points and to make the discussion stimulating.
15 min: “Relief from Depression.” Consider material in May 1, 1971, “Watchtower.” Possibly a member of the committee and one or two other brothers can discuss how beneficial these Scriptural thoughts are for all in congregation.
15 min: Cover necessary concluding comments and then close meeting with discussion of theme for the month of August, “‘Declare Jehovah’s Name in All the Earth.” Show why Jehovah’s name must be declared, what Jehovah has done toward making his name known, how we can share and why it is a great privilege. See August 1, 1970, “Watchtower.” Song 107.

