Announcements
● Literature offer for June: Three pocket-size books for $1.00, or one book for 35c if the three-book offer is not placed. In each set include the book God’s “Eternal Purpose” Now Triumphing for Man’s Good. For July: Watchtower subscription for $2.00 with a pocket-size book given free to new subscribers. For August: My Book of Bible Stories for $2.00. Publishers may use an alternative offer of three pocket-size books for $1.00 when speaking to adults who may not prefer the book for children. For September: A tract with a literature offer of two magazines and a revised brochure on Jehovah’s Witnesses for 25c. You should now order literature for September so that it will be on hand when needed. Check May issue of Our Kingdom Service under Announcements for details.
● Congregations will schedule a 30-minute review of things learned at the district convention. This meeting will be held the week following the convention your congregation is scheduled to attend as outlined in the 2/79 Our Kingdom Service insert. Each congregation book study should be assigned a specific day (or days) of the convention, being ready to highlight beneficial things learned.
● New Publications Available:
God’s “Eternal Purpose” Now Triumphing for Man’s Good—Czech
“Singing and Accompanying Yourselves with Music in Your Hearts” (Deluxe edition)—Norwegian, Portuguese
● Available Again in U.S.A.:
“Then Is Finished the Mystery of God”—English
● In preparation for the dramas to be presented at the “Living Hope” District Conventions, it is suggested that all read the following Bible accounts: Exodus chapters 1-3; Numbers 22:22-24 and Nu chapter 25; Deuteronomy 24:17-21.
● After June 15, 1979, congregations may begin ordering the Watch Tower Publications Index for 1978. The indexes are 10 cents each.
● Regular and special pioneers on the list for six months at the time of the district convention are entitled to receive convention food tickets upon presentation of their Pioneer Identification and Assignment card.

