Meetings to Help Us Make Disciples
WEEK STARTING JUNE 3
10 min: Song 2 and general announcements. Have children bring their copies of My Book of Bible Stories to meeting next week.
20 min: Discussion on “Young Men, Can You Accept This Special Privilege of Service?” to subtitle “What Can You Do to Qualify?” Elder reviews this material with 3 or 4 young brothers on the platform. Read the scriptures quoted and contrast principle in Malachi 3:10 with privilege of Bethel service.
25 min: “How Do You Support the Kingdom?” Base introductory comments on paragraphs 1-3, emphasizing the need for real commitment to Kingdom, even willingness to die for it. Highlight faithful example of apostles and other early Christians, raising the question as to whether our commitment is comparable. Cover remaining paragraphs thoroughly, having publishers explain how daily conduct, meetings and field service relate to support of Kingdom. Finally, stress how, in connection with “Living Hope” District Conventions, we can show whose kingdom we support.
 5 min: Service announcements. Song 90 and prayer.
WEEK STARTING JUNE 10
 7 min: Song 73 and general announcements.
28 min: Make Disciples out of Your Children. Interviews and demonstration with comments from audience on demonstration.
(1 min.) Introductory talk. Ask question: “How many children have a personal copy of this book—My Book of Bible Stories?” Have them raise their hands and show the book if they remembered to bring it. It is a wonderful provision to help young ones learn about Jehovah and his Word. Jesus said in Matthew 28:19, 20 to make disciples of people and to teach them. We do not want to overlook those of our own household, our children. They likewise should become disciples and speak openly of their faith.
(16 min.) Invite couple to the platform who regularly study this publication with their children. If you would like to use two or three couples in this interview, you may do so. Ask them about the good results achieved, and how the book aids them in really teaching their children and not merely entertaining them. (Examples: Story 2 develops heartfelt love and appreciation for God and his provisions. Story 4 teaches the wrongness of stealing. Story 6 shows the terrible results of hate and anger, and how we should not be jealous of others.) How do they use the pictures in the book? What method is used to study it with children? Couple demonstrates study with their children.
Get comments from audience about study, how it was conducted and what they liked about it. Have them comment about benefits of studying this publication with their children.
(10 min.) Invite all young children to the platform and interview some of them. Have them bring their books. Ask them to show what they like about the book and what they have learned. Do they ever take the book to school? Do they talk to others about what they are learning? Do they speak to unbelieving family members? Has anyone started a study with someone else in this book? How do you conduct it since there are no questions at the bottom of the page?
(1 min.) Help all to appreciate how this book is not only delightful to look at, having appealing pictures that make it easy to place, but also how it is a fine aid in teaching and making disciples. The praising of Jehovah by “every breathing thing” includes our children.—Ps. 150:6.
20 min: Talk on “Young Men, Can You Accept This Special Privilege of Service?” from “What Can You Do to Qualify?” to end of insert. Please read section “What Can You Do to Qualify?”
 5 min: Service announcements. Song 110 and prayer.
WEEK STARTING JUNE 17
10 min: Song 29, general announcements and Announcements.
20 min: “Presenting the Good News—Wherever We Are.”
Cover paragraphs 1, 2 in brief introductory comments (3 min.). Arrange in advance for publishers to relate experiences in the article. Also, have audience tell their own experiences in informal witnessing. (Be sure to include young publishers.) Plan for certain publishers to bring up problems, stating why or under what circumstances they find informal witnessing difficult. Invite audience to offer suggestions.
Emphasize this: Be observant, alert to appropriate opportunities to share the good news with others. Do not expect to give a full witness to everyone, but share Scriptural thoughts in a conversational way, and follow through with more information if interest is shown. Make it a practice to do this every day, wherever you are.
20 min: Rejoicing in Your Service to Jehovah.
(2 min.) We should be committed to Jehovah’s service. We cannot be in the world and try to be in the truth also and expect Jehovah’s approval. We must have the attitude of David when he prayed for Jehovah to unify his heart. (Ps. 86:11) Joy is sure to follow.
(18 min.) Have congregation relate experiences about things that have made them joyful since they have begun serving Jehovah. Include as many as time allows, but have specifically prepared comments from an elder, ministerial servant, parent and a youth. Comments may be gotten on the joys of overseeing the “sheep,” observing the growth of the congregation, assisting with congregational duties, seeing children grow in knowledge of Jehovah and being given service privileges, giving presentations at the doors for the first time, seeing a new one progress to the point of baptism, seeing relatives take up the truth or similar causes for rejoicing in their life of service to Jehovah. Everyone should speak from the heart.
10 min: Discuss plans for field service. Encourage everyone to participate in some way this week. One congregation had 117 publishers engage in field service on a Saturday morning. Song 101 and prayer.
WEEK STARTING JUNE 24
 8 min: Song 9, accounts report.
20 min: Keep on Obeying the Truth.
(3 min.) Talk explaining just what obeying the truth means: To live in harmony with the teachings of Jesus; dedicating one’s life to God; being baptized; sharing the message of truth with others; showing love for one another. (John 14:6, 15) Paul encouraged Galatians to keep on obeying truth. (Gal. 5:7) Need for perseverance, constant effort. He tells us to “keep on exhorting one another.” (Heb. 3:13) Today as in first century some do not continue sharing in Christian works. They become irregular in service and meeting attendance, or even inactive. Some elders and their families affected. No one is immune. With genuine concern, cite statistics of irregularity and inactivity of local congregation. Reporting may be a problem with some. However, others need loving assistance to actively obey truth.
(12 min.) Have brothers in audience read scriptures. Then ask questions and help them reason on these points, making practical and specific application to local needs.
Have Philippians 2:1-4 read. What are some of the things that Paul said would make his joy full? In what ways can we show concern for our fellow believers?
Have Philippians 2:12 read. How do we show that we obey and with what result in view?
What do Acts 15:36, Romans 1:11, 12 and 1 Thessalonians 5:11 show that we can do to help brothers? Have Psalm 71:17 read. What can parents do to help the youth? What can all of us do to be of more help to our younger brothers and sisters?
Have Romans 10:10 read. In our own family Bible discussion, why is reaching the heart so important? Emphasize how regular family consideration of daily text helps.
(4 min.) Family demonstrates consideration of daily text at evening meal. All briefly participate in commenting, with father asking questions. Let wife and children highlight main thoughts.
(1 min.) Conclude showing need to make diligent efforts to help one another; to care for one’s family; to reach hearts and to motivate others to keep on obeying the truth.—Rom. 6:16, 17.
25 min: “Do Not Give Up in Doing What Is Fine.”
(10 min.) Introductory talk based on article, followed by 12 minutes of interviews. Please select brothers and sisters beforehand according to the three groupings that follow. They should speak from the heart in a natural and upbuilding manner, having in mind something specific that has helped them not to give up in serving Jehovah. (1) Interview two or three who have served faithfully for many years. What pressures have they experienced and overcome? What helped them? Did prayer, meetings, personal study, field service, encouragement from others play a part? (2) Interview some who had become inactive in past, but were helped to be reactivated. Briefly, what contributed to their becoming inactive? What helped them to regain their balance and begin service again? Was shepherding by the elders a contributing factor? Did others encourage them? (3) Interview some who were irregular in past but who were helped to be regular in the field service. Also interview some children who are regular publishers. What has helped them to be regular in the field? Did encouragement by parents contribute? By others? What kind of encouragement do they feel young people need in order to be regular in field service? (Could touch on a mistake some parents make in trying to badger or drive their children to serve Jehovah instead of building love for God and desire to be pleasing to Jehovah.) Conclude with a 3-minute review of some of the points stated by those interviewed that aided them to endure.—Luke 21:19.
 7 min: Local service announcements. Song 44 and prayer.

