Presenting the Good News—Wherever We Are
1 How often do you find that you are able to offer sacrifices of praise to Jehovah? Are you able to share in the field service one or two days a week? When writing to Christians in Jerusalem, Paul urged them to “always offer to God a sacrifice of praise, that is, the fruit of lips which make public declaration to his name.” (Heb. 13:15) Those early Christians were acquainted with the fact that, under God’s law to Israel, sacrifices had been offered at the temple every day, morning and evening. Not a day went by when no sacrifice was offered up.—Ex. 29:38-42.
2 But how can we imitate that pattern? Not all of us can get out into the field service every day, to say nothing of twice a day. Yet there are occasions nearly every day when we can offer such sacrifices of praise to God.
OPPORTUNITIES
3 What if you have a full-time secular job? Well, a brother in New York took a copy of My Book of Bible Stories to his place of work and put it on his desk, knowing that it would arouse the curiosity of his fellow employees. It did, and they inquired about it. His conversation was brief, since it was during work hours, but he told them three things: ‘The book is accurate; it covers Bible events in chronological order; and it costs only $2.00.’ The rest he let them see for themselves. He got orders for 63 books.
4 Some brothers are in business for themselves, and they may witness more extensively while at work. A barber in New York, while not forcing the truth on his customers, does try to share something with each one; and when interest is shown, haircuts sometimes take a little longer. A taxi driver in Japan finds that if he personally shuts the car door and welcomes his customer, he can establish a friendly relationship. His discussions of God’s Word often last five minutes—sometimes an hour.
5 Are there opportunities to witness when you go shopping? A sister in Canada was in a large store and she stopped to look at some paintings of beautiful mountains, blue skies, trees and flowers. She commented to another woman: “All these beauties Jehovah God created, and now men have ruined so much.” The woman replied: “It’s true, but what can we do about it?” They had an enjoyable conversation. The woman wanted to know where our sister had learned so much about the Bible. Arrangements were made for a home Bible study. And it all happened while she was shopping.
6 Young publishers, too, have excellent opportunities. Following an incident of violence in the school that she attends, a young sister in Tennessee realized that it was a good opportunity to share the Youth book with others. After discussing with her parents how to proceed, she took one book to the principal and another to her homeroom teacher. With their approval, she offered the book to classmates; they obtained 35 in just one day!
HOW TO MAKE IT HAPPEN
7 Those who have many good experiences in informal witnessing usually give some thought to it in advance. They are looking for opportunities to “offer to God a sacrifice of praise.” They also pray to Jehovah to open a “door of utterance” to them. (Col. 4:2-4) Have you prayerfully reviewed your daily routine to determine when and where it might be possible for you to do some informal witnessing?
8 While in house-to-house work, many have had excellent results by following the suggestions appearing in Our Kingdom Service to approach persons who may be on the street, coming in and out of buildings or in elevators of large apartment buildings. We do not have to wait until we contact individuals at their doors to speak to them about God’s Word.
9 Realizing that salespersons often come to the house, a sister in California put a small table just inside the door. On it she has a Bible and an attractive display of other publications. That display “makes it happen.” Visitors comment on what they see, and this leads to a witness.
10 A brother in Missouri resolved that, during his 15-minute break at work, he would witness to the first person who sat down next to him. The man to whom he spoke knew about the truth but said that he did not want to pursue the matter. Nevertheless, our brother left literature where the man could easily pick it up. In six months that man and his family were all baptized.
11 Another brother simply made it a practice to do his Bible reading at lunch time. That “made it happen.” Soon one of the men started to ask questions about religious matters. He was impressed. As a result, when publishers called at his home, a study was started.
12 Many publishers open the way for informal witnessing by wearing lapel badges while traveling to and from conventions. Will you be wearing your convention badge this summer, and will you have some literature with you as you travel, in the event that you can use it?
13 So we should not limit our sacrifices of praise to a set day and time of the week. When gratitude to Jehovah fills our hearts, it is only natural to let it overflow in upbuilding conversation about him on every appropriate occasion, wherever we are.

