
Be “Tenderly Compassionate”




 1. What are people in dire need of today?
1 Never before in history have so many people been in such dire need of compassionate assistance. Deteriorating world conditions have resulted in widespread feelings of unhappiness, depression, and hopelessness. Millions need help, and we as Christians are in a position to demonstrate genuine concern for our neighbors. (Matt. 22:39; Gal. 6:10) How can such concern be shown?
 2. What is the best way for us to show compassion?
2 A Work of Compassion: There is no real, lasting comfort that does not originate with God. (2 Cor. 1:3, 4) Jehovah urges us to imitate him by becoming “tenderly compassionate,” and he has given us the commission to visit our neighbors with the good news of the Kingdom. (1 Pet. 3:8) Active participation in this work is the best way for us to comfort “the brokenhearted,” because God’s Kingdom is the only real hope for suffering mankind. (Isa. 61:1) Out of compassion for his people, Jehovah will soon act to clear away wickedness and establish a righteous new world.—2 Pet. 3:13.
 3. How may we view people as Jesus did?
3 View People as Jesus Did: Even when preaching to large crowds, Jesus saw more than a mass of people. He perceived individuals having spiritual needs. They were like sheep with no shepherd to guide them. Jesus’ heart was touched by what he saw, and he was moved to teach them patiently. (Mark 6:34) Our viewing people the same way Jesus did will prompt us to show genuine compassion for them as individuals. This will be apparent in our tone of voice and facial expressions. Preaching will be our priority, and we will tailor our words to address each one’s personal concerns.—1 Cor. 9:19-23.
 4. Why should we clothe ourselves with compassion?
4 A great crowd of people from all nations are responding favorably to the Kingdom message and the refreshing interest shown in them. As we continue to clothe ourselves with compassion, we will honor and please our compassionate God, Jehovah.—Col. 3:12.




