
BIBLE VERSES EXPLAINED
Isaiah 40:31—“Those Hoping in Jehovah Will Regain Power”




“But those hoping in Jehovah will regain power. They will soar on wings like eagles. They will run and not grow weary; they will walk and not tire out.”—Isaiah 40:31, New World Translation.
“But those who wait on the LORD shall renew their strength: They shall mount up with wings like eagles, they shall run and not be weary, they shall walk and not faint.”—Isaiah 40:31, New King James Version.



Meaning of Isaiah 40:31

Jehovaha God assures his worshippers that he will give them the strength needed to overcome or endure any problem they may face.
“Those hoping in Jehovah will regain power.” Those who have hope, or trust, in God’s ability and willingness to help his people can count on his support. (Proverbs 3:5, 6) One way that God can empower those who worship him is by means of his holy spirit, or active force.—Luke 11:13.
“They will soar on wings like eagles.” This word picture illustrates the effect God’s power can have on a person. An eagle relies on rising currents of warm air, called thermals, to soar and glide. Once an eagle locates a thermal, it spreads its wings and circles around within the thermal, rising higher and higher. Moving from one thermal to another, eagles can stay in the air for hours, expending a minimal amount of energy while flying to a chosen destination.
“They will run and not grow weary.” Problems in life can weaken us physically and emotionally, but we can keep going with the power God gives. It can energize us to do the right thing despite severe difficulties. The apostle Paul, who endured serious trials, wrote: “For all things I have the strength through the one who gives me power.”—Philippians 4:13.



Context of Isaiah 40:31

God inspired the prophet Isaiah to write these words in the eighth century B.C.E. While this scripture applies to all of God’s faithful servants, Jehovah may have provided these words to encourage the Jews who would be taken to Babylon for 70 years. When the Jews returned to their homeland from that exile, they saw God’s words fulfilled. (Isaiah 40:1-3) God gave them the power to complete that long and difficult trekb from Babylon to Jerusalem in 537 B.C.E.—Isaiah 40:29.



a Jehovah is God’s personal name.—Psalm 83:18.
b The route used by the exiles was likely some 1,600 kilometers (1,000 mi) long.

Read Isaiah chapter 40 along with explanatory footnotes and cross-references.


