
BIBLE VERSES EXPLAINED
Psalm 46:10—“Be Still, and Know That I Am God”




“Give in and know that I am God. I will be exalted among the nations; I will be exalted in the earth.”—Psalm 46:10, New World Translation.
“Be still, and know that I am God: I will be exalted among the heathen, I will be exalted in the earth.”—Psalm 46:10, King James Version.



Meaning of Psalm 46:10

God urges everyone to worship him and to recognize his right to rule over the earth. His power and authority are undeniable, a fact that everyone who wants to live forever will have to acknowledge.—Revelation 4:11.
“Give in and know that I am God.” Some Bible translations render the first part of this statement as “be still.” This has led to the misunderstanding that it is a command to be reverent or silent in church. However, the Hebrew phrase translated “give in and know that I am God” is an exhortation from Jehovaha God himself to people of all nations, urging them to stop opposing him and to recognize that only he is worthy of worship.
A similar exhortation is found at Psalm 2. There, God promises to take action against those who oppose him. On the other hand, those who recognize God’s authority rely on him for guidance, strength, and wisdom. “Taking refuge in Him,” they feel happy and secure, especially during difficult times.—Psalm 2:9-12.
“I will be exalted among the nations; I will be exalted in the earth.” In the past, Jehovah God was exalted when he used his great strength to protect his people. (Exodus 15:1-3) In the future, he will be exalted on a far grander scale when everyone on earth submits to his authority and worships him.—Psalm 86:9, 10; Isaiah 2:11.



Context of Psalm 46:10

One reference work calls Psalm 46 “a hymn celebrating the power of God, the mighty defender of his people.” When singing Psalm 46, God’s people expressed their trust in Jehovah’s ability to protect and help them. (Psalm 46:1, 2) The words reminded them that Jehovah was always with them.—Psalm 46:7, 11.
To strengthen their trust in Jehovah God’s protective power, the psalm invited them to reflect on his powerful works. (Psalm 46:8) In particular, it directed attention to his ability to put an end to war. (Psalm 46:9) In a sense, Jehovah brought an end to war in Bible times by protecting his people from enemy nations. However, the Bible promises that God will soon do so on an even greater scale when he brings an earth-wide end to war.—Isaiah 2:4.
Does Jehovah still help his worshippers today? Yes. In fact, the apostle Paul strongly encouraged Christians to rely on Him for help. (Hebrews 13:6) The thoughts contained in Psalm 46 strengthen our trust in God’s protective power. They help us to view God as “our refuge and strength.”—Psalm 46:1.
Read Psalm 46 along with explanatory footnotes and cross-references.


Watch this short video to see an overview of the book of Psalms.




a Jehovah is the personal name of God. (Psalm 83:18) See the article “Who Is Jehovah?“

