From Our Readers
Makeup  I work as a makeup artist and found the article “Young People Ask . . . How Can I Use Makeup Properly?” (June 22, 1990) to be very accurate and informative. Regarding the danger of bacterial contamination of store samples or testers, one sensible precaution is to shop at a reputable store. Such stores are usually staffed by well-trained personnel who work hard to keep their tester units clean and appealing to customers. You should also insist that disposable applicators, such as cotton swabs or cotton balls, be used. Lipsticks should be cleansed with alcohol before use. Makeup brushes should first be cleansed with a cleaning solvent. Eye pencils should be sharpened before each use. You can also show consideration for the next customer by not putting your fingers into any of the products.
C. H., United States
Guns  I am offended by your distorted portrayal of firearms in the May 22, 1990, issue. Such a one-sided, negative portrayal of inanimate objects is ridiculous. Guns are not inherently good or evil; neither is producing, selling, or possessing them.
J. P., United States
My uncle lost his wife in a car accident and spent three months drinking heavily. Eventually he locked himself in the bathroom and shot himself. I hope that people who read the article will stop and think as to whether it is worthwhile to own a gun.
M. C. A., Brazil
Though I must confess that I have always wanted a gun, when I read through those pages, it made me question whether it is still worthwhile for me to go on saving toward buying one.
D. M., England
Catholic Divisions  I was horrified at your issue of June 22, 1990! Was it necessary to show our crucified Savior split in half?
D. L. A., United States
No disrespect for Christ was intended. The crucifix is commonly used as a symbol of the Catholic Church itself. The picture thus served to dramatize the lamentable divisions inside Catholicism. Interestingly, when the apostle Paul condemned the sectarianism among Christians at Corinth, he used this vivid illustration: “The Christ exists divided.” (1 Corinthians 1:13)​—ED.
Congratulations. The writing was well researched, interestingly written, and nonjudgmental. You’ll never convert me to your religion, but you have enlightened and informed me.
V. O., United States
Epilepsy  I must express my deep gratitude for the article on epilepsy! (June 22, 1990) What a relief to realize I am not the only one who suffers from epilepsy. I had been so terribly depressed that I was going to end it all. The article came just in time. It opened up the hope of a future without sickness.
N. P., Federal Republic of Germany
Animal Research  I very much appreciated your article. (July 8, 1990) I knew that experiments were carried out on animals, but I would never have imagined that they were used in the development of cosmetics, shampoos, and detergents! I am anxiously awaiting the time when such abuses will cease.
R. M., Italy

