From Our Readers
Disciplining Children  I really appreciated the article “The Bible’s Viewpoint . . . ‘The Rod of Discipline’​—Is It Out-of-Date?” (September 8, 1992) With so much child abuse and brutality in the world around us, we need an article like this to help us stay balanced. I know children who were treated with excessive harshness from infancy. Today they are young teens with deep emotional problems. We need such information to help us to guide and teach our children in a loving way.
M. B., United States
Designer Clothing  Thank you for the article “Young People Ask . . . Designer Clothing​—Is It for Me?” (September 8, 1992) When I left my job a year ago to become a full-time evangelizer, I could no longer afford designer clothing. This upset me for a time. However, now I can see that the choice I made was good and that status-symbol clothing did nothing for me.
M. J. C., Brazil
Aral Sea Tragedy  Many thanks for the article “The Aral Sea Tragedy.” (August 22, 1992) Ever since my school days, this inland sea, as well as the neighboring Caspian Sea, has held a fascination for me. Over the years, I have been able to gather material about the larger of the two seas, but until your article, details about the Aral Sea were few and far between.
D. H., Germany
Grandparents  Although we are no longer youths, my wife and I have greatly appreciated the “Young People Ask . . .” articles on living with grandparents. (July 8 and July 22, 1992) We recently moved in with my wife’s grandmother, and this has posed real challenges for us. Your sound Bible-based advice and wise insight into elderly persons were just what we needed. Two family studies based on those articles and practical application of the advice definitely improved our situation.
J. L., United States
Death Metal  Your article “Death Metal​—What’s the Message?” (July 8, 1992) struck a chord with me. I’ve had a constant battle with this music. Your article gave me the strength and courage to get rid of this satanic music. I’ve still got a long battle, but with Jehovah’s help I’ll be able to win.
M. D., United States
AIDS  Your article on “AIDS in Africa” (August 8, 1992) was very responsible! The advice to young ones contemplating marriage could even be lifesaving. I am a newly baptized Christian, and because of my past life-style, I had myself tested for the HIV infection. My test was negative. I wonder why some who should be tested hesitate to do so. Many married ones whose mates have been unfaithful simply hope for the best. But it is getting too dangerous just to sit and hope that this deadly disease has not been transmitted.
L. J., United States
We appreciate these candid comments. According to the U.S. Centers for Disease Control, it can take from three to six months after infection for the body to produce enough antibodies to be detected by an HIV test. Retesting may therefore be advisable if the test is taken soon after possible exposure to the AIDS virus.​—ED.
I just wanted to express appreciation for the article “AIDS​—Health-Care Workers Take Precautions!” (June 22, 1992) I work in an urgent care center. Shortly after reading this article, we had a staff meeting during which these same precautions were discussed in detail. I was able to tell others that I had read about this first in Awake!
T. M., United States

