From Our Readers
Help for the Dying  Since I am a nurse working in a hospital cardiology unit, your Awake! issue on “Help for the Dying” (October 22, 1991) interested me. However, I feel a slight error should be corrected, for you say: ‘Many physicians have concluded that it is ethical to withdraw nutrition and hydration [fluids] from certain dying, hopelessly ill, or permanently unconscious patients.’ I assure you that it would be cruel and extremely painful to stop a sick person’s nutrition and hydration. Through personal observation, I can say that this would cause even more suffering.
M. S., France
The statement in question was quoted from “The New England Journal of Medicine” and reflects the thinking of many physicians. Doctors believe that many severely brain-​damaged patients are incapable of experiencing pain and suffering. Furthermore, the administering of medical nutrition and hydration requires sophisticated medical skill and entails discomforts and risks of its own. Some doctors thus believe that in certain situations, such risks outweigh the benefits. In any case, individual Christians must make their own conscientious decisions when it comes to such painful and emotional issues.​—ED.
Twenty years ago I made the decision to withdraw life support from my one-​day-​old son. He had been born prematurely and was brain-​dead. I had delivered him myself at home, as we had not been able to get to the hospital in time. I cannot explain the misery and guilt I carried for years. But by reading the articles, I was able to come to terms with my 20-​year-​old burden.
S. M., United States
Eastern European Conventions  I was deeply moved by the series “Lovers of Godly Freedom Rejoice in Eastern Europe.” (December 22, 1991) Having been brought up as one of Jehovah’s Witnesses, I have been inclined to take for granted the spiritual food we receive. But learning about how Witnesses in Eastern Europe received for the first time in their mother tongues publications that we have had for several years made me better appreciate the privilege I have of being a part of such a wonderful organization.
T. O., Japan
Reading  I am 13 years old. The article “Read to Expand Your Horizons” (July 22, 1991) was just what I needed. I used to read one word at a time. My mind would often stray, making it necessary to reread the material in order to understand it. Your wonderful tips were of great help.
A. K., Poland
Rehabilitating Criminals  I have a son in prison who receives a subscription to Awake!, and I have prayed diligently for articles that might reach his heart. I so appreciated the articles “The Power of the Truth to Rehabilitate” (July 22, 1991) and “I Was a Professional Burglar.” (September 8, 1991) I read them through tears of deep gratitude to God, who “desires all to attain to repentance.” (2 Peter 3:9) Hopefully, some day my son will do so.
A. F., United States
Cricket  Cricket is one of our favorite pastimes here in the Caribbean. But I was really surprised to see the article “Cricket or Baseball​—What’s the Difference?” (November 8, 1991) I never dreamed of seeing such an article in the magazine! It was very informative, and using just this article, I was able to place many copies of Awake! with others.
J. D., Jamaica

