Announcements
ARE YOU SKILLED IN YOUR WORK?
Good, wholesome work is a joy and a pleasure. When one is skilled in his work, he does it with real delight and derives great satisfaction from doing it well. Jehovah God, the Creator of heaven and earth, is the skilled Director of all good works. Did you know there is a definite work he wants all who love him to skillfully do? It is the work of making known his great and holy name to the ends of the earth. (Ps. 83:16-18) Blessed is the one who does his bidding and is ‘skilled at his work, for he will stand in the presence of kings.’ (Prov. 22:29, AT) Desiring to please God, during February all of Jehovah’s witnesses and their companions will derive joy and pleasure from offering a year’s subscription for the Watchtower magazine at the regular rate of $1. Free to each new subscriber, there will be given three booklets. As a skilled workman of God, stand in the presence of the enthroned King, Christ Jesus, by serving Bible truths to people living in your area. Testify boldly to all whom you meet.
YEARBOOK AND CALENDAR
The 1954 Yearbook of Jehovah’s Witnesses reports that the Kingdom message was preached by 519,982 different individuals of Jehovah’s witnesses scattered throughout 143 countries, colonies and islands of the sea. Daily they praised Jehovah’s name by proclaiming the Kingdom message from house to house, calling back on interested persons, conducting home Bible studies and in other ways sharing God’s message of life with seekers for Bible truth. All together these ministers spent over 72,000,000 hours last year, under the direction of the Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society, serving Kingdom interests. For a full and complete report of what was accomplished send 50 cents for a copy of the 1954 Yearbook. You may also obtain the 1954 calendar for 25 cents. Five or more calendars will be sent to one address at 20 cents each. Do not delay. Send your order now.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES
Week of February 21: Rearing Children in the New World Society, and Disciplining Children for Life, ¶1-5.
Week of February 28: Disciplining Children for Life, ¶6-27.

