The Folly of Apathy
THIS is the day of indifference, unconcern and apathy. Talk to a person about the dry rot of corruption in high places, and he manifests indifference. Tell him about the staggering and ever-mounting national debt that is undermining the nation’s economic stability, and he remains unconcerned. Warn him of the creeping fascism that is gnawing at the very vitals of his most precious freedoms, and he shows apathy. And knock at his door with a message from God’s Word, and he may not even exert himself to ascertain whether the one calling is peddling shoe strings or is a Christian minister bringing the good news of God’s kingdom.
And modern man feels quite pleased with his apathy. Why be concerned with corruption, with a day of reckoning or with what the morrow may bring? Things are going well with me today! Like his counterpart of twenty-five centuries ago he says: “Jehovah seeth us not; Jehovah hath forsaken the land.” “Jehovah will not do good, neither will he do evil.” (Ezek. 8:12; Zeph. 1:12, AS) Or he may take the smug attitude that “the old-time religion is good enough for me,” never concerning himself with whether his forebears used good judgment in picking their religion or not.
Actually his actions show him to be the fool that “hath said in his heart, There is no God.” (Ps. 14:1) Deep down in that heart he is dissatisfied with his philosophy of life, but instead of looking for something better, he selfishly indulges himself in physical pleasures and sooner or later is made to know the truth that “whatever a man is sowing, this he will also reap.”—Gal. 6:7, NW.
Instead of manifesting apathy, now more than ever before is the time for us to be alert, watchful, interested and concerned, for there is a God in heaven and his Word is truth. And that Word shows that we are living in a transition period from an old system of things to a new heavens and earth. (2 Pet. 3:4, 13) Now, therefore, is the time to heed Jesus’ warning: “Pay attention to yourselves that your hearts never become weighed down with overeating and heavy drinking,” and to obey the command: “Seek ye Jehovah, . . . seek righteousness, seek meekness.”—Luke 21:34; Zeph. 2:3, AS.
Those who make the hope of God’s kingdom their concern will receive even now peace of mind and joy of heart. And that hope is truly a prize for which to live, work and fight, for it will take an everlasting life to realize fully its blessings of peace and prosperity, health and life. Those manifesting apathy toward that hope today will never know such blessings. Truly such apathy is folly.

