VOL. XXX MARCH 15 NO. 6 
A.D. 1909-A.M. 6037 



CONTENTS 

Views from the Watch Tower 83 

Christian Nations Perplexed 83 

Occult Phenomena 83 

Another Harmony Suggestion 84 

Brother Russell's Sermons 84 

"Why Persecutest Thou Me?" 84 

How Noble His Conversion! 85 

Ransomer, Redeemer, Sin-Offering, Atoner, Advocate, 

Mediator 87 

Confusion of Tongues in Babylon (Illustrated) 89 

Christians First at Antioch 90 

Christ Our Passover (Poem) 92 

Missionary Spirit of Christianity 93 

Reasons for a Layman's Change of Belief 94 

Some Interesting Letters 95 

page 82 

Address Business Communications and Remittances to 

WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY 

610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA. 
--OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH, 24 EVERSHOLT ST., LONDON, N.W. 
GERMAN BRANCH, UNTERDORNER STRASSE, 76, BARMEN 
AUSTRALASIAN BRANCH, EQUITABLE BULDG., COLLINS ST., MELBOURNE 
PRICE $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POSTOFFICE. 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA 



R4360 : page 82 

ADDRESS US HEREAFTER AT BROOKLYN, NY. 



TO THE LIST OF GENERAL CONVENTIONS IN OUR LAST 
ISSUE ADD BROOKLYN, NY., SEPTEMBER 
4TH TO 6TH, INCLUSIVE 



VERY CHEAP POCKET HYMNALS WITHOUT MUSIC 

As the friends are learning the tunes of the Hymns of the 
Millennial Dawn, they are coming to a fuller appreciation of 
the fact that there is not another collection in the world its 
equal— either in high standard of quality or in lowness of 
price. These are well termed "333 Ageless Hymns"; because 
they never grow old. The tunes, too, are grand and never 



wear threadbare. 

The suggestion that all sing the same hymns, and all 
know the tunes at our Conventions, has borne good fruit also. 
All this has led up to a demand for the hymnal in very cheap 
form. This demand we can now meet. Orders may be sent 
in at once. Prices as follows:— 

Paper covered, 4 cents each, postpaid; per 100, charges 
collect, $2.00. In Great Britain, (2d.) per copy; (10s.) per 100. 

Cloth covered, 6 cents each, postpaid; per 100, charges 
collect, $3.50. In Great Britain, (3d.) per copy; (12s., 6d.) 
per 100. 



R4383 : page 82 

THE VOW IN BOOK-MARK FORM 

By April 10th we hope to have the Vow Poem and also in 
Prose in good supply. We can fill your orders by mail, postage 
prepaid, as follows:— 

On Satin Ribbon, 10 cents; three for 25 cents. 

On silk finished paper, 25 cents per 100. 



page 82 

PROBABLE DELAY IN FILLING OF ORDERS 

On account of the moving which is now in progress, the 
friends would do well to remember that quite probably there 
will be delay in the filling of orders now being received, and 
also in the answering of correspondence— for a few days only, 
we trust. 



R4350 : page 83 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER 
CHRISTIAN NATIONS PERPLEXED 



OUR dear friends, who do not believe in a future Millennium, 
attempt to prove that we are now enjoying the 
blessings of Christ's Kingdom, and point us to the 
Christian nations of the world, called "Christendom." They 
are greatly perplexed when we inquire why if Christ is King 
he should have different forms of government, and why his 
different governments for centuries have fought each other 
and today are wasting the blessings of our day on armies and 
navies and fortifications? 
Alas! the name "Christendom" is a delusion. Satan is still 



"the prince of this world" and the term "Satandom" would 
be the truer title. But our "wily" Adversary is so crafty that 
he puts darkness for light and deludes the poor world. Thank 
God that soon Satan shall be bound for a thousand years that 
he may deceive the nations (peoples) no more, until the thousand 
years are finished.— Rev. 20:3. 

Meantime, however, some useful purposes are being 
served by the military expenditures. Employment is being 
given to millions of men not only in military and naval services, 
but also in the building of guns and forts and battleships, 
—the mining of the ore, the smelting and rolling of the 
steel, etc. And not the poor, but the rich, foot the bills in 
taxes. The following from the Atlantic Monthly is 
interesting:— 

CAUSE OF NATIONAL DEFICIT 

All the great nations are today facing deficits, caused in 
every case by the military and naval experts. Into what a 
tangle the finances of Russia and Japan have been brought 
by militarists is known to everybody. Germany has, in a single 
generation, increased her national debt from eighteen million 
dollars to more than one billion dollars. The German 
Minister of Finance looks wildly around in search of new 
sources of national income. Financial experts confess that 
France is approaching the limit of her sources of revenue. 
Her deficit is created by her army and navy. The British 
government is always seeking for new devices by means of 
which to fill a depleted treasury. Her Dreadnoughts keep her 
poor. Italy has for years staggered on the verge of bankruptcy 
because she carries an overgrown army on her back. 
Even our own rich republic faces this year a deficit of over 
a hundred million dollars, largely due to the one hundred and 
thirty millions we are spending on our navy. Mr. Cortelyou 
has called our attention to the fact that while in thirty years 
we have increased our population by 85 per cent, and our 
wealth by 185 per cent., we have increased our national expenses 
by 400 per cent. 

MANY SECESSIONS FROM THE GERMAN STATE CHURCH 



Ecclesiastical circles in Germany are much exercised at 
the rapidly increasing desertions from the State Church. 

Although the process of official separation from the 
Church is one of the greatest difficulty, delay and expense, it 
is computed that in Berlin alone considerably over 10,000 persons 
have severed their connection with the Church during 
the past year. So great is the number of those who are notifying 

R4351 : page 83 

their intention to terminate their membership that special 
offices have been opened in Berlin to receive their applications, 
which now number between 300 and 400 daily. These applications 



are almost altogether from members of the Lutheran 
Church, and hardly affect the Roman Church at all. Added 
to this is the significant fact that the numbers of communions, 
baptisms, and church marriages are rapidly diminishing. It is 
computed that for every five marriages celebrated five years 
ago in church and registry office only three are now celebrated 
in both places, the other two being satisfied with a civil 
ceremony alone. 

Among the working classes, especially those attached to 
the Social Democratic party, there exists a bitter hostility to 
the clergy and all institutions which they control. The clergy 
have not shown themselves sympathetic to democratic wishes, 
siding on almost all occasions where conflict exists between 
poor and rich, between possessors and dispossesed, with the 
class in power. There is, moreover, a widespread feeling that 
the clergy are paid far too high salaries, yet notwithstanding 
this large additions have been made recently to their incomes. 

Much dissatisfaction is also felt at the methods employed 
by the ecclesiastical authorities in collecting those dues assigned 
to them by law. Defaulters are as ruthlessly treated 
as though their debt were a civil one, and it not infrequently 
happens that defaulters' goods and chattels are sold to meet 
church demands. 

But probably the chief cause of the movement against the 
Church is the spread of agnosticism among all classes of the 
population, and the fact that even in those universities where 
until recently an orthodox theology was taught, there are now 
few chairs from which ultra Liberal views are not proclaimed. 
—London Daily Chronicle. 

OCCULT PHENOMENA 



The newspapers far and near are publishing the following 
item, which can be understood only from the Bible standpoint, 
namely, that humanity is beset by the fallen angels 
("demons") except as protected by the divine power. And 
that now, in the end of the age, as a part of the great test 
or trial of the world, the divine protection will be relaxed in 
considerable measure. And that as a result occult phenomena 
will increase human delusions with a view to various ensnarements, 
mental and physical. The "very elect" will be 
shielded by the Truth and by its holy Spirit, keeping their 
hearts and minds in Christ Jesus. (Matt. 24:24.) We read:— 

"Fred E. Foskett, a young machinist of Orange, Mass., 
has attracted the attention of Prof. James, of Harvard, and 
other leading members of the Boston branch of the American 
Society of Psychical Research, who gave him tests recently. 

"The first of the tests was held at the home of Prescott 
F. Hall on Saturday afternoon. Prof. Wm. James and several 
well-known professors were there, and test conditions as 
nearly perfect as possible were made. Foskett was seated in 
the center of a room before a small table. There he performed 
every feat of the Hindu fakir and the Buddhist 
adept. 



"On the table was an ordinary kerosene lamp with a chimney 
and a flat wick, a pan and several quarts of alcohol. According 
to the reports of those present, Foskett succeeded in 
every test. The first test was made with ordinary sulphur 
matches. Foskett lighted half a dozen, one after the other, 

R4351 : page 84 

holding them with one hand so close to the fingers of the 
other that the flames curled around them. He then lighted 
the lamp and held his hands above the wick, while the flames 
curled over them and the soot completely blackened them. 

"From one of these tests to another Foskett went, while 
the scientists held their breath and watched every motion 
until he came to the climax. In this he poured a quart of alcohol 
into the basin, lighted it and then washed his hands, 
bathing them for nearly ten minutes in the burning fluid, 
washing it up over his arms and to his face— literally bathing 
himself in blazing alcohol. That completed the tests for 
Saturday. As soon as they were finished the physicians present 
examined Foskett, and they could not find the slightest trace 
of a burn or blister. Foskett then told them that the flames 
did not give him the slightest sensation of burning, that he 
felt comfortably warm and pleasant, and nothing more. 

"The second tests were made at the home of Prof. James 
in Cambridge, and under the same conditions as the day before. 
Considerable mystery is thrown about them. Mr. Hall 
said they were so startling that he did not care to discuss 
them until they had been tried again. Another scientist 
who was there said that Foskett performed all of his experiments 
of the day before, and then ABSOLUTELY AND POSITIVELY 
DEM ATERIALIZED ."' 

"He seemed to dissolve into thin air as we watched him. 
Was gone forty-one seconds and then materialized." 

ANOTHER INSTANCE 

A brother in Present Truth had a peculiar experience 
lately. He was called to the house by cries of Fire! He 
found that the lighted lamp had fallen over on the bookstand. 
The oil was blazing over the little table, burning the 
books, etc. In desperation he carried the stand out and threw 
it, lamp, books and all, into the snow. The blaze encircled his 
arms and came into his face and he expected to be terribly 
burned. To his surprise not even the hair of his arms was 
singed. 

After smothering the burning carpet he went to pick up 
the things thrown into the snow and found his WATCH TOWER 
Bible and Diaglott still burning, whereas the Bible of his 
wife (a Methodist) was not at all burned, though on the 
same table. 

The wife reasoned that this was a mark of God's displeasure 
against our publications. We argue reversely, that 
it marked Satanic displeasure. 

This reminds us of the case of a young man obsessed 
of evil spirits. A brother in the Truth heard of his case 



and called to advise him how to get rid of the evil spirits- 
taking along the Spiritism pamphlet and a copy of the WATCH 
TOWER. When he attempted to enter the room where the 
youth was, the latter became so agitated that the Brother 
retired. Later he entered without the literature all right. By 
conversation he got the youth to exercise his will against the 
spirits and finally got him reading. 

Gradually he regained his freedom, and when last we 
heard, he was rejoicing in the Lord and had symbolized his 
full consecration by water baptism. 

ANOTHER HARMONY SUGGESTION 



Some who have visited the Bible House and participated 
in our morning hymn and prayer, and the subsequent thanksgiving 
at the breakfast table and reading of "The Vow" and 
discussion of the MANNA text offer a suggestion. They desire 
"The Vow" in some form convenient for reading with the 
MANNA, and to know the numbers of the hymns to be sung, 
that they may join with us in voice as well as in heart. 

Undoubtedly this spirit of oneness and brotherhood will 
increase as we get the love of God more and more shed abroad 
in our hearts. The Bible House Family— henceforth the "Bethel 
Home," deeply reciprocates these precious sentiments, and will 
sing and pray and discuss with the more pleasure because of 
this fresh evidence of the oneness of the family of God 
everywhere. 

Our worship hour is 7:00 a.m., except Sundays, at 8:00 
a.m. We have long given the choice of hymn to each in turn. 
Hereafter we will permit each to choose in advance and publish 
in advance the choice monthly, as follows:— 

BETHEL HYMNS FOR APRIL 

(1) 19; (2) 121; (3) 155; (4) 105; (5) 198; (6) 193; 
(7) 7; (8) 179; (9) 176; (10) 224; (11) 263; (12) 307; (13) 
312; (14) 233; (15) 208; (16) 325; (17) 119; (18) 87; (19) 
144; (20) 268; (21) 114; (22) 273; (23) 116; (24) 63; (25) 
313; (26) 4; (27) 72; (28) 194; (29) 93; (30) 217; (31) 264. 

Our provision for copies of "The Vow" for use in the 
MANNA book is in the form of Book-marks, described on 
second page of this issue. 

BROTHER RUSSELL'S SERMONS 



Some of the dear friends appear fearful lest Brother Russell 
should become popular and then vain. Take no anxious 
thought on the subject, dear friends. Leave matters in the 
Lord's hands. He can give you rest and keep you from 
stumbling either into cold opposition or even lukewarmness. 

As already expressed, our expectation is that the Truth 
will have a very brief season of wonderful prosperity, which 



will draw the attention of Christendom to it through the pens 
and tongues of friends and foes. Even so it was in the close 
of our Lord's ministry, until the "rulers" said, "The world is 
gone after him," and took counsel to kill him. As the change 
of sentiment came quickly and those who hailed our Lord as 
King five days later cried out "Crucify him," so here the 
change may come quickly also. 

What the Newspaper Syndicate now handling Brother Russell's 
sermons may sometimes say of him in laudatory terms, 
by no means represents Brother Russell's humble estimate of 
his own talents. Publishers must be allowed to use their own 
ideas of what they publish and how they introduce it. 
They recognize the fact that the sermons are striking a responsive 
chord with many of their readers; and they must 
make the unresponsive feel that there is merit and dignity in 
the service so that they will not oppose it. 

Brother Russell has tried sending out the sermons without 
his name— merely as sermons from Brooklyn Tabernacle. 
But some of the newspaper publishers object to this, declaring 
that the personal feature is necessary. Let us then worry 
less over each other and specially guard our own hearts in 
this evil day; lest any root of bitterness and fault finding 
spring up to turn us aside. In a word, let us leave to God 
his supervising work and look for and thankfully use the opportunities 
he may be pleased to grant us in his blessed 
service. We "hold the Head" when we thus recognize the 
Lord's headship of his own work. Any other attitude is 
dangerous. 



R4355 : page 84 

"WHY PERSECUTEST THOU ME?" 

-ACTS 9:1-19.-APRIL 18- 

Golden Text:— "And he fell to the earth, and heard a 
voice saying unto him, Saul, Saul, why persecutest 
thou me?"-V. 4. 

HAVING already noted the establishment of the Gospel 
in Judea and Samaria and the opening of the 
door of opportunity to the Gentiles, we come now 
to the consideration of the spread of the message amongst 
the Gentiles. This brings us into touch with the great Apostle 
Paul, whose labors in the ministry will be the theme of 
the International Lessons for the remainder of this year. 
The Apostle to the Gentiles had two names, Saul and 
Paul. Of Jewish parentage he was named after Israel's first 
King, Saul; but, as his father was a Roman citizen, it was 
proper that he should receive a special name with such and 
Paul was chosen— possibly because in the Greek language the 
name Saul (Saulus) signified "waddling." We find that after 
St. Paul's ministry reached to foreign lands he adopted and 
used his Roman citizenship name exclusively. 



His family stock was strongly Jewish and religious- 
Pharisees. This accounted for his not being sent to the University 
of Tarsus, but instead to Jerusalem to the School of 
Gamaliel. Nevertheless, quite probably his early association 
with learned Greeks helped to give him mental poise, which 

R4355 : page 85 

was afterward helpful to him when he addressed all classes. 

Tradition has it that his parents were quite wealthy, as 
their position of Roman citizenship implies. Paul's education 
in Gamaliel's School further implies this, as that was an advanced 
School or Seminary, attended by few except the sons 
of the rich. It is surmised that Paul's conversion to Christianity 
isolated him completely from his home and family and 
deprived him of an income previously enjoyed, all of which 
he gladly forsook for Christ's sake. The fact that he had 
a trade at tent-making is not out of harmony with this, for it 
is the custom of the rich to give their sons trades. The fact 
that St. Paul was poor and needed to use his trade seems to 
imply that his financial allowances were discontinued. His later 
condition, on the contrary, seems to imply that he afterward inherited 
a patrimony, which enabled him to live in his own hired 
house, with numerous conveniences, enjoyed at that time only by 
the wealthy, and surely not by prisoners in general. It is remarkable 
that money matters are scarcely mentioned in connection 
with our Lord and the Apostles, the coins in sufficient 
amount for taxes and the collection of donations for sufferings 
at Jerusalem at one time being the only exceptions we 
recall. We are glad to follow this same course in connection 
with the present Harvest Work and to commend it to all the 
Household of Faith everywhere. 

Although St. Paul declared, as his enemies would be inclined 
to say, that in bodily presence he was weak and his 
speech contemptible, nevertheless, in offset to this, we recall 
that at Lystra the populace compared him to their god Mercury 
and thus impliedly complimented his general brilliancy 
and vigor of manner or both. Dr. Peloubet summarizes this 
great man's character in the following glowing terms, which 
we fully endorse:— 

"He was deeply religious, whole-souled, ardent, energetic, 
persevering, broad-minded, affectionate, loving. He was great 
in more ways, probably, than any other man of human history. 
He was a great traveler, a great author, a great orator, 
a great organizer, a great missionary, a great philosopher. 
All of this genius was yielded in absolute consecration to 
Jesus Christ. He is the Moses of the New Testament. The 
two stand supreme amongst men." 

HOW NOBLE HIS CONVERSION 

We must not use this word conversion in its ordinary 
sense. We must remember St. Paul's own words to the effect 
that he was a strong believer in a true God and fully 
consecrated to his service, not in a formal or nominal sense, 
but heartily, energetically, with a zeal which persecuted the 



Church. He had a zeal toward God, but it was not according to 
knowledge. When God supplied him with the knowledge, it did 
not change his heart, his impulse, his devotion; it merely 
changed the direction of his activities. The word convert 
signifies to turn around. Paul was not turned from a wrong 
condition of heart to a right one, but he was turned about in 
his course of action. He served the same God, and with the 
same zeal, but intelligently and correctly. It is important 
that we note this carefully, so that we shall not expect God's 
dealings to be after this manner with unbelievers. He does 
not smite them down, but, as the Scriptures say, draws them. 
And he draws only such as are in the right attitude of 
heart— "Feeling after him."— Acts 17:27. 

St. Paul's experience may find more of a parallel in the 
Christian Church, amongst those consecrated to the Lord, 
but blinded by superstition. Such may violently persecute 
those of "this way," and may do so in all "good conscience," 
as did St. Paul. There is hope for all such, that in some 
manner the Lord will cause the eyes of their understanding 
to open. We have more hope of the conversion from error 
to Truth of those who, in their blindness, are bitter persecutors 
of "this way," than we have for those who are cold and 
indifferent or lukewarm. The Lord stands pledged to help 
those whose hearts are right toward him. True, many, like 
St. Paul, may weep bitter tears in future years over their 
misdeeds of ignorance, over their failure to give proper heed 
to the instructions of the Scriptures, but in the end the Lord 
will deliver them. On the contrary, however, there is little 
hope for any who have once tasted of the good Word of God 
and the powers of the coming age and been made partakers 
of the holy Spirit— if such shall fall away we may do all in 
our power for their recovery, but cannot have much hope. 
As the Apostle remarks, it will be impossible to renew those 
who have gone to this length. 

THE ARREST OF THE "INJURIOUS" MAN 

The previous lesson narrated the progress of the Truth, 
the Lord blessing the activities of its followers; but still Saul 
of Tarsus was energetically opposing the Lord's followers 
and, as an authority in the Law before the Sanhedrin and 
the high priest and the people, he was carrying the persecution 
with a high hand. It was evidently because of his consent 
that Stephen was stoned. His latest move was to get orders 
from the high priest to bring the Christians of Damascus to 
Jerusalem to be tried before the Sanhedrin, rather than that 
they should be tried in their local synagogue. The authority 
had been secured and Paul, as a representative of the highest 
Jewish authority of the time, accompanied by a band of men, 
possibly zealots like himself or possibly commissioned servants, 
a sort of police squad, neared Damascus at about midday. 
Suddenly, in the midst of the noonday brightness, came 
a still brighter light, which fell specially upon Saul, and in 
the midst of which he sank to the ground quite overcome. 
Was it a sun-stroke? No! It was a vision "Above the 
brightness of the sun at noonday"— a vision of the Christ, 



the Son of God in Glory. A voice was also heard, not only 

by Saul, but by his companions, though they comprehended 

not the words as he did. He heard in the Hebrew 

tongue the message from the Lord, "Saul, Saul, why persecutest 

thou me?" The bewildered Saul queried, "Who art 

thou, Lord?" And the answer came, "I am Jesus, whom 

thou persecutest." [The remaining words, "It is hard for thee 

to kick against the pricks; and he, trembling and astonished, 

said, Lord, what wilt thou have me to do?" are not found 

in the old manuscripts.] "Arise, and go into the city, and 

it shall be told thee what thou must do." 

What an opening of the eyes of Saul's understanding occurred 
at that moment, when he lost his natural sight by reason 
of the Lord's mercy upon him! We can better imagine 
than explain what must have been the course of his reasoning. 
With a self-righteousness he had been a believer in God 
against heresy and heretics. He had thought of himself, 
doubtless, as having a specially large degree of Divine approval, 
because of his untiring zeal— and now suddenly to be 
told that Jesus was really the Messiah! This was the significance 
of our Lord's first reproof, "Saul, Saul, why persecutest 
thou me!" Saul thought verily that he had been doing 
God service in persecuting those whom he believed were a 
little band of heretics, amongst whom were not many great, 
wise, learned or noble. Now, to his astonishment, he found 
that the Glorious One of the vision claimed generally the 
unwise, ignoble, poor as his brethren, his "members," whose 
sufferings were a part of his own. 

SAUL HUMBLED AND MEEK 

The zealous Pharisee, loyal and appointed to the putting 
down of heretics, who so prided himself upon his zeal for the 
Lord, in one moment was humbled to the dust, not only literally 
falling to the ground, but crest-fallen in his mind and 

R4356 : page 85 

self-esteem. The city of Damascus, which he had expected 
to enter with great dignity as the representative of the Jewish 
High Priest, the head of the Jewish religious system, he 
entered very differently. Opening his eyes after the voice 
had told him to go into the city, Saul found himself totally 
blind, so that he required to be led by the hand. So overwhelmed 
was he that for three days he did neither eat nor 
drink. He was doubtless acquainted at Damascus or possibly 
stopping at a hotel, but evidently on the most aristocratic 
street of the city, called "Straight," because it was really 
straight, as were so few of the streets of old-time cities. It 
was a very noble thoroughfare for those times of narrow 
streets. Its width was one hundred feet and it had a colonnade 
of marble columns separating the roadway from the 
building. 

ANANIAS GOD'S MESSENGER 



If one mentioned Ananias in the Scriptures was convicted 
of falsity toward the Lord, another of the same name 
was found faithful. He resided at Damascus. To him the 
Lord appeared in a vision directing him fully as to how he 

R4356 : page 86 

should find Saul and what he should do to him for the opening 
of his eyes. Ananias protested that there must be some 
mistake, because this man Saul had done much evil to the 
saints of Jerusalem. He knew also the purpose of his visit 
to Damascus. 

The Lord's commendation of Saul to Ananias was, "Behold, 
he prayeth!" Ah! how much of a story is told in those 
three words! How sure we may be that those who similarly 
humbly address the Almighty are in no injurious mood! True, 
there are hypocritical prayers, just as our Lord illustrated in 
the parable of the Pharisees and the publican, but, taken as a 
whole, private prayer may be considered a sure index to an 
honest, contrite heart. In our estimation, only the praying 
ones, even of the Lord's consecrated people, are at all likely 
to win the prize. If they do not love the Lord enough to 
render thanks for his mercies and to approach the throne 
of the heavenly grace and obtain mercy and strength to help 
in every time of need, then they are not likely to have sufficient 
strength to stand the trials and tests. We wish that we 
could feel sure that all of our readers are faithful and earnest 
in the practice of prayer. We are sure of many of them, 
but as we long for their progress, we urge them to embrace 
this great privilege heartily. 

Ananias is the first one accredited with the use of the 
word "Saints" in connection with Jesus' followers. As we 
well understand, the word signifies "holy ones," "sanctified 
ones." Surely it is a fitting name for all who profess and 
endeavor to follow in the footsteps of their Master. Let us 
each try to be worthy of the name, whether it ever be applied 
to us or not. 

A CHOSEN VESSEL TO ME 

In answer to Ananias' protest, in the vision the Lord said 
to him, "Go thy way, for he is a chosen vessel unto me, to 
bear my name before the Gentiles, and kings, and the children 
of Israel, for I will show him how great things he must 
suffer for my name's sake." Saul was peculiarly fitted by 
birth, by education and by temperament for the service for 
which the Lord chose him. He was a chosen vessel, and one 
of large capacity. And yet he was only a vessel. The good 
things that vessel was to carry were the Divine message of 
love and mercy. So it is with all the called "members" of the 
Church. We are merely vessels. The excellency, the merit, 
the worth, is of our Lord. We are merely servants to him 
and to his Church. We are not to understand that Saul was 
chosen to go to heaven, but chosen to be a vessel of mercy. 
But even in this respect his choice was dependent upon his 
own willingness. Speaking of the matter himself he declares, 



"I was not disobedient unto the heavenly vision." Elsewhere 
the Apostle tells us that the "Lord called me from my mother's 
womb." Presumably he meant that the Divine providence 
evidently had ordered and arranged that he should be born 
under certain conditions and environments which tended to 
make of him just such a vessel for the Gospel as he now was. 
This choice did not interfere with his free agency, however. 
He himself declares that he might still become a castaway, 
even after he had preached to others. The same lesson is 
appropriate to all of us. The Lord may order our affairs so 
as to give us special opportunities and privileges in connection 
with his work, but he never interferes with our hearts— 
to be in his service against our will. We may at any time draw 
back from the service, "But," said St. Paul, "if any man draw 
back, my soul shall have no pleasure in him."— Heb. 10:38. 
The chosen vessel was to bear the message of grace 

(1) To the Gentiles; 

(2) To Kings; 

(3) To Israel. 

We can see the propriety of preaching to the Gentiles 
first in order. We can see also that such a person as St. 
Paul had special opportunities for serving the Truth, on such 
occasions as those in which he appeared and reasoned before 
Felix, Augustus, Agrippa and others— possibly before the 
Emperor Nero. (2 Tim. 4:16,17.) His commission also 
mentioned Israel, and we remember how his preaching in 
various quarters was "to the Jew first." 

SUFFER FOR MY NAME'S SAKE 

How strangely it sounds, "For I will show him how great 
things he must suffer for my name's sake!" Is any other service 
than that of our Lord ever entered on these terms- 
promises of suffering? Surely not. Yet how honest for the 
Lord not to call his disciples under any misapprehension of 
the facts! We are called to suffer with him— to sacrifice ourselves, 
our earthly interests— to share his Cross and, by these 
experiences, to prove that we have been begotten of his 
Spirit, and that it has been shed abroad in our hearts and 
constituted us copies of God's dear Son. Faithfulness to this 
cause insures the reward of joint-heirship with our Redeemer 
in his Kingdom; nor can those Kingdom honors be hoped for 
on any other terms. The Apostle understood this and seems 
to give the thought, also, that the more any of the Lord's 
followers can share of the sufferings of Christ, in the flesh, 
proportionately will be his share in the glory which by and 
by shall be revealed to us— in the "members of his Body." 

The expression, "For my name's sake," is comprehensive. 
It includes everything connected with the Divine Plan, 
of which Jesus, the Messiah, is the center. It includes sufferings 
for the Truth's sake, because the Truth is vitally connected 
with the "only Name." It includes the brethren because 
they have named the name of Christ and they are 
under his name as members of his Body. It includes all the 
work of the Millennial Kingdom because he is the Head of it 
all, and his name, his honor, is associated with it all. Let us, 



therefore, be glad of any sufferings which come to us directly 
or indirectly, because of our faithfulness to the 
"precious name" and these various interests which are associated 
with it. 

"APPEARED TO THEE IN THE WAY" 

Assured by the Lord's leadings that the way was open 
to him to serve the Truth, Ananias hesitated no longer. In 
full confidence of faith he addressed Saul in the most kindly 
terms, saying, "Brother Saul, the Lord, even Jesus, that appeared 
unto thee in the way as thou earnest, hath sent me, 
that thou mightest receive thy sight, and be filled with the 
holy Spirit." (V. 12.) Promptly there fell from Saul's eyes 
something resembling fish scales. Evidently the intense light 
had destroyed the surface of the eye, which now peeled off. 
His sight was restored, though to what degree of perfection 
is questionable. It seems evident that for the remainder of 
life he was afflicted with weak eyes, which hindered his writing 
his own epistles, except one which, he remarked, was 
written in large characters. We can fancy the disadvantage 
he would be under in some respects by reason of this affliction, 
that his bodily presence would be much less attractive 
than before, and that nothing but the Truth behind his words 
could longer influence his auditors. 

We can fancy the sympathy which St. Paul's affliction 
called forth among the loving brethren. "I bear you witness, 
that, if it had been possible, ye would have plucked out your 
own eyes, and have given them to me."— Gal. 4:15. 

The Apostle as a chosen vessel was to have a very conspicuous 
part in the Divine program, in the introduction of 
the Gospel, and his own humility was a very essential matter. 
Doubtless the Lord foresaw that this remnant of his eye 
trouble would ever keep him in remembrance of the great 
blunder he made in his zeal without knowledge, and of the 
Lord's mercy to him. These two thoughts would doubtless 
keep him humble and trustful and probably provide a great 
blessing to him, even though he entreated for its removal, 
until the Lord indicated otherwise, saying, "My grace is sufficient 
for thee." (2 Cor. 12:9.) Ah, says the Apostle, if having 
this affliction means more Divine grace, then I am content 
to keep it and would be sorry to part with it. Let us, dear 
friends, view our trials, persecutions, difficulties, thus— as of 
Divine permission for our good. Let us be assured that he 
who has accepted us in the bonds of love and who has begotten 
us with his Spirit and called us sons, is not unmindful 
of our highest interests and would not suffer us to be 
tried and tempted except as he would make all such experiences 
work out harmoniously to our highest welfare. 

Saul had been praying and fasting for three days and 
nights and now realized the Lord's forgiving love, as manifested 
in the sending of Ananias, in harmony with his dream 
and with a recovery of a measure of his sight. With this 
evidence of Divine favor he would start afresh. First he 
would be baptized and thus symbolize his allegiance to the 



R4357 : page 87 

Crucified One. Then he would eat for the refreshment of 
his body that the strength might be used in the service of his 
new Master. 

We read that forthwith Saul preached Christ in the synagogue 
of Damascus. We admire his courage, his honesty! 
We do well to let the illustration quicken our own minds 
and hearts with appreciation that we may be fortified for similar 
and all emergencies— to use every opportunity to serve 
the Lord and to undo anything that we have previously done 
amiss. Presumably the Apostle felt his need of special preparation 
for the ministry of the Cross of Christ. At all events 
it is presumed that it was shortly after his conversion, shortly 
after his preaching at Damascus, that he turned aside into 
the desert of Arabia. It is possible that those three years 
were spent studying out the various features of the Divine 
Program. Doubtless there he received visions which filled 
him with enthusiasm for the work of his great message, the 
blessings of which have come down through all age and 
are still with us. 

"Lives of great men, all remind us, 

We should make our lives sublime; 
And, departing, leave behind us, 

Footprints on the sands of time." 



R4352 : page 87 

RANSOMER, REDEEMER, SIN-OFFERING, ATONER, ADVOCATE, MEDIATOR 

ADMITTING that we are not justified by the degree 

of our knowledge of the Divine Plan, but by the fulness 

of our faith, we are, nevertheless, deeply interested 

in every expression of the Scriptures bearing upon 

the philosophy of the great fact which the arms of our faith 

have grasped as a whole. The fact was as large when first 

we laid hold upon it as it is today, but we did not see its 

details as we now see them. And quite possibly there may 

be certain features which will yet more fully open to our 

eyes of understanding in the future. Our proper attitude is 

one of gratitude to God for knowledge of the blessed fact 

that his forgiveness of sins is somehow or other made possible 

to us through the death of Jesus. It was the appreciation 

of that fact which justified us and drew us to the Lord 

in consecration, saying, "The love of Christ constraineth us." 

(I Cor. 5:14.) Since that blessed moment it has been our 

privilege to go on and on, growing in grace and in knowledge 

and appreciation, in love and self-sacrificing obedience. 

Let us continue in this way and permit no amount of philosophizing 

to rob us of the blessings and privileges already 

secured. Some seem in danger of so doing— in danger of 

quarreling over philosophies which they cannot see; and, 

by the wrong spirit fostered through the quarreling, they 

seem in danger of losing all the blessings ever enjoyed. Let 



us not follow such a course, but, while maintaining our justifying 
faith and spirit of devotion, let us seek to appreciate 
every feature of Divine Truth presented to us in the Divine 
Word. 

THE RANSOMER AND THE RANSOM 

The Gospel message is the good tidings respecting a Ransom 
sacrifice, on account of which God may be just and yet 
be the justifier of the believer. Of the Ransomer God gave 
the first intimation to father Abraham, yet without explaining 
the particulars. He merely intimated that in some manner 
Divine Justice would be satisfied by Abraham's offspring, the 
Messiah, and that in consequence a blessing would go 
through his Seed to all the families of the earth. When our 
Lord was introduced as the Seed of Abraham he made the 
first statement of the philosophy of the Divine Plan by which, 
as Abraham's Seed, he was to bring the promised blessing. 
He declared, "The Son of man came to give his life a ransom 
for many." (Matt. 20:28.) This comprehensive statement 
of the Ransom was not elaborated— no details were 
given. However, in the Law to Israel, God prefigured and 
elaborated the Ransom, not in such a manner that all would 
understand it, but in types and shadows, which in his "due 
time" he proposed should be made clear and plain to such 
as would have the proper eye of understanding, enlightened 
by the holy Spirit. 

SIN-OFFERING OF ATONEMENT 

The word Ransom, as we have already pointed out, signifies 
a price to correspond. Adam, disobedient and a sinner, 
was condemned to death and needed to be Ransomed or Redeemed 
or Purchased back from death and from the condemnation 
of Justice. As he was but one man, so it needed but 
one man to Redeem him, to Ransom him. But it needed a 
perfect man, and there was none such. And so God sent 
Jesus, holy, harmless and undefiled, to be the Ransom of 
Adam and incidentally of his race, because all were involved 
through his disobedience. When, therefore, Jesus "died, the 
just for the unjust," on Calvary, a price sufficient had been 
laid down to redeem Adam and his race. 

But this merit has not yet been placed in the hands of 
Justice. Merely the merit of the sacrifice of a perfect human 
life was laid down in death, and it belonged to our 
Lord Jesus when the Father raised him from the dead by his 
own power. 

What did the risen Jesus do with the merit of his own 
sacrifice? We answer, that forty days later he ascended up 
on high, there to appear in the presence of God for us— believers, 
the "household of faith." This was pictured in the 
Law. As Jesus said, "Moses wrote of me." (John 5:46.) In 
the type Aaron, the high priest, typified the consecrated Jesus 
anointed with the holy Spirit, the High Priest of our profession. 
As Aaron took the blood of the bullock, which represented 
his own blood or life or sacrifice, and went with it 



into the Most Holy and sprinkled it upon the mercy-seat to 
make for himself (and the under-priests) and for his house 
(the tribe of Levi) atonement for sins, so did our Lord 
Jesus do in the antitype. He took not the blood of the bullock, 
but "his own blood," the merit of his own sacrifice. He 
sprinkled it not for the literal priests and Levites, the typical 
people, but for the antitypical Royal Priesthood, and Levites 
(or servants) of the "household of faith." 

What has this to do with the Ransom? We answer, This 
is the philosophy of it, as set before us in the Scriptures. It 
is not God's intention nor our expectation that all or many 
will be able to understand this Divine philosophy. As our 
Lord says, It is "given" to some to understand and not 
"given" to others. (Matt. 13:11-17.) We write in hope of 
assisting only those to whom it is "given to know the Mysteries 
of the Kingdom of Heaven." We write not to those 
outsiders to whom it is not intended these mysteries shall be 
understood or made known— either because they never came 
into the right attitude of heart to receive them, or because 
they subsequently left that proper condition of loving devotion, 
humility and teachableness. 

So, then, our Ransom sacrifice was presented before the 
Father when Jesus ascended up on high after his resurrection; 
and, according to the God-given type, it was presented, 
not for all the people, but merely for the antitypical "household 
of faith." The Sin-Offering, the offering which Christ 
made to Divine Justice in offset to man's sin, was the Ransom. 
None but he could have given it, as we have shown, 
and he could have given it for one of the race only, or for all 
of the race of Adam, as he might choose to apply it. As a 
price it was sufficient for all, but for how many of the all he 
would choose to apply it rested entirely upon himself and the 
Divine Plan, which he was following, although, as the type 
shows, he did not apply it for all, but for merely the "household 
of faith"— "for us." Nevertheless it is ultimately to 
apply for all, "a ransom for all," not only in the sense that it 
was sufficient to meet the penalty for all, but additionally in 
the sense that it will yet be made available to all— indirectly— 
by passing the merit through the "household of faith," 
through the "members of his Body." 

The waters of a great spring are set apart for the supply 
of a great city. To serve the intended purposes it is 
passed through numerous pipes and spigots. It is the same 
water in each spigot because from that same spring. In partaking 
of its refreshment we might indeed refer to the spigot 
from which we drew it, or we might refer to the spring itself 
or sometimes to the one and sometimes to the other. So 
in thinking of the merit of our Lord Jesus' sacrifice we 
should remember that all sin-atonement merit sprang from 
our Lord's sacrificial death— whenever applied and however. 
He is the Ransomer. His blood is the blood of Atonement 

R4352 : page 88 

for the sin of Adam, which brought the death sentence upon 
him and his race. No one adds to that Ransom and no 



one takes away from it. In the divine plan it is appropriated 
to the Church, "the elect," in order to let us have the privilege 
of joining our Lord as his "members" and by dying with 
him; as sharers of his sacrifice we merely pass his merit on to 
natural Israel and the world through the New Covenant. 
He is the spring, we are the pipes. 

THE BETTER SACRIFICES THAN THOSE 

In Tabernacle Shadows of the Better Sacrifices (published 
in 1880) we have already elaborated this subject. We 
therein show that Christ, instead of applying the merit of his 
sacrifice directly to the whole world, eventually effects the 
same thing by applying his merit to the comparatively small 
class drawn of the Father during this age. The Father draws 
(John 6:42) to the Son for "justification by faith in his 
blood" those who love righteousness and hate iniquity, and 
who are feeling after God, if haply they might find him. The 
Son receives these and acquaints them with the fact that he 
has already made atonement for sin and presented it on behalf 
of "every one that believeth." And then he guides them 
to the further privilege of this Gospel Age— that they may 
become join t-sacrificers with him and thus become his Bride 
and Joint-Heir in his Mediatorial Kingdom, which is soon 
to be established for the blessing of the unbelieving world- 
yet undrawn, unjustified, unblessed. The Son will draw them 
during the Millennium.— John 12:32. 

Why should the merit of Christ Jesus be thus placed upon 
the "household of faith" and not upon the world of mankind 
in general? 

We answer that this feature of the Divine Plan of the 
Ages is, as yet, a "Mystery" to all except the "saints." To 
the latter God reveals this great privilege— that by it he will 
"bring many sons to glory," under the Captaincy of Jesus, 
and that these will be called "his brethren," "his members," 
"his bride," according to the various standpoints of observation. 
In order that they may share his nature and its glory 
they must share his sufferings, "his death"; thus, since he 
must suffer, the just for the unjust, so these, being justified 
through faith in his blood, must similarly suffer, the just for 
the unjust, as his "members," and as "filling up that which is 
behind of the afflictions of Christ;" not afflictions left behind 
in the sense of the Redeemer's incompetency to make the full 
Atonement for the sins of the whole world, but sins left 
behind in the sense that our Lord did not apply his own 
merit directly to the world of unbelievers. Their sins are 
left behind that the merit of Christ, passing through the elect 
Church, might benefit them just as much in the end, and additionally 
might give the "elect" of this age the opportunity 
of suffering with their Lord and Head, in order that in due 
time they might be glorified with him.— Col. 1:24. 

This is all clearly shown in the type of Leviticus 16. As 

R4354 : page 88 

the High Priest's own personal sacrifice is represented in the 



bullock, so the sacrifice of his adopted members, justified by 
his blood, is shown in the secondary or supplemental sacrifice 
of the goat. All who have studied the subject remember well 
that everything that was done to the bullock was done to the 
goat, and that thus our Lord in advance foretold and illustrated 
that all who will be members of the "elect," the Royal 
Priesthood, must be copies of God's dear Son, the great High 
Priest, by whose sacrifice they were justified. Again, these 
are they who are called to walk in the footsteps of Jesus, in 
the "narrow way"— the way of self-sacrifice, self-denial, the 
way of the cross. 

We have repeatedly called attention to the fact that these 
highly honored ones were originally "children of wrath even 
as others," and many of them "strangers and aliens from 
God," but brought nigh unto him "by the blood of the cross" 
and still closer through the sufferings of this Gospel Age, 
this anti typical Atonement Day of sin-offerings. 

Who cannot see that our Lord offered himself once for 
all, a sin-offering? and that Christ dieth no more than "once 
for all"? Who cannot see that there were two distinct sin-offerings 
in the type— the bullock and the goat? Who cannot 
see that there are two sin-offerings during this Gospel 
Age, our Lord, our Redeemer, the center of all the merit, 
and the sacrifice of his Church, his Body, to whom his merit 
is applied? Who cannot see that these two offerings, the 
bullock (Jesus) and the goat (the members of his Body), 
are the "better sacrifices" mentioned by the Apostle Paul? 
(Heb. 9:23.) Who cannot see that these are the sin-offerings 
which alone were burned outside the camp? (Lev. 16:27.) 
Who cannot see that the Apostle urges us to present our 
bodies living sacrifices and to "Go forth unto him without 
the camp, bearing his reproach"? (Heb. 13:13.) So surely 
as two and two make four, we who go without the camp with 
our Lord are therefore participants in the sin-offerings, exactly 
as the Apostle declares. 

"WE HAVE AN ADVOCATE" 

We have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the 
Righteous. The world has no advocate with the Father, because 
they do not believe and have not accepted Jesus as 
their Redeemer and Advocate: he has not "appeared" for 
them, but "for us." When he appeared in the presence of 
God for us, just after his ascension on high, he presented 
his merit for believer's "sins that are past by the forbearance 
of God." He did not apply his merit for our future sins, 
transgressions, trespasses, weaknesses, ignorances, etc. As 
the basis of his work as our Advocate, our Lord retained a 
measure of his abundant merit for this purpose, with a view 
to having us come daily to the throne of the heavenly grace 
to obtain mercy— not for the original sin, which for believers 
is past, through the forbearance of God, but for our daily 
trespasses of ignorance or weakness. So he encourages us to 
remember that the imperfections of our earthen vessel need 
be no hindrance as New Creatures, spirit-begotten, because 
for all these human weaknesses "we have an Advocate with 



the Father, Jesus Christ the Righteous." Thus we are exhorted 
to keep our garments unspotted from the world, because 
if we are in the right condition of heart we may appreciate 
the privileges of going to the throne of grace and 
having every trespass of weakness and ignorance blotted out, 
washed away. 

Thus our Lord is the Atoner "for our sins and also for 
the sins of the whole world." But there is a difference. Our 
sins are represented in one part of the sin-offering, the bullock, 
and the sins of the whole world are represented in the 
other part, the goat. (Heb. 13.) He has already made satisfaction 
for our sins. Now he is offering his "members" in 
sacrifice that we may share his sufferings and glory. He is 
passing his merit through us that he may apply it "in due 
time" "for the sins of the whole world." Surely the merit of 
the Atoner is not decreased in any wise by reason of its 
passing through those whom he accepts and whom the Father 
accepts as his "members" on the larger scale! 

This is the thought which our Lord suggested, saying, 
"Except a corn of wheat fall into the ground and die, it 
abideth alone; but if it die, it bringeth forth much fruit." 
(John 12:24.) The immediate fruitage of our Lord's death 
was the bringing forth of the Church and the "household of 
faith." The dying in turn of those grains accepted as part 
and parcel with the original is to bring forth in the Lord's 
due time the appointed crop suggested by the Prophet, saying, 
"There shall be an handful of corn in the earth upon the 
top of the mountains; the fruit thereof shall shake like Lebanon." 
-Psa. 72:16. 

"MEDIATOR OF THE NEW COVENANT" 

The word "Mediator" is not synonymous with the words 
"Ransomer," "Redeemer," etc. On the contrary there could 
be no use for a Mediator until first a Redeemer had ransomed 
mankind. The word "mediator" is Scripturally used 
in connection with the establishment of the Covenants, and 
never otherwise. For instance, "Moses, the mediator of the 
Law Covenant," and Christ, "the Mediator of the New Covenant." 
Notice, however, that Aaron, the priest, did not mediate 
any Covenant; neither does Jesus, as the antitypical 
Priest, mediate a Covenant. It was the work of the priest 
to offer sacrifices for sins, and this our Lord has been doing 
for nearly nineteen centuries, as the antitypical High Priest. 
All of the antitypical priesthood must offer up "sacrifices holy 
and acceptable to God," else they cannot be of the "Royal 
Priesthood."— Rom. 12:1. 

But notice further that Moses typified the greater Christ 

R4354 : page 90 

—Jesus the Head and the Church his "members." As, for instance, 
in Acts 3:23 St. Peter says, "For Moses verily said 
unto the fathers, a Prophet (Teacher and Mediator) shall 
the Lord your God raise up unto you from amongst your 
brethren, like unto me; him shall ye obey in all things, whatsoever 



he shall say unto you; and it shall come to pass, that 

every soul, which will not obey that Prophet, shall be destroyed 

from amongst the people." The antitypical Moses 

here pictured was undoubtedly the glorified Christ, Head and 

Body, in his instruction of the world during the Millennium. 

It is certainly not true that all are destroyed who disobey 

the Lord at the present time. It is this antitypical Moses 

taken from amongst the brethren that God has been raising 

up during this Gospel Age. Our Redeemer and Lord was 

raised up first to be "Head over the Church which is his 

Body." Since then the members are being raised up from 

the world, separated from the world to the Lord and the 

Millennial work.-Eph. 1:23; 4:4,12,16; 5:30; Col. 1:18; 

3:15. 

Moses was not the typical priest and made not the typical 
atonement for sin; that was the work of the priest— Aaron. 
Moses as the mediator of the Law Covenant typified The 
Christ, Head and Body, Mediator of the New Covenant. 

However, that it might be seen that the work of the 
Mediator of the future in the sealing of the New Covenant 
will be vitally identified with the Atonement work, we have 
the declaration of the type that Moses used in sealing the 
Law Covenant, the typical blood of both bulls and goats. The 
lesson of this most distinctly is that the greater Mediator, 
Jesus the Head of the Church, his "Members," will seal or 
sprinkle the New Covenant with the blood of both of the sacrifices 
the meritorious blood of the antitypical bullock (our 
Lord, our Redeemer), and also the blood of his "members" 
(the Church), the antitype of the goat. 

OUTLINED BRIEFLY IN REVIEW 

Looking back at the original Covenant made with Abraham, 
it is like a closed-up telescope. For hundreds of years 
natural Israel seemed to be the Seed of Abraham, to whom 
the promises were made and through whom all the nations 
of the world would be blessed. Yet after more than sixteen 
centuries the telescope was slipped out a notch and matters 
so completely changed that the Jew does not know what 
happened unto this day. The thing which did happen was 
that Christ Jesus came and personally became the Seed of 
Abraham, by obeying the Law. Then, by dying for Adam's 
race, he was exalted to be the Spiritual Seed of Abraham. 
Then he was ready to give the earthly part of Israel's blessings 
to as many as would receive them— by justification by 
faith. Bewildered Israel held off and the favor went to the 
few of that nation and to thousands of others previously in 
darkness— Gentiles. These, after accepting the blessed privilege 
of human justification, were invited to surrender it, to 
sacrifice it, as their Redeemer had done. 

This work of sacrificing has been going on for more 
than eighteen centuries, and soon will be finished. When the 
sacrificing finishes, to whom will the blessed privileges of 
fellowship with God and Covenant privileges then be given? 
We answer that the Apostle and the prophets declare that it 
will be given to Israel again, but not by their own Law Covenant, 



but by a Law Covenant which the Lord will make with 
them at that time. The Redeemer and his sacrificing associates, 
his "members" or "Bride," will act as Mediator of the 
New Covenant between God and Israel.— Ezek. 16:60,61; 
Rom. 11:27-32. 

Furthermore, the blessed privileges of that New Covenant 
will not be confined to those of Jewish birth, but all the 
nations of the earth will be privileged to become "Israelites 
indeed," without guile, and to come under the terms, conditions 
and blessings of that New Covenant. 

Thus eventually the blood of Christ shall extend in its 
efficacy and blessing, not only to the "household of faith" of 
this present time, but to the Jews in the next age and through 
them to all nations. It will be none the less the blood of 
Christ that will bless and whose efficacy will restore all nations 
to fellowship with God because (1) Spiritual Israel and 
(2) Natural Israel shall have been associated in conveying 
the blessing to all nations. 

R4355 : page 90 

Have in mind, then, that a priest never is a mediator of a 
Covenant and that a mediator of a Covenant is never a priest 
to offer sin-offering and make atonement. What God has 
thus distinctly separated in his Word, we do well to keep 
separate in our thoughts and words, else our poor heads will 
become confused over terms, even while holding fast to certain 
facts. 



R4353 : page 89 

CONFUSION OF TONGUES IN BABYLON 

[This page is an illustration of a "BIBLE BELIEVER" holding "THE WORD OF GOD" 
"HOLY BIBLE" standing in front of various mountains while people walk up 
to the monuments on top of the mountains. The following signs are placed on 
the mountains.! 



ALTARS OF SOPHISTRY. 
HIGH PLACES OF HUMAN 
PHILOSOPHY RANGE. 

OCCULTISM, SCIENTIFIC THEOLOGY, HYPNOTIC HEALING. -THE EMMANUEL MOVEMENT, 
ADVANCED THEOLOGY, SOCIAL SERVICE, RELIGIOUS LEGISLATION, SOCIALISM, 
NEW THOUGHT, HIGHER CRITICISM, NEW THEOLOGY, CHRISTIAN SCIENCE, 
EVOLUTION, ETHICAL CULTURE, SPIRITUALISM, THEOSOPHY, 
FEDERATION OF CHURCHES 



WORSHIP THE LORD IN THE BEAUTY OF HOLINESS 



The above illustration, sent us from an unknown quarter, 
is too good to pass unnoticed. We regret that we cannot 
give proper credit. The lesson is so plain as to require no detailed 
comment. Truly the world is passing by the Bible to 
worship at every other shrine than that of the Divine Truth. 
Yet even such falling away is less deplorable than falling 
from the pinnacle of Truth into bitter envyings and hatred, 
strife and vainglorying contentions. The changes of the last 
century are taken by Evolutionists and all "Progressives" to 
prove that a gradual progress of our race has been in operation 
for thousands of years, whereas there is no such evidence. 
They see not, neither can they understand, the true philosophy 
of the great advances of the century past in the arts 
and sciences. The Bible alone reveals the secret; and the 
secret of the Lord is with those that reverence him and his 
Word. Only such as have humble hearts, have the hearing 
ear to discern the message of the Scriptures. It declared long 
ago that this wonderful epoch would come, and explained 
that it would mark the end of the present age and the inauguration 
of the Millennium; that this would be the "day of God's 
preparation" for the reign of righteousness. It tells that the 
knowledge born of the travel and commingling and printing 
would bring present developments. It shows, too, that present 
blessings to the unregenerate hearts will mean discontent, 
and that they in turn will bring the great time of trouble which 
will shake the present social structure to its foundations 
and pave the way to the long-promised Kingdom of God under 
the whole heavens.— Dan. 12:4,9,10. 



R4357 : page 90 

CHRISTIANS FIRST AT ANTIOCH 

-ACTS 11:19-30; 12:25.-APRIL 25.- 

Golden Text:— "The disciples were called 
Christians first in Antioch."— Acts 11:26. 

ANTIOCH, on the sea coast north of Jerusalem, was 
once a very prominent city— the third city in the 
Roman Empire, only Rome and Alexandria taking 
precedence. Our Lord narrates the introduction of the Gospel 
there, giving us a glimpse of the simplicity of the early 
Church under the guidance of the holy Spirit and the instruction 
of two of the ablest teachers of the Gospel. From 
it, therefore, we may advantageously gather suggestions and 
helpful lessons respecting what the Church of Christ should 
ever be in faith, simplicity, love and zeal. 

First we notice the hand of providence. The stoning of 
Stephen spread to a general spirit of opposition to Christianity 
amongst the Jews. So far from this being accidental, it 
was the Divine purpose that thus messengers of the Gospel 
might be scattered in every quarter, carrying with them the 
message of good tidings on their lips and its spirit in their 



hearts and lives. Remembering our Lord's words, When they 
persecute you in one city or place, depart for another, his 
persecuted followers obeyed, and thus a blessing was carried 
beyond the boundaries of Palestine. Knowledge of the fact 
that "the middle-wall of partition," separating the Gentiles 
from the blessings and privileges of the Jews, had been 
broken down, had not yet become general. Hence the earliest 
preaching of the Cross of Christ was to the Jews only, and 
this was of Divine intention also; as St. Paul points out, It 
was necessary that the Gospel should be preached first unto 
you— the Jews— the natural seed of Abraham, to whom the 
promise was made. However, in the Lord's providence, some 
of these Antioch believers were Jews of Cyrene and Cypress, 
converts to Christianity; these being more familiar with the 
Greek language and less familiar with the Hebrew, overflowed 
the joy of their hearts, the good tidings of the Gospel 
message, upon their Gentile neighbors, who, to their joy, responded 
in a remarkable manner. "A great number believed, 
and turned unto the Lord."— Acts 11:21. 

The secret of their success lay in the fact stated, "The 
hand of the Lord was with them." The word hand, as a symbol, 
signifies power and direction. Here we have the true 
secret of all successful Christian work which will have the 
Divine approval. Each individual Christian, so to speak, is a 
finger of the Lord; as our dear Redeemer expressed the matter, 
"I, as the finger of God, cast out demons." (Luke 1 1:20.) 
If we would be used and useful as God's agencies, ambassadors, 
we should seek to be impulsed and guided by him. We 
are to hear his voice through the Scriptures and we are to 
realize his energizing power in the spirit of the Truth. As it 
is written, "I will pray the Father, and he shall give you another 
Comforter, that he may abide with you forever; even 
the Spirit of truth; whom the world cannot receive, because 
it seeth him not, neither knoweth him; but ye know him; for 
he dwelleth with you, and shall be in you." (John 14:16,17.) 
Whoever forgets this, to that extent fails to render acceptable 
service, which will bring forth the proper results. Nor are 
we always to gauge the success of our endeavors by the "great 
numbers," as in this case, which was quite exceptional. We 
should, however, expect some fruitage to our labors, and if, 

R4357 : page 91 

peradventure, by unwisdom in our methods of presenting the 

message we have lost our influence as "ambassadors for 

God," we should seek to appreciate the lesson of greater wisdom 

and should look to the Lord for an open door to service 

along some other lines or in some other place, where our lessons 

of experience could be put to practical effect. 

"THE EARS OF THE CHURCH" 

The oneness of the Body of Christ, the Church, is illustrated 
by the fact that this progress of the Truth at Antioch 
speedily became known to "the ears of the Church at Jerusalem." 
This reminds us of the Apostle's illustration in I Cor. 12th Chap., 



where he likens the Church to a human body, 

whose active members are hands, feet, eyes, mouth, etc. The 

Apostles at Jerusalem were on the lookout to help, to encourage, 

to assist in forwarding the Gospel in every quarter, just 

as we of the WATCH TOWER today feel an interest in and give 

attention to the progress of the Truth in every quarter. 

Christianity is not selfish, but the reverse. When selfishness 

is seen— avarice, self-seeking— it is so much of the Antichrist 

spirit creeping in. "To do good and to communicate, 

forget not," writes the Apostle. 

God uses means— human means so far as possible. And 
so he wishes that we, as his representatives, should follow 
his example. The decision was to send the new converts the 
help which it was realized they would need, to encourage 
them, to forewarn them of dangers, and to assist to clearer 
knowledge of the Divine Plan, that thus they might become 
a force for good and not for evil under the Lord's banner. 
A disciple named Joseph was chosen, one who had shown 
great zeal for the Lord and for the Church and who had 
given considerable of his property for the assistance of others. 
They gave him a new name, Barnabas, which signifies 
Son of Consolation. How beautiful! This testimony of 
itself draws out our love to Barnabas in a manner that would 
have been impossible if the record had been to the contrary— 
that, although a follower of Jesus, he was quarrelsome, disputative, 
a stirrer-up of strife and contentions. 

It may be said that none could have such discordant character 
and yet be a Christian at all. We agree that no matured 
Christian could be of such a character, yet we know 
of some who naturally are very contentious, who, by the grace 
of God, have received the Truth. These need to be the more 
vigilant in cultivating amiability and humility. And assuredly 
the brethren should have considerable patience with such, 
especially if they note in them loyal-heartedness toward God, 
the Truth and the brethren— and particularly if they see evidences 
that they are striving to overcome their natural contentiousness. 
However, it would be mistaken kindness to encourage 
such or to fail to indicate to them the unloving manner 
wherein they injure the cause they wish to serve. Such 
should never be chosen to positions of leadership or otherwise 
encouraged until they show evidences of victory along this 
line. Assuredly such should never be chosen as missionaries 
or representatives of the Church to others, for they would 
misrepresent the Lord and his Spirit, which is one of humility, 
gentleness and patience, even while strong and resolute 
for the Truth. 

THE SON OF CONSOLATION CHOSEN 

Barnabas was evidently a most wise selection to be a representative 
of the brethren at Jerusalem, a Pilgrim to the 
newly interested brethren at Antioch. The narrative indicates 
that he stopped to visit other groups of the Lord's people 
enroute, Antioch being the end of his prescribed journey. 
On his arrival several things resulted: 

(1) He himself received a blessing. "He perceived the 



grace of God and was glad." 

(2) He exhorted them all that with purpose of heart 
they should cleave unto the Lord. They had already separated 
themselves from heathenism and Judaism, and by faith 
and obedience and acceptance of the holy Spirit had been 
joined to Christ. The exhortation was that they should thus 
abide, separated from further affiliations and bound unto the 
Lord— with purpose of heart— not temporarily nor because of 
mental conviction of the logic of Christ's religion, but that 
their hearts should be fully given over to the Lord in the fulness 
of consecration. 

Such consecration was the subject of Barnabas' preaching 
for quite a little while, and the result was "Much people were 
added unto the Lord." Now notice another beautiful tribute 
to Barnabas' character, and let us each see to what extent we 
can find these characteristics predominant in ourselves, and to 
what extent we can, by God's grace, have them still more 
abound. We read, "For he was a good man, and full of the 
holy Spirit and of faith." What more could be said to the 
credit of any child of God? This testimony is far richer than 
if we read, "For he was a learned man, or a brainy man, and 

R4358 : page 91 

full of self-confidence and a mighty collector of monies for 
the Church." His heart was full of the spirit of holiness and 
he was full of faith as respects God's power and God's 
Truth. 

We remark that the usual signs of prosperity amongst 
nominal Christians are not here mentioned— Church building, 
collections, etc. The success of the early Church lay greatly 
in the fact that the money question was ignored, likewise the 
building of great temples for worship. The work was one 
of proclaiming Christ and turning the hearts of men from sin 
to righteousness, from ignorance to knowledge and unbelief 
to faith— from devilishness to saintship. 

SAUL BROUGHT TO ANTIOCH 

Barnabas perceived the largeness of the field of opportunity 
at Antioch and bethought him of Saul of Tarsus, whom 
he sought out and brought to the new field of labor. Evidently 
the Lord had allowed Saul to rest in quietness for a 
time to digest certain features of the Truth, to get himself 
properly gauged up. No doubt these lessons were needful for 
the development of humility and faith and obedience. Now, 
however, the time had come for Saul to be introduced into 
the Gospel work. Again God used instrumentality. Barnabas 
did not trust to writing a letter, but went to see him personally, 
to urge upon him activities in the Master's service 
and to point out to him the open door of a still greater work 
at Antioch, where Saul's learning and talents would be an 
additional fortification to the Truth and inspiration to the 
brethren. For a year he assembled with the Church at Antioch 
and taught much people publicly and privately. 



DISCIPLES CALLED CHRISTIANS 

The name "Christian" was first applied to the Lord's followers 
at Antioch. Such a name would not be given to them 
by the Jews, nor in any place where Judaism was paramount, 
because the Greek word Christ is the equivalent to the Hebrew 
word Messiah. And the Jews would be the last in any 
sense of the word to intimate that Jesus was the Messiah, or 
that his followers were Christians or Messiahans. We do 
not read that Christians first assumed this name at Antioch, 
but that they were first called it by others. Would that the 
custom had continued to prevail, and that still the only name 
by which the Lord's followers throughout the world would 
be known would be his name! Dr. A. McClaren correctly 
suggests, "If the men at Antioch had called Christ's followers 
'Jesuits' that would have meant the followers of the mere 
man. They did not know how much deeper they had gone 
when they said, not 'followers of Jesus' but 'followers of 
Christ'; for it was not Jesus the man, but Jesus Christ, 
the man with his Office, that makes the center and bond of 
the Christian Church." 

There is a forceful lesson in the following from the pen 
of Rev. Peloubet, D.D.:- 

"John Wesley was said once to have dreamed that he 
saw a great throng entering hell and he asked whether any 
Methodists were among them. Yes, he was told, and plenty 
of them. And Baptists? Yes. And Presbyterians? Yes. 
Then in his dream he found himself suddenly at the gate of 
heaven and earnestly asked the porter who were inside. 
Methodists? Not one. Presbyterians? Baptists? No, not 
one of these. Catholics? No. 'Then who are inside,' he 
asked. 'Only Christians,' was the reply." 

We are not endorsing Brother Wesley's dream of the 
crowds entering heaven and hell; believing as we do, that all 
go to the Bible hell, the grave, the tomb, and that the First 
Resurrection will be composed only of the saints victorious. 
We do, however, feel sure that in that Resurrection of the 
Blessed and Holy, sectarianism and membership in sectarian 
institutions and worldly lodges will not be recognized as giving 

R4358 : page 92 

such members any priority, honor or glory, but possibly 
the reverse. The name that will stand will be Christians. They 
will all be that. Why should Messiah's Bride, after taking his 
name, confuse matters in any degree by adding to it the name 
of any human being or institution? We urge them all to stand 
free from all human titles and bondages in the liberty wherewith 
Christ has made us free. Our bondage is to the Head 
and under his direction, and by his Spirit we are firmly 
bounden by all the principles of righteousness and to all those 
who have his Spirit, his mind, his disposition, as living members 
of the one Body. To separate ourselves from these 
bonds of love and sympathy and fellowship and obedience 
would mean our starvation and death, even as a branch cannot 
abide itself, nor bear fruit, except it abide in the Vine, in 



fellowship with the other branches of the same Vine, and as 
a participant in the juices (the graces, the blessings) which 
come to all the true branches through the root. 

THE FRUITAGE OF THE SPIRIT AT ANTIOCH 

In the Lord's providence the Antioch brethren were advised 
in advance of impending famine throughout the civilized 
world. The scarcity would affect all parts and classes, but 
especially be severe upon the poor, by reason of the high 
prices. Immediately the Antioch brethren bethought them of 
the fact that the brethren at Jerusalem, specially poor and 
persecuted, would be special sufferers from that famine and 
they desired to aid them and made a collection accordingly. 
They did not hesitate, because, not wealthy themselves, they 
would probably also feel the severity of the famine. The 
love of God shed abroad in our hearts overcomes much of 
our natural selfishness and tends to make us generous and 
thoughtful of others. How beautiful, how Christlike, the 
spirit! We must love these brethren for this and seek to 
emulate their example and to be of willing mind as respects 
any assistance to be rendered to any of the fellow-members 
of the Body of Christ, near and far. 

The Apostle truly intimates that if any professed follower 
of Christ see his brother have need and close up his 
heart of compassion against him and refuse him aid, this 
would be an indication that he lacked the spirit of the Head, 
the spirit of love, the distinctive feature which our Lord said 
would indicate his disciples as different from all others in the 
world. "By this shall all men know that ye are my disciples, 
if ye have love one for another."— John 13:35. 

Whenever an opportunity for doing good comes to our 
attention it should not be slighted, but reasonably investigated 
with the thought that possibly the Lord has brought this matter 
to our attention as a test of love for him or for the brethren. 
Indeed it will profit us greatly if we can learn to look at all 
of life's affairs from this standpoint. If trials and difficulties, 
joys and pleasures, are all scrutinized with the thought of the 
Lord's oversight and guiding care in respect to our interests 
and affairs it will greatly increase our faith and our spiritual 

joy. 

Paul and Barnabas were the chosen agents to see to the 
transportation of the food supply for the aid of the Jerusalem 
brethren in the approaching period of famine. In due course 
they returned, bringing with them John Mark as a further 
helper in the good work. 



R4358 : page 92 

CHRIST, OUR PASSOVER 



BY REBECCA FAIR DONEY 



In the dark night, when Egypt lay asleep, 
Forth went the angel, God's command to keep: 
Slay all the first-born, even from the throne, 
Down through the realm to the humblest home. 

Swift was his work; and on the midnight air, 
Oh, what a cry of anguish, and despair 
Rose, from the hearts of those in every home: 
God's word was sure; the last great plague had come. 

But in the homes of Israel, what a sight! 
Darkness without, in every dwelling, light. 
Clad for a journey; shoes upon their feet; 
With staff in hand, a solemn feast they eat. 

Their father's God had heard their cries at last: 
His time had come; their bondage now was past; 
So in that night while Egypt mourned her dead, 
They ate the lamb with bitter herbs and bread. 

But why this blood we see on every door? 
Why does the angel, seeing, pass it o'er? 
Israel's first-born in Egypt's danger shared; 
And only through that blood could they be spared. 

Centuries passed; and still by God's command, 
Each year they slew, and ate the paschal lamb. 
Not that its blood could for their sins atone, 
But as a type of one that yet should come. 



That sinless one, who, hanging on a tree, 
Bore all earth's sins, to set the prisoners free; 
That Righteous One, that perfect Lamb of God, 
Who for the world gave his most precious blood. 

Our blessed Lord, with those whom he loved best, 
On that last night, sat down to keep the feast. 
"With great desire," he told his chosen few, 
"Have I desired to eat this feast with you." 

R4359 : page 92 

"My heart is grieved; for I betrayed shall be 
By one of you, my chosen company." 
"Lord is it I?" each asked in trembling tone, 
"Nay, Lord, we'll die with thee! cried every one." 

But in great sorrow, still our Lord did say, 
"One shall deny; another shall betray; 
All be offended, and flee unto their own- 
But for my Father, I should be alone." 



After the feast, he took the Cup, and said 
"Drink ye of it; for you my blood was shed. 
I drink no more, until I drink with you, 
In that glad day, when we shall drink it new." 

Then blessed the bread, and as each one did take, 
"This is my body, broken for your sake." 
Oft as ye drink this wine, and eat this bread 
Ye do show forth the suffering of your Head. 

Bearing the whole world's load of guilt and shame, 
Knowing his own would soon deny his name; 
Knowing, by God, he would forsaken be, 
Thus our Lord went to his Gethsemane. 

And still that sacred feast down through the years, 
Thy saints commemorate with holy tears. 
Keeping the words of him, who said, "This do 
In mem'ry of my dying love for you." 

In this dark night, Lord, we, thy first-borns meet, 
With staff in hand and shoes upon our feet. 
Thy precious blood is sprinkled on our hearts; 
Thy broken body life to us imparts. 

Come, dearest Lord, and bless us while we feast; 
Around this board, be thou our honored Guest. 
We eat, and drink, and here our vows renew; 
Oh to our vows, Lord, keep us ever true! 

All earthly hopes and joys, behind us lay; 
Lord, we would walk with thee, the narrow way. 
What is earth's joys and what its glittering dross? 
We gladly leave it all for thy dear cross. 

Thy matchless sacrifice doth us afford, 
A chance to share thy sufferings, dearest Lord. 
Broken with thee, we claim this privilege rare, 
That in thy joys we may obtain a share. 

On this Atonement Day, we would lay down 
Upon the altar, Lord, beside thine own, 
Our sacrifice; it is so very small; 
Take, Lord, and offer it; it is our all. 

Day after day, our testings, Lord, increase: 
This side the veil, we know they must not cease. 
Scourging, or sword, or flames, whate'er it be, 
Help us, dear Lord, in our Gethsemane. 

R4359 : page 93 

The bitter cup that to thy lips was pressed, 
We, too, would drain, nor shrink at bitterness. 
These marks of sonship share with our dear Head; 



To live with thee, we must with thee be dead. 

We'll take the cup tho' filled with grief and pain; 
Drink the last drop, and, dying, drink again; 
Oh wondrous joy! this time, the cup shall be 
The cup of life, and immortality. 

Lord, we have had a blessed feast with thee; 
Now we go forth that we may tested be. 
Help us, that we do not our Lord betray; 
When Satan tries to sift, Lord, for us pray. 



Some solemn night, mid scenes of dread, and woe, 
While the fierce winds from every quarter blow; 
While passions rage, and tempests onward sweep, 
Their last memorial, thy saints shall keep. 

They may be few who gather round the board; 
Many, be entered into their reward. 
Praising the One who led them safely home; 
Waiting, until the marriage hour shall come. 

Some, weary grew, before the fight was o'er; 
Some, through offence, would walk this way no more. 
Zealous awhile, methinks, they did run well, 
But at the test of Love, they stumbled— fell. 

Those who are left, the last of thy dear "feet," 
Keep the last feast before the mercy seat; 
Gathering strength for what before them lies, 
When they complete in death, their sacrifice. 

Some glorious morn the angelic host shall sing! 
Some glorious morn the bells of heaven ring! 
The Church of Christ has passed her trial stage; 
Eternal bliss is hers from age to age. 

Before his Father's throne, with love and pride, 
Christ shall present his perfect, spotless Bride. 
The feast begins; the marriage hour has come; 
Christ and his faithful, are forever One. 

On that blest day, the Bridegroom shall sit down, 
With his dear Bride beside him, on the throne. 
To share his joys; to see his blessed face; 
In that blest throng, oh Lord, give us a place. 
February 21, 1909. 



R4359 : page 93 

MISSIONARY SPIRIT OF CHRISTIANITY 



-ACTS 13:1-12~MAY2.~ 

Golden Text:— "Go ye into all the world, and preach the 
Gospel to every creature. He that believeth and is baptized 
shall be saved: but he that believeth not shall be damned." 
-Mark 16:15, 16. -(Omitted in the old Mss.) 

THIS verse and all this chapter from verse nine to the 
close is acknowledged by all scholars to be an interpolation 
—an addition to the Scriptures— not written 
by Mark, but added centuries later. The words are not found 
in the oldest Greek manuscripts. We would better use the 
well-authenticated words of Matt. 28:19, "Go ye, therefore, 
and teach all nations, baptizing them in the name of the 
Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Spirit." 

The spirit of Christianity is an aggressive one. The 
Gospel sets before the true believer an object, a motive, which 
inspires to an enthusiasm of the highest degree. The message 
becomes a burning one which must flame forth as a 
true light to enlighten others. Otherwise it would become 
extinct, smothered. "Quench not the holy Spirit, whereby ye 
are sealed," may surely be applied to a proper missionary 
spirit, as well as in other ways. 

Missionary endeavor in foreign lands certainly has been 
in harmony with the Divine intimation, that a knowledge of 
the grace of God might be scattered abroad so as to select 
God's "elect" from every quarter. We are not by these 
words endorsing everything connected with the methods or 
the message which have been sent forth in the name of the 
Gospel. We do believe, however, that a blessing has resulted 
even through the use of wrong methods and impure teachings. 
Those who have given money to the cause have surely 
received a blessing, compensating every endeavor to serve the 
Lord. The sacrifice of earthly means has brought its blessing 
and compensation in fervency of spirit. We are not certain 
to what extent the heathen have been benefited by the 
lessons civilization has brought them; some, more; some, 
less. Only the Lord will know how to determine the actual 
results and to apportion the rewards for services in his cause. 

It is our thought that while there is so much to be done 
at home in civilized lands, those who have their hands full do 
well to content themselves therewith, leaving it for the Lord to 
open up the way later, according to his wisdom and grace, 
for the heathen to hear the message. Our readers will remember 
that in the Lord's providence it seemed wise that 
Brother Booth and wife should go to Africa as representatives 
of the Truth. This seemed to be no hindrance to the 
work in civilized lands, and the evidences were that the Lord 
had some ripened grains of wheat in far-off Africa. Word 
from Brother Booth and others of Cape Town and vicinity 
assure us that the proclamation of the good tidings of great 
joy is making fairly good headway in that region. Three 
white brethren there are now preaching to mixed audiences 
continually. Some half dozen little congregations are rejoicing 
in a growing knowledge of the Divine Plan of the 
Ages. Further, three black brethren have espoused the cause 



R4360 : page 93 

and zealously begun its proclamation. One is laboring near 

Cape Town. One has already journeyed nearly two thousand 

miles and is exerting a considerable influence amongst his 

people near Lake Nyasa. Another has just started for the 

same vicinity on foot, a journey of about a month. With 

him go six or eight other young black Christians who thus 

journey, that they may have the benefit of his indoctrination 

on the way and be the better prepared to tell the tidings of 

great joy when they reach their fellow-countrymen. Our missionary 

efforts, however, both at home and abroad, are of a 

different character and different inspiration than other missionary 

efforts. Ours is not a proclamation of a fierce God and a 

great place called hell or Purgatory into which all their forefathers 

have gone and into which they must go unless they 

receive our message. Ours is the missionary message of St. 

Paul and Barnabas— an announcement that the God of love 

has provided a Redeemer; that in due time the Redeemer 

will establish his Kingdom and through it bless all the families 

of the earth with a knowledge of his grace, and grant 

assistance back into harmony with God and thereby an opportunity 

for eternal life. 

Ours is a message of special favor now being given out 
to any who have the "ear to hear" and the heart to appreciate 
and accept it. Ours is the missionary hunt for the 
Lord's jewels, for his "Royal Priesthood," his "little flock," 
his "elect"— that these may be enlightened and assisted to a 
clearer knowledge of the Truth, that they may make their 
calling and election sure to joint-heirship with their Redeemer 
in his coming Kingdom. Our chief work is at home 
or in places where the Gospel has already been proclaimed, 
because we understand the Scriptures to teach that we are 
in the Harvest time of this Gospel Age, just as the work of 
the Lord and his Apostles was in the Harvest time of the 
Jewish Age. To his disciples Jesus said, "I sent you to reap 
that whereon ye bestowed no labor." Other men labored and 
ye are entered into [the fruit of] their labor— harvesting the 
ripened grain. It will not surprise us to learn in due time 
that as many as two hundred new believers in Africa celebrated 
the Memorial Supper this year in excess of the number 
that partook of it last year. Of course, two hundred 
are not many, nor can we hope that they will all be ripened 
grains of wheat. However, we consider this a very favorable 
opening, considering the length of its establishment. 

THE MISSIONARY SPIRIT IN ANTIOCH 

Our lesson tells us that there were three public speakers 
at Antioch, besides Paul and Barnabas, and that as they 

R4360 : page 94 

served and practised self-denial, the holy Spirit indicated 
that Barnabas and Paul should have a special work to do in 



carrying the message of God's grace to others. And in this 

way we have a suggestion in respect to the proper course 

to be pursued amongst the Lord's people generally, wherever 

it is found, that the number of public speakers and teachers, 

Berean Lesson leaders, etc., is greater than is really needed. 

Instead of wasting valuable time and energy all should recognize 

the facts of the case, and square them to the instructions 

of this lesson, and separate some to special missionary 

effort. A failure to notice the breadths of the Lord's work 

and the privileges of service has proven a temptation 

to some, and led to fault-finding and bickering, heart-burnings 

and discouragements, instead of mutual encouragements, 

sympathetic aids, and increase in the joy of 

the Lord and spread of the Truth. Each member of 

Christ, and especially each one of teaching ability, should 

seek to take the broadest possible view of the Lord's work 

and the most loving and appreciative view of every fellow-servant's 

endeavors. This course leads to mutual upbuilding, 

while the other course tends toward coldness and leanness, 

if not to back-biting and devouring one another. 

LAID THEIR HANDS ON THEM 

The Church ordained the Apostles for this missionary 
service. The laying on of hands did not signify the impartation 
to them of any spiritual or occult powers. It did not 
mean the giving to them of authority to preach. It did mean 
that the congregation of the Lord at Antioch recognized 
these two men as God's servants and authorized them to go 
forth as their representatives, and impliedly at their charges, 
to carry the message of good tidings to others. As the 
priests laid their hands upon the animals which were to represent 
them in sacrifice, so the Church laid their hands upon 
those who were to represent them in the service of the 
Truth. 

Similarly today we are following what we believe to be 
the direction of the holy Spirit in sending forth the Pilgrims 
to proclaim the good tidings. They go forth, as the 
apostles expressed the matter, not authorized to preach by 
man or men or human systems, but by him who said, "Go ye, 
disciple all nations"— people of all nationalities, and not 
merely the Jews, as at first. Nevertheless the Church in general 
lays its hands upon these Pilgrims in the sense of saying, 
"You go with our approval, as our representatives, and all 
of your expenses will be met out of our donations to the 
Tract Fund. Serve the Lord faithfully and make reports to 
us through the Society's channels. 

LIGHT AND DARKNESS IN CONFLICT 

They decided to go first to the Island of Cyprus, probably 
because Barnabas was a native of that Island and because 
it would be their proper route in going into Asia Minor. 
Apparently nothing of special moment occurred until they 
had gone almost the length of the island, where they came in 
conflict with a Jew, a sorcerer, known as Elymas or magician. 



Much of the trickery of that time and today is aided and 
abetted by the fallen angels or demons. Elymas perceived that 
the reasoning of the Apostle was having its effect upon the 
governmental deputy or pro-consul and sought to gainsay the 
Truth, recognizing that the success of the Apostles meant the 
loss of prestige to his own presentations of falsehood. St. 
Paul, imbued with a special power of the holy Spirit, fastened 
his gaze upon Elymas and said, "O full of all guile and all 
villainy, thou child of the devil, thou enemy of all righteousness, 
wilt thou not cease to pervert the right ways of the 
Lord? And now, behold, the hand of the Lord is upon thee, 
and thou shalt be blind, not seeing the sun for a season." 

It was not Paul's power, nor Paul's judgment, but the 
Lord's, and Paul was merely his mouthpiece. Nor does the 
Lord always thus punish his opponents now, but rather this 
was an exceptional occurrence, intended to assist in the establishment 
of the religion of Christ as well as to encourage 
the apostles in their further ministries. It is not for us to 
seek to emulate St. Paul's course in this matter. He was an 
Apostle, specially empowered and specially used in a sense 
that we are not. It is ours to preach the Word and to leave 
the results to the Lord. However, the day is not far distant 
when, under the power of the Kingdom, those who resist the 
Truth will be dealt with vigorously and feel the heavy hand 
of Divine judgment on them. We are glad, however, that 
there will be a recovery from those judgments, even as there 
was in the case of Elymas; even as his blindness was only 
for a season. Of that future Age it is written, "When the 
judgments of the Lord are abroad (everywhere) in the land, 
the inhabitants of the world will learn righteousness." No 
doubt Elymas learned something by his experiences, and the 
narrative indicated that the matter was of great assistance to 
the pro-consul. But his belief was aside from the miracle. 
As we read, "The deputy, when he saw what was done, believed, 
being astonished at the teaching of the Lord." We 
remark here that this is the proper influence which we should 
seek to leave in every heart; not astonishment at our ability 
or oratory or other powers, but astonishment at the teaching 
of the Lord's Word. Indeed, there is no doubt that this is 
the secret of the progress of the Harvest message today. 
People are astonished at the doctrine. Our Pilgrim speakers 
are not beyond the average. Many would say, perhaps, 
not up to the average of denominational ministers, but they 
have the teaching. They have the Divine Plan of the Ages— 
and this it is which impresses and astonishes those who hear. 



R4361 : page 94 

REASONS FOR A LAYMAN'S CHANGE OF BELIEF 

If any one had approached me four months ago with any 
"new" or different religious belief than I then had, I would 
have stated that I was a Congregationalist and satisfied with 
that belief; that I did not think there was any belief nearer 



right or nearer to Bible truth. Not that I think Congregationalism 
better than the faith or belief of other denominations, 
but certainly just as good. 

But recently the unexpected happened. A "new" belief 
was brought to my attention, one concerning which I knew 
but little. This was Pastor Charles T. Russell's first volume 
of SCRIPTURE STUDIES, known as "The Divine Plan," of 
which I was hearing much from day to day. I had always 
considered myself quite liberal in my estimate of those of a 
different Christian faith, but toward these books I found 
myself bitterly prejudiced. 

Some things were brought to my attention which I 
thought, if true, every one ought to know. But were they 
true? Could they be true? I did not want to be won over 
to any "new thing," but there were some things of which I 
wanted to know more, and to these I listened and read, but 
not wanting to be convinced. 

Finally replying to inquiry, I said I was not so obstinate 
or headstrong as to refuse to believe or to be convinced, if 
I was in error in regard to Scripture teaching, provided the 
statements presented to me were Scriptural and would lead 
to a better understanding of the Bible and of God's plan, and 
provided also the proofs could be produced. 

In this spirit I began the reading and study of the MILLENNIAL 
DAWN-SCRIPTURE STUDIES. I found each volume of 
the series intensely interesting, as God's wonderful plan and 
truth was unfolded. After reading the series of six volumes 
I can say that if these books are true they certainly are the 
most wonderful and important books ever written— outside 
the Bible. And I believe they are true! If they are true 
every one ought to know the Bible teaching. 

I found that the chronological results are reached by five 
separate and distinct lines of computation, and the same 
careful and conscientious handling of every subject is manifested 
throughout the series. 

Pastor Russell rids religion of error, the error which has 
crept in little by little through the Church of Rome, etc. He 
rids religion of tradition and man-made creeds and seeks to 
make plain God's way in all Scriptural purity, proving all 
teaching by Scripture, and by unperverted Scripture alone. 

He does not exalt self. He exalts Christ alone, with the 
Father. He tears down nothing taught in God's holy Word. 
He builds up no creed nor religious system, but takes the 
Scriptures and the Scriptures alone for our spiritual guide, 

R4361 : page 95 

proving and testing all things by that standard. He combats 
evil of every kind, and every shade of infidelity, Spiritualism, 
Higher Criticism— every form of unbelief. 

At first thought some conclusions seem radical to one 
accustomed to the usual so-called "orthodox" interpretations, 
but in every instance they will be found to be soundly Scriptural. 

Believers in MILLENNIAL DAWN do not teach, as some 
seem to think, that those who believe and faithfully follow 
these teachings are the only ones to be saved. They not 



only teach that all such must follow the Master in the strait 
and narrow way, but teach also a more compassionate gospel 
and a broader plan of salvation for all who will be saved, 
than is usually understood and commonly taught by others. 

MILLENNIAL DAWN does teach that there are other 
truths than those commonly taught by the various churches 
and religious systems, truths that are important, and these 
it seeks to make plain. 

Not one more creed to add to the world's diversified religious 
beliefs, but the one interpretation, which means harmony 
of all Scripture and unity of belief and purpose to all 
Christians of whatsoever name— to all seekers after truth 
who are willing to forsake all and follow Christ. 

J. M. M.-Ia. 



R4361 : page 95 

SOME INTERESTING LETTERS 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

May the richest blessings of the Living God rest 
upon you, and upon all who are determined to cooperate 
in the doing of the Lord's will. My prayers are for 
you and them many times every day. Your name is continually 
being pressed before the Throne. 

Let me take this opportunity to thank you and the 
dear Lord for the full and beautiful— yea, gorgeous light 
turned upon the Covenants— another proof that the 
Word of God is being fulfilled: "The path of the just is 
as the shining light, that shineth more and more unto 
the perfect day." "The way of the wicked is as darkness; 
they know not at what they stumble."— Prov. 4:18,19. 

This last clause brings a measure of sadness. They 
stumble at the light, the very thing that should be a 
blessing to them. No doubt this precious light will 
also prove offensive to the spiritual vision of some 
whose eyes are weak and cannot, therefore, stand the 
full glare of the light of God's Truth. If so, it shows 
they are unfit for the Kingdom. But it makes the heart 
ache. 

I am truly your servant in love and service of our 
Lord and King, O. L. SULLIVAN. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

It has been on my mind for some time to write you 
of the extreme thankfulness to our heavenly Father and 
to you for the experience I have had in connection with 
"the Vow." After reading February 15th TOWER, I can 
no longer refrain from writing. My heart overflows 
with gratitude after reading dear Brother Gibbs' letter, 
which surely needs no explanation. 

He has exactly expressed my heart sentiments. I 



have been in one of the same traps in which he was. I 
also quickly ate of the bait which appeared so good, 
but now see the course I was following. I had not yet 
become a "first-rate back-biter," but was working my 
way rapidly toward one. Oh, Brother Russell, it grieves 
me to think of the untrue things I believed and thought 
of you. I am now deeply impressed by your sincerity 
and daily manifestations of the Christ-like spirit and 
tender love and care over the entire flock, as expressed 
in the TOWER. 

I am so thankful for the Lord's guidance of you in 
sending our dear Brother Herr among us, for it was 
through him I have been delivered from the snare of the 
Adversary. He showed me in a most loving manner 
how all such evil surmises and back-biting (against you 
in connection with "the Vow") were not fruits of the 
Master's spirit of love. By these fruits we can know 
them. After clearing my mind of those evil thoughts, 
I then could not see any objections to the Vow. 

I cannot see how a true child of God could oppose 
it, or your presentation of it in the TOWER. I have now 
made "the Vow" "my Vow" unto the Father, knowing 
what it means to me the rest of my life. I would prefer 
making it as a Vow instead of a resolution, as I feel a 
vow more binding than a resolution. Need we hesitate 
to be bound in any way closer to the Lord! 

I would not exchange the precious blessings enjoyed 
since making "the Vow," for the spiritual coldness endured 
while having the spirit which opposed it. Everything 
is with new beauty and clearness. I press onward 
with renewed zeal, realizing more clearly how very carefully 
we must guard our every thought (as we build character 
by thought), to bring every thought into captivity 
to the will of Christ, and think only of the things that 
are pure, holy, lovely and of good report. And with the 
holy things always uppermost in our minds, how can 
we find any time for evil surmising and speaking ! 

It is with great sorrow I see some taking the course 
they are in their oppositions to "the Vow," those noble 
and esteemed ones, who have been particularly dear to 
me as brethren in Christ. It is with very much heartfelt 
sympathy for you, Brother Russell, as I know what 
it has been to you, but I also know of the Lord's special 
care and guidance over you to keep you in such peace 
of mind and love amid such fiery darts of the Adversary. 

It seems that you have done all in your power to tell 
them of the course they are taking and they cannot yet 
see the unreasonableness of their arguments. Let us 
continue to pray for them. 

I have made apology for my former stand to all 
those to whom I particularly slandered you and "the 
Vow," so I do not especially request that this letter be 
published, although I would not be ashamed to give such 
a testimony to the whole Church. I am assured of your 
forgiveness of my sin. 

May our dear Lord continue to bless you richly and 



use you in his service unto the end. You may know of 
my daily remembrance, and Christian love for you 
and the whole Bible House Family. 
Your sister in the One Hope, 

CORA BRACKMAN,-Pa. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

I feel that I must write you, if only a few lines. I 
have been thinking daily about "the Vow." It seems to 
me it is the sixth volume in a "nutshell."— Rev. 21:9. 

Do you realize how much I need your prayers, and 
the Lord's grace as my eyes open— are being opened? 
May grace abound. 

Your brother, W. M. HERSEE. 



page 96 

PUBLIC MINISTRIES OF THE TRUTH 
UNDER THE AUSPICES OF PEOPLE'S PULPIT 
ASSOCIATION OF BROOKLYN, N.Y. 



ONE-DAY LOCAL CONVENTIONS ADDRESSED BY THE 
EDITOR OF THIS JOURNAL AS FOLLOWS: 

PITTSBURG N.S. (Allegheny), PA., MARCH 28 

Session for the public at 3 p.m. in Allegheny Carnegie 
Hall, Corner Ohio and Federal Sts. Visiting friends heartily 
welcomed. Baptismal services for those desiring same and 
notifying, at 10:30 a.m. Question meeting at 7:30 p.m., 
Bible House Chapel, 610 Arch street. 

BROOKLYN, N.Y., APRIL 4 

Discourse by Brother Russell at 3:00 p.m. Evening meeting 
for the interested at 7:30 o'clock, when the annual Memorial 
Supper will be celebrated. Visiting friends cordially 
welcomed. 

All meetings will be held in the Brooklyn Tabernacle, Nos. 
13-17 Hicks street. Convenient to all cars and ferries— close 
to the old bridge terminus. 

BOSTON, MASS., APRIL 11 

Morning and evening meetings in Faneuil Hall. Take 
surface cars from depots going through Dock Square. Local 
friends will be at stations to assist visiting friends. Meeting 
at 10:30 a.m. for Prayer, Praise and Testimony. 

Afternoon session for the Public in Tremont Temple, 
Tremont street, between School and Bromfield streets, at 3:00 



o'clock; subject, "Where are the Dead?" 

Evening meeting for the interested at 7:30 o'clock. Arrangements 
have also been made for a meeting in Tremont 
Temple Building, on Saturday evening, for the benefit of those 
who may have to come to the city at that time. When purchasing 
railway tickets inquire for reduced rates, account of 
Bible Students' Convention. 

TOLEDO, OHIO, APRIL 18 

BROOKLYN, N.Y., APRIL 25 and MAY 2 



BROOKLYN TABERNACLE EVERY SUNDAY 



Preaching at 3:00 p.m. Praise service at 7:00 p.m.; 
Berean Bible Study at 7:30 p.m. Convenient to New York 
via Subway, and Jersey City via P.R.R. Annex Ferry. 



STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES 
"MILLENNIAL DAWN" 

THESE STUDIES ARE RECOMMENDED TO STUDENTS AS VERITABLE "BIBLE KEYS. 

PRICES ARE NET AND BARELY COVER COST OF PRODUCTION, 

WHEN DELIVERED BY COLPORTEURS THE COST AND PRICE ARE INCREASED. 

SERIES I., "The Plan of the Ages." gives an outline of the divine plan 
revealed in the Bible, relating to man's redemption and restitution: 
386 pages, in embossed cloth, 25c. (Is. l/2d.) India paper edition, 75c. 
(3s. l-l/2d.). 

This volume has been published as a special issue of our journal— 
at the extremely low price of 5c. a copy, in any quantity, postage included. 
(To foreign countries, 9c.) This enables people of slender 
purse to herald far and wide the good tidings in a most helpful form. 

SERIES II., "The Time is at Hand," treats of the manner and time of 
the Lord's second coming, considering the Bible Testimony on this 
subject: 370 pages, in embossed cloth, 25c. (Is. l/2d.) India paper 
edition, 75c. (3s. l-l/2d.) 

SERIES III., "Thy Kingdom Come," considers prophecies which mark 
events connected with the "Time of the End," the glorification of the 
Church and the establishment of the Millennial Kingdom; it also contains 
a chapter of the Great Pyramid, showing its corroboration of the 
dates and other teachings of the Bible: 384 pages, in embossed cloth, 
25c. (Is. l/2d.) India paper edition, 75c. (3s. l-l/2d.) 

SERIES IV., "The Day of Vengeance," shows that the dissolution of the 
present order of things is in progress, and that all the panaceas offered 
are valueless to avert the predicted end. It marks in these events the 
fulfilment of prophecy, noting specially our Lord's great prophecy of 
Matt. 24 and Zech. 14:1-9: 660 pages, in embossed cloth, 30c. (Is. 3d.). 
India paper edition, 85c. (3s. 6-l/2d.) 

SERIES V., "The At-one-ment Between God and Man," treats an all- 
important subject— the hub, the center around which all the features 
of divine grace revolve. Its topic deserves the most careful and 
prayerful consideration on the part of all true Christians: 507 pages, 
in embossed cloth, 30c. (Is. 3d.) India paper edition, 85c. (3s. 6-l/2d.) 

SERIES VI., "The New Creation," deals with the Creative Week (Genesis 1 
and 2), and with the Church, God's "New Creation." It examines 
the personnel, organization, rites, ceremonies, obligations and 
hopes appertaining to those called and accepted as members of the 
Body under the Head: 740 pages, in embossed cloth, 30c. (Is. 3d.) 
India paper edition, 85c. (3s. 6-l/2d.) 

The above prices include postage. 

IN FULL LEATHER BINDING, gilt edges, the set (6 vols.) $3.00, 
(12s. 6d.), plus postage, 60c. (Is.). 

Is also published in foreign languages as follows: German, six vols., 
in Swedish Vols. 1, 2, 3, 5 and 6; in Dano-Norwegian, three vols.; 
in Greek, three vols.; in French, two vols.; Hollandish, Spanish, 
and Italian, one vol. each; bound in cloth, uniform with English edition, 
prices the same; in Polish, condensed edition, one vol., 10 cents. 



page 97 



SEMI-MONTHLY 