Announcements
FIELD MINISTRY
To safeguard our thinking ability for effective service of God is of great importance. Study of the Bible is necessary to do this. During February Jehovah’s witnesses will call on people everywhere with a Bible-study aid of real worth, The Watchtower, offering a year’s subscription and three booklets on a contribution of $1.
DO YOU BELIEVE THE LORD’S PRAYER?
When you say the Lord’s Prayer do you consider what its fulfillment will mean? “Thy kingdom come. Thy will be done in earth, as it is in heaven.” If that were to be accomplished suddenly, say tomorrow, what drastic changes would it mean for this world’s affairs? What would you have to do to share in its blessings? That day will come in our generation. Would you like Bible proof? Send for and read “Your Will Be Done on Earth.” It is only 50c.
1961 ASSEMBLY NOTICE
All of Jehovah’s witnesses and many persons of good will are talking about the 1961 assemblies, and many are beginning to make their plans to attend. The list of assembly cities was published in the February 1 issue of The Watchtower. However, we are glad to say that the arrangements for an assembly in Milwaukee, Wisconsin, for August 22 to 27, are now definite; also, an assembly is scheduled for Omaha, Nebraska, August 15 to 20. Spanish programs are being arranged for the assemblies in New York city, San Francisco, California; Houston, Texas, and Paris, France.
Further information on rooming accommodations, both in America and for the European assemblies, will be provided through the congregations in ample time. In the past those who have taken accommodations in private homes have found that they were able to do much more to help persons in the assembly city to benefit from the convention. When it comes time to request rooms this year, no doubt the majority of assembly delegates will want to ask for such accommodations.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES FOR THE WEEKS
March 26: Finding Joy for Everlasting Life. Page 101.
April 2: Hold Fast Your Joy! Page 109.

