Other “New World Translation” Features
There are also many other features that recommend the New World Translation to Bible lovers. One of these is that, in keeping with the Hebrew and Greek verbs, it consistently distinguishes between a single act or a repeated one, a continual one. Those translations such as the King James, which do not recognize such differences, have the apostle John contradicting himself. How so? In that at 1 John 2:1 he says “If any man sin, we have an advocate with the Father.” But at 1 John 3:6 we read: “Whosoever abideth in him sinneth not.” But the New World Translation makes this all clear, for at 1 John 2:1 it reads: “If anyone does commit a sin, we have a helper with the Father.” Whereas at 1 John 3:6 it reads: “Everyone remaining in union with him does not practice sin.”
Similarly at Luke 11:5-10 Jesus uses an illustration to drive home the point that we must persevere in prayer. So he does not simply say that if we “ask,” “seek” and “knock” God will answer us but that “everyone asking receives, and everyone seeking finds and to everyone knocking it will be opened.” Hence, continuous action is indicated.
Additionally, the New World Translation distinguishes between the adjective kalos, which means fine, excellent, superb, choice, and agathos, which chiefly means that which is morally good. So, at John 10:2-16, Jesus did not speak of himself as merely a good shepherd, but as a fine, excellent, superb shepherd.
The New World Translation also recommends itself in its uniquely distinguishing between the five Hebrew words usually indiscriminately translated “man.” There is a difference in the meaning of these words, and Hebrew Scripture writers recognized the difference. Thus, in keeping with the original meaning, the New World Translation renders adam as “earthling man,” referring to man as a creature of the earth. Enosh it renders as “mortal man”; this emphasizes man’s puny, weak state. Geber it renders as “able-bodied man,” for the Hebrew word indicates a powerful man. Ish it renders simply as “man,” as distinguished from ishah, woman, or simply a person; and zakar it renders as “male,” for it is generally used with regard to sex relations.

