VOL. XXVII NOVEMBER 1 No. 21 
A.D., 1906-A.M., 6035 



CONTENTS 

Views from the Watch Tower 339 

Roman Catholicism in Trouble 339 

Hatred of the Jews 340 

Insanity on the Increase 341 

The Rose (Poem) 341 

Report of Recent Conventions 341 

Gathering or Scattering, Which? 342 

Harvest Helpers and Hinderers 343 

The Spirit of Division 344 

Berean Studies in "Tabernacle Shadows" 345 

"With Strong Cryings and Tears" 346 

He Was Heard in the Thing Feared 347 

"Despised and Rejected of Men" 349 

page 338 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-24 EVERSHOLT ST., LONDON, N.W. 
GERMAN BRANCH-MIRKERSTR., 45, ELBERFELD. 
AUSTRALASIAN BRANCH-32 JOHNSTON ST., FITZROY, MELBOURNE. 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 

TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR AS FOLLOWS:- 

All Bible Students who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity or 
adversity, are unable to pay for this Journal, will be supplied FREE if 
they send a Postal Card each June stating their case and requesting its 
continuance. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on 
our list continually and in touch with the Studies, etc. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



THIS JOURNAL IS PUBLISHED IN THE 

FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN LANGUAGES. 

SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



R3882 : page 338 

SWEDISH AND FRENCH TRUTH LITERATURE 



We have just published Vol. V. of MILLENNIAL DAWN in 
the Swedish language— style, binding and price uniform with 
English volume; see next column. We do not purpose publishing 
Vol. IV. in this language, the demand not being great 
enough. 

We have on hand cloth-bound copies of the Swedish TOWER 
for 1903 and 1904. They will be sent postpaid to any address 
for $1.00 each. 

The Swedish Hymnal, cloth-bound, containing a choice 
selection of 50 hymns, without music, is 10c, postpaid. 

"About Hell," in Swedish, is supplied in paper binding, 
at 10c each, 50c per doz.; in cardboard covers at 20c per copy, 
$1.00 per doz. 

In French we have "Bible versus Evolution" and "Our 
Lord's Return: His Parousia," etc., at 5c each. 

page 338 

"VOLUNTEER" TOWERS IN SWEDISH 



We have good quantities of Swedish literature for general 
circulation as Volunteer matter. We cannot send these by 
mail except in small lots, but where 2000 or more are ordered 
in one lot we can send by freight, charges prepaid. Order all 
you can use judiciously amongst the Swedish people of your 
neighborhood. 



R3881 : page 339 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 
ROMAN CATHOLICISM IN TROUBLE 



WE have already noted the fact that the French government 
has cancelled its agreement or "Concordat" 
with the Church of Rome, and that religion in 
France is now on much the same plane as in these United 
States— that is, that religion shall no longer be supported 
by the government. There is this difference— the 
French have gone a step farther than America, and have 
decided that the great church edifices, etc., built with 
the money of the French public, are not the property of 



the Pope and Roman hierarchy, but to be supervised by 
the French government, which, being a Republic, is 
the people's government. 

French laws on the subject are even-handed toward 
all religions— Catholic, Protestant, Hebrew, et al. They 
will not recognize the power of the Pope and others in 
Italy to close the church buildings, nor to otherwise 
control them; but insists that the Catholic people of 
the diocese shall have the control. To understand this 
we must remember, as pointed out in MILLENNIAL 
DAWN, VOL. II., that the Roman Catholic Church is 
not composed of the Roman Catholics of the congregation, 
but is a hierarchy composed of the Pope and higher 
clergy. The Catholic congregations are merely "the 
children of the Church, who call the Church" (the hierarchy) 
their fathers. This is the Episcopal idea even 
amongst Protestants: but the majority of Protestants 
recognize, in theory at least, that "All ye are brethren." 
However, even amongst these the division into "clergy" 
and "laity" is a too common fact— descended from "the 
dark ages" and fostered by Roman and Episcopal 
usages. 

The Pope (Pius X.) has issued (Aug 14) an Encyclical 
letter to the Roman Catholic Bishops of France 
in which he denounced the French government's action, 
and while apparently forbidding compliance with 
it, really instructs them how best to comply with it;— 
by organizing Societies amongst the laity who can and 
will co-operate with their Ecclesiastics. Note the point: 
Rome will not concede that her "children" are in or of 
the Church, but she will outwardly comply with French 
law to hold possession and control of Church property. 
The poor French "children" may never know that they 
have the control of the situation. Similar regulations 
in Great Britain and in these United States might be 
favorable to the greater liberty of the people of all denominations. 
For instance, then Presbyterians and 
Methodists and Catholics, et al., would control their 
own properties as the Disciples and some Baptists 
now do. 

ROMISH INFLUENCE IN SPAIN 

Ever since the Spanish-American war Spain has 
been awakening to a realization of her bondage to religious 
superstitions of the "dark ages." The action of 
France has been a lesson to Spain, which she is gradually 
learning, and it need not surprise us if it lead to 
separation between the State-and-Church union which 
has prevailed there for centuries. The entering wedge 
was the recent decision of the Minister of Justice, that 
a civil marriage is lawful and binding whether sanctioned 
by the Roman Catholic Church or not. The test 
case was on the refusal of burial privileges to the 
corpse of one married without the approval of the 
Roman clergy. The decision will thus be seen to be a 



breaking of the power of the Roman clergy over the 
people. 

A dispatch from Madrid states that the Church and 
State relationship is exciting heated discussions and 
that public disturbances have occurred. It is said that 
at the next session of the Spanish Parliament the 
King's representative will introduce a bill making the 
"religious orders" amenable to the law controlling industrial 
corporations, and another bill providing that 
the members of orders recently expelled from France 
shall either become naturalized citizens or leave Spain. 

We rejoice that "the dark places of the earth, the 
habitations of cruelty," are getting a glimmer of the 
light of the Millennial morning. We lift up our heads 
with rejoicing that the deliverance of the true and only 
Church ("whose names are written in heaven") is nigh 
at hand; and that then speedily the great Sun of 
Righteousness will shine forth to bless all the families 
of the earth, to give to all the knowledge of the glory 
of God as it shines in the face of Jesus Christ our Lord. 

Meantime the Lord has stirred the hearts of some 
familiar with the Spanish tongue, and they are preparing 

R3881 : page 340 

a translation of Vol. I., ("The Divine Plan of the 
Ages,") in that language, which we hope to have ready 
soon after the beginning of 1907. It will be in demand 
in Mexico first, but we learn will also be appreciated by 
considerable numbers in Spain. 

STRONG PROTESTS AGAINST THE POPE 

A cablegram says:— "Poor Pope Pius X's honeymoon 
is over, and the simple-minded child-like occupant 
of the chair of St. Peter is surrounded on all sides 
by dangers and intrigues. That his good intentions 
have at least partly failed and that the Augean stable of 
the Vatican is still waiting for a Hercules to clean it is 
no secret, and it is also a well-known fact that the Pope 
has fallen a victim to the forces of the reactionary parties 
surrounding him, and that this has caused great 
dissatisfaction amongst the Roman clergy. 

"This is plainly shown by the numerous libelous 
pamphlets which have appeared during the last few 
months. The latest of these, which has created widespread 
sensation, is entitled, Tldebrand monaco,' criticizes 
the Pope in a manner which in regard to forceful 
language surpasses anything ever printed in the Eternal 
City. 

'"It is no longer you, Holy Father, who rule, but 
reckless and unscrupulous prelates who have taken advantage 
of your kindness and modesty. A small clique 
of younger prelates, led by Cardinal Merry del Val, are 
bringing disgrace upon the Church, and while they are 
satisfying their every desire, the priests are struggling 



with poverty, many of them living on a lire and a half 
(30 cents) a day. 

'"We know that you, Holy Father, were inspired 
with the best intentions when you ascended to the 
throne of St. Peter, but though you do not realize it, 
you have become a weak, tyrannous Pope. You desired 
to reinstate the rule of love and charity, but you have 
been conquered by Satan, whose servants are surrounding 
you, disguised as young cardinals. 

'"Oh, Holy Father, remember that it is your holy 
duty to seek truth, and more so as many of us are beginning 
to doubt its existence. Remember that some 
day you will be called to account for your 
stewardship!'" 

HATRED OF THE JEWS 



Benjamin Disraeli, better known as Lord Beaconsfield, 
wrote a political biography which is attracting 
considerable attention. Goldwin Smith thus refers 
to it:~ 

"It is natural that in the course of this political 
biography Disraeli, who had witnessed the exclusion 
of Jews from the House of Commons and who had 
found and was still finding his own Israelite descent 
an almost insuperable bar to advancement, should diverge 
for a moment from the main current of his narration 
to consider the grounds of the disabilities to which 
the Hebrew race had been so long subjected in Christian 
Europe. He begins by reminding us that the 
Saxon, the Slav and the Celt have adopted most of the 
laws and many of the customs of the Jews, together 
with all the latter's literature and all their religion. 
The former are, therefore, indebted to the Israelites for 
much that regulates, much that charms and much that 
solaces existence. The toiling multitude rest every 
seventh day by virtue of a Jewish law; they are perpetually 
reading, that they may be taught by example, 
the records of Jewish history; they are continually 
singing the odes and elegies of Jewish poets; and they 
daily acknowledge on their knees with reverent gratitude 
that the only medium of communication between 
the Creator and themselves is the Jewish religion. 
Yet, at the hour when Disraeli wrote, the Saxon, the 
Slav and the Celt were accustomed to treat that race as 
the vilest of generations; and, instead of looking upon 
them logically as the channel of human happiness, they 
were accustomed to inflict upon them every term of obloquy 
and every form of persecution. Had it not been for 
the Jews of Palestine the good tidings of our Lord 
would have been unknown forever to the northern and 
western races. The first preachers of the Gospel were 
Jews, no others; the historians of the Gospel were 



R3882 : page 340 

Jews, no others. No human being has ever been permitted 
to write under the inspiration of the holy Spirit 
except a Jew. 'They nursed the sacred flame of which 
they were the consecrated and hereditary depositories. 
When the time was ripe to diffuse the truth among the 
Gentiles it was not a senator of Rome nor a philosopher 
of Athens who was personally appointed by our 
Lord for that office, but a Jew of Tarsus, who founded 
the seven churches of Asia. That greater Church, 
great even amid its terrible corruptions, that has 
avenged the victory of Titus by subjugating the capital 
of the Caesars and has changed every one of the 
Olympian temples into altars of the God of Sinai and 
of Calvary, was founded by another Jew, a Jew of Galilee.' 
From all which Disraeli concludes that the dispersion 
of the Jewish race, preceding as it did for ages 
the advent of our Lord, could not be for conduct which 
occurred subsequent to his nativity, and that they are 
also guiltless of that subsequent conduct which has 
been imputed to them as a crime, since for him and 
his blessed name they preached and wrote and shed 
their blood, 'as witnesses.' 

"Disraeli says: 'The creative genius of Israel, on 
the contrary, never shone so bright; and when the 
Russian, the Frenchman and the Anglo-Saxon, amid applauding 
theaters or the choral voices of solemn temples, 
yield themselves to the full spell of a Mozart or 
a Mendelssohn, it seems difficult to comprehend how 
these races can reconcile it to their hearts to persecute 
a Jew.' In the course of the same remarkable chapter 
Disraeli refers to the futility of persecution in the case 
of the Jew. 'Egyptian Pharaohs, Assyrian kings, Roman 
emperors, Scandinavian crusaders, Gothic princes 
and holy inquisitors have alike devoted their energies 
to the fulfilment of this common purpose. Expatriation, 
exile, captivity, confiscation, torture on the most 
ingenious and massacre on the most extensive scale, 
and a curious system of degrading customs and debasing 
laws which would have broken the heart of any 
other people have been tried, and in vain! The Jews, 
after all this havoc, are probably more numerous at 
this date than they were during the reign of Solomon 
the Wise, are found in all lands, and prospering in 
most. All which proves that it is in vain for man to 
attempt to baffle the inexorable law of nature, which 
has decreed that a superior race shall never be destroyed 
or absorbed by an inferior.' Disraeli adds that all 
the tendencies of the Jewish race are conservative. 
The bias of the Jews is toward religion, property and 
natural aristocracy. For which reason Disraeli pronounces 
it for the interest of statesmen that this bias 
of a great race should be encouraged, and their energies 
and creative powers enlisted in the cause of the 
existing social order."— Watchword. 



R3882: page 341 

INSANITY ON THE INCREASE 



Washington, D.C.,-At the end of the year 1904, 
the last for which figures have been returned, 199,773 
persons were under restraint in the 328 mad-houses of 
the country. No account was taken of the hopelessly 
insane people returned to the insane wards of the county 
poor-houses throughout the country by the hospitals 
for the insane maintained by the various States. 

During the thirteen years' period from 1890 to the 
end of 1903, the number of hospitals for the insane and 
the insane confined therein both doubled. In that same 
period 16,946 persons were confined in forty-two institutions 
for the feeble minded. 

These statistics were completed by the Census 
Bureau, and made public in a special bulletin to-day. 
The bureau does not regard them as conclusive answer 
to the question whether insanity is increasing. They 
do regard them as persuasive. They regard them as revealing 
a remarkable increase in the class to which they 
belong, namely, to the number of insane placed under 
restrictions. 

The number of insane in hospitals for each 100,000 
of population increased from 81.6 in 1880 to 118.2 in 
1890, and 186.2 in 1903. A remarkable fact is that 
among native whites there is more insanity among the 
males, while among foreign-born whites the females are 
more likely to lose their reason than the males. Although 
not made a part of the official record of speculations 
on the subject, there is an impression among 
those who assisted in the compilation of the figures that 
American males go insane as the reason of their strenuous 
efforts to get the money wherewith to support the 
female members of their families in comparative ease, 
while among the foreign-born insanity among the females 
results from the work their lords and masters 
compel them to perform.— Rochester Democrat. 



Science has been boasting of late that the average 
of human life has been increasing: that the 
average is now 35 years, whereas only twenty years ago 
it was as low as 32 years. This raise of the average has 
been accomplished chiefly through increased skill in dealing 
with children's ailments. Weakly children are now 
"pulled through" by the use of incubators, etc., etc. 
On these achievements of science some were disposed 
to predicate wonderful things— possibly eventually 
"eternal life." 

But those whose eyes of understanding are opening 



under the eyesalve of God's Word see matters differently: 
they see that man's hopes of everlasting life 
center in Christ and not in medical science. To us 
there is quite a connection between the above and other 
reports of the rapid increase of insanity and the preservation 
of the weaklings of our race. The lesson is that, 
if science held the race out of the grave a little longer 
the survival of the weak would mean in a few generations 
a weaker race and a still more rapid deterioration and 
shortening of longevity. Even now insanity experts 
are telling us that at the present rate the whole world 
would be insane in less than two centuries. Evidently 
the world as well as the Church has cause to pray 
earnestly, "Thy Kingdom Come." 



R3883 : page 341 

THE ROSE 

Within my hand I gently hold "the Garden's Queen," a rose,— 

The softly sighing summer wind about it faintly blows 

And wafts its wondrous fragrance out upon the evening air. 

And as I gaze upon the rose, so perfect and so fair, 

In memory's halls there wakes, the while, a legend, quaint and old, 

How once upon a time, one day, a sage picked up, we're told, 

A lump of common clay, so redolent with perfume rare, 

He marvelled, and the question wondering asked, "Whence dost 

thou bear 
Such fragrance, oh, thou lump of clay?" In tones of deep repose 
There came the sweet reply, "I have been dwelling with the rose." 

The while the legend stirs my soul, within my hand still lie 
The petals of the rose, and from my heart of hearts I cry, 
"Thou lovely "Rose of Sharon," may I ever dwell with Thee, 
So closely that the fragrance of Thy love shall cling to me! 
Oh, fill me with the spirit of Thy sweet humility, 
Then all shall see and know, dear Lord, that I have learned of Thee; 
And let my earthly pilgrimage, until its blessed close, 
Each day and hour bear witness, "I've been dwelling with the Rose.' 

G. W. S. 



R3882: page 341 

REPORT OF RECENT CONVENTIONS 

ALTOONA, PA., SEPT. 23 

WE had three splendid meetings at Altoona. The 
morning Testimony Rally showed warmth and 
zeal and love for the Lord, the Truth and the 
brethren. The afternoon meeting for the public was in 
the Opera House, which was well filled with an audience 



of about 1000. The evening session for the interested 
was attended by about 275. God's blessing was with 
our united efforts, we believe, and we already know of 
some good results. 

COLUMBUS, O. SEPT. 30 

Arriving at an early hour we had the privilege of 
visiting the Penitentiary, where a number of "brethren" 
are confined for misdeeds committed while they were 
still under the blinding instructions of "orthodoxy." 
We could not see all, on account of prison rules, but 
those whom we did meet gave good evidence of the 
truth of the Apostle's words, "He that hath this hope 
in him purifieth himself, even as he is pure." 

The Testimony Rally was at 10 a.m. and was a 
great success. A goodly number attended from nearby 
points and the general witness was to the mercy of God 
and special thankfulness for the Truth. The service 
for the public was in the new "Memorial Hall," the 
largest auditorium of the city, said to seat 3500. It was 
packed full, 200 on chairs on the platform, 300 standing, 
and several hundred were unable to obtain admittance 
when the public safety authorities closed and 
locked the doors. It was a grand audience which gave 
close attention for nearly two hours to our theme, "To 
Hell and Back." The evening address to the interested 
many of you already read in the Dispatch. The attendance 
was about 700, the majority of them being 
people who had heard in the afternoon for the first 
time. The friends had prayed much and labored hard 
for this meeting and had spent much money in wise 
advertising, that their fellow-citizens might have the 
privilege of coming in contact with the Truth, and they 

R3883 : page 342 

felt greatly blessed and encouraged by the results seen 
and hoped for. 

CONVENTIONS IN TEXAS 

Only one Texas Convention was announced— at 
Dallas, Oct. 13,14— but at a date too late for 
announcement in the WATCH TOWER the appeals 
from San Antonio and Houston prevailed. The 
determining arguments were that the Editor when at 
Dallas would be within 300 miles of the other points, 
that to visit them would consume little more time, and 
that the majority of the friends could not afford to visit 
Dallas. 

At Dallas we had a splendid gathering of the 
"brethren," representing every section of Texas, Indian 
Territory, Oklahoma, Arkansas and Louisiana. The 
only drawback was the rainy weather, which interfered 
with the attendance of the public, but in no sense 



dampened the spiritual ardor of our own people. 

The Convention opened Saturday morning, Oct. 
13, and closed the following Monday at noon. The 
largest attendance was about 400; 20 symbolized their 
consecration by immersion. 

The Editor left Dallas for San Antonio on Sunday 
night. At the latter place two public meetings were 
held— Monday afternoon and evening. The latter, in 
the Grand Opera House, was attended by about 1000 who 
gave excellent attention. 

Leaving on the night train, Houston was reached 
Tuesday morning and there two public services were 
held— afternoon and evening— about 350 being present 
at the closing session. Thence by train two days and 
three nights brought us in safety to the Bible House, 
Allegheny, on Friday morning, Oct. 20. 



R3883 : page 342 

GATHERING OR SCATTERING, WHICH? 

"He that is not for me is against me; and he 
that gathereth not with me scattereth abroad." 
-Matt. 12:30- 

OF THE JEWS in general at the first advent our 
Lord declared, "They knew not the time of 
their visitation." (Luke 19:44.) When we remember 
that the people addressed were the prototype 
of nominal Christendom today, it should not surprise 
us that the same words are applicable now. As Israel 
recognized not Jesus as the Messiah and that his work 
was a harvest work, a separating work, so likewise 
Christian people in general today are unaware that we 
are living in the second presence of the Messiah and 
that a similar harvesting work is now in progress- 
separating wheat from tares and gathering the wheat 
into the garner. Although there has always been a 
right and a wrong side to every question— the side of 
right and truth and the side of wrong and error, the 
side of God and the side of Mammon— yet the harvest 
in the end of the Jewish age brought a new issue and 
a fresh division along new lines. 

So it is in this harvest time: throughout the Gospel 
age there has been the side of right and justice and 
its opposing side of wrong and error, the side of God 
and the truth and the side of Mammon and confusion. 
But now in the harvest time the fresh separation takes 
place along new lines— a separation amongst those who 
are on the side of God, on the side of right, on the side 
of truth. Evidently these harvest testings, siftings, 
separations, represent more crucial tests to the Lord's 
people than have come to them at other times, and correspond 
with the harvest time at the first advent, and 



now have come increased blessings, privileges, favors, 
enlightenments. Where much advantage is given the 
more will reasonably be expected in return— where the 
trials are more severe, the more assistance and enlightenment 
are necessary and have been provided. 

THE PERIOD OF TRANSITION 

Surveying Christendom we find many in the nominal 
churches doing all in their power to oppose the 
harvest work; nevertheless it goes on prosperously, in 
harmony with our Lord's declaration, "So shall my 
word be that goeth out of my mouth; it shall not return 
unto me void, but it shall accomplish that which 
I please, and it shall prosper in the thing whereto I 
sent it." (Isa. 55:11.) It was just so at the first advent: 
practically all of the leading theologians, Doctors 
of the Law, as well as the priests and the leading 
prominent Pharisees, took the side of opposition to the 
great Reaper and that harvest work. Similarly today 
in this harvest the most vigorous opponents of the 
Lord's work are the Doctors of Divinity and those 
prominent in religious matters. They can agree 
amongst themselves, and bury all their own serious 
oppositions of doctrine and usage in union meetings, 
etc., Episcopalians, Methodists, Presbyterians, Roman 
Catholics and Jews, as we sometimes see mentioned in 
the public press. But they all with one accord are 
violently opposed to Present Truth as represented in 
the WATCH TOWER publications, opposed to the harvest 
work. 

Just so the Sadducees, the Pharisees and Herodians 
made common cause in opposition to the Master 
and the harvest work in the end of the Jewish age. 
Nevertheless the Lord's work was really helped forward 
by their opposition, for he intended the gathering only 
of the elect class, the fully consecrated, and the opposition 
helped to separate from these all others; and 
just so we find it at the present time. We are not, 
therefore, complaining respecting these oppositions, 
knowing full well that the Chief Reaper has the entire 
situation in charge, and that by divine ability he is 
able to make all things work together for good to the 
right class, and for the accomplishment of his purpose 
in the separations intended at the present time. 

We feel justified according to the Scriptures in supposing 
that Satan, the great Adversary of the divine 
plan, has more or less to do with the oppositions of 

R3883 : page 343 

this present time, as the Scriptures assure us he had 
to do with the opposition to the harvest work of the 
Jewish age. He of course works through natural 
channels, uses human instrumentalities. As an angel 
of light he urges those who have been identified with 



religious institutions of human organization that their 
systems having been used by the Lord to some extent 
in helping faithful souls nearer the truth, it would be 
an error now to think of these institutions or systems 
as being rejected of the Lord and his people called out 
of them. He blinds them to the fact that in the past 
God has repeatedly used the wrath of men to praise 
him, and various institutions not approved by him 
have served as his instrumentalities in accomplishing 
his needed work, just as the Lord had undoubtedly 
blessed and used the priests and Levites, the Doctors 
of the Law and the Pharisees, in olden times, and 
continued to use them more or less up to the time of 
their final testing, when the Master declared publicly, 
"Your house is left unto you desolate."— Matt. 23:38. 

All true Israelites should have recognized the change 
of dispensations; or, as the Scriptures declare, they 
should have known "the time of their visitation." The 
difficulty evidently was that many of them were overcharged 
with the cares of this life, the deceitfulness of 
riches, the honors of men and their sectarian prosperity. 
And so it is here in this harvest time: the test comes 
along similar lines. Fidelity to the voice of him that 
speaketh from heaven through the Bible means, in the 
clearer light now granted us, an opposition to the errors 
and false doctrines long cherished as truths by ourselves 
and forbears and friends. Now as then this increase 
of light, this hearing of the voice of the Lord, brings a 
test— the separation of those who are the true sheep 
from others who do not belong to this flock. "My sheep 
hear my voice and they follow me." 

R3884 : page 343 

The true sheep have long recognized that the voice 
of their creeds from the "dark ages" was not purely and 
simply the voice of the Shepherd: they heard instead 
confused voices, some of them from the Lord and some 
of them from the Adversary; and this confusion is represented 
in the creeds. The word Babylon signifies 
confusion; hence nominal Christendom as a whole is 
today, according to the Scriptures, to be recognized as 
Babylon, confusion. Her voice is not wholly bad nor 
wholly good— it is the message of the Lord contradicted 
and confused by the message of the Adversary. 

But now in the harvest time the Chief Reaper is 
here, and all the wheat class should know it and should 
heed his message and be gathered into the garner. 
Under another figure the Chief Shepherd has come, 
and all the true sheep should now discern clearly between 
his voice and the voice of strangers, heard 
through their creeds and generally from their pulpits- 
voices which speak Evolution, Higher Critical Infidelity, 
and the rejection of the Word of God, which the Apostle 
declares is alone able to make us wise unto salvation 
—that is alone able to qualify the man of God that he 



may be thoroughly furnished unto every good work.— 
2 Tim. 3:17. 

HARVEST HELPERS AND HINDERERS 

One of the chief delusions practised by the Adversary 
at this time is to persuade the Lord's true people 
that any downfall of Babylon in any of its departments 
or denominations would be sacrilegious, would be an 
injury to the cause of Christ, whereas they should see 
clearly that the prosperity of the cause of Christ at the 
present time means the deliverance of his true saints 
from Babylon, and that this shall signify eventually 
the complete fall of Babylon as expressed in the Scriptures, 
the rejection of Babylon, which chronologically 
we located in the Scriptures by the words, "Babylon the 
Great is fallen, is fallen.... Come out of her, my people, 
that ye be not partakers of her sins and receive not 
of her plagues." (Rev. 18:2,4.) This fallen condition of 
Babylon signifies, not her destruction, but her complete 
rejection from God's favor, so that God will use her no 
more as a channel for the bestowment of his best blessings 
—"The voice of the Bridegroom and the Bride shall 
be heard no more at all in thee."— Rev. 18:23. 

We are now in the little season in which the Lord 
is waiting for the response of those whom he is calling 
out of Babylon. Those in her who have the highest 
stations of honor find it most difficult to forsake these 
and to become followers in the footsteps of Jesus to 
the extent of being disowned by the religious teachers 
and made of "no reputation." The Lord's call out of 
Babylon is not an audible one— he merely calls us by 
the principles of righteousness. He lifts the curtain 
before the eyes of understanding of his consecrated 
ones and thus lets them see some of the errors, some of 
the falsities in which they and others of Babylon are 
involved— dishonoring the holy name— blaspheming 
the holy name by misrepresentation of the divine character 
and plan. This is and should be call enough for 
those who are of the Lord's Spirit, for those who love 
the Lord and the honor of his name more than they 
love houses or lands or parents or children or any other 
creature or thing— yea, more than they love their own 
lives. Such are sure to respond and to come out of 
Babylon; others who remain, in spite of seeing the 
light, fail to be overcomers of the highest class— fail 
therefore to be in the elect Bride class, and must be 
counted in with the great company, which will come 
through great tribulation, and will get out of Babylon 
only when she has been cast as a great millstone into 
the midst of the sea— in the time of anarchous trouble 
with which this age will close. 

"WHO IS ON THE LORD'S SIDE?" 

What we all need to see clearly is that if we are on 



the side of the Lord we are helpers in this harvest 

work— helpers in the separation which is now due to 

be accomplished— an assisting of the Lord's true people 

out of Babylon and its confusion and darkness into 

the light of truth and more fully into the grace of God. 

We will all then see that to be in Babylon, upholding 

her systems, upholding her errors, whether by the influence 

of our names upon her rolls, counted in with 

her numbers, or by rendering any financial aid in any 

R3884 : page 344 

measure or degree, we are to that extent opposing the 

work which he is now doing in the world. If all could 

get this correct Scriptural thought in mind it would 

help them amazingly to know the step of duty and to 

take it. All who are the Lord's at heart must be loyal 

to him; and if they could but see the force of our 

Lord's words, that he who is not gathering with 

him in this harvest work, gathering out of Babylon, 

is in opposition to him and hinders his work, it 

would help many such, we believe, to come forward 

courageously and take their stand on the side of 

the Lord in opposition to Babylon and every false doctrine 

and false system. True, the Lord with great 

forbearance permitted the wheat and tares to grow together, 

permitted the truth and the falsehood to be 

mixed together. But now we have come to the turning 

point, now we are in the separating time: he no longer 

says, "Let both grow together," but he says positively 

to those who are his, "Come out of her, my people," 

and all who are his people of the "more than conqueror" 

class will heed the voice and come out before the 

fall of Babylon— come out in time to help rescue others 

by their word and example, and to bring others of the 

truth-hungry sheep out of the Babylon creed-pens into 

the liberty wherewith Christ has made us free, that we 

may be taught of God. 

This message, "Come out of her, my people," is 
not to those who are still blind in Babylon; hence it is 
not the first message to be given out at the present time. 
The light, the truth, the divine plan of the ages, is to 
be let shine; the errors of Babylon on various points 
are to be shown, and how these are dishonoring to 
God: then it is that the voice of the truth, the voice of 
these facts, will cry aloud to all who are truly the 
Lord's sheep, to separate themselves from such misrepresentation 
of the divine character and plan, in 
heart, in person, in purse. There are some of the 
Lord's people today who much remind us of Nicodemus 
of old— they are inclined to visit the Lord by 
night, to hold the truth in secret while giving their 
time, their influence, principally in opposition to the 
divine plan. 

So long as any one is in this condition he cannot 
hope to make much progress in growth in grace, in 



knowledge and in the peace and joy and love and other 
fruits of the Spirit, now due to be developed and ripened 
in our hearts and lives. It is an element of the divine 
law that for every ray of light that we receive a certain 
amount of obedience and response must be expected: 
if therefore any would go on and grow in grace and 
grow in knowledge, he must practice the things which 
he has already learned, he must take the steps one by 
one as he comes to them. 

THE SPIRIT OF DIVISION 

Even if we have come out of Babylon and taken 
our stand on the Lord's side the great Adversary pursues 
us, seeking to entrap and ensnare and to hinder 
the work in general. Strange as it may seem, unreasonable 
as it may appear, there are some who have 
recognized Present Truth who have realized that we 
are in the harvest time, that the separation of wheat 
from tares is in progress, that the great Reaper is present 
conducting this work, that under his conduct of 
the work they themselves were gathered out and have 
received many blessings, yet now they begin to scatter 
abroad, they hinder the harvest work, they attempt to 
sow discord amongst the under-reapers by saying all 
manner of evil falsely against some of them, by traducing 
their characters, impugning their motives and by 
implication persuading those who have only gotten free 
from Babylon that the great Reaper himself has nothing 
to do in the matter, and that the proper thing is 
discord, dissension, slashing right and left to scatter 
abroad the wheat already separated from the tares. 

"We are not ignorant of his devices," writes the 
Apostle concerning our great Adversary. (2 Cor. 2:11.) 
We know who is to blame particularly for the present 
attitude of some in opposition to the harvest work. 
We remember how he practiced similarly in the early 
Church; how he got up dissensions amongst the 
Lord's chosen twelve, disputing as to which should be 
greatest— as to which had accomplished the greatest 
service and would have greatest honor. We remember 
how his spirit actuated Peter, so that he tried to interfere 
with the Lord's consecration to sacrifice, and how 
the Lord himself rebuked Peter, saying, "Get thee behind 
me, Adversary; thou savorest not the things that 
be of God but the things which be of man." We remember 
Jesus' own words to that same disciple, saying, 
"Satan hath desired to have thee that he might sift 
thee as wheat, but I have prayed for thee." Shall not 
these incidents from the typical harvest of the Jewish 
age have their weight with us in respect to the harvest 
of this Gospel age? Here, too, Satan is desirous to 
sift out some, and the great Chief Reaper is ready to 
aid all who desire his aid and succor. Here, too, we 
may expect to find some like Judas, of whom it is written, 
"Satan entered into him."— John 13:27. 



Satan's work in the heart of Judas was a gradual 
one: evidently the love of money was the beginning of 
his fall into the Adversary's hands. With some today 
the love of money and business prosperity may be the 
power, the influence, which will lead them to become 
Satan's accomplices. But so far as our observation 
goes temptation today is more likely to be along other 
lines of selfishness— honor of men and desire to be 
thought great and wise, to be leaders. As the spirit of 
selfishness undermined the loyalty of Judas to his Master, 
so a similar spirit of selfishness may today undermine 
loyalty to the Lord, his truth, his work, and thus 
lead on and on until Satan enters in, and the work of 
Satan is manifested more and more in the anger, malice, 
envy, hatred, strife and other works of the flesh 
and the devil, against members of the body of Christ, 
against under-reapers, and therefore against the great 
Chief Reaper, who declares that "he that rejecteth me 
and receiveth not my words hath one that judgeth him"; 
and, "Whoso offendeth one of these little ones that 

R3885 : page 345 

believe in me, it were better for him that a millstone 
were hanged about his neck, and that he were drowned 
in the depth of the sea;" and again, "It must needs be 
that offences come; but woe unto that man by whom 
the offence cometh."-Matt. 18:6,7. 

The matter is an individual one, as stated in our 
text: therefore let each of us apply the matter to himself, 
and with the greatest of earnestness and solicitude 
inquire whether he is united fully at heart with 
the Lord, and whether his hands and heart and purse 
and every talent and possession are associated with 
the great Chief Reaper in the present harvest work— 
whether he is gathering into this barn, this garner, or 
whether he is doing a scattering work. The Lord indicates 
that his work is one, and that it is all under his 
supervision. Whoever, therefore, thinks otherwise— 
that he may do a separate harvest work, and that each 
of the Lord's people should do a separate harvest 
work, each according to the bent of his own mind, 
has evidently misunderstood the divine program. 

All of the propositions of Present Truth harmoniously 
agree that the Lord is here supervising and conducting 
the harvest work, calling his own servants and 
reckoning with them. If therefore we have been separated 
from the world and from Babylon, in part or in 
whole, let us look well to it that our stand is either for 
or against the Lord from the moment that we recognize 
the work he is doing. Hence every word and 
every act means to us responsibilities that it shall be for 
the Lord, for the truth, for the gathering of the saints, 
not in opposition to him and his, not to the scattering 
of his work. "He that is not for me is against me; he 
that gathereth not with me scattereth abroad." Very 



soon, we trust, we shall render our accounts to the one 
who gave us this message, and our joy or our shame 
shall be in proportion as we have heeded his words, 
allowing nothing of selfishness or personal ambition to 
have any place in our hearts or conduct. Let us more 
and more seek exclusively to glorify God in our bodies 
and spirits, which are his.— I Cor. 6:20. 



page 345 

BEREAN STUDIES IN "TABERNACLE SHADOWS" 

In the references below, Z. represents this journal 
and T. stands for Tabernacle Shadows. The references 
should be given to brethren and sisters for reading 
in the classes. Free comment should be permitted 
after each reading. 



NOVEMBER 4 

1 . What was the divine purpose in establishing the 
Tabernacle in the wilderness with its services 

and ceremonies? Heb. 10:1; Heb. 8:5; Col. 2:16,17; 
T. 11, par. 1;Z. '02-235 (1st col. par. 1; 2nd 
col. par. 1). 

2. What is a "type"? and how should types be used? Z. '92-100; 
see also WATCH TOWER BIBLE under 

"Types." 

3. What should be our object in studying the Tabernacle 
"shadows"? T.ll, par. 2 to 12, par. 2. 

4. Briefly stated, what was the Tabernacle, and where 
do we find the directions for its construction? 

T.12, par. 3; Ex. 25 to 27; 35 to 40. 

NOVEMBER 1 1 

5. What were the dimensions of the Tabernacle, the 
names and sizes of its two apartments? T.13, par. 1. 

6. How may we avoid the confusion arising from improper 
translations of the "Holy" and "Most 

Holy"? T.13, footnote. 

7. Describe the Court, with its dimensions. T.14, par. 1. 

8. What were the names of the three entrance passages 
into the "Court," the "Holy" and the "Most Holy," 
respectively? T.14, par. 2. 

9. What and where was the "Camp"? T.14, par. 2. 

10. What were the furnishments of the "Court" and 
how situated? T.15, par. 1 to 3. 

1 1 . What were the furnishments of the "Holy" and 
where were they placed? T.15, par. 4 to 17, par. 1. 

12. What furniture did the "Most Holy" contain? T.17, 
par. 2. 



13. What difference in the material of which the furniture 
in the Tabernacle and the "Court" was 

made, and what did this signify? T.17, par. 3. 

14. What did the "Camp" typify? T. 18, par. 1. 

NOVEMBER 18 

15. What did the "Court" represent, and who alone 
might enter into it? T.19, par. 1; Z/02-235 (2nd 
col. par. 2). 

16. Briefly, what did the two apartments of "the Tabernacle" 
proper represent? T.19, par. 2; Z. '02-236 

(1st col., top of page). 

17. Who only of the Israelites might enter the Tabernacle, 
and what is the antitype? T.20, par. 1. 

18. In the antitype, do all who enter the "Court" experience 
a change of nature? T.20, par. 2. 

19. What does entering the antitypical "Holy" imply, 
and how is Christ the "Gate" and the "Door"? 

T.20, par. 2. 

NOVEMBER 25 

20. What parts of the Tabernacle represented the two 
stages of our new life? T.20, par. 3. 

21. Who are those begotten of God through the Word 
of Truth (Jas. 1:18), and how represented in the 
"Holy"? T.20, par. 4; Z/00-227 (1st col., par. 2). 

22. Did the "Most Holy" represent the present or future 
condition of the "overcomers"? T.21, par. 1. 

23. What is the hope, which "as an anchor entereth into 
that within the [second] vail"? Heb. 6:19; 10:20; 

T.21, par. 2. 

24. How do consecrated believers follow in the footsteps 
of their Leader and High Priest, Jesus?" T.21, 

par. 3, to 22 par. 1; Z. '02-236 (1st col., par. 1). 

DECEMBER 2 

25. How do we pass the "vail of sin and unbelief," and 
why was it not necessary for Jesus to take 

this step? T.22, par. 1. 

26. How do we pass the first vail, and into what does 
it lead us? T.22, par. 2, 3. 

27. What does the passing of the second vail typify? 
T.22, par. 3. 

28. Why must we leave our human bodies behind when 
we pass the second vail? I Cor. 15:50; John 3:5,8,13; 
T.23 (top of page). 

29. By way of recapitulation, what did the "Camp," 
"Court" and "Tabernacle" typify? T.23, par. 1. 



R3885 : page 346 



"WITH STRONG CRYINGS AND TEARS" 

--MATTHEW 26:36-50.-NOVEMBER 11.- 

Golden Text:— "Not my will, but thine, be done."— Luke 22:42. 

THE Garden of Gethsemane was not a wild woods nor a 
public garden, but an olive orchard. The name 
seems to indicate that upon the premises was located 
an oil-press for the extraction of the oil from the olives. It 
is supposed to have been the home of the mother of Mark, 
reputed to have been a wealthy widow, a friend of Jesus' 
cause. The house and outbuildings were probably in one 
part of the orchard or "garden." At all events it seems 
evident that the property was under the control of Jesus' 
friends, and that he and his disciples were well acquainted 
with the spot to which, after eating the Memorial Supper, 
our Lord and his disciples adjourned. The site now pointed 
out as this Gethsemane Garden is about half a mile from 
the wall of Jerusalem, and contains some remarkably old 
olive trees, the Garden itself being under the care of some 
monks who reside near by. 

When our Lord and his eleven disciples had arrived at 
the entrance to the Garden or orchard, Jesus left eight of 
them there as a kind of outer guard, taking with him the 
favorite three, Peter, James and John, the three who on various 
occasions had been similarly favored— for instance, in 
connection with the visit to Jairus' daughter— and it was 
the same three who were privileged to see the "vision" on 
the Mount of Transfiguration. While Jesus loved all of his 
disciples, these three were especially dear to him, probably 
because of their special zeal and love for him. But on this 
occasion not even these, his specially dear disciples, could 
enter into or sympathize with the weight which was upon 
our Lord's heart; hence he stationed them and went still 
further along to engage in prayer to the Father. The language 
of all of the accounts of this incident taken together, 
especially in the light of the original Greek, shows that a 
sorrowful loneliness and anguish came upon our Lord with 
great force at this time. While with the disciples, doubtless 
in their interest, he had sought to be cheerful and to give 
them the needful lessons in preparing them for their trials; 
but now, having done all in his power for them, and having 
gone to the Father alone, his thoughts turned inward upon 
himself and his relationship to the Father, and outward 
upon the public shame of his trial and conviction as a blasphemer, 
a seditionist, and further on to the contemptuous 
mockery of the trial, and still further on to his public execution 
between two thieves. All this, now clearly before 
his mind, was enough for anguish, for pain, for deep, poignant 
sorrow. 

"THE MAN OF SORROWS-ACQUAINTED WITH GRIEF" 

In viewing the matter of our Lord's sufferings on this 
occasion it is well to remember that his perfect organization 



—untainted, unblemished by sin, undegraded, undulled by 
dying processes— was much more susceptible to the pains 
and sorrows of the hour upon him than the feelings of others 
of the fallen race could be. Under adverse conditions the 
finer the sentiments and characteristics the greater the pain. 
A hoodlum ringleader might even glory in a ride in the 
patrol wagon, while to a refined person the experience 
would be terrible. Take another illustration: A finely 
educated musician, with an ear for harmonies well developed, 
would know a disturbance and a pain from a discordant 
note that might not at all be appreciated by one of less 
acute musical talent. We could even imagine that one of the 
seditious robbers crucified at our Lord's side might have 
gloried in his death as a triumph had there been over his 
head those words which were over our Lord's head, "This is 
the King of the Jews." It is, of course, difficult for us to 
appreciate perfection, since neither ourselves nor any with 
whom we have relationship are perfect; but we repeat that 
it must be true that the perfect organization of our Lord 
would suffer far more than any of his followers could suffer 
under the same conditions. 

But there was another reason, and indeed it was the 
chief reason, we may be sure, why our Lord sorrowed on this 
occasion so that his agony, becoming very intense, produced 
a bloody sweat. That other reason was his realization of 
his own situation in relationship to God and the covenant 
under which he made his sacrifice. To fulfil the Father's 
will he had left the heavenly glories, stooped even below 
angels to take the human form and nature, so that he by 
God's favor might redeem Adam and, in redeeming him, redeem 
the race condemned in him. He had pleasure, yea, 
"delight," in this self-abasement, as it is written, "I delight 
to do thy will, O my God: thy law is written in my heart." 
(Psa. 40:8.) It was this spirit that led our Lord to a full 
consecration of himself to death as soon as he was thirty 
years of age, and could properly thus present himself as our 
sin offering. The same love and zeal kept him faithful 
during all the years of his ministry, and enabled him to 
count as light afflictions all the experiences of life and the 
various contradictions of sinners against himself— because 
he realized that he was doing the Father's will. 

Why was it, then, that at the very conclusion of his 
ministry, after he had told his disciples of his coming death, 
and having explained that he would be "set at naught by 
the chief priests and elders" and crucified— in the face of 
all this knowledge, confidence, loving obedience, faithfulness 
to his consecration vow unto death— why did our Lord 
experience so terrible an ordeal in the Gethsemane orchard? 

The words of the Apostle explain the situation: he 
says of Jesus, "He offered up strong cryings and tears unto 
him that was able to save him from [out of] death." (Heb. 5:7.) 
But others have died, others have faced death in as 
terrible or even more terrible form, and done it with calmness. 
Why did our Lord break down in such deep sorrow 
and such strong cryings as to bring on a bloody sweat? We 
answer that death to him was a very different proposition 



from what it is to us. We are already nine-tenths dead, or 
worse, through our imperfections, our share in the fall, 
which has benumbed all of our sensibilities, mental, moral 
and physical, and which renders us incapable of appreciating 
life in its highest, best and supremely fullest sense. Not 
so our Lord. "In him was Life"— perfection of life. True 
he had for three and a half years been laying down his life, 
using it in the preaching of the truth, and especially in the 
healing of multitudes of the sick, when virtue or vitality 
went out of him and healed them all. This indeed weakened 
his physical frame and strength, but undoubtedly he 

R3886 : page 347 

continued mentally very full of vigor, life, perfection. Besides, 

our experiences with death and our expectancy of 

death lead us to estimate it as a certainty sooner or later. 

On the contrary, our Lord's experiences were with life: for 

centuries to us untold he had been with the Father and the 

holy angels, enjoying the perfection of endless life; his experiences 

with dying men were but for a few short years, 

and hence to him death had a very different signification 

from what it has to the dying race. 

But there was more than this, much more: The heathen 
have a hope of future life built upon the traditions of their 
ancients, and God's people have hope of a resurrection built 
upon the divine promise and guaranteed to them through 
the merit of Christ's sacrifice— but what hope had Jesus? 
He could not share the heathen's hope that the dead were 
not dead, for he knew to the contrary; he could not share 
hope in a redemption and a raising up through the merit of 
another. His only hope, therefore, was that his entire career, 
from the moment of his consecration to the close, had been 
absolutely perfect, without flaw in the sight of justice, in the 
sight of the heavenly Father. It was here when alone that 
this awful fear overwhelmed him: Had he been perfect in 
every thought and word and deed? Had he pleased the 
Father absolutely? and would he be able on the morrow, 
with such a shrinking from the shame and ignominy as he 
would experience on account of his perfection— would he be 
able unflinchingly to perform his part? and would he, as a 
result, be accounted worthy by the Father to be raised from 
the dead on the third day? Or had he failed, or should he 
fail, even in some slightest particular, and thus be accounted 
unworthy of resurrection and thus become extinct? No wonder 
these weighty matters bore in upon our dear Redeemer's 
heart with unsurmountable sorrows, so that he offered up 
strong cryings and tears unto him who was able to save him 
from death [by a resurrection]. 

Matthew says he prayed, "If it be possible let this cup 
pass from me;" Mark says he prayed, "All things are possible;" 
Luke records it, "If thou be willing," and the substance 
of all is that our Lord was exceeding fearful of himself 
—fearful lest he should make a misstep and thus spoil 
the entire plan of God, which he had so obediently undertaken 
and thus far so loyally performed. Apparently death 



in any form would have been sufficient as a ransom for the 
first Adam's disobedience, meeting his death penalty; 
but it had pleased the Father to put his Son, the Redeemer, 
to the extremest of all tests, laying upon him 
the ignominy, the shame, of the cross. Our Lord's 
query was, Could he stand this? or would it be possible for 
the Father to deviate to that extent without interfering with 
the divine plan or the great work being accomplished? The 
necessary submission is indicated— "Not my will but thine 
be done." 

HE WAS HEARD RESPECTING THE THING FEARED 

The Apostle declares that our Lord was heard, that is, 
answered, in respect to the thing he feared— in respect to 
the cross and the recovery out of death. Prayers for help 
or deliverance from these troubles may be answered in two 
ways: The Father may remove the disturbing cause, or he 
may so strengthen us that we will be able to quite overcome 
the disturbance. And with us, as with the Master, the 
Father usually takes the latter course, and gives us the 
peace and strength through his assurance in his Word. 
Thus we read of our Master that an angel appeared unto 
him strengthening him. We know not what message that 
angel brought to our dear Redeemer in his hour of loneliness 
and violent grief, nor is it necessary that we should: it 
is sufficient for us to know that the Father answered the 
prayer, that it was heard respecting the thing feared, that 
the fear was all removed, that calm reigned in our dear Redeemer's 
bosom thereafter, so that in all the affairs and incidents 
of that night and the following day he was of all 
men the coolest and calmest. We can surmise that the 
Father's assurance through the angel was that he had the 
divine favor, that up to that moment he had been faithful, 
that he had the Father's smile, and that he would be fully 
able to meet, when the time would come, all the exigencies 
of the hour of trial before him. With the assurance of the 
Father's approval no wonder sorrow took its flight, no wonder 
hope, joy, love and peace streamed into the dear Redeemer's 
heart, and he returned to the disciples ready for 
the events that he knew were about to transpire. 

"LET US ALSO FEAR" 

It is well that the Lord's people strive to live a rejoicing 
life, giving thanks always to the Father in all things, 
and rejoicing to be counted worthy to suffer shame, etc., for 
the cause of Christ. But as the Apostle elsewhere declares, 
Let us rejoice with fear: let not our rejoicing be of that 
reckless, self-satisfying kind which might ensnare us and 
entrap us; let our rejoicing be in him who loved us and who 
bought us and who is ever present with us, our best Friend 
and truest Guide. Let us rejoice, not in feelings of our own 
strength and courage and wisdom, but in the fact that we 
have a Savior and a great one, who is able to deliver to the 
uttermost all that come unto the Father through him. Thus 



may the Lord be our strength, our confidence, our shield, our 
buckler. 

In our Lord's case we read that "He trod the winepress 
alone, of the people there was none with him." In his 
very saddest hour, when he most needed comfort and consolation, 
it was not possible for even the closest and dearest 
of his earthly friends to enter into his feelings or sympathize 
with him. How different with us! We are not so different 
from others that they cannot enter into our joys and sorrows, 
our hopes and fears, if they have been begotten of the 
same Spirit and instructed in the same school of Christ. 
With us human counsel and sympathy are both possible 
and proper. Indeed, this is the divine provision as set forth 
in the Scriptures, which assure us that the Lord desires that 
we should comfort one another and build one another up as 
members of the body of Christ. Nevertheless we should never 
neglect the throne of heavenly grace in personal interview 
with our Father and glorified Lord. Whatever of earthly 
companionship we may have, the Lord's companionship must 
never be underestimated or forgotten. The Lord sometimes 
sends his angels to us to comfort us, to give us the assurance 
of his love and to point out to us the sureness of our 
confidence, our hope. But it is not necessary any longer to 
send a heavenly messenger, for already the Lord has on 
the earth angels— messengers, members of the body of Christ 

R3886 : page 348 

—imbued with the Master's Spirit and love, and ready 
always and anxious to speak the kind word, to bind up the 
broken heart, to pour in the oil and wine of consolation and 
joy, and in every way to represent to us the Master himself. 
What joy often comes through such ministries, what blessing 
we have received in this manner, and what a privilege we 
have when occasion offers to be thus used of the Lord as his 
ministers of joy and peace and blessing to the fellow-members! 
Let us be on the alert that no such opportunity pass 
us by. 

The Apostle intimates that we have need of fearing the 
same thing that Jesus feared when he says, "Let us also fear 
lest a promise being left us of entering into his rest, any of 
us should seem to come short of it." As New Creatures we 
have tasted of the new life, the heavenly life: our eyes of 
understanding have to some extent been opened to see the 
grandeurs and beauties of the heavenly things which God 
hath in reservation for them that love him. And we, too, realize 
that our attainment to the glory, honor, immortality and 
joint-heirship with the Lord depends upon our faithfulness 
to our covenant of sacrifice. If faithful, we know that he is 
faithful who has promised; if unfaithful, we know that we 
shall fail of that prize. What manner of persons ought we 
then to be under these conditions? Let us fear the loss of 
such a wonderful prospect of glory, honor and immortality, 
in the sense that we will seek constantly to fulfil our covenant 
and to abide in our Father's love and in our Redeemer's 
favor and smile. All who are thus walking carefully may 



have their moments in which they will experience something 
of the shadows of Gethsemane loneliness, for their testing, 
for their proving, and to develop in them the proper fear 
necessary to their full knowledge, to their appreciation of 
the situation and to faithfulness. 

"SLEEP ON NOW" 

During that hour of intense mental agony our Lord 
prayed and prayed again, and in the interim came to his 
disciples, doubtless craving such sympathy as they would be 
able to give; but he found them asleep, their eyes being 
heavy from sorrow, says the Evangelist. The hour was 
midnight; they were sharing his sorrows, but unable to appreciate 
them rightly. The Master chided, probably especially 
Peter, when he said, "What, could you not watch with 
me one hour? Watch and pray, lest ye enter into temptation." 
The noble Peter had but a short time before declared, 
"Lord, though all men forsake thee, yet will not I," and 
even now he had the sword which he subsequently used in 
seeking to defend the Lord, and yet he did not realize the 
importance of the hour; he knew not, as the Master did, how 
serious were the testings and how close; he knew not that it 
was a very short time until the Master's words would be fulfilled. 
"Before the cock crow twice thou shalt deny me 
thrice." Ah, had he realized as the Master did the trials 
that were near, how vigilant he doubtless would have been! 
And is it not so with us to-day? Are we not as the Lord's 
people in this harvest-time drawing close to the Gethsemane 
hour of the Church? Are we not already in the hour of 
temptation to a considerable extent? Will not the last members 

R3887 : page 348 

of the body soon follow the Head unto complete sacrifice? 
How ready are we for the ordeal? Are we asleep, or 
are we heeding the words of the Apostle, They that sleep 
sleep in the night, but we who are of the day should be 
awake, sober, putting on the whole armor of God that we 
may be able to stand in this evil day, in the time of trial 
already upon us, and in the still severer trials which no 
doubt will be ours in the near future? Are we prepared for 
the time when there will possibly be a general scattering, 
as these "all forsook him and fled"? How courageous we 
will be in our hour of trial will probably depend much 
upon our following the Master's example and securing first 
of all that positive conviction that we have the divine approval. 
Let us not then avoid the Gethsemane moment if it 
come to us in the Lord's providence, but let us also with 
strong cryings and tears look up to him who is able to save 
us out of death by the glorious First Resurrection, and let 
us remember that we have an Advocate, we have a helper. 
The Lord is our angel who speaks to us the Father's message, 
telling us that if we abide in his love all will be right 
in the end, and that he is able and willing to bring us off 
conquerors, yea, more than conquerors through his own 



merit. 

"THE SPIRIT IS WILLING, BUT THE FLESH IS WEAK" 

This was our dear Redeemer's comment upon his disciples. 
He appreciated the fact that at heart they were loyal 
to him— he was not unmindful of their forsaking all to be 
his followers, he is not a hard Master, but on the contrary 
ever willing to accept our heart intentions, even where the 
flesh fails to come up to the perfect standard; and doubtless, 
therefore, his words, "Sleep on now, and take your rest," 
were not meant as sarcasm, but in very truth he wished that 
they might get a little rest, refreshment, in view of the ordeals 
of the day approaching. But not long did they rest 
until the trial was upon them. Judas guided a multitude 
seeking for Jesus— not Roman soldiers, but a multitude, a 
rabble of the curious, with certain servants of the High 
Priest, who was also a Judge. These, then, were court officers, 
an impromptu sheriff's posse, that came upon Jesus in 
the garden and arrested him by night, fearing that an arrest 
in daylight would create a disturbance at a time when the 
city was full of visitors to the Passover, and when disturbances 
were rather to be expected, and by the officers of the 
law sought to be carefully avoided. 

Judas either knew the garden as a spot frequented by 
Jesus and the disciples, or had learned at the Supper where 
the company intended to go subsequently. When Satan 
entered into him and he resolved to earn the thirty pieces of 
silver by betraying the Lord, he left the gathered company 
at the Passover Feast and went to the chief priests and 
bargained with them, and now, as the result of that engagement, 
he came forward in advance of the multitude mentioned 
to meet Jesus and to indicate to the soldiers the one 
they wished to apprehend. As he approached he saluted, 
saying, "Hail, Rabbi," and kissed him. The Greek indicates 
that he kissed him repeatedly. Jesus received these expressions 
that belong to love, and knew that they were traitorous, 
yet made no evil retort. Instead he most kindly and 
respectfully said, "Friend, do that for which thou art come." 
The word "friend" does not signify loving friend— it is not 

R3887 : page 349 

from the Greek word philos, beloved, but from hetaire, which 
signifies comrade or partner. 

AVOID THE JUDAS SPIRIT 

Truly every disciple of Christ, realizing that the issue is 
with himself, will desire to follow such a course as will insure 
against his ever becoming a Judas to the Lord and his 
cause. God's foreknowledge that one of the twelve would 
prove a traitor, not only receiving the grace of God in vain, 
but using it in a most villainous manner, was not the cause 
of Judas' fall. The Apostle says, "The Lord knoweth them 
that are his. And, Let every one that nameth the name of 



Christ depart from iniquity." (2 Tim. 2:19.) It is for us to 
determine how the favors of God shall be received and used, 
and God's foreknowledge in no sense of the word influences 
us. 

We have every reason to suppose that Judas at the beginning 
of his career as a disciple was sincere. We may 
safely conclude that the gross deflection of his heart and 
character manifested at last came upon him gradually— that 
it began with the merest suggestion and ended with the 
most awful tragedy. The suggestion was probably along the 
line of selfishness; that he was not sufficiently honored 
amongst the twelve; that our Lord seemed to have a preference 
for Peter, James and John, and thus showed his lack 
of superior knowledge and ability— discernment. Doubtless 
Judas encouraged his own spirit of criticism. Self-complacent, 
he no doubt thought he saw places where Jesus and 
the others erred in judgment, failed to take advantage of 
opportunities, probably said the wrong word at the right 
time, etc., etc. Such a heady spirit, such a critical spirit, 
such a self-satisfied spirit, such a selfish spirit always go 
before a fall. The history of the Church as well as our individual 
experiences attest this. 

When Judas perceived that the cause of Christ was not 
prospering— that Jesus not only did not respond to the suggestions 
of the multitudes here and there that he become a 
king, but that on the contrary his mind turned in another 
direction, anticipating violence from the rulers of the Jews, the 
suggestion probably came to Judas that it was time to begin 
to "feather his own nest," so that when the disruption would 
come he would be one of the party who would gain and not 
lose by his experiences as a disciple. Thus selfishness was in 
control of his mind and led him to pilfering, as it is written, 
"He was a thief, and carried the bag." That is to say, he 
was the treasurer of the little company, and appropriated 
some of the funds to his own personal account. We can even 
suppose that in his perfidy he exonerated his theft with the 
thought that he had been giving his valuable time to the 
cause, and that what he took would not more than reimburse 
him the value thereof. Such is the spirit of selfishness, the 
very reverse of the Spirit of the Lord— the spirit of self-sacrifice 
and whole-souled service to the Truth. Whoever has 
this spirit in any measure has the Judas spirit to that extent, 
and the result will surely be evil whether it amounts to such 
an awful result as that of Judas or not. 

Our Lord declares that his faithful members in the 
world represent him, and that anything done against them is 
done against him. We may be sure, therefore, that the Judas 
spirit of selfishness even today might lead to betrayal of the 
Lord by the betrayal and injury of one of the least of his 
followers. Nor should it surprise us that these representatives 
of the Judas spirit follow his course even to the extent 
of betraying with a kiss, and ofttimes profess great love and 
respect for the members of the body of Christ, whom they 
secretly smite for their personal gain, or in an endeavor to 
gain place or influence or other selfish aggrandizement. Let 
each follower of the Lord apply to himself exactly Judas' 



words, saying, "Lord, is it I?" And let us each examine our 
own hearts to see to what extent anything of this Judas spirit 
might be lurking there, seeking a favorable moment to entrap 
us and destroy us as New Creatures. 



R3887 : page 349 

"DESPISED AND REJECTED OF MEN" 

--MATTHEW 26:57-68.- 

"HE is despised and rejected of men," wrote the Prophet 
Isaiah (53:3), as in the Golden Text of 
this lesson. How strange it all appears to those 
who have come to know the Lord and to appreciate man 
from the standpoint of the divine Word. Nevertheless, as 
we take up the narrative and follow the circumstances as 
though we were there present we perceive that it was difficult 
for the chief actors surrounding our Lord to realize the 
true situation. And turning from these to ourselves in the 
present time we may apply a lesson and realize that we, too, 
are in touch with great and important subjects in the present 
harvest-time; that we, too, probably are so close to great 
events as to be unable to appreciate their true import; that 
we, too, should go very carefully and should continually 
watch and pray lest we also fall into temptation. The 
thought of our own precarious condition will doubtless 
give us sympathy with those whose reprehensible conduct is 
noted in this lesson. 

Our last lesson left Jesus and the disciples at the garden 
gate. There Peter, who had one of the two swords 
previously mentioned, started to use it in defence of his 
Master, at the first blow smiting off the ear of Malchus, one of 
the servants of the High Priest's court. As Jesus said when instructing 
them to bring their swords, and being informed there 
were two swords already in the company, "It is enough," so 
this mere demonstration of the willingness of the disciples to 
defend him was quite sufficient, and the order at once came to 
"Put up thy sword." The opportunity was thus furnished 
for Jesus to heal the ear and so display his gracious magnanimity 
toward his enemies. The disciples apparently 
learned most thoroughly the lesson that he that taketh to 
the sword shall perish by the sword, and hence never afterward 
do we hear of their using force or violence in 
the service of the Lord. How well it would have been had 
all the followers of the Lord learned and applied to themselves 
this same lesson. The neglect of it has stained the 
pages of history to the dishonor of the Lord's teaching and 
been injurious to his real cause, while favorable to nominal 

R3888 : page 350 

Christianity— Churchianity, Christendom and its large crop 
of tares. All of the Lord's people should take to heart this 



message and remember the Lord's word, "Blessed are the 
peacemakers; they shall be called the children of God." 
(Matt. 5:9.) We are never to use the sword, earthly power, 
in seeking to promote the cause of the Master. He has 
power enough, and when the time comes for its exercise he 
will take to himself this great power, and the sword of justice 
will be unsheathed and cause a terrible time of trouble. 
But that will be the due time, and the Lord will then so take 
charge of the affairs of earth that the lessons from that experience 
will prove profitable and not injurious. The only sword 
which the Lord's people now may use is the sword of the 
Spirit, the Word of God, and it is to cleave its way by its 
own sharpness and penetrating power rather than force of 
language and invective, or any manifestation of anger on the 
part of those who use it. On the contrary, they are directed 
to speak the truth in love, that thus the truth may do its 
own work in its own way. 

"ALL FORSOOK HIM AND FLED" 

At first glance it would appear that the disciples were 
very cowardly when they all forsook the Master at the time 
of his arrest. But then we must remember that this was our 
Lord's own suggestion. He said to the officers, "If I am the 
one you seek, let these go their way." They discerned that 
they could be of no use to the Lord after he was in the 
hands of the high priests, who represented the civil court, 
the law of the land, and whom they knew to be prejudiced 
against Jesus. They may have even taken Jesus' words to 
imply a command that they should go their way. Furthermore 
they were perplexed: they had been expecting such 
different results from their adherence to Jesus. When they 
looked for his exaltation he talked about his crucifixion, 
was sad and distressed, and now was arrested. Everything 
was perplexing, disheartening, and they probably went to 
their homes thoroughly discouraged, except Peter and John, 
who followed him afar off. Arriving at the High Priest's 
palace and court-room, Jesus was first led before the aged 
priest Annas and cross-questioned a little, and then sent to 
the court of his son-in-law, the official priest, Caiaphas. 
His presentation before Annas was probably merely a matter 
of courtesy, as apparently it was Caiaphas who had caused 
his arrest and was waiting with certain elders of the Jews to 
examine him preparatory to his trial, with a view to ascertaining 
just what charges they would bring against him. 
(But in the morning it was evidently not thought worth while 
to have a formal trial according to the Law. Hence the unlawful 
night hearing was really the trial. The determination 
to get Pilate to try and execute Jesus was the thought, 
though to Pilate they subsequently implied that they had 
condemned Jesus lawfully.) 

SEEKING FALSE WITNESSES 

We have little reason to doubt that the High Priest and 
elders had considerable knowledge of Jesus, his teachings 



and his mighty works. We are informed that one of his 

last miracles in the vicinity of Jerusalem, the awakening of 

Lazarus from death, had so stirred the Scribes and Pharisees 

that they determined that Jesus must be put to death, because 

they feared that a few more such miracles would thoroughly 

arouse the people on his behalf and thus break their 

control over them. They now had their victim in their 

grasp, arrested without the knowledge of the people and 

without arousing any disturbance. And they still had the 

murderous intention respecting him. It was merely a question 

how they might execute it— not how they might serve the 

ends of justice, but how they might appear to conform to the 

requirements of justice and the Law, of which they were representatives, 

and yet accomplish the villainy, the murder, 

that was in their hearts. Hence we read that they sought 

false witnesses: they did not wish true witnesses, who 

would tell what they knew about the Master, but false witnesses, 

who would misrepresent him, his teachings, etc., 

either ignorantly through misunderstanding him or designedly 

with a view to gaining favor with the officers of the 

court. But they found none. It is certainly to the credit of 

those connected with the court, aside from its chief officers, 

that they neither seriously misunderstood our Lord's teachings 

nor were willing to misrepresent them. Finally, the best 

they could do was to find two witnesses who declared that 

they had heard Jesus say that if the Temple were destroyed 

he would be able to raise it up in three days. Nothing about 

this was false evidence— it was what the majority of those who 

heard probably understood our Lord to mean. It was subsequently, 

under the enlightenment of the holy Spirit, that the 

apostles understood that he "spoke of the temple of his 

body"; hence these two witnesses are not to be blamed as 

false witnesses, though doubtless in their ignorance they 

supposed that the testimony they bore was against Jesus and 

discreditable to him, as showing a spirit of boastfulness and 

a disregard for the greatness and grandeur of the Temple. 

The High Priest, however, realized that he had utterly failed 

of getting any testimony against the Lord. But he did not 

wish this to so appear to all the people present, and hence 

he affected to regard this testimony as very damaging, and 

indignantly questioned Jesus whether or not he heard that 

testimony, and if he had nothing whatever to say in rebuttal 

—was he unable to refute the witness, the testimony? Jesus 

answered nothing. Had the witnesses repeated his 

words exactly there was nothing in them upon which any 

law would condemn him. 

"ART THOU THE CHRIST?" 

Finally, unable to get Jesus to discuss the Temple 
question, and thus possibly say something that could be 
considered incriminating, the High Priest bethought him that 
a leading question put in a most solemn form might succeed 
in getting Jesus to make some admission that would be incriminating. 
The question was, "Tell us whether thou be 
the Christ [Messiah], the Son of God?" Caiaphas probably 



knew that Jesus had not boasted of his Messiahship, 
that rather he had gone quietly about his work, doing good 
and instructing the people, and allowing his works to testify 
that "never man spake like this man," and that he was 
working the works of him that sent him and was therefore 
the Messiah. It was a question, therefore, whether or not 
Jesus would incriminate himself by admitting his Messiahship. 
Had he denied it what recourse for a charge against 
him would have remained? But Jesus did not deny this 
question. To have remained silent even would have been 
to deny himself, denying the truth, denying the High Priest 

R3888 : page 351 

of the nation the knowledge and the corresponding responsibility 
of the hour. It was every way due to the head of the 
nation he should know that Jesus claimed to be the Messiah. 
Our Lord therefore answered, "Thou hast said," that is, I assent 
to what you have said, or, I am the Messiah, the Son of 
God, and I will volunteer further to assure you that by and by, 
hereafter, ye shall see the Son of man sitting on the right 
hand of power and coming in the glories of heaven. 

In this statement, as in nearly all of our Lord's utterances, 
much was said in few words. It was not his intention 
nor would it have been proper to have explained 
the future of the divine plan at that time under those 
circumstances to those people. "The secret of the Lord 
is with them that reverence him, and he will show them his 
covenant." Hence our Lord did not say, as he might 
have said, "You are about to condemn me; I will be crucified 
this day between two thieves; I will rise again on the 
third day; I will ascend to the Father in forty days thereafter; 
I will then send my holy Spirit at Pentecost, and the 
work will be begun of a spiritual kingdom which will find 
the very elect throughout the whole earth. When these are 
found I will come again at my second advent in power and 
great glory, not to be tried by you, but to be your judge and 
to be the King and Ruler of the whole world, and to grant 
the blessings of the Millennial Kingdom to every creature, 
with full opportunity of coming to full knowledge and full 
blessing." We see that what our Lord stated implied that 
he knew all this, but it was not the proper time for its 
declaration. 

What lessons are there for us in connection with these 
facts? One is that when we seek information on any subject 
we should be thoroughly honest, thoroughly just, and not 
seek opportunity to misrepresent another, no matter what 
useful ends we might suppose would be served by such a 
course. To all who are the Lord's people in any sense of 
the word justice must stand out prominently. It is the very 
foundation of God's throne, we read, and surely must be the 
foundation of all character amongst those who are the Lord's 
and who hope ever to come off conquerors in this present 
time. Only the honest, only the just, seem to be influenced 
by the message of the Lord's Word at the present time, and 
those who lose their candor, their honesty, their sincerity, 



seem very certain to lose the Truth also. Let us all beware, 
therefore, of any slackness along this line of justice— toward 
God, toward ourselves, toward our friends, toward our enemies. 
We can not, we must not, be less than just to any, 
though we may be and should be more than just to all— yea, 
loving, generous. 

FEIGNING RIGHTEOUS INDIGNATION 

Hearing Jesus' admission that he was Messiah, the High 
Priest realized that this was the strongest, indeed the only 
complaint he could make against the Lord of anything that 

R3889 : page 351 

had the appearance of evil. Nor was there evil in this, for 
it was the truth; but feigning great piety, great respect for 
God, great reverence for the promise of God respecting Messiah 
—feigning to be thunderstruck with such a claim by 
Jesus, Caiaphas arose, his face full of pretended indignation 
and wrath against such a claim, which he affected to think 
so dishonored God as to be blasphemy, he rent or tore his 
robe as an expression of his pretended righteous indignation. 
He cried out to the people, "This is blasphemy— what further 
need have we of witnesses? Behold, now ye have heard his 
blasphemy. What think ye? What would be the proper 
punishment for such an awful crime as this? How shall we 
deter others from similarly coming forward and claiming to 
be Messiah, the Son of God, healing the sick, giving examples 
of his power in awakening the dead and casting out the devils 
from the people?" The elders, there assembled for the 
very purpose of murdering Jesus, answered, voted, "He is 
worthy of death." Jesus must wait, and they meanwhile 
reviled him— if not the elders and officers, yet with their 
knowledge and without their hindrance— and smote the Lord 
and spat upon him and derided him, and, calling him a 
Prophet, asked him to prove his ability as a Messiah and 
prophet by naming his tormentors. "But as a sheep before 
her shearers is dumb, so he opened not his mouth" to defend 
himself, nor did he use the power invested in him, nor call 
for the twelve legions of angels who he previously declared 
would have been ready to respond for his release. On the 
contrary, he realized that he was but carrying out his covenant 
of sacrifice and submitted himself accordingly, desiring 
that this or whatever was the Father's will might be done in 
him. 

What is the lesson in this for us? We have covenanted 
to learn of him, to follow his example. How do we receive 
the buffetings, the trials, the "contradictions of sinners"? 
Are we similarly patient, long suffering? Do we endure these, 
realizing that nothing could happen to us except by our 
Father's knowledge— nothing that he is not both able and 
willing to overrule for our good? It will not do for us to 
say that if we deserved the evil treatment we could take it 
patiently, for we are to remember the truth of what one of 
the thieves confessed, "This man hath done nothing amiss." 



We cannot say that we have been perfect in all of our dealings 
with those who may despitefully use us and persecute 
us, even though our intentions have been the best, and even 
though we have in some degree rendered good for the evil 
we receive. Let us remember the Apostle's words on this 
line, "For what glory is it, if, when ye be buffeted for your 
faults, ye shall take it patiently? But if when ye do well, 
and suffer for it, ye take it patiently, this is acceptable with 
God. For even hereunto were ye called: because Christ also 
suffered for us, leaving us an example that ye might follow 
in his steps; who did no sin, neither was guile found in his 
mouth; who, when he was reviled, reviled not again; when 
he suffered, he threatened not; but committed himself to him 
who judgeth righteously."— 1 Pet. 2:20,23. 

Let us not only see to it that we are as nearly as possible 
faultless and undeserving of reproaches and buffetings, 
but when these experiences come to us let us remember to 
take them patiently, uncomplainingly, and thus to more and 
more develop and exhibit the character-likeness of our Lord. 
Those who thus do, have the Lord's guarantee that every 
such experience shall prove a blessing in the end. Those 
who, on the contrary, undertake to "battle for their rights," 
show that they either do not understand the nature of the 
covenant they have made to take up the cross, or else that 
they are unwilling to comply with the terms of that covenant. 



page 353 

SEMI-MONTHLY 