Protect Yourself From Parasites!
BY AWAKE! CORRESPONDENT IN HONDURAS
YOU wake up with feelings of nausea. You tire more quickly. Your stomach is slightly swollen. Symptoms of pregnancy? Perhaps. But if you live in a tropical or semitropical part of the world, the problem could very well be some form of intestinal parasite. What are intestinal parasites, and how can you tell if you are playing host to these unwanted guests?
Simply stated, a parasite is a living organism that obtains some benefit from its host, a living organism on or in which it lives. Two types of intestinal parasites are protozoans, which include amoebas, and helminths, or worms. The degree of damage to the host depends on the type and number of parasites present and on the age and health of the host.
The female roundworm, for example, can release some 200,000 eggs a day. However, the eggs must incubate in soil to become viable. The number of roundworms a person carries depends on the number of viable eggs or larvae ingested. Many people play host to a few roundworms without even being aware of it. But a large number of roundworms can cause serious intestinal blockage.
Some common symptoms of intestinal parasites are abdominal pain, nausea, loss of appetite, a swollen abdomen, fatigue, and chronic indigestion, diarrhea, or constipation. Weight loss, restless sleep, itching, wheezing, and fever may also be indications of parasites. Of course, these symptoms can be indicative of a number of illnesses. But parasites can be diagnosed by means of several stool examinations.
A correct diagnosis is essential. For example, if roundworms and some other type of parasite are present, the roundworm needs to be treated first. Why? Because some medicines do not kill the worms but may only irritate them, so that they migrate to other body organs and cause serious damage.
Prevention Better Than Cure
While drug treatment has proved effective in getting rid of parasites, it is better to avoid being infected with them in the first place. So how can you protect yourself from parasites?
Cleanliness is the best protection. Excrement should not be left exposed to the air. Toilet facilities should be a safe distance from the water source. Human waste should not be used as fertilizer. Proper hygiene is essential as well. In addition, don’t let children eat dirt. If one child is found to have parasites, it would be a good idea to have all family members checked.
Care should also be exercised in buying and preparing food. Try to buy products grown in an area that has a reputation for sanitary conditions. Meat should be well cooked in the center. Never eat raw meat. Raw fruit and vegetables should first be thoroughly washed. Be careful not to reuse the water, however, as it may be contaminated.
Drinking water should be brought to a full boil. After the water has cooled, it may be aerated to restore oxygen. Most household filters are not sufficient to eliminate all parasites. The purity of commercially bottled water depends on the degree of sanitary precautions observed in the plant where it is processed.
Traveling or eating out will require additional precautions. Bottled and cartoned drinks are usually safe if served without ice. Since some parasites survive freezing temperatures, ice is only as pure as the water it is made from. You may want to be careful about eating food sold by street vendors. Cut-up pineapple or melon may look inviting, but it is often freshened up by sprinkling water over it—water that may be contaminated. Be careful, but do not become so paranoid that you can no longer enjoy your trip. By taking reasonable precautions, there is much that you can do to protect yourself from parasites.
[Picture on page 14]
Cleanliness is the best protection
[Picture on page 15]
Ice is only as pure as the water it is made from
[Pictures on page 15]
Amoebas and worms are two types of parasites
[Credit Line]
DPDx, the CDC Parasitology Website

