Announcements
● Service overseer and brother handling literature should note the following upcoming campaigns and prepare for these now by ordering supplies early and in sufficient quantity to fill the congregation’s needs. September: Life​—How Did It Get Here? By Evolution or by Creation? The contribution is $2.50. Small size for a contribution of $1.25. October: Subscription for either Awake! or The Watchtower, or both, for a contribution of $4.00 for each one-year subscription. November: New World Translation and True Peace and Security​—How Can You Find It? The contribution is $4.50. December: My Book of Bible Stories for a contribution of $2.50. The new brochure “Look! I Am Making All Things New” will also be offered for a contribution of 30¢.
● The presiding overseer or someone assigned by him should audit the congregation’s accounts on September 1 or as soon as possible thereafter.
● We are pleased to announce that a new Cost List has been prepared. Four copies are being sent to each congregation. They should be distributed to the secretary and the brothers caring for the literature, magazines, and accounts.
● New Publications Available:
New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures​—1985 edition (Deluxe edition), available in black or maroon—​Japanese, Spanish
Holy Spirit​—The Force Behind the Coming New Order!​—Arabic
Life​—How Did It Get Here? By Evolution or by Creation?​—Greek, Korean
Sing Praises to Jehovah (Large size)​—Danish
Survival Into a New Earth​—Indonesian
Watch Tower Publications Index for 1971-1975​—German
Worldwide Security Under the “Prince of Peace”​—Chinese, English, French, Greek, Italian, Spanish
You Can Live Forever in Paradise on Earth (Small size)​—Croatian, Tswana, Yoruba
Enjoy Life on Earth Forever!​—Giryama, Luhya-Bukusu, Nyamwezi, Persian
Jehovah’s Witnesses​—Unitedly Doing God’s Will Worldwide—​Chinese, English, French, Greek, Italian, Spanish
“Look! I Am Making All Things New” (Brochure)​—Afrikaans, Chinese, English, French, Greek, Italian, Korean, Sesotho, Spanish, Tsonga, Tswana, Venda, Xhosa, Zulu
The Divine Name That Will Endure Forever​—Indonesian, Romanian
The Government That Will Bring Paradise​—Arabic, Batak Toba, Bislama, Chamorro, Fijian, Kosraean, Luo, Papiamento, Ponapean, Samoan, Tongan, Trukese, Wallisian
● New Cassette Recordings Available:
Deuteronomy (set of two; congregation and public: $3.00; pioneers: $2.50)​—French
Joshua (set of two; congregation and public: $3.00; pioneers: $2.50)​—French
Kingdom Melodies No. 7 (congregation and public: $2.00; pioneers: $1.75)

