Assist Newer Publishers
1 Jehovah’s people are increasing worldwide. From 1984 to 1985 we had 184,909 more publishers in the ministry. Country after country continues reporting new peaks. Many people are making progress in the truth. Who can help all these new ones to advance to Christian maturity?​—Heb. 6:1.
2 In order to help others, we ourselves must be mature. We should “reflect like mirrors the glory of Jehovah.” (2 Cor. 3:18) We do this in the way we live and by the manner we convey to others the truths we have learned about Jehovah’s purposes. So we need to be qualified ministers.​—2 Cor. 3:5.
ARE YOU PREPARED TO ASSIST?
3 Do you have good study habits that can provide you with knowledge to share with others? Preparing for the meetings also helps to equip you for this fine work. At times all of us appreciate help from others. When Jesus sent his disciples out by twos, they were able to encourage and assist one another in working their territory and speaking to people.​—Luke 10:1.
4 New publishers appreciate kindly assistance. Just knowing that someone is at their side to assist them, if necessary, in the conversation gives them confidence. Usually, the person who studied with a new one helps him to get started in the field ministry. Children should receive training from their parents. But others can help; in fact, the Scriptures encourage us to help one another. (Prov. 27:17; Gal. 6:6) Perhaps you know someone in your Congregation Book Study group who would be happy to have an invitation to go with you in the service from time to time.
5 With a view to assisting others in the congregation, Paul instructed Titus to “keep on speaking what things are fitting.” Following through on this counsel, he then explained the role of both “the aged men” and “the aged women” in building up the congregation. (Titus 2:1-4) New and younger ones are particularly in need of assistance in molding their lives so as to be pleasing to God. As they are built up, they will qualify to instruct others in the truth. Today, as in the first century, mature brothers and sisters alike should take seriously their Scriptural roles to be examples and to assist younger and newer ones in the congregation.
ASSIST YOUR CHILDREN
6 Parents can do much to help their children make progress. Helping them with their first student talks and then seeing them develop their own talks and gain ability to comment freely from the heart and with understanding is truly a satisfying experience. Are you aiding your children in this way? Could they make more progress if you worked with them consistently with those goals in mind? Think of the joy you would have seeing sons and daughters progress in appreciation of the truth and in zeal and ability to share the good news with others.
7 All in the congregation of Jehovah’s people should cooperate with a view to the advancement of each member in the ministry. Some are qualified to be teachers, while others can help in different ways. (Compare 1 Corinthians 12:27, 28.) Perhaps you are one who can be helpful by encouraging and assisting newer publishers.

