Presenting the Good News​—As a Family
1 One of the finest qualities that a parent can implant in his child is the desire to share the Kingdom good news with others. Because of the imperfect inclination of mind and heart from birth onward, children must be taught what is expected of them in order to please God. (Ps. 71:17) Actually, all of us must be taught to ‘seek first the Kingdom’ because, left to ourselves, we invariably seek first our own personal desires.​—Matt. 6:33.
2 Jehovah commanded the Israelites to teach their children his laws and commandments. (Deut. 6:6-9) That same instruction is appropriate for families today in their rendering of sacred service to God. Are you helping to mold the hearts of your children so that they love Jehovah and find delight in sharing in his service? Do you take your children with you in the field service?
EXAMPLES TO COPY
3 The Bible presents excellent examples of youths who became involved in sacred service at a very early age. Samuel started temple service right after being weaned by his mother, his age then being comparable to preschool age today. (1 Sam. 3:1, 15) Jephthah’s young unmarried daughter took up sacred service at the tabernacle in compliance with her father’s vow. (Judg. 11:36-40) Timothy had a fine reputation as a zealous Christian youth. (Acts 16:2) Philip the evangelizer had four daughters who prophesied, indicating that he took the lead in helping his family to serve Jehovah. Do the members of your family make an effort to help one another to serve in the field as disciples of Christ?
4 Parents should arrange for their children to accompany them in the field ministry from a very early age. This is a part of parental responsibility. The father or mother, or both where possible, should regularly train their children in the field service. Setting a good example is one of the finest ways to encourage right goals and cultivate good motives in children. (Prov. 22:6) The Bible says: “One who is good will leave an inheritance to sons of sons.” (Prov. 13:22) Thus, much depends on setting the right example, for certainly we would not want our children to be following a wrong one. Since godly parents are the prime example a youngster imitates, children can be motivated to put Kingdom interests first if the parents take the field ministry seriously and do as much as they reasonably can in the preaching activity.
5 Often even very young ones can give householders a handbill or a tract. They can have a share in the preaching work by perhaps inviting people to the Kingdom Hall, letting them know they are welcome. Many young ones enjoy witnessing with the magazines. They prepare a brief presentation of the latest issues. At the doors, parents could mention that their child is being trained in the ministry and enjoys going along with them. A young publisher could be invited to keep the house-to-house records or read scriptures at the door. He may even be able to comment on the Bible verse being used in the current Topic for Conversation or answer a question or two that the parent might ask in order to isolate a main point. Some children, even at a very young age, can give a fine Scriptural presentation at the doors because of the excellent training their parents have given them. As you can appreciate, having a part makes the work much more enjoyable for our young people. Householders are often prompted to comment on how well such young ones express themselves.
6 Are you taking time to teach your children by working with them in the field service? Are you young publishers appreciating the help you get and showing a willingness to accompany your parents or others in the field service? You can be sure that Jehovah is pleased with you when you do. It is gratifying to see our children apply the things we teach them.​—Prov. 23:15, 24.

