Question Box
● When is a person eligible to receive his own copy of Organized to Accomplish Our Ministry, and how and when should the elders make arrangements for reviewing the questions with those desiring to be baptized?
Information on this subject is given on pages 173-5 of the Our Ministry book, under “Note to Congregation Elders.” There it is explained that when a person has conformed his life to Jehovah’s righteous standards, is a regular meeting attender, and is having a meaningful share in the field service as an approved associate, he may express to one of the elders his desire to be baptized and at that time receive a personal copy of Organized to Accomplish Our Ministry.​—See also pages 97-100 regarding “approved associate.”
Upon receiving the book, the approved associate should begin reviewing the questions for baptismal candidates starting on page 175. He should endeavor to discern the application of the quoted and cited scriptures. After he has had opportunity to go over the designated information, some of the elders will review the questions and answers with him. The presiding overseer makes arrangements for this.
Preparation for baptism should not be rushed. Therefore, the individual should inform the elders well in advance of the time he plans to get baptized. It is not necessary for the elders to wait until an assembly has been announced before going over the questions with those who are preparing for baptism. Those conducting Bible studies should be alert to the spiritual progress of their students, discern when they are approaching dedication, and let them know how to make arrangements for baptism.
Elders reviewing the questions with a person desiring to be baptized may decide that it would be advisable for him to make further spiritual advancement before taking this important step. Perhaps he needs to take in more knowledge or become more adept at expressing his faith to others. (1 Pet. 3:15) It may be that he should gain additional experience in the field ministry. Or it could be found that he really does not yet qualify for baptism. (See Acts 8:36.) In each case, the elders should outline what further progress is needed and, if necessary, arrange for whatever personal assistance may be required to help the person to qualify later.

