Young People, Be Progressive in the Ministry
1 “Praise Jehovah . . . , you young men and also you virgins, you old men together with boys.” (Ps. 148:7, 12) Young people can bring praise to Jehovah by making the truth their own. This means applying Christian principles in their lives, participating in congregation meetings, and having a full share in field service. They should come to do these things because they want to, not just because their parents or friends expect it of them.
2 Choosing the Christian way of life starts with taking in knowledge of God. This can lead to a personal relationship with Jehovah. (Ps. 71:5) When a person dedicates himself to God to serve him for the rest of his life and is baptized, a friendship with God is established. Such a friendship with God, where young ones are concerned, enables them to “flee from the desires incidental to youth,” avoiding unnecessary worldly associations and attitudes. (2 Tim. 2:22) Setting theocratic goals, such as pioneering, Bethel, or missionary service, and then working toward them will strengthen young and old, drawing them closer to Jehovah.​—Prov. 16:3.
THINGS YOUNG PEOPLE CAN DO
3 We rejoice to see young ones who are conscious of their spiritual need and who enjoy attending and sharing in the congregation meetings. (Matt. 5:3, 6) Christian youths, you can encourage others in the congregation by regularly offering upbuilding comments during the meetings. By cultivating warm relationships with all age groups in the congregation, you will be able to enjoy upbuilding association with all before and after the meetings.​—1 Tim. 4:12; compare Proverbs 18:1.
4 Jehovah also uses young people to have the good news preached. (Matt 21:16) Many have found that by sharing in preaching activity on a weekly basis, they have come to enjoy it more and more. Some take advantage of their opportunities at school to speak about Jehovah’s purposes. (Ps. 71:17; 145:21) Certainly such activity makes the heart of Jehovah glad.
5 You young people, like others in the Christian congregation, be progressive in your spiritual development. By applying yourselves constantly to improve your theocratic activity, you make the truth your own. Thus you can be assured of Jehovah’s blessing.​—Phil. 3:16; 2 Tim. 2:15.

