2004 “Walk With God” District Convention of Jehovah’s Witnesses
1 What makes our annual district conventions special for you? Upbuilding talks and a drama prepared for us by “the faithful and discreet slave”? (Matt. 24:45-47) New publications containing timely spiritual nourishment? Brothers and sisters presenting their experiences of how the Bible has changed their lives for the better? Reports of how the Kingdom-preaching work is progressing in other lands? Association with fellow believers of all ages? Yes, we look forward to our conventions with keen anticipation for these and many other reasons!
2 Attend All Three Days: Through Moses, Jehovah commanded: “Congregate the people . . . in order that they may listen and in order that they may learn.” (Deut. 31:12) Through the faithful and discreet slave class, Jehovah has prepared a special program of education for us on each day of our convention. Since he is teaching us to ‘benefit ourselves,’ we want to be present for all of his instruction. (Isa. 48:17) If you need to request time off from your employer, pray to Jehovah and make your request, following Nehemiah’s courageous example. (Neh. 1:11; 2:4) Also, it would be loving to inform unbelieving family members of your convention plans as soon as possible.
3 Accommodations: For your convenience, rooming arrangements have already been made in each convention city. A Recommended Lodging List of available hotels will be posted on your congregation’s information board after this insert is considered at the Service Meeting. The local brothers assisting the branch office are able to arrange these reduced hotel rates because of your fine cooperation. Therefore, please reserve rooms only at hotels on the list, and agree to pay only the rates shown. This will help toward the goal of obtaining high-quality hotels near the convention site at the best rates possible each year. Hotels slightly farther from the convention site are also very good. Before you call to make your reservation, review the points in the box “How You Can Support the Rooming Arrangements,” on page 4. When you call, follow the steps in the box “What Is the Best Way to Reserve a Hotel Room?”
4 Special Needs: The apostle Paul reminded the congregations in Galatia to “work what is good toward all, but especially toward those related to [them] in the faith.” (Gal. 6:10) Elderly brothers and sisters, the infirm, single parents, or those in full-time service may not ask for your help, but they may have challenges to overcome in order to attend the convention. Are you in a position to “work what is good” toward them and offer some assistance? Christian relatives and the elders should particularly be aware of the circumstances of such ones.
5 If a Special Needs Room Request form is submitted by a publisher, the Congregation Service Committee will review it, using the guidelines on the form. They should consider whether the need can be cared for locally. This provision is only for publishers in good standing, along with their well-behaved children. If the Rooming Department has any questions regarding a special needs request, they will contact the congregation secretary.
6 Attending Another Convention: Your circumstances may require that you attend a convention other than the one to which your congregation is assigned. If you need information about another convention, please see your congregation secretary. The reverse side of the Special Needs Room Request form has the current year’s conventions in the United States and Canada in date order, and the address for each convention headquarters is provided. Mail your request to the appropriate address, and include a self-addressed, stamped envelope. If two or more conventions are held in the city, be sure your request indicates the dates of the convention you wish to attend. The Rooming Department for that convention will send you their most recent Recommended Lodging List.
7 At a convention of Jehovah’s people held nearly 2,500 years ago, Ezra and his fellow Levites read from God’s Word and explained it to the gathered people. The result? Nehemiah 8:12 tells us that “all the people went away to . . . carry on a great rejoicing, for they had understood the words that had been made known to them.” Are we not grateful that the anointed slave class, like Ezra and the Levites, uses God’s Word, explains it, and shows us how to apply it in our lives? In so doing, that slave reflects Jehovah’s genuine love and concern for all His people. Make it your resolve not to miss a day of the “Walk With God” District Convention!
[Box on page 3]
Program Times
Friday and Saturday
9:30 a.m. - 5:10 p.m.
      Sunday
9:30 a.m. - 4:05 p.m.
[Box on page 4]
How You Can Support the Rooming Arrangements
▪ Stay only in hotels on this year’s Recommended Lodging List. Do not call hotels that are not on the list and ask if they have a rate for our convention. Hotels that are not on the list will often say they have a rate for Jehovah’s Witnesses.
▪ To comply with fire safety laws, plan on a maximum of four persons in each room, including children, unless the list indicates otherwise under the heading “Adults.”
▪ If no rooms are available after calling all the hotels on the list or if you have a problem with a hotel, inform your congregation secretary. He should contact your convention’s Rooming Department, using the information at the top of the list. Please wait for a revised list to be received for your convention, rather than calling a hotel that is not on the list.
▪ Reserve only the rooms you will actually use.
▪ To guarantee your reservation, you must send a deposit to the hotel for each room reserved. Otherwise, the hotel can offer your room to someone else.
▪ Keep your first reservation.
▪ The congregation secretary may make a copy of the Recommended Lodging List for each book study overseer to share with his group only if the congregation has its two-day circuit assembly the week the convention assignment letter is read. No copies of the list are to be made for individual publishers.
[Box on page 4]
What Is the Best Way to Reserve a Hotel Room?
 1. Call hotels during regular business hours, using the telephone numbers on the Recommended Lodging List.
 2. Inform the hotel that you are attending the convention of Jehovah’s Witnesses.
 3. Provide the dates you will check in and check out of the hotel.
 4. If no more rooms are available, call another hotel on the list.
 5. Be sure that you are receiving the room rate shown on the list. Do not accept a higher rate.
 6. Make your reservation, and ask for a confirmation number.
 7. Make your deposit by credit card, check, or money order. Never send cash. If deposit is made by check or money order, write the confirmation number on the front. Mail within ten days.

