Help Those “Rightly Disposed”
 1. Who is Jehovah gathering to himself in our day?
1 Each person has a disposition that is rooted in his figurative heart. (Matt. 12:35) The Bible speaks of one whose “heart is disposed to fight.” (Ps. 55:21) Some are “disposed to rage.” (Prov. 29:22) But there are also those who are “rightly disposed for everlasting life.” (Acts 13:48) In our day, Jehovah is gathering to himself such rightly disposed ones. (Hag. 2:7) How can we help them to become worshipers of Jehovah?
 2. What is involved in fulfilling our commission to make disciples?
2 Return Conscientiously: Having the right view of making return visits is vital in order for us to fulfill our commission to make disciples. (Matt. 28:19, 20) Are we quick to follow up on the interest we find? Do we call again on all who accept literature or who express interest in the good news? Do we persist in our efforts to help them grow spiritually? Since lives are involved, we should seek to cultivate all the interest that we find.
 3. What should we do after conversing with someone in the ministry?
3 While a conversation with an interested person is still fresh in mind, take a moment to write down his name and address. Note the subject discussed, any scriptures that were read, and what literature was placed. Thereafter, make it a point to return as soon as possible.
 4. How can we make effective return visits?
4 Making a Return Visit: When you are making a return visit, it is helpful to be warm and friendly and to show sincere personal interest in the householder. Keep the discussion simple and Scriptural. Prepare an appealing Bible subject to discuss, and at the conclusion of the call, raise a question that can be answered on the next visit. It is best to avoid needlessly taking issue with unscriptural views that the householder may express. Strive to build on things that you have in common.​—Col. 4:6.
 5. What effort did one pioneer put forth, and with what results?
5 Making return visits requires effort, but the rewards are satisfying. A pioneer in Japan set a goal to make more return visits every month. He began keeping a record of all those he met in the house-to-house work, and then within seven days, he called on them again. He thoroughly prepared what he would say and carried out his service with complete confidence in the message he bore. On one of his calls, he was able to start a study with a person who had said: “I’ve always turned you people away. It’s the first time I’ve ever listened.” The pioneer’s loving persistence brought results. By month’s end he was reporting ten Bible studies.
 6. Why must we persist in making return visits?
6 People’s circumstances are constantly changing. (1 Cor. 7:31) It often takes several attempts to find an interested person at home again. By our conscientiously making return visits, we can help those who are rightly disposed to get on the road to everlasting life.​—Matt. 7:13, 14.

