R356 : page 1 

VOL. III. 

PITTSBURGH, PA., JUNE, 1882. 

NO. 12. 



page 1 

ZION'S 

Watch Tower 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S 
PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED MONTHLY. 101 Fifth Ave., PITTSBURGH, PA. 
C. T. RUSSELL, Editor and Publisher. 



The Editor recognizes a responsibility to the Master, relative to 
what shall appear in these columns, which he can not and does not 
cast aside; yet he should not be understood as endorsing every 
expression of correspondents, or of articles selected from other 
periodicals. 



TERMS OF SUBSCRIPTION. 

TERMS : —Fifty cents a year, postage prepaid. You may send 
paper-money or three cent stamps to the amount of two dollars by 
mail at our risk. Larger amounts by Check, P.O. Money Order or 
Registered Letter, payable to C. T. RUSSELL. 



FOREIGN TERMS. 

Foreign Postage being higher, our terms to foreign subscribers will 
be 65 cents a year. Please send us no foreign money or postage 
stamps as we can make no use of them. Remittances may be made 
by Postal Money Orders. 

N.B.-This paper will be sent free to any of the Lord's poor who 
will send a card yearly requesting it. 



R356 : page 1 

VIEW FROM THE TOWER. 

The view is encouraging. The realization of our hopes seems to 
draw on apace with the gloom and perplexity of earth. Statesmen 
are alarmed at the fearlessness of anarchists. The representatives of 
Great Britain have been butchered in daylight in Ireland. In Russia 
the Nihilists are so bold and so numerous that the coronation of the 
present Czar has been postponed until now, and only with the 
greatest caution, are the arrangements now being made. Two 
attempts on the Czar's life have already been discovered and 
frustrated, one being to cause an explosion by use of electricity, and 
another prepared caps filled with explosives to be worn by Nihilists 
and thrown at the Czar during applause. The persecution of the 
Jews still continues in Russia and they are fleeing the country. The 
government has neglected to interfere boldly, probably because it 
hopes to thus appease the restless element of the population. 

Prussia which only a few years ago expelled the Bishops of Papacy, 
now feels the restlessness of socialism among her people, and is 
receiving back the Church of Rome with open arms, hoping thereby 
to maintain a stronger hold upon the people. 

France is threatened with serious difficulties through strikes- 
capital and labor coming more into conflict than heretofore. 

In this land, free from the extravagance and oppression of kings, 
there is no little trouble and perplexity. Capital and Labor are daily 
arraying themselves against each other more decidedly. Men of low 
estate, view with suspicion the rapid growth of large corporations 
and monopolies. Strikes are the order of the day and capitalists are 
sore distressed. Used to large incomes and intent on wealth and 
luxury, they feel that they cannot yield the laborer a larger share of 
the profits. Workmen covet a larger share of luxury and are 
groaning for what they cannot get until "Gentile Times" have ended 
and the kingdom of Christ is established in the earth. Yes, "the 
whole creation groaneth and travaileth in pain together". .."waiting 
for the manifestation of the sons of God" -waiting until the "little 
flock" is glorified and shall deliver them from the bondage of sin 
and death, into the liberty of sons of God. (Rom. 8:19-22.) 

We can sympathize with all these troubled classes-with kings in 
their supposed divine right to rule; with the restless peoples in their 
desires for liberty; with capitalists in their desires to have all the 
advantages which their wealth gives, and in their endeavor to 
maintain a superior social standing; and we can sympathize with the 
mechanic in his belief that all men are created free and with equal 
rights to the blessings of heaven; we can but agree to his logic also, 
that to obtain his rights from the world, he must insist on them. 

But while selfishness is the controlling motive among men, their 
different interests must necessarily conflict; and not until the 



kingdom of God is established can the rights of men be properly 
adjusted. 

The Church-both Papal and Protestant -is largely controlled by the 
influence of governments and wealthy men. It will rapidly become 
the tool and mouthpiece of these, and they all will go down 
together, fighting against God and liberty. (Rev. 19:19-20.) 

When these things now beginning to come to pass were published 
by us in 1876, men scoffed and asked if we were prophets. We 
answered no, but that God's Word as a telescope showed all these 
things and more, to the eye of faith. At the same time we showed 
that God's special favor was due to pass away from the nominal 

R357 : page 1 

Gospel Church though it would still continue to really consecrated 
individuals; and that the favor would return again in some form to 
the Jew in 1878 as foretold by Paul and the Prophets. (Rom. 11:25, 
Jer. 16:13,14.) At God's appointed time a Jew happened to be 
Premier of England; the famous Berlin conference happened to take 
place in that very year; and it happened that by that conference, 
Palestine was put under the protection of Great Britain; and since 
then it has been free to the Jew so that he may be a land-owner. 
Thus in the very year, it happened (?) that privileges and favors 
came to the Jew which he had not enjoyed for over 1800 years. 
Now they are being persecuted and driven out by various peoples, 
and many will go and are going to Palestine. 

Yet bear in mind, "Gentile Times" do not fully end as scripturally 
shown until 1914 A.D.; consequently their overthrow may be less 
rapid than would now seem probable. The trouble may be expected 
as birth pangs to a mother— each succeeding one more severe until 
full deliverance. This is Paul's illustration of it. (1 Thes. 5:3) It is in 
fact the birth of a new era or age; and its birth involves pain and 
death to the present age and its corrupt systems and customs. 

Let us remember, too, the words of Jesus, that "Jerusalem shall be 
trodden down of the Gentiles, until the times of the Gentiles be 
fulfilled. " Hence, if Gentile Times end in 1914, the Jews will not 
have an independent national existence before then. This furnishes 
ample time for their regathering and Jerusalem's rebuilding on her 
old heaps. 

As it has always been, so now the teachings of God's Word are not 
recognized even when thus strikingly fulfilled, except by those 
"taught of God." How true today- "Who hath believed our report 
(doctrine-teaching) and to whom is the arm (power) of the Lord 
revealed?" Only to a few-a little flock-his special favored friends, 
have the plans of the Great Architect been shown. 

As we look inward at the progress of truth, we find much to 
encourage and strengthen us. Among the hundreds of letters 
recently received one from the West tells how, from a torn fragment 
of ZION'S WATCH TOWER found wrapping a store parcel, 



nourishment and strength was gained, and an appetite for more 
produced-how by and by a letter from a friend in Massachusetts 
mentioned the same and gave our address. Now, they in turn have 
some to loan to neighbors. So it seems with all, who now hear the 
"glad tidings." Just as with the early church, all love to tell the 
story. It so warms and fills our own hearts that it becomes our 
greatest privilege and chief employ to— 

Tell the whole world the blessed tidings, 
Speak of the time of rest that nears; 
Tell the oppressed of every nation, 
Jubilee lasts a thousand years. 

It is wonderful, too, how ripe some seem to be for the message, by 
their promptness and obedience quite putting to shame some who 
have had far more instruction and privilege. We recall two 
instances of this sort reporting this month, the prompt obedience of 
whom, we can only attribute to full consecration to GOD. One 
brother in Texas, a Steward and Class-Leader in the M.E. Church, 
says he received and read "Food" very carefully. He felt convinced 
as to his duty, and had already resigned his connection with the 
church and become a free man in Christ, stepping out from the 
barriers of creeds to study the Word of God unbiased by human 
traditions. 

The other was a minister in the M.E. Church: He writes that he had 
received from some one, and read, the December and January 
numbers of the WATCH TOWER. Careful study of those papers 
and his Bible, convinced him that "the dear old Methodist Church is 
a part of the 'Image of the Beast;'" and while he loved it much, he 
loved Christ Jesus more and must obey God rather than men. He 
has cancelled his obligations to the M.E. Church and engaged as a 
servant (minister) of the Church "whose names are written in 
heaven." He says that Satan suggested that he retain his 
"parchment" as evidence of authority and right as a minister, but he 
gained the victory and concluded that a commission from the Lord 
was of superior value. 

Our efforts being mainly directed to the feeding of the sheep and 
lambs (those already in the fold— starving) we seldom learn of the 
effects of this "strong meat" upon the worldly. Three notable cases 
we might mention: One wrote to us from England, how, having lost 
all confidence in religious professors, he had become a scoffer and 
was on the downward grade. He received a copy of "Food," and 
became enraptured with the real beauties of God's character and 
plan. He donated $25 to the tract fund and has given and loaned 
many of the pamphlets to others where he feels sure they will do 
good. Two of other cases report this month; one had been, he 
writes, profane and unbelieving but the reading of "Food" had been 
greatly blessed to him and he will henceforth be a reformed man. 
We make an extract from the letter of the other. 



Reports from the brethren laboring in a public way, are 
encouraging. Bro. Sunderlin reports interesting meetings near 
Arlington, N.Y. Bros. Leigh and Spears have started on a trip down 
the Ohio river in a small boat belonging to the latter. They purpose 
(D.V.) to visit all the river towns between here and Cincinnati or St. 
Louis, spending about a week at each. This will require all summer 
or longer. The Lord bless them and their hearers, as also all the 
brethren holding forth the word of life-the glad tidings of great joy. 
We subjoin extracts from a few letters. 



NOTTINGHAM, ENG., April 13, 1882. 

MY DEAR SIR:— I should esteem it a favor if you would send me a 
dozen copies of "Food for Thinking Christians" and about the same 
number of "Tabernacle Teachings." Eternity alone will reveal the 
good these books are doing, and several of my friends here are 
hungering for more information upon these great themes. 

I lend my WATCH TOWER every 

R357 : page 2 

month, and look eagerly for each new one. May God continue to 
bless the work. Yours in Him, 

. (A Minister.) 



MULHOLLON, N.Y. 

DEAR BROTHER:-I received the book safely. I am very glad to 
say that I am very much interested in the truth, and I feel thankful 
that it has been placed within my reach. I call you brethren because 
I feel you are such. These glorious teachings have brought me from 
the broad road to destruction and have placed me on the road that 
leads to life. I have been for a few years back a poor drunkard and a 
profane swearer, till about a year and a half ago, when, through 
God's loving kindness Bro. Keith came here and declared the 
glorious teachings of Gods Word. And I thank God that I now have 
been begotten of the spirit; and I am willing to present this life and 
this body a living sacrifice to God. I am willing to give my all for 
Jesus and the glad tidings. I thank God that I am what I am and he 
is helping me to understand His Word. 

With kind wishes, your brother, 
page 2 
ROSEVILLE, ILL. 



MY DEAR BROTHER:-I sincerely thank you for advice and 
encouragement in your last letter. My deepest gratitude, however, I 
owe to our Heavenly Father, for I begin to realize how he uses his 
agencies in the manifestation of his love. If Jesus condescends to 
recognize so unworthy an object as me, I will rejoice and continue 
to strive, so to run, as to obtain the prize of the high calling. 

The "Tabernacle Tract" and January number of ZION'S WATCH 
TOWER were rich feasts of spiritual food to my hungry soul. My 
feelings can best be described by the language of the two Apostles, 
who unknowingly had talked with Jesus, on their way to Emmaus 
after his resurrection: "Did not our hearts burn within us." Oh what 
joy to the Christians' heart, is the hope that we shall reign with 
Jesus evermore. All the Tracts and papers you sent me I have tried 
to loan judiciously. The Tabernacle tract and January number of 
TOWER are so excellent, I want you to send me some of each; also 
about ten copies more of "Food." Enclosed find ($10.00) ten dollars 
to be added to the Tract Fund. May the Lord greatly magnify your 
efforts for good, and lead all his children to an action of duty, 
through the spirit of love and obedience. Hoping and striving for 
increased light and knowledge of the Scriptures and to be aided by 
your efforts, I remain your brother, through fellowship in the Spirit. 



R357 : page 2 

The colored minister who desired a Diaglott has been supplied. 
Four persons sent pay for him. We like this; it is the right spirit. As 
requested, the overplus was added to the tract fund. 



R357 : page 2 

"CHANGE YOUR MINDS." 

MATT. 3:2. 

(See Young's Concordance under word repent.) 

Stability of character and purpose are qualities which we all admire. 
We like the man upon whom we can depend. To know that a man is 
what is commonly termed fickle, is to make us distrustful; for the 
course which he will pursue to-day, is not an index of what he will 
be or do tomorrow. With such a man we cannot do business with 
pleasure, and so will have no more to do with him than we are 
obliged to. Of such a man it is said, "He has no mind of his own," 
he has no settled character; he is driven hither and thither by 
circumstances, so takes no root and withers away. Such a man has 
not much influence, because people do not know where to find him, 
nor what to expect of him. 

Again, the man who never changes is a hard man to deal with; you 
know where to find him always, to be sure; he is fixed; he has a 
purpose of his own, and if it is not like yours, the reason, in his 



mind, is, that yours is good for nothing. You need not undertake to 
move him, he is settled, he is established, he has become fossilized. 
The world moves on and leaves him behind. You may go to the 
spot where you left him, though it be a decade after, and there you 
will find him glorying in his unchangeable nature. "He is wise in 
his own conceit." Not willing to "receive instruction," he is not 
bothered with having to change his mind; such a man will have to 
learn by some other mode than precept. Let us be glad that our 
Heavenly Father has provided more than one mode of instruction. 

Now, both these characters are wrong, they are extremes, and it is 
hard to tell which is the most to be shunned; perhaps the latter, for 
he may be always wrong, while the former will be right at least part 
of the time; but a not over sanguine temperament would better 
comport with limited knowledge, and a sufficient 

R358 : page 2 

amount of firmness would meet and repel evil assault. 

Change of mind is a necessary operation with all finite creatures, so 
far as we know, because their knowledge is imperfect. An 
important part of man's work in this world should be, at proper 
times, to change his mind. Show us a man who never changes his 
mind, and we will show you a man who never makes any additions 
to his knowledge, or else is a bigot, which is usually about the 
same. 

There is but one character in the universe who never changes his 
mind, i.e., the Almighty, Allwise, and Eternal God. Because his 
knowledge is perfect he need not change his mind, or perhaps more 
properly, he need not change. "But," says some one, "the Bible says 
he repented because he had made man. How is that?" Though that 
is a little irrelevant, we will stop a moment to consider it, as it is 
often brought up by skeptics. How could God's change of conduct 
toward man be expressed to him, in the childhood of the race, in 
other and better language? Some have said in explanation that it 
meant that he changed his purpose; but this answer was not 
satisfactory for the reason that it did not change the meaning, but 
only the word. 

Let us use an illustration; our Heavenly Father provides them in 
abundance. Suppose that a little boy having no knowledge of 
horticulture should see his father planting apple-seeds, and after 
awhile should see him trans-planting the young trees; he might 
inquire, Father, what made you plant your apple-seeds there? Why 
didn't you plant them where you wanted them to remain? The father 
might reply, I did want them there then, but now I do not; I have 
changed my mind; now I want them to stand where they will have 
more room, etc. It would be difficult to explain to the child-mind 
the broad plan of the father, but he can be made to see clearly that 
there has been a change. In this illustration the father changed one 
part of his plan as it related to another part of the same plan, i.e., 
there was, to one not understanding his plan, an apparent change of 



purpose, and one, too, not in harmony with the original design, and 
yet it was all in the mind and design of the father from the first. So 
with our Heavenly Father. He communicates with us according to 
our understanding, and if our hearts were right, we should not so 
readily misunderstand him. He speaks of things as they seem to us, 
and not always as they really are, and we do the same, and think it 
all right enough when we do it. He speaks to us of the sun's rising 
and setting, and we do too, whereas we know that it is only 
apparent; let us reason the same with this word repent, and we shall 
have no further trouble. So we increase in knowledge and grace, we 
shall understand him better, and in just the proportion that we grow 
in knowledge, we change our minds, or "repent"; at least that is 
what we should do. By this we do not wish to be understood as 
saying that we should ignore all that we have passed over, or that a 
change of mind involves a condemnation of all our former 
opinions, but that our minds should change something as the trees 
change from small to large, from a few to many branches, and from 
blossom to fruit; and in doing this we gradually put away the 
former things; for the tree had to pass through its sappling 
condition, before it could extend its far-reaching branches. So we 
pass through the transitions of mind and character. 

There are special seasons when important changes should take 
place both in the physical and moral world. This time in which John 
was speaking was one of those seasons. The fullness of time had 
come and God had sent his Son into the world to realize to the 
world the signification of the "types and shadows" of the Jewish 
ceremonial. For many centuries these shadows had been indicating 
"good things to come"; but now they were to be lost in the glory of 
the brighter and better day. 

He whom they pointed to was present. The passover lamb was to be 
superseded by the lamb of God, of whom the former was but the 
figure. 

At the time John made the proclamation above referred to, the 
Jewish church were more strict to observe every particular of the 
ceremonial law than perhaps at any time in their history; they were 
scrupulous to pay tithe of mint and anise, plants like or identical 
with our dill and caraway; when we consider that their tithe was a 
tenth part, we can see how nice they were to observe the letter of 
the law where it did not so directly affect the heart and life. They 
could be strictly scrupulous in regard to the slightest ritual 
performances, while having but little remorse for the grossest 
immoralities. It is not at all likely that they understood the deep 
spiritual import of most of the forms that Paul calls "shadows of 
good things to come. " At this juncture John makes his appearance 
and exhorts them to "repent (change their minds; see Young's 
Concordance, and Emphatic Diaglott, reform) because the royal 
majesty of the heavens has approached." In these forms, or in the 
observance of them, they thought they had eternal life; (John 5:39) 
but now he who was to bring light and immortality to light had 



come; now John had given them more definite instruction upon 
these weighty matters, and with increase of knowledge there should 
be a corresponding change of mind, so he makes the announcement 
in accordance with the facts. 

We think the nominal Christian church of to-day occupies, in many 
respects, a similar position; each different section or sect being very 
strict to observe the letter of their law, and thinking that in them 
they have eternal life; but that law, or those laws, instead of being 
God's requirements, are the formulated laws of the leaders of the 
various societies, supposed to be based upon God's law or word; 
they have built upon this foundation, but with hay, wood, and 
stubble. (1 Cor. 3:12.) 

Now some seem to think when you speak to them about this matter, 
that it is of no particular consequence if they are only upon the right 
foundation. Jesus showed that it was important to be founded upon 
a rock (Matt. 7:24,25), and Paul shows that it is important also to 
build with good material. Some seem to think that if they are only 
saved, that is enough, but would not reason so about their earthly 
matters; though they might think it fortunate to escape from their 
burning house, yet they would think it better to have a house that 
would not have taken fire; thus showing that "the children of this 
world are wiser in their GENERATION. " If a member of any one 
of these societies should be arraigned for misdemeanor, the law of 
that society ("Discipline," "Regulations," or whatever) is the 
standard by which the misdemeanor is measured and weighed. 

During the time of the church's wanderings, through the dark ages, 
while walking in adulterous union with the world, the light that was 
in it "became darkness," and how great was that darkness. Man 
came to use the word of God as a medium of worldly gain, and 
when once begun, there seemed to be no limit to which the enemy 
would lead in distorting the truth, for the truth had to be the means 
of giving acceptability to the counterfeit. So now the nominal 
Christian church is in a condition strikingly similar to that of the 
Jewish church then, i.e., "rich and increased in goods, and having 
need of nothing," according to their opinion, but as the Lord sees, 
"poor and blind and naked, " and their doing similar to that 
described in Mai. 1:13. 

So the proclamation of John comes with equal if not greater force" : 
"change your minds," "reform because the royal majesty of the 
heavens has approached. " 

But, says some one, what has our church to repent of? Do we not 
teach that men must repent of their sins to be saved? Yes, but what 
idea do you give them of salvation, and of their friends who do not 
obtain the salvation which they are told about? Is not the salvation 
which you tell them of, embraced in the idea of songs of praise to 
God, and word- worship and glorification of his wondrous majesty, 
and possibly some idea of learning more of his glorious attributes? 
All this is included in the "great salvation," but it is a meagre 



representation of it from the Bible standpoint as we (we say it 
humbly) view it. Then those who do not attain to this salvation, it is 
said, God will miserably torment without end of duration. 

Now we cry aloud that the effulgent glory shed abroad by the 
approach of "the royal majesty of the heavens," throws such light 
upon his word, that we repent, and call upon all who hold such 
ideas of God and salvation to "change their minds" and actions 
accordingly. 

J. C. SUNDERLIN. 

[TO BE CONTINUED.] 



R358 : page 3 



OUR PATH TO GLORY. 



page 3 



We journey through a desert drear and wild, 
Yet are our hearts by such sweet thoughts beguiled 
Of Him on whom we lean, our strength and stay, 
We scarcely note the sorrows of the way. 

Thoughts of his glory— on the prize we gaze, 
And in it see the hope of coming days; 
Beacon of hope, which, lifted up on high, 
Illumes with heavenly light the tear-dimm'd eye. 



Thoughts of our gathering-of that joyful day, 
In patient hope we tread the narrow way; 
The dawn draws nigh, and from the watch-tower see 
Millennial day dawn-and the shadows flee. 

Thus while we journey on, our Lord to greet, 
Our thoughts and meditations are so sweet 
Of Him on whom we lean, our strength and stay, 
We scarcely note the sorrows of the way. 

B 



R359 : page 3 

THE SEVEN CHURCHES. 

THE MESSAGE TO PERGAMOS. 

"And to the messenger of the Assembly at Pergamos write." Rev. 
2:12. 

Per is an article of emphasis, frequently equivalent to very. Ga or 
gee [g hard] is earthy. Thus the name Perga [Acts 13:13] very 



earthy. Pergamos means earthy height or elevation. It was the name 
given to the citadel of Troy. 

The Pergamos of John's day, and to which literally the message is 
addressed, was a celebrated city of the Roman province of Asia. 
Here parchment was first perfected. It had a library of 200,000 
volumes; also a famous temple of Esculapius, the mythological 
deity who presided over medicine. 

The Pergamos period dates from the time that Constantine 
professedly embraced Christianity; which, being thus popularized, 
soon became the nominal religion of the people. The church of this 
period was exceedingly exalted, but only from an earthly point of 
view; she was "exalted in the earth." 

Persecution having ceased, the policy of the Emperor became the 
policy of both priests and people; and the nominal Christian church 
soon filled with the popular time-serving crowd. Masheim tells us 
that while the great zeal of many good men, the purity of their lives, 
the many translations and expositions of the Scriptures made at this 
time, and the intrinsic beauty and value of Christianity as contrasted 
with Paganism must have had their influence; yet it is evident that a 
desire to please the great emperor and his successors, and to be on 
the popular side, were the chief reasons for the sudden and great 
increase of the nominal church. 

Many pagan philosophers finding that it would be policy to join the 
ranks of the rising religion, set about paving an easy way to it by 
trying to discover correspondencies between Christianity and 
Paganism, and so to blend the two together. They succeeded only 
too well. Many sought "to form to themselves a middle kind of 
religion, between the ancient theology and the new doctrine that 
was now propagated in the empire; and they persuaded themselves 
that the same truths which Christ taught had been for a long time 
concealed by the priests of the gods under the veil of ceremonies, 
fables, and allegorical representations." [Mosheim.] As the old 
theology had a number of chief gods, with many demi-gods of both 
sexes, the Pago-Christians [if we may coin a word] set themselves 
to reconstruct the list for the new theology. At this time, therefore, 
the doctrine of three Gods was invented -God the Father, God the 
Son, and God the Holy Ghost. Also the Goddess Mary. To make 
the list as respectable in numbers as the long line of pagan deities, 
they canonized the dead apostles and an unlimited number of 
martyrs, angels, etc., real or imaginary. 

Mosheim says of this period: "The public processions and 
supplications by which the Pagans endeavored to appease their 
gods, were now adopted into the Christian worship, and celebrated 
in many places with great pomp and magnificence. The virtues 
which had formerly been ascribed to the heathen temples, to their 
lustrations [ceremonial cleansings by water, etc.], to the statues of 
their gods and heroes, were now attributed to Christian churches-to 



water consecrated by certain forms of prayer, and to the images of 
holy men. " 

"The propensity of rude and uneducated converts [?] from 
Paganism to cling to the festal rites of their forefathers proved to be 
invincible, so that it seemed to be necessary to adopt the old usages 
to the new worship, rather than to abolish them altogether." [Encyc. 
Brit.] 

We feel safe in asserting that all the vile doctrines that have 
saturated the papal church, and that still permeate Protestantism had 
at least their origin in this period. 

The philosophy of Plato was engrafted, a parasite upon the 
Scriptural stock. This vile fungus, planted by Satan in Eden [Gen. 
3:4], watered by the Egyptians, and brought to an increase by a 
pseudo-Christianity, has borne an abundant harvest of errors, and 
exhaled an influence more deadly than the repas tree. Purgatory, 
Eternal Sin, Eternal Torment, Mariolatry, Saint Worship, 
Transmigration, Mohammedanism, Swedenborgianism, and 
Mormonism are some of its legitimate fruits, which could not have 
existed without it. 

The Pergamos message opens in the words, "These things saith He 
who hath the sharp sword with two edges." The speaker is Christ 
himself. It seems as if the little company of faithful ones, beset on 
every side by the enemy, were earnestly looking amid all the noise 
and strife for their Leader, when, suddenly, the great Captain 
appears by their side, and waiving his sword on high, shouts, 
Attention! Company! 

The two-edged sword is the Word of God. [Eph 6:17; Heb. 4:12.] 
This weapon is formed both for offensive and defensive warfare. It 
is sharp, and while one edge is presented toward the enemy, there is 
another toward him who wields it. Christ has given it to the church 
to be used in his service: woe to him who handles it unskillfully. 
Our Lord's words are a warning to those of that age who were 
exercising this spiritual weapon. 

"I know thy works." They were many. The faithful of this period 
were very zealous, and were hard workers against much opposition. 

"And where thou dwellest, where Satan's seat is." The home and 
stronghold of Paganism; which, in course of time, with a change of 
little else than name and names was rechristened Papacy. 

"Thou holdest fast MY NAME, and hast not denied my faith." 
Their fidelity is more particularly noted because of their adverse 
surroundings. At this time there were many teachers, and more 
controversy than ever before. Light was darkened by words, and 
truth with sophistry. During this period also arose the old dispute of 
"who should be greatest?" The bishops, or Patriarchs, as they 
preferred to be called, of Rome, Antioch, Alexandria, and 
Constantinople, had acquired a degree of pre-eminence over the 
others, and there was a long-continued rivalry between them; the 



supremacy being finally divided between Rome and 
Constantinople. The nominal church was split in two, chiefly over 
the question of image- worship; the idolaters ranging under the 
bishop of Rome, who received the name of Pope [Latin, papa-the 
father], while the image-breakers, as they were called, formed the 
Greek Church under the Patriarch [chief father] of Constantinople. 
A remembrance of this controversy will help us to understand the 
passage which follows: 

"Thou holdest fast MY NAME... even in those days in which 
ANTIPAS was my faithful witness; who was slain among you, 
where Satan dwelleth." Anti, in Greek, means opposite or against; 
papas is father. In the usual manner of forming words, Anti-pas 
would evidently mean against the father, or opposed to the Pope or 
Patriarch; as we use the name anti-christ, the opponent of Christ. It 
is clear, then, that our Lord here commends the faithful hand who, 
"holding fast" the endearing name of our "Father," in obedience to 
the command, "Call no man Father," opposed the development and 
establishment of the Papacy, with its attendant heresies of a class of 
holy [?] and Rev. [?] fathers [Matt. 23:9], who, being called by the 
church— or the almighty dollar— or the love of honor and ease, as the 
case may be, profess a superior sanctity, privilege, and authority for 
the exposition of God's Word. 

"But I have a few things against thee. Thou hast there them that 
hold the teaching of Balaam, who taught Balak to cast a stumbling- 
block before the children of Israel, to eat things offered to idols, and 
to commit fornication. " 

Num. 22 and onward tells the story of Balaam. The kings of Midian 
and Balak, king of Moab, found themselves unable by force of arms 
to subdue Israel. They hired Balaam to curse God's people. He 
found it impossible, but knowing why they had the Lord's favor and 
protection, he advised Balak to lead them into sin; which 
succeeding, brought upon them a plague which destroyed 24,000 of 
them. 

From what has been said, the spiritual meaning of the Balaam 
teaching should be easily seen. The blasphemous doctrines of 
eternal torment, and the endless existence of sin and sinners; also 
the fiction of the short line from the death-bed to heaven, and 
kindred fancies, have always been a "stumbling-block" to the 
church. The homage given to pagan rites, ceremonies, festivals, 
etc., Christianized [?] such as prayers to the dead, sacred places, 
days, and persons; union with earthly powers and with those who 
do such things, would in our opinion be Baal-am service. 

The doctrine of the Nicolaitans, noticed in the Ephesus message, 
found its development in this age; and has been a burden to the 
church ever since. Nicolas means a conqueror of the people. In the 
church of Rome the laity or people are as much the subjects of the 
Pope, both in spiritual and temporal things, as any of earth's 
conquerors ever dreamed of demanding. This, in the face of Christ's 



plain statement that there is but one Lord, one Master, one Father, 
"and all ye are brethren." [Matt. 23:8-12.] The command "Search 
the Scriptures," was intended for every one; the commission to 
"preach the good news" to all who have received the Spirit; and if 
any one has not the Spirit of Christ he is none of His, and can only 
be a blind leader of the blind. 

"Repent, or else I will come unto THEE quickly, and will fight 
against THEM with the sword of my mouth. " Notice thee and them 
in this passage. The words are evidently used like you and them in 
1 Thes. 5:1-4. The Lord speaks directly to his church as thou or 
you; but of the world, as they or them. He came to his own, and 

R360 : page 3 

in a sense delivered them out of Babylon; bearing them up on 
eagles' wings [Rev. 12:14], and carrying them into the wilderness; 
"into her place, where she is nourished."... from the face of the 
serpent, Satan. To them-Babylon, he comes with the sword, and by 
the sword they are cut into two— the Roman and Greek churches. 

"He that hath an ear, let HIM hear what the Spirit says to the 
churches." 

"To him that overcometh, to him will I give of the hidden manna. " 
The manna recalls the story of Israel in the wilderness. Hidden 
would point as an index finger to the golden bowl full of manna 
laid away in the Ark of the Covenant as a memorial of the 
faithfulness of Jehovah, who led and "nourished" his people in the 
wilderness. It is a pledge to the Pergamos church that he who 
watched over literal Israel in their journeyings would care for them 
in the weary march that was about to begin. 

The manna, of course, typifies spiritual food, the word of God. 
Perhaps some were enabled to see a deeper meaning, that it referred 
not only to the written word, but to the living Word; the true Bread 
of Life who came down from heaven to give life to the world. [John 
6:47-51.] 

It was a promise in the face of desolation and death, of a life that 
should be hid- from all the power of persecution -with Christ, in 
God. 

"I will give him a white stone, and upon the stone a new name 
engraved, which no man knoweth but he that receiveth it. " 

What a blessed assurance to the church during those 1260 years of 
trial, outcasts from the world, branded as heretics by the church, to 
realize that God's seal was upon them; to remember that "the Lord 
knoweth them that are his." 

The signet or seal— evidently referred to— was the emblem of 
authority. See Gen. 41:41-42; 1 Kings 21:8; Esther 3:10-12; 8:2-8, 
etc. To present any one with the signet ring was to invest them with 
all the power and authority of him who owned it. This is, therefore, 



one of the exceeding great and precious promises of joint heirship 
with Christ, given only to the overcomers. 

The color of the stone would indicate the purity of the reign. "A 
scepter of righteousness is the sceptre of thy kingdom. " However 
precious the jewel, it was made much more so on account of its use; 
it was therefore the symbol of that which was most highly 
esteemed. See Haggai 2:23; Sol. Song 8:5-6. 

The name on the seal is significant. We believe it is the name 
assured by our Lord on taking unto him his great power and 
beginning his reign. A name now revealed to the members of his 
body, since the reign has begun. [See article of Bro. Jones in March 
No. ZION'S WATCH TOWER, page 4.] A name peculiarly 
comforting to the persecuted saints during the reign of Anti-christ- 
the name of our beloved 

KING OF KINGS, AND LORD OF LORDS. 

W. I. M. 



R360 : page 4 

ANASTASIS.--RESURRECTION. 

"For since through a man there is death, through a man also there 
is a resurrection (anastasis) of the dead; for as by ADAM all die, so 
by the ANOINTED also, will all be restored to life." 1 Cor. 
15:21,22. Diaglott. 

Recognizing death as a reality, we have long seen, and often 
pointed out, that a resurrection of dead ones, is God's remedy for 
the removal of this sin-curse. Not until very recently, however, did 
we recognize the full force and deep scope of the word resurrection. 

We have been accustomed to regard it as meaning the giving to a 
dead person of a spark of life-the very faintest spark of life, such as 
the act of Elijah to the widow's son, (1 Kings 17:22) or the act of 
Paul to the young man who fell from a window, (Acts 20:9,10) or 
the act of Jesus to Jairus' daughter, to the son of the widow of Nain 
and to Lazarus. (Mark 5:41,42, Luke 7:14,15, John 11:43,44.) We 
had considered and called these, resurrections of the dead. But an 
examination proves that these restorations of a faint spark of life, 
are never called a resurrection in Scripture. An examination of the 
Greek word from which resurrection is translated (Anastasis) 
proves that its meaning is broader and fuller than we had supposed, 
and that we have been in the habit of misusing it, when applying it 
to such partial restorations of life as above mentioned. 

Liddell and Scott's Greek Lexicon defines the word anastasis to 
mean- "a setting up again"-"REBUILDING" - 
"RESTORATION." Let us then look at the resurrection in the light 
of this standard definition, and also, in the light of our text. 



Mankind is the subject of Paul's discourse. Mankind as a race, had 
forfeited all right to life by the disobedience of Adam. The 
existence forfeited, was the one given by God to our representative, 
Adam. It was a perfect being or existence, and all the imperfections 
under which we as a race now labor, have come as a result of sin, 
and are a part of the death penalty. We are now, and have been for 
6,000 years a dying race, growing weaker and weaker and dropping 
faster and faster into the tomb. Adam in his perfection did not lose 
the last spark of life for 930 years. We, less perfect, are born with 
but a spark, the average duration of which is 30 years. This 
condition in which we now are, is Scripturally called death, even 
before we enter the tomb. We are all walking in the valley of the 
shadow of death and are now far down below the mountain tops of 
life and perfection. (Psa. 23:4; Matt. 8:22; 2 Cor. 5:14.) 

Now let us ask the question— Where was our race when it began to 
fall— when death began to oppress, degrade and conquer? The 
answer is: Man was perfect, on the mountain tops of life, and not at 
all in the valley of death; not only perfect in being but in full 
communion with his maker who considered his handiwork "very 
good. " Then as death means a falling from all this perfection, 
resurrection means "a setting up again"— "rebuilding"-"restoring" 
of humanity from every vestige of death to the perfection of their 
nature as represented by their head, Adam. 

Now notice our text closely, and see the second clause, explaining 
the first, defines resurrection (anastasis) to mean restored: 
"Through a man there is death"— "by Adam all die." Then it states 
the remedy provided: "Through a man also (Jesus) there is a 
resurrection of the dead"- "by the anointed will all be restored to 
life. " To restore life means to give back, or offer a thing which was 
lost or taken away. The thing lost by our race was perfect being. 

But while resurrection means to restore, there is nothing connected 
with this word which limits it in time. All of the race shall be 
resurrected, but not necessarily all in a moment; on the contrary 
Scripture teaches us, that there are "times (years) of restitution," 
and another shows us that it will be the work of a thousand years. It 
will be seen then that the resurrection ("rebuilding-setting up again 
-restoring") of humanity will be in process, but will not be 
complete until the thousand years are ended. [This may furnish 
another explanation of the first clause of Rev. 20:5, to those who 
think there is a shadow of proof of that clause being genuine; and 
not as we believe an interpolation.] 

But Paul proceeds in the consideration of the anastasis— restoring, 
upbuilding, perfecting; he explains that there are two conditions of 
perfected ones. In answer to the question- With what body do they 
come to life again?— he explains (vss. 36-38) that as with the 
development of grain, so with mankind, the body sown is not the 
identical thing which springs up, though the same nature will be 
found in that which springs up, and the same identical personality, 
able to recall its former degraded condition, (Psa. 22:27; Ezek. 



16:61; Zech. 12:10.) and to glorify God for the blessed change. But 
we inquire; will there be any difference in the resurrection- will all 
be raised alike? Paul replies that there will be a difference: As in 
the sowing there are different kinds of seed, so in the resurrection 
there will be different kinds of bodies, just as we see it illustrated in 
nature; when we sow wheat we expect wheat to spring up and so 
will every seed develop its own kind. The large majority of the race 
are sown (die) human seed; a few- "a little flock" have changed 
their nature, been begotten of God. They are sown spiritual seed, 
and in the resurrection, God will give "to every seed its own body 
as it hath pleased him." (vs. 38.) The human seed will have a 
human body, but the spiritual seed will have a spiritual body; "as is 
the earthy, such are they also that are earthy; and as is the heavenly, 
such are they also that are heavenly." (vs. 48.) 

According to the illustration given, the human being will rise in a 
body like that which went into decay and death, but not formed of 
the very same atoms of matter that composed it. (vs. 37,) "Thou 
sowest not that body that shall be. " But to those begotten of God- 
of the spiritual seed, Paul says, "as we have borne the image of the 
earthy, (human nature —but having given that up to become 'new 
creatures') we shall (when born in the resurrection) bear the image 
of the heavenly"— the spiritual body. 

Again some inquire, what is a spiritual or heavenly body like? It 
doth not yet appear what we shall be (like), but we know that... we 
shall be like 

R361 : page 4 

him (Jesus; not as he was, but as he is) "for we shall see him as he 
is." (1 John 3:2.) 

We can form a tolerably clear idea of what the race in general will 
be when perfected (resurrected), knowing by experience that were it 
not for the imperfection it would be "very good." 

And though we cannot fully comprehend what the new creature 
shall be when perfected (resurrected), because "it doth not yet 
appear, what we shall be" in all particulars, yet our Father's word 
informs us of some of the qualities of those "new creatures" "of the 
Divine nature" when perfected. He says: "It is sown in corruption, it 
is raised in INCORRUPTION; it is sown in dishonor, it is raised in 
GLORY; it is sown in weakness, it is raised in POWER; it is sown 
an animal body, it is raised a SPIRITUAL BODY." [1 Cor. 15:42- 
44, Diaglott.] Thus we get a very meager view of the excellent 
glory of the new creatures— like Christ Jesus, the express image of 
the Father's person; "whom no man hath seen nor can see." (1 Tim. 
6:16.) No wonder Paul said it doth not yet appear; no wonder God 
has not given us a more full account of the future glory; with the 
little glimpse we have, it almost over-awes us. We ask ourselves 
how searching must be our trial, if we would be accounted worthy 
of such divine honors? "What manner of persons ought we to be in 



all holy conversation and God- likeness" -"He that hath this hope in 
him purifieth himself even as he is pure." 

This perfecting, Paul shows, is not what the world is to get, but is a 
special thing. In 1 Cor. 15:42 he says, before giving the foregoing 
description -"Thus is THE resurrection of THE dead" i.e. the 
CHIEF perfecting of the CHIEF class of the dead. This CHIEF 
resurrection (anastasis-perfecting) began with Jesus, the head of 
the church which is his body-the head of THE CHRIST. Having 
proved himself worthy of this great glory by obedience even unto 
death, he was made perfect-MADE PERFECT through (by or on 
account of the) suffering" of death. (Heb. 2:10.) Jesus' resurrection 
was the first, no one before him had ever been raised completely 
out of death's control into perfection either of human or divine 
nature. He was "a first-fruit of those having fallen asleep." (vs. 20.) 
This is called "His (Jesus') resurrection, " because if members of his 
body we shall share the same with our head. It is Scripturally 
illustrated by natural birth; Our head was born-delivered over 1 800 
years ago; the body is not yet fully delivered. We, "the feet of him," 
are still in the condition in which we "groan within ourselves 
waiting for the adoption, to wit, the redemption" in full of the entire 
body of the Christ. (Rom. 8:23.) (Will God cause to come to birth 
and not deliver? Will he deliver the head and not complete the 
work? (See Isa. 66:9.) The "little flock" of overcomers of the world- 
-the blessed who shall "have part in the first (chief) resurrection" 
(anastasis— lifting up to perfection) and who shall "reign with him a 
thousand years," (Rev. 20:6.) will have part in "His resurrection" 
and experience the same changes and perfecting which he 
underwent, when God highly exalted him above the angels next to 
himself in power and glory- "the right hand of power." 

Such is our, and such was Paul's hope. For it we suffer the loss of 
all things and do count them but dross that we may win Christ and 
be found in Him (as members of the body of Christ). ..that we may 
know him (fully) and the POWER of HIS RESURRECTION." This 
desirable sharing in the power of HIS anastasis-raising to 
perfection, we hope to attain by sharing "the fellowship of His 
sufferings, being made conformable unto his death; if by any 
means, (by all these earthly sacrifices) we might attain unto the EX- 
anastasis (the out-resurrection) from the dead"-the chief perfecting. 
Phil. 3:8-11. 

Let us consider next, the 

ORDER OF RESURRECTIONS. 

We have already seen that the best or chief perfecting-that of the 
Christ, comes first, and the bringing of mankind to human 
perfection follows during the Millennial age: But let us follow 
Paul's argument on this point and note that this is his argument 
exactly. After telling in the words of our text that "by Adam all die, 
so by the Anointed also will all be restored to life," he adds-"But 
each one in his OWN rank; Christ a first-fruit, afterwards those who 



are Christ's at his parousia (presence)." Here are two ranks, or 
orders of anastasis, Christ (the anointed head and body) first. 
Theirs, as we have seen, is the first and chief anastasis, the first to 
come to perfection and that the Divine perfection. Afterwards, 
during his presence, another class or order will be perfected. His 
presence will continue during the Millennial age, for he comes to 
reign and to put down all authority, all opposition to right and to 
bring all things into harmony with God and His laws. Then "he 
must reign" -must be present until all of this work is accomplished; 
and he shall reign a thousand years. (Rev. 20:6.) consequently that 
entire age is the time of His presence. During his presence he shall 
bless mankind with truth and knowledge and restore all things. 
Then all, who during that blessed reign, will, may come into 
harmony with him and "Hail Him Lord of all," thus becoming His. 
This class we understand to be referred to by Paul when he says— 
"afterwards those who are Christ's at (during) his presence." These 
shall be raised up to the perfection of their (human) nature. 

The raising up, the perfecting, may be either an instantaneous, or 
gradual work so far as the meaning of the word anastasis is 
concerned. We have seen that the perfecting, or the raising of the 
world in general to full perfect human being, will require a long 
period. During that period they will learn valuable and lasting 
lessons in overcoming evil under the superintendence of able 
helpers and teachers. But there are two general exceptions to this 
rule; these two have learned these lessons in the present life under 
the dominion of evil. They have been made perfect through 
discipline endured here, and being thus prepared, are counted 
worthy to attain their perfect condition in the instant of return to 
life. 

The first of these classes and the chief, are the members of the body 
of Christ, who have fought a good fight and finished their course of 
training and work of sacrifice, by obedience even unto death, and 
there is prepared for such, a crown of righteousness- the reward. 
The anastasis (raising up to perfection) of this class, though not 
coming to all of them at the same instant, will be an instantaneous 
perfecting to each one. The dead in Christ shall rise, be perfected, 
first; then we which are alive and remain, shall share in the same 
anastasis, the same perfecting, without sleeping for a single 
moment in death. 

We shall be changed or translated in a single moment, lifted in the 
twinkling of an eye, instantly, out of the earthly tabernacle or house 
(which will dissolve in death) into our house (body) from heaven- 
our glorious spiritual bodies, whose glory doth not yet appear. But 
both the raising of those who sleep in Jesus, and the 

R361 : page 5 

changing of the living members into new conditions, as well as the 
resurrection of Jesus, together constitute the first (chief) anastasis. 
"Blessed and holy is he that hath part in the chief, first resurrection- 



-perfecting; on such the second death hath no power, but THEY 
shall be priests of God and of Christ and shall reign a thousand 
years." (Rev. 20:6.) 

The second class, though less notable are highly esteemed of God, 
and in their sphere were overcomers and fought the good fight 
though a different one from ours of this Gospel age. We refer to the 
Prophets and Patriarchs of preceding ages. Though they never had 
our "heavenly" -"high calling"-though never invited to change 
their nature from human to Divine, yet they were faithful and laid 
hold of the earthly promises set before them. Moses verily was 
faithful as a servant over all his house (of servants) but Christ was 
faithful as a Son over his own house, whose house are we, if— (Heb. 
3:6.) 

All those ancient worthy faithful ones, died in faith without 
receiving a fulfillment of the promises made them, yet were 
confident to the end of life, trusting God to give them at some time 
the things promised them. [Abraham had been promised all the land 
of Canaan, but had never received so much as to set his foot on, yet 
he died trusting God for what he had promised. Acts 7:5.] Instead 
of at once giving to Abraham, Isaac and Jacob and all the Prophets 
the earthly kingdom and dominion promised them, God let them 
rest; they "fell on sleep," while he developed the Gospel Church 
through the "better promises," even the heavenly -that it should be 
a kind of first fruits of his creatures. (Jas. 1:18.) Hence Paul, 
referring to these ancient worthies, states that God having provided 
some better thing for us, (the Christ) they without us (our 
instrumentality) shall not be made perfect. (Heb. 11:39,40.) 

The anastasis of the Christ must take precedence to that of all 
others, because it is through The Christ that all things are to be 
restored. We believe, however, that the anastasis or perfecting of 
Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, the Prophets and overcomers of past ages, 
will be a rapid or instantaneous perfecting of the human nature. 
And we understand that it is as perfected men ruling over imperfect 
men, that these of the fleshly seed, will bless all the families of the 
earth as the agents of the spiritual SEED which is Christ-the 
express image of the invisible God. (Col. 1:15; Heb. 1:3.) Through 
the Christ primarily, the blessing of restoration comes. 



R362 : page 5 

EUROPEAN ARMIES. 

It is the theory of a large number in the nominal church, that the 
Millennium of peace, when nation shall not lift up sword against 
nation, neither shall they learn war any more, is drawing near, and 
is to be brought about by present Christianizing influences. We also 
claim it "nigh, even at the doors," but to be accomplished by a 
totally different process, viz: by the setting up of that kingdom for 



which we were ever taught to pray, "Thy kingdom come (that) thy 
will may be done on earth as it is done in Heaven. " We believe 
also, that the setting up of the kingdom, involves first, the presence 
and exaltation of the new King (the Christ complete, who will 
dethrone and bind the former Prince of the power of the air -Satan, 
and accomplish the final overturning (Rev. 20:2; Psa. 149:8; Ezek. 
21:27.) and the complete destruction of the present evil, unjust and 
oppressive governments and institutions. By the tumult of 
contending factions, he will dash them in pieces as a potter's vessel. 
Psa. 2:9; Jer. 13:14. 

We seldom mention the outward evidences which support our 
views, and expectations. It has been our desire to direct your 
attention not so much to "the things which are seen," but mainly to 
"the things which are not seen" by the natural eye but discernable 
only by the eye of faith-in the Word of God. This knowledge it is, 
which enables us to see things which are coming to pass, but which 
are not yet discernable by the world. It was this favor of seeing 
further into the future than the world could look, which Jesus 
referred to, saying that the spirit of truth would guide us into truth 
and show us things to come. (John 16:13.) It is both a comfort and a 
strengthener of faith, to see how Scripture is being gradually 
accomplished. Therefore we give below some interesting and 
carefully collected facts regarding the present condition of 
European nations. 

The peace footing of the standing armies of Europe, is as follows: 
Russia 715,000, France 498,483, Germany 427,274, Austria- 
Hungary 252,535, Italy 202,271. Those of the lesser powers, 
Turkey, Spain, Norway, etc., etc., aggregate 643,000 and Great 
Britain has an army of about 250,000 men. Thus it will be seen that 
Europe has a standing army of about 3,000,000 men, besides a navy 
which numbers 250 iron-clad and several hundred wooden vessels. 

In addition to these regular armies there are reserve forces of drilled 
men, ready for immediate call in case of war, as follows: In Russia 
2,252,126, Germany 1,500,000, France 1,230,000, Austria-Hungary 
(army and navy) 1,220,000, Italy 664,105. Great Britain and 
smaller powers about 2,500,000. This gives the enormous army of 
over 12,000,000 men ready for immediate action, composed only of 
trained soldiers in the prime of life. Truly it has been said "Europe 
is a huge standing camp." "All Europe stands ready for war." 

How dreadful, how heart sickening the sight; 12,000,000 men 
trained in the use of the most devilish instruments of death, stand 
prepared to slaughter one another at the beck and nod of Emperors, 
Czars and Kings. 

And yet it seems that in our Father's sight, 

'Tis well that men should learn the evils now of war by bitter taste; 

That when hath been o'erturned these governments of evil men, 

All then might come to love the peaceful reign, 

Of Him who's called "the Prince of Peace. 



And yet some tell us that these are Christian governments; and all 
their Kings claim the right to rule-to be of God's authority and 
appointment. This idea of God's appointment was given by Papacy. 
Papacy placed in power the ancestors of most of those now 
reigning; Papacy claimed that in so doing it represented God, and 
that in fact it was "the Kingdom of God" and had the power and 
right to appoint the rulers of earth. The earthly governments still 
cling to the claim of divine appointment and use it as a mighty 
chain to bind the people under them. Their proclamations are 
signed, as for instance, King William of Prussia "By the grace of 
God." 

Papacy, claiming infallibility, cannot but sustain the general 
principle of their appointment, and being now without temporal 
power, dare not offend one of these rulers. 

Protestants unthinkingly and ignorantly uphold the decisions of 
Papacy on this matter, not seeing that thereby, they acknowledge 
the anti-Christ. This is just as the Word of God foretells-viz: That 
in the struggle between the people and their Papal appointed rulers 
just at hand, while the people will be struggling for freedom and 
their God given rights, the nominal churches will unite with the 
governments which they appointed and recognize, to help keep the 
people in thraldom. (Rev. 19:19-20.) 

How absurd anyhow to say that the present governments are of 
God's appointment, or Christian governments in any sense. Surely 
everything indicates, that they are Satan's governments -appointed 
and sustained by their prince "The prince of this world. " (John 
14:30 and 12:31.) This their actions clearly demonstrate. Being the 
Kingdoms of Satan, they must be demolished to give place to the 
Kingdom of God. How great will be the change, when these, give 
place to a righteous pure government under the true prince-the 
"Prince of peace." "In his day the righteous shall flourish." (Psa. 
72:7.) 

Mankind now groans under these evils, Satan and Anti-Christ 
appointed governments; but the groaning will soon be over. Satan 
will soon be bound; (Rev. 20:2) his earthly empires overturned 
(Ezek. 21:27.) and the kingdom will be given unto the people of the 
saints of the Most High under Christ. (Dan. 7:27.) The whole 
creation groaneth and travaileth in pain together until now— waiting 
for the manifestation of the sons of God. (Rom. 8:22,19.) 

The church now is commanded to be subject to the powers that be 
for "The powers that be are ordained of God." (Rom. 13:1.) Yes, 
God, during the "present evil world" (age) not only permits Satan to 
be its prince, (John 14:30) but also permits the earthly governments 
of his appointing. He leaves his church and all men for a time under 
their control, assuring us through His word that shortly the prince of 
this world shall be bound, and "the kingdoms of this world shall 
become the kingdoms of our Lord and his anointed"-during the 
sounding of the Seventh Trumpet. (Rev. 20:2 and 1 1:15.) 



The Church must not resist the powers that be except in matters of 
conscience. But now that "Gentile Times" have nearly ran their 
ordained course, their overthrow is at hand. To this end God is 
raising up His great army, the masses of the world, to overturn all 
forms of evil and oppression. His army here, as in the overthrow of 
Jerusalem A.D. 70, will know not God, yet will fulfill His purposes. 
(Rev. 19:19.) God's army is now being marshaled and His church 
should stand aloof from both the governments that be, and their 
opposers. We should remember that "we are not of this world"- 
"our citizenship is in heaven." (John 17:16. Phil. 3:20.) 

The time for the fulfillment of Joel 3:10-16 is nigh at hand and the 
sooner it comes the sooner will another (Isa. 2:2-4) be 
accomplished. But first look not for these. First must be gathered 
from the earthly plane-the little flock -the bride of Christ. And in 
this gathering of the little flock from out the mass— the mass called 
by men the church, there will be a shaking, rooting and complete 
overturning of that mass so full of tares-corrupt with worldly pride. 
Thus saith the word of God: Judgment must begin at the house of 
God. 



R362 : page 5 

"THE WAGES OF SIN IS DEATH.'' 

How clear and simple is this statement. How strange it is that so 
many who profess to receive the Bible as the Word of God persist 
in contradicting this positive statement, and affirm that they 
believe, and that the Bible teaches, that the wages of sin is 
everlasting life in torment. 

They realize that this is an awful thought, and affects the interests 
of every human being— because all have sinned and come short. Yet 
it is what they have been taught from infancy. It is what their 
church creed still teaches, and they are taught that it is one of the 
first steps to infidelity and perdition to doubt the eternal torment of 
all who are not true Christians. They suppose that, since their 
church creed teaches it, it must be one of the fundamental teachings 
of Scripture. 

A very large majority of Christians (We say it with sorrow and 
shame) have never searched the Scriptures which are able to make 
them wise. (2 Tim. 3:15.) They have merely learned a few texts, 
which, construed in the light of their church creeds and instructions, 
tend to convince them that those creeds are in harmony with the 
Bible, and that eternal agony awaits a large majority of our race, 
foreseen and foreknown and pre-arranged by our Creator and 
Father, who, despite this terrible plan, they must call a God of love- 
-who, despite his malevolence, must be worshiped and adored as 
the benevolent, loving One, the Author of every good and perfect 
gift. This One they must thus worship and try, or pretend, to love, 



lest they be of that eternally tormented multitude. No wonder so 
many draw near to God with their lips, while their hearts are far 
from him. No wonder that some who come to lose the fear of such 
torment, become blasphemous infidels, denying all things sacred, 
and regarding all religion as fraudulent, when they lose their dread 
of this fundamental teaching of the religion of to-day. 

R363 : page 5 

The difficulty is that the traditions of men are given the authority 
which belongs only to the Word of God. God says that he gave us 
our existence, and has the power to deprive us of it if we do not use 
it properly; (Ezek. 18:4; Eccl. 9:5,10; Psa. 145:20; and 146:4,) that 
the wages which he will pay to sinners will be DEATH-the 
extinction of life; and the wages he will pay to those who use life in 
harmony with his will, will be, everlasting life-life unceasingly. 
"The soul (being) that sinneth it shall die," but none other. (Ezek. 
18:20.) Again we read, "I have set before you life and death"- 
blessing and cursing; "therefore choose life." (Deut. 30:19.) Choose 
it by complying with the condition, on which God says we may 
have it. "I have no pleasure in the death of him that dieth, saith the 
Lord God; wherefore turn ye and live." (Ezek. 18:32.) 

Nor can any one find a reasonable objection to death- 
EXTINCTION of being-as the punishment for sin. Man (as a 
perfect being when created) was capable of appreciating good and 
evil, and of developing a character in harmony with the one he 
chose. God gave him this free agency, telling him which is His will, 
and which is best, and what the consequences of his choice will be 
to himself. He said to Adam regarding a forbidden thing, "In the 
day thou eatest thereof, dying thou shalt DIE." (Gen. 2:17, margin.) 
So he tells us that the wages of sin is death; that we must shun sin if 
we would avoid its penalty. 

R363 : page 6 

All of God's plans and laws are the very best, and any other course 
than obedience is sure to bring some evil consequence. The 
interests of humanity are so much in common, that evil and its 
consequences in one member produces more or less evil and 
distress to others. It is a wise and blessed provision God has made, 
that none will be allowed to live whose misuse of life would be an 
injury and source of misery to themselves and others. And who 
would not admit that God's dealings with the sinner as thus 
explained by His Word, are not only Just, but Merciful? 

One cause of much of the confusion on this subject, arises from the 
fact that death happens alike to saint and sinner, hence many 
conclude-It must be some other kind of death than the death of the 
individual as we see it all about us, that the Scriptures refer to as the 
wages of sin. And giving their imaginations full play, they conclude 
that the DEATH which is the wages of sin, must be a life in 
torment, or, as some describe it— a death that never dies. In 
attempting to explain this, modern theologians fall into grievous 



errors, and begin to talk mysteriously about a number and variety of 
deaths. They must find as many beings to die as they find deaths. 
Hence, they not only tell us that there are many deaths, but that man 
is a combination of a number of beings. They explain that what 
God said to Adam, and what happened to him when he had sinned, 
was spiritual death; that nine hundred and thirty years after was 
physical death, and that then he was liable to eternal death-a 
condition of torture -a death that never dies. 

We will first state our objection to this theological division of death 
into three, and proceed to explain the question under discussion 
from our standpoint. We object first to the division of a man into 
three parts- spiritual man, physical man, and something after 
which survives both of the former. The supposition that man could 
lose spiritual being arises from a confusion of thought concerning 
human and spiritual beings. Scripture teaches us that human beings 
and spiritual beings are different orders of beings, there being far 
more difference between a man and spiritual beings (angels, etc.), 
than between a fish and a horse. Adam, as a human being, was "of 
the earth, earthy." (1 Cor. 15:47.) And this was God's design in his 
creation— viz. : to make a different order of beings from angels- 
spiritual beings, which he had already created-an order of beings 
adapted to the earth by nature. That God had succeeded in making 
man different from angels -spiritual beings-is evident from the 
fact that he called him "very good," and gave him dominion over 
earth and all earthly things. (Gen. 1:26; Psa. 8:6.) 

If, then, Adam was human and not spiritual by nature, he could not 
lose spiritual nature or spiritual life; and those who hold that he did 
lose it, are unable to point to a single Scripture which so declares. 
We suggest to make it forcible to your minds, that it would be as 
reasonable and as sensible to talk of a fish dying to a horse's life or 
nature, as to say that man died to a nature totally different from his 
own. 

Adam died only as a man. From the time he sinned and was driven 
from the Garden of Eden, he gradually began to die as a man; he 
began to lose those grand perfections of mind and body which 
constituted him the superior and ruler of the lower animals. This 
dying process continued by reason of his strength and perfection for 
a long time— 930 years— then the dying process was complete- 
Adam was dead— lifeless. So far as he knows or feels he is "as 
though he had not been" created. 

Thus, in him was illustrated God's word— the wages of sin is death. 

But the query comes— would not Adam have died anyhow, whether 
he had sinned or not?-if not, how could he ever go to heaven? We 
reply, no; if Adam had not sinned, he had not died, but would have 
lived on, on earth. God never promised anywhere in his Word to 
take Adam to heaven. Adam had no such hope or desire. His desire 
was in harmony with his earthly or human nature— to live on the 
earth and to enjoy it. And this, as we have shown, was God's will 



also— to make an earth to be inhabited, and to make a creature to 
inhabit and use and rule it in harmony with God's will. 

It should be clearly held in mind, that while God does purpose and 
is to accomplish the lifting of a "little flock" of humanity from the 
human nature to a spiritual-the Divine nature,-as new creatures- 
yet this is not a change of God's original plan, when he said let us 
make MAN. God's plan relative to having the earth peopled with a 
race of perfect MEN, still continues, and will, ere long, be 
accomplished. It is only during this Gospel Age since Jesus was (at 
resurrection) highly exalted to the DIVINE PLANE of being, that 
God is calling out from among men, some to become partakers of 
the Divine nature, and sharers of glory as spiritual beings-joint 
heirs with Jesus Christ their Lord. The condition upon which we 
may claim those promises as ours, is, that becoming dead to earthly 
aims, hopes, motives, and pleasures, we render the human nature 
(not its sins) a living sacrifice. 

But another inquires— if Adam would not have died had he not 
sinned, does it not prove that he possessed immortality? Not at all, 
(You will see the distinction between immortality and everlasting 
or continuous life by reading "Food," pp. 11 and 134,) his life 
would have been continued by allowing him to continue to feed on 
the trees of life in the Garden of Eden. There was nourishment in 
their fruit which sustained human life. God executed the penalty, 
death, by separating man from those nourishing trees; Adam's life 
forces were exhausted in labor, and the products of the cursed earth 
were insufficient to supply the waste. The earth was cursed for 
man's sake- that it might not sustain his life. 

But now the previous question. If physical death is the penalty or 
wages of sin, why is it that all-saints and sinners alike-die? We 
answer in the words of the apostle, death is passed upon all men in 
that all have sinned. The reason you die is because you are a sinner- 
-you were born a sinner. It was not your fault that you were thus 
born, but it resulted from a law which God established in the 
creation of the race to which we belong. It was a part of his law or 
plan that this race should propagate its species. Thus Adam was to 
multiply and fill the earth with beings perfect and sinless like 
himself -in God's sight "very good" men. But when Adam began to 
decay and to lose his grand perfections as a part of the penalty of 
disobedience —dying— he began to lose the ability to produce sinless 
and perfect offspring. A pure, perfect and sinless race could not 
come from a sinful and decaying head, and thus when Adam 
sinned, all his unborn posterity partook of the evils or wages of sin- 
-death. 

At first glance it seems unjust and harsh that we should be 
condemned and punished for an act in which individually we had 
no share. But when we take God's explanation of it, all is clear and 
satisfactory: He condemned all through, or on account of one man's 
sin, in order that he might have mercy upon all and redeem all by 



one sacrifice, which he had purposed in himself, before the 
foundation of the world. (Rom. 5:18,19; and 11:32.) 

As we have before shown, had each man been given a trial, such as 
Adam had, the probabilities are, that more than half of the billions 
of his children would have done just as he did. And each one who 
did so, would have been condemned to death, and to redeem them 
all, would have made necessary the death of just as many 
substitutes or ransoms; causing pain and death to as many sinless 
(willing) redeemers. All of these redeemers must have first come 
down to earthly conditions, and become men, that they might taste 
death for the sinner and pay his penalty. 

But how much wiser and better was the plan which God took. He 
condemned all through one representative, that he might justify 
through another-a representative redeemer. "Oh, the depths of the 
riches, both of the knowledge and wisdom of God." 

The reason, then, that all die, is, that by nature all are sinners. And, 
though the ransom of believers has been paid by the death of Jesus, 
yet those believers are not yet saved from 

R364 : page 6 

the penalty of sin (death), but are merely assured by God's promises 
that their ransom has been paid, and in His due time, they will be 
saved out of death by a resurrection. 

The advantages which now accrue to believers are not actual for 
they share the miseries of the curse with the world, but they are by 
faith, "For we are saved by hope" only, and not in fact. (Rom. 
8:23,24.) We have a basis of hope for future life, in God's promise 
of a resurrection, which none but believers in those promises can 
have. Thus we have hope as an anchor which keeps us from the 
drifting doubts of the world. We have more also as believers in the 
efficacy of Jesus' ransom. We realize that while before as sinners, 
God could not recognize us at all, now as those whose sins have 
been paid and canceled by Jesus' death, we can come to God as 
sinless— "justified from all things." (Acts 13:39.) We can again, as 
Adam did before sin, call God Father, and be recognized by him as 
human sons. (Luke 3:38.) 

But, as we have seen, the penalty of sin— death— is allowed to 
continue until the full close of this Gospel or Sacrificing Age. 
During this age so many of the believers as desire may join 
themselves to Christ in sacrificing their humanity, and become 
thereby sharers with him of Divinity. When this work shall be 
accomplished -which pays in full the ransom price of the world- 
then comes the time for SALVATION in the actual sense. The 
church— the new creatures— will be the first to be saved from death. 
Theirs is called the first (chief) resurrection, because they are raised 
to the divine— spiritual plane. Blessed and holy are all they that have 
part in the first (chief) resurrection. This first (chief resurrection) 
began with our head, Jesus, and will be completed in raising to the 



same condition the church, which is his body. As Paul aimed, so we 
also aim to have a part in that chief resurrection, for only the "little 
flock" -his body-are of it. (Phil. 3:8-1 1.) 

Then will follow the actual SALVATION of the world from death, 
by a resurrection. (See article "Resurrection. ") So we see that death 
is not complex but a simple thing. The man died, and God's plan is 
to save him from death by paying his ransom, and then giving him 
back his life, in hope, that being better able to appreciate its value, 
he will "choose life and live" in harmony with God's laws. 

At some future time we will answer and explain the various 
passages supposed to conflict with the above explanation of sin's 
wages. 



R364 : page 6 

THEORETICAL vs. PRACTICAL CREEDS. 

Who has not been struck with the difference between the practice 
and theory of those who adhere to the creeds of the various sects. 
They preach positively and repeatedly that crimes and sins will be 
surely punished in everlasting torture from which there is no chance 
of escape, and no hope of mercy or pity ever helping them. They 
preach that "Straight is the gate and narrow is the way that leadeth 
unto life, and few there be that find it, "-and that therefore, the great 
mass of mankind are on the broad road, which they say, leads to the 
irrevocable doom of eternal torture. 

And yet those who profess this, contradict it by their acts. Parents 
whose children are walking any but the narrow way, are careless 
and seemingly indifferent. Ministers who preach thus, eat, drink 
and are merry, and feel content to preach on "The beauties of 
nature"— "Anti Mormonism, " or "Longfellow our great poet" -all of 
which seems very inconsistent with their professed belief. But they 
all have a way of solacing their minds by saying: God will do right; 
he will have mercy on my sons and my daughters, and all my 
relatives and my friends. The great centre of hope seems to be that 
sometime, perhaps just the moment of death, they will say or think - 
-may God forgive my life of sin. 

A forcible example of this was recently furnished in the case of 
"Jesse James," the notorious outlaw, robber and murderer, who, for 
a number of years, at the head of a band of his kind, has been the 
terror of Missouri. He was very recently shot, and it is said never 
after spoke and was conscious but a short time. He was buried from 
a Presbyterian Church, three ministers officiating. They detailed 
some of his honorable and manly (?) traits of character, and hoped 
that God would have mercy upon him -for possibly in his 
conscious moments after being shot, he might perchance have said, 
"God be merciful to me a sinner. " 



Now we object, not to the benevolence which could desire for Jesse 
a place more tolerable than that the church has drawn and painted 
for the sinner, but we do ask in the name of common sense— Where 
is the consistency of such conduct? 

We see their difficulty to be an endeavor to make peace and 
harmony, between the traditions of men framed into church creeds 
in the dark ages, and enlightened common sense and reason of to- 
day. But how sadly they fail to reach any reasonable conclusion. If 
they could but leave human creeds and take God's Word, allowing 
it to interpret itself, how it would all become clear and plain, and 
grandly harmonious and consistent. 



R364 : page 7 

HUMAN TEACHERS NECESSARY. 

"He gave indeed the Apostles and the Prophets, and the 
Evangelists, and Shepherds, and Teachers, for the complete 
qualification of the Saints for the work of service; in order to the 
building up of the body of the Anointed one; till we all attain to the 
unity of the faith and of the knowledge of the Son of God to a full 
grown man (till the body is complete)— to the measure of the full 
stature of the Anointed one." Eph 4:11-13. 

This teaches us that we may be saints (consecrated ones) before we 
have come to full harmony with God's plans, or reached our full 
development in knowledge and faith. It also shows us that it is the 
will of God that we should not continue babes in Christ but should 
"grow in grace and knowledge, growing up (as members) into him 
in all things, who is the head of the body, even Christ; (Eph. 4:15,) 
striving and aiming continually for the perfection of knowledge and 
faith-stature of the anointed pattern, our head. This increase and 
growth must not stop until we ALL (the entire body) have been thus 
schooled "for the work of service. " 

To assist us, God has provided helpers-Apostles, Prophets, 
Evangelists, Pastors, Teachers. Those whom God selected for these 
positions in the primitive Church, were not selected because of their 
learning or worldly wisdom, nor because of their natural gifts; but 
evidently, largely because of their entire consecration to his will 
and service. 

In selecting his ministers, Jesus passed by the "Theological 
Seminaries" -their "Schools of the Prophets," and their Doctors of 
Divinity, and their students too, and chose unpretentious "Israelites 
indeed. " Among those chosen, being some rather illiterate 
fishermen. Thus he has ever chosen the weak things to confound 
the mighty. "Even so Father, for so it seemed good in thy sight. " It 
should be remembered too, that God has always provided his 
church with ministers and helpers. It may help us also, to remember 
that Jesus always gives his ministers their commission, which may 



be known and read of all the saints-viz. His spirit of self sacrifice 
for the sheep, and ability to feed them by expounding to them the 
Scriptures harmoniously. 

That God does set apart or raise up teachers for the Church, is not 
only evident from the Scripture (1 Cor. 12:27-31 and 2 Tim. 2:2.) 
but also from his dealings. It is a fact that during this Gospel age, it 
has pleased God to make use of some men far more than others in 
the work of teaching and edifying the body of Christ. Jesus was a 
teacher sent of God. The disciples were sent to preach and teach 
and baptize. And while we believe that every consecrated member 
of the body of Christ is a MINISTER in some sense, and all are 
"anointed to preach the glad tidings," yet there are various members 
adapted to different parts of the work, just as there are different 
members and offices in the human body, which Scripturally is used 
to illustrate the body of Christ-the Church. 

The head of the body is gone from earthly to spiritual conditions. In 
him centres all the knowledge and wisdom which must direct the 
affairs of (his flesh) the members on the earthly plane. This is 
accomplished by delegating various qualities of the head to some 
members of the body. The highest offices entrusted by our head to 
members of the body for the use of the entire body, are the qualities 
of the Eye, the Ear and the Mouth. The two former are channels of 
information, and the latter of expression. These correspond with 
certain of the chief offices in the church. First the Eye to see: John 
and Paul were two members of the church, who enjoyed more than 
any others perhaps, this grand quality of the head. It was a gift in 
which they greatly rejoiced. Jesus received a wonderful revelation 
from the Father relative to coming events (Rev. 1:1.) and true to his 
body, he sent and signified it to John who thus stood as the eye of 
the Church and through him we can see as fast as due, the 
unfoldings of that revelation. Paul too, had this gift or office in a 
remarkable 

R365 : page 7 

degree, being in visions and revelations of the Lord more abundant 
than they all. (2 Cor. 12:2-4. Gal. 1:12; 2:2.) 

Paul is the clearest eye the Church has ever had. Though he was not 
permitted to make known what he so clearly saw, (2 Cor. 12:4) yet 
it is evident that the things seen, so deepened and widened his own 
knowledge of God's plan and love as related to the past, present, 
and "ages to come," that his writings have a rich depth, fullness, 
and golden coloring, possessed by no other New Testament writer. 
He seems to come to the very verge of those glorious revelations 
while explaining Rom. 1 1 :25-33, concerning the plan of God 
relative to the casting off of fleshly Israel and their future 
restoration to his favor through the agency of the church-when the 
church is complete —when they shall obtain mercy through your 
mercy. How anxious he seems to tell plainly all about those future 



dealings-what was not due to be clearly known until now. "O the 
depth of the riches both of the wisdom and knowledge of God. " 

Note again the value of the sights shown to that celebrated eye of 
the church— concerning the development of the body of Christ and 
its future work in coming ages-Eph. 2:6,7 and 3:3-6. Yes looking 
through those Apostolic eyes of the body (church) we can see 
wonderful things. 

But several "gifts" were bestowed upon some of the Apostles: The 
ear quality was another gift less honorable than the eye, yet very 
desirable. This gift was possessed to some extent by nearly all the 
Apostles, and by some of the members of the body throughout this 
age. It is the gift or quality of understanding and appreciating the 
Word and plan of God. It was by the exercise of this gift that Paul, 
Peter and the others were able to point out the fulfillment of 
Prophecies, and to have understanding of the deep things of God. 

The mouth (utterance) is another quality belonging to the head 
which is delegated to members, for the benefit of the body. This gift 
though possessed by perhaps all of the Apostles, was specially 
notable in Peter and James. Paul, though a great reasoner and 
possessed of the eye and ear qualities was inferior to Appollos and 
some others in oratory. (See 1 Cor. 14:3; Acts 18:24; 2 Cor. 11:6.) 

These qualities belonging to the head, are still in and with the true 
members of the true body of Christ. God is still pleased to use some 
such channels through whom the whole body is to be blessed and 
edified; yet we should always remember that their honor consists in 
doing greater service for the body and head than other members. 
Now, as in Paul's day, "to each is given the manifestation of the 
Spirit, for the benefit of ALL," (1 Cor. 12:7) and not alone for 
themselves individually. And, as even Paul, who possessed the 
chiefest gifts in chief measure, guarded himself, lest after having 
preached to others, he himself should be a "castaway" from the high 
calling; so now, it is no positive assurance of our final victory, that 
we have been used as ministers of the body. 

But there are other good positions with honor, in the body of Christ. 
There are members which belong properly to the body and not to 
the head, viz: the hands and the feet etc. The feet make progress 
and represent the mission work of Evangelists. The hands care for, 
protect, assist, and feed the body, and thus answer to the work of 
Pastors; then the trunk of a human body represents the mass of the 
church. The working together of the whole system is to build itself 
up and to strengthen the laborers-the hands and feet, and to prepare 
the entire body for the doing of the will of the head. So the entire 
body of Christ builds itself up and grows strong by the use of the 
spiritual food; and it imparts its force and strength to those 
members which minister to it— viz: Prophets, Teachers, Evangelists, 
and Pastors. 

This Scriptural insight into the proper condition and active office of 
the various members of the body of Christ, forces the conclusion 



that the real members of the real body are very few. That it was the 
design of our Father that the body should be formed of such real 
members, and that every member should contribute to the 
upbuilding of all, is very clear. And it is none the less clear, that all 
the real members are thus performing their part, as fast as they 
perceive their ability and privilege. 

God is not merely expressing how he would like to have the body 
grow, but how it must grow, and is growing up to the full stature of 
the anointed one. It behooves us each then, to examine ourselves, 
and thus see if we are abiding in the anointed body, and as active 
living members, contributing to the general health and activity of 
the body. 

The great worldly organizations, claiming the name of Christ, yet 
refusing his headship, leading and control, and the teachings of his 
word, has nothing in common with the real followers in Jesus' 
footsteps. They have their heads and prophets and pastors, but not 
the true (Isa. 9:15; 29:9-13 and Jer. 23:16-32.) They have large 
flocks but they are not all sheep. They have their teachers, but the 
time has come when these great flocks of nominal sheep will not 
endure sound doctrine; but after their own desires, they gather to 
themselves teachers having itching ears (for the world's applause) 
and they turn away their ears from the truth, and are turned unto 
fables. (2 Tim. 4:3-4.) But let us watch that we be not deceived by 
all their form of Godliness, lacking the power, (2 Tim. 3:5) which if 
possible would deceive the very elect. But let us faithfully endure 
afflictions and fully accomplish our service. 

The true body of Christ is indeed a mystery from the world's 
standpoint -a visible company with no visible head; a company 
bound and cemented to each other by no visible bond or interest, 
but by the invisible spirit (mind) of their head, which unites them in 
a labor of self-sacrifice, each member doing according to his ability 
to bless and benefit the body and honor the invisible head. 

In this body are still to be found the representative qualities of the 
head. They have eyes, for they look through the eyes of the 
Apostles at the plans and works of God, and have not left these for 
the traditions of men. The true church has ears; it is still being 
blessed with members specially used to unfold to it the prophecies 
and dark-sayings, and to direct it to the "meat in due season." It still 
has those who esteem it a privilege to serve, and feed, and care for 
the body as pastors. And it still has faithful ones (and equally 
members of the body and beloved of the head) who, though not 
thus special workers, are nevertheless, strengthening the hands and 
the knees and glorifying the head by supporting these by their 
means and by their prayers, and by their influence. 

Oh that each might fully value his privilege and opportunities as 
body members. All cannot be the eye, nor all the ear, nor all hands 
nor feet. Some are honored with one service, and some with 
another; (1 Cor. 12:14-20.) yet let us each remember to seek 



earnestly the best gifts, but rather that we may prophecy-expound 
the Word. (1 Cor. 14:3.) 

Let us remember that the basis of all promotion from a lesser to a 
higher opportunity of work in the body, will be the faithfulness with 
which we use our present abilities. Again let none despise his office 
of Steward of this world's goods. If this is your opportunity use well 
your office, and perhaps you will be promoted by our head and 
become a dispenser of spiritual things. [We commend the plan 
suggested by Paul to all, even the very poorest; those who have 
never learned to give, have failed to rightly appreciate one of our 
choice privileges and pleasures. Read 1 Cor. 16:2, and 2 Cor. 8:1-8; 
and 9:1-9.] 



R365 : page 7 

A CRITICISM CRITICISED. 

A gentleman who read in "Food" concerning the first clause of 
Rev. 20:5. -"The rest of the dead lived not again until the thousand 
years were finished"-that this passage is spurious, and not found in 
any MSS. written previous to the fifth century— possibly 
questioning the correctness of our statement, or at least desiring to 
have additional testimony, wrote to the "Bible Banner," a Second- 
Advent publication, inquiring the correctness of this statement. 

In reply Eld. D. T. Taylor published the following in the "Banner" 
of May 4th, 1882: 

The words, "But the rest of the dead lived not again until the 
thousand years were finished," Rev. 20:5, are omitted, and not 
found in the Sinaitic Codex, which was probably made A.D. 331- 
350. It is the oldest N.T. MSS. known. But Tischendorf says its 
omission is "a mere error." The Alexandrine MSS., written about 
A.D. 450, has the text, and merely omits the words "but" and 
"again." The Vatican MSS., made about A.D. 350, omits no part, 
but contains the entire text, as now in our Bibles. Hence it is not 
true, as some writer has said in the "Banner," that this verse "is not 
found in any MSS. written previous to the fifth century. 

We must answer this, and if we answer it satisfactorily we hope our 
opponent will give a proper retraction to his remarks above quoted, 
at an early date. 

First then, the brother says: "The Alexandrine MS. -A.D. 450-has 
the text. " We reply, that any one understanding the subject, knows 
that 

R365 : page 8 

the fifth century commenced with the year 401, and ended with the 
year 500. Just so the fourth century began with the year 301 and 
ended with the year 400. So too, we say since 1801 that we are now 
living in the nineteenth century and may properly use the 



expression until the end of the year 1900. Now we admit freely that 
the text is found in 

R366 : page 8 

the Alexandrine MS., but we still claim, and every scholar will 
support us in it, that if the Alexandrine MS. was written in A.D. 
450, or any time after the year 400, it was not written previous to 
the fifth century. 

But it is claimed, that the passage is found in the Vatican MS. of 
about the year 350. This we most positively deny. Every authority 
on the subject bears witness that this Vatican MS. supposed to have 
been written about the middle of the fourth century, contains the 
New Testament only so far as Heb. 9:14, "from which verse to the 
end of the New Testament it is deficient; so that not only the last 
chapters of the Hebrews, but the Epistles to Timothy, Titus, and 
Philemon, as well as the Revelation are missing. " [We quote from 
C. Tischendoerf, perhaps the best of all authorities on ancient MSS 
ofN.T.] 

While the above mentioned is the MS., which is generally 
understood by the name "Vatican MS.," yet as a matter of fact there 
was more than one MS. of the New Testament in the Vatican 
Library; but none but the one above, is sufficiently ancient to 
constitute it an authority. The Emphatic Diaglott is principally 
compared with the "Vatican MS. No. 1209," the ancient copy; but 
for the lacking book of Revelation the Vatican MS. No. 1 160 is 
used, the author giving it a preference over the "Alexandrine MS.," 
though it was written about the eleventh century. (See "Diaglott" 
note to Rev. 1:1.) 

But even if brother Taylor got mixed on the two Vatican MSS., he 
is still at fault, for Vat. MS. 1 160 does not contain the disputed 
clause. See Diaglott note on Rev. 20:5. 

But it is claimed that Tischendoerf, the finder and translator of the 
very ancient and most authentic of all Greek MSS., excuses the fact 
that this clause does not appear in his "Sinaitic MS." by saying that 
it is doubtless "a mere error." To this we reply that we fail to see 
what weight this has on the subject. The finder of a book knows no 
more than any one else about whether or not the omission of this 
clause was a "mere error." We claim again, that the absence of this 
clause from all MSS. written prior to the fifth century, as well as 
the fact that it would contradict other Scriptures, which teach that 
the "Restitution of all things" is due at the coming of Jesus and 
before he shall finish his reign— prove the disputed clause to be 
spurious-an interpolation. (Acts 3:21.) 

The Syriac-Peshito version of the New Testament (the mother 
tongue of Jesus and the Apostles) was written in the latter part of 
the first or early part of the second century, and is therefore of 
earlier date than any Greek MS. extant. This most venerable 
authority, also repudiates the disputed first clause of Rev. 20:5. 



page 8 

THIS is the last number of Vol. III. All readers who have not 
subscribed since July last, should notify us at once whether they 
desire the paper continued or not. This applies also to names on the 
"Lords' Poor List." 

LEAFLET SUPPLEMENT -We send you a sample of some 
matter for free distribution, as a supplement. Order as many as you 
want, we will print 100,000 copies. They are on thin paper, 
convenient to enclose with letters. May they be a part of the hail of 
Isa. 28:17. 



R366 : page 8 

QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS. 

Ques. Do those who die in childhood ever obtain spiritual bodies? 

Ans. If the child was begotten of the spirit it will be in the 
resurrection, born of the spirit to perfect spiritual being. If not, it 
still retains the human nature, and in due time will have a part in the 
restitution of all things and may with all mankind, if it will, reach 
full human perfection. 

Since the begetting of the spirit is through the word of truth, (James 
1:18.) it follows that children who cannot understand at least the 
first principles of the doctrines of Christ, could not be begotten by 
those principles, or influenced to a consecration-sacrifice of their 
human nature. 

Ques. Does not the "Greek Church" as well as the Church of Rome 
have a place in prophecy? 

Ans. God of course could have given us a history of all the 
governments of earth. Yet as a matter of fact he has confined his 
prophetic declarations to a few-as outlined in Daniel's image and 
four great beasts. The declarations relative to present governments 
being almost exclusively confined to the nations of Europe— the 
remnants of the Roman Empire. 

Probably for similar reasons God has measurably confined those 
prophetic utterances which apply to religious systems, to that 
system which was given the seat of the beast (Rev. 13:2.) —The 
Church of Rome and her daughters (Rev. 17:5.) and passed by 
almost unmentioned, the other, and some of them larger, religious 
systems, such as Confucianism, Buddhism, Mohammedanism and 
the Greek Church. 

Ques. Please explain Rom. 6:10. "He died unto sin once." 

Ans. The Diaglott reads "by sin;" Murdoch's Syriac "for sin." We 
think the signification is that Jesus died for, or on account of, or by 



reason of sin. So it is also with those who as members of the body 
of Christ, are sharing in his death, (vs. 11.) With the body as with 
the head, it is not a dying to sin in the sense of presenting cut off 
sins as a sacrifice to our Father. No, Jesus "knew no sin" and his 
death was a sacrifice, giving up, not of sins, but of a sinless nature 
for the sins of others. So too with his body— we were sinners even 
as others, but we were redeemed, bought with a price, even his 
precious blood (life); and now with every sin stain cancelled, we as 
he did-present a sinless offering. (In God's estimation sinless and it 
should be so esteemed by us.) We present this sinless nature to 
share in his death-thus having fellowship in his sufferings and 
death which fills up that which is behind of the afflictions of Christ, 
and complete the World's ransom price. 

Read succeeding vs. 11-13. Reckon that the dead or sinful nature 
was buried when Christ died for your sins; reckon that as justified 
human beings you became alive when he rose; but go further and as 
justified beings present yourselves to God (living sacrifices) and 
yield your members to God as his instruments in doing all of his 
good work. 

Ques. Please explain Phil. 3:21. "Who shall change our vile body 
that it may be fashioned like unto his glorious body. " Does not this 
Scripture contradict the thought which you have so often expressed, 
viz: that the bodies of saints will be in the resurrection spiritual 
bodies, and totally "new creatures "-not formed in part by and out 
of the earthly bodies of the human nature? Does not this Scripture 
positively assert that the new body will be merely this vile body 
changed? 

Ans. The body to be changed, here mentioned, does not refer to our 
personal bodies, for then it should read "change our vile bodies that 
they &c. " But it is our vile body; one body (the body of Christ) 
composed of many members that is spoken of. 

It will help, in this as in every case if we examine the context. Paul 
is drawing a contrast between two classes claiming to be Christians. 
He sets himself as at the head of those who are living properly, and 
exhorts all true followers of Jesus running for the prize to follow 
and imitate him, and concludes by saying, "Brethren be followers 
together of me," vss. 15-17. This company constitute members of 
the true body of Christ, because they follow in his footsteps of self- 
denial. 

On the other hand he mentions the false ones saying, vss. 18 and 
19, "For many walk, of whom I have told you often, and now tell 
you even weeping, that they are the enemies of the cross of Christ: 
Whose end is destruction, whose God is their belly (appetite) and 
whose glory is in their shame, who mind earthly things." 

Now contrast with this body which falsely claimed to be a body of 
Christ, but which sought and gloried in and minded the very earthly 
things to which Jesus was crucified— contrast these, I say, with the 
aims, joys, and mind of the true body. Paul details the experiences, 



&c, of the true body in vss. 7-15. (Read carefully.) He says that the 
true body instead of glorying in earthly things and pampering 
earthly desires, counts all earthly glories and honors and gains as 
loss and dross, and casts them away as detestable compared to the 
glories and joys anticipated in the future with its head. Then he 
concludes his argument by assuring them that though this true body 
of Christ has become very poor, miserable, outcast, and vile, from a 
human standpoint, yet the time is coming when they will be owned 
and accepted to a condition of glory as his body by the true head. In 
consideration of this coming change from a condition of 
degradation to glory, he exhorts "Therefore my brethren... so stand 
fast in the Lord my dearly beloved." (Ch 4:1.) 

We give here, Murdoch's translation from the "Syriac," "Our 
concern (interest) is with heaven; [We are not minding earthly 
things,] and from thence we expect our vivifier, our Lord, Jesus the 
Messiah; who will change the body of our abasement that it may 
have the likeness of the body of His glory. " 

Ques. Please explain 1 Kings 17:22. 

Ans. The Hebrew word here translated soul, is nephesh; it signifies 
being, or life, or existence. Now read it: "the child's life came into it 
again"; and all is clear. The word soul has been shrouded in 
mystery by theologians, and helps to deceive themselves and others 
with the idea that it is an intelligent person which lives in a man. 
There is no excuse however for any one who has even a slight 
knowledge of the Hebrew, or is possessed of any of the "helps" of 
our day— there is no excuse for such persons making this mistake, as 
this same word nephesh, is repeatedly used with reference to the 
lower animals and fish, &c. But this is hidden from the general 
reader by the English translation. The translators, when nephesh is 
used in referring to fish and lower animals, generally translate it 
"breath" or "life," and sometimes where nothing else will make 
sense they translate it "breath" 

R367 : page 8 

or "life" in connection with mankind. But wherever the mystifying 
word soul can be used to give seeming support to the teachings of 
theology, it has the preference. 

Ques. What about baptism now; should it still be performed? 

Ans. Baptism into Christ, we regard as no longer possible since 
Oct. '81. All however who previous to that time had performed the 
real baptism into death; (consecration) we would still urge to 
perform the outward illustration of it, i.e., immersion into water. 

It should, however, be remembered that the "Baptism of John" was 
an outward sign of repentance and turning (being converted) to 
God. This symbol of sin washing, may still be performed on any 
who desire it. This last form is all that is generally recognized by 
Christian professors of today -"Knowing only the baptism of 



John." Very few know of the higher baptism into Christ's death, and 
thus into membership in his body. 

Ques. If God never cursed man for sin, why was it necessary for 
Jesus to die? 

Ans. God did curse man. The words of the curse were: "Dying, thou 
shalt die." We cannot make this subject more plain than we have 
done in "Why evil was permitted. " Read it again. Those who are so 
anxious for truth as to be willing to sacrifice other things to get it, 
are the ones for whom God prepared it. If thou searchest for her as 
men search for silver, then shalt thou find the knowledge of God 
and his plans. (Prov. 2:2-11.) 

Ques. Isa. 13:9-13. This will be answered with other similar 
statements in "Millennial Day Dawn. " 

Ques. Relative to explanation of Matt. 25:46 in March WATCH 
TOWER, permit me to inquire the Greek word there translated 
punishment and its critical definition. 

Ans. The word is kolasis. Young defines it to mean restraint; 
Liddell and Scott say it means pruning, and B. Wilson in the 
Diaglott renders it "cutting-off. " These are the best authorities on 
Greek. Thus it is clearly evident that the punishment referred to is- 
everlasting restraint or cutting off from life, of which they had 
proved themselves unworthy. 

As to when this destruction is due, read more particularly March 
number and see it to be at the close of the Millennial age. 

Ques. Do you claim that the Bible does not teach that there are 
three persons in one God? 

Ans. Yes: On the contrary, it does tell us that there is one God and 
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ of whom are all things (or who 
created all things). We believe then in One God and Father, and 
also in one Lord Jesus Christ whom God hath highly exalted, and 
given a name above every name. But these are two and not one 
being. They are one only in the sense of being in harmony. We 
believe also in a spirit of God called also the spirit of Christ and 
spirit of truth. But it is no more a person than is the spirit of devils 
and the spirit of the World and the spirit of Anti-Christ. The one 
represents the influence or power or will of God, and the other the 
power or influence or will of Satan and of the World. The biased 
views of the New Testament translators has led them to translate it 
when they could, as though it were a person. More on this again. 


