VOL. XXIII. JANUARY 15, 1902. No. 2. 



CONTENTS. 

Views from the Watch Tower 19 

Anti-Semitic Move Renewed 
in Russia 19 

The Zionist Congress 20 

The Decay of Belief 20 

Some Suggested Remedies 20 

A Pastor's Testimony 21 

The First Persecution 21 

The Great Jehovah's Plan 23 

"With Him— Called and Chosen 

and Faithful" 24 

Attempting to Deceive God 28 

May We Defend Earthly Interests? 29 

page 18 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH, 131 GIPSY LANE, FOREST GATE, LONDON E. ENGLAND. 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE, 5c (2-l/2d.) A COPY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER, will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



NEW SUBSCRIBERS AND OLD ONES. 

We welcome the lists of new subscribers now coming in, 
and greatly appreciate the zeal of the friends, manifested thus. 
We offer no "Premiums," preferring to have only such help as 
is tendered to the Lord by grateful hearts. They shall receive 
their reward in another form,— from the Master. 

But, however glad we are to get new names on our lists, 
we are still more pleased to have old ones continue there. It 
will be with pain that we will now, shortly, cut off our list the 
names of several hundred whose subscriptions expired a year 
ago, and who have neglected to send money for renewal, or 



request to have the journal continue on credit, or on the free 
list,— as the "Lord's Poor." 

We give all such this final notice; and explain that unless 
you state the matter explicitly, no record is made in our subscription 
books; and thus our list-clerk assumes that you have 
not been heard from and are either dead or no longer interested; 
and the name is dropped. 

If you sent us money and we received it, you get a mail 
acknowledgment of it. If any mistake appears drop us a card 
at once, explaining. If your paper ceases to come to you, write 
at once; we will be glad to reenter your name; but it would 
save both you and us trouble if you would express your intentions 
promptly when your subscription (whether cash, 
credit or free) expires. We desire that all the deeply interested 
shall have the journal so long as they live and it is published. 
We have no desire to force or intrude it upon any one. 



If you subscribe for a friend on account of Good Hopes 
or sending the money, please notify him to expect the journal, 
otherwise he may be less interested in examining it. 



R2938 : page 19 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 



AMERICA is forcing a revolution on Europe 
as certainly as God reigns. 

How? By taking the bread out of European 
mouths, by sending men, women and children 
to bed supperless, by forcing European millions to 
live upon two meals a day, and those two scant ones, 
in reality not more than one and one-half. American 
genius, American machinery, American push, 
American capital is doing that, and each revolution 
of American engines brings the inevitable day of 
doom for Europe nearer. 

How long has it been since the American manufacturer 
began to realize his power? Ten years, perhaps. 
What has he accomplished toward the inevitable 
end in that time? He has closed European 
factories; he has cut European profits on manufactured 
goods to the minimum; he has thrown European 
workmen out of employment, he has forced 
Europe a long step ahead toward the day of 
revolution. 

But the end is not yet. Scarcely have we seen 
the beginning. Wait until a heavier over-production 
than we have yet witnessed cuts prices on manufactured 
articles still lower. Who can best stand 
such a cut? The American. Why? Because he 



has not already been forced to the last notch. He 
does not know the meaning of small profits. When 
he begins to sell on a small margin of profit the European 
manufacturer will go out of business, and the 
revolution will be on. 

Of all the nations of Europe England, blood-stained 
England, is least able to stand the dark days 
that are to come. Our people have drank more liberally 
of the liquor of prosperity and financial freedom 
than have those of other nations. We have cultivated 
a taste for the luxuries of life that is hardly 
known among the peasant classes of the continent. 
It will be hard to renounce these, and I fear they 
will not be renounced without a struggle that will be 
the dearest and darkest in the history of the English 
empire. 

American prosperity means European bankruptcy, 
and bankruptcy means anarchy.— W. T. Stead. 

This is a gloomy picture, not only for Europe 
but for the entire world; for the world today is bound 
together as never before. If Europe suffers, America 
will just as surely suffer. The poor world, the 
"groaning creation" has our sympathy as it opens 
its eyes to the grand result of its highest civilization, 
under its inexorable law of selfishness. Would that 
we could point out to this brilliant editor, and to all 
men, the glorious prospect we see in the Word of God 
—the silver lining of the cloud, which they see not;— 
the dawning of the long-promised Millennial Day. 
But a clear insight into the lengths and breadths 
and heights and depths of the divine love and plan 
is intended only for the "little flock," yet. "None 
of the wicked shall understand; but the wise shall understand.' 
-Dan. 12:10. 

Those who were readers of Zion's Watch Tower 
twenty years ago, will remember how astonished they 
and others were at its presentation, from the Scriptures, 
of the very conditions which all men now perceive 
to be fast hastening toward us;— anarchy in the 
midst of the greatest prosperity the world has ever 
known. Those who have newly come into the truth, 
and who never saw the earlier issues of our journal, 
are often amazed at the statements they find in the 
Millennial Dawn, Vol. I., when they notice that it was 
published in 1886. 

Our Master, who gives us in his Word the inside 
information, tells us to note the fulfillments; and 
adds, "When ye see these things begin to come to 
pass, then know that the Kingdom of God is nigh at 
hand. Look up, lift up your heads and rejoice, for 
your deliverance draweth nigh."— Luke 21:25-31. 

ANTI-SEMITIC MOVE RENEWED IN RUSSIA. 



Vienna Dispatch.— Again the Jews in Russia are 
being harassed. Presumably this is by order of the 
government, since the oppressive measures are not 
confined to any one place. The ministry of the interior 

R2938 : page 20 

has appointed a special commission, under the 
presidency of M. Dournovo, to revise the laws and 
regulations governing the Jews. Heretofore Jewish 
matters have been discussed and reported upon by 
the clerical department. Intervention by the ministry 
of the interior, acting on its own discretion, is 
likely to lead to a more stringent policy than ever. 

Jews of all classes are now prevented from moving 
freely about Russia in pursuit of their professions. 
For example, the law allows certain classes of 
Jews to reside in St. Petersburg or Moscow, but it 
does not expressly say that a Jew merchant has the 
right to trade in those cities. Therefore, if a Moscow 
Jew merchant wishes, he may go to St. Petersburg 
and he may even live there, but he may not 
trade there. If he dies his wife and children are immediately 
"cleaned out." This is the phrase used. 
They are compelled to go to the Jewish "pale," or 
the place from which they originally went to St. Petersburg 
or Moscow. 

In every form of activity known in Russia today 
the Jew is in some way represented, and, as he 
has no friends except those of his own religious persuasion, 
he is a convenient anvil for every official 
hammer. The Russians hate the Jews because they 
fear them even more than they fear the Germans or 
the Poles. 

Now that the ministry of the interior has taken a 
hand in the persecution, there will be no refuge. 
The officials will treat them with less mercy even 
than the clerical department, which formerly had 
them under supervision. There are instances where 
the clerical authorities have shown some mercy toward 
Jews, but there is none where the purely political 
officials have treated him as anything better than 
a convenient scape-goat.— Chicago Record-Herald. 

THE ZIONIST CONGRESS. 



As per announcement, the Zionist Congress opened 
December 26th, at Basle, Switzerland. It was attended 
by about one thousand delegates, twenty-five of them 
from the United States. Dr. Herzl of Vienna, the 
founder, presided, but had nothing definite to report 
from the Sultan of Turkey, respecting Palestine. He 
reported, however, that in his audience with him, in 
May last, the Sultan had expressed his sympathy with 



Zionism's ambitions, declared himself the friend of the 
Jews, and that he considered them desirable as colonists. 
Failure to receive something more tangible was 
a source of disappointment to the Congress; but it is 
not discouraged. It has thus far accumulated about 
$1,000,000.00 toward its object;-nearly all from the 
poor Jews of the world. 



R2938 : page 20 

THE DECAY OF BELIEF 



PRESIDENT CYRUS NORTHROP, of the 

Minnesota State University, recently delivered 
an address before the Chicago Baptist Social 
Union. In it he made the following reference to the 
present religious conditions. He said in part:— 

It seems to me that in looking at the religious 
condition of the country— I do not mean the statistics 
of the churches, nor the amount of gifts to missions 
and philanthropy, nor the general condition of the 
church as an organization— but I do mean the state 
of thought in the church itself in reference to its own 
faith; it seems to me that we are confronted by four 
marked changes which have grown into prominence 
in the last few years. If I am wrong I shall be glad 
to know it, and if I am right I shall be grateful, as 
I am sure you all will be, to any Biblical scholar who 
will show us the truth. These changes stated briefly 
are: First— A decay of belief in the supernatural. 
Second— What I may call the disintegration of the 
Bible. Third— New views respecting inspiration. 
Fourth— Loss of the sense of accountability. 

These four changes are essentially one. They 
are at least shoots from a common root— and that 
root is doubt as to whether God ever has had any 
communication with men. Under this doubt Christianity 
ceases to be the religion which God intended 
for men to cherish, and becomes simply one of the 
religions of the world— a purely human device, like 
Confucianism or Mohammedanism, of no more authority 
than these and to be preferred to these only 
as its teachings are more reasonable and uplifting. 
There is a world of difference between saying this 
thing is true because God said it and God said this 
because it is true. The former carries with it the certainty 
of "Thus saith the Lord." The latter is of no 
validity, because many things may be true which God 
never said. And if God never said anything to men 
inspiration becomes so attenuated that it is hardly 
discoverable under the more or less theory which 
grants inspiration of some degree to every one who 



voices a noble truth, and grants no higher inspiration, 
though perhaps a greater degree of inspiration, 
to any one else. Under this arrangement a man 
must first get his idea of God and then determine 
whether anything is the product of divine inspiration 
according as it meets or does not meet that idea. 
There is in this no possibility of revelation in the 
usual sense. The order is inverted— God does not 
reveal truth to men; the truth on the contrary, reveals 
God. Now this may or may not be satisfactory 
to some. But it is, to say the least, very unsettling 
to human faith and very depressing to the ordinary 
Christian who does not know enough about God's 
style to determine whether he said a thing or not, 

R2939 : page 20 

and who is not sufficiently familiar with the internal 
signs of inspiration to determine whether any particular 
writing reveals God truly or not. And this 
condition of things is the darkest part of the outlook 
at the opening of the twentieth century. 

SOME SUGGESTED REMEDIES. 

FOR THE PULPIT: 

a. "Preach the Word." Restore the Bible to its 
rightful place as the Word of God divinely inspired 
and supremely authoritative. Use the Old Testament 
Scriptures as our Lord used them; freely and 
without apology. He never explained them away. 

You need not. To discredit your text book is to discount 
your message. Eliminate the "ifs" and "perhapses," 
and proclaim the Word in the power and 
demonstration of the Spirit. 

R2939 : page 21 

b. Remember your calling; it is not to exploit 
shifting philosophies and passing fads; sociology, 
evolution or even higher criticism; but to declare the 
gospel of the grace of God. The former never edified 
a church or saved a sinner or comforted a human 
heart. The latter is the wisdom of God and the 
power of God unto salvation. 

"The prophet that hath a dream, let him tell a 
dream; and he that hath my word let him speak my 
word faithfully." 

c. If the Bible doctrine is true that the one sufficient 
remedy for man's sin is the sacrificial death of 

the Divine *Substitute— not his teaching or his example 
—then the popular teaching of "salvation by 
character," is manifestly unscriptural and unwarranted. 
"He suffered for us, the just for the unjust, that 
he might bring us to God." 



d. "The fatherhood of God and the brotherhood 
of man," as so often indiscriminately and universally 
applied to saint and sinner alike, is equally unscriptural 
and misleading. 

There is no spiritual Fatherhood without spiritual 
birth. "That which is born of the flesh is flesh." 
"Ye must be born again." 

FOR THE PEW: 

a. "Take heed what ye hear." "Let no man deceive 
you with vain words." "To the law and to the 
testimony; if they speak not according to this word, 
it is because there is no light in them." "Examine 
yourselves whether ye be in the faith." "Be ye ready 
at all times to give... an answer for the hope that 

is in you." 

b. "Be not conformed to this world, but be ye 
transformed by the renewing of your mind." "Be ye 
blameless and harmless, the sons of God in the midst 
of a crooked and perverse generation, among whom 
ye shine as lights in the world, holding forth the word 
of life." 

c. Live and walk habitually in the light of 
Titus 2:11-14. 

A PASTOR'S TESTIMONY. 



Joseph Parker, of London, on the 40th anniversary 
of his pastorate of the City Temple, said: "Looking 
back upon all the chequered way, I have to say 
that the only preaching that has done me good is 
the preaching of a Savior who bore my sins in his 
own body on the tree, and the only preaching by 
which God has enabled me to do good to others is the 
preaching in which I have held up my Savior, not as 
a sublime example, but as the Lamb of God that taketh 
away the sin of the world." 



*We must understand this to mean,— the substitute 
which God furnished: otherwise it would be out of accord 
with the Scripture testimony, and the meaning of the word 
ransom,— "a corresponding price." 



R2939 : page 21 

THE FIRST PERSECUTION. 
-ACTS4:1-12.-FEB. 2.- 



"There is none other name under heaven 
given among men whereby we must be saved." 



THE COMMOTION caused by the healing of 

the cripple by James and John, and the gathering 

of the crowd of worshipers to whom they 

preached, brought upon the apostles a new difficulty. 

The priests, whose ministries were more or less interrupted 

by the disturbance, felt a grievance against 

those who thus attracted attention away from themselves 

and their services, and the officers of the Temple, 

whose duty it was to preserve order, were also 

disturbed. These, coming upon the preaching Apostle 

and the interested multitude, arrested the three 

who were the cause of such a commotion, that the 

matter might be enquired into. It was toward evening, 

and therefore too late to gather the members 

of the Sanhedrin Court. The three who had been 

witnessing for God and for Christ were put in ward, 

in the prison; not as felons, but for trial. It would 

have been possible for the imprisoned men to have 

viewed their situation from the standpoint of unbelief, 

and to have said to themselves and each other: God 

did not approve our work, and hence has permitted 

us to be thus arrested and imprisoned, and now we 

know not what the result will be on the morrow, for 

those who crucified our Lord may crucify us also. 

Or they might, in unbelief, have reasoned still 
otherwise, and have said to each other: After all, 
what right have we to think that God has anything 
to do with these matters? We are like other men, 
and have merely found some new way in which natural 
law operates in the healing of the sick: God 
evidently is not concerned in this work; for if he 
were surely he would not have permitted us to come 
into these straits, while we were seeking to serve 
him and to declare the good tidings. But we may 
safely assume that the thoughts and words of the 
prisoners took a totally different direction. Full of 
faith, they no doubt said to themselves: We know 
not in what way the Lord may intend to use this, 
which seems to be a disadvantage to us, and an interruption 
to his work; doubtless however, he will 
use it in some manner to forward his cause and to 
reach more of his people with the truth. 

As a matter of fact, the Lord evidently intended 
through this seeming calamity to bring to the apostles 
a still grander opportunity of testifying to the 
truth on the next day— of preaching to a class which 
they might never again have opportunity to reach— 
the priestly class, the ruling class, represented in the 
Sanhedrin, and those who would gather at its sessions. 
When the Sanhedrin Court opened the next 
morning, amongst its seventy members, representatives 



of the most influential classes in Jerusalem, 
were Annas, the high priest, and Caiaphas, his son, 
both of whom had about two months previously presided 
in the trial of the Master himself. Nevertheless, 
the apostles were evidently not at all dismayed by 
the dignity of the Court— the Lord evidently fulfilling 
to them his promise, "Ye shall be brought before 
kings and governors for my sake, for a testimony 
against them and the Gentiles; but when they 
deliver you up, take no thought how or what ye shall 
speak; for it shall be given you in that hour what ye 
shall speak." (Matt. 10:18-20.) That Peter, as 
spokesman for the three, was supernaturally assisted, 
is implied in the narrative. "He was filled with 
the holy spirit." 

It is not amiss here to notice that the Jewish 
party which most particularly persecuted our Lord 

R2939 : page 22 

was the sect of the Pharisees, the holiness people 

of that time, basing their opposition upon our Lord's 

public declarations of their hypocrisies,— the Sadducees 

taking less interest in the persecution. But, on 

the contrary, in the Acts of the Apostles, the persecutions 

of the Church seem to have been largely at 

the hands of the Sadducees. The Sadducees should 

scarcely be considered a religious party, for they denied 

the resurrection of the dead, and denied also 

the existence of spirit beings, and hence believed 

principally in a religion for the present life merely. 

The Sadducees were the policy-men of that time. 

They favored harmony with the Roman Empire, and 

might, indeed, be termed the politicians of the Jewish 

nation. History says that the high priest and his 

family, and those principally in influence, were Sadducees. 

It is evident, therefore, that the preaching of 

the resurrection of Jesus, and of some spiritual power 

by which he could work through the apostles to the 

healing of the man born lame, would be an aggravation 

to these Sadducees, because it was directly in 

conflict with their belief and teachings. 

Indeed, it is worthy of notice, here and in subsequent 
lessons, that one of the main features of the 
Gospel which the apostles preached was the doctrine 
of the resurrection— that Christ had risen from the 
dead, and that through him in due time not only believers 
should be raised from the tomb, but ultimately 
all the world of mankind be released from death,— 
that each and all might have a full share in the judgment 
or trial for life everlasting, which had been 
secured by the ransom sacrifice of Christ. No wonder, 
then, that the Sadducees specially resented this 
new doctrine, which antagonized their views and to 
some extent supported their religious opponents, the 
Pharisees. 



It may at first seem peculiar that a court trial 
should be held in respect to the healing of a cripple. 
However, the object of the trial evidently was, if 
possible, to condemn the apostles for having practiced 
necromancy, sorcery, the black art. For, according 
to the law, a witch or wizard or necromancer, 
a spirit medium, was to be put to death. 

If Peter had been filled with fear he would not 
have spoken as he did to this Court, or if he had 

R2940 : page 22 

been filled with the spirit of egotism and boastfulness 

he would have spoken differently;— he would have 

spoken unwisely, rashly, no doubt. But filled as he 

was with the holy spirit, the spirit of meekness, patience, 

gentleness, long-suffering, brotherly kindness, 

and guided in his words by this spirit, he made 

an address which is beautiful, both for its simplicity, 

its directness, and its meek-boldness. His opening 

sentence had in it, possibly, a gentle irony respecting 

a trial for a good deed; but, as on previous occasions, 

he immediately proceeded to disclaim for himself 

and his associate, John, any power, any authority, 

in connection with the matter, and declares that 

the miracle was performed in the name, by the authority, 

by the power, of Jesus of Nazareth. Once 

again, he is not ashamed to own that the one he acknowledges 

was contemptuously called the Nazarene; 

nor to say that he is a follower of the one who 

was crucified as a malefactor. While telling the plain 

truth, that this very Sanhedrin had caused the death 

of Jesus, he states the matter without bitterness or 

acrimony. 

Peter allowed the fact that God raised up Jesus 
from the dead to stand as the proof that they had 
erred in their condemnation of him; and, without 
parleying the question, he proceeded to assure his 
hearers that this one, Jesus, whom they despised 
and rejected, had nevertheless been owned of God 
as the "chief corner stone" of the great Temple 
which God purposes to build. He thus referred their 
minds directly to a Messianic Psalm (1 18:22) familiar 
to them, pointing out its fulfillment in Christ, and 
declares, "Neither is the salvation in any other." This 
expression, "the salvation," to his hearers would have 
the sense of, The salvation for which we Jews, as a 
nation, have been waiting and longing,— a national 
salvation, and an individual salvation in the Kingdom 
of God. 

Let us mark well also the inspired utterance of 
the Apostle, "There is none other name under heaven 
given among men whereby we must be saved." 
This would be a difficult lesson for his hearers to receive. 
It would mean a total revolution of their 
theories, hopes, aims, plans and projects. It would 



mean that they had been wrong, utterly wrong, in 
all their expectations for some time. It would mean 
that they had, as teachers, been misrepresenting the 
divine plan and misleading the people. The Apostle's 
course, however, was plain. It was proper that 
he should state the matter clearly, without peradventure, 
that his hearers might have a full testimony 
respecting the truth. 

The Apostle's words are "a hard saying" today, 
also, in the nominal church. False doctrines have 
made it appear an unreasonable statement in the 
minds of Christian people generally. They say, This 
cannot be so, because if true, it would mean that the 
heathen are lost. If true, it would mean that our 
friends and neighbors and relatives who have never 
believed in the name of Jesus, who have never accepted 
him as their Savior, are lost; and by "lost" 
they would mean— gone into eternal torment. Thus 
does false doctrine becloud and contradict the truth. 
But how beautifully and how simply might the Apostle's 
words be received just as they are, if all could 
but realize that the whole world was already lost, 
already condemned, by one man's disobedience; already 
under sentence of death and passing into it. 
Peter's declaration is that only those who have accepted 
Jesus have yet come under the terms of the 
only salvation God has provided: and, since Jesus 
"tasted death for every man," it follows that in God's 
"due time" every man must come to an opportunity 
of hearing of the only name, and of accepting the 
one salvation. This opportunity, according to the 
Scriptures, will be during Messiah's reign in the 
Millennial age, when "the knowledge of the Lord 
will fill the whole earth," and "all the families of the 
earth shall be blessed" by the glorified Christ and his 
glorified Church unitedly, the spiritual seed of Abraham. 
-Gal. 3:16,29; Jer. 31:34. 

Blinded by the inconsistencies of doctrines received 
from the "dark ages," many of the Lord's 
professed people are today grappling with this question 
of who shall be saved, many or few, and fail to 

R2940 : page 23 

see that the greater part of God's plan of salvation 
is to come after the calling and perfecting of the 
"elect," the Church. Thinking that the present life 
ends all trial for every creature, many are convincing 
themselves that the Apostle erred, and that instead 
of one name only being given for salvation 
there are many names— including those of heathen 
divinities and teachers. They fail to see the ransom 
and its importance, as paving the way for teaching 
of any value or assistance. Hence they vainly hope 
that the ministries of Confucius and others will somehow 
or other save them, separate and apart from 



Christ, whom the Scriptures declare to be God's appointed 
Savior for the whole world,— and of whom 
Peter, under the plenary inspiration of the holy spirit, 
declares that his is the only name whereby salvation 
must be obtained, if obtained at all. These false 
hopes turn the eyes of many away, so that they cease 
to look for the God-ordained "Sun of righteousness," 
whose beams, we are promised, shall shortly enlighten 
and bless all. -Mai. 4:2. 

Very evidently the testing for the saints in this 
end of the age is coming along this very line— belief 
or unbelief in the testimony which God has given 
us through his Son, and through his chosen apostles, 
—"the twelve." Those who are faithful to the Word 
of the Lord will come off conquerors; those who 
yield to human theory, miscalled wisdom, will fail, 
will stumble, will be separated from the true wheat, 
the entire remnant of which must shortly be gathered 
into the garner. We thank God that this stumbling 
and unbelief will not mean the Second Death 
to all who stumble, because very few today evidently 
have that sufficiency of light and opportunity essential 
to a sentence to the Second Death;— very 
few obtain their full trial. We are to judge ourselves 
closely, however, and build no false hopes for ourselves, 
if we are among the favored few who have 
tasted the good word of God and been made partakers 
of the holy spirit. We are to remember the 
Apostle's caution that such as have enjoyed these 
favors, if they should fall away, would be doing despite 
to God's grace, and would afterward find no 
place for repentance.— Heb. 10:29. 

R2945 : page 23 

THE GREAT JEHOVAH'S PLAN. 



I am so small, and thou so great; 

So weak, and thou so strong; 
Yet from my heart there flows to thee 

A true and loving song. 
Thou art Jehovah, God! 

And hast in thy control 
The empire of the universe, 

Where suns and systems roll 
In wide expanse of trackless space, 

Yet held in place by thee; 
Each sphere into its orbit set, 

Through vast immensity. 

Of dust am I, and to earth's dust 

I'll molder and decay; 
This living frame and pulsing heart 

Will soon have passed away; 



But is it all of life to live, 

Or all of death to die? 
Thy Word proclaims a ransom found, 

On whom we can rely. 

Thou art the mighty King, 

Thy name, the Holy One, 
But unto thee a living way 

Was opened by thy Son. 
He is our righteousness; 

Through him comes peace with thee; 
And in his name we favor seek, 

And are from sin set free. 

He tasted death for every man; 

He dieth once— no more; 
And by his sacrifice secured 

Man's rights he will restore. 
"Death" was the penalty of sin, 

But Love o'er Death hath won; 
For the gift of God is life supreme, 

Eternal, through his Son. 

He died for all of human kind; 

He rose that they might live; 
And, as God's Word is ever true, 

This greater life he'll give! 
In sheol, hades, hell, 

In earth, or oceans' deep, 
His voice and power will soon be felt, 

To wake from death's long sleep. 

The one true church, the "little flock," 

The Holy Spirit sought, 
As kings and "royal priests" of God, 

Are to the Father brought. 
"First fruits" are they of those who slept: 

Joint-heirs with Christ, their Lord, 
When he, who is their life, appears, 

He'll bring them their reward. 
Made like the One they serve and love, 

His nature to them given; 
His power, glory, honors share; 

Their home, with him, in heaven. 

As "Abraham's seed," they'll bless the earth 
And rule with loving sway; 

Instruct and teach the way to life 
Is to God's laws obey. 

But they who will not hear this Priest- 
Christ and the Church— his wife, 

Will be cut off by second death, 
Destroyed from hope of life. 

But they "who will" need never die, 
And glories, yet unknown, 

Are kept reserved in store for those 



Who loyal love have shown. 
Thus up the scale to perfect life, 

In "highway" wide and broad, 
The ransomed race can seek and find 

Full harmony with God. 

A race redeemed, an earth new made, 

Riches and wealth untold; 
A world where righteousness will dwell 

And man his God behold! 
Where pain and sickness, grief and death 

Are memories of the past; 
Where loving faithfulness to God 

Forever more will last, 
With curse removed, the blight of sin 

Entirely swept away, 
And man God's image evermore 

Abides in perfect day. 

R2946 : page 23 

This is thy finished work, 

Thy own most glorious plan; 
And this the wondrous love thou'st shown 

Toward sinful, fallen man. 
Oh, Israel's God! How great art thou! 

What wisdom, love and grace 
The eye of faith will always find 

When we thy dealings trace!— Mrs. Jennie M. Stratton. 



R2940 : page 24 
"WITH HJM--CALLED AND CHOSEN AND FAITHFUL. 



BECAUSE considerable interest is being manifested, 

by our readers, on the subject of the 

Gospel Age call, and the prospects of those who 

have consecrated themselves to the Lord since 1881, 

we take this occasion to present some thoughts supplemental 

to what we have already presented, in our 

issue of Nov. 1, 1901, and in Dawn, Vol. III., pages 

212-216. 

The terms of the gospel are necessarily those of 
a call or invitation; leaving the matter of acceptance 
open and optional with the invited ones. Hence 
we read, "Many are called, but few chosen;" and note 
that, the invited are advised, not commanded, to 
make their "calling and their election sure," by compliance 
with the terms of their call. (Matt. 20:14; 
2 Pet. 1:10.) Commands to accept an invitation to 
joint-heirship with Christ, and penalties for not accepting 
that invitation, would be as incongruous as 



to have given a call or invitation to keep the Law 
Covenant, or, in the Millennium, to invite the keeping 
of the Laws then to be promulgated. We cannot 
even suppose that the holy angels are merely invited 
to obey the divine mandates. We must suppose 
that they are under a law commanding their 
obedience. We must assume that they have much 
of the spirit expressed by our dear Master, who is 
represented as saying, "I delight to do thy will, O my 
God; thy law is written in my heart." If this were 
not their attitude they would surely not be holy 
angels. 

The reasonableness of a Creator, through his 
representative, giving his just and good commands 
rather than invitations, becomes so apparent upon 
a little reflection, that we want to scrutinize all the 
more closely this question:— Why did God, during 
this age, apparently depart from so reasonable a rule, 
and, instead, to allure us with a high-calling, inviting 
us to become joint-heirs with his Son in the Kingdom? 
Why does he send word to us saying,— "Ye 
are not under the Law, but under grace"— favor? 

The reason is, that divine law can demand no 
more than even-handed justice; and the Lord's purpose 
during this Gospel Age is to select a "little 
flock" along lines of self-denial, sacrifice,— beyond 
what Justice could demand. Hence of necessity this 
must be accomplished by a call— an invitation, with 
exceeding great and precious promises attached as 
incentives; "that by these we might [be encouraged 
to faithfulness, and so] become partakers of the divine 
nature,"— in the Kingdom.— 2 Pet. 1:4. 

God foreknew us; we were "Elect according to 
the foreknowledge of God the Father." "And whom 
he did foreknow, he also did predestinate must be 
conformed to the image of his Son." He determined 
in advance that as the Son must pass through severe 
tests before being accepted to the divine nature, 
so also, all who would be acceptable to joint-heirship 
with him must exhibit and demonstrate that 
they have his spirit; that they are copies of him;— the 
very image of him, in their hearts. And the object 
of this Gospel Age is to call, and find, and test this 
predetermined class.— I Pet. 1:2; Rom. 8:29. 

The promises made to the seed of Abraham 
(though appropriated by the twelve tribes of Israel, 

R2941 : page 24 

without divine disapproval) belonged really to anti-typical 

Israel— spiritual Israel. The natural seed, as 

natural branches in the olive-tree (representing divine 

favor) were allowed to grow for a time and be 

tested, but on failure they were broken off;— new 

branches coming forward continually, until our 

Lord's first advent. The branches then in place were 



specially favored with the offer of the highest spiritual 
favor— not under the Law, but under Grace. 

But few, "a remnant," were in the heart-condition 
to appreciate and accept this great favor. The 
majority clung to attempts at self-justification; and 
like their fathers were broken off. Then the message 
was broadened; the invitation went to the Gentiles, 
"wild olive branches" to fill up the places of 
the broken off natural branches;— to complete the 
foreordained number of the elect. The total number 
of branches in the tree is 144,000, springing from 
twelve main limbs or tribes. Keeping up the Scriptural 
figure, we may say that as we who were by nature 
Gentiles, are grafted into the Abrahamic Covenant, 
we are reckoned as members of the original 
twelve tribes,— sealed, spiritual Israelites— until the 
predestined number, 144,000, shall have been 
completed. 

The methods by which the Lord has proceeded 
to call these "elect" are worthy of careful notice. 

(1) Our Lord declares that he called "sinners" 
in Israel "to repentance." This call was no part of 
"our high calling" to a share with Christ in the heavenly 
Kingdom; but it was a preparatory step: guilty 
sinners are not invited to, nor desired in the Kingdom. 
The call to faith and repentance, if heartily accepted 

by the sinner, brings him justification from 

sin— release from divine condemnation— reconciliation 

with the Father. 

(2) "Being justified by faith [after repentance], 
we have peace with God [realizing that our sins and 
imperfections are covered] through the sacrifice of 
our Lord Jesus Christ; by whom also [additionally] 
we have access into this grace wherein we stand, 
[viz.,] rejoicing in the hope of the glory of God,"— 
the hope of sharing the Kingdom glories of our Lord 
Jesus. How did we gain access into this grace, after 
justification? By another call or another part of the 

one call— God "called us to glory and virtue [excellence]." 
-2 Pet. 1:3; Rom. 5:1,2. 

In a general way all repentant believers, justified, 
are called or invited to consecrate themselves to 
the Lord; because, as each starts out desirous of doing 
right— (with no thought of self-sacrifice), he goes 
but a short distance until he finds great opposition 
to right-doing, and even to right-thinking. He finds 
his opposition coming not only from the world and 
the devil, as he might have expected, but also from 
his own flesh, and from nominal Christians. These 
four opponents harass the newly justified will— whiles 
in anger, whiles in pity and sympathy— declaring 
that the right way is an impossible one, and that an 
attempt even to follow it will mean the ruin of every 
earthly prospect. 

THE EFFECTUAL CALLING. 



This is a testing time. Will the justified one 
heed the voices of the world, the flesh and the devil, 
and choose a downward or, at least, a compromise 
path? Or will he heed the voice of God, inviting him 

R2941 : page 25 

to walk in the footsteps of Jesus, in the "narrow way" 
which leads to glory, honor and immortality? If he 
obeys God's invitation, he is one of the effectually 
called. His acceptance means a full consecration to 
God;— a renouncing of all earthly hopes and 
prospects, to obey God rather than self or others; 
and to have the blessings God has provided for his 
faithful: (though at this stage he cannot clearly discern 
the reward). This is self-sacrifice. God's acceptance 
of the sacrifice (the consecration) is guaranteed 
by the terms of the general call: further, it is 
attested by receipt of "the spirit of holiness," "the 
spirit of the truth": additionally, by an ability to discern 
spiritual things, and "to comprehend with all 
saints the heights and depths and lengths and 
breadths of the love of God."— Eph. 3:18. 

Since our standing is the result of our acceptance 
of God's gracious call, and since the Father seeketh 
only such as worship and serve him in spirit and in 
truth, it follows that, in the exercise of our free wills, 
we may if we choose renounce our consecration, withdraw 
our sacrifice, and thenceforth walk after the 
flesh, and not after the spirit. But whoever does 
so, of course loses the spirit of God, the spirit of his 
begetting to the new nature,— he is no longer to be 
classed among those begotten of God;— he is of those 
who "draw back unto perdition," destruction, Second 
Death, nonentity. He who is in the begotten 
condition "sinneth not [willingly, designedly, of 
preference] because his seed [the holy spirit] remaineth 
in him:" while it remains he cannot love or 
willingly serve sin.— Heb. 10:39; I Jno. 3:9. 

THE PREDESTINED NUMBER OF THE ELECT. 



The more our knowledge and experience expand 
our judgments, the smaller is apt to be our estimate 
of the number who ever reach the point of making 
such a consecration or self-sacrifice as we have above 
delineated. And, on the other hand, growing experience 
is apt to convince us that comparatively 
few of those who have consecrated themselves, fully 
and intelligently, ever draw back;— in the sense of 
willingly and heartily renouncing the Lord and their 



covenant obligations. 

The large numbers who profess conversion during 
"revivals," etc., and soon fall away, are not to 
be reckoned as of this class. They merely heard a 
call to repentance and reformation; a call which any 
and all are authorized to make, at any time. The 
majority never progressed beyond repentance, even 
to the extent of justification;— the chaffy, confused 
presentations of most of revivalists, and so-called 
teachers, being quite insufficient knowledge to lead 
even to justifying faith— much less to sanctifying 
faith. 

Accepting the word "called" as applying only 
to those who come under the conditions of justification, 
and subsequent full sanctification through a 
belief of the truth; and admitting that these, in all, 
have been very few at any period— truly a "little 
flock"— can we suppose the number so small as 144,000 
from Pentecost until now? 

Examining our own day, and the views of consecration 
now prevalent, and the general scarcity of 
that quality;— remembering that love for the truth 
and the brethren is among the tests of devotion to 
God;— remembering, too, that a knowledge of present 
truth is to be an indication of those now close to the 
Lord in favor;— we are inclined to look into the past 
with far less optimism than in years past. With a 
clearer eye than formerly, for what constitutes a 
saint, and a martyr "beheaded for the witness of Jesus," 
we incline to think that but few of the millions 
of martyrs were really saints,— from the Scriptural 
standpoint. 

For instance, St. Bartholomew's day— and its 
slaughter of French Huguenots: Have we any sound 
reason for supposing that the hapless victims were 
any more saintly or more sinful than the Galileans 
who suffered death at the hands of Pilate?— or than 
the eighteen upon whom the tower of Siloam fell, 
and slew them?— or than a like number slain today 
in Paris, or London, or Berlin, or Vienna, or Rome, 
or St. Petersburg, or Washington? Today, when 
religious questions have been largely removed from 
the arena of party strife, it is somewhat difficult for 
us to realize that, in olden times, all politics turned 
chiefly on religious questions. Suppose that the 
Boers were Catholics and the British Protestants, or 
the Filipinos Protestants and the Americans Catholics, 
—and then imagine how partizan historians could 
write up both sides of these wars, and describe their 
victims as Christian martyrs. 

We are not meaning by this to intimate that 
there were no true saints martyred in olden times, 
anymore than we are denying that some true saints 
may have fallen in the South African and Philippine 
and Cuban and Chinese wars. What we do mean to 
imply is, that any estimate which would rank all those 



millions of the past (who, nobly, and ignobly, died 
for their convictions), as "saints," "overcomers," 
members of the "little flock,"— would be nearly as 
gross a mistake as to suppose that all who have fallen 
for their convictions in modern warfare are such. 
We must remember that the records of martyrs 
such as Cranmer and Latimer, and others less notable, 
who surely gave strong evidences of saintship, 
and whom we hope to meet in the Kingdom, were 
exceptions, and by no means the rule. 

Our estimate of the past must and should be 
based considerably upon our findings of the present: 
and reckoning thus, 144,000 would seem not only 
ample, but large, as an enumeration of the "copies 
of God's dear Son." Let us not forget that in the 
Primitive Church the congregations were small, and 
usually met in private houses. (Acts 1:13; 5:42; 12:12; 
Rom. 16:5; Col. 4:15; Philem. 2.) It was not 
until the apostles fell asleep in death, and errors 
came in and attracted the unconsecrated— by false 
threats and false promises— that the numbers became 
large, and costly edifices were erected. And yet, 
the apostles dealt chiefly with Jews, who for centuries 
had been under the Law Covenant, whose 
mission was to guide them to Christ. Out of all the 
millions of Jews in Palestine only a few thousand 
"received the word;"— so few that Josephus did not 
even mention them in his histories of that time. 

That the result of the Apostle Paul's renowned 
missionary journeys was only small congregations, 
as a rule, seems evident from the records;— because 

R2942 : page 26 

he set forth the gospel so clearly, so uncompromisingly; 

—showing the narrowness of the way, as well 

as the glories of the reward;— not shunning to declare 

the whole counsel of God. Yes, it was afterward 

—after the apostles fell asleep— that the mixed 

and misrepresenting preaching drew and drove multitudes 

into an apostate system;— "tares" to choke 

the "wheat." 

And even though the apostles, through faithful 
preaching of the truth, kept out the "tares" in their 
day, we find that the congregations which they established 
were not by any means all saints. St. 
Paul's epistles generally indicate this; for he sometimes 
addresses them to "the saints and faithful 
brethren" and to those "called to be saints." In these 
epistles, too, he intimates that many are called compared 
to the number who will make their calling and 
election sure. He urges them to take heed lest any 
should seem to come short of the requirements; but 
to so run as to obtain the prize. Hence we could not 
count all of the "household of faith" then, anymore 
than now, in the number of the final overcomers,— 



144,000. 

If we keep in memory the Apostle's statement, 
that God's special favors, light, etc., have come upon 
"the ends of the ages" (I Cor. 10:11), and note its 
correctness,— that special light and favor came at the 
first end, and now also at the latter end of this Gospel 
Age,— it will be helpful in this study. We might 
almost be justified in expecting that the first and 
last half-centuries of this age have not only enjoyed 
special light and favor, but possibly may supply a full 
half of the elect number. 

THE GREAT COMPANY WHOSE NUMBER NO MAN KNOWS. 



But, another matter is to be considered: The 
144,000 are the "called and chosen and faithful;" the 
"overcomers;" whereas the real converts, the true 
saints, in the apostles' day and since, include not 
only the "overcomers" who make their calling and 
election sure, but also those [probably few] who 
"draw back" and become subjects of the Second 
Death (Heb. 6:6; 10:39), and also those who— while 
not rejecting the Lord, nor turning to love sin— still 
fail to fulfill their sacrifice with zeal; and, becoming 
overcharged with the cares of this life, can only be 
"saved so as by fire," and must "come up out of great 
tribulation and wash their robes and make them 
white in the blood of the Lamb," and take a lower 
place than that to which they were called.— 
Rev. 7:9-14. 

Would it be safe to estimate that this "great 
company whose number is known to no man" (because, 
unlike the "little flock," it was not predestinated, 
and consists of such only as fail to reach the 
standard required) would be twice as numerous as 
the "little flock"? If so, it would mean that the total 
number of the truly sanctified and spirit-begotten, 
during this Gospel Age, has been 432,000. But 
we are not to forget that no more than the 144,000 
could be under invitation at one time; because it is 
not reasonable to suppose that God would ever invite 
anyone for whom there would be no place if he 
proved faithful. 

A COMPARATIVE ESTIMATE OF THE ELECTION. 



Suppose, for instance, that 45,000 made full consecration 
during the remainder of the first century, 
and that one out of three gained the victor's crown; 
that would represent 15,000 of the "elect;" the result 
say of 68 years' labor of the Apostles,— garnering 
the ripe wheat of the Jewish nation and starting 



the work among such Gentiles as were "feeling after 
God, if haply they might find him." If for every 
period of 68 years, from the year 100 to the year 
1881, A.D., we estimate the results to have been one 
fourth what they were under the very favorable Apostolic 
ministration, it would probably be very liberal, 
viz., 3,750. We are not to forget that in Israel, 
as the Master said, the fields were already white for 
harvesting. In those fields the Apostles needed not 
to do sowing, but merely to gather in the fruitage 
of the Law dispensation. After the cream of the 
Gentiles had also been gathered in, the work would 
surely go more slowly. 

Calculating on this reasonable and liberal basis, 
the year A.D. 1881, would see 112,500 who had already 
finished their course with joy as "overcomers," 
—and a remainder of 3 1,500 yet needed, to complete 
the predestinated number. Or, if the perfect fruitage 
of the Apostolic period were estimated at 12,000, 
and the remainder on the same basis, the total number 
garnered up to 1881 would have been 90,000; 
leaving a balance of 54,000 to be perfected since 1881, 
A.D. , -up to,-say 1910. 

For our estimates, let us take the former figures, 
as being very conservative;— viz., 31,500, to be 
developed— during, say 30 years. This would be 
considerably above the ratio estimated for the Apostolic 
period; but we are not to forget, on the other 
hand, that this is the harvest time for Christendom; 
—many times more numerous than was fleshly Israel. 
We are not to forget, either, that not only present-day 
inventions, conveniences, etc., permit each laborer 
to do more work, but also, that education being 
much more general now, a more extensive and intensive 
"harvest" work is possible now, than in the 
Jewish "harvest." On the whole, we cannot think 
that these figures can be considered immoderate. 

"THE WISE SHALL UNDERSTAND. "-DAN. 12:10. 



This brings us to another point. We believe 
that the Lord meant us to understand, that one evidence 
of faithfulness today, would be a knowledge of 
present truth. This seems to be the only possible deduction 
from the Parable of the Ten Virgins, from 
the Apostle's words in I Thes. 5:4, etc. And is it 
not as reasonable to suppose that the "elect" will all 
learn of our Lord's second presence, as that every Israelite 
indeed was informed of our Lord's first advent, 
in that separating of wheat from chaff? We are 
to remember, however, that some of those who at 
first were in such darkness that they persecuted the 
faithful, were subsequently rescued from their blindness, 
and became zealous brethren and servants of 



the truth. So here;— our thought is, that none could 
now be esteemed "overcomers," victors, while ignorant 
of our Lord's parousia, etc.; but we believe that 
many, if not the majority of the above mentioned 
31,500, still in darkness, may yet prove amenable to 

R2942 : page 27 

their consecration and come into the light of present 
truth. 

As is generally understood, we believe the prophetic 
Scriptures to teach that the general call or invitation 
ceased in 1881; and on the foregoing calculation 
this would imply that the conjectured 31,500 
consecrated, were written in the Lamb's book of 
life at that date, as fully sanctified persons, who had 
presented their all to the Lord in living sacrifice, to 
walk in the footsteps of Jesus. 

Our hypothesis being correct, these 31,500 have 
been on trial, for now over twenty years; and, meantime, 
the only chance for others to come into this elect 
class has been as the trial time of some of these may 
have lapsed, without their making their calling and 
election sure;— their names being blotted out of the 
Lamb's book of life, and their claims upon crowns 
of life being forfeited, as our Lord forewarned (Rev. 2:10; 
3:11),— they being numbered either among 
God's enemies (Heb. 10:26,27) or among those 
whom the Son will deliver, "so as by fire," in the 
"great company" of Revelation 7:9,13. 

If we are correct in supposing that a knowledge 
and confession of present truth are essential to overcoming 
now, we may give a fair guess at the number 
thus far faithful from the Watch Tower lists and our 
general knowledge of the friends. A liberal estimate 
would be 10,000, walking in the light of present 
truth, and sanctified thereby. This would leave 
21,500 yet in darkness; and probably most of them 
in "Babylon." Of the 10,000 whom we will assume 
that we know, our estimate would be that nearly or 
quite one half of them were not consecrated in 1881, 
—not amongst the 3 1,500. Accepting this as a basis 
of estimate it would teach us what? 

THE WISE VIRGINS GOING IN TO THE WEDDING. 



It would teach us that since 1881 about 5,000 
had gone on faithfully and been granted the light 
of present truth, and have good hopes if they stand 
fast that they will finish their course with joy— in 
death. It implies, that the 5,000 who have consecrated 
and received the light of present truth since 
1881, took the places of 5,000 whose period of probation 
ended without proving them so far overcomers 



as to be worthy of the light. Thus 10,000 of the 31,500 
are already disposed of. Now, of the 21,500 yet to 
be dealt with, what may we expect? (1) That one 
third, or possibly one half the number, will yet prove 
themselves "overcomers" (Rev. 15:2-4; 20:4); and 
(2) that the remainder-10,000 to 14,000-would 
represent the numbers of those whom we might expect 
yet to come into divine favor by a full consecration; 
—to take the places vacated and prospective 
crowns forfeited by the "overcharged." And more 
than this: we must reckon that of those consecrating 
now, even in the light of present truth, there must be 
a testing, a sifting; and that if one half of the smaller 
estimate fail, it would mean 5,000 more to make consecration 
and stand testing; and if one half of these 
fail, it would mean 2,500 more, and so on. 

We should not forget, however, that those entering 
the "race" now have many advantages. (1) We 
may assume, in harmony with reason and our observations, 
that a considerable number who have consecrated 
since 1881, have been under the Lord's care 
and instruction, along the lines of discipline and 
character-building, with a view to their being accepted 
to fill the places of those failing to make their calling 
and election sure,— to joint-heirship in the Kingdom. 
(2) We may assume that, since the general 
call has ceased, none of these would be instructed in 
"the deep things of God," except as they are permitted 
to take their places in the race. (3) We may 
expect that those consecrated in 1881 must close their 
probation for the prize very shortly now. (4) As the 

R2943 : page 27 

"present truth" is now shining very clearly, and is 

getting more generally shed abroad, and is in a condensed 

form, easy of quick assimilation, we should 

expect that characters would form and expand and 

crystallize, now, much more rapidly than ever before. 

(5) We see that the cleavage or gulf is growing wider 

and wider, between "wheat" (true believers, fully consecrated) 

and "tares" (deceived persons misnaming 

themselves Christians, because mistaught by Churchianity). 

As the "tares" more and more openly repudiate 

faith in the blood of Christ, and more and 

more boldly declare for "higher criticism" and "evolution," 

the "wheat" who have been halting and fearful 

toward the truth and its true servants, will begin 

to see that they must decide quickly;— and all of the 

"wheat" class will decide correctly; and some of them 

promptly enough to be classed with the "elect little 

flock." (6) We anticipate continued and increasing 

opposition; so that it will be fair to suppose that 

those giving adherence to the truth will generally 

so well count the cost in advance that comparatively 

few of them will need to be sifted out. 



LABOR,-FOR THE NIGHT COMETH. 



Those who for some time have inclined to wonder 
at our sanguine expectations, respecting the 
progress of the truth, the growing numbers of Watch 
Tower subscribers, etc., now have, in the foregoing, 
our reply to their queries. We doubt not that the 
arguments will commend themselves to the majority, 
if not all of our readers. We trust that it will come 
to you all as a fresh incentive to energy and zeal in 
the harvest work. Faith and patience are qualities 
necessary to every soldier of the cross. Be valiant! 
Quit you like men! is the Apostolic exhortation, and 
it is ours also. Go forth in the name of our glorified 
Head, giving to all true Israelites the "three signs" 
of the Lord's presence. And if in pouring the water 
upon the land it turn into blood, even your blood, rejoice 
and be exceeding glad. Remember that your 
covenant is, to lay down your life for the brethren,— 
even unto death. 

Let each go at once to the throne of grace, petitioning 
the Lord, that in so far as these presentations 
are the truth, they may be blest to his own heart. 
Pray also that the Lord will send forth more laborers 
into his vineyard and inspire yourself and all of 
his faithful "brethren" (Heb. 2:11) to renewed energy 
and effectiveness during the year 1902. Among the 
estimated 21,500 consecrated brethren yet in Babylon, 
several thousand should be ready for the sanctifying 
truth this year. Watch and pray for opportunities 
to serve them, and for wisdom from on high 
to rightly use the opportunities as they come to you. 
May the grace of God abide with us! 



R2943 : page 28 

ATTEMPTING TO DECEIVE GOD. 

-ACTS 5:1-1 1-FEB. 9.- 

Golden Text:— "Wherefore, putting away lying, speak 
every man truth with his neighbor."— Eph. 4:25. 



"WHILE MEN slept the enemy came and 

sowed tares," our Lord's parable explains. 

After the apostles fell asleep in death the Adversary 

had a comparatively free hand in the sowing 

of the seeds of error, and cultivated in the Church 

the tare class, as a result. But at the time of our 



lesson— shortly after Pentecost— circumstances were 

different. The apostles were still in the Church, and 

exercised the special powers of the holy spirit conferred 

upon them, as the Lord's representatives, for 

the establishment of the Church— sowing only the 

good seed, and hindering the Adversary from sowing 

tares or hypocrites in it. Our lesson illustrates 

the method by which the Lord, through the apostles, 

kept the infant church free from hypocrites. 

As previously suggested, a partial community 
of interest amongst the believers was early established. 
A number of the faithful had already sold 
possessions and contributed to the general fund. 
Joses was one of these whose case is particularly 
cited. (Acts 4:36,37.) He was one of the noble 
brethren whose generosity and helpfulness in the 
Church was generally recognized, so that amongst 
the believers he received a new name, Barnabas, 
which signifies "son of consolation," or son of comfort 
and helpfulness. 

Although there was nothing compulsory upon 
any in respect to this selling of goods and giving to 
the common treasury, the very fact that those who 
did so were highly esteemed in the Church would 
naturally become a snare to some who, without the 
real spirit of helpfulness and sacrifice, would appreciate 
and desire to have the approbation of the brethren. 
Ananias and Sapphira, his wife, were of this 
class, desirous of the approval of the Church, yet 
deficient in the real spirit of sacrifice. They had a 
property which they determined to sell, and in order 
to pass before the believers as saints of the same order 
as Barnabas, they pretended to give to the general 
fund the full amount received for the property. 
Secretly, however, they had much less generous sentiments; 
they agreed together that they would retain 
part of the sale-money for future contingencies, 
—yet would pass as sacrificers to the full amount. 

The wrong of their course is manifest. As the 
Apostle Peter declared, the property was their own, 
and after they had sold it they still had a right to do 
as they pleased with the proceeds; but they should 
have been honest about the matter, and if they 
wished to give a tenth, a half or all of the amount, 
it was a matter of their own business alone, and no 
one would have had the least right to find fault with 
or criticise them. The entire wrong consisted in the 
deception practiced— the palming off of a part of the 
price as the whole, for the purpose of deceiving the 
Church and of gaining an applause for an amount of 
sacrifice more than they made. In this and in this 
alone consisted the sin for which they both died. 

The record is that "great fear came upon all the 
company"— great reverence for God and for the 
apostles, his representatives. It brought also a realization 
that consecrations to the Lord were far from 



meaningless forms. This would mean, not only to 
those who had already espoused the Lord's cause, 
but also to all who for some time thereafter would 
identify themselves with the church, that any who 
were insincere would best make no pretensions to 
discipleship. Quite probably the influence of the 
lesson lasted for a considerable time— during the 
lives of the apostles. Since the death of the apostles, 
however, any number of hypocrites have come 
into the Church,— indeed, have been dragged and 
coaxed in to swell the numbers: and God has been 
pleased to permit the many false assumptions and 
false pretenses of these "tares" to go unpunished 
and unchallenged. (Matt. 13:30.) This does not mean 
a change on God's part as respects such characters, 
but rather that the case of Ananias and Sapphira 
was made a special one to serve as a lesson in the 
Church. Likewise, the first offence of Sabbath-breaking 
was punished with death (Num. 15:32-36), 
although Sabbath-breaking was not similarly punished 
subsequently under the law. We are not to 
think of Ananias and Sapphira as being sinners above 
others of their class, because summary punishment 
was meted out to them. 

Those who believe that eternal torment is the 
punishment for sin must, to be logical, suppose that 
Ananias and Sapphira passed on to torments at the 
hands of devils, from which they have since been suffering, 
and such must wonder that many who are 
equally hypocritical in nominal churches of today, 
so far as human judgment can discern, go unpunished, 
and are encouraged by their spiritual leaders 
to hope for a share in the best the future has to give. 

From our standpoint— the Bible standpoint— 
these two deceivers received no other punishment 
than the loss of the present life; and as they were 
evidently not of the "wheat" class at all, and had not 
become partakers of the holy spirit, but deceived 
themselves, as they attempted to deceive others, 
their conduct did not affect their cases everlastingly, 
but merely as respects the present life. They were 
made an illustration of a principle— they served as 
ensamples for the instruction of the Church. They 
received the full penalty of their deception in the loss 
of present life. As respects the future life, an opportunity 
for which the Lord Jesus has purchased for 
all mankind, it will "in due time" be thrown open 
to them and to the whole world, to be accepted or 
rejected, under terms of clear knowledge and obedience. 
They are still heirs to a share of those blessings 
which will come to the world after the spirit-begotten 
Church shall have been glorified, and begun 
the work of blessing all the families of the earth. 

The particulars of the lesson require no further 
detailing. We merely note the fact that the Apostle 
Peter evidently had the gift of discerning spirits (I Cor. 12:10), 



and that God fortified the knowledge 
granted him, as evidence or proof of his apostleship. 
We proceed next to consider some of the lessons 
which may properly be learned from this incident of 
the past, by the Lord's consecrated people of today. 
The lesson is that God desires "truth in the inward 
parts"— in the heart— and that any who have not 
this quality— candor, honesty, truthfulness— cannot 

R2944 : page 29 

be pleasing to God; and therefore cannot share in 
the glories shortly to be dispensed to the elect class 
of this Gospel age.— Psa. 51:6. 

As we look at ourselves, we come to realize how 
imperfect are all the members of the fallen race; and 
when we consider God's perfection, we can conceive 
of only one quality that the fallen creature could possibly 
possess, that would meet with divine approval 
—even when viewed through the merit of Christ's 
atonement. That one quality is honesty. The true 
Christian must, in honesty, confess his own shortcomings, 
his own deficiencies. He must, in honesty, 
acknowledge that his sufficiency is of God, through 
Christ and not of himself. He must honestly strive 
for the standard set before him in the Gospel. He 
must honestly admit that he cannot do the things 
that he would. He must candidly and fully accept 
the righteousness of God in Christ Jesus, as the covering 
for his blemishes. We are inclined to the belief 
that the greatest sin in the Church— even 
amongst the consecrated believers— is the sin of dishonesty 
—the sin of which divine disapproval is so excellently 
illustrated in the case of Ananias and 
Sapphira. 

We have no desire to distort, or to make matters 
appear worse than they really are; but from our 
standpoint the nominal church teems and overflows 
with just such hypocrites— self-deceived, to some extent. 
These are the tares, or imitation wheat. 

Do not all who claim to be Christians profess 
to be following in the footsteps of Jesus,— to bear his 
name, to be his Church, his body, and to take up his 
cross and follow him? Yet how comparatively few 
of the nominal whole have or have ever had any 
thought of so doing? By their profession they declare 
that they have sold their earthly possessions, 
their earthly interests, that they have sacrificed these, 
and presented the whole matter as a loving gift and 
sacrifice to the Lord; yet in reality they have done 
nothing of the kind, and never for a moment thought 
of even as much liberality to the Lord's cause, keeping 
as proportionately little to themselves, as did 
Ananias and Sapphira. 

We cannot judge the heart, and will not attempt 
to do so. We cannot even always tell which 



are grains of "wheat" and which "tares," but out 
of their own mouths we may judge those who profess 
to be "wheat." Some professing thus, and occupying 
very high positions in the Church, even as 
ministers of the Gospel, tell us plainly, not only by 
their actions, but also at times by their words, that 
in pretending to sell out their interests and to turn 
over the entire proceeds in consecration to the 
Lord's service, they have grossly falsified— some of 
them tell us that they do not even believe the things 
which they vowed they would preach. They thus 
tell us that they have been dishonest with men and 
with themselves, in respect to the things of God. 
Truly this is a serious, a dreadful condition. The 
Church of today, instead of being free from deceivers, 
has them in its very highest positions of trust and 
honor,— as representatives of the Lord, purporting 
to be his mouthpieces. 

This is an individual matter still, as it was in 
the days of the apostles. Each individual of the 
Lord's people must answer for his own course, to the 
Lord himself. It therefore behooves all those who 
are seeking divine approval to see to it that they are 
not influenced by the prevalent disposition to hypocrisy, 
but that they deal with the Lord in purity and 
honesty of heart. They should see to it that, having 
covenanted to give to God and his service their 
all, they keep nothing back, but consider their time, 
their influence, their means, their lives, fully devoted 
to the Lord, and that they use these as his— as they 
believe he would wish to have them used— as stewards. 
He who is honest with himself will be honest 
with God, and be honest also with his fellow-men. 
As Shakespeare expresses it,— 

"To thine own self be true; 
And it must follow, as the night the day, 
Thou canst not then be false to any man." 

Our Golden Text is quite to the point, and requires 
no comment. We perhaps should, however, 
guard some against a mistaken view of truthfulness. 
Some persons of large conscientiousness fail to 
properly balance the subject, and reach the conclusion 
that they are bound to answer every question 
that may be asked them, telling all that they know 
upon any subject. This is a mistaken view; we are 
not bound by any laws of honesty to tell all that we 
know in all cases. Some people ask questions which 
they have no proper right to ask— about things 
which are not their proper business: such persons 
should not be encouraged; their queries should not 
be satisfied. Nor is it necessary to truthfulness that 
we should say to them in so many words,— You are 
busybodies, and your questions are impertinent, and 
I will not answer them. On the contrary, a soft 



answer will be better— an answer which will tell 

them as much or as little as suits convenience, permitting 

them to draw the conclusion that for some 

reason unmentioned you would not care to give a 

fuller statement of the facts. An exception to this 

rule would be a case in which the keeping back of 

the information would be to the injury of the inquirer. 

Then, love for our neighbor should prompt 

the giving of the information; perhaps, indeed, the 

volunteering of it without being asked— especially 

if it be concerning a matter of which you have not 

merely an opinion but actual knowledge, without the 

revealing of which he would suffer injury. 



R2944 : page 29 

MAY WE DEFEND OUR EARTHLY INTERESTS? 



Dear Brother Russell:— 

At our Dawn Circle the postal ruling was referred 
to. One sister expressed surprise that you 
should take the position you have in contending 
against it: which remark led to a further exchange 
of thought. A brother said he thought he was supposed 
to give up anything when asked for it, and let 
people impose upon him— that that was a part of 
his sacrifice. Another brother stated he once had 
a house and lot which was two-thirds paid for, when 
some obstacle arose, and rather than have any trouble 
he sent the contractor his deed to the place, letting 
him have it without standing up for any of his 
rights. If our little meeting is any criterion, it seems 

R2944 : page 30 

to me very many of our dear brethren are allowing 
Satan's followers to defraud them of not a little of 
their stewardship. J. H. C 

We publish this letter, with its answer, believing 
that some of the Lord's dear sheep have need 
of counsel along the lines of the inquiry. 

It is difficult for many, to rightly adjust the relationship 
between the two parts of our Lord's command, 
"Be wise as serpents, harmless as doves." 
The harmlessness of the sheep and of the dove beautifully 
represent what should be the character of all 
the Lord's consecrated people as respects violation 
of the rights of others; but a sheep is stupid as well 
as harmless, and the Lord does not recommend that 
his followers shall consider stupidity a Christian 
grace. Rather, he encourages us, in the words above 
quoted, to be wise;— not, like serpents, in venom 



and disposition to injure and attack, but like serpents 
in wisdom; that this wisdom in us may be combined 
with the harmlessness of the dove and of the 
sheep. 

This combination of wisdom and gentleness— a 
wisdom used for good and not for evil purposes,— 
is in the Scriptures denominated "the spirit of a 
sound mind." This sound mind was well illustrated 
in the conduct of our Lord and of the Apostle Paul, 
the leading representatives of the truth and examples 
of the flock in the New Testament. To illustrate: 
When our Lord was assailed by the scribes 
and Pharisees, who sought to entrap him in his teachings, 
he was meek and gentle, as the Lamb of God, 
but not foolish;— he did not run away from the questions, 
but, as the narrative shows us, he entrapped 
in their own arguments those who were seeking to 
entrap him. When his arrest was threatened in Gethsemane, 
although he knew that "his hour was come," 
he did not go forward and say, I know all about this; 
just take me along. He enquired, Why did you 
come here to take me as a prisoner, after night? 
Why were you not courageous enough to take me 
prisoner in the day time, when the multitudes were 
surrounding me, as I taught in the Temple? Then 
he seems to have exercised some influence upon them 
which caused them to go back and fall to the ground. 
But having thus asserted the right, and knowing 
that it was the Father's will that he should now be 
delivered over to their power, he subsequently permitted 
them to take him prisoner. In the judgment 
hall, when reproved and smitten unjustly, our Lord 
defended himself, to the extent of reasoning with 
his assailant, and declaring his own rectitude. 

The Apostle Paul defended himself, frequently, 
before priests and kings; explaining the justice of his 
cause; and on one occasion replied to his assailant, 
"God shall smite thee, thou whited wall." In every 
instance he seems to have used the law, so far as 
there was a law, for his defence, on one occasion going 
so far as to appeal his case to a higher court- 
Caesar's at Rome. Nevertheless, whenever the laws 
did not support him we find the Apostle bringing 
no railing accusation against the laws nor against 
magistrates, but submitting himself, and counselling 
the Church to "be subject to the powers that be, for 
the powers that be are ordained [permitted] of God." 
In all this we understand that the Apostle was entirely 
right;— within the letter and spirit of the Master's 
teaching, when he said, "If any man sue thee at 
the law, and take away thy cloak, begrudge him not 

R2945 : page 30 

thy coat also,"— if he secure it by process of law.— 
Luke 6:29. 



We consider that the brothers mentioned in the 
letter erred in judgment; but we are glad to be able 
to fully approve their heart-intentions. Although, 
by doing as he did, one failed somewhat in his stewardship 
of the means entrusted to his care, and to that 
extent is to be criticized; nevertheless, we are sure 
that the Lord, who looks at the heart, would be better 
pleased to see him thus fail in his stewardship 
than to have seen him violate his conscience in the 
matter. If the property under consideration was 
worth contesting for, in our judgment, it would have 
been his duty to have resisted the injustice practiced, 
in so far as the laws of his State would grant 
him justice. The Apostle's words, "Dare any of 
you, having a matter against another, go to law before 
the unjust, and not before the saints?" (I Cor. 6:1), 
has no reference to such a case as this. It applies 
only to differences between brethren in the Church; 
—amongst the consecrated. A brother is to shield 
a brother in the Church, and to condone any injustice 
suffered at his hands, even as he would shield a 
natural brother and condone his injustice, rather than 
make the matter public before the world. But we 
would have no scruple about going into the State 
courts in an action against a nominal Christian, if he 
attempted to defraud us, provided the amount involved 
seemed to justify the trouble and expense incidental 
to the trial of the case. The reason for this 
distinction between a brother in the Church and a 
nominal Christian would be that nominal Christendom 
accepts present governments and present courts 
as "Christian"— part and parcel of Christendom itself. 
Therefore, in trying a case against a nominal Christian 
in the public courts we would be trying him before 
a Christian court, according to his acceptance of 
the term. 

As respects our appeal to the President against 
the violation of the law by his representatives in the 
Post Office Department. We hold that our action 
was proper, right; and that any other course,— a failure 
to take such action, might have been wrong. 
God opened a wide door of opportunity for the 
spread of the truth through the postal laws as they 
now stand; but a man has arisen, and without the 
authority of the law has deprived us of this open door. 
We are right in appealing to the law; and to the President, 
as the head of all the departments of the Government; 
to protect us in the privileges which the 
law grants us as it stands. We have the same right 
to appeal for justice that our Lord exercised and 
that the Apostle Paul so frequently exercised. We 
believe that the Lord was pleased with the Apostle's 
interpretation of his will; and we believe that he is 
pleased with our interpretation of it in this matter of 
appealing to the President for rectification of an injustice, 
—a violation of law, defrauding us of our 



rights. 

But now, suppose that our protests avail nothing; 
—what will we do? We answer that we will allow 
the sheep and dove nature to control fully; we 

R2945 : page 31 

will neither become anarchists, nor vicious maligners 
of the Government; nor make any attacks upon either 
the laws or those who have defrauded us. We 
will neither dynamite them literally nor with our 
mouths and pens;— we will submit. Why? Because 
we understand this to be a part of the Lord's injunction; 
that we shall be subject to the powers that be; 
that we shall be harmless, as sheep and doves. When 
all the wisdom we possess has been exercised, we 
shall be content; and take the results as being the 
will of God;— knowing that he is perfectly able to 
overrule in the matter as may please him. 

Besides, our readers know that for years we have 
been expecting that the door to opportunities of 
service would soon close; and we are not surprised 
if it closes gradually rather than abruptly. We will 
not be surprised that our protests shall be of no 
avail in this matter. We will consider, nevertheless, 
that we have done our duty; and that failure to effect 
anything should be to us an evidence that the Lord's 
providence is cooperating in the matter with a view 
to restraining, to some extent, the opportunities at 
our disposal. 



page 3 1 

KIND WORDS FROM THE INTERESTED. 



Dear Brother:— 

I did not know there were such publications as Millennial 
Dawn and Zion's Watch Tower until this year. And 
how forcibly they have brought the message to me, "Go 
work in his vineyard!" for indeed the harvesters are few. 
I feel that I could sacrifice all for the Master. But oh, I 
feel my insufficiency when I ask myself what can I do? 
I have an ardent desire and longing to work for the Master 
in an acceptable way, and ask the Father many times 
with streaming eyes to open the eyes of my understanding 
and let me know the truth of his divine plan. We 
have been so blinded by error and misconception of the Truth. 
I have been a member of the "Church of Christ" since 
early girlhood, but I am sorry to say that until the last five 
or six years I belonged to that large body who call themselves 
Christians and do not know God. Since that time 
I have been earnestly seeking for more light and it seems 



that your glorious works have been an answer to that 
prayer. I accidently (?) ran across three numbers of 
Zion's Watch Tower and the first three volumes of the 
Dawn. They have thrown a wonderful light on passages in 
the divine Word which were either neglected, or dark to 
me before. 

Oh, Brother Russell, the wealth of earth could not 
buy from me the knowledge I now possess of the Father's 
glorious plan! With a grateful and earnest heart I thank 
God for the store house of knowledge you have opened 
to my understanding. It seems that you have given me 
the key. May many other souls awake and be brought to 
the knowledge of the glorious coming kingdom and realize 
what it is to suffer with Christ if we would reign with 
him! I am eager and anxious to work for the Master, but 
how, in the way to do the most good? The Church would 
be glad to have me work, at fairs, suppers and entertainments, 
but I cannot do that and call it for the Master. 
What are the qualifications necessary for the colporteur 
work? I think possibly I might work there. Explain this 
matter to me fully, for I am anxious to help with this 
grand work. Remember me in my weakness at the throne 
of grace. I am sincerely your sister, 

Mrs. V. Roughton.— Illinois. 

[Colporteur work explained by letter. Ed.] 



My Dear Brother Russell:— 

I think I have a somewhat peculiar request to make 
of you. I know how busy you are, but your past kindness 
makes me bold to come to you. As the Dawns have 
been published we have received and read them greedily,— 
often reading them in whole or in part several times: and 
we have most surely appreciated them. Our hearts have 
been filled with love and praise to our Father for permitting 
us to see the glories of his plan, the mysteries of his 
blessed Word. We have loaned and given away books, 
tracts and Towers more than we could possibly tell, hoping 
that some hungry soul might find a feast. We tried to 
be zealous and faithful, but realize that we have made 
more failures than anything else. The Father has been 
so good to us. We were permitted to attend the St. Louis 
Convention and that was the beginning of better days to 
us. 

I am now about half way through a re-reading of Vol. 
III. Dawn. I did not realize that I was neglecting the 
Dawns, but I now know that I was. I have had such a 
feast, I cannot express it. I can only praise our Lord for 
stirring me up to the re-reading. 

You see that all these years I have been reading the 
Towers and the Bible and now as I re-read the Dawns I 
understand them so much better. Besides, at first I was 
not capable of grasping so much, all at once. If I knew 
the right words to say that would cause all Watch Tower 
readers to re-read their Dawns, I would write a letter for 



publication in the Tower and I would plead with them as 
they value the truth and their "high calling" not to neglect 
this privilege. I would not call it a duty, for it is 
above a duty, it is a privilege. So now, Brother Russell, 
that is what I want you to do, for you will know the right 
things to say. May the Lord give you the things he sees 
you need to make you perfect in his sight. We thank you 
for all your kindness to us. 

Mrs. S. B. Strate. -Illinois. 



Gentlemen:— 

I have read the three volumes of Millennial Dawn with 
much interest, pleasure, and profit, and am therefore anxious 
to know if any more volumes have been published 
since Vol. III., as intimated in its pages. 

[Five volumes are now out, and two more are purposed. 
Ed.] 

I should very much like to express to the author, the 
great spiritual blessing I have received from a study of 
these three books, fully believing that God has put them 
into my hands. I had been looking for light on these 
things for some time, and before hearing of these volumes 
I had already made some of their opinions my own. 
Hoping that God's blessing may still rest on your labours, 
believe me, Yours gratefully, 

, England. 



Dear Mr. Russell:— 

I received a copy of "Tabernacle Shadows" enclosed 
with a parcel of tracts. I am not able to express how much 
it was appreciated by me, and what a help it was to a 
fuller understanding of God's Word. Some parts I wept 
over, in particular, the verses "My Sacrifice," and about 
the scapegoat. I felt, indeed, the scapegoat more nearly 
represented me, but I am very desirous to be of "the Lord's 
goat,' and to be an "overcomer" by his grace. Sometimes 
I have a strong hope that I may be "accounted worthy," 
which gives me such joy that I can then triumph over 
every adverse circumstance, but sometimes I am discouraged 
by the difficulties of the way. But I thank the Lord 
for his loving favor in allowing me to know these things, 
and trusting in his merit, "I press toward the mark." 

The Watch Towers are my greatest help. I find them 
more so as time goes on, and the way seems more narrow. 
I have received several helpful messages enclosed 
with tracts from the London Branch, which are much enjoyed. 
I am still distributing tracts on Sunday afternoons 
when able, but cannot say much about results. I must 
leave them with the Lord. Several Christian people have 
appreciated them and wanted more, but many have been 
distributed at a distance, so that I do not see the people 
for a long while. But I feel that it is for my good not 



to see great results. His word will not return void but 
will accomplish that for which it is sent, so I can leave it 
with him. With love in the Lord to all at Bible House, 
with much gratitude I remain, yours in our Lord Jesus, 
, England. 



page 33 

SEMI-MONTHLY. 