VOL. XXV. MAY 15, 1904. No. 10. 



CONTENTS 

Views From the Watch Tower 147 

Possibilities of a European War 147 

The Essential Unity of all 
Religions 147 

Volunteer Work, 1904 149 

"Choose Ye This Day" 149 

How and Why Christ was 

Crucified 155 

Public Ministries of the Truth 160 

Special Items: 



Editor's One-Day Conventions 146 

page 146 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-24 EVERSHOLT ST., LONDON, N.W. 
GERMAN BRANCH-MIRKER STR., 45, ELBERFELD. 
AUSTRALIAN BRANCH-32 JOHNSTON ST., FITZROY, MELBOURNE. 

PRICE $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE, 5c (2-l/2d.) A COPY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER, will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE 



THIS JOURNAL IS PUBLISHED IN THE 

FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN LANGUAGES. 

SAMPLE COPIES AND TERMS FREE. 



ONE-DAY LOCAL CONVENTIONS ADDRESSED BY THE 
EDITOR OF THIS JOURNAL AS FOLLOWS: 

PORTLAND, ORE., MAY 15. -All meetings in Elks Hall, 
Marquam Building, Sixth and Morrison Sts. Morning 
rally at 10 o'clock. Meeting for the interested at 2.30; 
and for the public at 7.30— subject, "The Oath-bound 
Covenant." 

ST. PAUL, MINN., May 19. -Meeting place, Central 
Hall. At 3 p.m. for interested friends, and 7 p.m. for the 
public. Subject, "The Oath-bound Covenant." 

MILWAUKEE, WIS., May 20.-Meeting for the interested 
at 2.30 p.m. at Lincoln Hall, Sixth St., off Grand Ave. 

ALLEGHENY, PA., MAY 22. 
INDIANAPOLIS, IND., MAY 29. 
HAMILTON, ONT., JUNE 12. 

OUR MOTTO STOCK EXHAUSTED. 



We are unable to supply more mottoes until our stock 
is replenished. We are ordering a new lot from Great 
Britain, which will be in place about November. Hold 
your orders until further announcement. 



R3365 : page 147 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 
POSSIBILITIES OF A EUROPEAN WAR. 



NEWSPAPERS and magazines are discussing the 
possibility of the Russo-Japan war eventuating 
in a world-wide war. It is generally 
conceded that it would be the part of wisdom for 
Russia to back down and sue for peace proposals, but 
equally certain that the pride of that great nation 
will hinder such a course. If, therefore, the land 
fighting should go against Russia it is surmised by 
many that her diplomacy would manage to bring 
on a general war, in which her own defeat by little 
Japan would be measurably lost sight of in the glare 
of still more momentous conflicts. Matters have this 
appearance, though they may not reach such a culmination 
very soon. 

Meantime the great nations are preparing for 
emergencies— especially Great Britain, France and 
Germany. Naval warfare is steadily undergoing a 
radical change: the prospect is that the great battleships 
will soon be of little value under the new conditions. 
The new models of fighting craft are the auto-boats 
and the submergible-boats. The latter can be 
sunk completely under water— 100 feet if desired— 
in six seconds, and can thus travel toward their 
opponents unobserved, and can discharge torpedoes 
at close range and be gone. England has about 
twenty of these boats nearly completed and a large 
number ordered. France has more, and by the close 
of this year she will have at least thirty. These boats 
carry gasoline for fuel— enough for a 400-mile journey, 
and require but small crews. They would, of course, 
operate near a harbor or in conjunction with larger 
vessels. The auto-boat can be operated by one intrepid 
man, can travel 20 miles an hour and in the 
dark could creep close to a great ship and attack her 
with a torpedo. A large, swift ocean liner could 
carry twenty or thirty of these little auto-boats and 
make great havoc— in the night or in a fog. 

Experts are speculating on the possibilities of 
these two new craft and conclude that no port would 



be secure against them— that four million dollar battle 
ships with hundreds of men aboard could be sunk 
almost instantly and without a sight of their enemy. 
Others still believe that air-motors will soon come 
into prominence and be used in dropping explosives 
upon ships and cities and armies. 

We are to expect great things— shortly. The 
passions as well as the ingenuity of men will ere long 
wreck present civilization according to the Scriptures. 
We recall our Lord's prophecy of the days now near 
at hand, "Except those days were shortened there 
should no flesh be saved." But, for the elect's sake, 
they shall be shortened;— the "elect," Head and body, 
will assume the Kingdom control at the right time 
to stay the awful anarchy which will follow the great 
war. 

The prospects for the immediate future are conceded 
on all sides to be more favorable for peace, 
because of the recent amicable settlement by Great 
Britain and France of differences between them which 
have long been a source of friction. The large navies 
of these two nations far outweigh all the combined 
navy power of the world. 

THE ESSENTIAL UNITY OF ALL RELIGIONS. 



Rev. R. Heber Newton, D.D., of New York City 
(Episcopalian), in a recent article in The North American 
Review, proves to his own satisfaction, and doubtless 
to the satisfaction of many of his readers, that 
all the religions of the world are really one;— that 
they differ merely in proportion to their degrees of 
evolution. This is the view of "higher critics" and 

R3365 : page 148 

Evolutionists the world over. It ignores and laughs 
to scorn the Bible teaching of Adam, Eve and the 
fall (Rom. 5:12 and 1:21-28). It has no place for 
Jesus except as a great teacher like unto Confucius, 
Moses, Darwin, Spencer, and others. His work as 
Redeemer— as the sacrifice for man's sins, by which 
alone reconciliation to God was possible— it entirely 
discredits, but ignores because a few "good people" 
still so believe. 

Doctor Newton likens the religion of the world 
to a great tree with many branches and sub-branches. 
Buddhism is a branch, Brahminism is another, Confucianism 
is another, Mohammedanism is another, 
Christianity is another— its various shoots and smaller 
branches representing the various sects and denominations 
of Catholicism and Protestantism. 

As usual, the wisdom of this world misses the 
mark it thinks it hits. It is Devildom that the Doctor 



sees as a tree with these many branches. In every 
branch it has a "form of godliness" to deceive men— 
to satisfy the craving originally a part of man's nature 
when he was in the image of God— a craving which 
since persists notwithstanding the fall, though now 
through the blinding influences of Satan deteriorated 
into superstition and formality. Let us ask the 
Apostle Paul's inspired judgment on the subject. He 
tells us respecting these heathen worshipers that they 
worship devils and not God. See his testimony in 
I Cor. 10:20,21; I Tim. 4:1. 

When the Apostle would use a tree to illustrate 
the Church, he pictured a very different tree and 
very different branches. This inspired account is 
found in Rom. 11. There his olive-tree represents 
not all nations, but the one nation of Israel, each Jew 
a branch, drawing strength and vitality from the root, 
namely the oath-bound covenant made with Abraham 
and his seed. The Apostle shows plainly that no 
other tree is recognized in the divine plan, and tells us 
that when the Jews rejected Jesus all the rejectors 
were broken off from the relationship the tree represented, 
and that only believers in Jesus were privileged 
to be engrafted to take the places of the broken-off 
branches, as members of the spiritual seed of Abraham. 
-Gal. 3:29. 

Our position as Gentiles he distinctly pictures as 
"children of wrath even as others"— strangers and 
aliens and foreigners— without God and having no hope 
in the world. (Eph. 2:3,19,12.) How different 
the view of this modern Divinity Doctor from that of 
the great Apostle to the Gentiles! Mark the agreement 
of the Apostle John's testimony. He says of 
the Christian believers and all the world outside,— 
"We know that we are of God, and the whole world 
lieth in the Wicked One." (I John 5:19.) This reminds 
us of our Lord's words to some of the nominal 
Israelites: "Ye are of your Father the devil." 
(John 8:44.) Doctor Newton says:— 

"Religion develops the same great institutions in 
different lands and ages which the varying religions 
of man vary indefinitely. 

"The Church, spelled with a capital C, was an 
institution of Chaldea, India and Egypt, millenniums 
ago, as it is of Italy and England and America 
today. The Buddhist felt toward his 'order' much 
as the Romanist feels toward his church. A sacred 
ministry, a class of men set apart for the divine offices 
of religion, would have been found of old in Babylon 
and Thebes, as it is found now in Rome and London. 
The pagan temple was the Christian basilica and 
cathedral, baptized with another name. The altar 

R3366 : page 148 

stood in the sacred spot of the heathen temple, as it 



stands in the holy place of the Christian minister. 
Monasticism developed in the East long before it 
arose in the West. Monks and nuns and hermits 
would have been found along the Nile valley ages before 
Christendom poured its host of sad souled ascetics 
up the sacred river, peopling the hills for thousands 
of miles. Good Father Hue was utterly astonished 
to find in the Far East tonsured priests bowing before 
splendid altars, while acolytes swung the fragrant 
censers by their side. His naif explanation was, that 
the devil had counterfeited in advance the mysteries 
of true religion, in order that the elect might be deceived 
into perdition. A less heroic solution of the 
problem finds in these resemblances hints of the oneness 
of religion, generating the same sacred institutions 
among different religions." 

"Good Father Hue," in recognizing the similarity 
between the Catholic and the heathen ceremonies, 
was not astray in attributing the heathen ceremonies 
to Satan's instigation. He should have gone farther 
and have realized that he and his associates had likewise 
fallen into the "snares" and "wiles" of the 
adversary. 

Doctor Newton proceeds to prove that all religions 
are shown to be from one source because related 
in worship. We agree that all world-religions are of 
one spirit— the spirit of "the prince of this world." 
But the true Church, "whose names are written in 
heaven," is in all but a "little flock,"— not of the 
world, but separate from it. "I have chosen you out 
of the world." Of the world's worships the Doctor 
says: 

"The sacred symbolisms through which art ministers 
to worship meet us in the temples of paganism 
as in the churches of Christendom. The circle, the 
triangle, and the trefoil were graven by pagan chisels 
on the walls of the sacred buildings reared by religions 
which thought of themselves only as aliens and foes 
one to the other, for the unity of God, signed by the 
circle, and the triunity, the oneness in variety, of 
God, signed by the triangle and the trefoil, were 
truths known to no one religion alone, shared by all 
great religions in the same stage of evolution." 

R3366 : page 149 

The beliefs of men, though seemingly wide apart, 
Dr. Newton finds to be substantially one: 

"All great religions pass through one general 
course of evolution. In the same stages of development, 
all alike will bring forth, as the same institutions 
and worships, so also the same beliefs. Arrange 
these different religions synchronously, in respect to 
their evolution, and the same ideas will be found in 
all, more or less modified. As they grow, they grow 
together; over all differences of environment and 



heredity, the forces of the common life of man asserting 
the oneness which exists under black skins and 
yellow, red skins and white. In their higher reaches 
they strain toward each other. The flowering of all 
beliefs is in one faith— all religions seeding down one 
religion. So, beneath the variant and discordant beliefs 
of the present the germs of the future universal 
religion can even now be traced. 

Coming to the contrast of the Christian's life 
with the life of the heathen, Doctor Newton says: 

"Goodness knows no native soil. Virtue is at 
home in every land. The Ten Commandments form 
the law of Egypt and of Persia as of Christendom. 
The Golden Rule proves the rule of Hindu and Chinaman, 
as the Christian. It waited not for Jesus to reveal 
it. The spirit of the Christ had already revealed 
it through Jewish Hillel and Chinese Confucius, and 
great spirits of well nigh every land. The Beatitudes 
exigently call upon the Buddhist as upon the Christian, 
'Sursum corda.' Saints are of blood kin the world 
over. There is nothing alien to the truly devout 
Christian in the devoutness of the Hindu Guru, or of 
the yellow-robed saint of Japan or of the mystic 
worshiper among the Iranian Mountains. When the 
soul of man fronts the infinite and eternal Spirit, beneath 
the bo-tree of India or amid the rugged fastnesses 
of Tibet or in the cloisters of the Christian 
abbey, it is one and the same God who is seen. Wherever 
we overhear the communings of a soul with God, 
we hear in our own tongue. In the presence of the 
man of the spirit, be his name what it may, we know 
that he is of our family and household of God." 

Could evidence be more clear than the foregoing 
to prove that the Doctor does not know what constitutes 
a Christian— that he does not know that, according 
to Christianity as taught in the Bible, acceptance of 
God rests not upon perfection of life, for "there is 
none righteous, no not one"? (Rom. 3:10.) Its 
teaching is not, either, that none are justified by 
doing the best they can, but that none are justified except 
by faith in the Son of God— "faith in his blood" 
—our ransom-sacrifice. If these, justified by their 
faith, do the best they can, such obediences and efforts 
are acceptable to God as though they were perfect.— 
Phil. 3:9; Rom. 4:7,8; 8:4. 



R3366 : page 149 

VOLUNTEER WORK, 1904. 

THE Free Volunteer Tract Distribution reached 
larger proportions last year than ever before: 
more friends than ever engaged in the service 
and the quantity circulated was greater. This year 



bids fair to see the work carried forward with the 
same zeal and possibly to a still greater extent— 
though at some points seemingly no more would be 
possible. For instance, in Allegheny, Pittsburg and 
suburbs 1 12,000 tracts were placed in as many houses 
—practically every house was reached. 

We urge cooperation,— that each little church 
unitedly take charge of its own district, elect a Captain 
for supervision and Lieutenants for sub-districts, 
and that all who can shall volunteer and serve under 
such beneficial regulations. A few of the Captains sent 
us reports at the close of last year's campaign, in November, 
showing the number of tracts distributed and 
giving the names of all participating. We request 
that all Captains follow this course this year. 

As for the method this year: We urge that the 
careful house-distribution be continued, except in 
neighborhoods where there are many foreigners or 
Catholics, where it would best be done near (but not 
at) the churches, as their congregations are dismissed. 
The house-to-house circulation has reached 
some who do not attend public worship. Many good, 
moral people are becoming so confused on religious 
subjects that they attend no services. 



R3366 : page 149 

"CHOOSE YE THIS DAY." 

-MARK 15:1-15.~JUNE5.~ 

Golden Text:— "Then said Pilate to the chief priests and 
to the people, I find no fault in this man."— Luke 23:4. 

HOW MUCH depends upon our proper decision of 

the questions of life as they come before us day 

by day is well illustrated in this lesson. When 

our Lord and the eleven apostles left the upper room 

for the garden of Gethsemane, Judas— who earlier in the 

evening had reached a decision— had left their company 

to conspire with the chief priests, etc., and to guide 

their followers and servants to where Jesus could be 

apprehended quietly in the night, without the knowledge 

of the multitude in the city at that time for the 

Passover occasion. For the friends of Jesus, it was anticipated, 

might arouse a commotion amongst the throng 

of people, which might make the religious rulers of the 

Jews appear to be seditious, the Romans always being 

very much alert at such times for the suppression of 

any indications of revolt against the Roman authority. 

Judas doubtless had already conferred with the chief 

priests, and was probably present at the Passover Supper, 

R3366 : page 150 



partly for the purpose of learning the direction 
which Jesus and the others would take after the Supper. 
Our Lord's words to him, "What thou doest do quickly," 
seemed to imply that the matter was already arranged, 
and that Jesus by supernatural power was aware of it. 
That was the moment of final decision for Judas. He 
was a money lover, and decided to sell his Lord for 
money. Perhaps indeed he surmised that Jesus could 
deliver himself, and possibly he thought to gain the 
money without our Lord being injured; but in any 
event it shows a baseness of character and willingness 
to do evil for selfish reasons that remind us very much 
of the Prophet Balaam, who so greatly desired Balek's 
rewards of iniquity. 

BARTERING THE TRUTH FOR POTTAGE. 

This matter of selling the Lord for money cannot 
be practised today in the same manner in which Judas 
practised it, yet we believe there is somewhat of the 
same ignoble spirit manifested by some in our day. It 
perhaps does not go to the same extent, but it is of the 
same kind, and who knows but that under favorable 
conditions it might be willing to go to the same length? 
We refer to some who are willing to sell the Truth for 
financial profit, for social advantage, for money; and 
others willing to sell the members of the Lord's body as 
Judas sold the Head, for earthly advantage, to deliver 
one another up to evil, to assist in bringing evil, tribulation, 
adversity, reproaches, etc., upon the members of 
the body of Christ. Yet with each of these, as with 
Judas, there was a time when they were perfectly innocent 

R3367 : page 150 

of such base ingratitude and wicked designs; 
there was a time when neither self-love, nor money 
love, nor any other consideration would have moved 
them to do injury to members of the anointed body. 
Let us beware of the little things which, like a switch 
upon a railway, turn a train into an entirely different 
track, and may let us off far from the goal we at first 
desired to reach. We cannot be too careful in the way 
we meet the trials and testings of character which come 
to us daily, and whose determination means so much to 
us respecting the present and the future life. 

Our Lord, as he went with his disciples from the 
upper room and crossed the brook Cedron to the Mount 
of Olives, to the garden of Gethsemane, was likewise 
entering— a trial. His trial was from the opposite 
standpoint to that of Judas; his hour was fully determined, 
his consecration was completed, he wavered not 
in respect to the work he had come into the world to 
accomplish, he had no thought of anything else than 
dying for our sins. But as he stood upon the brink of 



death and realized that in a few hours the whole matter 
of his consecration, his "baptism into death," would 
be "finished," two matters presented themselves forcefully 
to his attention. One was that he perceived clearly 
that his arraignment would take place before the Roman 
tribunal— that his death would be according to the 
Roman form, by crucifixion— that, in order to secure 
his condemnation by the Roman government, the chief 
priests and scribes, his enemies, would misrepresent his 
character and teachings, and that his record before the 
world would stand as that of a blasphemer against God 
and an evil worker amongst men. 

We have no doubt that there are characters in the 
world who would measurably gloat over an opportunity 
to suffer as outlaws and desperadoes; they would feel 
themselves more or less heroes, and would be regarded 
more or less as heroes amongst their own class, similarly 
depraved in mind. But for those of more refined 
temperament— for the upright and honorable and pure 
in design— to pass through the same experiences would 
be a terrible ordeal. We may well imagine that our dear 
Redeemer, perfect, and with sentiments not in the 
slightest degree degraded, would feel the shame and ignominy 
of his position in such circumstances more than 
any of us could do. It was this shame, this reproach 
of being executed as a blasphemer against God and an 
injurious person amongst men, that we believe our Lord 
referred to as the cup which he prayed might, if possible, 
pass from him, saying at the same time, "Nevertheless, 
not my will but thine be done." 

"OF THE PEOPLE THERE WAS NONE WITH HIM." 

That sad hour in Gethsemane's garden, his disciples 
asleep, unable to appreciate the situation as he 
did, was the most trying hour of our dear Redeemer's 
experience. Added to the cup of grief and shame and 
ignominy came the thought that it is written in the 
Law, "Cursed is every one who hangeth on a tree," and 
thus he would be held up and marked amongst all 
the people of God as being accursed. A further thought 
was: "Is it possible that I have failed to meet the entire 
demand of the Law perfectly? Is it possible that I 
have failed in some little particular, and that thus the 
curse of the Law of God is to rest upon me, and that 
I shall lose life entirely after having striven to do the 
will of the Father and the fulfilment of perfect manhood 
under the divine Law?" 

The strain upon the nervous system became so intense 
as to produce a bloody sweat, a form of illness 
very rare indeed and yet not unknown to medical men. 
This was the greatest agony of all. If he had failed in 
the slightest degree he had no future, but all of his 
bright prospects of returning to the Father's love and 
favor and heavenly conditions by a resurrection would 
all be vitiated. The Apostle refers to this saying, how 



in the days of his flesh he offered up strong cryings and 
prayers unto him who was able to save him from [out of] 
death, and who was heard in that he feared. (Heb. 5:7.) 
He was heard in respect to that he feared: he was delivered 
from death by a resurrection. More than that, 
he was delivered from the fear of death, from all doubt 

R3367 :page 151 

as respected his faithfulness to the Father's will and his 
acceptance of the Father down to that very moment. 
An angel, a heavenly messenger, appeared and strengthened 
him, comforting him and assuring him of the Father's 
love and care, and that he was well pleasing in his 
sight. Such an assurance to the loyal heart of Jesus 
was all that was necessary. He could go through any 
experience courageously while confident that the Father 
was well pleased with his course, and that the result 
would be his reattainment of the glories he had left 
when he came into the world to be our Redeemer, and 
the attainment also of all the other joys set before him 
in the Father's promises. Here was a trial upon a great 
heart that resulted in great blessing to himself as well 
as to others. The result of his trial was the peace, joy 
and confidence which, during that night and the next 
day, kept him the most calm of all, even to his dying 
moment, and which, as the Apostle declares, led to his 
glorification in the resurrection, and which eventually 
shall bring blessings to every member of the human 
family in the lifting of the curse, the right to lift which 
was secured by his faithfulness even unto death. 

BETRAYED BY A PROFESSED FRIEND. 

Presently Judas arrived on the scene with a company 
of the high priest's servants— not followers in the 
ordinary sense of the term, but court followers, resembling 
more the police of the present time. Some of them 
carried swords and some carried clubs, as our Lord's 
language to them indicates. Peter and another of the 
apostles had swords with them— a not unusual matter 
in those times, though unusual for the apostles, as the 
context shows. They doubtless had the swords with 
them to demonstrate that our Lord was not taken contrary 
to his own will. He had with him eleven able-bodied 
men, willing to lay down their lives at his command 
in his defence. One of these, Peter, drew his 
sword and smote off the ear of the high priest's servant, 
and doubtless the defence would have been carried on 
vigorously if our Lord had said the word, or rather had 
he not interfered by intimating to Peter that what he 
had done was enough. He bade him put up his sword 
—he was not to battle for his Lord with carnal weapons 
—and meantime healed the wounded ear. Our Lord, 
in surrendering himself, stipulated that his apostles 
were not included in the arrest. 



Thus awakened, surprised, dismissed by the Lord, 
his disciples saw him taken from them, and were bewildered 
and confounded, notwithstanding our Lord's 
words to them on several occasions previously, intimating 
that some such calamity might be expected. It was 
a trial to them at the time, as the Master had already 
intimated, saying, "Watch and pray, lest ye enter into 
temptation." They had not sufficiently appreciated 
his words, had slept while the trial hour was coming on, 
and were, therefore, the less prepared for it. 

Our Lord, his hands bound, was led away to Annas 
and Caiaphas. Although it was night time, about one 
o'clock, some of the chief officers of the Jews and the 
Sanhedrin had gathered, being informed that the arrest 
would take place that night, that one of his disciples 
would pilot the officers to take him, and the matter was 
urgent, so that his death could take place as quickly as 
possible on the next day, before the people in general 
learned about the matter and before the Passover week 
would begin. It was not lawful to try a man for any 
capital offence between sundown and sunrise, and hence 
this trial was in one sense an informal one— it would 
be required to be ratified by the Sanhedrin after sunrise. 
They were willing, however, to come as near as 
possible to breaking the Law that thus they might accomplish 
their purposes. 

THE VILE CHARGE OF BLASPHEMY. 

As he stood before the high priest, and as his enemies 
brought witnesses and the trial progressed, our 
Lord may be said to have made no defence; it would 
have been useless anyway, as they were intent on finding 
a charge of some kind— they had murder in their 
hearts. The charge they sought to establish was blasphemy, 
one of the few charges the penalty of which 
under the Law was death, and it was his death they 
wanted. The blasphemy against God was declared to 
be proven in that he claimed to be the son of God, and 
blasphemy against the Temple was claimed to be proven 
in that some had heard him say that if the Temple were 
destroyed he could rear it again in three days. A decision 
was reached, but nothing could be done until day 
light. Meantime the petty officers of the court spat 
upon the Lord, blindfolded him, and struck him, saying, 
"Prophesy, now, who is he that smote thee?" and 
thus the weary hours passed till daybreak. The Jews 
thought it a trial of the Lord, but his trial was all in 
the past. It was the trial of their high priests, of the 
court officers and of the members of the Sanhedrin and 
of the Jewish nation. It was a trial of whether they 
loved truth or a falsehood, righteousness or unrighteousness. 
They decided for unrighteousness. 

Meantime the Apostle Peter was having a great 
trial, too. He had gained access to the outer room of 
the court and could probably hear or see something 



from where he stood and warmed himself at the fire. 

The first instinct of nature, self-preservation, overpowered 

him. It flashed upon him that if he were recognized 

as one of Jesus' subordinates he might be treated 

in the same manner as the Master, and in his desire to 

avoid the troubles that had come upon Jesus he denied 

that he knew him, and on a second occasion of the 

same kind he even swore that he did not know him. 

Poor Peter! It was a time of severe trial, and, alas 

he failed. How he might have gloried afterwards if he 

had suffered something for Christ's sake and for his 

R3367 : page 152 

acknowledgment of being his follower! But had he done 
so, all of the Lord's followers since would have lost a 
very valuable lesson conveyed to us in Peter's 
experiences. 

Peter's weakness on this occasion, afterwards so 
bitterly lamented and acknowledged and forgiven, has 
in some respects been a great blessing to all of the 

R3368 : page 152 

Lord's followers as they found that they, too, had weaknesses, 

and that sometimes they were overtaken in a 

fault as was Peter. They have learned from Peter to 

weep bitterly for these shortcomings, and have not been 

utterly cast down when they have found that Peter was 

received again by the Lord and heartily forgiven, and 

that the lesson thus learned made a deep impression on 

his life and resulted evidently in his favor. It is related 

of Peter that ever after this he arose every morning at 

cock crowing, made a fresh remembrance before the 

Lord of his weakness on that occasion, and accepted 

divine forgiveness. It was a testing time to Peter, and 

so similarly testing times come to all of us. Let us see 

to it that under no circumstances shall we ever deny 

our Lord. More than this, let us remember that the 

Lord places himself and his Word and his brethren on 

a par, and assures us that those who deny his Truth 

deny him, and those who deny his Word of prophecy 

are thus denying him. 

TREASON AGAINST ROME. 

With sunrise the Sanhedrin met officially, and, 
accepting the testimony of the high priest, that he had 
examined witnesses and that it had been proven that 
Jesus had blasphemed God and the Temple, the verdict 
was reached that he should die. Then, as related in our 
lesson, they held a private consultation respecting how 
they should present the matter before Pilate, the Roman 
governor. They well knew that he would pay no attention 
whatever to their charges of blasphemy and would 
tell them that was not a crime under the Roman law. 



They determined that the charge against our Lord before 

Pilate should be treason against the Roman government. 

In support of this charge of treason they said 

that he declared there was another king besides Caesar, 

namely, himself, the Messiah; and to seemingly corroborate 

this they declared falsely that he had forbidden 

to pay taxes to Caesar's government, whereas when they 

tried to catch him on this very subject two days before 

he had answered to the contrary, "Render to Caesar the 

things that are Caesar's, and to God the things that are 

God's." Moreover, he had paid taxes himself, Peter being 

sent for the fish to pay the tax for them both. But 

this false allegation would seemingly prove the truth 

of the original charge of treason. 

Now Pilate's time had come for trial. He stood as 
judge, and the principles of right and wrong, truth and 
untruth, righteousness and unrighteousness, in this case 
were for him to determine. What a wonderful chance 
he had! Suppose he had refused to connive at the malice 
of the high priest when he recognized that it was "for 
envy they had delivered him." Suppose that Pilate had 
dismissed the high priest and Sanhedrin and the multitude 
and had set Jesus free, and had cautioned them 
that if any of them did him injury they would be answerable 
with their lives! What a noble picture it would 
have been before the eyes of history! But, instead, his 
course and reputation have been anything but commendable 
and admirable. Nevertheless, while recognizing that 
he thus had a test and that he failed to take the noble 
part, we are far from sharing with the majority in their 
very ignominious view of this governor. 

We are to remember that Pilate was neither a Jew 
nor a Christian, but a heathen man— without God and 
having no hope in the world. We are to remember that 
he did not believe in the Jews' religion, whatever he may 
have believed. He did not believe in Jesus, nor had he 
any respect for the Messianic promises. He was filling 
the office of governor as the representative of Caesar's 
government at Rome. He had his own pleasures and 
self-gratifications distinct from the Jews and their festivals, 
etc., for which he cared nothing. He was amenable 
not to our God, for he knew him not, but merely to 
Caesar, and Caesar expected nothing of him except that 
he would preserve the peace and quiet of the city and 
maintain the dignity and authority of Rome. Rome 
cared not if one or ten or hundreds of innocent persons 
were put to death, if only the peace of the country were 
maintained. It was, therefore, Pilate's first duty as 
Roman governor to keep the peace in Jerusalem. 

ART THOU THE KING OF THE JEWS? 

From this standpoint we can say that Pilate's 
course was noble and just— though not the noble and 
just one which we would have preferred for him. Pilate 
did not readily accept the charges of the Pharisees: he 



knew them to be hypocritical, and really we may here say 
that the worst wickedness in the world at any time, at 
every time, in its history has been that form of wickedness 
which parades under the cloak of religion, which 
does evil in the name of that which is right, true, good. 
Pilate asked for specifications respecting the treason, and 
this seems to have surprised the chief priests, who presumed 
that their word would be taken on that subject 
without proof. If they thought a Jew had been worthy of 
death for treason then Pilate should certainly so suspect 
and so believe, for they were not supposed to wish the 
destruction of any fellow-Jew on such a charge. Pilate 
looked at Jesus and saw in him no criminal appearance, 
saw that he did not look at all like one who would 
become a leader of sedition; that, instead, meekness, 
gentleness, patience, long suffering, love, were marks of 
his features. Pilate inquired of Jesus respecting this 
charge, "Art thou the king of the Jews?" Our Lord's 
answer was not quite equivalent to yes, and yet it intimated 

R3368 : page 153 

that he did not wish to dispute the charge. To 
have attempted to explain the Kingdom of God under 
such circumstances would have been improper, for none 
there were prepared to hear and appreciate or understand; 
to have done so would have been in conflict with 
our Lord's own instruction on the subject, not to cast 
pearls before swine. Those present were not prepared 
to understand that the Kingdom would come a spirit 
Kingdom, that it would have earthly representatives, 
etc. 

Meantime the chief priests accused him fiercely, 
Jesus saying nothing— "He was led as a lamb to the 
slaughter, and as a sheep before her shearer is dumb, so 
he opened not his mouth." He was not there to defend 
himself, nor to protest against his execution. On the 
contrary, he was there to sacrifice his life, to lay it down, 
to permit it to be taken from him without resistance. 
Pilate himself marveled that anyone could be so indifferent 
to the results of his trial. All this, however, 
proved the more conclusively that there was nothing 
dangerous to the interests of Rome in connection with 
our Lord's life or teachings: it all disproved what the 
chief priests were charging, and demonstrated that they 
had some ulterior malevolent spirit of opposition to 
Jesus. 

PREFERRING BARABBAS TO JESUS. 

There had been a real sedition, a genuine movement 
against the authority of Rome, at a previous 
time, and Barabbas and others had been made prisoners 
on account of it. Some one in the crowd started a 
call on the governor to do as was his custom every year 
at this time— to release some prisoner as a matter of 



clemency and favor. Soon the whole mob took it up, 
and Pilate inquired, "Shall I then release unto you the 
king of the Jews?"— Jesus. His thought evidently was 
to arouse in them to some extent an enthusiasm in favor 
of his liberation of Jesus, for we read that he perceived 
that it was the chief priests and not the multitudes 
that were against Jesus. He hoped to turn the 
rabble to the side of Jesus and to release him on their 
request. But the chief priests, who had accused Jesus, 
stirred up the multitude to request the release of Barabbas, 
the seditionist, the rioter. One wonders that 
they were not ashamed in the presence of even a heathen 
governor to manifest their perfidy in this manner 
—to accuse Jesus of being a traitor to Rome and asking 
to have him crucified and in the same breath to urge 
the release of one about whose rioting there was no 
question. 

Pilate evidently heard something said about Jesus' 
work being largely done in Galilee, and thought to be 
rid of the matter by turning the case over to Herod, 
the ruler of Galilee, who was present in Jerusalem at the 
time. He therefore sent Jesus bound to Herod, with 
the explanation that, as he was a Galilean, Pilate was 
pleased to acknowledge Herod and to submit the case to 
his adjudication. Really he was glad to be rid of the 
case, for he preferred not to put to death an innocent 
man, yet he perceived that the chief priests could make 
very violent charges against him if he refused to put to 
death one whom they charged with treason against the 
Roman government. At Rome such conduct would 
have the appearance of favoring rebellion; and if Pilate 
should reply that there was no danger of rebellion, that 
the man was merely a quiet, innocent man, they would 
have probably responded that he was entirely too particular 
anyway, that he should be prompt in the execution 
of anybody and everybody charged with the slightest 
degree with rebellion in word or act against the 
Roman power. Thus, no doubt, he would have lost 
his position and would have been degraded for the 
remainder of life. Pilate was in a very trying position. 

HEROD'S OPPORTUNITY AND FAILURE. 

The coming of Jesus to Herod meant a trial for 
Herod. How would he receive Jesus? What would be 
his conduct toward righteousness and truth and justice 
and purity and goodness? This is the same Herod who 
about a year and a half before had beheaded John the 
Baptist, and who, hearing of Jesus, had suggested that 
he might be a reincarnation of John. Herod, we are told, 
was glad to see Jesus and hoped to see him perform 
some miracle of which he had heard so much; but the 
Lord was absolutely silent before him, not a word had 
he to say before such a man. Such a course was probably 
the most striking rebuke he could have administered 
to Herod, and was entirely in line with the whole 



conduct of our Lord— his determination to do nothing 
that would hinder the accomplishment of that which he 
knew to be the divine purpose— his death that very 
day. 

Finding that Jesus would not even reply for him, 
nor perform any miracles for his entertainment, Herod 

R3369 : page 153 

suggested to his men of war that they robe him as a 
king and have some sport with him, as it seems was a 
custom of that time in respect to criminals— the soldiers 
were granted opportunity to give them mock homage 
and then to buffet them, etc., before they were executed. 
This done to Jesus he was returned to Pilate, Herod in 
turn expressing his appreciation of Pilate's course, but 
declining to interfere in Pilate's territory. From that 
time Pilate and Herod were friends, though previously 
they had been adversaries. 

"DO NOTHING AGAINST THIS JUST MAN." 

The case returning to Pilate, and the chief priests 
evidently fearing some slip of their plans, were very persistent 
in demanding the death of Jesus and in inciting 
the multitude to clamor for it. Some six times in all 
Pilate declared the innocence of Jesus, yet under the 
circumstances already narrated he hesitated to absolutely 
refuse the demand of the Jewish priests and multitude: 

R3369 : page 154 

especially did he feel the point of the argument 
made by the priests, "If thou let this man go, thou art 
not Caesar's friend," which meant, You are an enemy to 
Caesar and to the government of Rome. Pilate realized 
that such a course would not be understood by his superiors, 
and hence he tried every method to get the Jews 
satisfied in the matter. One step in this proceeding was 
to order that Jesus should be scourged. He hoped that 
the scourging would satisfy his adversaries' thirst for 
blood. Meantime Pilate's wife sent a message to him 
urging that he do nothing against this man, for that she 
had had a dream in the night to this effect. Under the 
circumstances Pilate evidently did everything that could 
be expected of a worldly man in the times and under 
the conditions in which he lived. The only exception 
to such a procedure that we could expect would be on 
the part of a Christian, or of some one who under Christian 
influence had gained a much more than ordinary 
love for justice, and willingness to sacrifice every interest 
in its behalf. 

It was in connection with his endeavor to free 
Jesus from those who sought his life that Pilate stood 
Jesus forth so that they might see him, exclaiming, 
"Behold the man!" The impression we get is that 



Pilate himself was struck with the quiet dignity of our 
Lord in his facial expression, in his composure under 
trying conditions. His words seem to mean, Look at 
the man you are talking about crucifying! Why, Jews, 
you have not such a man in all your land. I doubt if 
there is any man his equal anywhere! But it was all of 
no avail; the multitude had become excited and were 
clamoring for our Lord's blood. In the expressive symbolic 
language of the time, Pilate, before delivering 
Jesus for crucifixion, indicated that he was averse to the 
sentence they were compelling him to pronounce, and 
that wherever the responsibility lay he was not the 
guilty party. He did this by washing his hands with 
water in the presence of the people, exclaiming, "I am 
innocent of the blood of this just person."— Matt. 27:24. 

THE RESULT OF THESE TRIALS-RETRIBUTION. 

What a number of trials, testings and provings we 
have found in this lesson— and now let us briefly glance 
at the results. Judas, as a result of failure in his trial, 
died soon by his own hand. Pilate, the unwilling instrument 
of the condemnation and not one hundredth 
part as guilty as the Jews, shortly afterwards lost his 
commission as governor and in despondency committed 
suicide. Annas, the high priest, was subsequently 
dragged through the streets, scourged and murdered. 
The multitude who cried out, "Crucify him!" and who 
in answer to Pilate's declaration that he was innocent 
of the blood of Jesus, declared, "His blood be upon us 
and upon our children," experienced a baptism of blood 
not many years after when the entire city of Jerusalem 
was a scene of most horrible atrocities, which culminated 
in the utter destruction of their city with great loss 
of life, in the overflow of the entire Jewish polity in Palestine, 
and the scattering of the survivors amongst all 
nations and peoples. The curse they thus brought upon 
themselves still remains to some extent; his blood is 
still upon them, and from that day until the present 
time the Jews have suffered greatly; and although the 
divine disfavor has been passing from them as a nation 
since 1878, it will continue in some measure until nearly 
or quite 1914. The curse will be remitted because of 
its being forgiven through the grace of God in Christ. 

On the other hand, note the blessings which came 
to those whose testings were received in the proper 
manner, demonstrating their loyalty to the Lord. Our 
Lord Jesus was highly exalted, far above angels, principalities 
and powers and every name that is named— 
because faithful unto death, even the death of the cross. 
Peter the Apostle, although partially overtaken in a 
fault, nevertheless through repentance and bitter tears 
was accepted back again to the Lord's favor, profited 
by his sad experience, and became one of the noblest of 
the apostles, one of the most honored, and is yet to be 
honored in the Kingdom as joint-heir with his 



Redeemer. 

THINK NOT STRANGE YOUR FIERY TRIALS. 

We are not to expect similar trials, in all respects 
like those of our lesson, but we are to expect fiery trials, 
and we are to note that the results will be in accord 
with the manner in which we meet them. The lesson 
to us is that we should follow in the footsteps of Jesus 
and resolve to be faithful to our heavenly Father, to 
do his will at any cost, at any sacrifice of earthly interests 
—not grudgingly, but, as expressed prophetically of 
our Lord, "I delight to do thy will, O my God; thy 
Law is written in my heart." Another lesson is that if 
temporarily we should stumble in following the Master 
we must not be discouraged, but turn the failure and 
stumbling into a blessing by permitting it to bring us 
into closer relationship to the Lord and to make us 
more and more careful and more faithful in our walk 
with the Lord henceforth. 

Some one has said: "This scene has often been alleged 
as a self-condemnation of democracy. Vox populi, 
vox Dei (The voice of the people is the voice of God), 
its flatterers have said; but look yonder. When the 
multitude has to choose between Jesus and Barabbas, 
it chooses Barabbas. If this be so, the scene is equally 
decisive against aristocracy. Did the priests, scribes 
and nobles behave any better than the mob? It was 
by their advice that the mob chose Barabbas." This 
is a very wise and a very truthful suggestion. The 
voice of the people can be relied upon in some matters, 
and, on the whole, the republican form of government 
is probably the best of any in the world for civilized 
peoples under present conditions; but as respects religious 

R3369 : page 155 

things the voice of the people is far from being 
the voice of God. On the contrary, the Apostle declared, 
"The world by wisdom knows not God." It 
must not, therefore, prejudice our judgments to find 
the popular voice against us. What we seek for and 
listen for is the voice of the Lord through his Word. 
With this let us be satisfied as was our Redeemer, content 
whatever lot we see since it is our God who leadeth 
us. It is possible that the closing scenes of the 
Church's experience may in some respects resemble 
that of our dear Redeemer; it is possible that some of 
the Lord's people may be branded as blasphemers and 
hailed before governments on the charges of preaching 
Christ as another King. Should it ever come to such 
a pass, we should have no doubt whatever respecting 
our position. It should be that of full confidence in 
the Lord, and through faithfulness to him, to his Word, 
and to all the brethren. Let us leave the outcome of 
these trials and testings in the hands of the Lord, assured 



by his Word that he will make these afflictions to 
work out for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight 
of glory. 



R3369 : page 155 

HOW AND WHY CHRIST WAS CRUCIFIED. 

--MARK 15:22-39.-JUNE 12.- 

Golden Text:— "Christ died for our sins 
according to the Scriptures."— I Cor. 15:3. 

VICTOR HUGO wrote, "Waterloo is the change of 

form of the universe." Another amends the 

statement thus, "Calvary is the change of form 

of the universe." The story of our Lord's crucifixion 

is related with a pathos which stirs our souls with sympathy, 

and begets in us a responsive love from the moment 

we truly recognize the purport of our Golden 

Text. Others have died just as cruelly, and a few have 

gone to death voluntarily and composedly. The Lord's 

death, however, was the first one in which the victim 

was entirely innocent, entirely unworthy of the death 

sentence,— the only one, therefore, in whose case the 

matter of dying was wholly voluntary, the only one 

who needed not to die had he not so willed. 

CROSS-BEARING EXEMPLIFIED. 

The evangelists relate the incidents of the crucifixion 
with very slight variations, and the whole matter is 
before us when we group together the various statements, 
each of which is true. From Pilate's Judgment 
Hall, after the governor had consented to Jesus' death 
because unable to stem the tide of Jewish prejudice 
and vociferous demands, the centurion, with three Roman 
soldiers, took Jesus to Calvary to crucify him. As 
was the custom, the culprit— in this case the victim- 
bore his own cross, which must necessarily have been a 
terrible task. Our Lord apparently was overcome by 
the weight of the cross, when a countryman named 
Simon coming along was forced to assist him. The 
statement of Luke 23:26 implies that Simon did not 
carry the cross entirely, but merely assisted Jesus, carrying 
the hinder part of it, which usually dragged. 

We have often wondered, Where were Peter and 
John and James that they did not see the Master's burden 

R3370 : page 155 

and run to proffer assistance? If disposed to envy 
Simon his privilege of assisting the Master in the bearing 
of the cross, let us reflect that many of the Lord's 



brethren are daily bearing symbolic crosses, and that it 
is our privilege to assist them, and that the Lord agrees 
to reckon any service done to his faithful followers as 
though it were rendered to his own person. Yet if no 
brother sees the privilege of giving a helping hand let 
not the burdened ones lose heart. The Lord knoweth 
the need and will send the aid necessary, even though 
it be impressed, and that because of the sympathy of 
the worldly— as in Jesus' case, when the soldiers provided 
the aid. As the wooden cross was not our Lord's 
heaviest burden, so, too, his followers have crosses which 
the world sees not, but which the "brethren" should 
understand. "Bear ye one another's burdens and thus 
fulfil the law of Christ." 

Sympathetic Jewish women walked near, weeping. 
Quite probably these included Mary, our Lord's mother, 
Martha and Mary of Bethany, and Mary Magdalene. 
The particulars are not given us, but the sympathy of 
woman is markedly testified to. Our Lord was full of 
composure, though weak and fainting, not only because 
of the expenditure of his vitality previously in the healing 
of the sick, etc., but additionally because he had been 
under a most terrible nervous strain throughout the 
entire night, without sleep or food. It was now nine 
o'clock of the day of his crucifixion, and he had wearily 
borne a share of the weight of his cross for about three-quarters 
of a mile, from Pilate's Judgment Hall to Calvary. 
Golgotha, the name usually given to this place 
by the people of the vicinity, signified "the place of a 
skull," because that particular slope of the hill very 
closely resembled a skull in shape and in color, dark 
crevices in the face of the rock corresponding to the 
eye sockets, nose cavity, etc. 

The offering of wine mingled with bitter myrrh, 
otherwise styled gall, was not an indignity as is usually 
supposed, but an act of kindness. A Women's Society 
for the Relief of the Suffering furnished sour wine with 
bitter narcotics with a view to deadening the sensibility 
to pain, and it was customary to provide this draught 
for all the poor unfortunates to reduce their terrible 
sufferings to a minimum. Our Lord tasted the wine, 
Matthew informs us, doing so probably to assure himself 

R3370 : page 156 

of what it was, or as a token of his appreciation of 
the kindness expressed by it. But he refused to drink 
of it, evidently preferring to experience the full measure 
of the pain and suffering which the Father's wisdom 
and love and justice had prepared for him— had permitted 
to come upon him as a test of the full measure of 
his loyalty and obedience. 

The crucifixion must have been a terrible ordeal. 
The cross was laid upon the ground and the victim 
stretched upon it, while the nails were driven through 
the feet and hands; and if possible a still more trying 



moment came when the cross, lifted by sturdy men, 

was allowed to drop into the socket prepared for it in 

the rock. Very properly the evangelist did not stop 

to detail or comment upon the extreme suffering experienced 

by the Lord, and very properly we may similarly 

leave the matter. Nevertheless, our hearts can 

but ache still when we think of what this part of the 

redemption price paid for our sins cost the One who 

bought us with his precious blood. He who grasps the 

situation clearly will be the more willing to suffer something 

for the Lord's sake and for his cause' sake— thus 

to testify in return his love and his appreciation of the 

great things done for him by the Son of God. Indeed 

we should esteem it a deprivation if not permitted to 

"suffer with him," for otherwise we could not hope to 

"reign with him." 

TWO PROPHECIES FULFILLED. 

It was the custom to count the personal property 
of an executed person the perquisites of the soldiers 
performing the execution, and in Jesus' case we read 
that, having divided his garments amongst them, his 
outer robe, his head dress, sandals and girdle— enough 
to give one piece to each— they assigned by lot "what 
each man should take." One piece remained, namely, 
his tunic or under garment, reaching from the neck to 
the feet, "woven throughout and seamless." This they 
could not divide advantageously, and hence "for his 
vesture they did cast lots."— Psa. 22:18; 
John 19:23,24. 

The crucifixion took place at the third hour, Jewish 
reckoning, or nine o'clock, our reckoning. Over his 
head was his accusation written in three languages— 
the Latin, the official or governmental language of 
Rome; in Greek, the classical language of that period; 
in Hebrew, the language of the Jews. The charge was 
that upon which the chief priests had laid special stress 
in their arraignment of Jesus, that he claimed to be the 
king of the Jews. Elsewhere we are informed that the 
prominent Jews objected to Pilate's inscription and 
endeavored to have it altered, but he refused, saying, 
"What I have written, I have written." The Jews 
would have written, "This is an impostor claiming to 
be the king of the Jews," but in the Lord's providences 
the true title was put above his head, "Jesus, the King 
of the Jews." Those of us who are not Jews have reason 
to rejoice that he is more than this— that by God's 
providence he is heir of the world and is surely to be 
the King of the world, and is already King of saints. 

How it happened that two robbers were awaiting 
execution at the same time is not stated in the account. 
We may presume, however, that they had been in custody 
for some time under sentence, and that the chief 
priests may have suggested their execution at the same 
time. Their thought may have been to detract from the 



injustice of their own course and to throw a measure of 

justice into the proceedings as a whole, or their object 

may have been to demean Jesus in making him a companion 

of outlaws. But whatever the circumstances 

the matter was foreseen by the Lord and foretold by 

the Prophet— "He was numbered with the transgressors." 

-Isa. 53:12. 

"WE DID ESTEEM HIM STRICKEN, SMITTEN OF GOD." 

Near the cross stood the Apostle John and Jesus' 
mother and others who loved him, and whose hearts 
were breaking with sympathy as they beheld his ignominy 
and suffering and were unable to fully appreciate 
the necessity for this, as we shall shortly see it. Some 
few idlers were standing by probably, while travelers 
were coming and going, because Golgotha was on a frequented 
route. Apparently many of these, who had 
heard much about Jesus and his miracles, were now satisfied 
that his claims were false, and that probably his 
miracles were deceptions wrought, as the Pharisees said, 
by the power of Beelzebub, the prince of devils. These 
reasoned from analogy that if the Lord had done the 
works ascribed to him by the power of God, as he 
claimed, he would not need to be at the mercy of his 
enemies, for it never occurred to them that any one 
would voluntarily lay down his life for his friend- 
neither did they have the slightest conception of the 
necessity or object of the Lord's death. 

A similar mistake is made by the world in respect 
to the Lord's followers. Those who have sorrows and 
trials and persecutions and poverty they esteem to be 
under divine disfavor. Thus it was prophesied of our 
Lord, but is true of his Church, his body as a whole— 
"We did esteem him stricken, smitten of God and 
afflicted," and we were ashamed of him. The world 
cannot discern, as we do, that God's favor toward the 
elect is manifested in letting them have those experiences 
necessary to their preparation for Kingdom 
honors. 

"NONE OF THE WICKED SHALL UNDERSTAND." 

Our Lord's statement of a few days before was remembered 
by some, but either misunderstood or deliberately 
falsified in their raillery. He had not spoken of 
destroying their Temple, but had said that if they destroyed 
the Temple it would be reared again within 
three days (an ti typical). The Temple construction had 

R3370 : page 157 

required about forty years, and our Lord's declaration 
they considered bombastic, and said, It will be much 
easier for him to show his power by coming down from 
the cross. The fact that he did not do so was esteemed 



an evidence of the falsity of all that he had previously 

said and done. To a sensitive mind, like that of our 

Lord, we can readily suppose that such a charge of falsification 

and misrepresentation would be a severe burden 

upon his heart; yet he bore it patiently. O, we are so 

glad that Jesus did not come down from the cross, and 

thus leave us in our sins— the whole world unredeemed! 

The chief priests and scribes pursued their victim 
to the cross— neglecting, doubtless, important matters 
in their eagerness to make sure that he did not escape 
them. They were more blameworthy than the common 
people, yet they sought to justify their course in the 
same manner. Strangely enough, they admitted that 
"he saved others;" and the fact that he did not save 
himself out of their grasp seems to have been to them 
conclusive evidence of the falsity of all of his claims 
as respected relationship to Jehovah God. They were 
satisfied that his blood should be upon them and upon 
their children. Poor men! they thought themselves 
wise, yet, as the Apostle Peter pointed out a few days 
subsequently, the whole matter was done in ignorance. 
Peter's words are, "I wot, brethren, that ye did it in 
ignorance, as did also your rulers." It is fortunate for 
these— yea, for the great majority of mankind— that the 
Lord our God is not the resentful One he is represented 
to be; that on the contrary he is "long suffering and 
of plenteous mercy." In full accord with this is the 
glorious prophecy that eventually those who crucified 
the Lord shall look upon him whom they pierced and 
mourn because of him, and that "the Lord will pour 
upon them the spirit of prayer and supplication and 
they shall mourn for him." 

WHEN REVILED HE REVILED NOT IN RETURN. 

The Apostle points out our Lord's patience under 
this reviling as an example to us. When he was reviled 
he reviled not in return. How many cutting things our 
Lord might truthfully have thrown back at his persecutors. 
The secret of his patience was expressed in his 

R3371 :page 157 

words to Pilate: "Thou couldst have no power over me 
at all except it were given thee of my Father." The 
same thought is expressed in the words: "The cup that 
my Father hath poured for me, shall I not drink it?" 
Likewise our ability to take reviling and persecution 
patiently and unresentfully will be in proportion as our 
consecration to the Lord is full and complete, and in 
proportion as we realize that "All the steps of the righteous 
are ordered of the Lord." 

One of those crucified with Jesus reviled him also— 
perhaps both, but probably only one— the other for a 
time keeping silent, but afterward speaking in defence of 
Jesus, as is related in another Gospel. The morning, 



which had opened very bright, became very cloudy, and 
the darkness from the sixth hour (12 o'clock noon) 
until the ninth hour (3 o'clock), when Jesus died, was 
quite noticeable. 

It was at the close of his experiences, at 3 P.M., 
that Jesus cried aloud with a strong voice, indicating 
considerable vitality still. His cry was, "My God, my 
God, why hast thou forsaken me?" Throughout the 
entire experience of the night and the morning, from 
the time he had the assurance, in the Garden of Gethsemane, 
that he was pleasing to the Father, our Lord 
was most cool and tranquil of mind. Why was it, then, 
that at the very close of his experiences he should have 
so dark a cloud, a shadow, between his heart and 
the Father? Why should the Father permit any cloud 
to come between on an occasion when his dear Son, well 
beloved, so much needed more than any other time the 
comfort and strength and sustenance of a clear appreciation 
of his love and favor? This we must answer later, 
when considering why our Lord was crucified. 

It was at this time that our Lord had said, "I 
thirst," and that a sponge fastened to a hyssop stock 
and saturated with sour wine (Jno. 19:29) was lifted to 
his lips. From it he sucked some refreshing moisture, 
for by this time under such conditions his wounds must 
have developed a raging fever in his blood. Then Jesus 
cried aloud again. What he said is not recorded in 
Mark's account, but Luke gives it as, "Father, into thy 
hands I commit my spirit"— my life. This indicated 
that his faith in the Lord was absolute and that the 
thing he chiefly thought of was life. He was laying 
down his life most loyally, most nobly, in accord with 
the Father's arrangement. The Father had promised 
him as a reward to raise him up from the dead: he 
trusted in this promise, and now in his dying breath he 
expressed his faith. 

"IT IS FINISHED." 

Various things are recorded as taking place at the 
moment of our Lord's death— an earthquake shook the 
ground in the neighborhood of the cross, and in the 
Temple at Jerusalem the great vail which separated between 
the Holy and Most Holy was torn, not from the 
bottom toward the top, as would be the expectation if 
it were the result of wear, but from the top to the bottom, 
as indicating that it was a manifestation of divine 
power. The vail or curtain is described as being sixty 
feet long and thirty feet wide, and its thickness about 
four inches. Josephus describes it as "of Babylonish 
texture, a wonderful stretch of white, scarlet and purple." 
The rending of this curtain represented symbolically 
the opening of the way between heaven itself 
and the heavenly condition of those in the world. 
Christ has opened to us a new and living way through 
the vail— that is to say, through the sacrifice of his 



flesh. True believers are represented as being now 

R3371 :page 158 

associated with Jesus as priests in the Holy, or outer 
apartment of the two. Here we have fellowship with 
God through the light of the golden candlestick, 
through the bread of the golden table, and through 
the incense that we are permitted to offer on the 
golden altar, and from this standpoint we can now 
by faith see beyond the vail— catch glimpses at least of 
the heavenly estate which God hath in reservation for 
them who love him, for the called ones according to his 
purpose, for the Christ, Head and body. 

WHY JESUS WAS CRUCIFIED. 

One of the most puzzling matters connected with 
Christianity in all minds, including the hypercritical of 
the Lord's professed followers, is why the sufferings and 
death of our Lord at Calvary were necessary. We answer 
that they were necessary because God made them 
necessary— because he so arranged his plan that they 
would be indispensable. That he could have devised 
another plan of salvation is beyond question, for the 
whole matter was in his hands, but that he did 
choose the best plan is equally indisputable. Whoever 
attempts to solve this question in his own mind or with 
the human philosophies of the natural mind will be sure 
to err. The only safe, proper course is to give heed to 
the wisdom that cometh from above respecting this 
matter. 

Hearkening to the voice of the Lord, we perceive 
that he knew the end from the beginning, and that his 
plan is designed to be a lesson respecting his attributes 
of justice, wisdom, love and power, not only to men but 
to angels, not only to the unholy, but to the holy. 
When the divine plan shall have been fully accomplished, 
all shall see the lengths and breadths and 
heights and depths of wisdom and love and justice and 
power exemplified in the divine arrangement. At the 
present time, however, only a few may see: "The secret 
of the Lord is with them that fear him; he has 
covenanted to show it unto them."— Psalm 25:14. 

With full knowledge that he could not retract his 
own sentence, God pronounced death to be the penalty 
for sin— knowing at the time that Adam would sin and 
that he and his entire family would come under the 
death sentence. To Adam and to all who understood 
the matter the case must have appeared hopeless, since, 
first, God could not revoke his sentence; and, second, 
the sentence deprived man of everything in depriving 
him of his life. It would not occur to man that God 
might have in his purpose a substitute: and even if it 
had occurred to him, looking about amongst his fellow 
men he could have found no one capable of serving as 



a substitute for Adam, because all were sinners through 
their inherited share in the results of the fall. It surely 
never would have occurred to man that God, looking 
down upon the fallen race of Adam, would have such 
pity for the transgressors of the law as to provide for 
them a way of escape from the penalty at such cost as 
was entailed. For God to provide a substitute for 
Adam meant the creation of another man, his equal 
in every particular, or the transfer of some holy being 
to a condition in nature similar to that of Adam before 
he fell. It would not have been supposable to man 
that Almighty God would be so considerate of the interests 
of his human creatures. Furthermore, they 
might have reasoned that for God to have created a 
man similar to Adam would have been merely to have 
duplicated the transgression; while for him to have 
transferred some glorious spirit being to human conditions 
would have appeared but a violation of justice— a 
punishment of a holy and obedient creature in the interest 
of unholy and sinful ones. 

But behold the wisdom of God, as well as his love 
and justice, manifested in the course arranged for. He 
would provide a ransom for Adam and thus for his race; 
he would provide a perfect man to be the Redeemer of 
the fallen one and those who lost life in him, yet he 
would do no injustice to any. Rather he would so arrange 
the plan that the one who should become man's 
redemption would himself be greatly advantaged by 
the sufferings and deprivations incidental to the work. 
No doubt had God offered the proposition in a general 
way to all of the heavenly hosts there would have been 
many ready and willing to render joyful obedience and 
to trust for whatever reward and blessing the Father 
might think best to give them; but he did not make 
the offer general— it was made to but one. 

"LO, I COME-TO DO THY WILL, O MY GOD." 

Amongst the heavenly hosts was the only begotten 
of the Father, he who in the beginning was called the 
Word and who was with the Father, and who himself 
was a God or a Mighty One, and who had been used of 
the Father as his instrument in the creation of all the 
angelic and human beings. To this one, highest of 
all, the Father would first make the proposition of the 
great sacrifice, the great test of faith in the Father's 
love and the Father's power— that he would restore him 
again when the work was finished, and that with added 
glory. True, the Only Begotten might have declined, 
and, so far as we know, without prejudice, in which 
event the offer or opportunity would have been given 
probably to the one next in honor and glory and power 
amongst the angels. But the Only Begotten did not 
decline, but joyfully accepted the offer of being a 
co-laborer with the Father on behalf of mankind. 
He carried out the project; he left the heavenly courts, 



laid aside the heavenly conditions, spirit body, etc., 
was transferred to the womb of Mary, and in due time 
was born a man amongst men, "the man Christ Jesus." 

At thirty years, the proper period under the Law, 
he made his full consecration unto death and symbolized 
it in baptism. For three and a half years the 

R3371 :page 159 

death was being accomplished by him, until at Calvary 

he cried, "It is finished." Thus his first great humbling 

of himself in becoming a man was a preparatory 

step, while his giving of himself as a sacrifice, as a substitute 

for Adam, covered a period of three and a half 

years, ending in his death on the cross. He finished 

there the work which the Father had given him to do 

so far as redeeming the world was concerned. His life 

was the ransom price for Adam's; and since the world 

had lost life through Adam, because inheriting his 

weaknesses, his imperfections, therefore justly, legally, 

actually, Christ's death not only redeemed Adam, but 

redeemed the world of mankind. It was because Adam 

as a sinner was cut off from fellowship with God that 

our dear Redeemer, as his substitute, was obliged to 

have a similar experience for a little season before he 

died. It was his hardest moment and called forth the 

cry, "My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken 

me?" 

In due time the Father's promise toward him was 
fulfilled in his resurrection from the dead, a spirit being; 

R3372 : page 159 

in due time he ascended up on high to appear in the 
presence of God on our behalf— to apply to each believer 
a share in the merit of his sacrifice. This work 
has progressed throughout this Gospel age, and every 
consecrated believer has been accepted in Christ; and, 
being accepted in him as a member of his body, these 
believers in turn have been privileged to present their 
bodies living sacrifices and thus to fill up the measure 
of Christ's sufferings. Soon the entire Atonement Day 
sacrificing will be finished, soon it will be accomplished, 
soon the promise will be fulfilled, "If we suffer with him 
we shall also reign with him: if we be dead with him we 
shall also live with him." From that time onward the 
redemptive work takes on a larger scope. As soon as 
the last members of the body of Christ shall have suffered 
with him he will apply the full payment to Justice 
on behalf of all the remainder of mankind not believers, 
and the penalty, the curse against the world, 
will thus be cancelled— not through faith, not merely 
for those who shall have exercised faith, but regardless 
of faith. 

THE RESULTS-THE GRACIOUS EFFECTS. 



Then will begin the work of uplifting the world— 
those who have not yet gone into the tomb, and gradually 
those who already have gone down into the prison-house 
of death. The prison doors shall be opened, all 
the prisoners shall show themselves; as the Prophet 
declared, they will all come forth to trial. (Isa. 61:1.) 
Not to a new trial on account of the first offence by 
Adam, neither to a trial on account of things done 
while more or less affected by the penalty upon Adam, 
but to a new trial for life on their own responsibility. 
The responsibility of each shall be according to the 
measure of character and strength which he possesses,— 
it will be a righteous judgment that will make full allowance 
for every inherited imperfection and weakness, 
and that will expect from the world only that which 
mankind will be able to render. 

The result will be an uplift of the world of mankind, 
an opportunity for each to come back gradually 
to all that was lost in Eden by Father Adam's disobedience, 
—including Paradise restored. The obedient of 
heart shall then be accounted worthy of the blessing of 
the Lord, to continue with them eternally. They shall 
have everlasting life, all contrary minded being cut off 
in the Second Death. 

Thus seen the death of our Lord Jesus was necessary 
for man's release from the death sentence. Christ 
died for our sins, as our Golden Text expresses it. He 
died in order that, by paying our penalty of death, God 
might be just and yet the justifier of him that believeth 
in Jesus, and release him from the death sentence. 
Our Lord's death was necessary for another reason also, 
as the Apostle explains: it is expedient that he who 
shall judge the world during the Millennial age shall 
have full ability to sympathize with the world of mankind 
who will then be on trial— one able and willing 
to succor those beset by sin and weakness and to have 
compassion on them, having been tempted in all points 
like as we are, yet without sin. Thus not only the 
Lord Jesus, the great King and Judge of that time, but 
also the Church— his joint-heirs in the judgeship and 
in the Royal Priesthood— will be able to sympathize 
with those whom they will be judging and trying, sustaining, 
assisting and uplifting. 

We perceive, then, that the plan which God adopted 
is in the broadest sense of the word the wisest and 
best imaginable, and that under this plan nothing else 
than death was possible in order to man's redemption 
from the sentence of death, and that nothing else than 
severe trials were appropriate for the one who would 
be intrusted with so high a dignity, honor, responsibility, 
as that which the Father had apportioned to the 
Christ. We see also that it behooved the Father, in 
bringing the Church to glory and subsequently testing 
the world, to prove the Captain of the salvation perfect 
through suffering; that he who was chief of the 



universe next to the Father, and whom he purposed to 
make so much greater still as to give him a participation 
in the divine nature, glory and honor— he might 
reasonably be expected to demonstrate before every 
creature his absolute loyalty to the Father; and this he 
did in the days of his flesh when he suffered the just 
for the unjust that he might bring us to God. As a 
consequence "him hath God highly exalted and given 
him a name above every name; that at the name of 
Jesus every knee should bow and every tongue confess 
to the glory of the Father"— during the Millennial 
age. 



page 161 

SEMI-MONTHLY 