Announcements
TAKING TEACHING FROM JEHOVAH
A great number of books and magazines are published on every subject under the sun and much can be learned from many of them. However, to have real understanding of the issues that are vital and to comprehend present-day world events and their meaning requires one to be a student of the Bible. There alone can God’s mind on matters be ascertained, for Jesus said: “‘And they will all be taught by Jehovah.’ Everyone that has heard the Father’s teaching and has learned comes to me.” (John 6:45, NW; Isa. 54:13, AS) Having learned the purposes of God by study of the Bible with the help of the Watchtower magazine, Jehovah’s witnesses will encourage all whom they meet during March to take teaching from Jehovah by studying The Watchtower with their Bible. A year’s subscription is only $1, and three booklets dealing with timely subjects will be given free with each new subscription.
OBSERVE THE LORD’S EVENING MEAL
It is the privilege of all who are of good will toward God and all who “seek after Him” to attend the Lord’s evening meal, commemorating the sacrificial death of the Lord Jesus. All persons of good will are invited to be present when Jehovah’s witnesses throughout the world assemble on Saturday evening, April 17, after 6 p.m., Standard Time, to observe the Memorial. A dedicated, baptized servant of Jehovah will preside over this special yearly meeting, one of the anointed if available and capable. The meeting will be opened with song and prayer. A discourse will set forth the significance of the occasion. At the appropriate time the emblems, unleavened bread and red wine, will be served after Jehovah’s blessing has been asked in connection with each. Those of the anointed present will partake of the emblems. Service announcements for Sunday, April 18, will be made and all present will be invited and encouraged to join in the activities. Song and prayer will conclude the meeting.
“NEW HEAVENS AND A NEW EARTH”
Written around the divine promise of “the new heavens and the new earth” (Isa. 66:22, AS; 2 Pet. 3:13) the book with the above title presents in glowing terms the heartening prospect of a world of righteousness. It gives sure evidence of the close-at-hand end of the present wicked system of things, visible and invisible, and the blessings that will be enjoyed by those who now gather for survival in accord with God’s instructions. This 384-page book will be sent postpaid on a 50c contribution.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES
Week of April 4: Repairers and Restorers of True Religion.
Week of April 11: Restoration of True Religion Today.

