Taking Teaching From Jehovah
THE Bible reveals Jehovah, the exclusive God, as the Maker or Creator of all things, as the Husband of his organization Zion and as the Father of all living creatures. It also presents him to us as the great Teacher of the children of his organization: “And all thy children shall be taught of Jehovah; and great shall be the peace of thy children.”—Isa. 54:13, AS.a
No one ever counseled Jehovah or gave him knowledge, for he himself is the original source of all wisdom and knowledge. As Elihu well asked, “Who is a teacher like him?” (Job 36:22, RS; Rom. 11:33-35) Certainly no one! Exclusive education belongs to him; he has all the qualities of the best teacher: he possesses all knowledge; he has the interest of his pupils at heart; he is extremely patient; truly his ability to teach is second to none.
He placed in the lower animals their innate or instinctive wisdom; he taught Adam what to do and what not to do. He revealed his will at the time of the rebellion; he taught Enoch, Noah and Abraham. For some 1,500 years he made known his will to his people Israel by means of prophets and the Levitical priesthood from Moses down to the coming of Christ.
With the arrival of his Son Christ Jesus, Jehovah stepped up his teaching activity; for Christ Jesus, the very first of his pupils as well as the most willing and most skillful, was, above all else, a teacher; a fact recognized even by his religious opponents the clergy, for they repeatedly addressed him as “Teacher.” (Mark 12:19, 32; Luke 7:40, NW) And he not only taught others the truth regarding his Father’s name and purposes, but he also trained them to serve as teachers and commissioned them to ‘go and make disciples, that is, learners and followers, of people of all nations, teaching them to observe all the things I have commanded you.’—John 17:6; Mark 3:14; Matt. 28:19, 20, NW.
While on earth Jesus quoted Isaiah’s prophecy about Jehovah as teaching the children of his organization and applied it to the teaching work God was doing then and there. (John 6:45) However, from the context of that prophecy as well as from related scriptures, it appears that Isaiah’s words have an even more pertinent application to the present time, when Zion has brought forth her children and when the birth of God’s nation has taken place. (Isa. 54:1-17; 66:7-9) By what means does Jehovah teach today? By means of his Word, his spirit and his organization.
So, if we would be taking teaching from Jehovah we must, first of all, qualify as his children by dedicating ourselves to the doing of his will. We must study his Word, which is the chief means by which he teaches us, doing so in meekness and proper fear. (Ps. 25:12, 14) We must have the help of his holy spirit or active force, which comes to us through prayer, study of his Word, association with his people, and by applying God’s Word to our daily lives.
And, finally, we must recognize his organization or earthly instrument, which he uses to throw light upon his Word. And what is that instrument? The group, organization, association or society that is devoted to upholding God’s Word and name, bringing forth the fruitage of “every kind of goodness and righteousness and truth.” And let us not forget the purpose of our taking teaching from Jehovah: to bring honor to his name and comfort to men of good will.
[Footnotes]
For details see The Watchtower, April 15, May 1, 1953.

