Seeking to Do the Divine Will on Earth
JEHOVAH God is perfect in wisdom and justice, almighty in power and wholly unselfish. Since that is so, it is sheer folly to presume to oppose his divine will. All wise persons therefore will be in the frame of mind of the apostle Paul when he wrote: “Now may the God of peace . . . equip you with every good thing to do his will, performing in us through Jesus Christ that which is well-pleasing in his sight.”—Heb. 13:20, 21.a
That the divine will cannot be successfully opposed can be clearly seen from the pages of history as recorded in God’s Word, the Bible. Repeatedly it tells of mighty rulers being made to know that Jehovah God is supreme. In particular does it tell of God manifesting his supremacy in the case of Nebuchadnezzar, king of Babylon. Jehovah did this, first of all, by causing Nebuchadnezzar to dream about a great image, to forget the dream and then to have Daniel tell Nebuchadnezzar both the dream and its interpretation. Nebuchadnezzar was also made to bow to the divine will at the time he had the three Hebrew youths cast into a crucible. And in a most decisive manner did Jehovah make Nebuchadnezzar bow to the divine will by causing that proud pagan monarch to become insane, to eat grass like an ox, for “seven times,” after which Nebuchadnezzar regained his reason and acknowledged the supremacy of the divine will in human affairs.
Concerning those who appreciate these truths Daniel wrote: “He [the dictatorial ruling power] shall seduce with flattery those who violate the covenant; but the people who know their God shall stand firm and take action. And those among the people who are wise shall make many understand, though they shall fall by sword and flame, by captivity and plunder, for some days. When they fall, they shall receive a little help. And many shall join themselves to them with flattery; and some of those who are wise shall fall, to refine and to cleanse them and to make them white, until the time of the end.”—Dan. 11:32-35, RS.
As Christian witnesses of Jehovah we do indeed know our God. He is the Most High, the Creator of all things seen and unseen, whose name alone is Jehovah. The more we study his Word privately and with others in the Christian congregation, the more we engage in the ministry of making known his name and kingdom, and the more we commune with him in prayer, the better we shall get to know him and the more fully we shall be able to do the divine will on earth. Then we shall be able to stand so firm that the agents of Satan will not succeed in seducing us with flattery. Then also, we shall be taking faithful action and not be like those that violate the covenant by compromising.
Who are those that “join themselves to them with flattery”? Those who associate with the New World society, enjoying the truths it publishes and the clean Christian fellowship, but who, while saying nice things, refuse to dedicate themselves to do God’s will and then be baptized in symbol thereof.
Far from being like such, let us rather take the step of dedication and prove ourselves to be among the ‘wise that cause many to understand’ by teaching others. Should persecution cause us to stumble, still thereby we shall become refined and made white, all to Jehovah’s glory and our eternal welfare. So let us continually seek to do the divine will on earth now, regardless of opposition.
[Footnotes]
For details see The Watchtower, February 15, 1959.

