How the Difference Affects Our Future
THE world situation that we just reviewed was forecast with startling accuracy in the Bible. It predicted that in a period of just one “generation” mankind would see developments that would cause “on the earth anguish of nations, not knowing the way out” and that men would “become faint out of fear and expectation of the things coming upon the inhabited earth.” (Luke 21:25, 26, 32; see also Matthew 24:3-8.) In an effort to cope with these new global challenges, the nations confer increasing authority on the United Nations.
Accurately foreseeing this development, Bible prophecy reveals this international organization to be “an eighth king” that springs from the seven preceding “kings” or world powers that successively dominated Bible history. (Rev. 17:10, 11, Berkeley Version; NW) The Bible often uses animals or their “horns” to represent governments. (Dan. 7:17, 23, 24; 8:20-22) Thus this composite political power is here represented by a “beast,” this one having “seven heads,” to represent the seven previous world-dominating “kings” from which it has sprung. But it also has “ten horns.” (Rev. 17:3, 7) What they represent and what they do are very significant.
The “ten horns,” continues the prophecy, “are ten kings, who have not as yet received a kingdom [in the prophet’s time]; but for one hour they will receive royal authority along with the beast.” (Rev. 17:12, Berkeley; NW) The prophetically complete number of “ten kings” represents the totality of political governments today that are ruling for a short time along with the U.N.
During this short period, like “one hour” compared to past history, conditions would be such that, for the first time, though disagreeing on almost everything else, they would finally come to “have one purpose; they give over power and authority to the beast [the U.N.]” in a human scheme for establishing global peace and security.​—Rev. 17:13, Berkeley; NW.
Recognizing that they face crises different from any that have gone before, the nations finally band together in an all-out attempt to save their national sovereignties. They desperately hope that such united action will rescue the crumbling “civilization” upon which those sovereignties are founded. Admits Secretary Kissinger:
“As a historian, you have to be conscious of the fact that every civilization that has ever existed has ultimately collapsed. . . . one has to live with a sense of the inevitability of tragedy. As a statesman, one has to act on the assumption that problems must be solved.”
Will they? Bible prophecy does indicate that the nations will apply a temporary, superficial patch to their decaying “civilization,” just sufficient to provoke the cry “Peace and security!” But at that point, says the Bible, “sudden destruction is to be instantly upon them just as the pang of distress upon a pregnant woman.” (1 Thess. 5:3) Why? For two reasons:
First, nothing fundamental has really changed. Can any number of agreements among nations restore human society’s foundations that are already rotted through with greed, crime, violence, immorality, family breakdown, racial and religious hatreds? The situation is much like what the famed Norwegian explorer Thor Heyerdahl said about the recent U.N. Conference on the Law of the Sea:
“I have the feeling that the delegates . . . are discussing how to divide and make the best use of an apple which is on the way to rot, and they leave it rotting while they try to find a way to divide it.”
Second, in giving over their “power and authority to the beast [the U.N.]” in an abortive attempt to save their own earthly sovereignties, the nations are rejecting God’s way to bring true peace and security. They are spurning His promised kingdom, founded on lasting, righteous principles. (Dan. 2:44; 7:13, 14; Matt. 6:10) That is why, after the “ten kings” give “power and authority” to the U.N., the prophecy says: “They will war against the Lamb [the Kingdom ruler, Jesus Christ], and the Lamb will conquer them.”​—Rev. 17:14, Berkeley; NW.
Thus the stage is set. Those who believe that human diplomatic and technological efforts will solve the multiplying crises of the world are due for a rude awakening. “They willfully ignore the fact that long ago,” warns the Bible, “the then existing world was destroyed” in Noah’s day by forces at God’s command. Today’s crises provide abundant proof that “the heavens and earth are by the same word stored up for . . . the destruction of godless people.”​—2 Pet. 3:3-7, Berkeley.
If the escalating differences so obvious in today’s crises do not convince such persons, then they will soon be shaken awake to what is happening. Their short-lived cry of “Peace and security!” will be suddenly interrupted by a “great tribulation such as has not occurred since the world’s beginning until now, no, nor will occur again.” (1 Thess. 5:2, 3; Matt. 24:21) That is certainly not the time for us to face up to the fact that today’s crises are different.
Rather, those who appreciatively accept this fact as proof of the nearness of God’s promised righteous Kingdom rule are in a position to act wisely now. Since the present world system is going to be destroyed, the Bible urges, “what sort of persons ought you to be in holy acts of conduct and deeds of godly devotion, awaiting and keeping close in mind the presence of the day of Jehovah.” That “day” will be followed by God’s foretold “new heavens and a new earth” in which “righteousness is to dwell.” What a worthwhile reward for those willing to learn the meaning behind today’s different crises and act accordingly!​—2 Pet. 3:11-13.

