VOL. XXVII NOVEMBER 15 No. 22 
A.D., 1906-A.M., 6035 



CONTENTS. 

Views from the Watch Tower 355 

From Devilish to Saintly Surgery 355 

Another Operation at Toledo 356 

Secretary of the Navy on Anarchy 356 

Glasgow Convention Report 357 

One-Day Conventions 358 

Earthly Things Appreciated Most 358 

Do All as Unto the Lord 359 

"Ye Can Do Nothing Against the Truth" 362 

"As Deceivers and Yet True" 363 

An Apology for Pilate 364 

Barabbas Chosen— by Popular Vote 365 

Some Interesting Letters 366 

page 354 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 



-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-24 EVERSHOLT ST., LONDON, N.W. 
GERMAN BRANCH-MIRKERSTR., 45, ELBERFELD. 
AUSTRALASIAN BRANCH-EQUITABLE BLDG., COLLINS ST., MELBOURNE 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 

TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR AS FOLLOWS:- 

All Bible Students who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity or 
adversity, are unable to pay for this Journal, will be supplied FREE if 
they send a Postal Card each June stating their case and requesting its 
continuance. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on 
our list continually and in touch with the Studies, etc. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



THIS JOURNAL IS PUBLISHED IN THE 

FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN LANGUAGES. 

SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



OUR SYMBOLIC PINS 



For some time the friends have been inquiring for symbolic 
pins, and now we are able to supply them. One represents 
the scene of Isa. 1 1:6. Sister Darlington drew the design for 
us and it is very fine. The other is a representation of the 
cross, crown and wreath which appears on the upper left corner 
of the TOWER cover. These are without metal rims, celluloid 
finish— beautiful. The latter design is in three sizes, 
5/8 in., 7/8 in. and 1-1/4 in.; the former is 1-1/4 in. in diameter. 

Getting these made in large quantities permits us to supply 
them at 25 cents per dozen— postpaid. We will assort 
them three of each unless you specifically mention a different 
preference. They are ready now. You may order at once. 
From their appearance you would expect them to cost each, 
the price we charge by the dozen. 

WATCH TOWER BINDERS. 



These are substantially made of stiff cloth boards, and can 
hold two years' issues of the WATCH TOWER. They prevent 
soiling and loss. Price, postpaid, 50c. 



R3894 : page 354 
Vol. III. in Norwegian and Vol. V. in Swedish, just issued. 



We again have "The Wonderful Story" in stock. 



R3889 : page 355 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 
FROM DEVILISH TO SAINTLY SURGERY 



WE HAVE already noted in these columns an 
instance of how surgery, the trepanning of 
the skull and the removal of a tumor 
from the brain, changed a bad boy into a good one. 
We now note, in the American-Journal-Examiner, 
the account of another such case: a bandit, desperado, 
train robber and murderer of the Northwest, 
after being imprisoned was found to have some 
good traits and became a very useful man in the prison 
service, but nevertheless retained a vindictive, murderous 
spirit. Seizing his opportunity he was about to kill 
one of the keepers. The record says: "He fought like a 
madman, and it was only after a spirited struggle that 
the handcuffs were placed upon his wrists. When the 
man regained his feet he said, "I never expected to be 
taken alive. Give me my arms and I will defy the whole 
town." The man's name is Charles Holzhay, but he 
was generally known as Black Bart. 

The attention of the surgeons connected with the 
prison was drawn to the man, an operation was performed, 
a tumor removed from the brain, since which 
time Black Bart gives every evidence of being greatly 
changed in his general disposition, and, as the newspaper 
records— "Before they cut out the bad spot in the 
brain of Black Bart, the murderous bandit, he was the 
wildest, fiercest villain and freebooter of the Northwest; 
now he is tame and mild, a teacher in a Sunday 
School, a reader of tracts, a praying man full of noble 
impulses." 

No one for a moment supposes that all the meanness 
and weakness of the world are caused by brain 
tumors; but from our standpoint we can readily see 
that all the badness and meanness of the world is 
caused more or less directly by the fall, the imperfect 
twists and ruts of the human mind in consequence of 
depravity. Sin and death working in our race have 
wrought the general havoc of mind and morals and 



physique which makes of the human family what the 

Apostle describes as the "groaning creation." We can 

readily see that the will may have large influence in rectifying 

these defects, so that those who give their hearts 

to the Lord and turn from sin and meanness to copy 

the Lord's character to the best of their ability, may 

and do make considerable progress; but we all are witnesses 

that perfection is not attainable by any of us, 

however much we will to have it. As the Apostle said, 

"To will is present with me, but how to do [all that I 

will] that which is good, I find not."— Rom. 7:18. 

What the world needs, then, is the great Restorer, 
who, during the "times of restitution of all things 
spoken by the mouth of all the holy prophets since the 
world began," shall lift up the poor, degenerate race 
from its fallen condition and bring it gradually back to 
all that was lost in Eden by the first man's transgression 
—back to the image and likeness of God. True, 
there will still be room for the human will to exercise 
itself, and any who knowingly, willingly, understandingly 
reject and oppose the divine restitution work will 
be utterly destroyed in the Second Death.— 
Acts 3:19-23. 

The whole world, then, is waiting for the good 
Physician, and the Scriptures tell us how long they 
must wait and what blessings will come to them as 
soon as the waiting time is ended. They must wait 
until the Church, the Body of Christ, has been selected 
from the world and proven itself worthy of its call by 
willing and glad participation with Jesus in his work 
of sacrifice, that they may also be participators in his 
coming work of glory and blessing and uplifting. Then 
all the blind eyes shall be opened, all the deaf ears 
shall be unstopped and the lame shall be healed— 
physical, mental and moral healing and enlightenment 
are herein proclaimed as the work of the great Restorer, 
soon to begin. The entire work will require one day's 
time— not a twenty-four-hour day, but the "Day of 
Christ," for, as the Apostle Peter declares, "we should 
not be ignorant of this one thing, that a day with the 
Lord is as a thousand years."— 2 Pet. 3:8. 

R3889 : page 356 

ANOTHER OPERATION AT TOLEDO 



The Toledo News-Bee says:— "Nearly a year has 
elapsed since Doctors J. & P. Donnelly operated on 
Harold Hurley, an incorrigible boy, at St. Vincent's hospital, 
and since that time four other operations of similar 
character have been performed. The Hurley boy 
was a burden to his family and a menace to the neighborhood: 
he is a changed youngster, obedient, kind, 
tractable, and the parents are ready witnesses to the 



efficacy of the operation which rescued their boy from 
degradation, vice and crime. 

"From all over the country, especially from large 
cities, come eager inquiries for the Toledo surgeons 
seeking information as to the nature of the operation 
and its results. Already in Philadelphia the city is 
bearing the expenses of the operations on incorrigibles 
and considers them a good investment, while New 
York is seriously considering the same problem. 

"The last operation of this kind was performed in 
St. Vincent's hospital Friday morning (Aug. 24) by Dr. 
J. Donnelly, on a 13-year-old boy, who was released 
from the workhouse and taken directly to the hospital 
for the operation. 

R3890 : page 356 

"Dr. Alfred Gordon reports that he has discovered a 
surprisingly large number of cases of feeble-mindedness 
among children supposed to be victims of cruelty, 
who are really in a condition bordering closely upon 
imbecility, and calling for constant and patient care, of 
a character their busy parents are unable to give them. 

"It is proposed that these children in many cases 
shall be sent to the Institution for Feeble-Minded, which 
is to be built at Spring City, where the evil can be corrected 
to a great extent and perhaps result in the total 
cure of the children, who would otherwise be turned 
out upon the world, misunderstood and regarded as 
common criminals, for it is believed that the criminal 
instinct in their brains, caused by the defect, would increase 
as they grow older. 

"The Philadelphia Inquirer tells of the organization 
of a Society there for surgical operations on juvenile 
incorrigibles apparently destined to a criminal career 
through some physical defect. It says: 

'"In all seven children were put under the knife by 
a number of the city's most prominent surgeons, who 
performed operations of varied natures from the most 
delicate to those of minor importance, calculated to improve 
the mental and moral conditions of the patients. 
The total number of children examined was 147, and 
about fifty per cent, of these were found to be suffering 
from refraction of the eyes. Glasses have been ordered 
for all of these, and wherever possible the parents have 
been required to meet the cost, but the Society furnishes 
them free to the others.'" 

SECRETARY OF THE NAVY ON ANARCHY 



Secretary of the Navy C. J. Bonaparte's recent 
address is thus reported by the secular press: 

After reviewing briefly the history of anarchism 
in this country, the efforts made in the past to check 



its growth and its probable peril to nations for years, 
Mr. Bonaparte said: 

"In the first place, the unlawful acts prompted 
by anarchism should be made crimes, in so far as they 
are not, strictly speaking, crimes already, and as crimes 
they should be visited with such penalties as are particularly 
distasteful to the criminals and therefore the 
most effective deterrents to crime. In dealing with a 
convicted anarchist two facts may well be remembered: 
the chances of his real reformation are so small that they 
may be safely neglected, and we can appeal for practical 
purposes to but one motive on his part to discourage a 
repetition of his offence, namely, the fear of physical 
pain and death. 

"On anarchists the death penalty should be unequivocally 
imposed by law and inflexibly executed 
whenever the prisoner has sought, directly or indirectly, 
to take life. For offences of less gravity, I advise a comparatively 
brief, but very rigorous imprisonment, 
characterized by complete seclusion, deprivation of all 
comfort, and denial of any form of distraction, which 
could be, to my mind, advantageously supplemented 
by a severe, but not a public whipping; the lash, of all 
punishments, most clearly shows the culprit that he 
suffers for what his fellowmen hold odious and disgraceful 
and not merely for reasons of public policy. 

"The final and most truly vital condition of success 
in ridding our country of anarchism in practice is that 
American public opinion should recognize the utter 
emptiness, the inheritent folly of its theory, and of all 
the kindred ready-made, furnished-while-you-wait 
schemes for the social regeneration of mankind. 
Civilized society, as it exists to-day, if it be nothing 
more, is the outcome of all the strivings for justice 
and happiness of the human race during thousands of 
years. What monstrous presumption, what preposterous 
conceit, for any man, were he the wisest, the most 
learned, the most justly famed of his own age or of all 
ages, to imagine that, with but the dim, flickering lights 
of his own dull, feeble mind, with but the few imperfect 
lessons of his own short, ill-spent life to guide his hand, 
he could cast down and build up again this incredibly 
vast, this infinitely complex fabric and improve on its 
structure!" 



Poor world! All are deranged in some measure 
as a result of the Adamic fall. Some go crazy on religion, 
others on politics, others are money-mad. Only a few 
have what the Apostle calls, "the spirit of a sound 
mind." (2 Tim. 1:7.) All deserve our sympathy as 
all have the Lord's sympathy and are soon to have his 
aid, through Christ's Millennial Kingdom. 

Anarchists are probably as sincere as others, but 
their brains have a different twist from those of the 



majority. They have lost all hope of the establishment 
of a reign of righteousness by human instrumentality; 
and in their selfishness and sympathy exaggerate the 
woes and wrongs suffered by themselves and others, 
and propose the extermination of the rich; because 
lacking the spirit of love, "the spirit of a sound mind," 
they see them as wholly evil. 

From the standpoint of God's Word we see that 
in the near future Socialists will become quite strong 
throughout the civilized world, as in opposition to 
anarchy, but that later on their failure to achieve their 
hopes will make anarchists of the majority of them 
and speedily convulse the world in the greatest time 
of trouble the world has ever known, which will completely 
overthrow present institutions. Thank God we 
see still further in his Word— that on that anarchistic 

R3890 : page 357 

wreck the Lord will establish the Kingdom of his dear 
Son, "under the whole heavens." 

No doubt Mr. Bonaparte's prescription of death 
for anarchists will soon become law, under the claim 
that society's life, as well as the lives of its individual 
members must be preserved, secured. And no doubt, 
also, at about that time the law of might will become 
so powerful as to throttle all liberty. And no doubt 
about then the enemies of Present Truth, as we expound 
it, will be numerous enough and powerful enough to 
throttle Zion's Watch Tower publications, if not to 
persecute its subscribers. Opposition to civil government 
being esteemed injurious and worthy of a death 
sentence, it may be that a further step will be to declare 
a State Church standard of religious doctrine, and to 
proscribe us and others who cannot assent to it as 
"religious anarchists" also worthy of death. Let us 
not forget that our Lord and his apostles thus suffered 
as religious anarchists, because not in accord with the 
so-called orthodoxy of their day. "When ye see these 
things begin to come to pass, then lift up your heads 
and rejoice; knowing that your redemption [deliverance] 
draweth nigh."— Luke 21:28. 



R3890 : page 357 

GLASGOW CONVENTION REPORT 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

It is said that "Coming events cast their shadows 
before," and surely we felt that the Convention just 
past was affected by the knowledge that the great Convention 
of the Church is near at hand. But it was not 
a shadow we had— rather it was the light from the 
"glory to come" which gave us such a happy and blessed 



time together. While all the conventions are good 
there was a general consent to the feeling that this has 
been our best time. If we might judge we should say 
that while the addresses and talks were good and helpful 
it was not in these specially that the chief advantage 
was felt or the chief gain made; but that the fellowship 
and the encouragement gained from personal intercourse 
between the brethren— the communion of the 
holy Spirit— gave the real help and advantage. But all 
was good, and we praised the Lord for the foretaste of 
the "good to come." 

The British brethren were better represented than 
ever: the whole country from extreme North to furthest 
South sent messages of love, and a showing of 
interest. The Convention meetings were held in a 
pleasant hall, situated in one of the city parks; and 
besides the overflowing cup with which we were fed 
inside the hall the Lord favored us with the good 
things of nature. The weather smiled, and the brethren 
smiled, and the trees of the park, moved with the 
wind, clapped their hands for joy, and seemed delighted 
with the privilege of holding up the large advertisement 
telling that a "Bible Students' Convention" 
was being held. 

Many prayers had been offered for the Father's 
blessing and guidance, and the Convention at once 
struck a high note of expectation and spiritual desire, 
and this was maintained throughout the meetings. 
Brother Hemery gave a welcome on behalf of the absent 
President of the Society— Brother Russell— and 
Brother Edgar, on behalf of the Glasgow brethren, 
gave a welcome to the Society. Then we had a most 
inspiring talk from Brother Bilsbrough on "Our Good 
Fight." Other brethren who addressed the Convention 
were Brother Barton, Brother Edgar, Brother Johnston 
and Brother Hemery. On the second day thirty-three 
brothers and sisters were immersed, symbolizing their 
consecration to the Lord: our hearts went out to them 
and our prayers ascended for them that they might 
walk worthy of the grace given to them. The whole of 
the Sunday afternoon session was given for testimonies, 
and surely no people ever spent a happier time 
than we did. The testimonies were of the best character, 
and we laughed and wept and rejoiced with each 
other, and all to the glory of him we love and to the 
praise of his grace. Our minds recalled the earlier 

R3891 : page 357 

meetings when we met in small numbers, and we 
thought of the testimonies then given. Mostly, and 
naturally so, they were of thankfulness for the light 
which had come: now while there is the same gratitude 
for the light there is more praise for that which 
the light has worked in the heart. The Lord's people 
are learning to rejoice in him as well as in his Truth. 



Monday afternoon was spent partly on an exhibition 
lesson in the Berean Studies, and partly on a talk 
on the Harvest Work. The Study was chosen as an 
opportunity of showing the benefit of this special arrangement; 
how a very profitable time can be spent 
together, and how all can take part in the lessons. 
Already we have heard of several classes which are 
beginning these studies since the Convention. In the 
talk on the Harvest work Brother Edgar gave us a 
series of notes he had taken in the States, and the 
meeting was stirred as he told of the many brethren 
there who are spending their lives in the colporteur 
service. Brother Edgar and his wife, and his sister 
also, came back from the States enthused for the colporteur 
service, and as a consequence we had, on the 
Tuesday, a further meeting with this work specially 
to the front. As a result a general stimulus was seen: 
one dear brother gave up his work right away, and is 
doing well; others are to give a portion of their time, 
while quite a few others are thinking of entering the 
field. Bro. Hemery was unable to take part in the 
colporteur meeting, but on the previous day he said he 
thought the Lord's hand was in the recent visit to 
America of the three Glasgow friends, for their report 
was very timely. The work of putting the books into 
the hands of the people is not increasing in proportion 
with the increased numbers of those who show interest; 
and owing to sickness and other causes the number 
of colporteurs had not been quite so large, and 
therefore the sales were not increasing as could have 
been wished. (We are glad to say that there has been 
a quickening of the output, and that we feel a little 
lighter since our stock is getting less! We cable today 
for further shipments.) 

We had a very affecting time when Brother Barton 
was to leave us. The "sweet sorrow" of parting was 
almost too much for the dear brother. He had a good 
send-off as he left the railway station at night, for his 
visit has been a spiritual blessing to all the churches. 
How these brethren are appreciated! We shall look 

R3891 : page 358 

forward to the coming of a brother next year, but we 
should be glad if you would bring him— under your 
own hat. At the close of the Convention the meeting 
expressed its appreciation of the sending of the Pilgrim 
Brethren, and it rose to signify its love to Brother Russell, 
and to send him loving greetings and good wishes 
by this means. 

This report is delayed through the writer's sickness 
in Glasgow, where he was confined to bed for 
some days. Thanks to the Lord's favor and the kind 
care of a good nurse, he is back at work again. We 
thank the Lord for the mercies of the past days, and 
are going forward with stimulated zeal and desire to 



do his will, to spend and be spent for him. With the 
love of all the brethren, 
I am, dear Brother, your fellow-servant, 
J. HEMERY. 
LONDON, Eng., Oct. 13, 1906. 



R3891 : page 358 

ONE-DAY CONVENTIONS 

AT Scranton, Pa., Sunday, Oct. 21, we had a 

splendid season of refreshment. A Praise 

and Testimony meeting was started at 9 a.m., 

about 200 being present— interested friends from Scranton 

and surrounding points. It was closed shortly 

after the arrival of Brother Russell, in charge of a reception 

committee of six. Then followed the discourse 

to the interested, a report of which those desiring 

same already have in the public prints. It related to 

the manner of the Kingdom, and was intended to stimulate 

the faith and zeal of those present, to make their 

calling and election sure. 

The afternoon session for the public had been well 
advertised, and was in the finest and largest auditorium 
in the city. Of course under those conditions a 
large audience was secured. The dear Scranton 
friends had determined to bring the Truth to the attention 
of their friends and neighbors more thoroughly 
than ever before, and succeeded splendidly— we understand 
at an expense of about $300. They seemed 
greatly pleased that, notwithstanding dark, threatening 
weather the Lyceum was crowded, about 
300 being unable to obtain admittance, but were 
given with tracts on the topic. It is estimated that 
1600 were seated and that 600 stood during the service. 
We all prayed the Lord's blessing upon our united efforts 
to glorify his name. Only eternity will show the 
full results; but we know that no such efforts in his 
honor are despised by our gracious Lord, whether few 
or many of the large concourse were blest. Anyway 
all seemed to feel more than rewarded for the time, 
money and energy it cost. What a blessed privilege it 
is to be permitted to be co-laborers with the great Chief 
Reaper in this "harvest" work! Brother Russell left 
at 6 p.m., and Brother Samson gave a public discourse 
in the evening. 

At Brantford, Ont, Canada, Brother Russell arrived 
about 10 a.m. Sunday, October 28. At about the 
same time others arrived from Hamilton and Toronto. 
At the meeting place about 200 assembled, and as the 
Brantford class numbers not above 20 this signified a 
large attendance from outside places: from Hamilton 
14; from Toronto 30, and Chatham, London, Highland 
Grove, Gait, and many other places, as far away as 



New Liskeard, were represented. Some of these dear 
ones arrived Saturday, and their Praise and Testimony 
meeting began that evening and adjourned at 10 p.m., 
and was in full tide again on our arrival next morning, 
and continued until 1 1 o'clock, affording us an opportunity 
for hearing some of the praises to God for deliverance 
from darkness into his marvellous light. Something 
about the Canadian brethren and sisters reminds 
us of the friends in Great Britain; they are very whole-souled 
and warm-hearted. We always greatly enjoy 
meeting them. They seem to combine reverence for 
sacred things and fervency of spirit. 

Brother Russell's discourse to the interested began 
promptly at 1 1 o'clock and lasted for an hour and 
a half. It was on Matt. 25:31— the coming of our Lord 
in power and great glory. We need not comment, as 
those interested already have the newspaper report. 

At 3 p.m. the service for the public was held in the 
"Grand Opera House." The day was dark and threatening, 
but the house was packed (about 1000), many 
standing. Several hundred unable to gain admittance 
were supplied with tracts. Close attention was given 
and we trust some hearing ears were found. Anyway 
all in the Truth rejoiced in the hoped-for fruitage of 
our mutual endeavors. Homeward bound in the evening 
we had the company of many of the Toronto and 
Hamilton friends as far as the latter place, and parted 
singing "God be with you till we meet again," and 
hoping that it may not be long until "we meet to part 
no, never, on the resurrection shore." 



R3891 : page 358 

EARTHLY THINGS APPRECIATED MOST 

NOT infrequently we meet some dear brother or 
sister who says: "It seems to me that I am 
not of the spiritual class. Try as I will I 
cannot imagine spiritual things, heavenly things. On 
the contrary, I can well imagine and take great joy 
and pleasure in thinking of the blessings of the Millennial 
Kingdom, the restitution times, the earth in process 
of release from the curse and progressing to the 
Paradise condition, and mankind being greatly uplifted 
through the ministries of the Lord and the glorified 
Church out of sin-and-death conditions now prevailing 
up to the full perfection of all lost in Adam, 
with the added favor of increased knowledge on every 
subject. Does not this indicate that I am not begotten 
of the Spirit, and that I need not have any expectancy 
of attaining to the heavenly things of which we read 
so much in the WATCH TOWER publications?" 
We answer that those who take this position 



R3891 : page 359 

labor under a great mistake. These same things are 
true of every Christian. Everyone who has seen beautiful 
fields and lawns and gardens and who has a soul 
appreciative of the beauties of nature, can to some 
extent imagine what Paradise restored will be. Everyone 
who discerns the noble and true qualities of the 
human mind can approximately estimate what perfection 
of mind and heart would mean in the fully 
restored race of Adam, the result of restitution times 
at the end of the Millennial age. But not a soul on 
earth, not a saint that ever lived, has been able to 
imagine the heavenly things, the spiritual things, 
because he has never seen anything of the kind, has 
no powers whereby to contrast these with earthly 
things, and because they are not described in the 
Scriptures. As the Apostle declares, "It doth not yet 
appear what we shall be." (I John 3:2.) He gives 
the key to our faith and knowledge when he adds, 
"But we know that we shall be like him, for we shall 
see him as he is." 
Our knowledge is purely a faith knowledge, dependent 

R3892 : page 359 

upon our confidence in our Lord and his promises. 

We walk by faith, not by sight, whom not having seen 

we love, whose heavenly home not having been described 

to us we realize to be grander than all earthly 

things, because our heavenly Lord has assured us that 

"eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, nor entered into 

the heart of man the things which God hath in reservation 

for them that love him." These things he tells 

us God hath revealed unto us by his Spirit. (I Cor. 2:9.) 

Not that he has given us pictures of them either 

by visions or mental pictures or word pictures, but he 

has revealed them to us in the sense that he has revealed 

himself to us; and as we come to a knowledge 

of the Lord and to an appreciation of his great wisdom 

and love and justice and power— as we come to realize 

that he is the grand exemplification and illustration of 

all that is good and great and loving and wise and 

beautiful and true, so we know that his heavenly home 

and all the arrangements which God has prepared for 

his special elect ones must be in some very special 

sense far above the very glorious things which he has 

prepared for those of the world in general, who during 

the Millennial age will accept his favors and his blessed 

provisions. 

Suppose a woman who had found her ideal of a 
man, noble in every trait, mental, moral and physical, 
the one altogether lovely in person and character: 
suppose that she has accepted from this lover an invitation 
to become his bride and joint-heir in his estates: 
suppose that he showed her the most beautiful things 



of her knowledge in the vicinity of her home, and told 

her that these were not worthy to be compared with 

the grandeur of the home which he had prepared for 

her. Would not her confidence in her lover, that would 

lead her to forsake all to become his bride, lead her to 

have full confidence in his judgment and in his veracity 

respecting the many advantages of the home which 

he had specially prepared for her? Surely it would! 

She would need no more than his assurance, and would 

be glad to forsake her father's house and the best of everything 

that she had ever seen or could imagine and attain 

to the things of her betrothed. And is it not so with 

those who have accepted the Lord's invitation to become 

his Bride— to leave the world, to be changed from 

human nature to spirit nature, to inherit with him the 

glory, honor and immortality unspeakable and unknowable 

until the change shall come? Is this an unreasonable 

faith? Is this credulity? Does our Redeemer require 

of us an unreasonable faith? We think not. Yea, 

in proportion as we become followers in his steps our 

faith in the Leader grows, and our confidence not only 

in his words but also in his wisdom increases day by 

day as we onward go. We are confident, therefore, 

that he is able and willing to do for us exceedingly more 

abundantly than we could have asked or thought, 

according to the riches of his grace and his loving-kindness 

toward us in Christ Jesus.— Eph. 3:20. 

Let us, therefore, gird up the loins of our minds 
and be sober minded, and hope to the end for the grace 
that shall be brought unto us at the revelation of our 
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. Let us look not at things 
that are seen, which at most are temporal, but let us 
look at the things that are unseen, at the eternal things. 
Let us look unto Jesus with the eye of faith, let us look 
unto the crown of life which he has promised, let us 
look unto the place that he is preparing for us in the 
many mansions of the Father's house; let us look, not 
with doubt and fear, but with full confidence that the 
grandest of our hopes will be much more than realized 
when he shall bid us come up higher and enter into the 
joys of our Lord. "Faith can firmly trust him, come 
what may." The more we exercise faith along these 
lines of his direction, the more are we pleasing in the 
sight of him who has called us out of darkness into his 
marvellous light; and the more of such faith we exercise 
the more we will have in us the power of God, which 
will work in us both to will and to do his good pleasure 
—which will enable us to more and more live separate 
from the world, to overcome the world, and to fight 
a good fight against sin and selfishness, the world, the 
Adversary and our own flesh. 



R3892 : page 359 



DO ALL AS UNTO THE LORD 

--ISAIAH 5: 11 -23. -NOVEMBER 25.- 

Golden Text:— "I keep under my body, and 
bring it into subjection."— 1 Cor. 9:27. 

THIS DATE has been set aside as the "World's Temperance 
Sunday," and the S.S. Lesson has been selected 
in accord with this. The consecrated of the 
Lord's people are not to be supposed to need special warnings 
or reproofs along this line. They have left the world 
behind, turned their backs upon sin and its various snares, 
and begun a life of consecration to the Lord— to them "old 
things have passed away, all things have become new." 
For such to turn again to the ways of sin and the gratification 
of the flesh, the Apostle says (2 Pet. 2:22), would be 
like the sow turning to wallowing in the mire after having 
been washed. Nevertheless the general weakness and 
frailty of our fallen human nature, and the fact that we are 
surrounded by temptations, make it necessary that the New 

R3892 : page 360 

Creature in Christ should continually watch as well as pray 

lest he enter into temptation. None achieve such strength 

of character nor attain to such heights of spiritual development 

as would permit them to glory in the flesh or insure 

them against ever yielding to its seductive influences. 

Hence it is, the Apostle assures us, that when we realize 

our weakness and our dependence upon the Lord for grace 

to help in every time of need, then we are really strong; 

whereas when we feel strong, sufficient of ourselves, self-confident, 

we are really in danger. 

THEREFORE GONE INTO CAPTIVITY 

Isaiah's prophecy was written after the ten-tribe kingdom 
of Israel had gone into captivity to the Assyrians, and 
in this lesson he seems to imply that in connection 
with the idolatries which were the direct cause of the 
nation's overthrow as elsewhere stated, intemperance 
was associated. But although he uses most direct language 
on the subject we are still not sure that the drunkenness 
referred to was not symbolical, figurative, representing intoxication 
with the spirit of the Adversary, the spirit of self-indulgence, 
the spirit of licentiousness, the spirit of wilfulness 
and alienation from God. We do know that in other 
parts of Isaiah's prophecy drunkenness is thus used figuratively, 
and we do know the same of other Scriptures, as, 
for instance, when we are told that Great Babylon made all the 
nations of the earth drunk with the wine of her fornication, 
and again it is declared that the world is drunk with the wine 
of the wrath of God just before the great climacteric trouble, 
which will be the consummation of the present age and the 
introduction of the new dispensation. 



Isaiah was not writing to the people who had been injured 
—to the people of the ten tribes, but to the Israelites 
of the two tribes. He was seeking to warn 
them by the experiences of their sister nation. In a 
parable he pictured a garden of the Lord kept with diligent 
care by the great Husbandman, which should have brought 
forth good grapes and good wine, but which instead brought 
forth evil grapes and a generally evil, poisonous influence. 
And it is upon this pedestal or basis that our lesson is set 
up, warning the Jews who were still under divine favor 
against making a similar mistake. However, whether we 
apply the Prophet's words to the figurative wine and strong 
drink or to the literal, we have lessons in both which are 
surely very profitable to all of the Lord's people. We need to 
fortify our minds, not only against strong drink of false doctrines 
and error, but against every intoxicating influence. In 
our poor fallen state none of us have any too much sense, and 
we need to conserve all that we have, and of the Lord's grace 
to receive more and more of his Spirit, which the Apostle 
describes as "the spirit of a sound mind." In this connection 
we quote the wise words of Professor George Adam 
Smith:- 

"No one who has had to do with persons slowly falling 
from moderate to immoderate drinking can mistake 
Isaiah's meaning when he says, 'They regard not the work 
of the Lord, neither consider the operation of his hands.' 
Nothing kills the conscience like steady drinking to a little 
excess; and religion, even while the conscience is still alive, 
acts on it only as an opiate.... With fatal persistence the 
luxury of every civilization has taken to drink; and of all 
the indictments brought by moralists against nations, that 
which they reserve for drunkenness is, as here, most heavily 
weighed. The crusade against drink is not the novel 
thing that many imagine who only observe its late revival 
amongst ourselves. In ancient times there was scarcely a 
State in which prohibitive legislation of the most stringent 
kind was not attempted, and generally carried out with a 
thoroughness more possible under despots than where, as 
with us, the slow consent of public opinion is necessary. A 
horror of strong drink has in every age possessed those who 
from their position as magistrates or prophets have been 
able to follow for any distance the drifts of social life. 
Isaiah exposes as powerfully as ever any of them did in 
what the peculiar fatality of drinking lies. Wine is a mocker 
by nothing more than by the moral incredulity which it produces, 

R3893 : page 360 

enabling men to hide from themselves the spiritual 
and material effects of over-indulgence in it." 

In our lesson the Prophet represents those who are 
enslaved to strong drink, saying, "Woe unto them that rise 
up early in the morning that they may follow strong drink; 
that continue until night, until wine inflame them." That 
which at first was a matter for the will to decide becomes 
very speedily a fixed habit, which controls the will and 



brings it into slavery, rendering it almost powerless. To 

the slaves of liquor or other intoxicants, such as tobacco, 

opium, morphine, etc., the voice of their tyrant master is 

heard when they awaken— their nerves cry out for the 

opiate; it is not with them as with those who are fully consecrated 

to the Lord and have him as their Master. To the 

latter the thought is and should be thankfulness to the 

Lord for blessings received, and petitions to him for wisdom 

and grace to render service in his cause for the day beginning. 

The Apostle declares that it is not so much whose 

servants we claim to be, but "his servants ye are to whom 

ye obey; whether of sin unto death or obedience unto 

righteousness." (Rom. 6:16.) If we are serving sin, serving 

the flesh, we are slaves to it; but if Christ has made us 

free in heart it is for the new mind to claim the divine 

promise, and to exalt itself in the ways of righteousness and 

to gain repeated victories over the weaknesses and besetments 

of the flesh. 

EVERY GOOD THING PERVERTED 

While under slavery to sin there is a disposition to 
turn all the good things of life into the service of the perverted 
appetites, and so our lesson sets forth that the harp, 
the flute, the tabret, good in themselves, become improperly 
associated with the wine of revelry. Then the result is 
stated, "They regard not the work of the Lord, neither consider 
the operation of his hands." How true this is: sin 
in its various forms blinding, influencing, the mind and 
heart are attracted away from the most worthy subjects of 
consideration. The Prophet David tells how he praised the 
Lord early in the morning, and in the night-watches called 
to mind his goodness, but contrariwise declared of those 
given up to self-indulgence and enslaved to sin, "God is 
not in all their thoughts." (Psa. 10:4.) Their minds are 
distracted, turned to unworthy and ignoble subjects, that 
have more and more a degrading influence upon them. In 
a word, the general tendency of sin, which abounds in the 

R3893 : page 361 

world through the fall, is downward, but God has set before 
us in his Word higher and nobler and better standards. 
Wise are those who, hearing the voice divine, seek to follow 
it; foolish are those who, knowing the downward tendency 
of sin, pursue it. 

CAPTIVES IN HELL 

"Therefore my people are gone into captivity for lack 
of knowledge: and their honorable men are famished, and 
their multitudes are parched with thirst. Therefore hell 
hath enlarged herself and opened her mouth without measure, 
and their glory and their multitude and their pomp 
and he that rejoiceth shall descend into it; and the mean 
man shall be brought down, and the mighty man shall be 



humbled, and the eyes of the lofty shall be humbled." 

We cannot hope that even the most abstemious living 
on the part of the most godly of mankind would deliver any 
from the divine sentence, "Dying thou shalt die," which, 
the Apostle declares, "passed upon all men through one 
man's disobedience." As a result of that sentence Adam 
himself went down to sheol, into the tomb, into the state of 
death (the "hell" of the above quotation). We can, however, 
fearlessly assert that the ignoring of the divine Law, the disposition 
to gratification of the fallen flesh, has greatly enlarged 
hell, sheol, the tomb. That is to say, that many more die 
prematurely than otherwise would. Because of this slavery to 
sin and appetite our race is greatly weakened mentally, 
morally and physically— hence the death of so many of the 
weaklings of our race in infancy and the general captivity 
of all, for, as the Apostle declares, "Sin and Death reign," and 
the world are their subjects, their slaves. Thank God the 
Apostle points out a coming day when the groaning creation, 
slaves to sin, will be delivered from this bondage of 
corruption into the glorious liberty of the sons of God. The 
opportunity for deliverance will be within their reach, yea, 
thrust upon them by the blessed conditions of the Millennial 
age, so that only by a wilful, persistent resistance of 
God's gracious purposes will any of them be remanded to 
the Second Death as incorrigible. 

Our lesson points out that this enslaving and degrading 
influence takes hold upon all the mighty and the great 
as well as the mean and the little, but eventually out of all 
this miserable failure on man's part the Lord shall get glory 
and honor. In due time his gracious plan will so outwork 
as to bring in righteousness, and cause it to predominate and 
rule the world, even as Sin and Death are now ruling. 
Thank God that the great Redeemer who has purchased the 
world with his own precious blood is shortly to be the King 
of earth, Immanuel, God with men, and that one of his first 
works in connection with the establishment of his Kingdom 
will be the binding of Satan, the restraining of the power of 
Sin and Death and the setting free of all their captives, as 
it is written, the prison-doors shall be opened and the captives 
shall be liberated.— Isa. 61:1. 

The people of Israel had been favored of God greatly 
in a covenant made with them through Moses, and in the 
consequent blessings which had attended them through the 
Lord's general supervision of their affairs; and since they 
rebelled against all these, and degraded themselves after 
the manner of the heathen, they merited special judgments 
and received them. Their captivity was a part of these, 
and, as our lesson declares, their favored land was permitted 
to fall into the hands of strangers. Yea, the goodly 
portion, even the spiritual favors, were many of them bestowed 
upon us who were by nature Gentiles, aliens, strangers 
and foreigners from the commonwealth of Israel.— 
Eph. 2:12. 

SLAVES OF VANITY AND SIN 



When we read, "Woe unto them that draw iniquity 
with cords of vanity, and sin as it were with a cart rope," 
we should not understand the word "woe" as a threat of 
future tribulation: rather we may consider it as an expression 
of sympathy. Woeful is the lot of those who are enslaved 
to a wrong course through vanity. Pride is really 
controlling a large proportion of the human family, conscience 
is violated because of pride, iniquities of various 
kinds are often unwillingly dragged along on this account. 
The poor groaning creation is as a slave bound to sin by a 
"cart rope"; it is so strong that he cannot break it even if 
he did realize its galling nature. On the contrary, blind to 
the real source of his troubles, the sinner often rejoices and 
seeks pleasure in his slavery, and knows not that the only 
one from whom it is possible for liberty to be secured is 
the Almighty God, who has appointed the Redeemer to set 
us free, and whose word is, "If the Son shall make you free 
you shall be free indeed."— John 8:36. 

This class of deluded ones, tied with cords of vanity 
and enslaved to sin with a cart-rope, are inclined to doubt 
the holy one of Israel— to say within themselves, "If there 
be a God, and if he have the power, would he not long ago 
have exerted it? May we not, therefore, go onward in the 
way of sin with impunity?" As the Prophet expresses it, 
they say, "Let him [God] make speed and hasten his work 
that we may see it, and let the counsel of the holy one of 
Israel draw nigh and come that we may know it." Today 
we are living in just such a time. The fact that the Lord 
has been lifting the vail of ignorance from the world, and 
permitting mankind greater blessings and greater enlightenment 
than ever before, is influencing many of those who are 
drinking the wine of Babylon to deny the Word of God and 
the plan of God therein set forth— to deny that man was 
created in the divine image, that he fell, that he needed to 
be redeemed, that it is God's intention to restore him, and 
that for the purpose of this restoration God has promised 
the Millennial Kingdom, and that the divine purpose in this 
Gospel age has been the selection of the Church, to be joint-heirs 
with Christ in that work of human uplift. As the 
Apostle has expressed it, they are inclined to say, "Where is 
the promise of his coming? for since the fathers fell asleep 
all things continue as they were from the beginning of the 
creation." (2 Pet. 3:4.) They have turned their minds in 
the direction of evolution, and conclude that man did not 
fall from the divine image, but that he has been progressing 
for now six thousand years from the image of a monkey, 
gradually attaining to perfection. They incline to say the 
world is just what we make it; they incline to ignore the 
Scriptural promise that there is a coming time of rectification 
or judgment as respects all the affairs of the world, 
and that in that thousand-year day of judgment all the 

R3894 : page 362 

iniquities of the present time shall be rectified, every good 
endeavor rewarded, every wilful misdeed receive its just 



punishment, and all mankind have a glorious opportunity 
of rising up under the stripes and disciplines and rewards 
of that glorious time to the recovery, if they will, of all that 
was lost in Adam. 

THEY THAT CALL EVIL GOOD 

These same people are disposed to consider the evils of 
our time as nothing, as really good in comparison with the 
past, and the good of the past they are disposed to reckon 
as evil, imperfect. The Doctors of Divinity and professors 
of our day are esteemed to be the highest standards of 
knowledge and authority that the world has ever seen, 
while correspondingly the Lord, the apostles and the prophets 
of the past are esteemed to have been unwise, foolish, 
ignorant, unable to discern each other's falsities as the 
Higher Critics of our day discern them. Do not these, as 
the Apostle declares, call evil good and good evil? do they 
not put darkness for light and light for darkness, bitter for 
sweet and sweet for bitter? Are they not "wise in their 
own eyes, prudent in their own sight"? Are they not 
"mighty to drink wine, and men of strength to mingle strong 
drink"— strong doctrine— wonderful philosophies? 

GUIDED BY POLICY, NOT BY TRUTH 

The final arraignment of the lesson is that the class 
under criticism "justify the wicked for a reward and take 
away the righteousness of the righteous from him." That 
is to say, the spirit of "graft" is here recognized— it is a matter 
of policy. Many today can be found ready to compromise 
as respects their condemnation of iniquities if there is 
some reward and advantage or gift for themselves in connection 
with the matter, or if they believe that some general 
purposes favorable to themselves would be served thereby. 
Likewise is there not a growing spirit of disregard for the 
reputation of the righteous, so that many are not only indifferent 
on this subject, but would be willing to misrepresent 
or vilify those in the right if it would be profitable to them 
so to do? We cannot avoid the thought that this self-seeking 
disposition is growingly manifest everywhere— perhaps 
nowhere more so than amongst the clergy of Christendom. 
Many of them, we have every reason to believe, clearly recognize 
the weakness of the erroneous positions with which 
they are associated, and recognize to a considerable degree 
the strength of the Truth. Nevertheless the majority of 
them seem to be ready to justify, to defend, the wicked, the 
erroneous, the God-dishonoring creeds for a reward— for 
their standing in their denominations, for the honor of men, 
for the dignity and financial emoluments connected therewith. 
And for the same considerations many are willing to 
denounce and misrepresent as in error those whom they 
know to be the defenders of the truth, of righteousness. 
What says the Prophet of these? He says:— "Woe unto 
them!" And the "woe" time is very near at hand. It will 
be that great time of trouble such as was not since there 



was a nation, which shall engulf the great, the wise, the 
mighty, the learned, the chief captains, financial, social and 
religious, in the great catastrophe of anarchy. Thank God 
for the glorious prospect which we see in his Word— that 
just behind the clouds of trouble which surround our lonely 
way the Sun of Righteousness is arising with healing in his 
beams for the blessing of all the families of the earth, according 
to the Abrahamic Covenant. 

OUR GOLDEN TEXT 

The lesson for us all as the Lord's followers is well expressed 
in our Golden Text, which holds before us the 
Apostle's example, that we should be followers of him as he 
was a follower of the Lord and of his instructions. Let us, 
therefore, each and all, strive earnestly that we may be able 
to faithfully apply to ourselves the words of the Apostle, 
"I keep my body under and bring it into subjection, lest having 
preached to others I myself should be a castaway"— a 
castaway from the high calling with which we have been 
favored— losers of the great blessing and privilege of joint-heirship 
in the Kingdom with our Lord. Could we but keep 
ever before our minds the thought that we are on trial now, 
being tested, that we are being given opportunity to prove 
the sincerity and depth of our consecration to the Lord and 
to righteousness, the effect would surely be to spur us and 
energize us in the ways of the Lord. Let us remember, 
then, that this keeping under of the body appertains to our 
food as well as to our drink, to our thoughts as well as to our 
speech. Indeed all the difficulties with which we are obliged 
to contend begin in our thoughts, and by these, therefore, 
is the New Creature properly and justly measured by the 
Lord, who judges us not according to the imperfections of the 
flesh, which we have inherited, but according to our new 
spirits, our new minds, our new intentions, our new wills, 
our new hearts, and the energy and activity which these 
put forth in the keeping of the mortal body in subjection to 
the spirit, and so far as possible to the letter of the divine 
requirement. 

"WE CAN DO NOTHING AGAINST THE TRUTH" 

Whoever intelligently, wilfully, heartily does anything 
against the truth, against that which is right, is in serious 
danger of losing his relationship to the Lord— in serious 
danger of extinguishing the spark of the new nature with 
which he had been begotten of the holy Spirit. The Spirit 
of Christ is the spirit of obedience to the Father and to all 
righteousness, and whoever loses this Spirit so that he will 
intentionally oppose the Lord and righteousness, seemingly 
comes under the head of those mentioned by the Apostle 
when he says, "If any man have not the Spirit of Christ he 
is none of his."— Rom. 8:9. 

This principle may be widely applied, but for the moment 
we narrow it down to the special topic of our lesson, 
intemperance, and suggest that from our standpoint the 



Lord's people should all be found on the side of temperance 
and in opposition to intemperance. Even when apparently 
there will be no hope of enforcing a prohibition law, we do 
not see how the Lord's faithful could conscientiously endorse 
the licensing a recognized evil. "We can do nothing 
against the truth." We must not be of those who say, Let 
us do evil that good may follow. We do not need to judge 
those who differ from us as to their conceptions of duty, 
but we suggest that each one who is the Lord's has a personal 
responsibility and should view it from this standpoint. 
We have no hope of the world's reformation along the lines 
of prohibition, but this does not hinder us from expressing 

R3894 : page 363 

our sympathy for the right, which we are sure will prevail 
as soon as our Lord's prayer is fulfilled that God's Kingdom 
shall come and his will be done on earth as in heaven. It 
is our duty to help lift up the standard for the people, even 
though that be a standard which they will not accept nor be 
greatly profited by until the Kingdom enforce it. In line with 
this we suggest that if the Lord's people at any time in any 
place be confronted with the question of license or no license 
they would do well to exercise their liberties and 
privileges in voting against the license— even though they 
may doubt the value of their vote and even though they 
might be sure that it would bring upon them more or less of 
odium and ill will on the part of those who are ready to 
rob the righteous of their righteousness for a reward and 
consideration. 

We quote the following from the public prints without 
being able to verify its truthfulness. The lesson is true, 
whether the incident is so or not. The item follows:— 

THE DECIDING TESTIMONY 

"I have read of a town meeting in Pennsylvania where 
this question of license was to be decided. As the question 
was about to be put there arose from one corner of the room 
a miserable female, wrinkled and gaunt, and stretching out 
her arms, in a shrill voice she cried: Look upon me. You 
all know me, or once did. You all know that I was once 
mistress of the best farm in town. You all know, too, I had 
one of the best— the most devoted of husbands. You all 
know I had five noble-hearted, industrious boys. Where 
are they now? Doctor, where are they now? You all 
know. You all know they lie in a row, side by side, in yonder 
churchyard; all— every one of them filling a drunkard's 
grave ! 

'"They were all taught to believe that temperate 
drinking was safe— excess alone ought to be avoided; and 
they never acknowledged excess. They quoted you, and 
you, and you [pointing with her shred of a forefinger to 
him who said that alcohol was a good creature of God, to 
him that sold the poison, to him that gave it as a medicine, 
for a little was good]. They thought themselves safe under 



such teachers. But I saw the gradual change coming over 
my family and prospects with dismay and horror: I felt 
that we were all to be overwhelmed in one common ruin. 
I tried to ward off the blow, I tried to break the spell— the 
delusive spell— in which the idea of the benefits of temperate 
drinking had involved my husband and sons. 

'"I begged, I prayed; but the odds were against me. 
My poor husband and my dear boys fell into the snare, and 
they could not escape; and one after another were conveyed 
to the sorrowful grave of the drunkard. Now look at me 
again. You probably see me for the last time— my sand 
has almost run. I have dragged my exhausted frame from 
my present home— your poorhouse— to warn you all— to 
warn you who taught, you who sold, you who gave;' and 
with her arms high flung, and her tall form stretched to 
the utmost, and her voice raised to an unearthly pitch— she 
exclaimed: 'I shall soon stand before the judgment seat of 
God. I shall meet you there, you false guides, and be a 
witness against you all.' 

"She spoke and vanished. But when the chairman 
put the question, 'Shall any license be granted for the sale 
of spirituous liquors?' the response was the unanimous, 
'No!'" 



R3895 : page 363 

"AS DECEIVERS AND YET TRUE." 

-LUKE 23: 13-25. -DECEMBER 2.- 

Golden Text:— "Then said Pilate, I find 
no fault in this man."— Luke 23:14. 

OUR Lord's words, "The darkness hateth the light," 
were verified not only in his own case but also 
amongst those who have been his footstep followers 
throughout this Gospel age. In the lesson before us we 
see an illustration of this in the incidents connected with 
our Lord's examination before Pilate and Herod, in his being 
"set at naught" and variously maltreated, and we can apply 
the same general principles to his true followers. Another 
of our Lord's sayings was illustrated in his experiences at 
this time, namely, "If the light that is in thee become darkness, 
how great is that darkness." The Jewish people had 
a certain amount of light, as the Apostle declares, "Much 
advantage everyway." (Rom. 3:2.) Yet the most rabid of 
our Lord's foes were the chief priests and rulers, and the 
Jewish mob whom they incited and authorized, and in a 
sense legalized by their learning, pretended piety and official 
position as those who "sat in Moses' seat." How great was 
their darkness, how perverted their sense of justice, how 
absent all sense of love!— how fully they demonstrated the 
wisdom of the divine decision that they were not fit to represent 
God and his Kingdom amongst men, and should, 



therefore, be cast off, that a spiritual Israel might be selected 
as Messiah's associates, his Bride. And is it not the same 
to-day? Has it not been a similar class all the way down 
through the age and now that is found opposing God and 
his Anointed, represented in his members in the flesh? It 
is even so: while the whole world under the blinding influence 
of the Adversary is opposed to the light, to the Truth, 
to the children of the light and to the promulgation of the 
Truth, nevertheless it is nominal Christendom and her Doctors 
of Divinity whose opposition is chiefly aroused, whose 
tongues are the loudest in crying, "Crucify! crucify!" against 
all the true members of the body of Christ, those who walk 
in his footsteps. We are glad of the Apostle Peter's assurance, 
as respects all such, that in general they have not had 
a sufficiency of light to make their course of conduct a 
guilty one to the last degree. The apostles said of the traducers 
of Jesus, his real crucifiers, "I wot that in ignorance 
ye did it, as did also your rulers." (Acts 3:17.) We may be 
sure that much of the opposition to the body of Christ all 
down through the age the Lord will be able to similarly pass 
by as done in blindness, in ignorance. We must be in the 
condition of heart to love our enemies, to do good to those 
who despitefully use us, and to pray for such; and we have 

R3895 : page 364 

good hope that when the blessed Kingdom of the Lord shall 
be established, and clear knowledge of the Lord fill the 
whole earth, many of these now blinded and bitter enemies 
will have the eyes of their understanding opened and be 
amongst those who will bow the knee and with the tongue 
confess to the glory of God. 

JESUS BEFORE PILATE 

Our Lord was brought before Pilate early in the morning 
of the day of his crucifixion, about eight o'clock. The 
Jewish Sanhedrin had met still earlier, and had approved 
of the findings of the High Priest in the examination during 
the night watches— that Jesus was guilty of blasphemy, of 
treason against God and his country. This was held to be 
proven by his admission before the High Priest that he was 
the Son of God, the Messiah. They were ashamed of him, 
and desired no such King, no such Savior, no such Messiah. 
They went to Pilate's judgment hall early, before the news 
of our Lord's arrest would reach the people of the city in 
general, and thus too great a commotion be made and perhaps 
some of his friends be aroused to his defense. 

It required but a few moments for Pilate to make an 
examination of the prisoner at the bar. The charge against 
our Lord before Pilate was a totally different one from that 
on which he had been condemned by the Jewish Sanhedrin. 
It was of three counts: (1) Sedition, raising a tumult, stirring 
up the people to a rebellion; (2) that he taught the people 
that they should not give tribute to Caesar; (3) that he 
himself claimed to be the king who should receive the tributes. 



The charges were so evidently untrue that Pilate 

speedily discerned the animus of the Jewish rulers who formulated 

them. He saw that it was the religious power of the 

rulers that was in danger, and not the civil power of the 

Roman government. The multitude standing outside the 

gates shouted the accusations riotously, incited so to do by 

their religious teachers. Jesus made no reply, so that even 

Pilate marveled at his quietness, self-possession, non-resistance 

and lack of vindictiveness and refusal to defend himself, 

even though he was manifestly a person quite able to 

plead his own cause. Pilate even asked him if he were not 

aware of the fact that he had power either to set him at 

liberty or to inflict the punishment desired by the people. 

Our Lord's answer was serene, that Pilate could have no 

power at all except as it was permitted him by the heavenly 

Father. Ah, this was the secret of our Lord's composure! 

He had given his life, his all; he had surrendered to the 

Father his every interest; he had confidence in the Father's 

love and wisdom, and was willing, therefore, to drink of the 

cup which the Father had poured, rejoicing to do the will of 

him that sent him and to finish that work. So with the 

Lord's followers throughout this age— in proportion as they, 

like him, have been enabled to realize the fulness of their 

consecration and at heart have been filled with his spirit and 

loving submission to the Father's will— in that same proportion 

they have been able to be calm under most severe and 

trying ordeals, so that the world even has marveled at their 

composure and self-control, the peace of God passing all 

understanding ruling in their hearts. 

Concluding his brief interview with Jesus, Pilate approached 
the wide-open doorway of his court-room, outside 
which the people were crowding, and publicly and openly 
declared, "I find no fault in this man." The rulers, disappointed, 
fearing that by some mischance they would after all 
lose their prey, were angry, and aroused the populace to expressions 
of dissatisfaction with the verdict. Pilate, however, 
had given the sentence and was not disposed to change it- 
yet he hesitated about setting Jesus at liberty in the face of 
such an angry demonstration on the part of the general public 
as well as of the influential rulers. Incidentally hearing 
something said about Galilee, he inquired if Jesus were a 
Galilean, and this being confirmed he said, "Since he is a 
Galilean I will send him to Herod, who at present is in the 
city." Then our Lord, publicly accompanied by a squad of 
Roman soldiers, was sent to Herod, who had a curiosity to 
see him; he had heard many things about him, and he had 
wondered whether or not he might be John the Baptist, 
whom he had beheaded, raised from the dead. But when 
Herod began to question Jesus he answered him never a 
word. There is a time to speak and a time to hold silence, 
and our Lord was the master of the situation. Undoubtedly 
his silence was more forceful than anything he could have 
said. Herod was evidently provoked by this silence, but dare 
not belittle himself by showing this. He therefore contented 
himself by allowing some of his men of war to array Jesus 
in a gorgeous robe, and to do him mock reverence. He regarded 



Jesus as a pretender, and no doubt thought it a 
stroke of wit to parody his claims of royalty. His verdict 
was, Not guilty— innocent. As Pilate had turned the prisoner 
over to Herod, declaring that he himself found no cause 
of death in him, Herod returned the compliment by remitting 
the prisoner again to Pilate. When, therefore, Pilate found 
the matter again in his hands he called together the chief 
priests and the rulers of the people, as stated in the opening 
verse of our lesson, and said, "Ye have brought this man 
unto me as one that perverteth the people: And behold I 
have examined him before you and have found no fault in 
this man as touching those things whereof ye accuse him. 
No, nor Herod, for I sent you to him; and lo, nothing worthy 
of death is found in him. I will therefore chastise him and 
release him." 

AN APOLOGY FOR PILATE 

Many are disposed to censure Pilate's severity: they call 
him a wicked man, unwilling to stand by his own convictions, 
and suggest that even the proposition to chastise Jesus was a 
manifestation of this weakness— that if there was no fault in 
Jesus, justice would not only have forbidden his execution 
but would also have forbidden his scourging with whips. 

We believe that an injustice is done the man. He was 
a heathen, had no faith in the Jewish expectancy of a Messiah, 

R3895 : page 365 

no respect for the Jews themselves, but thought of them 

as a rebellious people whom he was placed there to keep in 

order— in subjection to the Roman empire. His training in 

life had been to consider that there might be many gods invisible, 

but that Caesar, the Roman Emperor, was the tangible 

representative of the gods, whose honor, authority and 

respect should be maintained at any hazard. He knew that 

he was placed as the representative of Rome at Jerusalem 

not to do justice but to keep order— not to favor and forward 

the divine plans, but to represent and maintain the authority 

of the Roman empire. What mattered it to Rome if a 

thousand innocent victims suffered every year so long as 

Roman prestige was maintained and Roman tribute was collected? 

If injustice amongst the Jews had been likely to stir 

them up to disloyalty to Rome, then the injustice would have 

been righted, so that the authority of Rome might remain 

upon a good basis; but if both the rulers and the people 

united against anybody or anything, and made it a test of 

R3896 : page 365 

their loyalty to Rome, the Emperor and senate would surely 
expect that Pilate, as their representative, would favor the 
voice of the people and maintain order and quiet. Apparently 
therefore it was either a respect which Pilate felt for 
our Lord's personality or the influence of his wife's dream 
of the preceding night that led him to strive with the Jewish 



rulers for the release of Jesus. Many another man in his 
position would have used the opportunity to curry favor with 
those under his control, and would have executed Jesus 
simply to please them— just as we see that Herod did on 
another occasion, respecting which we read, "And he killed 
James, the brother of John, with a sword. And because he 
saw that it pleased the Jews, he proceeded further to take 
Peter also. "-Acts 12:2,3. 

The scourging incident should be viewed from this 
standpoint: Pilate wished to placate the mob spirit which he 
perceived at his court gate: if Jesus were scourged, and thus 
demeaned, the people would probably be better satisfied and 
more likely to let the incident drop than if the Lord were 
turned free without chastisement. We esteem then that it 
was with a good motive rather than a bad one that Pilate 
condemned Jesus to be lashed on the back. 

BARABBAS CHOSEN-BY POPULAR VOTE 

At this season of the year it was the custom for the 
Roman Governor to release a prisoner as an act of magnanimity 
and an adjunct to the general joy of the occasion. 
Pilate reminded them of this, and suggested that after 
scourging Jesus he would be the prisoner whom he would 
release, but the multitude cried out against this with united 
voice, "Away with this man, and release unto us Barabbas." 
We cannot doubt that the priests and rulers had more or 
less to do with this— that they were still inciting the people 
against Jesus. And when we think of the Jews we are 
appalled at the condition of heart which it reveals. Barabbas 
was a seditionist in fact and had been imprisoned for murder 
—and this was the choice of the people as against Jesus! 
Truly they showed the murderous condition of their hearts: 
although outwardly a moral people, respecting the Law, inwardly 
they were filled with the spirit of the Adversary— 
they hated the Light and the great Light-Bearer. Similarly, 
all down through the age, those who have been chosen to 
office— while they have not always been seditionists and 
murderers— have rarely, if ever, been saints. And so today, 
although nearly nineteen centuries have passed, and the 
most civilized parts of the world are called Christendom, we 
may be sure that if our Lord were to offer himself as King 
to these he would be rejected, and, if not a murderer elected 
instead, the choice would certainly fall upon one who had 
considerable of the murderous spirit— the spirit of the world, 
the spirit of the Adversary, which frequently manifests itself, 
as the Apostle declares, in malice, hatred, envy, strife- 
works of the flesh and of the devil. The disciple is not above 
his Lord; but in proportion as he has a heart-likeness to his 
Lord, in that same proportion he will be tolerably sure not 
to be pushed into any place of very great honor and dignity 
in the present time. We by no means inveigh against those 
who occupy official and honorable positions. We believe 
that good, noble characters have filled such positions by popular 
choice, popular vote, but we consider such occurrences 
so rare as to prove the rule to the contrary. Let it be remembered, 



however, that we make a wide distinction between 
a good citizen, a good ruler, a noble man and a saint, a follower 
in the footsteps of Jesus. Let us determine that by the 
grace of God our stand will be with the Master; let us expect 
that it will be unpopular, cost us shame and contempt 
and disadvantage, and that this will be our share in his 
cross— and let us remember that only those who bear the 
cross will wear the crown. 

"Once to every man and nation comes the moment to decide, 
In the strife of truth with falsehood, for the good or evil side; 
Some great cause, God's new Messiah offering each the bloom 

or blight, 
Parts the goats upon the left hand, and the sheep upon the right; 
And the choice goes by forever 'twixt that darkness and that 

light." 

PILATE'S WIFE'S DREAM 

Edersheim remarks that it was "While the people were 
deciding to choose Barabbas instead of Jesus, and Pilate was 
sitting on his judgment seat, a messenger came to him from 
his wife, warning him not to yield and deliver up Jesus to be 
crucified, for she had suffered many things in a dream because 
of him. We can understand it all, if, on the previous 
evening, after the Roman guard had been granted, Pilate had 
spoken of it to his wife. Tradition has given her the name 
Procula. What if Procula had not only been a proselyte, 
like the wife of a previous Roman governor (Saturninus), 
but had known about Jesus and spoken of him to Pilate on 
that evening? This would best explain his reluctance to 
condemn Jesus, as well as her dream of him." 

"WHY, WHAT EVIL HATH HE DONE?" 

Pilate a second time essayed to influence the people, 
but again they began shouting, "Crucify him, Crucify him," 
and the third time he appealed to them saying, "Why, 
what evil hath he done? I have found no cause of death 
in him. I will therefore chastise him and let him go," but 

R3896 : page 366 

the mob was "instant with loud voices requiring that he 
might be crucified, and the voices of them and the chief 
priests prevailed." 

Stalker comments upon this incident: "This scene has 
often been alleged as the self-condemnation of democracy. 
Vox populi, vox Dei, its flatterers have said— but look yonder! 
When the multitude has to choose between Jesus and 
Barabbas, it chooses Barabbas! If this be so, the scene is 
equally decisive against aristocracy. Did the priests, scribes, 
and nobles behave better than the mob? It was by their 
advice that the mob chose." 

Elsewhere their arguments are set forth: they clearly 
intimated to Pilate that the incident would be reported at 



Rome, and would have a peculiar light that would reflect 
against his vigilance as the representative of Roman authority 
—that a pretender to the dominion of Israel had appeared, 
and that they themselves, loyal to Rome, had arrested 
him and brought him to the Governor, who was so slack of 
his duty that instead of crucifying him he had set him free. 
Poor Pilate was in a very hard place for one of his character, 
position and education. He gave way finally under pressure, 
whereas many a man in his place would not have 
thought of resisting the popular will in such a matter. He 
finally gave sentence that the will of the people should be 
done. And is not this as high a level as is ever attained 
by earthly law and justice? What human law can stand 
against the will of the people? Is it not the same 
with us today? The people make the laws and the people 
execute them, and Pilate merely hearkened to the voice of 
Jesus' own countrymen. Here, too, the Scriptures lay the 
blame, saying, "He came unto his own, and his own received 
him not." Here the Apostle also lays the blame, not upon 
Pilate, but upon the Jews and their rulers. 

PILATE WASHED HIS HANDS 

As an indication of his dissent, and as clearing himself 
in the sight of all from the responsibility, Pilate called for 
water to be brought, and in the sight of the multitude 
poured it over his hands. Thus washing his hands he said, 
both in symbol and in words, "I am innocent of the blood 
of this righteous man, see ye to it." (Deut. 21:6-9.) How 
blinded were the Jews that they could not even appreciate 
justice to the same extent as this heathen ruler, who had 
nothing at stake personally nor religiously— whose every 
interest might be said to have been better served by a concurrence 
in the popular vote. This hardness of heart is 
represented by the willingness with which the priests and 
rulers and multitude accepted the responsibility, saying, "His 
blood be upon us and upon our children." The full responsibility 
of what followed was left with the Jews. 

"HIM WHOM THEY PIERCED" 

Carrying out the thought that the responsibility lay 
with the Jews, God through the Prophet had already declared 
that the time would come when the poor blinded eyes 
would be opened and the Jews would look upon him whom 
they had pierced and mourn for him. (Zech. 12:10.) Thank 
God that such a time is coming, and that the Lord promises 
that he will pour upon them the spirit of prayer and supplication, 
and will take away their sin. As a people they 
have had severe experiences for now many centuries, and all 
who have the Spirit of Christ rejoice to know of their coming 
reprieve; and not only so, but to know, further, that the 
blessing which will thus begin with the "Jew first" shall 
extend through him under the divine guidance of spiritual 
Israel in glory, the Christ, to the blessing of all the families 
of the earth during Christ's Millennial reign. 



"AS DECEIVERS AND YET TRUE" 

These words of the Apostle merely confirm the thought 
emphasized by the Master himself, that all true followers of 
Jesus will have more or less of his experiences. He was the 
true one— the Truth, as well as the Way and the Life— and 
yet he was crucified as a deceiver, he was misunderstood by 
the sin-blinded world, yea, by the most enlightened people 
of that time. The disciple is not to expect to be above his 
Lord, but rather to expect to glory in the privilege of being 
his companion. Let us learn, therefore, to rejoice even in 

R3897 : page 366 

the midst of misrepresentation, falsification, buffetings, 
scourgings, legal and illegal, farcical— let us count it all 
joy to be permitted thus to have companionship with our 
beloved Savior; let us learn the lesson of patient endurance 
in well doing, that in due time, not having fainted, we may 
reap the glorious reward of joint-heirship with him in his 
Kingdom. 



R3897 : page 366 

SOME INTERESTING LETTERS 

DEARLY BELOVED BROTHER:- 

I am thinking of that blessed season of soul refreshing 
which the good Lord permitted so many of us 
to enjoy to so full an extent at St. Paul. I wish I could 
have each countenance clearly impressed upon the tablet 
of my memory as I saw them there. I wish I could 
remember all their names, and recall all the kind words 
they uttered. But I can't, and therefore I realize that, 
good as it was, it was not quite the thing we are expecting 
and when I think what a good thing it was, 
then I wonder just what we are expecting anyhow, and 
I confess that my lips cannot describe that upon which 
my heart is fastening its hope. But I know that I 
shall see my Lord face to face and be with him and 
like him. 

Among the many things that impressed me was 
the thought that our dear Master was there, and all the 
glorified saints with him. The thought that very soon, 
if faithful, we, too, would be on the other side of the 
vail; and then that "if" impressed me, and I said deep 
down in my heart,— 

"Teach our thoughts to ever rise 
Upward toward the heavenly prize; 
Help our doubting hearts to clasp 
Hope within a firmer grasp." 



We thought of the thousand or more of the Lord's 
little ones there, and we tried to comprehend the sum 
of their trials, and we tried to multiply it by 144, and 
we failed; and then we tried to add it to the trials and 
suffering of our dear Master, and failed again. Then 
we tried to subtract it from the sum of all our joys 
when we shall be glorified together with our Lord, and 
the remainder was beyond our comprehension; and 
then we thought, Oh, how glad we will be when we 

R3897 : page 367 

know as we are known, when the dear Master will divide 
the spoils with the strong. 

We thought of the progress these dear friends had 
made, as we looked into their beaming faces and saw 
the beautiful lines traced there by the divine artist; 
lines and coloring that told of the beauty of thoughts, 
desires and hopes stored away in each bosom, and we 
seemed to hear the heart-throbs utter, 

"None of self, and all of thee." 

"But are there no scars and wrinkles to mar this 
beauty?" our ungenerous flesh asked, and the Spirit 
gently replied, "Doubtless there are scars and wrinkles, 
but not to mar this beauty— oh no, no! for there 
were no eyes there to behold the scars and wrinkles, 
only the beautiful." "Love hideth a multitude of sins." 
It was literally love before you, love to the right of you, 
love to the left of you, love above you and love within 
you. 

Then we thought of it as a rally— a rally around 
our invisible Standard-Bearer and his unseen army. 
And then we noticed lines and features that indicated 
discipline, hardness as good soldiers, firmness, decision, 
patience, etc. And we were impressed, and at 
once tightened our armor a little more and grasped the 
weapons of our warfare a little more firmly, and faced 
about a little squarer and stood a little straighter, and 
our hearts responded, "Yea, Lord, we are ready to follow 
even unto death." 

We remembered that we were an army in camp, 
feasting on food such as loyal soldiers needed, and 
that we were doing so in the face of the enemy, and 
that soon the orders would be to break camp and 
march. Yes, "To the front, to the front!" would soon 
be the call to the battle. And may we all "Fight the 
good fight of faith," and be able to say with the Apostle, 
"I have fought a good fight." 

Your brother in Christ and in fellowship of suffering 
and hope, J. P. MARTIN,-Ohio. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 



As Bro. is very busy he wishes me to write 

you in reference to the enclosed draft. 

Some matters have taken a different turn since he 
spoke to you of loaning the Society a sum of money 
this fall. We have again decided to make the enclosed 
amount ($1,000.00) a donation instead of a loan. We 
find, somewhat to our surprise, that in the Lord's 
providence we are about as able to give the amount as 
we were to give the same amount a year ago, so feel 
that it would be pleasing to the Lord to do so. Kindly 
place the amount to our credit on the "Good Hopes" 
fund for 1907. We thought it as well to pay "cash in 
advance" on the Lord's account and reserve the 
"hopes" for our own! 

Personally, Brother Russell, I feel that I would 
like to tell you that I find much peace and comfort 
from the clearer understanding of the Lord's will in 
reference to woman's place in the Church and home. 
I began to seek light on the subject before we came 
"into the Truth" and I presume I received as much 
light as I was able to walk in at the time. I can see 
how it must have cost you some "crucifixion of the 
flesh" to declare the whole counsel of God on the subject 
—even as it is in some cases contrary to the natural 
heart to receive it. But when we see the Lord's will in 
reference to any matter and submit our wills to his 
what rest of heart it brings! 

Brother and I found the double TOWER of 

last July a blessing, although we had never been disturbed 

in mind over your private affairs. We realize it 

must have caused you sorrow, pain, to be required in 

the Lord's providence to so lay bare your heart's secrets, 

but we trust it has not been without a measure 

of compensating blessing to yourself as it has without 

doubt been a blessing to others. 

May the dear Lord who has so graciously blessed 
you and made of you a blessing continue with you to 
the end. Your sister in hope, MRS. . 



MR. CHARLES T. RUSSELL: 

DEAR SIR,— It has never been my good fortune until 
the past few months to read any of your works on 
Bible common sense, but am pleased to inform you 
that within the past three weeks I have had the use of 
your work, and so far my reading is quite satisfactory. 
You are certainly led by the Spirit of God to write the 
simplicity of his expressed will in plain words. 

I had read some of your writings previous to reading 
these volumes, and was impressed with your reasoning 
and conclusions. I am a seeker after Gospel 
information, and have some crude ideas, but a firm 
believer, and get my opinions from my Bible reading, 
but never go to the Bible with an opinion of my own. 
I never believed in "torment" or "torture," but in a just 



punishment— the law of cause and effect, as it were. 

I have some pulpit work to do— not a "preacher," 
however— just talks, as Superintendent of this Home 
for paroled and discharged prisoners who would start 
new and honest in life. I practised law for twenty 
years, but retired, and am now giving my time and 
talents to this work. 

I thank God for such intellects as yours, and for 
such industry, such mind-consecration. God bless you. 

Sincerely yours, V. P. K.,— L.I. 



R.M.S. Lucania, Oct. 1, '06. 
DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

We are now on board, all three of us, off to the 
"Old Country." About a dozen of the New York 
friends were at the pier to see us off. We have had a 
very pleasant and helpful sojourn in this country and 
have met with so much kindness everywhere that we 
don't know how to thank you all sufficiently. We know 
that you will say to this that we are to thank the Lord, 
and we do, dear Brother, for without the Lord we 
should not have known you all. We are glad that we 
and so many others have received such marvellous 
light. All we have met have shown the same spirit, the 
Spirit of our dear Master. 

We shall always look back with thankfulness to 
our visit to America, and we hope the many lessons we 
have learned— for we have been keeping our eyes and 
ears open— will help us to be conformed to the image 
of God's dear Son. We shall try with God's help to 
impart to others the blessings we have received. 

We desire to thank you, especially, dear Brother, 
for the kindness we have received from you. We know 
that a great deal of the hospitality we have received 
has been due to you. We trust that you will be sustained 
throughout the rest of your life's journey on 
this side of the vail. We shall continue to pray for 
you. Convey our love in the Lord to all the Bible 
House friends. We love you all because we see in you 
so much of the Spirit of Christ. 

I am, with love to you from my wife, sister and 
self, JOHN EDGAR. 



page 369 

SEMI-MONTHLY 