From Our Readers
Eye Surgery  I had the pleasure of reading your article “Radial Keratotomy​—What Is It?” (September 22, 1994) As a refractive surgeon, having had the procedure on my own eyes and having performed over 2,000 procedures, I was very impressed with the quality and correctness of your article. Unfortunately, the information given to the public through the nonmedical media is often inaccurate and misleading. I felt your article did an excellent job of explaining the pros and cons of radial keratotomy.
R. F. B., United States
Death  I want to tell you how much I appreciated the “Young People Ask . . .” articles “Why Did Daddy Have to Die?” (August 22, 1994) and “How Can I Get Over Daddy’s Death?” (September 8, 1994) Even though I still have my parents, I was recently overwhelmed by the death of two loved ones. These articles brought me great comfort and showed me how to cope with such calamity.
T. H., France
My father died at the Kingdom Hall after delivering a talk. Since then I have been battling grief and anger. I reasoned that it was not fair that anyone so well loved and so devoted to Jehovah should die so suddenly. Reading through those articles, I felt that Jehovah was reaching out to heal my broken heart.
S. A., Nigeria
My father died of cancer, and I had the most difficult time trying to deal with it. It was amazing to see how this article so clearly coincided with my own feelings. What pains me is that my father is missing everything that is going on in my life right now. I just started my lifelong dream: a career as a full-​time evangelizer. I so much wanted him to see me do that. Missing out on his wonderful guidance and wisdom is difficult at times, but knowing that there are others who care is a great comfort.
C. T., United States
Watching the World  I want to congratulate you on the careful manner in which Awake! is prepared. I especially appreciate the feature “Watching the World.” Although it deals with different topics briefly, its helpful advice, curiosities, and observations have helped me to change many of my habits. “Watching the World” provides pleasant reading.
T. C. C., Brazil
Heimlich Maneuver  I have been a qualified first-​aid instructor for 11 years and would like to comment on the “Watching the World” item “Choking on Food.” (August 22, 1994) You mention the so-​called Heimlich maneuver. It is common knowledge, however, that a blow to the solar plexus can take the breath away. The Heimlich maneuver could thus make matters worse in a first-​aid situation.
G. B., Austria
Some European medical authorities view the Heimlich maneuver as risky and recommend it only be used as a last resort. Doctors in the United States, however, generally feel that when it is properly administered, the Heimlich maneuver is superior to all other methods of aiding choking victims. The risk of suffering internal injuries is considered small when compared with the risk of choking to death. For example, one U.S. study claimed that only four gastric perforations related to the maneuver had been documented. Whether European and U.S. doctors will reach a consensus on this matter any time soon remains to be seen.​—ED.

