A Message to Our Readers
The first issue of The Watchtower was published in July of 1879. This means that the journal has been printed for a century (in its original English edition). And keen interest in you, our readers, has prompted us to publish this special issue.
The article starting on the next page tells the story of The Watchtower during these first 100 years. It reminisces on how the world was in this journal’s early years, how the world changed, and how The Watchtower also adjusted to keep pace with advancing Bible enlightenment. The article quotes some of the significant passages that this magazine has published over the years and recounts how it triumphed over its critics and opposers.
Next, a picture-essay describes how The Watchtower is printed, translated and distributed.
An article beginning on page 13 discusses the truthfulness of some basic Bible doctrines, over which there has been controversy among many of the orthodox religions of Christendom.
Next, another article explains just what Jehovah’s kingdom is. What will it do for mankind? Why is it so important to announce Jehovah’s kingdom at this particular time?
In this special issue, two articles for study appear on pages 20 through 30. The first one, “Who Really Have the Truth?” identifies Jehovah as the God of truth, who wants the peoples of earth to walk in the ways of truth. It gives stirring examples of those who have walked with God, in both ancient and modern times. Also, it clearly identifies those who are walking in Jehovah’s truth in our day.
The second study article comes to grips with the question, Just how does God guide his people? For example, How did the early Christians come to an accurate knowledge of the truth? Did they have wrong ideas at times? If so, how were these views corrected? And today, How is truth revealed to God’s people? Is the Christian congregation infallible? Does it ever have mistaken ideas that need adjusting? And how does it differ from the religions of Christendom? These and other questions are answered.
We invite you to read and ponder over the contents of this special issue of The Watchtower. Also, we hope that you will enjoy future issues of this magazine as it enters its second century of publication.

