‘We Really Appreciate It’
FROM many parts of the world we receive letters from readers of “The Watchtower.” Frequently these are expressions of appreciation, and we would like to share a few of them with you.
A couple in England recently wrote: ‘We have always read and loved the Bible and realized that it was God’s Word. However, like so many others, we did not properly understand it. Then, when we received “The Watchtower,” the key to the Bible’s message came into our hands. It has meant so much to us.’
Some readers especially comment on the articles relating to prophecy. A university student in Japan writes: ‘What particularly strengthens my faith are the clear explanations of Bible prophecies. I have been amazed by the stupendous depth of God’s wisdom which I have perceived through these wonderful articles.’ A Canadian reader adds: ‘The big impact that “The Watchtower” has made on me is in understanding prophecy, particularly those prophecies about the Kingdom rule under Christ Jesus.’
Frequently, those who write to us have in mind the wholesome direction that “The Watchtower” has supplied in their own lives. A woman in England says: ‘The truths from God’s Word that I have absorbed over the years have aided me to change my outlook on the future completely. Instead of uncertainty, I now have complete trust and confidence in Jehovah and his purpose to establish true peace and security through his Son, Jesus Christ.’ And a man in Germany who has been reading the magazine for 40 years reflected: ‘Without the stimulation from “The Watchtower” I would never have experienced all the deep emotions of true satisfaction that spring from doing God’s will. I would have overlooked the treasures offered from Jehovah’s hand and wasted my strength.’
Among those treasures that large numbers of our readers have perceived is the guidance that God’s Word offers regarding family life. They write: ‘“The Watchtower” has helped me to have a happy marriage. My wife and I are continually reminded to show consideration for each other, to be modest, to face problems mildly and with trust in Jehovah.’ (Germany) ‘It helped me to understand from the Bible that polygamy is not acceptable among Christians and it strengthened me to send away my extra wives and settle down with my first wife. As a result, I am now living happily with my family and have the joy of rendering acceptable service to Jehovah.’ (Nigeria) ‘For twenty years “The Watchtower” has enabled me to teach my children what is good and what is bad, and to be confident that what I was saying was right, that it was God’s viewpoint. Because we used the Bible, along with “The Watchtower,” to handle problems, we have never experienced a rupture in the parent-child relationship.’ (Japan)
Not a few of our readers began to enjoy “The Watchtower” when they were quite young. One in England writes: ‘When first introduced to “The Watchtower,” I was a disillusioned teen-ager. I felt insecure, had little communication with my parents, and was desperately in need of guidance. “The Watchtower” filled that need. In its faithfully sticking to the Bible, “The Watchtower” has often published searching and sometimes (to me personally) searing articles about applying Bible principles to our own personality. I thank Jehovah for the help.’
The magazine also fills the needs of those in the later years of life. A widow asked: ‘What in the world would I do without it? I mean “The Watchtower,” of course. It has never failed to bring me timely counsel on my current problems. In the very month that my husband died, an article appeared entitled “You Are Never Alone.” What comfort and strength I drew from that article and the scripture it highlighted, Psalm 46! Subsequently, “The Watchtower” has been a great help in aiding me to build a new life as a single person. Through its counsel I have found that in trying to ease the loneliness of others, my own has disappeared.’
What many “Watchtower” readers feel goes far beyond gratitude for the help received in coping with a certain problem. A man in Spain put it this way: ‘In this “enlightened” 20th century, it is often very difficult to see things from God’s point of view, from the vantage point of the Sovereign Lord of the universe, Jehovah. Yet “The Watchtower” has faithfully helped me to do just that over the past 30 years.’ An Italian reader concluded: ‘The way it has upheld and defended before the whole world the name of Jehovah, the authenticity of his Word, his right to rule​—all of this shows me that it has been an instrument used by Jehovah to dispense spiritual light.’ And another one wrote: ‘The day “The Watchtower” first came to my home, I read it, and immediately a window was opened toward a wonderful future. I had always been taught such things as immortality of the soul, fiery hell and Trinity. But after reading “The Watchtower” for an hour, I cried out, “I have found the truth,” and I have never left it.’

