The Greatest Man Who Ever Lived
CAN any man unquestionably be called the greatest man who ever lived? How do you measure a man’s greatness? By his military genius? his physical strength? his mental prowess?
The historian H. G. Wells said that a man’s greatness can be measured by ‘what he leaves to grow, and whether he started others to think along fresh lines with a vigor that persisted after him.’ Wells, although not claiming to be a Christian, acknowledged: “By this test Jesus stands first.”
Alexander the Great, Charlemagne (styled “the Great” even in his own lifetime), and Napoleon Bonaparte were powerful rulers. By their formidable presence, they wielded great influence over those they commanded. Yet, Napoleon is reported to have said: “Jesus Christ has influenced and commanded His subjects without His visible bodily presence.”
By his dynamic teachings and by the way he lived in harmony with them, Jesus has powerfully affected the lives of people for nearly two thousand years. As one writer aptly expressed it: “All the armies that ever marched, and all the navies that ever were built, and all the parliaments that ever sat, all the kings that ever reigned, put together have not affected the life of man upon this earth as powerfully.”
A Historical Person
Yet, strangely, some say that Jesus never lived​—that he is, in effect, a creation of some first-century men. Answering such skeptics, the respected historian Will Durant argued: “That a few simple men should in one generation have invented so powerful and appealing a personality, so lofty an ethic and so inspiring a vision of human brotherhood, would be a miracle far more incredible than any recorded in the Gospels.”
Ask yourself: Could a person who never lived have affected human history so remarkably? The reference work The Historians’ History of the World observed: “The historical result of [Jesus’] activities was more momentous, even from a strictly secular standpoint, than the deeds of any other character of history. A new era, recognised by the chief civilisations of the world, dates from his birth.”
Yes, think about it. Even calendars today are based on the year that Jesus was thought to have been born. “Dates before that year are listed as B.C., or before Christ,” explains The World Book Encyclopedia. “Dates after that year are listed as A.D., or anno Domini (in the year of our Lord).”
Critics, nevertheless, point out that all that we really know about Jesus is found in the Bible. No other contemporary records concerning him exist, they say. Even H. G. Wells wrote: “The old Roman historians ignored Jesus entirely; he left no impress on the historical records of his time.” But is this true?
Although references to Jesus Christ by early secular historians are meager, such references do exist. Cornelius Tacitus, a respected first-century Roman historian, wrote: “The name [Christian] is derived from Christ, whom the procurator Pontius Pilate had executed in the reign of Tiberius.” Suetonius and Pliny the Younger, other Roman writers of the time, also referred to Christ. In addition, Flavius Josephus, a first-century Jewish historian, wrote of James, whom he identified as “the brother of Jesus, who was called Christ.”
The New Encyclopædia Britannica thus concludes: “These independent accounts prove that in ancient times even the opponents of Christianity never doubted the historicity of Jesus, which was disputed for the first time and on inadequate grounds at the end of the 18th, during the 19th, and at the beginning of the 20th centuries.”
Essentially, however, all that is known about Jesus was recorded by his first-century followers. Their reports have been preserved in the Gospels​—Bible books written by Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John. What do these accounts say regarding the identity of Jesus?
Really, Who Was He?
Jesus’ first-century associates pondered that question. When they saw Jesus miraculously calm a wind-whipped sea with a rebuke, they wondered in astonishment: “Who really is this?” Later, on another occasion, Jesus asked his apostles: “Who do you say I am?”​—Mark 4:41; Matthew 16:15.
If you were asked that question, how would you answer? Was Jesus, in fact, God? Many today say that he was. Yet, his associates never believed that he was God. The apostle Peter’s response to Jesus’ question was: “You are the Christ, the Son of the living God.”​—Matthew 16:16.
Jesus never claimed to be God, but he acknowledged that he was the promised Messiah, or Christ. He also said he was “God’s Son,” not God. (John 4:25, 26; 10:36) Yet, the Bible does not say Jesus was a man like any other man. He was a very special person because he was created by God before all other things. (Colossians 1:15) For countless billions of years, before even the physical universe was created, Jesus lived as a spirit person in heaven and enjoyed intimate fellowship with his Father, Jehovah God, the Grand Creator.​—Proverbs 8:22, 27-31.
Then, about two thousand years ago, God transferred his Son’s life to the womb of a woman, and Jesus came to be a human son of God, born in the normal manner through a woman. (Galatians 4:4) When Jesus was developing in the womb and while he was growing up as a boy, he was dependent upon those whom God had selected to be his earthly parents. Eventually Jesus reached manhood, and he was granted full remembrance of his previous association with God in heaven.​—John 8:23; 17:5.
What Made Him the Greatest
Because he carefully imitated his heavenly Father, Jesus was the greatest man who ever lived. As a faithful Son, Jesus copied his Father so exactly that he could tell his followers: “He that has seen me has seen the Father also.” (John 14:9, 10) In every situation here on earth, he did just as his Father, Almighty God, would have done. “I do nothing of my own initiative,” Jesus explained, “but just as the Father taught me I speak these things.” (John 8:28) So when we study the life of Jesus Christ, we are, in effect, obtaining a clear picture of just what God is like.
Thus, even though the apostle John acknowledged that “no man has seen God,” he could still write that “God is love.” (John 1:18; 1 John 4:8) John could do this because he knew God’s love through what he saw in Jesus, who was the perfect reflection of his Father. Jesus was compassionate, kind, humble, and approachable. The weak and downtrodden felt comfortable with him, as did people of all kinds​—men, women, children, the rich, the poor, the powerful, even gross sinners. Only those with wicked hearts did not like him.
Indeed, Jesus did not merely teach his followers to love one another, but he showed them how. “Just as I have loved you,” he said, “you also [should] love one another.” (John 13:34) Knowing “the love of the Christ,” explained one of his apostles, “surpasses knowledge.” (Ephesians 3:19) Yes, the love Christ demonstrated ascends above academic head knowledge and “compels” others to respond to it. (2 Corinthians 5:14) Thus, Jesus’ surpassing example of love, in particular, is what made him the greatest man who ever lived. His love has touched the hearts of millions through the centuries and has influenced their lives for the good.
Yet, some may object: ‘Look at all the crimes that have been committed in the name of Christ​—the Crusades, the Inquisition, and the wars that have seen millions who claim to be Christian kill one another on opposing battle lines.’ But the truth is, these people belie their claim to be followers of Jesus. His teachings and way of life condemn their actions. Even a Hindu, Mohandas Gandhi, was moved to say: ‘I love Christ, but I despise Christians because they do not live as Christ lived.’
Benefit by Learning About Him
Surely no study could be more important today than that of the life and ministry of Jesus Christ. “Look intently at . . . Jesus,” urged the apostle Paul. “Indeed, consider closely [that] one.” And God himself commanded regarding his Son: “Listen to him.” This is what the book The Greatest Man Who Ever Lived will help you to do.​—Hebrews 12:2, 3; Matthew 17:5.
An effort has been made to present every event in Jesus’ earthly life that is set forth in the four Gospels, including the speeches he delivered and his illustrations and miracles. To the extent possible, everything is related in the order in which it occurred. At the end of each chapter is a list of the Bible texts upon which the chapter is based. You are encouraged to read these texts and to answer the review questions that are provided.
A scholar from the University of Chicago claimed recently: “More has been written about Jesus in the last twenty years than in the previous two thousand.” Yet there is a vital need to consider personally the Gospel accounts, for as The Encyclopædia Britannica stated: “Many a modern student has become so preoccupied with conflicting theories about Jesus and the Gospels that he has neglected to study these basic sources by themselves.”
After a close, unprejudiced consideration of the Gospel accounts, we feel you will agree that the greatest of all events in human history occurred in the reign of the Roman Caesar Augustus, when Jesus of Nazareth appeared on earth and gave his life in our behalf.

