Is More Governmental Control Needed?
GOVERNMENTS “by the people” appear unsure of their political future. They are finding it increasingly difficult to cope with mounting problems.
In the case of many democratic, capitalistic governments, economic growth and material prosperity have become almost synonymous. This has kept most people comparatively satisfied. But now the financial strength of the capitalistic world faces its greatest challenge. Economic growth has ground almost to a halt and, in some cases, reversed. Dissatisfaction is on the increase. What has happened?
Skyrocketing energy costs have dampened the fires of economic growth. This is threatening to tumble the living standards to which millions have become accustomed. Many people, therefore, feel that greater governmental control will definitely be needed to cope with the resulting problems.
The noted British historian Arnold Toynbee voiced the opinion that “progressively more severe” living standards will be forced upon industrial nations, creating growing social unrest among people who are used to having more. As a result, he predicts, “a new way of life​—a severely regimented way—​will have to be imposed by a ruthless authoritarian government” to force people to accept declining standards of living.
Even United States Secretary of State Kissinger warned that international rivalries could create economic crises that would force democratic governments to “move more and more to authoritarian models” while ‘Western civilization disintegrates.’
To increasing numbers of people the idea of dictatorships seems less objectionable than in the past. In Great Britain, says London columnist Bernard Levin, “talk of dictatorships of the right or the left is the common parlance of the day.” This was “unthinkable” just a few years ago.
Why Authoritarian Rule?
People want solutions. Inflation, unemployment and rocketing crime cause real hardships. All of this creates frustrations and the feeling: “Why doesn’t somebody do something about it?” Democratic processes begin to appear slow and cumbersome to people already out of work or suffering a declining standard of living. They want action​—fast. The means of getting it becomes less and less important to them.
The ability of strong governments to “restore law and order” and take decisive economic action becomes more appealing. This is what happened in Germany after the first world war. As democratic regimes proved unable to find a way out of the depression, those advocating stronger governmental control found more and more listeners.
The way was opened for Adolf Hitler to come into power. Under his iron rule, economic and social recovery was rapid. Business prospered. Unemployment ended​—along with personal freedoms.
In the opinion of many observers, the capitalistic world faces far more critical times than those, as problems with food, population, pollution, energy and other resources bear down relentlessly in the days ahead. Respected economist Professor Robert Heilbroner, in his book An Inquiry into the Human Prospect, forecasts:
“Candor compels me to suggest that the passage through the gantlet ahead may be possible only under governments capable of rallying obedience far more effectively than would be possible in a democratic setting. If the issue for mankind is survival, such governments may be unavoidable, even necessary.”
To put it bluntly, in many areas democracy may give way to dictatorship. But are authoritarian governments the way to cope with the problems? What are the alternatives?
“Pursuit of Political Myths”
Humanity has experimented with government for thousands of years. Just about every kind imaginable has been tried: monarchies, democracies, socialism, Communism, Nazism, Fascism, church rule, military rule, the feudal system and others.
But the time for experimenting is past. Questions of political power, says the Encyclopædia Britannica (1974 ed.), are “more urgent today than they have been in any earlier historical period,” because mankind can now “destroy itself in pursuit of political myths.”​—Vol. 14, p. 685. (Italics added)
Which human government today is no mere ‘political myth’ of broken promises and frustrated ideals? While it must be admitted that human governments each may have certain desirable features, which of them does not fall far short in other matters that are just as important or even more so?
For example, the collective viewpoint of democratic systems and their emphasis on freedom have definite advantages. Yet history shows that they also provide fertile soil for political corruption, soaring crime and violence, damaging strikes and class distinctions.
Some people feel that authoritarian governments have a certain ability to “get things done.” Such governments may partially succeed in limiting some of the problems plaguing democracies​—but at what a price! Maintaining control often requires stripping subjects of the freedom even to express their true feelings.
More recent political experimenting centers on the desperate hope that the nations will somehow ‘recognize their interdependence,’ as urged by Mr. Kissinger. They hope to reach global political solutions, thus staving off the authoritarian threat to democracy. But is this another myth, or reality?
Being frank about it, the Britannica (1974) says: “Almost everywhere” attempts to achieve international cooperation “have foundered on the rocks of nationalism.” (Vol. 14, p. 719) And economist Heilbroner observes that this nationalistic aspect of “‘human nature’ makes it utopian to hope that we will face the global challenges of the future as an international brotherhood of men.”
Should not the facts of history tell a thinking person something about man-made governments? Has it not proved true, as long ago recorded in the Bible, that “man lords it over man to his hurt”?a Also, that “the course of man is not in his control, nor is it in man’s power as he goes his way to guide his steps”?b
“But,” you may say, “that is just hopeless, negative thinking; and besides, there is no alternative. We have to keep trying.” However, after six thousand years of “trying,” is it negative thinking or is it realistic thinking that points to such conclusions? Facing up to the truth may be bitter medicine, but it is the best medicine, because it may also open otherwise closed minds to the real solution.
In the case of government, there is an alternative. It is bitter medicine only to those who insist on doing things in their own way regardless of the consequences. For honest-hearted persons, it is the answer that they really seek. What is it?
Government by Man’s Maker
The Maker of mankind has for too long been left out of account by many people. But consider this: When you make something with your own hands, something in which you take pride, do you not have the right to decide how it will be used? Even copyright and patent laws reflect this right as a legal principle.
What, then, about our Creator? The marvelous complexities of creation reflect a Maker who takes pride in his work. What care and attention to detail went into His designing of the “extras” that enhance our lives​—the infinite variety of beauty in nature, of pleasing colors, aromas, tastes and sounds to delight the senses. Surely the One who designed creatures that have a capacity to appreciate such things has in mind the very best for mankind.
Since all creation belongs to him, certainly government of the world by its Maker would be right and proper. The reasonableness and legal soundness of His claim to that position is cited in the Bible: “God, you are worthy of . . . power, because you made all the universe and it was only by your will that everything was made and exists.” Is not our Designer and Maker the One who knows humans best and, therefore, most qualified to govern human affairs successfully?​—Rev. 4:11, Jerusalem Bible.
However, humans have generally rejected this principle as unrealistic and hence refuse to seek their Creator’s guidance. Why, then, has man’s Maker not just asserted his right to govern? Because He chose to let his creation demonstrate for all time the futility of living outside his guidance. Rather than finding “freedom” without God’s control, more and more of humanity now face the possibility of oppressive, often corrupt, authoritarian rule, without freedom.
Will human creation ever see an end to the futility to which unsubmissive men and their governments are subject? Note God’s purpose in the matter:
“For the [human] creation was subjected to futility . . . on the basis of hope that the creation itself also will be set free from enslavement to corruption and have the glorious freedom of the children of God.”​—Rom. 8:20, 21.
How will humanity gain the “freedom of the children of God”? Bible prophecy reveals that, in our generation, “the God of heaven will establish a kingdom [a government] which . . . shall never pass to another people.” Thus “people,” humans, will never again be allowed to usurp their Maker’s legal right to govern, or dictatorially to ‘lord it over man to his hurt.’​—Dan. 2:44, New English Bible; Eccl. 8:9, Revised Standard Version.
But what about the present patchwork of nations with their boundaries and political and tariff barriers that make global cooperation impossible? There is only one solution: “[God’s kingdom] shall shatter and make an end of all these kingdoms,” answers the prophecy, “while it shall itself endure for ever.”​—Dan. 2:44, New English Bible.
A Government of True Freedom
With the removal of divisive and corrupt human political regimes, the way will be open for the “freedom of the children of God” to fill the entire earth. Does that “freedom” mean that God will exercise little or no authority over his human children?
Well, most parents exercise some control over their children, do they not? Why? Because a child’s understanding is limited. He does not fully comprehend all the many factors that affect what he does. Parental direction is motivated by love and not the cold efficiency of a dictator trying to control people. But wise parents also grant their deserving children much freedom, as long as they do not harm themselves or others.
Likewise, Jehovah God, by means of his kingdom in the hands of Jesus Christ, will exercise only such control as is needed to ensure the lasting welfare of humankind. That kingdom will be no dictatorship. All its loyal subjects will find pleasure in responding to its direction. This will be just as natural for them as eating, drinking and breathing. They will not feel restricted in any way. Even if absolute independence were possible, they would choose to remain submissive to their loving Maker, Jehovah God.​—Compare Psalm 97:10; 119:104, 128, 163; Jeremiah 9:24.
Think of the benefits that will come to the free “children of God” under his loving rule. Humans today admittedly have a very incomplete understanding of their environment​—hence, the pollution crisis. Their limited knowledge even of the weather prevents them from providing enough food for humanity.
But the Maker of earth and life upon it has a thorough understanding of all the physical principles involved. So does his Son, Christ Jesus, who, as a “master worker,” assisted in creation and now serves as the King in the kingdom of God. They will be able to guide mankind in a course that will root out the fundamental causes of pollution, food shortages and all other problems. Even while on earth Jesus demonstrated his understanding and control of natural phenomena when he calmed a storm. “Even the wind and the sea obey him,” marveled observers.​—Prov. 8:22-31; Mark 4:37-41; Isa. 9:6, 7.
It was also reported of Jesus that “he needed no one to give him testimony about human nature. He was well aware of what was in man’s heart.” Think how he can use this searching quality to eliminate the root causes of racial and national prejudices, selfishness and greed. In their place, he will inspire love and genuine concern for one’s fellow.​—John 2:25; 13:35, New American Bible.
Even now, “in the final part of the days,” over 2,000,000 persons in “all the nations” are learning the divine “law” and “ways” that will prevail then​—and are practicing them. Despite living in a divided world, Jehovah’s Christian witnesses enjoy a marvelous unity. They have been able to rise above racial and national barriers and ‘learn war no more.’ Their success amid the failing governments of this world proves that, not more governmental control by man, but only government by our loving Father and Maker can meet the challenges ahead.​—Isa. 2: 2-4; Mic. 4:1-3.
[Footnotes]
Eccl. 8:9, Revised Standard Version.
Jer. 10:23, Jerusalem Bible.

