What Is the Bible’s View?
Should You Consult a Fortune-Teller?
“THE lights are low, the price is high; the atmosphere is dim and the future is bright.” (The Sense and Nonsense of Prophecy, by Eileen J. Garrett) Often that is how the session goes when one consults a fortune-teller who claims to predict the future by peering into a crystal ball.
As you probably know, crystal-ball gazing is only one of many methods of fortune-telling. Some prognosticators base their predictions on the way tea leaves have settled in a cup, or on the order in which cards happen to be dealt. Other fortune-tellers are spirit mediums who claim to consult with the dead.
Since people frequently wonder what tomorrow will bring, it is no surprise that fortune-telling is an age-old occupation. In fact, the Bible mentions “professional foretellers of events” in ancient Egypt. (Isa. 19:3) But do the Holy Scriptures recommend consulting a fortune-teller?
Interestingly, the Bible does not lead us to expect that anyone will be able to make accurate predictions about our personal affairs. Rather, it says that “time and unforeseen occurrence” befall all persons. And the Scriptures realistically tell us: “You do not know what your life will be tomorrow.”​—Eccl. 9:11; Jas. 4:13, 14.
At times, a fortune-teller’s predictions are so general that they can be interpreted in more than one way. Also, most well-informed people know that there are prognosticators who engage in selfish fraud and deceit, practices condemned in the Bible. (Ps. 55:23; Mal. 3:5) It is noteworthy that the Christian apostle Paul denounced the sorcerer Elymas as a ‘man full of every sort of fraud and villainy.’ (Acts 13:6-12) Surely, you do not want to be deceived or cheated. So these very possibilities probably raise doubts in your mind about consulting fortune-tellers.
Basing decisions on a fortune-teller’s words can have very undesirable effects. For instance, a businessman may suffer financial loss by doing this instead of deciding matters on the basis of his own knowledge and judgment. Then, too, some persons may adopt a fatalistic attitude because a prognosticator has said that a certain thing is sure to occur. Yet, if these individuals took the initiative, they might solve their problems and avert trouble.
The Bible does not advise anyone to wait passively for a predicted fate. Rather, it recommends that a person use his thinking ability and then take fitting action. We are told: “When wisdom enters into your heart and knowledge itself becomes pleasant to your very soul, thinking ability itself will keep guard over you, discernment itself will safeguard you, to deliver you from the bad way.”​—Prov. 2:10-12.
Some spirit mediums claim to acquire knowledge of the future by talking with the dead. But is this really possible? Not according to the Bible. It says that the deceased “are conscious of nothing at all” and that “there is no work nor devising nor knowledge nor wisdom in Sheol [mankind’s common grave], the place to which you are going.” (Eccl. 9:5, 10) The dead ‘go down into silence.’ (Ps. 115:17) They are completely unable to speak or do anything at all. Therefore, no spirit medium ever has contacted them.
Nevertheless, apparent likenesses of humans reportedly appear during some séances. Concerning the nature of these occurrences it has been said: “The medium entranced is also sometimes disturbing to the spectators. It is not a pleasingly aesthetic sight​—especially not during a materialization, for ectoplasm exudes from her mouth and body in the nature of a gauzy, foggy, smokelike substance from which figures are formed by the spirit chemists.”​—They Have Found a Faith, by Marcus Bach.
Do you think that such a distressing practice is typical of God’s way of doing things? Look around you at the wonders of creation. You are not struck with revulsion, are you? No, the works of Jehovah God are beautiful, pleasant, desirable. “Everything he has made pretty in its time.” (Eccl. 3:11) Hence, even on this basis there is no reason to think that Jehovah God favors spiritistic practices.
In fact, Jehovah is against all spiritism and occult means of prediction. He commanded his people of old: “There should not be found in you . . . anyone who consults a spirit medium or a professional foreteller of events or anyone who inquires of the dead.” (Deut. 18:10, 11) Jehovah also decreed: “As for a man or woman in whom there proves to be a mediumistic spirit or spirit of prediction, they should be put to death without fail.” (Lev. 20:27) Moreover, “those practicing spiritism” are Scripturally placed among others who will experience “the second death,” or eternal destruction.​—Rev. 21:8.
Why is God against spiritism and occult prediction? Because these practices have a diabolical source. The Bible proves this beyond doubt. It shows that at ancient Philippi the apostle Paul encountered a servant girl who furnished her masters with much gain “by practicing the art of prediction.” The account says that she had “a spirit, a demon of divination.” For many days this girl followed and cried out behind the apostle and his associates. “Finally Paul got tired of it and turned and said to the spirit: ‘I order you in the name of Jesus Christ to come out of her.’ And it came out that very hour.” No longer was the girl able to predict the future. Why? Because the demonistic source of this power had been removed from her.​—Acts 16:16-19.
Now, please consider a modern-day example. A woman in Italy once told fortunes with cards. When she began studying the Bible with Jehovah’s witnesses, she became very nervous, had nightmares and spent many sleepless nights. Finally, assuming there was a connection between this trouble and the cards, she burned them. “I felt so relieved, as if eased of a great weight,” she said. Later, this woman dedicated her life to Jehovah God, and she admitted: “My ESP or occult power to predict certain future things had come from wicked spirits or demons.” With God’s help, many others also have been freed from bondage to wicked spirit forces.​—Eph. 6:11-17.
Clearly, then, those desiring Jehovah’s approval will have nothing to do with fortune-telling. Rather, they will seek knowledge from his written Word. (Isa. 8:19, 20) In it God furnishes, not trivial information that may satisfy selfish personal desires, but reliable knowledge of the future as it relates to the divine purpose. Taking full advantage of that information means eternal life.​—John 17:3.

