Giving a Witness Worthy of the Kingdom
What shows that the Watch Tower Society early saw the need of giving a witness worthy of the Kingdom?
The witness about the Kingdom that the Society early appreciated must be given was that mentioned by Jesus in his great prophecy: “This good news of the kingdom will be preached in all the inhabited earth for a witness to all the nations; and then the end will come.” “Also, in all the nations the good news has to be preached first.”—Matt. 24:14; Mark 13:10.a
The Watch Tower Society early pointed out that only truly enlightened Christians familiar with Bible truth regarding the paradisaic destiny of the earth could properly fulfill Jesus’ prophecy and that this must be done by all available means. To this end, among other things, it encouraged public lectures, the full-time house-to-house preaching activity and the publishing of sermons in newspapers, and it produced a Biblical slide and motion picture drama that coordinated the human voice with it, this being far ahead of the times.
How has the witness about the Kingdom greatly increased in spite of opposition?
Eight of the leading members of the Watch Tower Society, including the president, were arrested and spent nine months in jail in 1918 and 1919. Many other Witnesses were arrested and suffered mob action throughout the United States prior to and during World War II. In particular were the Witnesses persecuted in such totalitarian lands as Nazi Germany. Yet in spite of all such persecution the numbers of the Witnesses steadily grew; in fact, tenfold from 1928 to 1948, and nearly a million more Kingdom preachers have taken up the work since 1948.
What provisions for aiding Jehovah’s people to give a worthy witness have been initiated since 1942?
The Theocratic Ministry School was started at the Society’s headquarters with the male members of the staff in 1942 and then introduced throughout the world in all congregations. The Watchtower Bible School of Gilead was organized in 1943 for the training of missionaries for foreign service. In 1959 the Kingdom Ministry School was organized in many lands for the purpose of aiding overseers and their assistants better to discharge their duties toward their congregations. More recently the Primary School organized to give new members of the Brooklyn headquarters staff intensive ministerial training for six months.
What facts show that Jehovah’s witnesses last year gave a witness worthy of the Kingdom?
More than 82,800 new Witnesses were baptized. All together, 1,221,504 Christian witnesses of Jehovah spent 208,666,762 hours in preaching God’s Word and in teaching people who were hungry for the truth. These also made 89,903,578 return visits on interested persons and each month conducted 977,503 Bible studies with persons conscious of their spiritual need. This was done in 200 lands and in 165 languages.—Matt. 5:3.
What must a Witness individually do to give a witness worthy of the Kingdom?
He must give the interests of God’s kingdom first place in his life. (Matt. 6:33) This means finding time for regular private Bible study and for attending the weekly meetings of his congregation. (2 Tim. 2:15; Heb. 10:23-25) It also means endeavoring to share in all features of the ministry, offering Bible-study aids to people from house to house and in other ways, as well as sharing in the back-call and home Bible-study activity, making disciples. (Matt. 28:19) And it also means finding time to share in other activities such as visiting the sick, helping to keep the Kingdom Hall clean and attending the larger assemblies.—Jas. 1:27.
Giving a witness worthy of the Kingdom also requires that one watch his personal conduct so that it is above reproach; that he put on a new personality and bring forth the fruits of the spirit. Important also is keeping unspotted from the world both religiously and politically. At all times one’s conduct should be “worthy of the good news.”—Phil. 1:27.
Among the present rewards held out to those who give a witness worthy of the Kingdom is experiencing the greater happiness that comes from giving. (Acts 20:35) They also enjoy the blessing of Jehovah, which makes rich and to which He adds no sorrow. (Prov. 10:22) And they can hope to see their efforts prospered to the extent of bringing forth fruit, thirty-, sixty- if not a hundredfold.—Matt. 13:23.
[Footnotes]
For details see The Watchtower, January 1, 1968.

