Announcements
● The regular shipment of service forms will be sent to all congregations during the month of September. If any congregation is seriously overstocked on one or more forms, please advise us. We will adjust the annual mailing of your forms accordingly.
● Literature offer for July: Happiness book with the new tract Is a Happy Life Really Possible? on a contribution of 60c. (If the Happiness book is not available, use any other 192-page book with the tract.) August and September: My Book of Bible Stories on a contribution of $2.50. If not available, use any 192-page book.
● Court decisions on divorce and upholding the right of Jehovah’s Witnesses to have custody of their children may be obtained by those involved in such problems on request from the Treasurer’s Office of the Society. Upon receipt of them you may wish to reimburse the Society for mailing charges. The decisions should be given to one’s attorney before the case goes into litigation so he may prepare to meet the issues should they arise.—Prov. 22:3.
● The Society is now producing the Watchtower magazine monthly in the Bulgarian language. Subscriptions are being accepted and congregations may place distributors’ orders for this edition.
● New Publications Available:
Good News—to Make You Happy—Armenian
Our Incoming World Government—God’s Kingdom—Turkish
● New cassette recording available:
The Good News According to Mark (set of two cassette tapes)—French (Congregation and public: $3; pioneers: $2.50)
● The book Life Everlasting—In Freedom of the Sons of God in English is available again. Those who would like a copy for themselves or their Bible students may order these through their congregation. We do not recommend that congregations order a large stock of these books, but order only as copies are requested by publishers and pioneers.
● The Society is beginning to convert the subscription operation to a computerized system. To provide you with more time to renew your subscriptions and thus avoid missing any copies, the Renewal Form in the magazine will appear earlier than it has in the past. Also the Expiring Subscription slips will be sent to the congregations earlier. By promptly returning the subscription renewals to the Society’s Wallkill address you will ensure uninterrupted delivery of the magazines.

