Meetings to Help Us Make Disciples
WEEK STARTING JULY 5
Song 118
 5 min: Introduction and local announcements.
12 min: Question-and-answer discussion of article entitled “You Must Love Your Neighbor as Yourself.” Show how modern-day field ministry closely connected with the same work Jesus began when on earth. In discussing paragraphs 5 and 6, if there have been some good experiences in placing the Happiness book, include them. Then lead into the part that follows on using the Happiness book tract in field service to start home Bible studies.
15 min: Making good use of the tract Is a Happy Life Really Possible? Discuss with audience the value of the tract in encouraging people to have a home Bible study. Point out sections in the book that prove appealing to people who show interest in Bible study. Many today face economic problems dealing with inflation and unemployment. Demonstrate briefly how chapter 6, “Money Problems—What Help?” might be used to encourage home Bible study. Page 61, subheading “Being Content Is a Key” might well be used.
13 min: Service overseer can discuss use of current magazines on magazine day, highlighting their value and offering suggestions for placing them with interested persons. Consider information in box on page 1. Also comment on congregation’s April report.
Song 23 and prayer.
WEEK STARTING JULY 12
Song 73
 5 min: Introduction, Announcements from page 4, local announcements and accounts report.
20 min: Elder, along with a family head or two, discusses article “Training Our Children to Be Preachers of the Good News.” Among points to stress are (1) Children need to be trained in field service; (2) Objectives should be explained and responses to what is said analyzed; (3) Goals should be set and pursued; (4) Parents must train their own children, although others can offer to help; (5) Among us are examples of such fine results; (6) We have good potential.
15 min: Assisting Bible students to make progress. Talk and discussion. It is necessary to show students that they have a responsibility toward others. Happiness book can serve as a fine instrument in this regard. For example, page 40, paragraph 25, shows how a start can be made to take on this responsibility of sharing the good news. The need for association with fellow believers is stressed on page 50, paragraph 24. Getting to know what the Bible student thinks is important. Pages 34 and 35 illustrate ways this can be done, showing how you can teach him to express himself on what he thinks. As student approaches time when dedication and baptism should be considered, page 183 can be discussed in detail. Highlight throughout the need to make progress.
 5 min: Give a brief report on magazine-day activity the previous week and what is hoped can be accomplished the next time. Encourage brothers to use magazines to help others.
Song 63 and prayer.
WEEK STARTING JULY 19
Song 68
 5 min: Introduction and local announcements.
18 min: “Presenting the Good News—On Magazine Day.” Talk and demonstrations based on presentations suggested in paragraphs 4, 5 and 6 of article. Stress importance of reading magazines to be more effective in presenting them. Encourage publishers to put forth special effort to share in magazine work the second and fourth Saturdays of each month.
15 min: How I Came into the Truth. (Select two or three persons to interview. Keep part fast-moving and encouraging to all. Help publishers to see importance of assisting their own Bible students to progress.)
 7 min: Brief report on progress of those auxiliary pioneering during summer months. If time permits, relate an encouraging experience or two that auxiliary pioneers have had recently.
Song 103 and prayer.
WEEK STARTING JULY 26
Song 100
 7 min: Introduction and local announcements.
20 min: Question-and-answer discussion of article “Do You Have a Good Personal Study Program?” Include interviews of three persons—family head, youth, and new person—as to how they do their own personal studying and what program they have found to be best in their own situation. Receive expressions from audience on things that have threatened to disrupt good study program.
10 min: Use for local needs, or give encouraging talk on articles in March 1, 1981, Watchtower, entitled “Do You Appreciate the ‘Faithful and Discreet Slave’?” and “The ‘Faithful Slave’ Gives ‘Food at the Proper Time.’”
 8 min: Relate recent encouraging field service experiences by publishers and pioneers.
Song 12 and prayer.

