Presenting the Good News—On Magazine Day
1 What beneficial effects the Watchtower and Awake! magazines have had on the lives of those who read them! Why, each issue contains information that can assist truth-seekers onto the road to eternal life and happiness. Since the announcement that appeared in the February issue of Our Kingdom Service this year, arrangements have been made to feature magazine work each week; however, a special effort should be made to feature magazines on the second and fourth Saturdays of each month.
AT EVERY OPPORTUNITY
2 Most of us will participate in magazine-day activity by offering The Watchtower and Awake! from house to house. This generally is where we find many persons in a position to listen. But even here we do well to be brief, holding our presentations to just enough time to stimulate interest. The objective is to place the magazines and let them do the “talking.”
3 If we were not out in service on magazine day, likely we would be busy just as the people on whom we call, so we should take this into consideration. Because the weekends are the only time many people have to care for matters around the home, we should anticipate their objection: “I’m busy.” Therefore, some publishers find it beneficial to comment on this in their brief introduction, saying: “I am a local minister [or neighbor] calling on this busy Saturday morning. . . . ” Quickly they get into pointed comments that tie in with a preselected article and show how the information in the article can benefit the householder personally.
4 Another objection that may come up initially is: “I’m not interested in Jehovah’s Witnesses or those magazines.” To this some publishers reply: “I can understand why you may feel that way; however, I’m quite sure you are interested in information that would help you to get a good night’s rest,” or whatever topic you may be featuring in the magazines. At times, this response captures the interest of the householder.
5 “By far we place more magazines per hour by working from store to store,” wrote one circuit overseer’s wife. Other publishers will concur. One brother who enjoys fine success in this activity explains how he does it: “I give my name, state that I am a minister and that I am calling on business people in the area. I say: ‘I know that you are busy so I will be very brief.’ Then I mention the subject I am discussing and state a point on it in a sentence or two. I then take the magazines out of my briefcase, show the particular article on the subject and make the offer.” If the manager shows interest, you may ask permission to make a similar brief offer to the employees.
6 For some publishers, offering magazines on the street has proved especially effective. They usually do not stand in one spot. “I move slowly with the crowd,” one brother explained. “I may say to a man: ‘I beg your pardon,’ and then go on with my presentation.” The idea is to take the initiative and approach people.
PERFORMING A PUBLIC SERVICE
7 When a new magazine arrives, analyze its appeal. You may have a neighbor or friend who has not been especially responsive to the truth, but who is interested in a particular subject. When this is discussed in the magazines, you may be able to place them with him. Also, when an article deals with the police department or law enforcement, see to it that the policemen and judges in town receive a copy. Appropriate articles on the medical profession can be directed to those most interested in that subject. Or, if Awake! discusses automobiles or auto maintenance, feature it at gas stations, used car agencies and so forth. By taking advantage of these many possibilities, we perform a valuable public service.
8 Not to be overlooked, too, are our special issues. Many publishers have noted that they have wide appeal and are easily placed. Extra copies may be ordered and used for several months.
9 Magazine-day witnessing is one of the easiest and most enjoyable ways to share in preaching the good news of the Kingdom. (Matt. 24:14) Make it your aim to participate regularly in presenting the good news on magazine day.

