Training Our Children to Be Preachers of the Good News
1 Due to the fine witness given by two Christian boys concerning their faith and convictions, the parents of these youths received a letter, which said in part: “I am still under the charm of the long conversation I had this morning with your two children. . . . Truly, I never remember having heard children express their faith so interestingly and with so much conviction and intelligence. . . . I do not know you, but judging by your two children, you must be praiseworthy parents.” Even more than a credit to their parents, these children are truly a credit to Jehovah whose righteous principles have become a guiding influence in their lives.—Ps. 148:12, 13; Matt. 21:16.
2 Certainly all Christian parents want their children to grow up to be whole-souled, dedicated servants of Jehovah. (Prov. 23:24, 25) However, we know that just being a part of a Christian household does not automatically make youths praisers of Jehovah. Parents should not assume that attainment of the goal is a matter of chance. The experience related above well illustrates that we can train our children to be preachers of the good news. However, diligent and consistent effort is important.
PROGRESSIVELY TRAIN YOUR CHILDREN
3 Jesus trained his disciples progressively to be preachers of the good news. First he explained their objective. (Matt. 4:19) Then he took them with him, preaching to and teaching the people. Thus, the disciples were trained in service. In time he sent them out by twos to preach the good news on a wider scope. However, before doing so, he gave more specific instructions. (Matt. 10:1–11; Luke 10:2) From time to time he worked with them, training them further in the field ministry.
4 Parents!—Following the example of Jesus, progressively train your children. Teach them why we preach, and the objectives of the various methods and features of our ministry. Also, take the time to help them appreciate the meaning of the various responses encountered. Train them to do the work by setting goals for them and helping them to attain each goal. Passing out handbills, reading scriptures for you and keeping the house-to-house records may be simple objectives with which to begin their training. Later, they should learn some effective ways to introduce the message and how to converse with householders.
FINE RESULTS
5 There are many fine examples of faithful brothers and sisters among us who were taught from youth on to be disciples of Christ, preachers of the good news. In congregations everywhere they continue to serve, some as pioneers and appointed servants. How thankful they are that, from an early age, they had impressed upon them the importance of the field ministry.—Eccl. 11:9, 10; 12:1.
6 All of us in the congregations of Jehovah’s people have an interest in training our children to be preachers of the good news. To the extent that other members of the congregation are moved to volunteer to help parents with some aspect of training their children in the field service, parents may accept this help. However, Jehovah God has placed the responsibility of training children in the hands of the parents. Therefore, parents, train your children to be preachers of the good news!

