Announcements
▪ Literature offer for April and May: The Watchtower and Awake! magazines. Where interest is found on return visits, subscriptions may be offered. Offer the Knowledge book or Require brochure, with a view to starting home Bible studies. June: What Does God Require of Us? or Knowledge That Leads to Everlasting Life. Concentrate on starting home Bible studies. July: Any of the following 32-page brochures may be used: Does God Really Care About Us?, Enjoy Life on Earth Forever!, “Look! I Am Making All Things New,” Should You Believe in the Trinity?, The Divine Name That Will Endure Forever, The Government That Will Bring Paradise, What Happens to Us When We Die?, What Is the Purpose of Life​—How Can You Find It?, and When Someone You Love Dies. The brochures A Book for All People, Our Problems​—Who Will Help Us Solve Them?, Spirits of the Dead​—Can They Help You or Harm You? Do They Really Exist?, and Will There Ever Be a World Without War? may be offered where appropriate.
▪ Beginning in April, district convention lapel badge cards for 2001 in Armenian, Chinese, English, French, Greek, Italian, Japanese, Korean, Polish, Portuguese, Russian, Spanish, Tagalog, and Vietnamese will automatically be included with literature shipments. It will not be necessary to request these. Based on the size of each congregation, cards will be shipped in lots of 25. If additional badge cards are needed by the congregations, these should be requested on a Literature Request Form (S-14). It is necessary to request plastic badge card holders for any in the congregation who desire them.
▪ Assignments No. 3 and No. 4 in the “Theocratic Ministry School Schedule for 2001” are drawn from designated pages and paragraphs in the Reasoning book. When counting paragraphs in the book, only the ones that are indented are to be counted.
▪ It is necessary for the Society to maintain an up-to-date record of addresses and telephone numbers for all presiding overseers and secretaries. If there is a change at any time, the secretary should complete and send a Presiding Overseer/​Secretary Change of Address (S-29) form to the Society promptly. This includes any changes in area codes.
▪ Congregation secretaries should maintain an adequate supply of the forms Application for Regular Pioneer Service (S-205) and Application for Auxiliary Pioneer Service (S-205b). These can be ordered on the Literature Request Form (S-14). Maintain at least a one-year supply. Review all regular pioneer application forms to make sure they are complete. If applicants cannot recall the exact date of their baptism, they should estimate the date and keep a record of it.
▪ A large-print edition of Isaiah’s Prophecy​—Light for All Mankind I is being prepared for the benefit of the visually impaired. This magazine-size paperback book will be 512 pages with no illustrations, and the type size will be comparable to the large-print editions of The Watchtower that have two study articles. Only English will be available at this time. Other languages will be announced as they become available. This can be listed on the request form as Isaiah’s Prophecy I-Large Print.
▪ District Convention Update: The two Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, district conventions listed as “tentative” in the February 15, 2001, issue of The Watchtower are now definite.
▪ Whenever personal travel plans include attending congregation meetings, a circuit assembly, or a district convention in another land, your request for information regarding dates, times, and locations must be directed to the branch office that oversees the work in that land. Addresses of branch offices are listed on the last page of the current Yearbook.
▪ The Watchtower in Portuguese will be available on audiocassette beginning with the April 1, 2001, issue.
▪ New Publications Available:
A Book for All People​—Malayalam, Swahili, Twi
“All Scripture”​—Authentic and Beneficial (Brochure for use in 2001 Theocratic Ministry School)—​Russian
Bible​—Hmong
Bible Topics for Discussion​—Laotian
Comfort for the Depressed (Tract No. 20)​—Hiligaynon
Does God Really Care About Us?​—Hebrew
Enjoy Family Life (Tract No. 21)​—Hiligaynon
Enjoy Life on Earth Forever!​—Armenian
Hellfire​—Is It Part of Divine Justice?​—Armenian, Twi
How Can Blood Save Your Life?​—Hebrew
How to Find the Road to Paradise (for Muslims)​—Finnish, Wolof
How to Start and Continue Bible Discussions​—Laotian
Isaiah’s Prophecy​—Light for All Mankind I—​Amharic, Dutch
Is There a Creator Who Cares About You?​—Finnish
Jehovah’s Witnesses​—Who Are They? What Do They Believe?​—Arabic, Chinese, Chinese (Simplified)
Jehovah​—Who Is He? (Tract No. 23)​—Bengali, Czech, East Armenian, Ewe, Hiligaynon, Japanese, Kazakh, Mongolian, Malayalam, Sinhala, Swahili, Telugu
Jesus Christ​—Who Is He? (Tract No. 24)​—Cebuano, Czech, Ewe, Finnish, Indonesian, Marshallese, Polish, Russian, Sinhala, Slovak, Slovenian, Twi
Knowledge That Leads to Everlasting Life​—Gun
Life​—How Did It Get Here? By Evolution or by Creation? (Small size)​—Malayalam
Life in a Peaceful New World (Tract No. 15)​—Bambara, Bari, Sango
“Look! I Am Making All Things New”​—Palauan
My Book of Bible Stories (Small size)​—East Armenian, Tuvaluan
New World Translation of the Christian Greek Scriptures​—Romanian
New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures​—Large Print (set of four volumes)—​Japanese
New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures (Deluxe; available with black or maroon leather cover)​—Greek
New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures (Large size)​—Polish
Pay Attention to Daniel’s Prophecy!​—Ga, Swahili
Questions Young People Ask​—Answers That Work—​Latvian, Vietnamese
Reasoning From the Scriptures​—Myanmar
Sing Praises to Jehovah (29 songs)​—Hindi
The Divine Name That Will Endure Forever​—Tigrinya
The Government That Will Bring Paradise​—Kirundi
The Greatest Man Who Ever Lived​—Bulgarian, Tigrinya
The Guidance of God​—Our Way to Paradise—​Bengali, Czech, Gujarati, Malayalam, Persian, Urdu
Theocratic Ministry School Guidebook​—Hungarian
The Secret of Family Happiness​—Solomon Islands Pidgin
Watch Tower Publications Index 1986-1995​—Korean, Polish
Watch Tower Publications Index 1996-1997​—Ukrainian
Watch Tower Publications Index 1996-1998​—Korean
Watch Tower Publications Index 1997​—Dutch, French, Spanish
Watch Tower Publications Index 1998​—French
Watch Tower Publications Index 1999​—French, Italian
What Does God Require of Us?​—Ateso, Edo, Fon, Gun, Kannada, Luganda, Luo, Luvale, Ponapean, Rutoro, Samar-Leyte, Swahili (Congo), Tshiluba, Tuvaluan, Zande
What Do Jehovah’s Witnesses Believe? (Tract No. 14)​—Hiligaynon
What Happens to Us When We Die?​—Papiamento
What Hope for Dead Loved Ones? (Tract No. 16)​—Hiligaynon
What Is the Purpose of Life​—How Can You Find It?​—Armenian, East Armenian
When Someone You Love Dies​—Armenian, Hebrew
Who Are Jehovah’s Witnesses? (Tract No. 73)​—Assamese, Telugu
Who Really Rules the World? (Tract No. 22)​—Hiligaynon
Why You Can Trust the Bible (Tract No. 13)​—Hiligaynon
Will This World Survive? (Tract No. 19)​—Hiligaynon
You Can Be God’s Friend!​—Dutch, Urdu
▪ New Audiocassettes Available:
Acts of Apostles (set of three cassettes)​—Korean
Appreciating Our Spiritual Heritage (Drama, single cassette)​—German, Polish
Daniel (single cassette)​—Finnish
Families​—Make Daily Bible Reading Your Way of Life! (Drama, single cassette)​—Croatian, Serbian
Keep Your Eye Simple (Drama, single cassette)​—Dutch
Knowledge That Leads to Everlasting Life (five cassettes in an album)​—Japanese
Marked for Survival (Drama, single cassette)​—Norwegian
My Book of Bible Stories (four cassettes in an album)​—Czech
The Secret of Family Happiness (four cassettes in an album)​—Japanese
To the Romans (single cassette)​—Korean
When Someone You Love Dies (single cassette)​—Danish, German, Spanish
Why Respect Theocratic Arrangements? (Drama, single cassette)​—Spanish
▪ New Videocassettes Available:
Noah​—He Walked With God—​Arabic, Chinese (Mandarin), Korean
The Bible​—Accurate History, Reliable Prophecy—​Czech
What Does God Require of Us?​—Mexican Sign Language
Young People Ask​—How Can I Make Real Friends?​—Japanese

