Planning Ahead​—For What?
1 All of us give some thought to our plans for the future. Those with the earthly hope are looking ahead to living forever in God’s righteous new world. But there are influences that could snatch that hope out of one’s heart. Earnest effort is required to keep building our lives around Kingdom interests and not to be sidetracked by the tempting desires of the flesh.​—1 John 2:15-17.
2 The world simply cannot comprehend the aspirations of spiritual people. (1 Cor. 2:14) While others of mankind struggle to attain fame, power, or wealth, we strive after spiritual treasures. (Matt. 6:19-21) If we tried to adjust our thinking to conform to the world’s view of the future, would we ever reach our spiritual goals? Mundane things would soon consume our hearts. How can we prevent this?
3 “Put On the Lord Jesus Christ”: One way to determine whether we are building our future around Kingdom interests is to examine our conversation. Are we constantly talking about material things and mundane interests? If so, we must consider whether our heart is losing its focus on spiritual values. We may need to give greater emphasis to ‘putting on the Lord Jesus Christ rather than planning ahead for the desires of the flesh.’​—Rom. 13:14.
4 Youths can ‘put on Christ’ by planning ahead for the day when they enter the full-time ministry. A youth who wanted to regular pioneer was raised in a culture where the prevailing custom is for young men to become financially secure. Hence, he got deeply involved in business to the extent that he was just going through the motions of attending meetings and sharing in the ministry. Once he began trusting in the words of Jesus found at Matthew 6:33 and got off the figurative treadmill he was on, he took up a career in full-time service. Now, with a good conscience, he is serving Jehovah, as he says, ‘to his full potential.’
5 The Bible says that it is wise to plan for the future. (Prov. 21:5) May all of us do so with God’s will foremost in mind.​—Eph. 5:15-17.

