Service Meeting Schedule
Week Starting April 9
Song 93
15 min: Local announcements. Selected Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry. Announce the congregation’s Memorial attendance. Invite audience to relate expressions of appreciation made by those who attended for the first time. Encourage everyone to view the video The Bible​—Its Power in Your Life in preparation for the discussion at the Service Meeting the week of April 23.
10 min: Question Box. Talk by an elder. Include the factors that are considered in selecting homes for use as book study locations.​—See the February 1983 Our Kingdom Ministry Question Box.
20 min: “Be ‘Intensely Occupied’ With Your Ministry.”a Invite two or three publishers to relate experiences they enjoyed in helping others as recommended in paragraphs 3-5.
Song 80 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting April 16
Song 145
10 min: Local announcements. Accounts report. Only two weekends are left in April, so encourage everyone to participate in the ministry before the month ends.
15 min: Local needs.
20 min: “Simplicity Is Best.”b Incorporate ideas from the article “Let’s ‘Get to the Point!’” in the July 1999 Our Kingdom Ministry, page 4. Briefly demonstrate one or two simple presentations.
Song 146 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting April 23
Song 163
 5 min: Local announcements.
15 min: “Planning Ahead​—For What?” A talk. Include appropriate points from the November 1, 2000, Watchtower, pages 18-21.
25 min: “Impressions of the Video The Bible​—Its Power in Your Life.” Audience discussion. Why not follow through on the idea offered in the experience related in the 1997 Yearbook, page 54, paragraph 1, about making good use of the Society’s videos? In June we will review the video Jehovah’s Witnesses Stand Firm Against Nazi Assault.
Song 202 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting April 30
Song 215
10 min: Local announcements. Remind publishers to turn in field service reports for April. Book study conductors should check with everyone in their group so that all reports can be tallied by May 6.
15 min: “Witness as a Good Neighbor.”c Mention additional ways we can give a witness by our conduct.​—See the November 1, 1997, Watchtower, page 18, paragraph 16.
20 min: Pioneers Are Assisting Others. Talk and interviews conducted by the service overseer. Review the Pioneers Assist Others program as outlined in the September 1998 Our Kingdom Ministry, page 4. Relate the positive things that have been accomplished locally. Interview a pioneer who has helped someone else and a publisher who has been assisted. Show how both benefited from working together in the ministry. Invite others to take advantage of this provision in coming months.
Song 216 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting May 7
Song 84
10 min: Local announcements.
15 min: “With God All Things Are Possible.”d Briefly comment on what is stated in the Proclaimers book, page 443, showing the extent of preaching that was done in 1935 compared with statistics in the current Yearbook. Point out how this tremendous expansion once seemed to be an impossibility.
20 min: How Can Our Family Demonstrate Holiness? Elder and his family discuss August 1, 1996, Watchtower, pages 17-20. Review ways to manifest holiness at home, with relatives, in the congregation and neighborhood, and at school and work.
Song 70 and concluding prayer.
[Footnotes]
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.

