Simplicity Is Best
1 Why do young publishers often hold the attention of those with whom they share the Kingdom message? One reason is that their expressions are simple. Some publishers may feel that to witness effectively requires an eloquent presentation. However, experience shows that a simple and clear presentation is the best.
2 Jesus proclaimed the Kingdom of God in a simple, straightforward manner and trained his disciples to do the same. (Matt. 4:17; 10:5-7; Luke 10:1, 9) He used uncomplicated introductions, questions, and illustrations to capture the attention of his listeners and reach their hearts. (John 4:7-14) We do well to imitate his example and give presentations that are easily understood.
3 The “good news of the kingdom” is the message we are to proclaim. (Matt. 24:14) Using the Kingdom as your basic theme will help keep your presentation simple. Speak of things that concern your listeners. Women are often more interested in their family than in political subjects. Of immediate concern to a father are his employment and his family’s safety. Young people are interested in their future; older people, in better health and their security. People are usually more concerned about local events than what happens in distant lands. After conversing about matters of common interest, direct attention to the blessings that obedient mankind will enjoy under God’s Kingdom rule. A few simple, well-chosen words combined with a scripture can be the best means to stir your listener’s interest.
4 You might start a conversation by saying:
▪ “No doubt you agree that mankind is plagued with many incurable diseases. But did you know that God has promised he will soon eliminate all forms of sickness, as well as death?” Allow for a response, and then read Revelation 21:3, 4.
5 With clear and simple presentations, may you reach the minds and hearts of more people in your territory, aiding them to learn about Jehovah and the prospect of enjoying everlasting life.​—John 17:3.

