Witness as a Good Neighbor
1 Jesus said to “love your neighbor as yourself.” (Matt. 22:39) Undoubtedly, you “work what is good” toward fellow believers, but can you widen out in your love toward those people who live nearby? (Gal. 6:10) In what ways?
2 By Identifying Yourself: Do your neighbors know that you are a Witness? If not, why not call on them in field service? The results may surprise you! Or if you would feel more comfortable, try to witness to them informally. When outdoors, you might see them working in their yard or casually walking by on the street. Approach them with a warm smile. Endeavor to speak about your beliefs, the location of the Kingdom Hall, and what goes on there, and let them know whoever else from the neighborhood attends. Extend an invitation to the meetings. Be determined to bear thorough witness about the good news to everyone you know.​—Acts 10:42; 28:23.
3 By Your Exemplary Conduct: Your neighborly conduct speaks volumes about you and may open the way to give a witness. It also ‘adorns the teaching of God.’ (Titus 2:7, 10) Show genuine interest in your neighbors. Be friendly and understanding. Respect their right to privacy and quiet surroundings. If one of them becomes ill, be considerate and offer to help. When a new family moves into the neighborhood, stop by to welcome them. Such kind acts leave a favorable impression and are pleasing to Jehovah.​—Heb. 13:16.
4 By the Appearance of Your Property: Being a good neighbor includes caring for your home so that it is presentable. A home and yard that are clean and attractive are a witness in themselves. But a home that is dirty or that has discarded items lying around will likely detract from the Kingdom message. Thus, it is very important to keep your home, yard, and vehicles clean and in good repair.
5 Displaying concern for those outside the Christian congregation demonstrates love for your neighbors. What may be the outcome? It may well be that “as a result of your fine works of which they are eyewitnesses,” some of them will “glorify God.”​—1 Pet. 2:12.

