“With God All Things Are Possible”
1 The primary work of the Christian congregation is to preach the Kingdom message worldwide. (Matt. 24:14) That is a tremendous undertaking. To many observers, it seems to require resources far beyond what we possess. To others, fulfilling this assignment is almost inconceivable because we are subject to ridicule, opposition, and persecution. (Matt. 24:9; 2 Tim. 3:12) Skeptics are convinced that this work is something impossible to accomplish. However, Jesus said: “With God all things are possible.”​—Matt. 19:26.
2 Positive Examples to Imitate: Jesus began his ministry as one man against a whole system of things. To try to prevent him from succeeding, opposers subjected him to every imaginable indignity, finally inflicting upon him an agonizing death. Yet, in the end, Jesus confidently declared: “I have conquered the world.” (John 16:33) Truly an incredible accomplishment!
3 Jesus’ disciples displayed the same courageous spirit and zeal in the Christian ministry. Many were flogged, beaten, thrown into jail, and even put to death. Yet, they were “rejoicing because they had been counted worthy to be dishonored in behalf of his name.” (Acts 5:41) With the odds against them, they accomplished the seemingly impossible task of preaching the good news “to the most distant part of the earth.”​—Acts 1:8; Col. 1:23.
4 How to Succeed in Our Day: We too have zealously taken up the Kingdom-preaching work in the face of seemingly impossible odds. In spite of bans, persecution, imprisonment, and other violent attempts to stop us, we are succeeding. How is this possible? “‘Not by a military force, nor by power, but by my spirit,’ Jehovah of armies has said.” (Zech. 4:6) With Jehovah behind us, nothing can stop our work!​—Rom. 8:31.
5 When we preach, we have no reason to be timid or fearful or to feel inadequate. (2 Cor. 2:16, 17) We have overpowering reasons to press forward in spreading the good news of the Kingdom. With Jehovah’s help, we will accomplish the “impossible”!​—Luke 18:27.

