VOL. XX. AUGUST 1, 1899. No. 15. 



CONTENTS. 



The Indianapolis Convention 195 

The River of Salvation 196 

Returning from Captivity 198 

Who May be Coworkers 200 

Despise Not the Day of Small 

Things 204 

Questions and Answers 205 

Interesting Letters 207 

The At-One-Ment 

Between God and Man 

(Millennial Dawn, Volume V.) 194 

page 194 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
--ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, N.Y. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity or 
adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, if they 
send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting the 
paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list 
continually. 



R2507 : page 194 



THE AT-ONE-MENT 
BETWEEN 
GOD AND MAN. 



MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. V. 



We have pleasure in announcing that Volume V. of MILLENNIAL 
DAWN series is now on the press. It will (D.V.) be sent to 



all paid up subscribers to ZION'S WATCH TOWER (including those 

who have requested credit for the year, and those who are receiving 

it free as the Lord's poor)— as September 1st and 15th, 

and October 1st and 15th issues of this journal. There will be 

no other issues for the four dates named. If you do not receive 

a copy before Sept. 30th it will not be our fault. If your account 

differs from ours be sure to let us know all particulars. Notice 

the tag on the wrapper. Jun.9 means that your subscription 

is settled for only to and including June, 1899— that you are in 

arrears. Dec. 9 means that your subscription is settled for, up 

to the end of the year and should be renewed in December 

page 194 

or written about. 

R2507 : page 194 

This volume will, we believe, furnish an abundance of spiritual 
food for the two months (September and October). It 
should be thoroughly masticated, that it may be well digested 
and give strength to head and heart and hand. It is our prayer 
and hope that it may be a great blessing to the readers of this 
journal; and that through them as fellow servants of our one 
Lord and Master it may honor him and bless many. 



R2508 : page 195 

INDIANAPOLIS CONVENTION ECHOES. 



OUR RECENT "Believer's Convention" was 
certainly a success— so voted by all who were 
in attendance, so far as we have heard. It was a 
spiritual feast of fat things, for which we render thanks 
to the Giver of all good. Our present Lord seemed to 
gird himself and serve us with "meat in due season," 
and with the "wine" of his own spirit of love and devotion. 
It was good to be there. The attendance was 
about 250, of whom about 200 were visitors from 
twenty states of the Union, including Massachusetts 
on the East and Washington on the West, Texas on 
the South and North Dakotah and Minnesota on the 
North. 

The announced program was carried out with but 
slight modifications. Brother Owen, the leader of the 
Indianapolis meetings, conducted the opening "rally" 
so successfully that every one felt at home forthwith 
and well acquainted; indeed, there were quite a number 
of street and train recognitions without previous 
acquaintance or introductions— each seemed to recognize 
the spirit of love: as our Lord declared, "By this 
shall all men know that ye are my disciples, if ye have 



love one for another." 

Brother Owen's assurances that the Indianapolis 
Church most cordially welcomed us all was abundantly 
attested by the careful provisions and kind attentions 
shown to all— the poorer as well as the financially 
comfortable, and the blacks as well as the whites: 
for there were four or five deeply and intelligently interested 
colored brethren in attendance. 

R2509 : page 195 

According to our custom no collections were taken 
up, either publicly or privately: indeed, the only semblance 
of a dispute during the three days' meetings was 
occasioned by some of the visiting brethren insisting 
with the Reception Committee that they be permitted 
to share some of the general expenses; while the latter 
insisted that they had everything provided for, and 
that the visitors had sufficient journey expenses. We 
mention this to illustrate the general spirit of the 
Convention— the spirit of love and benevolence— so 
much in contrast with experiences we have all had in 
"Babylon." 

One novelty of this Convention which differentiated 
it, so far as we recall, from all others, was the 
attendance of two who had previously been spirit-mediums, 
but who now rejoice in the better knowledge 
of the truth. One of these declared in the Testimony 
Meeting that he had been a medium for fourteen 
years, but thanked God for deliverance through the 
reading of What Say the Scriptures About Spiritism? 

It was remarked by some that while the managers of 
the Epworth League Convention had a Bishop present to 
discuss "The Life of Lincoln," and an ex-Confederate 
General to discuss "The Closing Days of the Confederacy," 
our Convention, in almost continuous session 
from 8 A.M. to 10 P.M., had no time for social questions, 
and knew nothing but Jesus Christ, and him 
crucified, and the blessed hopes which center in the 
great transaction of Calvary. 

One of the most impressive services was the baptism 
on Saturday afternoon in the Central Christian 
Church, kindly put at our disposal for two hours and a 
half. Forty-two symbolized their immersion into Christ's 
death, by immersion into water— twenty-two brethren 
and twenty sisters (two of the former colored). The 
youngest seemed about twenty-five and the oldest 
about seventy years old. It was a service long to be 
remembered, and brought a blessing to those who 
witnessed it as well as to the participants. Our prayer 
is that the convention as a whole may have buried us 
all more completely and more deeply into death with 
Christ, and that walking in newness of life now we 
may all be prepared to share with him in "his resurrection" 
—"the first resurrection." 



R2507 : page 196 

THE RIVER OF SALVATION. 

AUG. 20.-EZEK. 47:1-12. 

"Whosoever will, let him take the water of life freely."— Rev. 22:17. 

MANY OF the particulars connected with this 
vision described by Ezekiel are so circumstantial 
to the land of Israel as to give considerable 
ground for belief that it will have a literal fulfilment 
in the future; and in connection with the vision is shown 
a new division of the land of Canaan amongst the 
twelve tribes. But whatever literal fulfilment the vision 
may have, we may be positive that it is to have a grand 
fulfilment as a symbol, for the life-giving river here 
brought to our attention is undoubtedly the same one 
described six hundred years later, by John the Revelator, 
and referred to in our Golden Text. 

Referring to the description of the river starting 
from the Temple, Prof. Davidson says, "The natural 
fact upon which this conception rests is this, that there 
was a fountain connected with the Temple hill, the 
waters of which fell into the valley east of the city, 
and made their way toward the sea." So far as we may 
know, this fountain never was of any considerable size, 
and never would be, without more or less of a miracle, 
for at present the entire country is arid, except in the 
rainy season. From this fountain the Valley of Kedron 
leads directly to the Dead Sea, which, as is well known, 
has no connection with the ocean waters, either on the 
surface or subterraneously, and is 1308 feet below the 
sea level. 

However, there are evidences that at one time the 
Dead Sea was on a level with the ocean, and if by earthquake 
or otherwise the connection between it and the 
ocean waters were re-established it would rise to its old 
level, which would make of it an inland sea 150 miles 
long, and five to ten miles wide. And such a filling up 
of its basin would have a marked effect, not only upon 
the humidity of the atmosphere in its vicinity, but also 
upon the water-springs of lower Palestine. The natural 
result would be, not only that the Dead Sea would be 
sweetened of its brackishness, and become like the 
ocean, but also that the springs in the vicinity of Jerusalem 
would be greatly enlarged so as to produce some 
such river as this described in the prophecy, and these 
springs in that now parched desert country would cause 
its vegetation to prosper. It is worthy of note that this 
valley now occupied by the Dead Sea was once most 
fertile,— before the destruction of Sodom and Gomorrah. 
We read, "Lot lifted up his eyes, and beheld all 
the plain of Jordan, that it was well watered everywhere, 



before the Lord destroyed Sodom and Gomorrah, 

—even as the garden of the Lord." (Gen. 13:10.) 

And the restitution of this country to a Paradisiac condition 

is what the Prophet Ezekiel describes, if his 

language be given a literal interpretation at all— and 

this it seems to demand, as well as the symbolic 

interpretation. 

There are many who seek to apply this prophetic 
vision as a symbol to the present time, and claim that 
this river of salvation has been flowing through the 
world from the days of Ezekiel until now;— especially 
during this Gospel age. These interpreters claim that 
the depth of the water up to the ankles would represent 
a date when Christians numbered fifty millions; the 
depth of the water up to the knees a period when 
Christians numbered a hundred millions; a depth of 
water up to the loins a date when Christians numbered 
two hundred millions; and a river that could not be 
waded, representing the present time, when the population 
of Christendom is estimated at four hundred and 
fifteen millions. But can we agree with this interpretation? 
Is it reasonable, is it Scriptural? 

(1) We answer, No; it is not a reasonable interpretation, 
for, if we may judge of the Christians so-called 

in the past by those so-called in the present, we 
must conclude that the river is far from pure, "clear as 
crystal:" indeed, all will agree that if nine-tenths of 
those who name the name of Christ, but who deny him 
in their daily lives, were to withdraw from all profession, 
the Christian Church would be greatly blessed by 
their withdrawal and the influence of the Church and 
the light from it would be increased many-fold. Bishop 
Foster, of the Methodist Episcopal Church, sized up 
the situation well when comparing the professed church 
to a sheep-fold, he pronounced the vast majority "black, 
ring-streaked and speckled." We all are confident that 
only a comparatively little flock are of the class mentioned 
by the Lord as being reckonedly washed whiter 
than snow, through his grace and truth. 

(2) It is not a Scriptural view. The Scriptures 

declare that God's grace at the present time is not comparable 

to a river, but in our Lord's words, "It shall 

be in him [each believer] a well of water springing up 

R2508 : page 196 

into everlasting life." (John 4:14.) And those Christians 
in whom God's grace is a fountain of life and refreshment 
are comparatively few. They are those who 
have been "begotten of the spirit of truth" through 
the Word of truth. They are the "sanctified in Christ 
Jesus;" they are the "little flock," to the faithful of 
whom it is the Father's good pleasure to give the 
Kingdom. 

No Scripture anywhere suggests that the water of 
eternal life is now free; nor that all are now called to 



drink of it. Our Lord Jesus himself declared the contrary 
of this, saying, "No man can come to me except 
the Father which hath sent me draw him." (John 6:44.) 
The drawing or calling of God through a knowledge of 
his grace is only unto those who have ears to hear, 
amongst those to whom the call is addressed; and the 
call has been specially sent to and has specially reached 

R2508 : page 197 

only comparatively few of the earth's fifteen hundred 
millions,— chiefly the inhabitants of Europe and America. 
And of this comparatively small number to whom 
the Word of the Lord has been sent, and of the still 
smaller number who have had "ears to hear" that call, 
only a still smaller number are chosen, as we read, 
"Many are called, but few chosen." (Matt. 20:16.) 
Not many are called, in proportion to the whole, but 
many are called in proportion to the number chosen, 
the few, the elect. 

Returning to the Prophet's vision, we note that the 
waters flowed out from the house of the Lord, from 
the Temple, and that wherever they went they brought 
vitality and refreshment, healing, restitution life— even 
to the Dead Sea. This to our understanding is a picture 
of the grace of God during the Millennial age, 
when from the Church, the house of God, the Temple, 
"the habitation of God through the spirit" (Eph. 2:22), 
the stream of the water of life, healing, restoring, 
rejuvenating, shall flow to all the families of the earth, 
whose condition is represented by the wilderness eastward 
of Jerusalem. The result will be the blessing 
and restitution of all the living families of the earth 
willing to receive the blessing. And it means more: 
for the Dead Sea fitly represents the vast multitude of 
mankind which has gone into the tomb, and the water 
of life shall reach even these, and bring to them also 
awakening from death, opportunities of restitution. 

That the fulfilment of this vision could not be a 
thing of the past nor of the present is evident when we 
remember that the house of God, the Temple, the 
Church, is not yet completed— that the present is the 
time in which the Lord is fitting the "living stones" 
for the Temple,— is chiseling, fitting and polishing 
each for the place to which he is called. The present 
Gospel age was typified in the building of Solomon's 
Temple, by the period of preparation of the materials, 
after which we are informed that the whole house came 
together quickly, each stone fitting to its place and 
each timber to its position, and that without the sound 
of a hammer or any tool of iron. So with the "living 
stones," as the Apostle Peter calls the Church. (1 Pet. 2:5.) 
These are "builded together for a habitation of 
God through the spirit," and the building will not be 
completed until the last of these fitted and polished 
stones is laid in its position. Then the glory of the Lord 



shall fill the house,— the Church will be glorified. Then 
will have come the time represented in this vision, 
when the stream of the water of life, truth and grace 
shall flow from the glorified Temple. 

As there is no completed Temple yet, so there is 
no river yet; but when the Temple is completed, when 
the various members of the body of Christ are brought 
together and united in glory, honor and immortality to 
the Head of the Church, then from this united and 
glorified company of God's elect shall flow the symbolic 
river of water of life, clear as crystal. In each 
member of this Temple class, in each of these "living 
stones," already is a well-spring of truth and grace, 
and when these many well-springs shall have thus been 
united to the great Head and Fountain, the result naturally 
will be a stream of good proportions,— a river. 
To this coming time of blessing of the world our Lord 
refers, saying, "He that believeth on me, as the Scripture 
hath said, out of his belly shall flow rivers of living 
water." (John 7:38.) In order to be of this class 
in whom the great river of water of life will take its 
start, it is necessary, first, that the believer shall now 
come unto Jesus and drink of him, the great Fountain 
of life; and it will be as a result of this partaking of 
the great Fountain that all of the elect Church shall 
become minor well-springs and fountains in due time. 

Turning to the description of this same symbolic 
river, furnished us in the Book of Revelation (chapter 22), 
we find abundant evidences that it does not refer 
to the present time, but to the Millennial age. For 
instance, it is symbolically pictured as having trees of 
life on either side, whose leaves are for the healing of 
the nations— not for the healing of the Church, which 
at this time is the glorified Temple from which this 
river proceeds— and this healing of the nations signifies, 
as plainly as a symbolic picture could indicate it, 
restitution,— the healing of the woes of the groaning 
creation, its sin and sickness and imperfection. 

We notice also that the proclamation which will 
then be made will not be restricted, as at the present 
time, to "even as many as the Lord our God shall call." 
(Acts 2:39.) It will not be to an "elect" class; it will 
no longer be said, "No man can come unto me, except 
the Father draw him." The call at that time will be 
general— to every creature— "Whosoever will, let him 
take the water of life freely." We notice further 
that that broad invitation is extended by God through 
the holy spirit and the glorified Church, as it is written, 
"The spirit and the bride say, Come!" We notice 
further that this expression, "the bride," unquestionably 
places this call in the future, because, altho the 
elect Church of this Gospel age is called out from the 
world to become the bride of Christ, she does not become 
such, does not enter that exalted station, until 
in the end of the age she is perfected in glory and in 
the likeness of her Lord. Then will come "the marriage 



of the Lamb:" and not until after the marriage 
will there be a bride; and not until after the bride has 
thus been accepted as such can "the spirit and the 
bride say, Come!" to the nations— the Gentiles. 

This same glorious City (Kingdom), the glorified 
New Jerusalem, the Church, and the river of the water 

R2508 : page 198 

of life gushing forth therefrom, are brought to our attention 
in Psalm 46: "There is a river, the rivulets of 
which shall spring from the City of God, the holy place 
of the tabernacle of the Most High. God is in the 
midst of her; she shall not be moved. God shall help 
her early in the morning." The connections here also 
show that these rivulets are not to be expected to flow 
out as a river, until the Millennial morning, and the 
context refers particularly to the time of trouble with 
which the present age shall end and the Millennial 
morning shall be introduced. 

Those whom the Lord our God has called, and 
who, in obedience to that call, have come to Jesus, the 
Fountain of life, and through him have tasted that the 
Lord is gracious, should let the Word and grace of God 
dwell in them richly and abound, making them neither 
barren nor unfruitful in the knowledge of the Lord and 
in his service. It is for these to seek enlargement in 
the grace of God, that as well-springs they may be 
deeper and wider and more and more filled to overflowing 
with that grace and truth which came by Jesus 
Christ. It is for these to see to it, each for himself, 
that he has not received the grace of God in vain, and 
that this well-spring does not become choked with the 
rubbish of this present evil world, its aims, its hopes, 
its ambitions, its pride, its desires of the flesh;— that 
thus, under divine providence and supervision, we may 
be made meet for the inheritance of the saints in light, 
and have fellowship with our glorious Lord and Head 
in the sending forth of the river of salvation unto the 
ends of the earth in "due time;"— the river of the 
water of life, clear as crystal, to whosoever will of all 
the families of the earth. -2 Pet. 1:4-11; 2 Cor. 6:1; 
Col. 1:12; 1 John 1:3. 



R2509 : page 198 

RETURNING FROM CAPTIVITY. 

AUGUST 27. -EZRA 1:1-11. 

"The Lord hath done great things for us, 
whereof we are glad."— Psa. 126:3. 

THE BOOKS of Ezra and Nehemiah are not prophetical, 



but historical; they take up the history 
of Israel where it was laid down by the scribes who 
wrote the Books of Chronicles. Ezra, the writer of the 
book bearing his name, was a scribe or educated man, 
whose genealogy is traced back through the priesthood 
to Aaron. (Ezra 1-6.) Ezra was not amongst those 
who went up first to Jerusalem under the proclamation 
of Cyrus: indeed, he was probably not born until a 
considerable time after that notable event. 

The record of the first six chapters of Ezra covers 
a period of twenty years; and then an interval of about 
fifty years transpired before the events recorded in the 
seventh chapter— Ezra's commission under King Artaxerxes 
of Persia to go up to Jerusalem and establish 
the worship of God. The history of the return from 
captivity, and the experiences of the people and their 
difficulties in connection with the rebuilding of the 
Temple, Ezra probably got from the records of the 
scribes at Jerusalem. 

The Book of Second Chronicles closes with the 
declaration that the king of the Chaldeans, Nebuchadnezzar, 
carried away the treasures of Jerusalem, broke 
down its walls, burned its palaces, and carried its people 
captive to Babylon, and then declares that this 
desolation of the land and the city was in fulfilment of 
prophecy, the word of the Lord by Jeremiah, that the 
land should lie desolate and keep a Sabbath of rest 
seventy years. It also declares that this seventy years' 
desolation was brought to an end by the decree of Cyrus 
in the first year of his reign. Thus has the Lord clearly 
marked the beginning of the seventy years and their 
end; yet we find that chronologists in general reject this 
plain statement of the Scriptures, and begin to count 
the seventy years at a much earlier date than the destruction 
of the city (for we are to remember that there 
were three distinct captivities at about that time).* 

It seems to be no easy matter to determine the 
chronological order of Medo-Persia. Cyrus is called the 
Persian, and Darius is called the Median, and whether 
they reigned jointly for a time seems difficult to determine. 
It would appear that Cyrus was in some respects 
the chief, yet that Darius was the representative of 
authority in Babylon for a time, and that upon his 
death Cyrus became sole emperor. Daniel most positively 
declares that Darius the Median succeeded to Belshazzar's 
kingdom (Dan. 5:31; 6:28), and this was before 
even Daniel had thought to search the prophecy 
of Jeremiah and to calculate the date when the seventy 
years desolation would end, and to pray for the preparation 
of Israel for the promised deliverance when it 
should come. (Dan. 9:1-16.) Chronologists in general 
fall into error here in attempting to fit together the conflicting 
and disconnected scraps of secular history covering 
this period: they overlook the bridge over that 
period furnished by the Lord's testimony that the 
"seventy years' desolation" began with the close of Zedekiah's 



reign and ended with the first year of Cyrus,— 
a well established date, B.C. 536. 

We are not told by what agencies the Lord operated 
when he "stirred up" the heart of Cyrus to fulfil 
his will, in letting go the captives, and hence we are at 
liberty to surmise on the subject. We presume it likely 
that, as Daniel was speedily made a high officer in the 
kingdom, he had access to King Cyrus, and quite probably 



*See MILLENIAL DAWN, VOL. II., Chap. 2. 

R2509 : page 199 

called his attention to the Scriptural predictions 
which marked him as the divine agent, even referring 
to him by name.-Isa. 44:26,28; 45:1-5; Jer. 25:1-12; 
29:10. 

It is quite possible, also, that the Lord used other 
means in stirring up the heart of Cyrus: possibly he 
reflected that by such a course he would firmly establish 
himself in the good will of the Israelites, who 
numbered millions amongst his new subjects, and comparatively 
few of whom he might feel sure would avail 
themselves of his generous offer of liberty to return to 
their native land. It would appear that this was the 
custom of Cyrus in respect to the religions of all the 
various peoples whom he conquered. Nebuchadnezzar 
had thought to unify the people by bringing to their 
minds one god, and compelling worship to him. Cyrus 
seems to have followed an opposite rule, and sought to 
make himself popular with his subjects of various religious 
inclinations by doing something to the honor of 
every prominent god whose devotees he conquered. 
Thus he posed as a general deliverer of the people and 
as the servant of all the gods. 

Moreover, he may have had in mind the fact that 
Egypt was a country of great fertility, and that it would 
be of great convenience to have Jerusalem as a friendly 
way-station between his capital and Egypt, so that in 
case of war he would have friendly representatives at 
Jerusalem to spy upon the enemies and to render assistance 
to his forces. Possibly some of these, or possibly 
all of these, were the considerations by which the 
Lord stirred up the spirit or will of Cyrus to make the 
proclamation of liberty to the captives of Israel. 

It was not an expulsion of the Israelites from the 
province of Babylon, for evidently as a people they 
were highly esteemed of their neighbors. The proclamation 
merely gave liberty to those who desired that 
they might return to Palestine, with the king's approval: 
and that those who remained might not feel that 
the king would be offended if they gave of their substance 
to help the enterprise, the proclamation made 
special mention of the fact that such cooperation would 



be pleasing to the king. 

We may readily suppose that the majority of those 
who thought upon the Lord and who trusted in the 
promises made to the fathers, which centered in the 
Holy Land and the Holy City, were poor, for it seems 
that in every case poverty is more favorable to religious 
faithfulness and zeal than wealth; and yet that there 
were some both wealthy and zealous is abundantly testified 
to by the liberal contributions made by the captives 
themselves for the rebuilding of the Temple. The 
vast majority, however, were evidently well pleased 
with their foreign home, in which some of them had 
been living for seventy years, some for seventy-eight 
years, and some for eighty-nine years (those carried 
away captive at the same time as Daniel), while many 
of them were born in Babylonia. Many had intermarried 
with their neighbors, many were immersed in business 
projects, and many perhaps felt themselves too old for 
such an undertaking. Thus did the Lord sift them, 
that he might gather back to the Land of Promise such 
only as had a fervent zeal for the Lord and full trust 
in his promises. 

The sifting of Israel began in the separation of the 
two tribes from the ten tribes, for the rapid spread of 
idolatry in the ten tribes gradually drew those faithful 
to Jehovah to the two-tribe kingdom, whose king was 
of the line which the Lord had promised to bless. Subsequently, 
when the two tribes also had grievously gone 
into idolatry, the Lord carried them all captive to 

R2510 :page 199 

Babylon, and now he stirred up Cyrus to make a proclamation 

for volunteers to return to the Land of Promise. 

The Lord, we may be sure, did not wish the return of 

any except those who had reverence for him and faith 

in his promises. We may therefore conclude that the 

company which did return, numbering in all not quite 

fifty thousand, was composed of the very choicest of 

all Israel out of all the tribes, the tribes of Judah, 

Benjamin and Levi being most prominently represented 

amongst these returning ones, as most of the faithful 

ones for several centuries had been found in their tribes. 

It should be noticed, however, in reading Ezra's account 

of the return from captivity, that the division of 

the nation of Israel was no longer recognized after the 

return— they are invariably spoken of as "all the people 

of Israel," and the sacrifices offered were for "the 

twelve tribes of Israel," and these statements are repeated 

over and over again. The ten tribes were no 

more "lost" than were the great body of those carried 

captive from Judah lost when they neglected to return 

under the proclamation of Cyrus. 

The chief men of Judah and Benjamin and the 
priests and Levites took the lead in the matter of accepting 
the provisions of King Cyrus' decree, and we 



read concerning the others that they were "those whose 

spirit God had raised to go up to build the house of 

the Lord which is in Jerusalem." In what way the 

Lord raised their spirit or disposition we are not informed. 

We may suppose, however, that those whose 

hearts burned with faith in the divine promises to Israel 

and with zeal to be and to do what would be acceptable 

in God's sight, would be awakened, quickened, 

by the decree of Cyrus, which was of God's instigation. 

Moreover, the Lord may have providentially 

directed other matters not here particularized, in channels 

favorable to the return of those who had confidence 

in him and faith in his promises. The fact that many 

of these returning ones were of the poorer class is implied 

R2510 : page 200 

by the statement that many of their neighbors 

"strengthened their hands" with presents of money, 

goods, beasts and other valuables. Such offers would 

be a great encouragement and would probably be considered 

as the leadings of divine providence in the direction 

of the return by such as were looking for providential 

leadings. Furthermore, the generosity of 

Cyrus was manifested in his sending back the precious 

vessels of the Temple, which must have been of immense 

value. The larger vessels are enumerated, in 

all 2499. These, with the smaller articles not specified, 

amounted in all to 5400, as stated in verse 11. 

Sheshbazzar (otherwise called Zerubbabel, which 
means, "Born in Babylon"), who was of the royal 
family of David and Solomon, was appointed the governor 
of the colony, which was nevertheless subject to 
the Persian empire and its successors,— the kingdom 
authority, removed from Zedekiah at the beginning of 
the seventy years' desolation, never being restored to 
the present time— as was foretold by the Lord through 
the Prophet, saying, "I will overturn, overturn, overturn 
it: and it shall be no more, until he come whose 
right it is; and I will give it him"— Messiah, at his 
second advent.— Ezek. 21:27; Luke 21:24. 

We have already seen that natural Israel's captivity 
in Babylon is Scripturally represented as a figure of 
the captivity of Spiritual Israel in mystic Babylon; and 
that the deliverance by Cyrus was to some extent a 
representation of the deliverance of Spiritual Israelites 
from mystic Babylon by Christ; that the fall of Babylon 
before Cyrus was figurative of the fall of "Babylon the 
Great," and that the message, "Mene, Mene, Tekel, 
Upharsin," applied not only to literal Babylon, but 
also now applies to mystic Babylon. In view of 
these things it is but proper that we should consider 
Israel's return from Babylon as to some extent representing 
the deliverance of the zealous of Spiritual Israel 
from mystic Babylon— a work now in progress. 
"Come out of her, my people, that ye be not partakers 



of her sins, and that ye receive not of her plagues."— 
Rev. 18:4. 

But now, as then, comparatively few, even of the 
consecrated class, are willing to undertake the trials 
and difficulties incident to the leaving of the settled 
affairs, comfortable quarters, contracts, engagements, 
etc., entered into in Babylon. The only ones disposed 
to risk the hardships and to go forth into the desert, 
leaving the strong walls and protection of sectarianism, 
are those who have great confidence in God and great 
respect for the promises made to the Seed of Abraham. 
The call to return to the old paths, and to rebuild the 
Temple of the Lord, and to replace therein the vessels 
of gold and silver (the precious truths of the divine 
Word— setting them in order as at first) is appreciated 
by the few only; yet these are encouraged by the Lord's 
providences, by the riches bestowed upon them from 
every quarter— not riches of an earthly kind, but of a 
spiritual sort,— precious truths, valuable lessons and 
experiences, providential leadings, etc. These encourage 
such as are of faithful heart to go forward and by 
obedience to become heirs of those glorious things that 
God has promised to them that love him. 

As all the bitter experiences through which Israel 
passed were, under providential guidance, used to sift, 
separate, purge and purify the proper class to be ultimately 
brought back into the Land of Promise as the 
heirs of the kingdom, so the experiences through which 
the Lord's people have passed during the "dark ages" 
in captivity to Babylon, no less than through recent 
experiences, all tend to show us the necessity for separation 
from the world and its spirit, all lead us to appreciate 
more than ever the divine arrangements by 
which the Lord is making ready for himself and his 
service a peculiar people, zealous for the Kingdom, 
zealous for the Lord's Word, and zealous for all good 
works. -Tit. 2:14; 1 Pet. 2:9. 

It is not for those who rejoice in the Lord's promises 
and leadings to be sad, and to leave Babylon with 
regrets ("Remember Lot's wife!"), but full of joy in 
the Lord and hope in his good promises; saying in the 
language of our Golden Text,— "The Lord hath done 
great things for us, whereof we are glad." Those not 
thus stirred in spirit may as well stay in Babylon, as they 
would only prove snares and stumbling blocks to others. 



R2510 : page 200 

WHO MAY BE COWORKERS. 
SEPT. 3. -EZRA 3:10 TO 4:5. 
"The temple of God is holy, which temple ye are."— 1 Cor. 3:17. 



ABOUT FOUR months must have been required 

for the return of the captives from Babylon to 

Palestine, for later Ezra, with a smaller company, required 

that length of time. (Ezra 7:9.) Arriving at 

their destination about July or August, probably the 

first steps were to provide at least temporary homes 

amid the ruins of Jerusalem and the small towns in that 

vicinity. But as it was a religious motive which prompted 

their return— faith in God and his promises— we 

find, as we might reasonably expect, that very speedily 

after their arrival the public worship of Jehovah was 

begun— probably about the beginning of their "new 

year," October.— Verse 6. 

Evidently the Lord's hand was with them, and it 
was of his providential guidance that their first work, 
in connection with the restoration of the Temple and 

R2510 : page 201 

its divinely appointed services, was the building of the 
altar. This will at once appeal to the intelligent Christian 
as an illustration of the truth so forcefully set 
forth in the Scriptures, that all approach to God, all 
reconciliation, all at-one-ment with him, must be by 
and through the great sacrifice for sins which Israel's 
altar typically represented. Vain are all the approaches 
to God which recognize not as their basis the sin-offering 
which God himself provided— the "ransom for 
all."— 1 Tim. 2:6. 

The site of the Temple was Mount Moriah, and 
one of the most prominent spots on that mount is supposed 
to have been the site of the altar. This place 
selected for the altar, under divine guidance, is believed 
to have been the same spot upon which Abraham offered 
his son, Isaac, the type of Christ, and received 
him again as from the dead in a figure, the Lord providing 
as his representative, upon the same spot, the 
ram caught in a neighboring thicket— Gen. 22:3-13; 
Heb. 11:17-19. 

It is supposed that this same spot was subsequently 
the threshing-floor of Araunah, where David offered 
the acceptable sacrifice to the Lord which stayed the 
plague. (2 Sam. 24:21-25.) The Mosque of Omar 
now occupies the site of the ancient Temple built by 
Solomon; and the Mohammedans, who have great respect 
for the holy places, have left the site of the ancient 
altar exposed to view, protecting it with a railing. 
The visitor may there see to-day the very spot on which 
thousands of typical sin-offerings were sacrificed, the 
base of the various altars which were erected from time 
to time. It is of solid rock, and has a rather distinct 
groove or trench about it, which probably conducted 
the blood of the slain animals to what seems to be a 
natural drain or sewer by which the blood flowed in 
the direction of the Valley of Jehoshaphat— the valley 
of graves. 



As we viewed this historic rock some years ago, 
and thought of the thousands of beasts slain there as 
types of the great ransom sacrifice, and noted the natural 
passageway by which the blood was carried off, 
our thoughts reverted to the Lamb of God, the great 

R2511 : page 201 

sacrifice for sins, and how the life which he laid down 
became a fountain or stream of life, not only for the 
dead of Israel, but all who died in Adam. The flow 
of blood toward the valley of graves seems to speak 
symbolically of life for the dead, secured through our 
dear Redeemer's sacrifice. But we remember that not 
only the bullock of the sin-offering was slain at this 
altar, but as well the goat of the sin-offering was slain 
there: not only the blood of the typical bullock, but 
also the blood of the typical goat, then, must have 
passed through that natural channel or drain; and this 
reminds us of how the Church, as members of the body 
of Christ, are during this age filling up that which is 
behind of the afflictions of Christ, sacrificing even unto 
death— for we know that, as the bullock represented 
the great High Priest, our Lord, so the goat represented 
the under-priests, the Church which is his body.* 
(Col. 1:24; Rom. 8:17.) And, as we have already 
seen, all the members of the body of Christ, the 
Church, must finish their course and lay down their 
lives, before the great work of this Atonement Day, 
the Gospel age, will be accomplished, and the healing 
and life-giving stream reaches the dead world with blessings 
and opportunities of eternal life. 

The beginning of the offering of sacrifices in connection 
with the Feast of Tabernacles, at the beginning 
of their "new year" (in the seventh month of their 
civil year), was a time of special rejoicing with the Israelites 
—it was always the most joyous season, but on 
this occasion the return from Babylon and recent evidences 
of returning divine favor added to its joys. And 
immediately the work of repairing the Temple was decided 
upon. They had brought certain gifts from the 
Israelites still remaining in Babylonia, and these were 
added to from the means of those who had returned, 
and the sum thus accumulated gives good evidence of 
the zeal of all concerned. As nearly as we may be able 
to judge, the total value of the gold and silver donated 
would amount to about $400,000. (Ezra 2:68,69.) It 
would appear that this sum was of three parts of about 
equal proportions, one-third contributed by those who 
remained in Babylonia, one-third by the few wealthy 
of the returned Israelites, and one-third contributed 
by the mass of the people, about $3 each.— 
Nehemiah 7:71,72. 

We have never considered it proper to solicit money 
for the Lord's cause, after the common custom; and 
yet we are thoroughly convinced that there is a great 



blessing in giving, and that those who do not learn to 
give deprive themselves of a great spiritual grace, 
and endanger their spiritual prosperity, if not their 
spiritual life itself. But the giving, to be acceptable in 
the Lord's sight, must be voluntary— free-will offerings 
—"not of constraint." Accordingly, it is our 
judgment that money raised by the various begging devices 
in the name of our Lord is offensive, unacceptable 
to him, and does not bring his blessing either upon 
the givers or the work accomplished. "The Lord loveth 
a cheerful [willing] giver." He seeketh such to 
worship him as worship and serve in spirit and in truth. 
-2 Cor. 9:7; John 4:23,24. 

Full of zeal for the Lord's cause, the people celebrated 
the corner-stone laying of the new Temple with 
great eclat. One of the special features of their worship 
was praise, and we think it safe to say that singing the 



*See Tabernacle Shadows of Better Sacrifices. 

R2511 : page 202 

Lord's praise has been amongst the greatest blessings 
and privileges of worship enjoyed by the largest number 
of the Lord's people throughout this Gospel age 
also. The power to praise God in song has been conferred 
upon man only of all earthly creatures, and how 
appropriate that he should use this power to praise the 
King of kings! 

If those Israelites, the house of servants, returning 
from their bondage, and remembering the covenant 
promises of God to them, had cause for singing and 
shouting Jehovah's praise, much more have we, who 
belong to the house of sons, great cause to tell abroad 
the great things which the Lord hath done for us. We 
were all servants of sin once, under the bondage of sin, 
ignorance, superstition and death, but God, through 
the great Cyrus, has permitted us to go free. Appropriately, 
therefore, our first step should be to recognize 
the sacrifice of the altar, and then to offer praise to him 
who hath called us out of darkness into his marvelous 
light, for "He hath put a new song into our mouths, 
even the loving kindness of our God." 

The Apostle assures us that, however appropriate, 
inspiring and refreshing are the songs of our lips, still 
more appropriate and still more appreciated of the Lord 
are our heart-songs, the joy and rejoicing of the new 
nature— "singing and making melody in our hearts 
unto the Lord." (Eph. 5:19.) And this joy and singing 
in the heart, this heart-thankfulness to the giver of 
all good, necessarily finds expression, not only in 
Christian carols, but also in all the acts and words of 
life— all of which constitute the hymn of praise and 
thanksgiving continually ascending before God from 



his people. 

"My life flows on in endless song, 

Above earth's lamentation; 
I catch the sweet not far-off hymn 

That hails a new creation. 
Through all the tumult and the strife 

I hear the music ringing; 
It finds an echo in my soul; 

How can I keep from singing!" 
We read, "They sang one to another in praising 
and giving thanks to the Lord, saying, For he is good, 
for his mercy endureth forever toward Israel." (Rev. 
Ver.) This is considered by some to be an indication 
of the Lord's will respecting Christian worship— that 
it should be done by choirs instead of by the congregation, 
and that it should be in the nature of solos and 
choruses. There can be no doubt whatever that selected 
and trained choirs can render better music than can 
the general average of Christians. Nor can we doubt that 
this would be particularly true of the time mentioned 
in our lesson, when musical and other education was 
very deficient, and when the most that the majority of 
people could do was to "make a joyful noise unto the 
Lord." But two things in this connection should be 
kept in mind:— 

(1) That so far as the Christian Church is concerned, 
the Lord has left her entirely without restrictions 

in such matters— to praise the Lord with heart 
and voice, according to her love and zeal and judgment. 
It is not, therefore, for one to judge another respecting 
the use of his love, zeal and judgment in offering the 
Lord worship in songs of praise, whether with instrumental 
accompaniment or without: it is for each individual 
and each church to exercise the liberty which 
the Lord has granted. However, we do urge that all 
remember that it is not the excellence of our music 
that will make it acceptable to our Lord. For we 
may well suppose that the harmonies of the heavenly 
choirs quite outmeasure the best efforts of earthly 
choirs, and hence could not hope that the Lord will 
receive our songs of praise because of their intrinsic 
merit. Their acceptance at all will be because they 
are expressions of the heart sentiments; and this being 
true all who have heart sentiments of thankfulness and 
gratitude should be encouraged to make "a joyful noise 
unto the Lord," as acceptable and pleasing to him 
through the merit of our Redeemer. 
"Let all his children sing 

Glad songs of praise to God! 
The children of the heavenly King 

Should tell their joys abroad." 

(2) It should be remembered that fleshly Israel 

was typical, and that their priests and Levites, selected 
for the offering of sacrifice and for the offering of praise, 
typified the Church, the "royal priesthood," and household 
of faith. We are to remember, too, that their 



songs of praise typified the songs and melodies of our 
hearts. From this standpoint we see that the setting 
apart of a special choir of Levites for praise would not 
be in any sense of the word a sanction or command for 
the selection of trained choirs, separate and distinct 
from the congregation of the Lord's people: indeed, it 
would quite contradict the common practice of hiring 
unbelievers to do church singing. None can offer acceptable 
praise to God except those who are of the 
priestly tribe,— "the household of faith." 

Amongst those who were present at the laying of 
the foundation stone at the rebuilding of the Temple 
were some who probably as small children could dimly 
recollect the glorious Temple of Solomon, and who now, 
returning from seventy years' captivity, were eighty or 
more years old. These wept as they contrasted the 
glorious things of the past with the small beginnings 
before them. Doubtless there was a great contrast, and 
yet quite probably distance and childhood's eyes lent 
an enchanted glory to their recollection of the former 
things. But their cries were drowned with the rejoicing 
of hope, and this was well. So with Christians 

R2511 : page 203 

who have gotten free from Babylon, and who are seeking 

by the Lord's grace to build their faith again on the 

old foundation laid by Christ and the apostles at the 

beginning of this age— they are apt to think backward 

to the blessings and privileges of the early Church, and 

to weep and sigh for those by-gone blessings. It is well 

that we should highly esteem the favors of God manifested 

in the primitive Church, its simplicity of worship 

and purity of faith and apostolic privileges, to the 

intent that these may stand before our minds as ideals 

in the work of reconstructing our faith and hope and 

love upon the old foundation; but it would be quite improper 

for us to give way to weeping at such moments; 

R2512: page 203 

rather should the necessities and exigencies of our time 
lead us to energy and the thought of divine favor in 
our deliverance from Babylon, lead us to rejoice and to 
sing the new song which the Lord has put into our 
mouths, even his loving kindness. 

"The people of the land" were of mixed nationality, 
placed as colonists in that portion of the country 
of Palestine previously occupied by the ten tribes. 
This colonizing of mixed peoples was in pursuance of 
the general policy of the Assyrian and Chaldean empires, 
of removing captives from their native soil to new 
homes, thus breaking the ties of the fatherland, destroying 
patriotic feelings, that by these means the sympathies 
and interests of the people might be the more readily 
attracted to and united with the one central government 



at Babylon. 

These "people of the land" (subsequently known 
as Samaritans) were disposed to be friendly to the returned 
Israelites, and proffered their aid in the building 
of the Temple, but their assistance was refused, 
the Israelites realizing that if these "strangers" were 
permitted to share in the work of constructing the 
Temple they could with propriety claim a share also in 
the character of the worship which would be established 
therein, and they foresaw that it would open the door 
to laxity in religious matters, and perhaps to the old 
idolatry, on account of which the Lord had so severely 
chastised them. Their course in this matter has been 
freely criticised as "narrow" and ungenerous, by those 
who have not rightly appreciated the situation. We are 
to remember that God's covenants were exclusively to 
the seed of Abraham, and not to other peoples, who 
were known as Gentiles. 

As an illustration of this exclusiveness, and a proof 
of its propriety, we note the fact that our Lord did not 
preach to others than the seed of Abraham, saying to 
his disciples, "Go not into the way of the Gentiles, 
and into any city of the Samaritans enter ye not; but 
go rather to the lost sheep of the house of Israel." 
And of himself he said, "I am not sent but unto the 
lost sheep of the house of Israel."— Matt. 10:5; 15:24. 

It would be well for those of Spiritual Israel who 
are now returning from captivity in the various provinces 
of "Babylon the Great" to remember this lesson. 
They find mixed peoples ready to express more or less 
of sympathy with them, and to offer more or less of cooperation 
in the reestablishment of the true worship of 
God in its primitive simplicity. The natural inclination 
would be to accept such proffered assistance, and 
to call every such assistant a "brother," and to accept 
and use not only the labor but the gold proffered, regardless 
of the fact that it comes not from true Israelites. 
Indeed, the general tendency of our time is not 
only to be willing to accept the money and other aid of 
worldly people in the Lord's service, but to beg for it, 
and to scheme to get it by every device conceivable,— 
fairs, suppers, subscriptions, collections, etc., etc. The 
tendency in every case must be to bring in a foreign 
and unsanctified influence, and to do great injury to 
the true Israelites. This indeed may be said to be one 
of the chief troubles with nominal Protestantism to-day. 
Zion is full of "strange children," and their 
voice and influence predominate in the business affairs 
of the churches, in the doctrines, etc., etc. The true 
Israelites in comparison are but as a little flock of 
sheep amongst many goats and some wolves. 

When "the people of the land" found that their 
money and services were not acceptable, and that they 
could have neither part nor lot in the construction of 
the Lord's house, it offended them and made them 
enemies; and from that time onward they persistently 



opposed the work of the Israelites. So it will be with 
Spiritual Israel; those who conscientiously live separate 
from the world in spiritual matters, and recognize as 
brethren in Christ only those who confess to circumcision 
of the heart and adoption into God's family, will 
find themselves opposed by moralists, liberalists and 
higher critics, as well as by the masses, who hate the 
light, because it condemns their darkness— doctrinal 
and otherwise. Nevertheless, this is the only good and 
safe course to pursue. Better far is it that only true 
Israelites should be recognized as brethren, and thus 
the wheat be separated from the tares. 

Some one has well said:— "The Christian in the 
world is like a ship in the ocean. The ship is safe in 
the ocean so long as the ocean is not in the ship." One 
of the great difficulties with Christianity to-day is that 
it has admitted the strangers, the "people of the land," 
and recognized them as Christians. It does injury, not 
only to the Christians, by lowering their standards (for 
the average will be considered the standard), but it also 
injures the "strangers," by causing many of them to 
believe themselves thoroughly safe, and needing no conversion, 
because they are outwardly respectable, and 
perhaps frequently attendants at public worship. It 

R2512: page 204 

lowers the standard of doctrine also, because the minister 

who realizes that at least three-fourths of his congregation 

would be repelled by the presentation of 

strong meat of truth, withholds the same, and permits 

those who need the strong meat, and could appreciate 

and use it to advantage, to grow weak, to starve. Furthermore, 

the worldly spirit and the fuller treasury 

have attracted "strangers" into the professed ministry 

of the Gospel, many of whom know not the Lord, 

neither his Word, and who consequently are thoroughly 

unprepared to feed the true sheep, were they ever so 

well disposed. 

The lesson in connection with the building of the 
Temple, the Lord's Church, "which temple ye are," 
is that worldly persons, worldly methods and worldly 
aid and wisdom are to be rejected. As all the living 
stones are to be polished, fitted and prepared under the 
eye and direction of the great master-builder, the Lord, 
so all the servants, all the ministers of the truth, engaging 
in this work, are to be, so far as we have to do 
with the matter, such only as manifest a circumcision 
of heart, and thus show themselves to be Israelites indeed. 
Much and serious has been the injury done to 
the Lord's cause by the selection of workmen whose 
chief recommendation has been that they had some 
ability as public speakers, a good address. Rather let 
us remember that none may engage in this work as 
true Israelites unless they be in full accord with the 
Master-builder, and by their ability in rightly dividing 



the Word of truth show themselves to be workmen that 
need not to be ashamed.— 1 Pet. 2:5,9; 1 Cor. 3:17; 
2 Tim. 2:15. 



R2512: page 204 

DESPISE NOT THE DAY OF SMALL THINGS. 

--ZECH. 4:10.- 

MANY, AS they note the mighty opposition 

to present truth, and the comparatively 

few who have ears to hear it, and hearts to obey it, 

are inclined to discouragement. They are in danger of 

despising their God-given opportunities as a "day 

of small things," and hence of letting slip valuable opportunities 

for service to God and his people. For such 

the Lord sends a message, saying,— "Strengthen ye 

the weak hands and confirm [make firm] the feeble 

knees. Say to the timid of heart, Be strong, fear not: 

Behold your God! Vengeance cometh! the recompense 

of God. He will come and save you. Then the eyes 

of the blind shall be opened and the ears of the deaf 

unstopped."— Isa. 35:3-5. 

Think of the possibilities, remembering that now 
as in Elijah's day there are probably more than seven 
thousand Israelites indeed who have not bowed the 
knee to Baal. But consider the possibilities within 
reach of the twenty thousand readers of ZION'S WATCH 
TOWER as follows:- 

If each one will interest another one this year, it 
will mean 40,000 in 1900. 

If all have similar zeal and success it would mean 
80,000 in 1901; and 160,000 in 1902; and 320,000 in 
1903; and 640,000 in 1904; and 1,280,000 in 1905. 

But suppose that only one in ten of the readers 
are fully consecrated— their all upon the Lord's altar 
as "living sacrifices, holy, acceptable to God" and 
doing "their reasonable service,"— how then would 
it show? Thus:— 

At present 2,000; in 1900 it would show 4,000; 
in 1901 it would show 8,000; in 1902 it would show 
16,000; in 1903 it would show 32,000; in 1904 it would 
show 64,000; in 1905 it would show 128,000. 

But the average should be more than this. Each 
of the consecrated, watching and praying and improving 
every opportunity, and permitting no day to pass 
without some special witness for the Lord and his 
truth either by word or pen, should expect to reach 
more than one each year. If they have not averaged 
better than this in the past, they should seek and pray 
for more opportunities and especially for more wisdom 
to see and to use their opportunities. Let us all make 
sure that the Master at last can say of us as he said of 



one of old,— "She hath done what she could."— 
Mark 14:8. 

Never before were there so many possibilities of 
serving the truth— God's provision for his people. 

(1) All the interested may have ZION'S WATCH 
TOWER regularly free if they cannot afford the moderate 
subscription price, and will write us to that effect: or 
they may have it on credit, if they prefer it so; and if 
they can never pay and will write us to this effect, the 
debt will be cancelled. 

(2) All TOWER readers are supplied, free, all 
the tracts they can use— for enclosing in their letters, 

R2513 : page 204 

for distribution on railway trains, at conventions, etc. 
Millions of tracts are thus circulated annually. 

(3) For those who can devote their time to colporteuring 
the DAWNS and booklets every reasonable 
arrangement is made; and about fifty brethren and 
sisters are giving their time and strength in this 

way. 

(4) For others who cannot thus "minister," the 
Lord has opened a new department of "Volunteers" 
for Sunday service in the free circulation of the "meat 
in due season" represented in the booklet, The Bible 

vs. Evolution. Many have taken hold of this opportunity, 
and at present we are unable to meet the demand 
as promptly as we would like. We know not 

R2513 : page 205 

what results the reaping will show, but are sure that 
the "reapers" are being blest and strengthened by 
their service. 

(5) Opportunity to secure the DAWNS, etc., at 
extremely low rates for loaning to neighbors and 
friends. 

Evidences multiply that all those facilities for 
service are at a most opportune time: when the fall of 
Babylon from steadfastness on even the first principles 
of the doctrines of Christ is awakening the Lord's 
people and calling them to come out of her; and when 
they need the helping hands of true "brethren" to 
guide them into the light of truth now shining. For 
we firmly believe that all in Babylon must come out 
of her, if they would be of the Bride class; and that 
none of the "brethren" who will be amongst the 
"overcomers" will be left in "darkness."— See 1 Thes. 5:2-5; 
Rev. 3:18-22; 13:14-16; 20:4. 

"Lord, increase our faith!" If we believe that 
we are in the "harvest" time of this age, and that the 
"harvest" work is in progress, and we participators 
in it, let us believe also that the great Chief Reaper is 
thoroughly able to use us as well as to bless us in his 
service; and let none look at clouds and discouragements, 



but let each do with his might what his hands 
find to do, with the eye of faith "looking unto Jesus," 
our Captain, and determined that, whether or not he 
shall be able to bring many unto the Kingdom, the 
King shall at least have evidence of his love and zeal 
and effort so to do. 



R2513 : page 205 

QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS. 



Question.— Are not present conditions less favorable 
to the performance of the injunctions of Eph. 4:28, 
and 2 Cor. 12: 15, than were the conditions at the 
time the Apostle wrote? Is not the labor market 
more glutted now than then? 

Answer.— No doubt circumstances and conditions 
varied in the Apostle's day as they do now, but we 
have no reason from history to suppose that the average 
working man of that time was more favorably situated 
in wages, opportunities for labor, etc., than at 
present. Indeed, it is very doubtful if labor was at 
any time in the past as well housed, as well clothed, 
and generally comfortable, as at the present time. 
This does not mean that we consider the laboring class 
too well cared for at the present time— nor that we 
think their condition all that could be desired. Gladly 
would we improve, if we could, the general conditions 
of labor. It is well, however, that we should not 
cultivate in ourselves or in each other a spirit of discontent, 
which can do no good, but is likely to work 
injury; and to this end it is well that we should not 
deceive ourselves or others into thinking our load unendurable 
or harder than that of other days, when it 
is really better by a very great deal. 

Question.— In a family of seven, when all the incomes 
foot up an average of $ 1 per day for working 
days, how would it be possible, after providing food, 
clothing, rent and fuel, to put by anything or to give 
away anything? 

Answer.— If you mean that the total income of 
seven persons is only $ 1 a day, $6 a week, we admit 
that it is small, and that it would require extraordinary 
economy to "provide things decent." But permit 
a kindly suggestion, dear brother, that there should 
be no family of seven persons at the present time unable 
to earn more than $6 per week— unless through 
some accident, some misfortune. A man who cannot 
earn more than a dollar a day ought to consider very 
earnestly the question whether or not he could afford 
to get married, and assume the responsibilities of a 
father, and any woman asked to become a wife should 



give earnest thought to the financial side of the problem 

before accepting such an invitation. Circumstances 

and prospects may have been more favorable 

at the time of marriage, but so soon as such circumstances 

became unfavorable the propagation of a family, 

for which only an unsatisfactory provision could 

be made, should not have continued— continence, self-denial, 

should be practiced by Christians under such 

circumstances, and be considered not merely a "virtue," 

but a "duty." Nor should they unduly bemoan 

their lot, but on the contrary remember what the 

Scriptures so clearly set forth— that the heavenly Father 

knoweth what things his children have need of. By 

cheerfully seeking to conform to the proper necessities 

of the case, and accepting such as divine providences 

in the case of the consecrated, a great blessing 

may result, for, as the Apostle declares, "All things 

work together for good to them that love God— to the 

called ones according to his purpose." 

Question.— Under such circumstances, how is the 
father to follow the Scriptural injunction to lay up for 
his children? Did Mary make provision for her son 
Jesus? Did not the son make provision for the parent? 

Answer.— "How just are God's commands, 
How wise his precepts are!" 

Scriptural injunctions we may understand to be 
applicable only so far as it is possible for us to follow 
them. If we find it impossible to lay by anything, we 
may consider ourselves excused from this provision or 
advice. But our effort should be to follow the Scriptural 
injunction, if it should only be to lay aside one 

R2513 : page 206 

or two or five cents out of each day's earnings. The 

Lord should at least see our effort to follow his instructions, 

and we would surely have a blessing in such 

endeavors. 

We do not understand the Apostle to mean that 
aged parents should slave themselves to provide for 
grown and healthy children. While the offspring are 
children their future welfare should be provided for 
by reasonable education, etc., and when such children 
are grown, they should take pleasure in caring for 
their aged parents. Mary was probably at least fifty-five 
years of age when Jesus, having evidently cared 
for her himself, committed her at his death to the care 
of John. And the Apostle shows that his thoughts 
on the subject were in full harmony with this, for, 
when speaking of widows, he says, "If any widow 
have children or nephews, let them learn first to show 
piety at home [by caring for their dependent relatives], 
and to requite their parents: for this is good and acceptable 
before God."— 1 Tim. 5:4. 

Question.— Is there not in the Scriptures quoted 
a cold business tone, indicating that man's wisdom 



had more to do with them than the spirit of the Lord, 
who so tenderly spoke of the Father's care and love, 
and who must have known to what straits many of his 
people would be brought in taking up his cross and 
following on, and the separation from worldly ways 
and means of obtaining a living— clubs, labor unions, 
church unions, etc., in harmony with the injunction, 
"Come out from among them and be ye separate"? 

Answer.— No, dear brother; we are to consider 
that the same holy spirit guided in all the writings of 
the apostles, and that God's Word is not yea and nay. 
Surely no Scripture writer more prominently or more 
fully set forth the Lord's love and care for his people, 
and the necessity for full separation from the world, 
than did the Apostle Paul who wrote the Scriptures 
which you criticise. 

On the other hand, we are to realize that the circumstances 
in which we are placed have not come to 
us by accident, but, according to the Scriptures, have 
come to us under direct supervision of God,— if we are 
his consecrated people. Consequently, instead of repining, 
rebelling and bemoaning, we are to accept the 
Lord's provision as being the best for us, as "new 
creatures," according to his divine wisdom. We are 
to seek to do as nearly as he has directed us as lies 
within our power, and the remainder entirely beyond 
our power we should take to the Lord in prayer, asking 
increase of wisdom, increase of grace, increase of 
strength, to know and to do his will more and more 
perfectly for the future, and whatever may have been 
our errors in the past, our loving Father has made 
abundant provision in Christ for our forgiveness and 
aid. And doubtless God's reason for permitting some 
of our experiences is that we may learn just such lessons 
necessary to the shaping and moulding of our 
characters into most perfect harmony with the divine 
pattern, our Lord Jesus. 

Question.— In the Old Testament we read, "Trust 
in the Lord and do good, and verily thou shalt be fed." 
I would like to know whether or not this and similar 
Old Testament expressions are applicable to the called-out 
ones of this Gospel age, or were they merely applicable 
to the Jewish age, when, according to the 
Law Covenant, God gave temporal rewards for 
obedience? 

Answer.— As heretofore pointed out, the promises 
to fleshly Israel were temporal and, as you suggest, 
guaranteed temporal prosperity as a reward for obedience. 
But are the promises to the Lord's faithful ones 
of this Gospel age smaller or less precious, because 
they do not guarantee riches and friends and freedom 
from blight and drouth? May we not realize that the 
promises made to us are much more comprehensive, 

R2514: page 206 



having the promise of the life which now is, and also 
of that which is to come? (1 Tim. 4:8.) Is it not still 
true, and most abundantly emphasized in the New 
Testament, that "No good thing will he withhold from 
them that walk uprightly"? If all things work together 
for good to them that love God, we may be sure 
that if riches or ease or luxury are withheld from us, 
they are withheld for our blessing, and may rejoice in 
such evidences of the divine care. Is it not in the New 
Testament that the Apostle declares, "Godliness with 
contentment is great gain"? and must not therefore 
contentment be a possible thing to those who will live 
godly in this present time, even tho they suffer persecution, 
and even tho they be not so prosperous in temporal 
matters as some others? 

The lesson of faith, dear brother, is an important 
one for all to learn and, if we are slow in learning it, 
we will probably be kept under the necessary experiences 
that much the longer— because the Father loveth 
us and seeketh in us this good quality. Faith will not 
look at any of the divine arrangements as unkind or 
cold, but will see in them all, and in all of life's experiences, 
the very blessing most needed, and can sing, 
"Content, whatever lot I see, 
Since 'tis my God that leadeth me." 

Question.— Please consider, briefly, the following 
Scriptures additional to those recently sent you:— 
Phil. 4:10,15-17; 1 Cor. 4:14; 2 Cor. 11:8,9; Luke 6:38; 
2 Cor. 10:11. 

Answer.— These Scriptures seem to be along the 
same lines as those considered in our last issue, to 
which we again refer all readers. We consider them 
in order. 

(1) Phil. 4:10,15-17:-This Scripture indicates 
that the Apostle, who was giving his entire time to 
the ministry of the Gospel, labored at tent-making or 
other secular business only when such a course was 
made necessary in providing things honest in the sight 
of all men— and rather than be burdensome to any, 
or even to request assistance. The Apostle here recognizes 
as the Lord's judgment that any laborer is 
worthy of his keep, unless he has missed his calling, 
or is incapacitated. The Apostle did not mistake his 
calling, and if the Church recognized him as a servant 
called of the Lord and being used effectively in the 

R2514: page 207 

ministry of reconciliation, it then became their privilege 
to cooperate with him in that ministry by supplying 
his temporal needs. And in the case of the 
Church at Philippi it would appear from the Apostle's 
testimony that they had appreciated and used their 
opportunities properly and repeatedly. All are not 
talented for public service of the truth, and whenever 
one is discovered by the brethren to have special gifts 



and talents and zeal for the ministry he should be encouraged 

in that direction, and the others less qualified 

in these respects should take pleasure in assisting 

such an one, and thus they would be reckoned as having 

a share with him in the fruit of their combined labors. 

In the Apostle's case there was no room to doubt 
that his ministry was owned and accepted of the Lord, 
and that he was an apostle— one specially sent forth, 
and whose services were specially guided by the 
Master; and that his entire time was given to the work 
and was needed for the work. 

(2) 1 Cor. 4:14:— The context preceding shows 

that the Apostle felt considerably hurt that the Church 
at Corinth, which he himself had established through 
the preaching of the gospel, had been quickly turned 
aside by false teachers, who had denied Paul's apostleship. 
The Church at Corinth had seemingly flourished 
financially and socially, and suffered little persecution. 
They were correspondingly unable to rightly 
sympathize with the Apostle in his active ministry of 
the truth, and the many hazardous incidents connected 
therewith. In the context he addresses them rather 
ironically, saying, "We are fools for Christ's sake, 
but ye are wise in Christ; we are weak, but ye are 
strong; ye are honorable, but we are despised,... 
and labor, working with our hands." In the 14th verse 
the Apostle assures his readers that he is not so 
writing in order to cause them pain and shame, but to 
awaken them to a proper appreciation of the true situation, 
to the intent that they might be to a larger 
extent co-laborers with him— sharers in the sufferings 
of Christ, that in due time also they might have share 
in the glory to follow. 

(3) 2 Cor. 11:8,9:— These verses show us that 

the Apostle was careful to avoid the money question 

in his preaching. He never so much as asked assistance 

from the Corinthians while he was with them; 

not that he would have refused to accept assistance if 

it had been tendered, nor that he considered that it 

would have been any less than their duty and privilege 

to have assisted him, but that he had confidence that 

the Lord would supply his necessities in the best way, 

and was willing rather to present the Word of God 

without charge, to the intent that his ministry should 

be the more impressive, as an exhibition of the fact 

that he sought not their money but their highest welfare. 

He assured them of this by letter afterward, 

explaining to them that others had been more careful 

to look after his necessities than they, and had a corresponding 

blessing. The Apostle wrote of the matter 

subsequently, not because he desired a gift, but 

because he realized that whoever receives the truth 

into a good and honest heart and is really benefited 

by it must partake of its spirit of generosity, and do 

his share in forwarding the truth, else he will go backward 

and lose some of the blessing and light already 



received. 

(4) Luke 6:38:— This verse represents the general 
principle of divine dealing— "The Lord loveth a 
cheerful giver," and causes his smile and blessing to 
rest upon such, whereas those who receive the Lord's 
favor and fail to be exercised by the spirit of benevolence, 
receive correspondingly less of spiritual blessing. 

(5) 2 Cor. 10:11:— This does not signify that 

if the Apostle wrote them respecting benevolence in 
money matters he would also preach to them upon 
this subject. His own expressions clearly indicate 
that he did not follow this course, and that his writing 
upon the subject of money-giving was from a 
standpoint wholly separate from any solicitations on 
his own account. The context shows that he was reproving 
some one in the Church who had been walking 
according to the flesh and not according to the 
spirit, and his declaration here is that he would speak 
in the same denunciatory manner if he were present 
with them. 



R2515 : page 207 

INTERESTING LETTERS. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-At last I managed to 
get to London to see the brethren, being hindered from 
an earlier visit. Brother Guard very kindly provided 
for me whilst there. I found in London both that 
which cheered and that which made me sad. It may 
be said that there are three classes; (1) the scattered 
ones, whom I found generally lacking in interest; 
(2) a company who meet regularly in the north 
of London, and who reside chiefly in the West and 
North. Brother Sheward, as far as I could judge, is 
the main-stay of this meeting, which is now getting 
beyond things we understand; and (3) a meeting in 
Stratford, East London, which meets in Bro. Guard's 
home and is in full sympathy with the TOWERS and 
DAWNS. It was with these all my meetings were held. 
I went on the 8th of June and held meetings the 
same day, Thursday, Friday and Saturday evenings, 
Sunday afternoon and evening, and again on Tuesday. 

R2514: page 207 

The day-time I spent looking up the odd ones, and 
hard work it was. London is such a big place, and 
some districts ten or more miles apart. I called upon 
our dear Brother Hart and spent some little time with 
him, besides seeing him three times at our meetings. 
Bro. Guard is another dear brother, to all appearances 



sincerely desirous of pleasing God. He is rather stern 
in countenance, but very kindly in disposition, and I 
believe he does his best for the brethren. We had a 
good time together. Our meetings were attended by 
forty or more people, all apparently deeply interested. 
I found their meetings had been, to my mind, rather 
too open, inasmuch as they allow interruption at any 
time; indeed, they had taken the form of conversation 
more than not. As brother Guard has some ability, I 
counseled him to develop the idea of worship more 
than they had, and let questions be asked and answered 
afterwards if need be. Or, in many cases it would be 
altogether preferable that a newly interested one should 
be allowed private opportunity rather than a whole 

R2514: page 208 

company should be kept waiting whilst every old 
question is again threshed out. 

There is, as you have often said, a tendency, when 
one is freed from Babylon's bondage, to swing to the 
other extreme not only in doctrine but ceremonies, and 
some forget the prime object of meeting together- 
worship. I am thankful to God for Bro. Guard and 
the dear brethren with him. 

There was much to encourage one. One feels 
more than repaid by the hearty words "God bless you!" 
The brethren generally seemed helped and encouraged 
by my visit. Perhaps some of this was due to the form 
of worship we had. I judged the brethren were needing 
exhortation, and by the grace of God I was enabled 
to encourage them. 

I was unable to get but a short time with Brother 
Sheward, but I was satisfied with even that. He was 
courteous,— one could expect that,— but he is developing 
a cynical trait of character, I am sorry to say. 
"I suppose you have some difference with Brother R., 
Brother Sheward?" "Well, yes! a little theoretically, 
but practically nil." This I found to be quite in 
error, for the practical difference is as between light 
and darkness. He could not define his position. On 
my saying it was negative, he admitted that was so. 
He denies the "high calling;" does not know what to 
hope for; neither does he know his position as touching 
the world, thinking there is probably the same 
hope for it as for us now. I pointed out to him how 
that his philosophy left a vacuum; which he also admitted. 
His chief claim is that none have understood 
or been "begotten of the spirit" since the apostles' 
days, that Bro. R. has made a brave attempt at the 
elucidation of the mystery, but has failed. "Bro. R. 
has done a great work and is now exhausted, nothing 
more need be expected from him." Presumably we 
are to look to Bro. Sheward (seeing he is not exhausted) 
for any further developments of truth(?). 

I should say that Bro. Sheward's theory of a 



spirit-begotten condition is "an ability to ring up Peter, 
for instance, and ask his statement as to an interpretation, 
etc." So we are to come to Spiritism by a 
new route. What assured him chiefly was that all the 
company meeting with him were agreed. As I asked 
for some Scripture for this or that statement, he admitted 
he could not prove, but claimed that I must 
disprove. There was not much opportunity for that, 
he was so busy telling me of his beliefs. Well! I came 
away quite sad, but assured, nothing could be done 
while he was in the same mind. To me it is another 

R2515 : page 208 

case of "the wisdom of this age." What a need for 

those who have responsibilities to guard themselves 

well! I did not seek opportunities of interviewing the 

members of his flock. He invited me to stay over 

Sunday and listen to them when they had a better opportunity 

of telling me, but I declined. 

It seems as if the truth received into any other 
than "good ground" (sincere hearts) creates an insatiable 
desire for new things; and if nothing new be 
forthcoming, something must be invented. 

I will write again shortly after I have given the 
brethren in Liverpool a call. With kindest good wishes 
in the Lord, I am, dear brother, 

Yours in the Lord, JESSE HEMERY,-England. 

page 208 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-Your esteemed favor 
of the 28th was joyfully received, because you say in 
it you expect to be able to send to us again Brother 
Draper about Oct. 1st. I feel especially pleased over 
the prospect, and I have good reasons to believe others 
feel the same. He seems to possess the faculty of 
stirring up, and waking up, those who have the harness 
on, as well as comforting and strengthening those 
that are feeble and halting to press on and entirely 
forsake the old way which in almost every case is more 
or less the way of Babylon. I have great reasons to 
rejoice and be glad and thankful every day for God's 
loving kindness which, when seen in its purity and 
grandeur, more than offsets the tribulations, trials and 
sorrows that surround us on all sides. But it makes 
me greatly ashamed of the complaining spirit that has 
heretofore often possessed me. I greatly desire to be 
separate from every defiling thing and to be clean in 
thought and desire as well as in person; and I freely 
acknowledge that your writings have opened to my 
view the precious, loving character of the Almighty, 
and of our dear Master, as no other light ever did, and 
have greatly encouraged me to accept the invitation 
to freely partake of the bountiful feast of fat things, 
so wonderfully brought to our view by your pen. Oh 



how gladly and thankfully I partake of them, and 

what a longing desire it has created in me to do something 

useful in return for these great benefits! 

I will enclose a small remittance to you, not small 
when compared with my income, but small compared 
to what I would like to make it. Desiring for your 
complete success as heir with Christ to the Kingdom, 
and with Christian love to all the Church, I am, 

Your brother in Him, A. B. PERINE,— Kansas. 

BELOVED BROTHER IN CHRIST:-It is after 11 P.M., 
but I must drop you a note before retiring, in reference 
to the meetings of Brother McPhail, the last one 
of which was held in Philadelphia this evening. To 
say we have been blessed is putting it too mildly. I 
believe we will all be better men and women in the 
Lord for what we have received of our heavenly Father 
through the instrumentality of this dear brother. He 
addressed one meeting Friday, two Saturday, and 
three to-day, and all the meetings were well attended, 
especially to-day's. Friends were here from Wilmington, 
West Chester, Chadd's Ford, Lansdale, Doylestown, 
Newport, Camden and Scranton. 

During the entire series of meetings a beautiful 
spirit of love was in evidence. Everyone seemed to 
enter heartily into the spirit of the discourse, which 
can truly be said to have been in the demonstration of 
the spirit and in power. I believe I can safely say 
that the past three days have been the most momentous 
in the experience of the brethren in this city. 
We feel very thankful, dear Brother, that when Bro. 
McPhail's route was laid out the brethren in Philadelphia 
were remembered. 

The Lord has blest us greatly of late, and I think 
the Philadelphia Church is in an excellent condition 
spiritually— there is love, unity, and peace, as well as 
a deepening confidence in God's ability to make all 
things work together for our good. Excuse the haste 
in which this is written. With Christian love to you, 

Yours, BENJAMIN H. BARTON, -Philadelphia. 



page 209 
