





CAN OUR PLANET SURVIVE?
FRESH WATER

LIFE on earth would be impossible without water, especially fresh water. In fact, the largest component of all living things is water. Lakes, rivers, wetlands, and underground aquifers provide drinking water for humans and animals and allow us to irrigate our crops.



The Threats to Fresh Water

Most of our planet is covered in water. However, according to the World Meteorological Organization, “only 0.5% of water on Earth is usable and available freshwater.” Although this relatively small amount of fresh water should be enough for life on earth, much of it is either becoming polluted or becoming inaccessible as a result of increased demand and climate change. Experts predict that within 30 years, five billion people could have inadequate access to fresh water.



Our Planet​—Designed to Survive

The earth has natural processes that prevent our water supply from disappearing. Also, soil, aquatic life, and even sunlight cooperate to purify our water. Consider some of the evidence that points to our planet as one that is designed to survive.
  It has been shown that soil can efficiently rid water of many contaminants. In wetlands, certain plants have been known to remove nitrogen, phosphorus, and pesticides.

  Scientists have identified physical and biological processes that purify water contaminated with naturally occurring organic waste. The contaminants are diluted in flowing water and broken down by microorganisms.

  Freshwater clams and mussels can extract some potentially harmful chemicals from water in a matter of days​—and perhaps do so even more effectively than water treatment plants can.

  Our planet keeps water trapped in a constant cycle known as the hydrologic system. This cycle, along with other natural processes, prevents water from escaping our atmosphere or otherwise disappearing.
DID YOU KNOW?
Soil​—Nature’s Freshwater Filter
Soil has been shown to remove metals, toxic chemicals, organic waste, and other contaminants from water that flows down through the ground. By the time the water settles in bedrock aquifers, it can even be safe to drink.





Physical Filtering
Sand and rock particles act like a fine sieve, catching some contaminants.
Biological Filtering
Microorganisms living in soil can neutralize substances that would otherwise be toxic to humans. Some bacteria can even break down toxic oils into carbon dioxide and water.
Chemical Filtering
Soils with a slight electric charge can capture toxic chemicals that have the opposite charge. Negatively charged clay particles, for instance, can remove positively charged particles of corrosive ammonium from water.







What Is Being Done





By repairing oil leaks and properly disposing of toxins, we help keep our freshwater sources clean



Experts recommend conserving water whenever possible. To reduce water contamination, they advise repairing any oil leaks in our vehicles and not flushing unused medicines down the toilet or pouring toxins down the drain.
Engineers have come up with impressive methods of modernizing desalination (the removal of salt from salt water). The goal is to increase the amount of accessible fresh water.
But more is needed. Even desalination seems to be unrealistic as a large-scale solution because of its high cost and because it requires excessive amounts of energy. In a 2021 report about water management, a United Nations source stated: “Globally, the current rate of progress needs to be doubled.”



Reasons for Hope​—What the Bible Says

“God . . . draws up the drops of water; they condense into rain from his mist; then the clouds pour it down; they shower down upon mankind.”​—Job 36:26-28.
God created natural cycles to protect earth’s waters.​—Ecclesiastes 1:7.
Consider: If the Creator engineered processes to purify fresh water, might he be able and willing to repair the man-made harm to this vital resource? See the article “God Promises That Our Planet Will Survive,” on page 15.



LEARN MORE





Water has unique properties that make life possible. Watch the video The Wonders of Creation Reveal God’s Glory​—Water on jw.org.


