
Seize Your Opportunities to Spread the Kingdom Message!




 1. What lesson can we learn from David’s example?
1 King David was someone who did not allow his circumstances to paralyze him. For example, David wanted to build a house for Jehovah. When he was prevented from doing so, David adjusted his goals and helped get things ready for Solomon to build the temple. (1 Ki. 8:17-19; 1 Chron. 29:3-9) Instead of dwelling on what he could not do, David focused on what he could do. How can we imitate David’s example as we look for ways to spread the Kingdom message?
 2. What self-examination could we make?
2 Do What You Can: Many have simplified their life in order to enroll as auxiliary or regular pioneers. (Matt. 6:22, ftn.) Could you join them? As you prayerfully examine your circumstances, you may see that “a large door that leads to activity” is open to you. If so, seize that opportunity!—1 Cor. 16:8, 9.
 3. What opportunities to witness can we take advantage of even if our circumstances do not allow us to pioneer?
3 What, though, if your circumstances prevent you from pioneering? Do not overlook other opportunities available to you. For example, if your secular work brings you in contact with nonbelievers, why not seize an appropriate opportunity to witness to them? Or if you are dealing with health problems, can you take advantage of opportunities to witness to your health-care providers? Remember that there is a provision for those who are very limited in their activity because of age or a serious health condition to report field service time in 15-minute increments. When filling out your monthly field service report, be sure to include time spent witnessing informally as well as any literature placements, including individual tracts and Memorial and convention invitations. You may be surprised at how quickly the time from those seemingly small opportunities adds up!
 4. What is your determination?
4 Whatever our personal circumstances, let us seize every opportunity to spread the good news. We will thereby experience the satisfaction of knowing that we are doing all we can for the sake of the Kingdom.—Mark 14:8; Luke 21:2-4.




