What Is Your Goal in Life?
DAY after day Kenichi had but one thought: ‘Find the gold that must be somewhere in these hills.’ For 35 years he made an unrelenting search in the hills outside his Japanese hometown. “I haven’t got time for either a wife or friends,” he would say. He became a lonely man, driven by the search for the elusive gold.
Then at age 65 Kenichi found what he had been seeking. At last the precious gold was his! What was his reaction after reaching a lifetime goal? He reflected: “At first I just wanted to be rich. But now the gold doesn’t really mean very much.”
Perhaps you understand why Kenichi felt this way. True, he was rich. But in the quest he had used up 35 of his best years​—years that he would never see again. This friendless man found that realizing his goal was simply not worth it. Have there been goals in your life that you worked hard to reach, only to find them unsatisfying? After studying the lives of some “who have realized their dreams,” psychologist Daniel Levinson reported that often these “begin to ask, ‘Is this all there is? Was it worth all I had to give up along the way?’”
On the other hand, you may be among those who have seen the futility of pursuing materialistic goals and, as a consequence, are undecided about your own goals. The lack of a clear goal in life can be just as harmful as the pursuit of a futile one. Dr. Bennett Leventhal, a child psychiatrist, believes that the behavioral problems of many affluent youngsters exist because their parents cannot offer them “any goals beyond material success.” The Chicago suburbs, where Dr. Leventhal practices, have one of the highest suicide rates in the United States​—especially among the young. According to an editorial in the respected German newspaper Frankfurter Allgemeine (September 12, 1981), the basic cause for the dramatic increase in drug abuse, delinquency, depression and senseless crime among youths is “an increasing feeling of purposelessness.” Yes, they have no legitimate goal in life.
What Is a Worthwhile Goal?
Just getting their daily bread is the goal of many. A recent survey of 1,000 American teenagers from various races and economic backgrounds found that “getting a job I enjoy” was listed as their chief goal. And yet, as you may realize, often such a goal can be frustrating and unsatisfying. Still, a consuming interest in getting food, clothing and shelter is the only real goal many have.
The greatest Teacher ever to walk on earth pointed to a different goal. He said: “Work, not for the food that perishes, but for the food that remains for life everlasting.” He urged that people elevate their sights and reach out for the provisions that can bring everlasting life. What type of persons would be given such a reward? According to Jesus, it was those upon whom God “has put his seal of approval.” (John 6:27) So working to have God’s approval and thereby receiving everlasting life in happiness was a goal that Jesus set before his disciples.​—2 Peter 3:13.
The Difference a Goal Makes
Jesus’ followers made dramatic changes in their life-style because their hearts became centered on this all-important goal. One of these, the apostle Paul, had evidently been born of wealthy parents in a prestigious Middle Eastern city. He had received a higher education from an esteemed Jewish teacher and judge and was making greater progress at a distinguished career than many of his age. Yet, because he was “pursuing down toward the goal for the prize of the upward call of God,” he considered these things to be “refuse” and devoted his life to doing things having God’s approval. Just as was true of other Christians, Paul’s devotion and singleness of purpose were clearly evident to onlookers.​—Acts 22:1-3; Galatians 1:14; Philippians 3:5-8, 14.
Similar zeal and singleness of purpose is noted today in genuine Christians. After observing a convention of Jehovah’s Witnesses, a Canadian newspaper journalist reported that the key reason for their growth lies “with the incredible sense of commitment and dedication shown by the Witnesses.” Many of these have found genuine happiness by seeking the goal of life rather than other pursuits.
For instance, 19-year-old Mark had reached his goal of being one of the best motorbike racers in the state of California (U.S.A.). “I had reached the point where I won many races. I had fame, all the money I wanted and the love of any girl in town,” said Mark. “But after winning a big race I asked myself, ‘Is this all there is? Here I am at the peak of my life and where is that great sense of accomplishment?’” Others were closely observing his illustrious racing career and were making his life course their goal. “They were trying to get what I had, but the whole thing was ridiculous. I had nothing and here they wanted it!” In time Mark studied the Bible seriously with Jehovah’s Witnesses and saw the value of seeking a worthwhile goal. After becoming one of the Witnesses, he devoted his life to seeking God’s approval and helping others spiritually. Reflecting on his life since then, Mark, now 27 years old, said: “I now found genuine friends and the pleasure of truly helping others spiritually. At last I felt my life was accomplishing something of lasting value to people.”
But to what extent does the quest for a goal affect a Christian’s life? Just how much effort is needed by a Christian to gain such a goal? And in what ways does the quest for the proper goal bring contentment? What preliminary goals must one work for while striving for the ultimate goal of everlasting life? Such questions will be considered in the following article.
[Blurb on page 4]
“I now found genuine friends and the pleasure of truly helping others spiritually. At last I felt my life was accomplishing something of lasting value to people.”​—A 27-year-old former motorbike champion

