VOL. XXXII JUNE 15 No. 12 
A.D. 1911-A.M. 6039 



CONTENTS 

Acceptable to God 179 

"Keep Back Thy Servant From Presumptuous 

Sins" 180 

The Rewards of Sacrifice 180 

Sacrifices Acceptable During the Gospel 

Age Only 181 

The Work of Grace in the Heart 182 

We Must Learn Thoroughly the Lesson 

of Love 182 

"Study to Show Thyself Approved" 183 

Divine Justice and Mercy 185 

A Godly Young King 186 

Deliverance From the Curse 187 

191 1— Conventions Program— 1911 187 

"Love Casteth Out Fear" 188 

Face to Face With Trouble (Poem) 188 

"Christ in You the Hope of Glory" 189 

The Robe of Christ's Righteousness 189 

Questions of Interest 190 

Some Interesting Letters 191 

page 178 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY 
CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
BROOKLYN TABERNACLE, 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N.Y., U.S.A. 

Foreign Agencies:-British Branch: LONDON TABERNACLE, Lancaster 
Gate, W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, Barmen. Australasian 
Branch: Flinders Building, Flinders St., Melbourne. Please address 
the SOCIETY in every case. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. FROM 

FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:— All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the STUDIES, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, AND DANISH EDITIONS. 



SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N.Y., POSTOFFICE 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA 



INTERNATIONAL BIBLE STUDENTS ASSOCIATION MEETINGS 



AT WHICH BROTHER C. T. RUSSELL WILL BE PRINCIPAL SPEAKER 
FRIENDS FROM NEARBY PLACES ARE CORDIALLY INVITED. 



FIVE-DAYS BIBLE STUDENTS CONVENTION 

Oakland, San Rafael and San Francisco brethren extend a 
most cordial invitation to all outside friends to attend the 
5-day joint-local Convention in San Francisco— June 22, 23, 
24, 25 and Oakland June 26. Brother Russell will speak 
twice in San Francisco— June 25— and in Oakland June 26. 
Pilgrim service will be arranged for all days. Opportunity 
for water baptism will be arranged in Oakland June 26. 

Arrangements will be made for visiting friends. Rooms 
may be engaged in advance at 50 cents, 75 cents, $ 1 and up 
per day. Send full data and money as soon as possible to 
"Sec'y Hotel Committee, I.B.S.A.," 2018 Green street, San 
Francisco. Data should show sex, color, those that wish to 
room together or are willing to share room and bed to save 
expense, also rate desired, exact dates, etc., and hour and 
route of expected arrival, if known. Free sleeping accommodations 
will be furnished by local brethren to those that can 
come, but cannot afford room rent; these should also advise 
promptly in advance. Visitors' mail may be sent in care of 
above address. 

Meetings and headquarters for four days in San Francisco 
will be at Lyric Hall, 513 Larkin street, with public lectures 
afternoon and evening of Sunday, June 25, at Dreamland 
Rink. 

Meetings and headquarters in Oakland, June 26, will be at 
corner of Jones street and Telegraph avenue. 

TORONTO, ONT., CONVENTION, JULY 15-17 

All services for the interested in Broadway Hall, 450 
Spadina Ave. On Sunday, July 16th, Brother Russell will 
address the general public at 3 p.m., and again at 7.30 p.m. 
in Massey Hall, corner of Victor and Shuter Sts. 

R4844 : page 178 



A DONATION OF MIRACLE WHEAT 

Brother Bohnet writes us that he has gradually accumulated 
a crop of miracle wheat from the few grains he 
obtained as a start. He prefers that the first opportunity for 
obtaining this wheat shall go to THE WATCH TOWER readers. 
He will sell it for $1 per pound, including postage, and give 
the entire proceeds to our Society. All orders for this wheat 
should be addressed, Miracle Wheat Bohnet, 17 Hicks street, 
Brooklyn, N. Y. This will keep mail on this subject separate 
from his personal mail and from ours. 

Brother Bohnet promises to be ready to ship this wheat 
by August 1. He says miracle wheat should be sowed one-fourth 
as thick as common wheat. Ordinarily it should produce 
from ten to fifteen times as much proportionately to the 
amount sown. To save keeping account, money should 
accompany the order. WATCH TOWER readers will have the 
preference up to August 15, after which orders will be attended 
to indiscriminately, so long as the supply holds out. 
This wheat should be sown in the fall. 

page 178 



BROOKLYN BETHEL HYMNS FOR JULY 

After the close of the hymn the Bethel family listens 
to the reading of "My Vow Unto the Lord," then joins 
in prayer. At the breakfast table the MANNA text is 
considered. Hymns for July follow: (1) 32; (2) 
24; (3) 95; (4) 176; (5) 130; (6) 105; (7) 57; (8) 
182; (9) 260; (10) Vow; (11) 281; (12) 129; (13) 
135; (14) 110; (15) 229; (16) 330; (17) 315; (18) 324; 
(19) 145; (20) 9; (21) 46; (22) 78; (23) 65; (24) 3; 
(25) 279; (26) 193; (27) 131; (28) 249; (29) 259; 
(30) 322; (31) 217. 



R4834 : page 179 

ACCEPTABLE TO GOD 

"Let the words of my mouth and the meditation of my heart, 
be acceptable in Thy sight, O Lord, my strength and my 
Redeemer."— Psa. 19:14. 

HOW BEAUTIFUL in the sight of right 

thinking men is a well-balanced, self-possessed 

and disciplined character! And 

in contrast with such, how unlovely are the 

undisciplined and ungoverned— the selfish, 

the unjust, the unkind and the violent-tempered! 

Naturally, the one awakens in 

us emotions of pleasure and admiration, 



and the other, of pain. And if such is the 
appreciation of virtue and the abhorrence 
of the lack of it among men who have lost much of the 
original image of God, with what a keen appreciation 
must they be observed by a pure and holy God! 

Men of the world who have no personal acquaintance 
with God have no special thought as to how they appear 
in His sight; but with what carefulness should those who 
love Him and who value His approval study to conform 
their conduct to His pure and holy mind! True, all who 
are "begotten again," notwithstanding their imperfections 
and shortcomings through inherited weaknesses, are 
acceptable to God through Christ, whose robe of righteousness 
amply covers them; but the measure of their 
acceptableness to God, even through Christ, is only to the 
extent that, while availing ourselves of His imputed 
righteousness, they are earnestly striving to attain actually 
to the standard of perfection. By so doing they manifest 
their real appreciation of the Divine favor. 

With what confusion and chagrin would one be 
covered who, in the midst of a fit of violent temper or an 
unjust or mean transaction, unworthy of his dignity or 
his profession, should be suddenly surprised by the appearance 
of a beloved friend of high and noble character! 
And yet, the eye of such a One is ever upon us. And only 
to the extent that we dismiss this thought from our minds, 
or else that we undervalue the Lord's opinion and approval, 
can we allow the evil propensities of the fallen 
nature to run riot. 

"WHEREWITHAL SHALL A YOUNG MAN CLEANSE HIS 
WAY" 

Realizing the downward tendency of the old nature, 
how constantly should the above prayer of the Psalmist 
be in the minds of God's consecrated children! But how, 
one inquires, may the difficult task of subduing the inherent 
depravity be accomplished? It is hard for one, 
particularly under exasperating circumstances, to control 
a hasty or violent temper, for another to bridle a gossiping 
tongue; and especially if the trials of life to some 
extent put their colored glasses on the eyes. And then 
what a host of inherent weaknesses there are, which 
every one of God's true children realizes and knows that 
he must strive against, if he would be acceptable with 
God! The thoughts of our hearts are not manifest to 
fellow-men until we express them in words or actions; 
but even the very thoughts and intents of the heart are 
all open and manifest to God. What a comfort to the 
honest-hearted! 

The Psalmist repeats this inquiry, saying, "Wherewithal 
shall a young man cleanse his way?" and then 
replies, "By taking heed thereto, according to Thy Word." 
Then he frames for us this resolution: "I will meditate 
on Thy precepts and have respect unto Thy ways; I will 
delight myself in Thy statutes; I will not forget Thy 



Word." (Psa. 1 19:9,15,16.) Here is the secret of a 

pure and noble life, acceptable to God. It is to be attained, 

not merely by prayers and righteous resolutions, 

but, in addition to these, by careful painstaking heed, by 

systematic and diligent effort at self-cultivation, by care 

and perseverance in weeding out evil thoughts, and 

by diligent and constant cultivation of pure, benevolent 

and noble thoughts, and by nipping in the bud the weeds 

of perversity before they bring forth their hasty harvest 

of sinful words and deeds. 

But observe, further, that this heed or care is to be 
taken, not according to the imperfect standard of our 
own judgment, but according to God's Word. The 
standard by which we test our lives makes a vast difference 
in our conclusions. 

The Psalmist further commends this standard to us, 
saying: "The Law of the Lord is perfect, converting the 
soul. [That is, if we take heed to our ways according to 
God's Law, it will turn us completely from the path of sin 
to the path of righteousness.] The testimony [the instruction] 
of the Lord is sure, making wise the simple 
[the meek, teachable ones— clearly pointing out to them 
the ways of righteousness]. The statutes [the decrees, 
ordinances and precepts] of the Lord are right [the infallible 
rules of righteousness], rejoicing the heart [of 
the obedient]. The commandment of the Lord is pure, 
enlightening the eyes. The fear of the Lord is clean 
[not a mental, servile fear, but a noble fear, begotten of 
love— a fear of falling short of His righteous approval], 
enduring forever. More to be desired are they [the Law 
and the testimony of the Lord] than gold; yea, than 

R4835 : page 180 

much fine gold; sweeter also than honey and the 
honeycomb. 

"KEEP BACK THY SERVANT FROM PRESUMPTUOUS SINS" 

"Moreover, by them is thy servant warned [concerning 
the dangers of the way and the snares of the Adversary, 
and concerning everything which is calculated 
to discourage, or to hinder his growth in grace], and in 
keeping of them there is great reward. Who [in the use 
merely of his own fallible judgment and without the 
standard of God's Law] can understand his errors [can 
rightly judge himself]?" 

But when, as we measure ourselves by this standard, 
we detect and deplore our shortcomings, let us remember 
the Psalmist's prayer: "Cleanse thou me from secret 
faults"— thus supplementing our efforts by our prayers. 
-Psa. 19:7-12. 

But there is still another part of this prayer which the 
Lord thus puts into our mouths. It reads: "Keep back 
thy servant also from presumptuous sins; let them not 
have dominion over me; then shall I be upright, and I 



shall be innocent from the great transgression." Let us 
consider what kind of sins would be presumptuous sins. 
To presume signifies to take for granted without authority 
or proof. A presumptuous sin would, therefore, be taking 
for granted and asserting as truth something which God 
has not revealed, or the perversion of what He has revealed. 
To claim and hold tenaciously as a part of God's 
Plan any doctrine, merely on the ground of fallible human 
reason and without Divine authority, would therefore be 
a presumptuous sin. 

Of this nature is the sin of those who malign the 
Divine character by boldly teaching the blasphemous 
doctrine of eternal torment without warrant from the 
Scriptures, and in direct contradiction of them. And 
there are many other sins of greater and less degree 
which partake of the same character. But the words here 
seem to refer directly to some particular error into which 
there is danger of drifting— "Then shall I be innocent 
from the great transgression"— evidently, the sin unto 
death referred to by the Apostles also. (I John 5:16; 
Heb. 6:4-6; 10:26-31.) Such a sin would be that of 
presuming upon the love of God to bring us salvation, 
even though we should wilfully refuse it through the 
channel which He has appointed— the precious blood of 
Christ, shed for our redemption. 

"BLESSED IS THE MAN WHOSE DELIGHT IS IN THE LAW 
OF THE LORD" 

Well, indeed, may we pray and strive to be kept back 
from presumptuous sins— sins of pride or of arrogant 
self-will which does not meekly submit to the will of 
God! Let us, beloved, beware of the slightest tendency 
toward pride and self-will, or the disposition to be wise 
above what is written, or to take for granted what God 
does not clearly promise. "Then," indeed, if we watch 
and strive against the very beginning of that proud and 
haughty spirit which surely presages a fall, we shall be 
"innocent from the great transgression." 

"Blessed is the man whose delight is in the Law of the 
Lord, and who doth meditate therein day and night. He 
shall be like a tree planted by the rivers of water, that 
bringeth forth his fruit in his season; his leaf also shall 
not wither, and whatsoever he doeth shall prosper." (Psa. 1:1-3.) 
If we make the Word of God the theme of our 
constant meditation, its principles will soon be assimilated 
and become part of our mental makeup, making our 
characters more beautiful and commendable both to God 
and to our fellowmen; and in harmony with this habit of 
the mind the acts of life will speak. 

The purified fountain will send forth sweeter waters 
than formerly, bearing refreshment and good cheer to all 
who come in contact with it. It will make happier homes 
—better husbands, better wives and better children. It 
will sweeten the temper, soften the voice, dignify the 
language, cultivate the manners, ennoble the sentiments 



and lend its charming grace to every simple duty. It will 
bring in the principle of love and cast out the discordant 
elements of selfishness. Thus it will make the home the 
very garden-spot of earth, where every virtue and every 
grace will have ample room to expand and grow. 

It will not only thus favorably affect the individual 
and the home-life, but it will go out into the avenues of 
trade, and truth and fair-dealing will characterize all the 
business relations; and thus will God be honored by those 
who bear His name and wear the impress of His blessed 
Spirit. 

While the heights of perfection cannot be reached so 
long as we still have these imperfect bodies, there should 
be in every child of God very perceptible and continuous 
growth in grace, and each step gained should be considered 
but the stepping-stone to higher attainments. If 
there is no perceptible growth into the likeness of God, 
or if there is a backward tendency, or a listless standstill, 
there is cause for alarm. 

Let us constantly keep before our eyes the model 
which the Lord Jesus set for our example— that model of 
the complete fulfilment of the will of God, in which the 
whole Law was kept blamelessly. Let us follow His steps 
of righteousness and self-sacrifice as nearly as a full 
measure of loving zeal and faithfulness and loyalty to 
God will enable us to do, and we shall have a blessed sense 
of the Divine approval now, and the glorious reward of 
Divine favor in due time. 



R4835 : page 180 

THE REWARDS OF SACRIFICE 

"I beseech you, therefore, brethren, by the mercies of God, that 
ye present your bodies a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto 
God, which is your reasonable service."— Rom. 12:1. 

NOWHERE IN THE SCRIPTURES are we 
commanded by the Lord to sacrifice our 
earthly rights and privileges. The Divine 
commands end at the line of justice. In 
other words, justice and righteousness are 
one and the same thing. Sacrifice, self-denial, 
taking up the cross to follow Jesus, 
are all propositions away beyond the Divine 
Law. The Law Covenant proffered a 
perpetuation of human life to all who would 
fulfil its requirements. None of the Jews, with whom 
that Covenant was made, were able to fulfil those requirements, 
except the One who came from above and 
for whom was provided a perfect human body, which 
enabled Him to keep the requirements of the Law Covenant, 
entitling Him, therefore, to everlasting earthly life. 
The New Law Covenant, under the antitypical Mediator, 



will offer the same reward of everlasting human 

perfection to all who will fulfil its requirements. Its 

superiority over the first Law Covenant will consist in its 

having a better Mediator, capable of helping mankind 

fully out of condemnation, death and weakness and authorized 

so to do because of the merit of His "better 

sacrifices." 

R4835 :page 181 

But while Jesus, born under the Law, was obligated 
to the conditions of that Covenant and fulfilled them and 
through them had a right to everlasting earthly life, He 
did more. He sacrificed that earthly life— laid it down- 
permitted sinful men to take it from Him without resistance, 
although He had the power to call for legions of 
angels for protection. This was His sacrifice. He did 
not sacrifice sinful weaknesses, for He had none. He 
sacrificed perfect life and all His legal rights and privileges. 
His reward for so doing was exaltation from the 
human nature to the divine nature— far above that of angels, 
principalities and powers. (Eph. 1:21.) Thus exalted 
He has the human rights (which He never forfeited) 
to give Adam and his race— their ransom-price. 
These He will give to them in the end of this Age, applying 
them to the sealing of the New Law Covenant, under 
which Israel and all mankind may be restored to all that 
was lost through the first man's disobedience. Meantime, 
the glorified Redeemer uses that sacrificial merit (which 
He intends to give eventually to the world) to cover (imputatively) 
the blemishes of those of the household of faith 
who may hear the Divine call (and accept the same) to 
follow in the footsteps of Jesus— to sacrifice and suffer 
with Him in the flesh, that they may be glorified and 
reign with Him on the spirit plane beyond the veil. 

SIN-OFFERING SACRIFICES ACCEPTABLE DURING THE 
GOSPEL AGE ONLY 

Throughout this Gospel Age the Law Covenant has 
continued upon the Jews only, the remainder of the world 
being without any Covenant with God and waiting for 
the "times of restitution" under the New Law Covenant 
of the future. (Acts 3:19-21; Jer. 31:31-34.) It is during 
this time (the Gospel Age) that God draws and calls 
a certain loyal class and gives them an opportunity of 
sharing with their Redeemer in sacrificial death. The 
faithful will be counted His members or His Bride or 
joint-heirs in His Kingdom of glory and honor and 
immortality. All men, in proportion as they know the 
Divine will (what is just, from the Divine standpoint), 
are correspondingly in duty bound to fulfil that righteous 
requirement or Law of God to the extent of ability. But 

R4836 :page 181 



those desirous of following in the footsteps of Jesus are 

shown what they can do more than justice; but they are 

not commanded to do more. All sacrificing is a privilege, 

not a duty, not a command. In harmony with this, St. 

Paul writes, not commandingly, but entreatingly, "I beseech 

you, brethren, ...present your bodies living sacrifices." 

He did not command this. To have made it a 

command would at once prevent the opportunity of sacrifice. 

What we sacrifice is something that is not commanded. 

Whatever is commanded of God is obligation 

and not sacrifice. 

The Ancient Worthies presented their bodies, laid 
down their lives, renouncing earthly rights, but they did 
not sacrifice. Why? Because it is one thing to kill and 
another to have the slain creature accepted of God as a 
sacrifice. God did not call for human sacrifices prior to 
Jesus' sacrifice of Himself. God was unwilling to accept 
imperfect, blemished creatures at His altar. They might 
lay down their lives, but He would not count them sacrifices. 
Jesus was accepted as a sacrifice because He 
was perfect and His followers, since Pentecost, have been 
acceptable as sacrifices, because they are perfect— made 
so by the Redeemer's imputation to them of a sufficiency 
of His merit to compensate their blemishes. 

Thus this Gospel Age is called the "acceptable day 
(or time) of the Lord," because, during this Gospel Age 
God is willing to accept a predestinated number as joint-sacrificers 
with Jesus. But as soon as that predestinated 
number shall have been completed the acceptable time 
will immediately end. No more presentations will be accepted 
as sacrifices— the antitypical Day of Atonement 
will have ended. 

But suppose that some should present themselves after 
the close of the acceptable time; what would be their 
status and God's dealing with them? 

Since God is unchangeable, we must assume that He 
would always be pleased to have His creatures devote 
their lives wholly and unreservedly to the doing of His 
will, as He was pleased with the faithfulness of the Ancient 
Worthies to lay down their lives before a Covenant 
of sacrifice was in force. We may reason that as God has 
promised human perfection to those Ancient Worthies 
who laid down their lives, He would be willing similarly 
to reward any who might follow the same course after 
the completion of the Church— after the ending of the 
acceptable time of sacrifice. 

Quite likely, therefore, there will be some in the end 
of this Age who, although faithful unto death, will not 
have been begotten of the Holy Spirit and not attain the 
spirit plane of being in the resurrection, but who will 
come forth members of the same class as the Ancient 
Worthies, who were developed before this Age began. 

THE PRESENTATION OF ONESELF ALWAYS A REASONABLE 
SERVICE 



In view of these facts our advice to all who love the 
Lord and who desire to be in complete fellowship with 
Him is the same message that has gone forth throughout 
this Age— "We beseech you, brethren, by the mercies of 
God, present your bodies living sacrifices." We cannot 
now assure them that, after presenting themselves as sacrifices, 
God will accept them as such and grant them 
spirit-begetting to a new nature; but we can assure them 
that it will be their reasonable service and that God always 
gives large rewards to those who manifest their 
faith and loyalty towards Him and His cause. We can 
tell them, too, that, to our understanding, the Scriptures 
teach that the Ancient Worthy class (of which they may 
be a part if they fail to be accepted to the new nature) 
will be highly honored of God, perfect on the human 
plane and made "princes in all the earth." We can assure 
them that, to our understanding, these princes will 
have a glorious precedence over the remainder of mankind 
as the special representatives of the invisible Messiah 
class for a thousand years. We can assure them 
that, to our understanding, after participating in that glorious 
work, these princes will be uplifted at the close of 
the Millennium to the spirit plane of being— as part of 
the an ti typical Levites. 

Since none can know when the elect number will be 
fully completed all should be alike anxious to lay down 
their lives in the service of God and of His Truth. To 
say that we would refuse to serve because any uncertainty 
would prevail in our minds respecting the character 
of our reward would be to show our unworthiness of 
any favor of God, for, to be acceptable to Him, our service 
must not be rendered to obtain the reward, but to 
serve righteousness and to please God! "I delight to do 
Thy will, O God"— everything written in the Book. 
Hence at Memorial season all of the consecrated should 
manifest their love, loyalty, obedience, faithfulness, by 
symbolizing the Redeemer's death and symbolizing also 
their own desire to share in the sufferings of Christ as 
parts of the "broken loaf" and as participators in the cup 
of His suffering. 

As to how much we should expect for our children is 

R4836 : page 182 

another matter. It is not for us to say at how early an 

age the children might demonstrate loyalty to God and to 

the Truth in a manner pleasing and acceptable to God. 

Those who are parents should, in all reasonable ways, by 

example and precept, illustrate and exemplify their appreciation 

of the privilege of the Lord's service— even 

unto death. Furthermore, their children should be instructed 

weekly and, if possible, daily, in respect to the 

different features of the Truth, that they may receive as 

much as possible. God knows whether a child of 

even tender years and short mental and heart development 

might not present himself in an acceptable manner. 



Parents, therefore, should do their best by their children 
and leave the results with the Lord, with full satisfaction 
with whatever may be His wise, just and loving decision 
for them, either on the earthly or on the heavenly plane. 
We are to remember, however, that none can enter either 
of these planes of instantaneous perfection in the resurrection 
unless his trial be finished successfully in the present 
life and by passing into death. The remainder of 
mankind, however, as already shown, will then have 
glorious opportunities and possibilities before them. 



R4836 : page 182 

THE WORK OF GRACE IN THE HEART 

"The love of Christ constraineth us."— 2 Cor. 5:14. 

THE WORD constrain has the double thought 
of drawing together, holding together. 
The Apostle had been recounting his own 
activities in the Lord's service, and had 
stated that with some his course seemed to 
indicate an unbalanced mind. He explained 
that this was not so; that he had 
a sounder mind than ever before. He felt 
himself bound to Christ, constrained by 
love of Christ to love Him and all who 
were His with a pure heart. 

Why should this love constrain? For this reason: If 
we reckon that all are dead, then all need the service 
of the Life-Giver; and if Christ died for all, and if we 
now have come to life through Him, we should hereafter 
live not according to, or after, the flesh. We should 
give up the flesh entirely and live the new life which 
we have received from Christ. St. Paul would say, 
I am not mad; but I am so closely drawn to Christ 
that I have the same sympathetic love for others that 
He had. As He had laid down His life for the brethren, 
so would I. 

Our Lord's love was specially manifested toward His 
disciples, and chiefly toward those who were the most 
zealous and energetic— Peter, James and John having 
the particular love of the Lord. Similarly the Church is 
thus instructed. There is no exhortation to lay down 
our lives in the service of the world, but specially for 
those of the household of faith. We see that the benefits 
of Christ's sacrifice are to reach the whole world of 
mankind, every member of Adam's race. 

Assuming, however, that the Lord knew from the 
very beginning who would betray Him, and that Divine 
discernment would know all who would go into the Second 
Death, we could not think that the Lord would do 
anything on their behalf. In other words, the blessing 
of God is only for the "Israelites indeed." Only those 



who will come into harmony with Him will have the rich 

blessing and favor of the Lord. These are included in 

the redemptive work, not because of anything in themselves, 

but because of the love of the Lord, which is 

broad enough and deep enough for all who will receive 

it. But God cannot love wicked characters. His blessings 

are only for those who are His children now, or 

who will be, under the blessings and privileges which 

He later on will grant. It is our duty to bless all to the 

extent of our ability. 

THE CHIEF OBJECT OF OUR TRAINING THE DEVELOPMENT 
OF LOVE 

The work of grace for the Church during this Gospel 
Age is the transforming of our perverted characters and 
the re-establishing of them in the likeness of the Divine 
character, Love. Whoever fails to attain this transformation 

R4837 : page 182 

fails to attain God's will concerning him, and 

must, necessarily, fail to win the prize set before us 

in the Gospel. We are, to begin with, very poor material 

out of which to form likenesses of God's dear Son. 

We were "children of wrath, even as others." (Eph. 2:3.) 

The original likeness of God, possessed by Father Adam 

before he transgressed, has been sadly lost in the six 

thousand years intervening. Hence, instead of finding 

ourselves in the Divine likeness of love, we find that we 

were "born in sin and shapen in iniquity" to such a degree 

that instead of love being the natural, ruling principle 

in our characters, it is in many instances almost 

entirely obliterated; and what remains is largely contaminated 

with evil, self-love and carnal love— perversions 

which are in direct antagonism with the wholly unselfish 

love which is the essence of the Divine character. 

"This is life eternal, that they might know Thee, the 
only true God"— the God who is Love. (John 17:3.) To 
know God means more than to know something of His 
loving Plan and character; it means to know God in 
the sense of personal acquaintance and intelligent appreciation 
of His character; and no one can have this except 
as he partakes of the Spirit of God, the spirit of 
holiness, the spirit of love. And this spirit of holiness 
and love cannot be acquired instantly; it is a growth; 
and its development is the chief business (and should be 
the chief concern) of all who hope to know God in the 
complete sense which will be rewarded with life eternal. 

But since our transformation of mind or will is not 
accompanied by a physical transformation, or restitution, 
it follows that so long as we are in the flesh we shall 
have to contend against its inherited weaknesses and 
disposition to selfishness and sin. But this sharp and 
continual conflict not only selects a special, overcoming 
class, but serves to develop the desired character more 



quickly than will the more easy processes of the Millennial 
Age. In consequence, while it will require nearly 
a thousand years for the world's perfecting, the perfecting 
of the saints in character may be accomplished 
in a few years, under the special training of sharp 
discipline and the special course of instruction designed 
for the "little flock." But whether in a few years or 
many years, and whether with little or much friction with 
adversity, the transformation and polishing of character 
must be accomplished. This love-likeness of our wills 
to the will of God is the end to be sought, if we would 
finish our course with joy and with good hopes for the 
eternal glory. 

WE MUST LEARN THOROUGHLY THE LESSON OF LOVE 

If we possess the love of God in our hearts it will 
rule all the affairs of our lives and will make us God-like 
in thoughts, actions and words. In the School of 
Christ, the great lesson which the Master is teaching us 

R4837 : page 183 

day by day is the lesson of love, which we must learn 
thoroughly if we would attain "the mark for the prize 
of our high calling." 

In the School of Christ, all the instructions of the 
Divine Word and providences are intended to develop 
our hearts and influence our conduct in harmony with 
the lines of love. While the fruits and graces— meekness, 
gentleness, patience, etc.— are manifestations of the 
Spirit, yet the Holy Spirit must be present before these 
manifestations could appear at all; and while the spirit 
might be perfect, its manifestations might be imperfect. 
The vine may be good, but for a season the grapes will 
be immature. So with these graces of the Spirit. They 
are outward manifestations of the inward condition of 
the heart, which may attain perfection before these 
graces are perfect. Indeed, these graces may never be 
perfect on this side of the veil. 

At the moment of making consecration, before we 
had borne any fruits of the Spirit, we were not at the 
mark of perfect love. We were consecrated and had the 
right spirit, so far as we had knowledge. But we had 
not a sufficiency of knowledge to recognize what would 
be expected of us. For this we needed some development, 
some instruction in the School of Christ. The 
knowledge of what it would cost to follow Christ came 
gradually. If the will kept up with the knowledge, one 
would reach the mark of perfect love in the heart. The 
manifestations of the graces of character which this 
condition of heart produces may never be fully perfect 
in the present life, but only when we have the perfect 
bodies. The heart which shall have reached this condition 
will be in perfect tune with the conditions which 
will obtain on the other side. 



"BY THEIR FRUITS SHALL YE KNOW THEM"; YET 
PERFECTION IN THE FLESH IS IMPOSSIBLE 

We must recognize each other, in the good professions 
which we make to each other and in the evidences 
of these professions which are manifest. As a gardener 
might go to his vine and look through the different 
branches for grapes, so the Lord knows whether the 
heart is in the proper attitude to bring forth fruit. Of 
those who have openly professed a thorough consecration 
to the Lord, all those whose lives do not contradict 
their profession, and who are walking, not after the 
flesh, but after the Spirit, may be known and recognized 
by us in the same way by which they will recognize us. 
"By their fruits we shall know them"— by the outward 
obedience, but not by the full fruit-development. We 
know each other, therefore, not by the full development 
of the fruits, but by the measure of the obedience and 
striving to obey the Lord. 

Absolute perfection would mean perfection of 
thought, word and deed, which is not our condition at 
the present time. The most that any of us can have 
now is perfection of love in our hearts; that is, a perfect 
love for God, for the Truth and for the brethren. Perfect 
love leads to sacrifice. "If ye love Me, keep My commandments. 
(John 14:15.) Those who have perfect 
love will fulfil their sacrifices. But at any time one may 
pass from the stage of perfect love to that of alienation 
and opposition. The person might come into such a condition 
of heart that the fervency of his love would become 
cool. Gradually he would become estranged from 
the Lord, and might become identified with the "great 
company" class. Then, if the chastisements of the Time 
of Trouble did not lead to a thorough reformation, he 
would pass on to the Second Death. 

After Love's provision of the Lamb of God (the Ransom-price 
for all mankind laid down by Him, and the imputation 
of His merit to the Church, all the various 
steps for our deliverance from sin are along the line of 
developing us in the character of love, the character of 
God, which alone, according to the Divine standard, 
will make us acceptable before the Father and bring to 
us His grace of everlasting life. How important, then, 
that we should be "taught of God" and develop this 
character! 

The work of grace for the world, during the Millennial 
Age, will be to make known to all mankind the 
gracious character of God and His provision for the salvation 
of all; and to transform all who are willing, from 
the depravity of sin to perfection of character- 
Love; making mankind once more images of God. This 
transformation of their wills, accompanied by a gradual 
physical transformation, will remove from them all the 
blemishes of sin and all hereditary inclinations thereto 
and leave them in the likeness of God, with a recollection 



of the undesirability of sin and its evil consequences. 



R4838 : page 183 

"STUDY TO SHOW THYSELF APPROVED" 

"Study to show thyself approved unto God, a workman that 
needeth not to be ashamed, rightly dividing the Word of Truth. 
-2 Tim. 2:15. 

THIS TEXT does not say, "Study the Scriptures," 

but "Study to show thyself approved" 

—study to know what God would 

approve. And yet it means, first of all, to 

study the Revelation He has made. Then, 

after having come to some knowledge of 

the Scriptures, we must meditate upon them 

and consider how the Word is applicable to 

all of life's affairs. Thus we would study 

the nature of everything that we come in 

contact with, as to whether it is good or evil. The word 

"study" here is used with very much the same thought as 

when the Apostle says, "Study to be quiet." 

Evidently the central thought of this expression is 
the approving of ourselves to God, not to men. It is 
proper enough that we should have the approval of all 
good men and good women. But our study, primarily, 
should not be along this line. First, we should study to 
please God— to be approved of God. We notice that there 
is a contemplative study, such as David speaks of when 
he says, "I meditate upon thy Law day and night"— to 
see how that Law would work out its height and depth, its 
length and breadth of influence upon himself. And so the 
Apostle's thought here is that it should be our chief aim 
to please God. 

"Rightly dividing the Word of Truth" would signify 
the proper application of the Word of Truth; the understanding 
of how and when and where it should be applied 
and what was the purpose and thought and Plan of the 
Divine Mind in the giving of this Word of Truth, the 
Word of God's Message. Up to the advent of our Lord, 
God's Message had been given chiefly through the Old 
Testament Scriptures. Then God's Message was attested 
by Him who came from heaven. Additionally, our Lord 
left twelve chosen Apostles to be His special mouthpieces, 
to increase the Word of Truth, to increase the Word of 
knowledge, to increase the Word of explanation of the 
Divine Plan. Everything, therefore, that Timothy could 

R4838 : page 184 

recognize as being the Lord's Message he was to give 
heed to. For instance, one part of God's Message applies 
to the past, a part applies only to the Jews, still another 



part applies to Christians in the present life, and yet another 
part to their future hopes. 

WE SHOULD HAVE CLEARER LIGHT THAN HAD OUR 
FOREFATHERS 

And so, as we get the matter rightly divided before 
our minds, we get the true understanding, the special enlightenment 
needed in our day, and we are enabled to 
rightly divide the Word better than did our fathers, so 
that today we can see, as our fathers did not see, the 
teaching of God's Word respecting the "high calling" 
and "restitution"— the spiritual portion of blessing for 
the Church and the human portion of blessing for the 
world. We also see something about the times and seasons 
—which apply to the Church and which to the blessing 
of the world. 

Thus, in our Day, to rightly divide the Word of Truth 
necessitates the taking cognizance of everything that 
seems to be of the Lord and that throws any light upon 
the Word, and thus we may be able to "rightly divide" it. 
We must always bear in mind that in the Scriptures of 
the Old Testament "holy men of God spake as they were 
moved by the Holy Spirit," and that the Lord also said 
of the Apostles: "Whatsoever ye shall bind on earth shall 
be bound in heaven, and whatsoever ye shall loose on 
earth shall be loosed in heaven." 

We are not to forget that the Lord promised that He 
would guide His people in the way of the Truth and show 
them things to come. We are to "study" to show ourselves 
approved— study the doctrine and endeavor to have 
our course of conduct harmonize with it— study to perform 
faithfully the duties of a loyal soldier of the cross 
of Christ. 

The Christian soldier must study to perform even the 
smallest duty in a manner creditable to his calling; he 
must not permit himself to become entangled with other 
things which do not relate to his duties as a soldier and 
thus be side-tracked. The Christian soldier who turns 
aside to seek some personal, temporal advantage to the 
detriment of his duties as a soldier is to that extent an 
unfaithful soldier and likely to be drawn out of the ranks 
entirely. 

R4839 : page 184 

"Study to show thyself approved." Study the Word; 
study yourself, that you may become well acquainted with 
yourself; that you may know your talents for service- 
in what direction they lie, and what are your weak points 
and how they may be guarded against— that you may 
know both your abilities and your shortcomings. Then 
study to avoid error and to shun all foolish questions and 
profane and vain babblings. Remember that only "the 
foundation of God standeth sure"; that all other foundations 
are worthless and that all other theories must come 



to naught. But "The foundation of God standeth sure, 
having this seal, "The Lord knoweth them that are His." 
And let every one that nameth the name of Christ depart 
from iniquity."— 2 Tim. 2:19. 

WE SHOULD STUDY TO MAKE OUR IMPUTED RIGHTEOUSNESS 
MORE AND MORE ACTUAL 

There is much significance in the word "study" and it 
is important to note that this Divine injunction is given 
to the Church, to those who are believers in Christ and 
who have consecrated their lives to His service. Having 
been reckonedly cleansed from sin, we are to give all 
diligence to the work of studying to make this reckoned 
cleansing, this imputed righteousness, an actual thing, to 
the extent of our ability. It is purely of Divine grace 
that we are reckoned righteous before we are actually so. 
Looking at our hearts and seeing in them, not only our 
good and honest intentions, but also our desire for righteousness 
and our efforts to become righteous in the way 
He would approve, God accepts the will for the deed. 
Accordingly, He counts us as righteous now and treats us 
as His children, since we have been redeemed from the 
curse and have accepted His gracious provision for 
reconciliation. 

LET US STUDY TO SEE THAT OUR LIVES ARE AN HONOR 
TO THE CAUSE WE ESPOUSE 

Let us, then, study our hearts to see that we are striving 
daily to cast out all the old leaven of sin; to be sure 
that we are not content to allow it to remain in us and 
work in us; otherwise we prove by our course that our 
love for righteousness is growing weaker. Happy are 
those who find that they are not merely working down 
the leavened mass occasionally and allowing it again and 
again to ferment, but are casting it out, by constantly 
resisting sin, by cleansing their thoughts, words and deeds 
with the Truth and cultivating the blessed "fruits of the 
Spirit"— love, joy, peace, etc. 

Only the studious find the way to Divine approval and 
acceptance. Let us study to see that our lives are an 
honor to the cause we have espoused; that we abstain 
from even the appearance of evil; that we are circumspect 
in all our conversation, in our conduct— watching 
our thoughts, our lips, our lives. Let us study to be 
diligent in every duty, performing it with a ready mind 
and with joy and gladness of heart. Let us never lose 
sight of the fact that we are soldiers, and that as true 
soldiers we are to learn to "endure hardness." 

A soldier has many trivial duties to perform and he is 
as really doing his duty as a soldier when he is polishing 
his armor, foraging, cooking his meals, cleaning camp or 
building bridges for the army to pass over, as when he is 
fighting the enemy. Such things are incidental work, but 
are necessary and entirely consistent with his commission 



as a soldier and should not be regarded as entanglements 
and hindrances. These duties cannot be disregarded nor 
carelessly done without a measure of unfaithfulness. 

WHATEVER OUR CAPTAIN HAS RECOGNIZED AND APPROVED 
IS PROPER FOR US 

So with the Christian soldier. The routine of life- 
housework, shop work, daily toil, anything, everything, 
incidental to a proper and honest provision of "things 
needful" for ourselves and those dependent upon us for 
support, as well as for provision for the prosecution and 
care of the Lord's work— all this is a proper part of our 
engagement as soldiers of the Lord. 

The Apostle Peter was as truly serving the Lord when 
catching the fish from whose mouth he got the coin with 
which to pay his Master's taxes and his own, as when 
proclaiming, on the day of Pentecost, the "raising up" and 
ascension of the Lord. The Apostle Paul was as truly a 
soldier of the cross and doing his proper work as such 
when making tents (rather than be chargeable to any) 
as when at Mars Hill he preached Jesus and the resurrection. 
Whatever is done with a view to the glory and 
honor of our Lord, the Captain of our salvation, or for 
the benefit of any of our fellow-soldiers, or for our own 
preparation for this warfare, or in the discharge of obligations 
which our Captain has recognized and approved, 
is proper work for us as soldiers and is not entanglement 
in the affairs of this life. 



R4839 : page 185 

DIVINE JUSTICE AND MERCY 

-JULY 16.-2 CHRON. 33:1-20.- 

"Cease to do evil; learn to do well."— Isa. 1:16,17. 

MANASSEH, the central figure of this study, 

was the son of the good King Hezekiah. 

Manasseh succeeded to the throne of 

Judah in his twelfth year— the bad son 

of a good father. This matter of good 

fathers and evil sons, and evil fathers and 

good sons was probably due, frequently, to 

the good or evil character of the mothers, 

as well as to the fact that the king, occupied 

with the affairs of state, could not give 

proper attention to the cultivation of his own children. 

Doubtless, there are exceptions to every rule, but it is 

impossible to avoid a certain amount of reflection against 

the parents in respect to every scape-grace child. 

HOW FEW RECOGNIZE THE SACREDNESS OF PARENTAL 



RESPONSIBILITIES 

Parentage is undoubtedly the highest and most important 
function of human life. Yet how few realize 
the sacredness of parental responsibilities! The Prophet 
inquires, "Who can bring a clean thing out of an unclean?" 
While admitting the inference that none of our 
race can possibly be perfect, we must admit also that in 
the parents reside great possibilities respecting the good 
or evil of their children. This responsibility should be 
felt in mating— before marriage. We are not urging 
that marriage should be put upon the same plane as 
stock breeding, and the finer sentiments disregarded; but 
we do claim that the spirit of a sound mind should be 
sought in connection with the most important contract 
of life, affecting not only the destiny and happiness of 
the pair, but also of their offspring. 

Whoever will acquaint himself with the care exercised 
by the scientific florist and gardener for the obtaining 
of choice varieties of fruits and flowers and vegetables, 
will have reason to feel ashamed of the little attention 
that is paid to the attainment of proper ideals in 
respect to the human race— indeed, it is amazing that 
with the majority there is no ideal whatever; blind, brute 
passion alone is recognized. 

The breeder of fine horses, dogs, cattle, etc., will explain 
how careful he is with the mother during the period 
of breeding— her health, her surroundings, all are considered, 
because all have to do with her offspring, yet 
these same breeders of cattle, horses, poultry, etc., seem 
to give little consideration to the condition of the wife, 
the mother of their own children, during the period of 
gestation. How strange that a horse-fancier realizes 
that the breeding mare will be benefitted by pictures of 
running horses and by seeing horses racing, and that as 
a consequence her foal will be more speedy and more valuable, 
yet fails to apply this principle to his wife! 

Is it any wonder that children are born nervous and 
peevish when we know that the mother in bearing them 
was fretted and annoyed in a thousand ways? Is it any 
wonder that children are born to a heritage of passion, 
anger and lust, when we think of the experiences of 
their mothers which are thus impressed upon them? 
Surely all parents of reasonable judgment, understanding 
these matters, would lay proper foundations for 
character in their children— foundations upon which, 
subsequently, they would patiently, carefully and lovingly 
develop their children along the lines of the highest 
standards of righteousness and the beauty of holiness 
and loyalty to the Creator! But while this should be the 
endeavor of all, when could we hope ever to bring the 
world into a condition to desire and strive for such results? 
Never! Hope for the world would die were it 
not based upon the sure Word of the Lord, which promises 
mankind help from on High in the great Kingdom 
of Messiah. 



THE VALLEY OF HINNOM 

King Manasseh reintroduced idolatry, built altars for 
the worship of Baal in the courts of the temple, used 
enchantments and communicated with evil spirits. The 
Lord permitted him to take this course and apparently the 
majority of the nation were swayed either to good or 
evil by the example of their kings. Thus the people were 

R4840 : page 185 

made to err. The punishment for this course followed. 
The king of Assyria was permitted of the Lord to be 
the executioner of the punishment. He captured the 
city and took the king prisoner. The punishment for 
idolatry was not eternal torment, be it noted; that erroneous 
view came to us during the "Dark Ages." We are 
getting back to a better understanding of God and His 
Word. 

After the king had been in captivity a while, his 
senses commenced to return to him and he began to learn 
his lesson. Thoughts of his good father, King Hezekiah, 
and the Lord's blessings upon him, surely came to his 
mind. King Manasseh repented, sought the forgiveness 
of the Lord and obtained it, and was restored to his own 
kingdom. 

In connection with the king's idolatrous delusions, it 
is recorded in verse six that he "caused his children to 
pass through the fire in the valley of Hinnom." That 
valley lies just outside the city of Jerusalem, to the 
south. It is now considerably filled up and covered with 
orchards. Of old it was a deep valley. It was used for 
religious rites at one time. A great brass image erected 
there, the body of which was hollow, constituted a flue 
for the fires built underneath. The image had outstretched 
arms, which became heated and upon these 
arms children were sometimes offered in sacrifice to the 
false deities, wholly contrary to everything authorized 
by the Almighty. 

Later on, this valley of Hinnom was polluted so 
that it might never again be used as a place of worship. 
No doubt it was used as a place for the destruction of 
the offal of the city of Jerusalem— dead cats and rats 
and dogs, etc., were thrown there and fire and brimstone 
burned therein for the destruction of the foul gases. 
The bodies of the vilest criminals might after death 
also be thrown into this valley as refuse, indicating no 
hope of future life for them. 

In the New Testament, written in Greek, this "valley 
of the son of Hinnom" is styled Ge-hinnom, or, later, 
Gehenna. Our Lord several times used this valley in illustrating 
the Second Death— the hopelessness of all 
those who would wilfully, intelligently and persistently 
refuse the grace of God. 



LEARN TO DO WELL 

Our text, from Isaiah, is the Lord's admonition, 
"Cease to do evil; learn to do well." It represents God's 
general attitude toward our race. He does not chide 
us for being sinners, for He Himself explains that we 
were born in sin and mis-shapen in iniquity, in sin did 
our mothers conceive us. What the Lord desires in us 
is that, realizing our wrong condition, we shall turn 
therefrom to the best of our ability to do right. We 
shall not be able to effect this transformation in ourselves 
except so far as to have a right will and a pure 
heart, or honest endeavor for righteousness. To all such 
the Lord proposes succor, assistance, and this assistance 

R4840 : page 186 

He has provided for us in our Redeemer. He is an assistance 
already to those who can accept Him and His 
Word by faith. He will be an actual assistance to the 
great majority of mankind through the establishment of 
His Kingdom. Eventually all who will come to love 
righteousness and hate iniquity shall be enabled to attain 
eternal life, and all who will love iniquity and hate 
righteousness shall have the punishment of the Second 
Death, symbolically represented in Gehenna— "everlasting 
destruction from the presence of the Lord." 



R4837 : page 186 

A GODLY YOUNG KING 

-JULY 23.-2 CHRON. 34:1-13.- 

"Remember now thy Creator in the 
days of thy youth."— Eccles. 12:1. 

KING MANASSEH of our last lesson had a 
bad son, Amon, who reigned but two 
years, and was murdered by his courtiers 
in his own palace. His son, Josiah, the 
central figure of today's study, became king 
in his eighth year. By the time he was 
sixteen his heart had begun to seek after 
and to desire to serve the Almighty God. 
By the time he was twenty his religious 
convictions were so deep and fixed, and his 
authority as a king so in his own hand that he dared to 
begin the work of reformation. The idols and their 
temples and groves for idolatrous worship were destroyed. 
The valley of Hinnom, as already suggested, 
was desecrated and made a dumping-place for the offal 
of Jerusalem. 
The temple of the Lord was repaired and cleansed of 



all its idolatrous defilements, and worship and praise 
therein to the Almighty, was restored. More than this, 
the king extended his influence for the destruction of 
idolatry into what was once the territory of the two 
tribes, north of his kingdom. 

MISTAKE TO ASSUME THAT WILD OATS MUST FIRST BE 
SOWN 

What a force there is in our text, "Remember now 
thy Creator in the days of thy youth" ! What a great 
mistake some parents make in assuming that their children 
must have an experience in "sowing wild oats" before 
they will be prepared to appreciate righteousness 
and become its servants! This thought is reflected upon 
the minds of the young, both male and female; rarely do 

R4838 :page 186 

they seek to live by a higher standard than that expected 
of them by their parents or guardians. We have 
known saintly mothers to unintentionally lay snares for 
the feet of their children by introducing them to ways 
of the world in which they themselves would not walk. 
Their expressed sentiment was, "I must not put upon these 
children the weight of the cross, nor expect of them 
saintship; if ever they become truly consecrated saints 
of God they will then know the trials of the 'narrow way' 
and have plenty of them." 

Alas! such Christian mothers have failed to grasp the 
situation properly. They have failed to realize that, at 
the present time, there is no real happiness in the world 
except in the "narrow way." The "broad road" of self-gratification, 
pride, lust, sin, selfishness, is indeed a beautiful 
picture at a distance, but the picture is a mirage- 
it can never be reached— it is a delusion. The millions 
of those who throng the broad road of selfishness, pride, 
etc., are all bent on pleasure, seeking it with all their 
might; but how many of all the millions on that 
road have found pleasure? We hold that they are 
merely pleasure-hunters and not pleasure-finders; we hold 
that the only real pleasure and substantial joy in the 
world is to be found in the narrow way of self-sacrifice 
—in the footsteps of the Great Teacher— in taking up the 
cross to follow him— in laying down life as He laid down 
His— in "suffering with Him that we might also reign with 
Him"— in being "dead with Him that we might also live 
with Him." 

Of those who enter the broad road, few ever turn to 
the narrow way. Parents, friends, Christians have given 
them the misunderstanding that the broad road is 
the one of pleasure and happiness. When they find it the 
reverse they naturally think that the narrow way must 
be much less happifying, much less desirable. 

A CERTAIN SIMPLICITY AND HONESTY IN THE MIND OF 



EVERY CHILD 

Of the few who do find the narrow way after having 
walked in the broad road their plaint is, "Oh, why did I 
not earlier find the way of the Lord, the way of Truth, 
joy, peace and happiness!" 

Notwithstanding the depravity with which all are 
born, there appears to be a certain simplicity and honesty 
in the mind of every child. It is that principle 
which must be used by teachers and helpers in general, 
if the child is led in the right way, by which he would 
most quickly attain a relationship and harmony with his 
Creator; nor is it necessary always that there shall be 
a preceptor. At times, under God's providence, the message 
from on High reaches the heart, and draws it with 
seemingly little resistance. The hollowness of life is perceived, 
the need of wisdom from on High is recognized, 
and perhaps by the servant, perhaps through parental 
instruction, perhaps through the counsels of a friend, perhaps 
by a tract or a book, the young heart is shown the 
way of wisdom and is pointed to the Lord and to the 
narrow way. 

We are to remember that the will is the real director 
of our destiny, under Divine providence, and that it 
is all-important to have the will rightly directed and established. 
Many a one is in the broad road of sin and 
selfishness— away from God today— who has in his make-up 
many good qualities entirely out of sympathy with 
his position and course in life. But without the will to 
guide, to lead, he goes downward. Similarly there are 
some on the narrow way who have many physical, mental 
and moral blemishes of heredity continually drawing 
them toward the broad road, but who are kept in the 
narrow way of the Lord, not by the self-will of the 
flesh, but by the power of a renewed will. How important, 
then, the proper directing and fixing of our wills in 
youth! How much greater blessing we may enjoy in the 
present life, and how much more adequate preparation 
we may thereby have for the future life! 

King Josiah of today's study is an example of the 
proper course for every young person to take. First of 
all, the heart should be given to the Lord in the days of 
youth, before the evil days and evil experiences have 
come; before one shall have learned so much of evil that 
the remainder of life would not suffice to eradicate it. 
Then, like Josiah, when time shall bring us opportunities 
for the service of righteousness, let us be whole-hearted 
in our advocacy of the right and in our opposition to the 
wrong, and in everything show forth the praises of our 
God, with the motto, GOD FIRST. 



R4840 : page 187 

DELIVERANCE FROM THE CURSE 



"He that hath the Son hath life; and he that hath not the Son of 
God hath not life"; "but the wrath of God abideth on him."— 
1 John 5:12; John 3:36. 

THE BELIEVER referred to in this text is 

he who believes with the heart— not merely 

one with an intellectual appreciation of the 

fact that Christ is the Son of God: "With 

the heart man believeth unto righteousness." 

It means one who has come into 

relationship to the Son of God, to acknowledge 

Him as his Leader, the Head over the 

Body! "He that hath the Son hath life." 

At the present time such a one has this life 

imputed to him; but he does not, of course, possess it 

in its full sense. He has merely the begetting to the 

new nature and the promise that, if faithful, he shall 

have part in the First Resurrection. "Blessed and holy 

is he that hath part in the First Resurrection; on such 

the Second Death hath no power; but they shall be 

priests of God and of Christ and shall reign with Him 

a thousand years."— Rev. 20:6. 

In this resurrection change, which will come in a 
moment, in the twinkling of an eye, such will, in the 
fullest sense, have life. Now, they are looked upon as New 
Creatures. They have passed from under the death condemnation; 
"For the wages of sin is death; but the gift 
of God is eternal life through Jesus Christ our Lord." 
(Rom. 6:23.) Those who have accepted this gift are, 
therefore, in this condition. The remainder of mankind 
are still under the death sentence, the wrath of 
God. They are not under the sentence of eternal torment, 
but under the curse, the condemnation of death. 
All mankind were born under this sentence. So the 
Apostle again says that we "have escaped the corruption 
which is upon the world." (2 Pet. 1:4.) It is still 
upon the world, but we are free. 

THE NEW COVENANT TO BE MADE WITH ISRAEL 

There is a difference, however, between this Age and 
the next. Before the world shall be put on trial it will 
have a Mediator provided, composed of Christ, the Head, 
and the Church His Body. This Mediator will stand 
between Divine Justice and the masses of mankind. The 
first act of the Mediator will be to put into operation the 
New Covenant. Jeremiah the Prophet (31:31) tells us 
that the New Covenant will be inaugurated with Israel: 
"Behold, the days come, saith the Lord, that I will make 
a New Covenant with the house of Israel and with the 
house of Judah." Messiah will be the Mediator of that 
New Covenant. Moses was a type of this greater 
Mediator; and the Law Covenant a type of this New Law 
Covenant. All the Jews will be transferred from Moses 
to Christ, the better Mediator; and from the Old Law 



Covenant to the New Law Covenant. 

This New Covenant will be open to all mankind as 
they come to realize their need, the supplying of which 
can be accomplished only through the Mediator. All 
must come under the arrangements of the Messianic 
Kingdom in order to share with the Jews in the blessings 
of that time. So we read, "And many nations will 
go and say, Come ye, and let us go up to the mountain 
of the Lord, to the house of the God of Jacob; and He 
will teach us of His ways, and we will walk in His paths; 
for out of Zion shall go forth the Law, and the Word 
of the Lord from Jerusalem." (Isa. 2:3; Mic. 4:2.) They 
will say, He has done for the Jew first; but he will also 
do for us. 

"HE SHALL BE CALLED WONDERFUL, COUNSELOR, 
MIGHTY GOD," ETC. 

Thus the Lord's blessing will extend from one nation 
to another until the whole world will be full of Divine 
blessings; and thus all the families of the earth will 
be blessed. This New Covenant arrangement, however, 
will bring blessings to mankind only in proportion as they 
accept the Mediator. All down through the Millennial 
Age the eyes of their understanding will be opened as they 
come into harmony with the New Covenant arrangements. 
Thus to gain life through the great Life-Giver 
in the next Age will be very different from the attaining 
of life now. All through that thousand years of His 
glorious ministration and reign, Christ, as the Mediator 
of the New Covenant, will be developing Israel and the 
world, raising them from their fallen condition and 
bringing them up to perfection. 

As Isaiah the Prophet puts it, "He shall be called 
Wonderful, Counselor, The Mighty God, The Everlasting 
Father, The Prince of Peace." (Isa. 9:6.) So the 
relationship of the great Mediator to all the people will 
be that of a Father to His own children. The period of 
Christ's reign will be the time in which everlasting life 
will be given to whomsoever will; and every creature 
will have fullest trial, fullest opportunity to come up to 
everlasting life. At the end of the thousand years mankind 
will be delivered up to the Father to be finally tested. 

The relationship of Christ to the Church, however, 
is a different one. He is not our Father. He is our 
Brother. Nevertheless, He is the Advocate through 
whom we must come to the Father; through whom we 
may cry, Abba, Father. 

Our text applies now, primarily. It will apply in the 
Millennial Age, gradually, as men shall come to a knowledge 
of the Truth. The Jews will be transferred as a nation 
from the Law Covenant to the New Covenant. God 
kept them bound up under the Law especially to that end, 
that they might be transferred in due time. But as for other 
people, they will be obliged to accept the great Mediator; 
and thus from the moment they accept Christ the provisions 



of the New Covenant will cover them. But upon 
those who do not accept God's arrangements the wrath 
of God will still abide. 



page 187 

19 11 --CONVENTIONS PROGRAM-1911 

LONDON (ENG.) CONVENTION opened the season and has 
already been reported. 

BOSTON CONVENTION, May 28, 29, 30, was a blessed success. 
The average attendance was between 500 and 650, while the 
public services ran up to 2,000 for the discourse on "Zionism" 
to 4,000 who heard "Which Is the True Gospel?" The 
dear friends entered heartily into the work— physically and 
financially— and the Lord greatly blessed their efforts. 

THE WESTERN CONVENTION TOUR, already announced, will 
extend conventional blessings far and wide. Our dear 
Brother Jones' Special Train will surely add to the zest of the 
various programs. 

TORONTO (CANADA) CONVENTION, JULY 15, 16, 17, has secured 
very favorable railroad excursion rates, as elsewhere 
announced. Accommodations, $1.25 per day and up. Address 
Wm. A. Sinclair, 193 Concord avenue, Toronto, Can. 

ST. JOHN'S (NEW BRUNSWICK), August 20, 21, 22. This 
gathering will accommodate the friends of a considerable 
area, and no doubt will be a joy as well as a blessing. Rates, 
$1.25 per day and up. Address us. 

MOUNTAIN LAKE PARK, MD., SEPT. 1-11. This is expected 
to be the Convention event of the year. The place is a choice 
one for resting and Bible study. It is a Summer Tourist 
Rate Point so far as railways are concerned. We can secure 
no further concessions. Entertainment, $1.25 per day up to 
$3. Particulars later. This Convention will be the last for 
the year except possibly one at GLASGOW, SCOTLAND, Oct. 28, 
29, 30, concerning which we still await information. 



R4841 :page 188 

"LOVE CASTETH OUT FEAR" 

"There is no fear in love; but perfect love casteth 
out fear; because fear hath torment."— I John 4:18. 

BETTER expressed could have been the 
thought of the text by saying, "There is no 
dread in love." We do not dread that 
which we love. In one sense, however, the 
more we love, the more we fear. We 
would not be so careful about pleasing a 
person whom we do not thus love. This is 
not the kind of fear, however, that the 



Apostle wishes us to cast out. On the 

contrary, it should be much enhanced. 

Consequently, the word dread would more accurately express 

the thought of our text. 

The Scriptures speak of some who have "no fear of 
God before their eyes." (Rom. 3:18.) Evidently these 
are unregenerate. Often, among men, there is a thoughtlessness 
in respect to God and the future. The Apostle 
in this text does not intimate that all hearts have fear; 
but that if any heart has fear, perfect love will cast it out. 
As the knowledge and love increase, the fear diminishes. 
We may say that those of the world who have a reverential 
fear are such as are in a preferable attitude of mind; 
they are in better condition than the thoughtless. In 
life, certain conditions which surround us call for reverence; 
and man's brain is so constituted that reverence 
will be a part of his mental attitude if he be not depraved. 
Hence, the Scriptures say that "The fear of the 
Lord is the beginning of wisdom." (Prov. 9:10.) The 
fear of the Lord, the reverence of the Lord, will bring a 
blessing. This fear of the Lord rather increases as the 
child of God comes to know His Maker; but it is a gradual 
process. 

There is a certain kind of fear which comes as the 
result of imperfect knowledge. We do not credit the 
Adversary with producing all the evil thoughts of the 
human mind, yet we believe he has very much to do with 
the evil influences which surround our race. People may 
be without fear of God; and we think that even after 
they have come to the Lord, and are learning to reverence 
Him and to know something about Him, they may 
lack the right kind of fear. Then the Adversary's plan 
will be to plant dread in their minds. 

So we find with all heathen peoples. As soon as they 
have any knowledge of God, the Adversary seems to conjure 
up slavish fear which crowds out love, and produces 
dread. We read that "The god of this world 
hath blinded the minds of them which believe not." (2 Cor. 4:4.) 
We think that this evil influence is accountable 
for many of the things which seem so remarkable 
to us. It explains the fact that the heathen have devilish 
doctrines mingled with dread of God; and that all the 
worldly who have knowledge of God, both Jews and 
Christians, have fear also— dread. Yet Christians have 
much greater light upon God's character than have 
others, and so should have correspondingly less fear than 
the heathen. 

A CERTAIN KIND OF FEAR PROPER 

Evidently our text is not intended to signify that a 
Christian should have no sense of fear. This fact is 
shown by the experience of the first Christian, our Lord 
Himself, in the Garden of Gethsemane. He there feared, 
as the Apostle tells us in speaking of this occasion, and 
He was heard in that He feared. He offered up strong 



cryings and tears to Him who was able to save Him out 
of death. (Heb. 5:7.) If the Master feared, so should His 
followers. The Apostle says, "Let us, therefore, fear, 
lest a promise being left us of entering into His rest, any 
of you should seem to come short of it." (Heb. 4:1.) 
How shall we harmonize these fears with our text. The 
text is, evidently, not intended to contradict the great 
lessons otherwise taught. Our Lord Jesus appealed to 
the Father who, He knew, loved Him; but He knew 
also, that the Father was absolutely perfect, righteous, 
just; and he feared lest He might have come short in 
fulfilling some of the requirements. 

So with us. Let us know that "God is love" (I John 4:8), 
but let us fear respecting ourselves, and have such 
a carefulness, such a desire to please God, that we should 
feel fearful lest in any degree we should come short. 
Ignorance begets fear; but love for God will enable us 
to cast out that fear, and will also enable us to come 
to God with great confidence. So let us "Draw nigh 
unto God" (James 4:8) with full confidence that He will 
bless us. This thought is the very opposite to that in 
the heathen mind. Their conception of a god is that 
of a demon. The Christian, on the other hand, who is 
walking in the footsteps of the Master, learns to love 
his God and to wish to do the Father's will only. Nothing 
is acceptable in the nature of a sacrifice that is not 
prompted by that love. "The Father seeketh such to 
worship Him as worship Him in spirit and in truth."— 
John 4:23,24. 



FACE TO FACE WITH TROUBLE 

"You are face to face with trouble, 

And the skies are murk and gray; 
You hardly know which way to turn, 

You are almost dazed, you say. 
And at night you wake to wonder 

What the next day's news will bring; 
Your pillow is brushed by phantom care 

With a grim and ghastly wing. 

"You are face to face with trouble; 

A child has gone astray; 
A ship is wrecked on the bitter sea; 

There's a note you cannot pay; 
Your brave right hand is feeble; 

Your sight is growing blind; 
Perhaps a friend is cold and stern, 

Who was ever warm and kind. 

"You are face to face with trouble; 

No wonder you cannot sleep; 
But stay, and think of the promise, 

The Lord will safely keep, 



And lead you out of the thicket, 

And into the pasture land; 
You have only to walk straight onward, 

Holding the dear Lord's hand. 

"You are face to face with trouble; 

And did you forget to look, 
As the good old father taught you, 

For help to the dear old Book? 
You have heard the Tempter whisper, 

And you've had no heart to pray, 
And God has dropped from your scheme of life, 

For— oh, many a weary day! 

"Then face to face with trouble; 

It is thus He calls you back 
From the land of dearth and famine 

To the land that has no lack. 
You would not hear in the sunshine; 

You hear in the midnight gloom. 
Behold, His tapers kindle 

Like stars in the quiet room. 

"Oh! face to face with trouble, 

Friend, I have often stood, 
To learn that pain has sweetness, 

To know that God is good. 
Arise and meet the daylight; 

Be strong and do your best! 
With an honest heart, and a childlike faith 

That God will do the rest." 



R4841 : page 189 

"CHRIST IN YOU, THE HOPE OF GLORY" 

"The mystery which hath been hid from ages and generations, 
is now made manifest to his saints;. ..which is Christ in 
you, the hope of glory."— Col. 1:26,27. 

THIS expression in various slightly different 

forms occurs many times in the New Testament. 

The consecrated children of God 

are spoken of as being "in Christ Jesus," 

whom God gave to be Head over the 

Church which is His Body. We are "baptized 

into Christ." This the Apostle explains 

as the Mystery hidden from the 

Ages, but now made known to us— that 

God was in Christ reconciling the world 

unto Himself. -2 Cor. 5:19; Col. 1:26. 

This Christ is composed of many members. (I Cor. 12:12.) 
The Greek word Christ corresponds to the 
Hebrew word Messiah. In either language the significance 



of the word is, The Anointed. In olden times the 
Priests were anointed with oil, as were also the kings of 
Israel. This ceremony seems to typify the anointing of 
the antitypical kings and priests. The Messiah, therefore, 
is the anointed King and Priest, whom God hath 
foreordained from before the foundation of the world 
—for putting some down and lifting up all who will be 
obedient to His arrangements. 

This Gospel Age is the time in which the Messiah is 
prepared. The Head of the Messiah, therefore, very 
properly, is first; and following Him the Apostles and 
all down through the Age the various members of the 
Body. This Age will end when the full number of the 
"elect" shall have been found and tested. Then the Body 
will have been completed. When The Messiah is complete, 
The Christ will be complete. 

This part of God's Plan is hidden from the natural 
man, who sees nothing in it. Only those who reverence 
God sufficiently and who are in close touch with His 
arrangement can see. It was hidden from the Jews, 
who saw not that Jesus was the Head of this Messianic 
Body, and was to be a Spirit-being, not human; and that 
God is taking from them and from all nations those who 
shall compose this Body. 

"YE HAVE AN UNCTION FROM THE HOLY ONE AND YE 
ALL KNOW IT" 

In view of the various statements of Scripture relating 
to this subject, we see how Christ is represented 
in us. In proportion as we have the Holy Spirit, in that 
proportion we are faithful members of His Body, and 
have the anointing in us. As the Apostle says, "The 
anointing that ye have received of Him abideth in you"; 
"Ye have an unction [or anointing] from the Holy One, 
and ye all know it." (I John 2:27,20.) It manifests 
itself to us as it would not to the world. We know that 
we have the mind of Christ— the opposite of selfishness. 
This we can more and more discern in others— better than 
in ourselves. As every good seed will bring forth good 
fruit, so we, if we abide in the Vine, shall bring forth 
the fruits thereof— meekness, patience, brotherly-kindness, 
long-suffering, love. 

Christ in you is the hope of glory in the sense that to 
this Christ, this Anointed One, God has promised glory, 
honor and immortality, the divine nature. Only those who 
possess this anointing, the Spirit of Christ, can properly 
possess this hope; for what we now have is merely an 
earnest of our inheritance and a foretaste of what is to 
come. But this call is to ignominy now. "They shall 
say all manner of evil against you" who have this anointing. 
The world will know you not, even as it "knew Him 
not." (I John 3:1.) This, which we have now, is a 
bitter foretaste; but coupled with this there is a joy which 
the world cannot give. 



R4842 : page 189 

THE ROBE OF CHRIST'S RIGHTEOUSNESS 

"Blessed are they whose iniquities are forgiven, 
and whose sins are covered."— Rom. 4:7. 

THE "WEDDING GARMENT" mentioned in 
the Lord's parable (Matt. 22:2-14), is the 
Robe of Justification, which becomes ours 
at the time of consecration. At the very 
moment of our begettal, when the Lord accepted 
us, we became probationary members 
of the Body of Christ, the Bride 
Class, and were covered with the Wedding 
Robe. 

This "wedding garment" is given, not 
to the Old Creature, but to the New Creature, to cover 
the blemishes of its imperfect body. At the moment of 
God's acceptance of our sacrifice, and of the begetting 
of the Holy Spirit, the New Creature is reckoned as 
coming into existence and as wearing this robe. Thenceforth, 
the Old Creature, from the Divine viewpoint, is 
non-existent— "Old things are passed away; all things 
are become new." (2 Cor. 5:17.) But this New Creature 
must have a new body. The New Creature has the old 
body, but a new will— the will of Christ. The Apostle 
tells us that we should not be satisfied with merely reckoning 
ourselves dead according to the flesh, but that we 
should reckon ourselves as having been made alive in 
the Spirit. If the Spirit of Christ be in us, it will 
quicken our mortal bodies— vivify them.— Rom. 8:8-14. 

These mortal bodies, then, which were under the influence 
of the old imperfections and under the old course 
of life, have now, under the new mind, a restraining, or 
constraining influence put upon them and the New Creature 
is expected to use the new mind, or will, to overcome 
the desires of the flesh. While in this body of 
flesh, the New Creature is expected to demonstrate such 
faithfulness in the development of character that he may 
be accounted worthy of being raised in the First Resurrection 
as a Divine being. Having this imperfect body, 
he needs the robe of Christ's righteousness to cover his 
imperfections. 

THE ROBE DOES NOT COVER SINS OF THE NEW MIND 

In studying this subject, it is well to keep in mind 
that the robe does not cover, as some seem to think, 
sins of the new mind. The Scriptures ascribe no sin 
to the new mind, and no perfection in righteousness to 
the fallen flesh. If the new mind were disloyal to God, 
the robe would not cover it; it would cease to be a new 
mind. To continue to have the imperfections of the 



flesh (which we have inherited from Adam) covered, 
the New Creature must remain loyal to God; otherwise, 
it will deserve the Second Death. Hence, these New 
Creatures, with imperfect bodies under the control of 
the new mind, have the Bridal Robe granted to them, 
that they may have a standing in the sight of the Lord 
and of each other. 

This righteousness of our dear Redeemer is represented 
as being imputed to us. It is for us, then, to work 
out the glorious embroidery, the stamp of which is already 
upon the robe— the directions as to how we may 
work out the fruits of the Spirit thereon. 



R4842 : page 190 

QUESTIONS OF INTEREST 

THE GRADUAL END OF GOSPEL FAVOR 

QUESTION.— Do you understand the Scriptures 

to teach, either directly or indirectly, 

through the Parallels of the Jewish Dispensation, 

that it was necessary that all who 

would eventually constitute the "little 

flock" must have been in a justified condition 

previous to October, 1881? 

Answer.— No, we do not so understand 
the matter. 

Question.— Was it necessary that all who 
would be of the "little flock" should have made their 
consecration by or before October, 1881? 

Answer.— No, we do not so understand the matter. 

The chapter in SCRIPTURE STUDIES, Vol. II, showing 
the parallels between the Jewish and Christian Dispensations, 
makes prominent four dates, viz., (1) October, 
1874; (2) April, 1878; (3) October, 1881, and (4) October, 
1914; these dates being parallel to four in the Jewish 
harvest, viz., (1) The beginning of our Lord's ministry; 
the beginning of the trial or harvest time of the 
Jewish nation, October, 29; (2) The end of our Lord's 
ministry, His crucifixion, and the rejection of the Jewish 
nation as a nation, April, 33 (See SCRIPTURE STUDIES, 
Vol. 2, chapter 7); (3) The close of the "seventy weeks" 
(Dan. 9:24-26) of favor upon the Jewish nation— October, 
36— after which the Gospel privileges were open 
to the Gentiles, Cornelius being the first convert; (4) 
The full end of trouble and destruction which came upon 
Israel's polity, October, 69. 

It should be clearly noticed that the parallels between 
the Jewish and Gospel Ages all belong to the nominal 
systems then and now, and if this is borne in mind, it 
will prevent our applying these parallels either to the 
gathering out of the Gospel Church or to the gathering 
of the Lord's people out of Babylon now. 



Noting these parallels, we find 1874 as the beginning 
of this "harvest" and the gathering together of the 
"elect" from the four winds of heaven; 1878 as the 
time when Babylon was formally rejected, Laodicea 
spewed out— the time from which it is stated, "Babylon 
is fallen, is fallen"— fallen from Divine favor. The parallel 
in 1881 would seem to indicate that certain favors 
were still continued to those in Babylon up to that date, 
notwithstanding the rejection of the system; and since 
that date we would understand that that relationship has 
been in no sense an advantageous one, but has been in 
many senses of the word a distinct disadvantage, from 
which only with difficulty could any free themselves, the 
Lord's grace and truth assisting. And in harmony with 
this parallelism, October, 1914, will witness the full end of 
Babylon, "as a great millstone cast into the sea," utterly 
destroyed as a system. 

Coming back: We concede it reasonable to infer that 
the close of the favors upon fleshly Israel represent 
the close of the special favor of this Gospel Age, 
viz., the invitation to the High Calling; accordingly, our 
understanding is that the open or general "call" of this 
Age to Kingdom honors ceased in October, 1881. However, 
as already shown in SCRIPTURE STUDIES, we make 
a distinction between the end of the "call" and the closing 
of the "door"; and believe that the door into the 
Kingdom class is not yet closed; that it stands ajar for 
a time, to permit those who had already accepted the 
"call" and who fail to use its privileges and opportunities 
in self-sacrifice to be thrust out, and to permit others to 
enter to take their crowns, in harmony with Rev. 3:11. 
The present time, therefore, from 1881 until the door of 
opportunity for sacrifice in the Lord's service shall fully 
close, is a period of "sifting" as respects all who are 
already in Divine favor, in covenant relationship with 
God. 

And since those who have gone into the "Feast" 
through the "door" represent all who are called (except 
those who have afterward been rejected and expelled), 
it follows that the places of those thus expelled must be 
taken by some who were not previously amongst the 
called, amongst the consecrated. This, we trust, makes 
plain the answer to your question, proving that some not 
previously consecrated will, in the eleventh hour, be admitted 
to the vineyard labors and to the rewards of the 
faithful, after the open call ceased, and before the "door" 
closes. 

Indeed, we are to distinctly remember that in 
speaking of the gathering to take place during this harvest 
time, our Lord mentions amongst others those who 
have been in the field (in the world), apparently referring 
to a class who previously had been neither justified 
nor sanctified through the Truth. See SCRIPTURE STUDIES, 
Vol. Ill, Chap. 6. 



THE NEW CREATURE GIVEN THE ROBE 

Question.— Can the New Creature's body sin? 

Answer.— The New Creature's proper body is the Spirit 
body of the First Resurrection. But before getting it he 
is placed on probation and given his old human body to 
practice with. The New Creature cannot make the old 
body obey him perfectly. But he can develop strength in 
his endeavors to bring words, actions and thoughts into 
perfect accord with the perfect Law of God— Love. 

Unable to conquer, he must show the Captain of his 
salvation his loyalty to the core by "fighting a good fight." 

The imperfections of the flesh to which the new mind 
does not consent are all of heredity— all from Adamic 
weakness— all, therefore, forgivable by the Redeemer, who 
merely needs to be appealed to as the great Advocate. 
But every transgression of the flesh is charged to the New 
Creature, who owns the flesh and is using it. This obligates 
repentance, prayer, etc., and means the greater 
blessing to the New Creature. To whatever extent the 
New Creature gives consent or sympathy to the sin of his 
flesh he is worthy of "stripes," which correctively will assist 
in his character development. "What son is he whom 
his Father chasteneth not?" 

The New Creature only is given the wedding robe, 
the robe of Christ's righteousness, as a covering for his 
imperfect flesh. It represents his justification as a New 
Creature. It shows him as in Divine sight, holy, harmless, 
undefiled, through the merit of Jesus his Advocate 
and Redeemer. 



THE NEW CREATURE AND SIN 

Question.— Can the New Creature sin? 

Answer.— Yes! and No! The Apostle says, "He cannot 
sin, for his seed remaineth in him." (I John 3:9.) That 
is to say, so long as any New Creature continues to possess 
the Spirit of God, the Holy Spirit, he cannot consent 
wilfully to do sin. If one Spirit-begotten does sin wilfully 
it implies that prior to that wilful sin he parted with his 
spirit of holiness (lost the seed of his begetting) and got 
instead a spirit of sin, the spirit of the Adversary. In 
other words, a holy person, possessing God's Spirit of 
begetting, cannot wilfully and intentionally do that which 
he knows to be unholy and displeasing to God. He cannot 
take pleasure in sin. He once died to it, and to have 
it revive means a return to wallowing in the mire— "twice 
dead, plucked up by the roots"; ready to be taken and 
destroyed as a brute beast.— Judge 12; 2 Peter 2:12. 



R4843 :page 191 



SOME INTERESTING LETTERS 

BELOVED PASTOR:- 

I feel constrained today to say a few words concerning 
the joy which I feel in my heart and what I owe to your 
faithful ministry. No loyal heart could fail to be impressed 
by your unwavering fidelity to our Master and to His "flock," 
to whom you stand so peculiarly related. 

Appreciating the "Vow" submitted in 1908 as a Heaven-provided 
safeguard for the "flock," I felt from the first that 
subtle tests just ahead were sure to emphasize the needs of 
just such a safeguard. Realizing that there is a practical side 
to the Christian warfare, I promptly availed myself of the 
"Vow," at the same time realizing that our relation to it must 
be the same as to our original Vow of full consecration; that 
while the taking of the Vow was the initial step, its value 
as a safeguard is in the faithful carrying out of all it expresses. 
While the developments following this note of warning 
have been more startling than I had anticipated, I have 
been impressed as never before with the significance of the 
Scripture, "Surely the wrath of man shall praise thee; the 
remainder of wrath (that which could not praise Him) shalt 
thou restrain."— Psa. 76:10. 

During 1909 I tabulated a large number of subjects being 
treated in WATCH TOWER concerning the "Ransom" and 
closely related topics. I feel that those wonderful explanations 
of Truth which have come to us, especially during the 
past two years in a faithful endeavor to shield the "sheep," 
are a forceful illustration of the "Vine and Branch" proposition 
—that nothing the Lord permits means loss to the fruit-bearing 
branches. The Divinely provided nourishment withdrawn 
from the unappreciative means added enrichment to 
those giving evidence of a disposition to use it. Truly, we 
have realized that the more searching the analysis the more 
glorious the Truth becomes; indeed, our hearts should be 
filled with wonder, love and praise. 

I am trying to weigh the serious side of it. Sometimes 
I cannot keep back the tears as I think of the abounding 
wealth into which we have entered. I feel that if we are not 
energized to greater appreciation and to greater faithfulness, 
as the reasonable acknowledgment of such favors, then 
we have lost all reasonable grounds for hope of their continuance. 
Surely we must enter into the spirit of His work 
now (the development of the "Bride"— laying down our lives 
for the brethren, not only willingly, but gladly), if we are to 
share in the ultimate work after the preparatory features 
are completed. 

God bless you richly, dear brother; our prayers follow you 
on your missions of love. We are constrained to express our 
sentiments in the language of the MANNA comment for Sept. 
1, as follows: "It is because we see Jesus to be the Father's 
choice that we unite ourselves to Him; because we see the 
Father's character manifested in Him, that we leave all to 
follow Him. Similarly, if we lend our aid, our support, to 
any human being in connection with the Divine Plan and 



service, it should be simply upon this ground— not merely a 
personal magnetism or favoritism, but because our hearts are 
touched by the Lord with the leader's being of His appointment. 1 

The hearts of the dear ones in these Lower Provinces of 
Canada are made glad with the hope of arrangements for a 
Three-Days' Convention during this season. 

We ask that you pray for us all, increasing faithfulness. 
Sister Black shares with me, dear brother, this expression of 
love for yourself and for the Lord's flock. 

Faithfully yours in the joy of service, 

W. W. BLACK.-CANADA. 



DEAR PASTOR RUSSELL:- 

I thank our Heavenly Father for the Truth and for you, 
through whom great blessings have come to me. I am also 
very thankful for the opportunity to be associated in the 
Harvest work, in Berkeshire Co., Mass., with Brother Goodwin, 
of Torrington, Conn., through whom I have received 
added blessings. 

I have recently had some remarkable experiences with the 
Jews, of whom there is a colony of about twenty families, including 
a Rabbi, in the vicinity of my home. 

Some time ago I distributed among them copies of Die 
Stimme, the Yiddish paper. The young people of the colony 
cannot read Yiddish and are asking for similar matter in 
English. As PEOPLES PULPIT sermons are along lines of 
Christian teaching, I have not distributed them, lest the motive 
be misconstrued. 

These people have the correct idea concerning the cause 
of the centuries of suffering which they and their ancestors 
have experienced. They acknowledge that Christ was sent 
of God to bless the world; even the Rabbi assented to this. 
They were very cordial, urging me to come again. 

This colony, composed mainly of farmers from Russia, I 
am told, has the support of the Rothschilds. They are looking 
for the resurrection of the Ancient Worthies, expecting 
it within a few years. 

Your statements upon Jewish matters, when clearly understood 
by them, will, it seems to me, be one of the most potent 
factors in uniting the Jews in the Zionist movement. Since 
the distribution of the Yiddish paper, I find your name a 
household word among them. I would like suitable literature 
(English) to give them, as they request it for the young 
people. Dear Brother, I wish always to be 

Your faithful brother in Christ, 

NEWTON T. HARTSHORN-MASS. 



DEAR PASTOR RUSSELL:- 

I am enclosing just a "mite" for use in the Harvest Work. 
Although I realize that you are very busy, I will take 
some of your time to tell you about it, for I know you will 
find it interesting. 



It is the contents of a "mite box" to which I contributed 
for six or eight months, putting in small amounts for each 
blessing which I received— not counting the daily blessings 
of bread and health, etc. It shows that the Lord was good 
to me, doesn't it? However, the most interesting part 
follows:— 

My box was one among several which our Sunday School 
teacher gave to us girls in 1909. We had previously withdrawn 
from the church with which we were associated, and 
its school, but had been held together by the Lord's loving 
kindness, and had weekly classes of our own. For some 
reason, which we could not then exactly understand, we 
were reluctant about sending the money to the Missionary Society 
of our denomination. 

About a year ago our teacher died after a short illness. 
I will not dwell upon the persecutions which she had suffered 
in the church, nor our own sorrow afterward. I will 
only say that God has opened the eyes of our understanding 
and enabled us to see Present Truth. As in her life she was 
a great blessing to me, so, also, in her death. I believe the 
Lord had me save the money for this very purpose, and that 
she was one of his bright "jewels." 

I cannot express the blessing which you have been to me, 
and the rest of us, and I thank Him for it. We daily remember 
you before the Throne of Heavenly Grace, and also 
the general interests of the work and the dear co-laborers. 

By His grace, one of the "Little Ones in Christ." 
MARY L. JENKINS.-MASS. 



DEAR PASTOR:- 

Having a growing conviction that the following extraction 
may be of interest to you (the more so after reading WATCH 
TOWER of March 15), I determined to send it along, hoping 
that you would be able to spare about two minutes of your 
valuable time for its perusal. 

The Rev. S. Manning, who traveled through the Holy 
Land in the early part of 1873, in recording his experiences, 
says concerning the barren slopes of southern Palestine: 
"Even yet we can trace the lines of those ancient terraces, 
showing what the land once was, and what it may yet become 
again when 'the time to favor Zion, yea, the set time, 
is come.' From our camp, a few miles north of Bethel, we 
could see the hills clothed to their very summits with fig 
gardens, now in their bright spring greenery. A Syrian 
gentleman, who was my frequent companion through this 
part of Palestine, plucked the young figs as he passed without 
stint or scruple. His reply to my question as to his right to 

R4844:page 191 

do so was instructive, as throwing light upon an incident in 
the life of our Lord, as to which some difficulty has been felt. 

"In the early spring, when the first leaves appear, an 
immense number of small figs are produced, which do not 



ripen, but fall from the branches, crude and immature, to the 
ground. To these we find a reference in Rev. 6:13. The 
true crop is not produced till later in the year. This first 
crude, 'untimely' growth, though of no commercial value, is 
yet plucked and eaten by the peasantry, sometimes with a 
pinch of salt, sometimes with bread. Like the wild fruit of 
our hedgerows it is free to all passersby. It was just at this 
early season, before the feast of the Passover, that our Lord 
and his disciples, having walked from Bethany, 'hungered.' 
Seeing a fig tree 'afar off having leaves' they sought fruit, 
but found none. Seeing leaves they had a right to expect 
fruit. Finding fruit they would have had right to pluck it, 
'for the time of figs was not yet'— the true and valuable crop 
was not yet produced. This incident He turned into a 
solemn lesson of warning to the Jews, etc., etc." 
Yours humbly in Him and His service, 

WILLIAM SMITH. 



page 194 

STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES 

THESE STUDIES ARE RECOMMENDED TO STUDENTS AS VERITABLE "BIBLE 
KEYS." PRICES ARE NET AND BARELY COVER COST OF PRODUCTION. 

SERIES I., "The Plan of the Ages." gives an outline of the Divine 
plan revealed in the Bible, relating to man's redemption and restitution: 
386 pages, in embossed cloth, 35c. (Is. 6d.) India paper edition, 75c. 
(3s. l-l/2d.) 

This volume has been published as a special issue of our journal 
at the extremely low price of 5c. a copy, in any quantity, postage included 
(To foreign countries, 9c.) This enables people of slender 
purse to herald far and wide the good tidings in a most helpful form. 

SERIES II., "The Time is at Hand," treats of the manner and time of 
the Lord's second coming, considering the Bible Testimony on this 
subject: 370 pages, in embossed cloth, 35c. (Is. 6d.) India paper 
edition, 75c. (3s. l-l/2d.) 

SERIES III., "Thy Kingdom Come," considers prophecies which mark 
events connected with the "Time of the End," the glorification of the 
Church and the establishment of the Millennial Kingdom; it also contains 
a chapter of the Great Pyramid, showing its corroboration of the 
dates and other teachings of the Bible: 384 pages, in embossed cloth, 
35c. (Is. 6d.) India paper edition, 75c. (3s. l-l/2d.) 

SERIES IV., "The Day of Vengeance," shows that the dissolution of 
the present order of things is in progress, and that all the panaceas 
offered are valueless to avert the predicted end. It marks in these 
events the fulfilment of prophecy, noting specially our Lord's great 
prophecy of Matt. 24 and Zech. 14:1-9: 660 pages, in embossed cloth, 
35c. (Is. 6d.) India paper edition, 85c. (3s. 6-l/2d.) 

SERIES V., "The Atonement Between God and Man," treats an all-important 
subject— the hub, the center around which all the features 
of Divine grace revolve. Its topic deserves the most careful and 
prayerful consideration on the part of all true Christians: 507 pages, 
in embossed cloth, 35c. (Is. 6d.) India paper edition, 85c. (3s. 6-l/2d.) 

SERIES VI., "The New Creation," deals with the Creative Week (Genesis 1 
and 2), and with the Church, God's "New Creation." It examines 
the personnel, organization, rites, ceremonies, obligations and 
hopes appertaining to those called and accepted as members of the 
Body under the Head: 740 pages, in embossed cloth, 35c. (Is. 6d.) 
India paper edition, 85c. (3s. 6-l/2d.) 

The above prices include postage. 

IN FULL LEATHER BINDING, gilt edges, the set (6 vols.) $3.00, 
(12s. 6d.), plus postage, 60c. (2s. 6d.). 

Also published in foreign languages as follows: In German, five 
vols.; in Swedish, Vols. 1, 2, 3 and 5; in Dano-Norwegian, four vols.; 
in Greek, three vols.; in French, two vols.; in Hollandish, Spanish, 
Italian, Hungarian and Polish, one vol. each; bound in cloth, uniform 
with English edition, prices the same. 

Vol. 6, German and Swedish (WATCH TOWER form), $1.50 each. 



page 193 



SEMI-MONTHLY 