It Takes All of Us to Get the Work Done
1 Every disciple of Jesus Christ should appreciate that his endeavors to support and participate in the Kingdom-preaching work are very important. Jesus realized that his disciples would produce Kingdom fruitage in varying quantities. (Matt. 13:23) Although a good portion of the preaching activity is being carried out by many hardworking pioneers, all who eagerly continue to glorify God by bearing as much fruit as possible are to be commended.​—John 15:8.
2 Collective Efforts Accomplish Much: Jesus foretold that the cumulative efforts of all his disciples would produce works greater than his. (John 14:12) Whether our personal circumstances limit what we can do or allow us to devote much time to Kingdom preaching, all of us are needed to get the work done. It is just as Paul stated: “All the body, by being harmoniously joined together and being made to cooperate through every joint that gives what is needed, according to the functioning of each respective member in due measure, makes for the growth of the body.”​—Eph. 4:16.
3 Some may feel that their efforts do not amount to much. However, in Jehovah’s eyes the important thing is that our service be whole-souled. Everything we do for him is valuable and appreciated.​—Compare Luke 21:1-4.
4 Continue to Support the Work: All of us have the privilege of contributing materially to the worldwide work. Some can also assist with the physical labor involved in supporting the Kingdom work. Each one can endeavor to give well-prepared comments at the meetings and participate in the Theocratic Ministry School. By taking advantage of opportunities to encourage others, we make a valuable contribution to the spirituality of the congregation, and this enhances its ability to accomplish the work entrusted to it.
5 Yes, it takes all of us to get the work done. No one should feel left out. Our combined efforts, both large and small, in serving Jehovah distinguish us as the only true worshipers of God. (Mal. 3:18) Each one of us can have a meaningful part in honoring Jehovah and in helping others to know and serve him.

