Service Meetings for June
Week Starting June 1
Song 223
 8 min: Local announcements. Selected Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry. Theocratic News.
15 min: “Completely Equipped for Every Good Work.” Questions and answers. Make brief comments on February 15, 1989, Watchtower, pages 22-4.
22 min: “Witnessing to ‘All Sorts of Men.’” An elder explains that although the offer for June consists of selected 192-page books, whenever it is advisable to offer the Greatest Man or the Mankind’s Search for God book to certain people, we may do so. An elder and a panel of experienced publishers discuss the suggested presentations. Briefly review what religions are encountered locally, and explain why we should have something in mind to start a conversation in each case. Have one or two brief demonstrations.
Song 112 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting June 8
Song 209
10 min: Local announcements. Accounts report.
15 min: “Caring for the Master’s Belongings.” Talk by an elder, covering information in insert.
20 min: “It Takes All of Us to Get the Work Done.” Questions and answers. Explain why elders depend on many willing volunteers to get necessary things done. Review local needs, such as Kingdom Hall cleaning and maintenance, helping sick and elderly, and covering territory. Invite elders to comment on how they appreciate the willing assistance that many give. Stress how the effort of each one is much needed.
Song 153 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting June 15
Song 7
10 min: Local announcements.
20 min: “Exert Yourselves Vigorously.” Talk based on January 15, 1986, Watchtower, pages 10-14. Discuss importance of regular pioneer service, encouraging enrollment by September 1.
15 min: “Witnessing by Good Conduct.” Questions and answers. Interview some exemplary young people. They tell how others have been favorably impressed by their Christian conduct. Relate one or two experiences from January 1, 1995, Watchtower, pages 24-5.
Song 170 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting June 22
Song 61
10 min: Local announcements. State when the audit of the congregation accounts was completed.
15 min: How to Start a Magazine Route. Outline what is needed: record all placements, return within two weeks, present fresh ideas from current magazines to keep interest alive. Suggest including neighbors, workmates, store clerks, service station attendants, and so forth. Offer six-month subscriptions to those who show sustained interest. Invite one or two publishers to relate a good experience about magazine routes.
20 min: Pioneers Assist Others. Talk by service overseer, reviewing arrangement to have pioneers personally assist others. Explain how assistance programs were initiated in the past. (jv 100; km 7/79 1, 3) The more than one million new ones who were baptized in the last three years need training. The “Pioneers Assist Others” program utilizes the experience and training of regular and special pioneers who have attended the Pioneer Service School. The goal is for each pioneer to help two publishers per year to become more skillful in the ministry and to reach out for a greater share. Those being assisted have no reason to be apprehensive; emphasis is on giving loving, kindly encouragement. This new program provides a potential for hundreds of thousands to become more effective ministers.
Song 207 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting June 29
Song 114
10 min: Announcements. Remind all to turn in field service reports for June. Discuss literature offer for July.
15 min: Local needs or Have I Slowed Down? Talk by an elder based on December 15, 1987, Watchtower, pages 18-19, paragraphs 14-16. Encourage those who have been active for several years to reflect on the quality and quantity of their sacred service.
20 min: All of Us Can Witness Informally. Talk and audience discussion based on October 15, 1987, Watchtower, pages 22-7. Show how those whose time is occupied with secular, family, or personal responsibilities can find many opportunities every day to share the good news with others. Include some local experiences.
Song 76 and concluding prayer.

