Witnessing by Good Conduct
1 In today’s permissive society, many young people recklessly squander their lives on drugs, immorality, rebellion, and violence. By contrast, the exemplary conduct of wholesome young people in the Christian congregation is refreshing to behold and is surely a thing of beauty to Jehovah. It serves as a powerful witness that may draw others to the truth.​—1 Pet. 2:12.
2 Many experiences show that the good conduct of Christian youths has had a positive impact on observers. Speaking about a young Witness who was her student, a schoolteacher told the entire class that this girl’s God, Jehovah, is the true God. She said this because the girl’s conduct is always respectful. Another teacher wrote the Society, saying: “I would like to commend you for the fine young people you have in your religion. . . . Your youths are really an example. They respect their elders, are polite, and are modestly dressed. And how they know their Bibles! That truly is religion!”
3 Another schoolteacher was impressed by the fine conduct of a seven-year-old Witness in her class. She was drawn to the boy’s mild and pleasing personality, which made him stand out in stark contrast to other boys. She was struck by his serious attitude toward his religious beliefs​—he was not embarrassed to be different because of what he believed. She could see that his conscience had been trained and that he was able “to distinguish both right and wrong.” (Heb. 5:14) Eventually, the boy’s mother visited the teacher, and a Bible study was started. In time, the teacher was baptized and later became a regular pioneer!
4 One young man was influenced by the good conduct of a Witness in his school. She was truly different​—very polite, studious, and always modest in her dress; also, unlike other girls, she never flirted with the boys. He could see that she was living by Bible principles. The young man asked her questions about her religious beliefs and was impressed with what he learned. He began to study, was soon baptized, and eventually shared in the pioneer ministry and in Bethel service.
5 If you are a young Christian who desires to give a fine witness to others, watch your conduct in every way. Never let your guard down by becoming sympathetic toward the world’s permissive attitudes, views, or life-styles. Set an elevated example in your speech, dress, and grooming, not only while participating in the field ministry and at congregation meetings but also while at school and when engaging in recreation. (1 Tim. 4:12) You will have real joy when someone takes an interest in the truth because you have been ‘letting your light shine’ through your good conduct.​—Matt. 5:16.

