Witnessing to “All Sorts of Men”
1 When we meet people of diverse cultures or religious backgrounds, we remember that Jehovah’s will is “that all sorts of men should be saved and come to an accurate knowledge of truth.” (1 Tim. 2:4) In addition to a number of specially prepared tracts and brochures, we have two excellent publications that can be used at any time to help individuals whose religious training has not taught them the truth about God and Christ.
2 The book Mankind’s Search for God gives insight into the origin of the world’s major religions and can thereby be helpful to people everywhere in making a comparison between their beliefs and what the Bible teaches about the only true God. On the other hand, by highlighting the life of Jesus Christ, the book The Greatest Man Who Ever Lived can help a person to become better acquainted with the Son of God and be drawn to him, as were many people in the first century. (John 12:32) Whenever appropriate, you may wish to try the following suggestions for introducing these books.
3 If you think it would be good to offer the “Greatest Man” book to someone, you might ask:
▪ “What comes to your mind when you think of Jesus Christ? [Allow for response.] Many historians acknowledge Jesus as the greatest man who ever lived. [Quote an example from the introduction in the Greatest Man book.] The Bible shows that Jesus’ life was a model for us to imitate.” Read 1 Peter 2:21 and the first paragraph on the last page of the introduction in the Greatest Man book. If the householder is interested in learning about Jesus, offer the book. Before you leave, read John 17:3 and ask, “How can we take in this knowledge that leads to everlasting life?” Make definite arrangements to return with the answer.
4 When you return to explain how to take in life-giving knowledge, you could say:
▪ “I promised to return to show you how we can take in the knowledge that leads to everlasting life.” Present the Knowledge book, and using the first chapter, demonstrate a study.
5 If you wish to offer the book “Mankind’s Search for God,” you could ask:
▪ “With so many different religions today, have you ever wondered how we can determine which one is approved by God?” After a response, open the Mankind’s Search for God book to page 377. Highlight point number 7, and ask if the householder agrees that the true religion should unite all races of mankind. Look up one of the cited scriptures, and as time permits, discuss some of the other points in the list. If there is genuine interest, offer the book. When leaving, you could ask, “How should true religion affect a person’s conduct?” Arrange for a return visit to answer the question.
6 When you return to explain how true religion affects a person’s life, you might ask:
▪ “How do you think religion should affect people’s conduct? [Allow for response.] Christ gave us a standard by which religion should be measured.” Read Matthew 7:17-20 directly from page 12 in the Mankind’s Search for God book. Then invite the householder to read paragraph 20 on pages 13-14. If time allows, discuss paragraphs 25-9 on pages 16-18. This may lead into a study in either the Require brochure or the Knowledge book.
7 Conversation Starters: There are many teaching aids in the Mankind’s Search for God book that may be used as conversation starters on the initial call or return visit. You can begin a conversation simply by asking an appropriate question. For example, note these questions and topics and the pages where they are addressed:
“Questions That Require an Answer”​—pages 17-18.
“Was Jesus a Myth?”​—page 237.
“Who Wrote the Bible?”​—page 241.
“The Qur’ān and the Bible”​—page 285.
“Evidence of the Bible’s Authenticity”​—pages 340-1.
“What Jehovah’s Witnesses Believe”​—pages 356-7.
“How to Identify the True Religion”​—page 377.
8 You can turn to the selected page(s) in the Mankind’s Search for God book and explain the point being discussed. Then set up a return visit by asking a follow-up question that can be answered from either the Require brochure or the Knowledge book. Be sure to invite the householder to the Public Meeting and leave a handbill. Give individuals the opportunity to contribute to our work, perhaps by saying, “Some like to make a small donation to our worldwide work.”
9 All sorts of honesthearted people are searching for the truth about God and Christ. We can assist them in our witness work. So, then, let us keep on “working hard and exerting ourselves, because we have rested our hope on a living God, who is a Savior of all sorts of men.”​—1 Tim. 4:10.

