“Completely Equipped for Every Good Work”
1 Jehovah’s people today are blessed with an abundance of rich spiritual food. (Isa. 25:6) There is much Scriptural material to enjoy through personal and family study and at congregation meetings, assemblies, and conventions. But are we taking full advantage of all of this with a view to becoming “fully competent, completely equipped for every good work”?​—2 Tim. 3:17.
2 Just think of the spiritual menu for the year 1998, which is already half over! Through the weekly congregation meetings, we are covering some of the highlights of 23 books of the Christian Greek Scriptures, reviewing information found in Insight on the Scriptures concerning the lives of 49 Bible characters, and considering 138 pages in the Proclaimers book. We are also reviewing one third of the Knowledge book, nearly all the Family Happiness book, and the entire God’s Word book. Additionally, we are being nourished with 12 issues of Our Kingdom Ministry, 52 Watchtower study articles, and nearly as many public talks on a variety of Bible subjects. Rich convention and assembly programs are in addition to all of this. What a wealth of spiritual good things has been made available to us!
3 Appreciate Jehovah’s Provisions: In order to benefit fully, we need to appreciate why Jehovah provides such a spiritual abundance. Feeding on these good things builds our faith and strengthens our relationship with him. (1 Tim. 4:6) However, spiritual food is not made available simply for our own instruction. It motivates us to share the truth with others and equips us to be effective in doing so as ministers of the good news.​—2 Tim. 4:5.
4 Let us not neglect our spiritual needs, but always be cultivating a longing for the rich and spiritually satisfying provisions from Jehovah’s table. (Matt. 5:3; 1 Pet. 2:2) To benefit fully requires setting aside sufficient time for such important matters as regular personal and family Bible study and meeting attendance. (Eph. 5:15, 16) The happifying rewards for doing so will be in accord with the inspired encouragement that Paul wrote to faithful Hebrew Christians, as recorded at Hebrews 13:20, 21.

