“We Wish Everyone on Earth Could Read It!”
THAT is what a man wrote in expressing his appreciation for the book Life​—How Did It Get Here? By Evolution or by Creation? His letter reflects the sentiments of millions of people who have found this 256-page illustrated book invaluable in answering questions about the origin and purpose of life on earth.
Released last year at conventions of Jehovah’s Witnesses in various lands, the book has been distributed in millions of copies and in many languages. It has helped people to see from the scientific and Biblical evidence that there is indeed a Creator who made us and that he has a marvelous purpose for humankind.
“Simple to Understand”
The book is written in a way that is easy to understand. As one letter noted: “I must tell you how impressed I am with your publication. Who, with rational mind, can resist your impeccable logic? You have managed to make this very deep and profound subject beautifully simple to understand​—quite a feat considering the very scholarly research that went into this book.”
Similarly, a former evolutionist with a science background said: “I am stunned by the clarity and power of this new book. I think that it’s the finest science book I’ve ever read for building appreciation for life. It’s very sophisticated scientifically, yet on a level that anyone can appreciate.”
Another stated: “The entire book is a masterpiece. The art content and printed word are fused together in such an appealing way that even those who shy away from material of this type will be impressed with the simple and concise style. The dignified and uninsulting manner with which the truth is laid bare will provide overwhelming evidence to answer unequivocally the question in the book’s title.”
Illustrations Help Reach the Heart
Referring to the colorful pictures, one person wrote: “How can we ever thank you for this most beautiful book? The illustrations are beautiful gifts of art.”
But the several hundred illustrations, including photographs, are more than beautiful art. They teach, reinforcing the points in the text. As a family wrote: “The illustrations and simplicity of the book have been a great aid for those of us who find the scientific field difficult to understand.” Another letter commented: “The illustrations and margin quotes are extremely helpful in getting the point and in remembering.”
Emotions were especially affected by chapter 19, “An Earthly Paradise Soon to Come.” Of the illustrations in that chapter, an Australian family wrote: “They make a deep impact on people. We tried to picture ourselves there in Paradise as a family. Surely Paradise and serving Jehovah eternally are worth any effort. The illustrations brought tears to our eyes.”
Another wrote: “It is the most beautiful publication I have yet seen published by Jehovah’s Witnesses. By the time I got to page 243 and saw the picture of the little girl and the tigers, it drew tears.” Still another said: “I cried when I looked through it. I cried in happiness.” And yet another, from Canada, related: “My heartstrings are tugged as never before and my eyes fill with tears of joy.”

