Announcements
GUARDING OUR CHRISTIAN TRUST—2 Tim. 1:14.
The apostle Paul, writing to the disciple Timothy, counseled: “Keep holding the pattern of healthful words which you heard from me with the faith and love that are in connection with Christ Jesus. This beautiful trust guard through the holy spirit which is dwelling in us.” (2 Tim. 1:13, 14) Yes, the preaching of the good news about the Christ and his kingdom has been entrusted to those who, like Timothy, have dedicated their lives to the service of Jehovah God. During March Jehovah’s witnesses will continue to present the Watchtower magazine to people as an aid to the understanding of the Bible. A year’s subscription will be offered for $1, and three booklets will be given free to each new subscriber. Be sure to have a part in God’s service this month.
WHAT DO YOU KNOW ABOUT THE BIBLE?
There is no favorite like the Bible. It has always been a best seller and is still given first place amongst literary classics. Yet few persons know who wrote it, when its writing began, how long it took to complete its sixty-six books and what their basic contents are, how it has survived in its textual integrity down to our day. Are you satisfied with your knowledge of these basic facts about the Bible? If you want the answers to your questions about the world’s most popular yet least known book, the Holy Bible, then you should have the Bible-study aid “Equipped for Every Good Work”. It is currently being studied at the Kingdom Halls of Jehovah’s witnesses. Send only 50c for your copy today.
1958 MEMORIAL
The time draws near when Jehovah’s people, remnant and other sheep, will assemble as congregations for the observance of the most significant of all memorials, the one that annually commemorates the victorious death of the Lord Jesus Christ. The date this year is April 3. The meeting, which will start after 6 p.m., will be opened with song and prayer, after which the discourse will be given by a qualified speaker, one of the remnant if available and capable. Then the emblems will be served separately after thanks have been offered to Jehovah for first the bread and then the red wine. The meeting will be closed with prayer and song, after all present have been invited to have part in special field service arrangements. Each congregation should commence making Memorial arrangements.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES FOR THE WEEKS
April 13: How Does Israel Stand with God? Page 145.
April 20: Grafting from the Wild Olive Tree. Page 151.

