VOL. XXIV. MARCH 15, 1903. No. 5 



CONTENTS. 

Views from the Watch Tower 83 

Ancient Tablets Agree with Bible 83 

A Statesman's Views of Europe's 
Future 83 

Christian Soldiership 84 

The Editor's Visit to Europe 85 

"Whatsoever He Saith, Do It" 85 

The New Life in Christ 88 

Review Lesson 91 

Able to Comprehend With All Saints 91 

Life and Death (Poem) 94 

Letters of Interest 95 

General Conventions, Etc 96 

page 82 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
--ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-131 GREEN ST., FOREST GATE, LONDON. 

PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE, 5c (2-l/2d.) A COPY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER, will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



THE MEMORIAL SUPPER. 



The date of the celebration this year will be Friday evening 
April 10th— after 6 o'clock. We mention the date thus 
early for the benefit of the brethren afar off. 

THE EMPHATIC DIAGLOTT. 



The new rates on the Diaglott brought an extraordinary 
demand and has quite exhausted our stock, before the 
new editions are ready. Have patience and we will have 
plenty for all. 

VOLUNTEER AMMUNITION FOR 1903. 



We are preparing two million tracts for this year's work: 
paper is already ordered and we will be ready to ship the 
tracts we hope by April. Let the captains get ready the 
forces and notify us during March the amounts they will be 
able to use advantageously. 

"STRONG'S EXHAUSTIVE CONCORDANCE." 



We fear we did this valuable work an injustice in describing 
it as inferior to "Young's Analytical Concordance." Use 
of a copy during the past year has greatly attached us to it. 
We can supply them at the following established prices (and 
give 3 cloth vols, of DAWN postpaid as a premium): In cloth 
binding, $6; in half leather binding, $8, express prepaid. 



R3162:page83 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 
ANCIENT TABLETS AGREE WITH THE BIBLE. 



IN view of the fact that most lecturers on the Babylonian 
excavations are endeavoring to prove 
that their findings date back thousands of years 
before the flood, and hence are in total disagreement 
with the Bible narrative, the following testimony to 
their corroboration of Scripture is the more appreciated. 
Excavators seem prone to "magnify their 



office" and to make their services and findings more 
wonderful than they really are. 

"Dr. Albert T. Clay, curator of the Babylonian 
department in the museum of the University of Pennsylvania, 
lectured in Widener hall yesterday on 'The 
Old Testament in the Light of Recent Excavations.' 

'"Accounts of the creation and deluge,' he said, 
'have been deciphered from early Babylonian monuments. 
No direct account has been found referring 
to the fall of mankind, although engraved rocks representing 
a man and woman sitting under a tree, with a 
serpent near by, have been found, which undoubtedly 
refer to it.' 

"The lecturer went on to show that the events 
recorded in the Bible had taken place contrary to 
what had been contended by critics of the Old Testament 
in the past few years. He presented a photograph 
of an engraved rock referring to the deluge and 
translated it. Although the period of time which 
elapsed while Noah was in the ark did not exactly 
correspond to the number of days given in the Bible, 
yet the historical significance of the event was corroborated. 
Dr. Clay presented many such photographs, 
all of which had been excavated in Babylonia, and are 
now in the museum. The translations of these were 
parallel accounts to passages found in the Bible. 

"He further said: This work is yet in its infancy. 
Research has not yet come to a limit. The 
lowest excavations show civilization in advanced 
stages and there is every reason to believe that future 
excavations will bring to light the majority, if not all, 
the history recorded in the Old Testament.'"— Philadelphia 
Times. 

A STATESMAN'S VIEW OF EUROPE'S FUTURE. 



A Philadelphia Ledger correspondent writing of 
the eminent correspondent of the Times, M. de Blowitz, 
deceased, says:— 

"Blowitz believed that his own forecast of events 
was more accurate than that of any living statesman. 
He not only placed himself on an intellectual level 
with Bismarck, but he spoke of himself as belonging 
to the same rank. I am not at all sure that he was 
not right, and that if his early lot had been cast in 
high places Blowitz would not have been a greater man 
than Bismarck. He had his faults and vanities, but 
he was a man of extraordinary capacity. 

"His opinions about the future of Europe are 
interesting, because his predictions were so often fulfilled, 
and his views, therefore, on the subject are 
worth consideration. As far back as ten years ago 
de Blowitz held that in the course of a generation 
Europe would be a congerie of bankrupt states; that 



all the national debts in Europe would be repudiated, 
with the exception of Britain's, and that vast social 
changes, involving bloody wars and reigns of terror, 
would come to pass in many countries. He took a 
pessimistic view of the future of Britain, though he 
admired the qualities of persistence and freedom, which 
form part of the British character. 

"He believed that the twentieth century would 
be a century of struggle, and that in Germany and 
Russia especially the development of the industrial 
idea would lead to the evolution of new surfaces of 
society, just as the iceberg which has changed its centre 
of gravity presents a new profile to the spectator. 
If these predictions had been made today no great 
power of discrimination would be credited to the 
prophet. To have formed such views ten years ago 

R3162:page84 

implies the possession of great analytic power, coupled 
with imaginative faculty." 



This is interesting, as showing how the wisdom of 
this world corroborates the forecast of prophecy— the 
revelations of the divine Word. "We have a more 
sure word of prophecy, unto which we do well to take 
heed, as unto a light shining in a dark place until the 
day dawn."— 2 Pet. 1:19. 



CHRISTIAN SOLDIERSHIP. 



We are pleased to credit the following article to 
a secular journal— the Atlanta Constitution:— 

"Endure hardness as a good soldier of Jesus Christ."— 
2 Tim. 2:3. 

"The service of Christ resembles no other so 
much as that of a soldier. There are few life-callings 
among men that demand such absolute self-surrender 
from the recruit as that of the soldier.... 

"In the decision to be a soldier one subordinates 
all other considerations— those of self-will, family supremacy 
and the varied opportunities of the freeman. 
It is to go under a vow of complete, unquestioning 
obedience to the orders of superiors. It is to abandon 
home for the camp, to forego the right of first serving 
the interests of father and mother, wife and children, 
business or friends. It means the entire suppression 
of every selfish interest for the advancement of the 
supreme cause one has contracted voluntarily to serve, 
to follow and for which, if need be, to die. 

"It seems hard to some minds to compare the 
service of Christ with that of a good soldier. Nine-tenths 



of those who call themselves Christians refuse 

to give their service that significance, and mutiny outright 

when called upon to act upon that principle. 

The weakness of the church universal as the leader of 

morals and life culture in the world is due to the fact 

that most Christian men and women serve Christ as 

independent camp followers. They are unattached, 

or uncommanded, or disobedient to the duty of discipline, 

and do as they please rather than as they are 

obligated by the commands and principles of Christ. 

"Goethe said that 'earnestness is eternity,' and 
the spirit of God is the spirit of earnestness. He who 
is informed and inflamed by that spirit will be filled to 
overflowing with zeal, courage, daring, fortitude and 
the faith of conquest. In the fervor and forcefulness 
of these feelings he will serve his Master, as the soldiers 
of Alexander followed unquestioning where he 
led; as the soldiers of Leonidas, who died rather than 
retreat; as the soldiers of Napoleon, who believed 
him invincible always; and as the soldiers of Lee, 
who felt that he could not lead them wrongly or to 
defeat. 

"If Christ possessed in this world today an army 
of men and women one-hundredth part the figures of 
official Christendom, who would follow him— who 
would labor, fight and endure as do the soldiers of our 
American armies— he could not long be kept from his 
world-wide conquest. 

"But he has few real soldiers in his service. 
Most of his followers are pensioners, pleading always 
that he will do something for them— ease their pains, 
disperse their enemies, smooth their paths, increase 
their fortunes and bed them in places of plenty and 
comfort. They are a hungry and a helpless host. 

"One would expect naturally to find in the pulpits 
stalwart captains of the army of our Lord. And yet 
how few are they who do not look more closely to their 
hire than to their opportunities to endure hardness? 
They are eager for rich and easy pastorates, they 
dwell in luxuries and preach as those who make pleasant 
music on a lute. Transfer them to posts of poverty, 
scant rations, hard service among the poor and 
the sick, and they become broken-hearted over their 
lot as soldiers! 

"The true soldier does not debate his cause. He 
is rightly supposed to have settled upon its justice 
and righteousness before he enlisted to serve it. Thereafter 
he avouches it and defies contradiction of it. He 
is ready to spend all and be all spent in its defense. 
He does not fight for the rations that are doled to him, 
but for the great principles and great purposes of the 
cause to which he is committed.... 

"No man should deceive himself in a matter so 
plain and serious as the service of Christ. If he 
doesn't mean to abandon himself to the commands 
and demands of his Master, he ought to be honest 



enough not to offer a hypocritical profession and a 

R3163 : page 84 

treacherous or abortive promise of service. The causes 
of Christ on earth need men who are strong in will, 
courageous of heart and hardened to self-sacrifice, 
sufferings and the perils of conflict and death. None 
other can do the work that is needed to pull down the 
strongholds of sin, rout the enemies of righteousness 
and set forward in hostile territories the standards of 
the Kingdom of Christ. 

"It is glorious to serve Christ in honesty and in 
fulness of fidelity. There is an ineffable joy in being 
on the right side, in knowing that one's service is 
toward victory and that beyond the field of blood 
and the valley of shadows is an abundant entrance 
into the joys and peace of the triumphant King of 
kings. For that hope none should shrink from the 
harness of battle, none quail before the rage of the 
enemy, and none tremble before the certainty of hunger, 
thirst, nakedness, wounds or death!" 

THE EVOLUTIONISTS' TREND. 



The Western Recorder tersely expresses the truth, 
thus:— 

"When a man starts on the line of evolution and 
higher criticism he gives up more and more, and he 
has no logical stopping-place till he has given up everything 
The frantic efforts of those who start on this 
line to hold to 'what is vital,' while giving up more 
and more, are pitiful. Their claiming that 'after all 
we have this or that much left' is simply whistling to 
keep their courage up. They have surrendered everything, 
and have left themselves at the mercy of the 
enemy. As George Adam Smith says, it is left only 
for the critics to fix the indemnity, and to take all 
they want, and everybody ought to have learned that 
they want everything. With them 'progress' means 
to deny more and more. And their work will not be 
done as long as any belief is left." 

R3163 : page 85 

THE EDITOR'S VISIT TO EUROPE. 

For several years the Editor has been promising 
the friends abroad that as soon as the sixth volume 
of MILLENNIAL DAWN series would be ready for the 
press he would comply with their many urgent invitations 
for a visit. From present appearances he hopes, 
by April, to have the manuscript of Vol. VI. in the 
hands of the compositors, with also a sufficiency of 



WATCH TOWER matter to last during the four issues 
of the period of his proposed absence. 

Not only does he anticipate joy in meeting many 
already known through correspondence, and new 
friends in Great Britain, but additionally it is his 
thought that a considerable extension of the service 
of the truth may be possible in Germany, France, 
Switzerland, Holland, Sweden, Norway and other 
European countries. He will make brief visits to 
these various countries, conferring with the friends, 
and ascertaining, so far as he can, the advantages 
and opportunities of the present time. 

Announcements for TWO-DAY CONVENTIONS for 
the trip are as follows:— 

London, England April 25,26. 

Stockholm, Sweden May 2,3. 

Glasgow, Scotland May 9,10. 

Liverpool, England May 16,17. 

Thun, Switzerland May 23,24. 



R3163 : page 85 

"WHATSOEVER HE SAITH UNTO YOU, DO IT." 

-JOHN 2:5.- 

THESE were the words of our Lord's mother to the 
servants, at the marriage in Cana, about the 
time of the beginning of our Lord's ministry— 
our Lord, his mother and his disciples being guests at 
the wedding. There was a shortage of wine, it will 
be remembered, and Mary evidently expected our 
Lord to exercise his power in some manner: although 
just why she should expect this is not evident, because 
we are distinctly informed that the miracle of turning 
water into wine was the beginning of Jesus' miracles. 
(Vs. 11.) And, by the way, this distinct statement by 
the Apostle John, gives emphatic contradiction to the 
apocryphal legends which accredit to our Lord various 
miracles, etc., previous to this time. 

How suitable are Mary's words to all of the Lord's 
people: "Whatsoever he saith unto you, do it!" How 
important that all should learn the lesson that it is not 
merely the hearing of the gospel which brings blessing 
to the heart; but obedience to the glad tidings! Of 
course, it is necessary that we should believe the Master 
before we could be ready to obey him; yet the 
expression, "Whatsoever he shall say unto you, do 
it!" includes a faith in the Lord on the part of all 
those who are obedient. The Christian cannot do 
better than adopt these words as one of the mottoes 
of his life,— Whatsoever my Lord saith unto me, I 
will do it. 

We are not to hear and to obey every voice, but, 



as our Lord himself said, "My sheep hear my voice, 

...and they follow me." (Jno. 10:27.) There 

are many voices in the world (1 Cor. 14:11), some 

calling in one direction and some in another. The 

world calls us, the flesh calls us, the Adversary calls 

us, and the Master calls us. The Christian may 

readily enough discern the voices of the world and 

the flesh, and should be on his guard against their 

seductive influence. But he may have more difficulty 

in discerning between the voice of the Adversary and 

the voice of the Good Shepherd; because, the Adversary's 

method is to simulate, or counterfeit, the voice 

of the Shepherd. His usual methods of deception are 

through false teachings backed by human organizations; 

the whole being made to appear as a message 

of light through messengers of light. (See 2 Cor. 11:13,14.) 

Christians need to be specially on guard on 

this point; many are hearing and adopting the voice 

of the Pope, others the voices of Presbyteries, Conferences 

and Councils, which hinder them from hearing 

and obeying the voice of the Shepherd. They have 

need to remember that the proper course is to "take 

heed that ye refuse not him which speaketh from 

heaven"— "Whatsoever he shall say unto you, do it." 

Hearken to his words! "A new commandment I 
give unto you, that ye love one another as I have 
loved you." (Jno. 13:34.) "If ye love me keep 
my commandments." "He that hath my commandments 
and keepeth them, he it is that loveth me; and 
he that loveth me shall be loved of my Father, and I 
will love him, and will manifest myself to him." 
(Jno. 14:21.) "He that loveth father or mother 
more than me is not worthy of me; and he that loveth 
son or daughter more than me is not worthy 
of me. He that taketh not his cross, and followeth 
after me is not worthy of me. He 
that findeth his life shall lose it; and he that 
loseth his life for my sake shall find it. He that 
receiveth you receiveth me, and he that receiveth me 
receiveth him that sent me." (Matt. 10:37-40.) He 
speaks again and says, "Blessed are the meek, the 
merciful, the humble-minded, the peacemakers, the 
pure in heart and those hungering and thirsting for 
righteousness and enduring persecution for righteousness' 
sake"— "Blessed are ye when men shall revile 
you, and persecute you and say all manner of evil 

R3163 : page 86 

against you falsely for my sake. Rejoice and be exceeding 
glad; for great is your reward in heaven." 
He saith to us again,— "Ye are the salt of the earth 
and the light of the world;" "let your light so shine 
before men that they may see your good works and 
glorify your Father which is in heaven."— Matt. 5. 
From heaven, he continued to speak to us through 



the Apostles to the same effect:— "Present your bodies 

living sacrifices to God, holy, acceptable, your 

reasonable service." (Rom. 12:1.) "Love as brethren; 

be pitiful, be courteous." (1 Pet. 3:8.) "Laying 

aside every weight, run with patience the race set 

before you, looking unto Jesus, the author and the 

finisher of your faith." "Laying aside all malice, 

and all guile and hypocrisies, and envies and all evil-speaking 

as newborn babes, desire the sincere milk 

of the Word, that ye may grow thereby." And 

"giving all diligence add to your faith fortitude; and 

to fortitude knowledge; and to knowledge moderation; 

and to moderation patience, God-likeness, 

brotherly-kindness, love."— 1 Pet. 2:1; 2 Pet. 1:5. 

We have heard his words. They impress us as 
being the very essence of wisdom and righteousness. 
We know that he is faithful who has promised that 
if we do these things we shall never fall, but be granted 
an abundant entrance into his everlasting Kingdom. 
We have taken the first step of belief; we have 
taken the second step of response, and have agreed to 
do these things; the important question with each 
one of us, therefore, must be— Am I obedient to him 
from heaven who speaketh? Am I doing whatsoever 
he says? To whatever extent any shall find shortcomings 
on the line of obedience to the Shepherd's 
voice, to the extent of ability let him beware and 
arouse himself, promptly, energetically to do these 
things; for the Father also saith, "This is my beloved 
Son: hear him!"— Luke 9:35. 

Returning to the narrative: We note our Lord's 
command to the servants to "fill the water-pots with 
water." Remembering the statement of the prophet, 

R3164:page86 

corroborated by our Lord's own words "without a 

parable spake he not unto them," we are inclined to 

surmise that this, his first miracle, contains some spiritual 

lesson for us. Endeavoring to draw such a lesson 

from this miracle, in harmony with the general 

testimony of the Word, we reason thus: The water-pots 

symbolize the Lord's people; their number, six, 

might indicate that it refers to the Lord's people in 

the present time of evil, because the number six is a 

symbol for imperfection and evil condition, as seven 

is the symbol for completeness and perfection. Thus 

six days of the week are set apart for labor, while the 

seventh is set apart for rest and refreshment: likewise 

the six thousand years of the world's history are 

permitted by the Lord to be evil, through man's disobedience 

and fall; while in the seventh thousand God 

proposes to bring in his Millennial Kingdom— his 

reign of everlasting righteousness. 

The water with which the water-pots were commanded 
to be filled, is in Scripture the symbol for the 



truth, the "water of life"; not merely the word of 

truth, but the word accompanied by and infused with 

the spirit of the truth— it is with this that the Master 

commands that we shall be filled. In the symbolic 

miracle the servants obeyed; not doubtfully or slothfully 

did they fill them half full, but, as it is recorded, 

"They filled them up to the brim." So it should be 

with us; having heard the Master's word, "Be ye 

filled with the spirit," we should draw abundantly 

from the fountain of grace and truth, nor cease until 

we are filled with the spirit "to the brim"— completely. 

And if we so do the Master's commands, what 

may we expect as a result? We may expect, as illustrated 

in the symbolic miracle, that the water will 

ultimately be changed into wine— the symbol for unalloyed 

pleasure, heavenly joys. 

In the symbol the miracle of change from water 
into wine came only to those vessels which were filled 
to the brim with water; so, likewise, the Lord has 
promised a still greater change to his faithful followers 
who receive the treasure of divine truth, and its spirit 
into their "earthen vessels," and who are filled with 
it. They shall be "changed" in a moment, in the 
twinkling of an eye, under the sounding of the seventh 
trumpet; they shall be changed from the human 
nature to the divine nature; from earthly conditions 
to heavenly conditions: this greater miracle, yet to 
be accomplished by our Lord, was well symbolized in 
the change of the water into wine— the joys of the 
Kingdom, the joys of the new nature. The Lord's 
consecrated people are symbolized not only by the 
water-pots and by the servants who fill them, but also 
they are symbolized by the bride at the marriage, 
just as the bridegroom is also the one who commands 
that the vessels be filled with the water. The governor 
of the symbolic feast who pronounced the new 
wine to be of the very finest quality, aptly symbolizes 
the heavenly Father who is the great Governor of the 
great feast associated with the union of the heavenly 
Bridegroom with his Bride, and the excellence of the 
wine represents fitly the joys of the Lord with which 
we shall be filled at our "change." Already we share 
to some extent in the blessings of this union; already 
we know something of the joys of our Lord; already 
we taste not only of the cup of his sufferings, but 
also "have tasted that the Lord is gracious." Already 
we partake of the wine on the lees, and the fat 
things full of marrow (Isa. 25:6); but our present 

R3164:page87 

joys are but foretastes of the coming realities— the 
best of the wine comes at the end of the feast, when 
our heavenly Bridegroom shall have changed us to his 
own image and likeness that we may share his glory. 
Oh, how important that we remember the words, 



"Whatsoever he saith unto you, do it!" Tis but a 
little time since we heard his voice directing us how 
our dearth of joy and happiness might be overcome, 
and how, instead of impurities and filth of the flesh, 
we might be filled with the truth, its spirit and its 
joy, and subsequently have the whole instantly 
"changed" to the perfection of joy,— into the divine 
nature. How are we heeding the Master's words? 
To what extent have we gotten filled with the truth 
and its spirit? He will give ample opportunity to 
each of us to be filled, and if any, therefore, is 
only partly filled, it will be because of a lack of the 
proper spirit of obedience. Our vessels may not all 
be of the same size; as with those in the symbol 
which apparently varied in size, holding from two to 
three firkins apiece, so our capacities, opportunities, 
etc., may vary; but, to fulfil the Master's requirement, 
each must be filled full,— no more, no less,— if 
we would experience the desired "change." 

While this lesson evidently applies merely to the 
hearing of the Lord's voice by the Church, during 
this Gospel age, the principle holds good also for the 
Millennial Age. Now, the vast majority of the world 
do not hear the Lord's message of grace, and, consequently, 
are not responsible; but by and by all the 

deaf ears shall be unstopped, and all the sin- and prejudice-blinded 
eyes shall be opened; and the Lord 
shall be recognized as the great Teacher, and all shall 
hear his voice. This is set forth by the Apostle Peter 
(Acts 3:22,23); after picturing the great Prophet 
(teacher), Christ the Head and the Church his body, 
whom God is raising up during this Gospel age, and 
fitting for the great work of the Millennial age, he 
declares, "Him shall ye hear [obey] in all things 
whatsoever he shall say unto you. And it shall come 
to pass that every soul which will not hear [obey] 
that Prophet, shall be destroyed from among the people" 
—in the Second Death. 

If the responsibility of those who will hear during 
the Millennial age is thus prefigured, and declared, 
so as to leave no doubt that "everlasting 
destruction from the presence of the Lord" shall be 
visited upon all who shall then refuse to obey, what 
shall we say would be the result of a refusal now to 
obey on the part of those who hear the Master's 
voice during the Gospel age? We will not say 
positively that there is no hope for such; but we see 
little room for hope for such as, hearing the voice and 
recognizing it, make no effort to obey it. On the contrary, 
we hear the Apostle saying, "If we sin wilfully 
after we have received a knowledge of the truth" 
[heard the Lord's voice], after we have tasted of the 
good Word of God and been made partakers of the 
holy spirit, and [experienced in our justification] the 
powers of the age to come, there remaineth no longer 
a share for us in the great sacrifice for sin; but only 



a fearful looking for of judgment and fiery indignation 
which would devour us as adversaries who had 
despised the mercy and grace of God.— Heb. 4:6; 
6:4,5; 10:26-31. 

Hearken to the Apostle's words again, "See that 
ye refuse not him from heaven who speaketh." (Heb. 12:25.) 
"We ought to give the more earnest heed 
to the things we have heard, lest at any time we 
should let them slip. "..."How shall we escape if 
we neglect so great salvation." (Heb. 2:1,2.) So 
far as we may judge, the hearing of the Word of the 
Lord in every case brings with it responsibilities; and 
becomes "a savor of life unto life or of death unto 
death." We do not say that those who are partially 
negligent— who fail to fill their "earthen vessels" to 
the brim with the truth and its spirit— will be esteemed 
to have despised the words of the great Teacher; on 
the contrary, the fact that they are seeking at all 
to be filled with the truth and its spirit is an evidence 
that they have respect to the Lord's Word, and do 
not reject nor refuse "him that speaketh from heaven." 
But their failure to give diligence to be filled 
with the truth and its spirit will mean their loss of 
the great prize, the fulness of joy in the "change." 
These are they who neglecting to use their opportunities 
zealously, neglecting to be filled full with the 
spirit of the truth, are correspondingly partially filled 
with the spirit of the world, and not accounted "overcomers" 
of the world. These are they who will 
"come up out of great tribulation," washing their 
robes in the blood of the Lamb. (Rev. 7:9,13-15.) 
Losing the great prize because of a deficiency of zeal, 
these will, nevertheless, get a great blessing because 
they did not refuse "him from heaven that 
speaketh." 

We must remember, however, that the hearing of 
the natural ear is not the only hearing to which the 
Scriptures refer. Hence, the expression, "He that 
hath an ear let him hear;" and again, "Ears have 
they, but they hear not;" and again, our Lord's 
words respecting the multitudes, "To them that are 
without, these things are spoken in parables, that 
hearing they might hear, and not understand." Our 
responsibility is not, therefore, marked by the opportunities 
of the outward ear. Many have heard with 
the outward ear who have never heard in the responsible 
sense of the Scriptures, in the sense that all 

R3164:page88 

eventually must hear;— in the sense of understanding, 
appreciating the message. The responsibility as to 
how we hear, and how we reject, is upon those who 
have an understanding of the Lord's grace. "Blessed 
are your ears for they hear, and your eyes for they 
see." But the blessing can only come to such as 



"refuse not him from heaven that speaketh." Let 
us all, therefore, who have heard the Master's voice, 
strive to remember his Word, as we have considered 
it foregoing: and let each of us seek to live as nearly 
as possible according to that Word. "Whatsoever 
he saith unto you, do it." 



R3165 : page 88 

THE NEW LIFE IN CHRIST. 

--EPH. 2:1-10.-MARCH 22.- 

Golden Text— "By grace are ye saved through faith."— Eph. 2:8. 

IT WAS from his Roman prison that the Apostle Paul 

wrote the Epistle to the Ephesians, one of the 

most beautiful of all his letters to the churches; 

full of deep spiritual instruction. Its keynote is "in 

Christ," this expression, or its equivalents, occurring 

at least twenty times in this Epistle. As the first 

chapter points out that the Church is chosen in Christ 

Jesus, so our lesson shows that we have life in Christ 

alone; and, subsequently, the Epistle shows that all 

of God's blessings and favors toward his people are 

solely upon consideration that they are in Christ Jesus 

—members of the body of Christ, members of the New 

Creation. None can get clear-cut, distinct appreciation 

of the Apostle's meaning except those who clearly differentiate 

between the Church and the world, and discern 

their different hopes, built upon different promises; 

and perceive that in God's plan only the Church 

is being dealt with at the present time— that the world's 

hope is future, and very different from that of the 

Church, now being called as the body of Christ, "members 

in particular." 

Our lesson opens with a dark picture, delineating 
the condition of the whole world through the fall; a 
condition of sin and worldliness under the power of 
Satan; in disobedience to God, under divine sentence 
of death, which has already operated to the extent of 
corruption in matters moral, mental and physical. The 
whole world, although creatures of God, and thus in a 
general sense his offspring, or children, ceased to be 
children of his favor, and became "children of wrath," 
through sin. The Apostle points out to the Ephesians 
that this had once been their wretched and terrible condition 
in common with the rest of mankind. How 
true is the picture even today! But let it be remembered 
that this is not merely the picture of the villains 
and outlaws of the world, but a picture of the world as 
a whole, including its very best representatives. "All 
have sinned, and come short of the glory of God." All 
are "children of wrath"; all are more or less under the 



power and control of the great Adversary; all are more 
or less controlled by the spirit of disobedience common 
to the whole world of mankind. 

The only exceptions to this rule are the few who, 
like those addressed at Ephesus, have escaped this 
bondage, this corruption, this death state, this condition 
of alienation from God;— and surely these are few today, 
as they were in all but a "little flock" in the 
days of the Lord and at the time the Apostle wrote 
these words. 

But the Apostle passes on to note what a great 
change came to the saints at Ephesus, on their acceptance 
of the Gospel; and how glad we are that a similar change 
has come to all who have become the Lord's saints, 
from that day to the present time! The experience of 
passing from death to life is the same in every instance, 
although the circumstances connected with the transformation 
may vary considerably. The steps of grace 
by which the Lord delivered us from being children of 
wrath and under power of the Adversary are set forth 
by the Apostle in the succeeding verses. Let us trace 
these steps, and note to what extent we have taken 
them, and to what extent our experiences correspond 
to those which the Apostle delineates. 

Our recovery did not begin with something in ourselves, 
—good resolutions, good works, etc. We did 
not improve ourselves, and thus commend ourselves to 
God: on the contrary, God was the prime mover in our 
release and recovery. He was inspired to give us aid 
by the benevolence of his character, for he is "rich in 
mercy." He is rich in all of his attributes, rich in 
wisdom, rich injustice, rich in power, rich in love; 
but it is with the attribute of love and its corresponding 
benevolence, or mercy that the Apostle is here 
dealing. How necessary it is for us to get this 
thought of God's richness of mercy well rooted and 
grounded in our hearts— that we may never doubt his 
generosity, his kindness, his sympathy, his mercy toward 
all those who desire and seek to know and to do 
his will! We need great faith in our heavenly Father, 
and it is only as we come to a clear knowledge of his 
glorious plan through the Word that we can exercise 
such a confidence in his love and mercy. The Adversary 
evidently desires that we should misunderstand 
our Creator, and, hence, has in every way possible sought 
to misrepresent his character and his plan;— and so successfully 
has he done so that at this very moment 999 

R3165 : page 89 

out of every 1000 of those who profess his name are 
moved by fear of an eternity of torture, rather than by 
love for him and appreciation of his love for them. 

The Apostle assures us that God had great love for 
us, even when we were dead in sins— when we were 
corrupt. It is difficult for us to think of God's greatness, 



purity and splendor of character, and of man's 
fallen condition— his corruption, mental, moral and 
physical— and then to understand how the holy Jehovah 
could have love for his fallen creatures. We may 
be sure that it was not the love of affection, such as he 
has for us now, as his sons, newly begotten of the spirit, 
but merely the love of sympathy. He beheld our 
miserable condition, and realized that an offer of release 
from our corruption, and of return to holiness and harmony 
with himself, would be joyfully appreciated and 
accepted by some— let us hope, by many;— and it was, 
undoubtedly, in view of such a response to his goodness 
and mercy that our Creator opened up for the 
world of mankind "a new way of life," in and through 
the Lord Jesus and his redemptive work. 

But although this sympathetic love was toward 
the whole world, it has not yet been made generally 
known— it has not yet been practically exercised toward 
the world, but only toward a comparatively small 
proportion of the whole. Here and there the message 
has been sent to a special class— to those who have "an 
ear to hear"— the remainder being left for the present, 
to be dealt with later. (Isa. 35:5.) It is to those 
who had the "ear to hear", and who hearing, have 
responded and laid hold upon the grace of God in 
Christ, that the Apostle is now writing. He calls attention 
to the blessing of such an experience. He 
does not here differentiate between those who have 
taken merely the first step of faith and obedience unto 
justification, and those who have gone on and taken 
also the second step of full consecration to the Lord, 
"even unto death"; but addresses the latter class only 
—those who, having made a full consecration to the 
Lord of their justified selves, have been begotten of the 
spirit, quickened and energized by that spirit as members 
of the body of Christ. The Apostle here interjects 
in parenthesis (2:5) a reminder that all this blessing 
has come to us, not of our worthiness, nor of our work, 
but by divine "grace are ye saved"; we reached this 
position in the new life, this reckonedly saved position, 
by faith;— delivered from the sentence of sin, 
saved from the darkness and delusion of the Adversary,* 
saved from the wrath of God, and brought, instead, 
into his loving favor. Oh, how great is the salvation 
which accompanies a complete conversion and 
full consecration to the Lord! What a wonderful 
change it brings to us, in thought, in word and in act! 
And yet this is only the beginning of our salvation, or 
what the Apostle elsewhere speaks of as being "saved 
by hope." (Rom. 8:24.) While thus saved by grace 
now, we are still waiting for a further salvation, by 
grace— "for the grace [salvation] that is to be brought 
unto us at the revelation of our Lord and Savior Jesus 
Christ"— the First Resurrection. 

All that, by the Lord's grace, we shall ultimately 
have through the "change" of the resurrection as members 



of the body of Christ— all the heavenly things, 

including full fellowship and communion with the 

Father and with our Lord— are reckoned as having 

their beginning in the present life. He, therefore, who 

knows not such a beginning of the new life, and its holy 

spirit now, has no reason whatever to believe that he 

has been begotten of the holy spirit— that he is a new 

creature in Christ. These new creatures are reckoned 

as having been raised up out of the state of sin and 

death into a new condition of life, and love of righteousness. 

Symbolically, they are ushered into the Holy 

of the Tabernacle, where they have the light of the 

Golden Lampstand, and partake of the spiritual Shewbread, 

and may offer the spiritual Incense to God, and 

have fellowship with him "in Christ Jesus"— as members 

of the Ecclesia, "the Church which is his body." 

This is a figurative resurrection from the dead— a figure 

and earnest of the real resurrection from the dead which 

shall come to each of these if they prove loyal to God 

and faithful to their covenant as members of the body 

of Christ— to be dead with their Head, that they may 

also live with him, through participation in his resurrection. 

-Rom. 6:5,8. 

Counting the new life as beginning now— counting 
ourselves as members of the New Creation, which by 
and by is to be glorified, we ask ourselves with the 
Apostle, What great thing must God work, then, in us 
and for us, eventually, if present foretastes of his goodness 
and grace are so superlatively grand? The Apostle 
answers such a query (vs. 7) assuring us that "in the 
ages to come God will show forth the exceeding riches of 
his grace through [in] his kindness toward us [who 
are] in Christ Jesus." He does not attempt to tell us 
what these riches will amount to. He would 
have us see that God is rich in mercy, rich in grace, 



*The Apostle was a firm believer in a personal devil, 
and a Bible study of his teachings on this subject would be 
profitable to many of the Lord's people in the present time, 
when, through Christian Science and other deceptive teachings, 
the very existence of the Adversary is being denied, 
and thus many are the more exposed to his wiles and deceptions. 
Note the following references to Satan by the Apostles: 
Acts 13:10; 26:18; Rom. 16:20; 1 Cor. 5:5; 7:5; 2 Cor. 2:11; 
11:14; Eph. 4:27; 6:11; 1 Thess. 2:18; 2 Thess. 2:9; 
1 Tim. 1:20; 3:6,7; 5:15; 2 Tim. 2:26. Our Lord 
also frequently referred to the Adversary: Matt. 4:10; 12:26; 
25:41; Mark 4:15; 8:33; Luke 10:18; 22:31; John 8:44; 
14:30. 

R3166 : page 90 

and rich in every other grand and estimable quality, 
and he would have us trust that so rich a Father will 



do for his adopted children "exceeding abundantly 
more than we could ask or think." Indeed, he assures 
us elsewhere that it is impossible for him to explain or 
for us to comprehend "the riches of our inheritance." 
"Eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, neither have entered 
into the heart of man the things which God hath 
prepared for them that loved him; but God hath revealed 
them unto us by his spirit."— 1 Cor. 2:9,10; 
Eph. 3:19. 

Nevertheless, the revelation by his spirit is only 
an approximate one. We cannot clearly discern those 
unseen things, we cannot comprehend them with our 
finite natural minds. "It doth not yet appear what 
we shall be;" but with the new mind we can, even 
though but vaguely, grasp the thought of our Heavenly 
Father's riches of grace and love, and can draw analogies 
from the things of this present life, and thus gain 
some idea of the glorious things which await us. As 
we see our heavenly Father's provision for the natural 
man,— a little lower than the angels,— as we look at 
the beautiful flowers of earth, and taste of its delicious 
fruits, it is but another step for the consecrated heart 
to realize that the rich Father who planned so beneficently 
for his human sons, and who permits so many 
of these blessings to come to mankind, even in its 
fallen condition, is no less rich in love and mercy 
toward his spiritual sons, and will make abundant 
provision for them also. And that as he has provided 
harmonies of music for the natural ear, and pleasant 
odors and flavors and scenes for the senses of the natural 
man, so, only on a more exalted plane, there will 
be gratifications for all the high qualities of heart and 
of mind for the New Creation;— there will be what will 
correspond to the present beauties of nature, but higher 
and grander, for those who shall gain the new nature. 
There will be that which will correspond to the flowers 
and the birds, the fields and the trees, the mountains 
and the valleys. There will be that which will correspond 
to the most delightful gratifications of the eye, 
the ear, the nose and the mouth, and to the most pleasurable 
thrills of the heart. Thus does faith, based 
upon a knowledge of the riches of grace and love in our 
heavenly Father, enable the new creature to see the 
things invisible and to rejoice in the wonderful things 
only partially disclosed at the present time. 

From this exalted position and favor and fellowship 
with God, associated in the heavenlies in Christ, 
we are enabled by faith to rejoice in those promises of 
our Father's Word, which assure us that we shall be 
permitted to cooperate with him in the great work of 
the next age, the Millennial Age, in showing forth his 
praises, in lifting up so many as will of the world of 
mankind out of their present fallen condition,— up to 
full restitution of that which was lost in Adam and 
redeemed by Christ. 

We notice (vss. 8-10) how carefully the Apostle 



seeks to guard us against the thought that any of these 

blessings have come to us on account of our own merit. 

He reiterates, "By grace are ye saved through faith." 

And if by grace, no longer of works, as he elsewhere 

points out. (Rom. 11:6.) If of works it would not 

be of grace. As members of the fallen race we were 

incapable of doing any work which our holy God could 

accept— we were dead, corrupted, foul, under condemnation 

as children of wrath, when he had mercy upon 

us, and opened up the way of life. Our present standing, 

therefore, as new creatures, is not the result of anything 

that the old creature did, or could have done. 

It is not of ourselves; it is a gift of God. This lesson 

must be thoroughly appreciated, else we will be continually 

in danger of falling. The grace is not of ourselves, 

certainly, and we may say also that although we exercised 

some faith at the beginning (else we could never 

have come to him at all, to accept his favors), yet the 

faith by which we were enabled to accomplish our consecration 

even unto death, and thus to become new 

creatures in Christ, was not of ourselves— we had no 

such faith when God laid hold upon us. He developed 

in us that faith by the revelations of his love, 

through his promises, through his Word. 

If our present standing were the result of our own 
efforts or "works," there would probably be some 
room for boasting;— it would imply that we were not 
so fallen that we could not have lifted ourselves out 
of the miry clay of sin,— on the line of the Evolution 
Theory. But such theories are not recognized in the 
divine Word and must not be recognized by any 
who would maintain their standing as new creatures in 
Christ. On the contrary, so far from considering the 
New Creature as an evolution of the old creature, the 
Apostle would have us understand distinctly that it is 
a new and separate creation. We were created in Christ 
Jesus, God's workmanship— prepared for good works, 
but not by good works. 

The Apostle assures us that God foreordained that 
this New Creation should progress in good works. To 
become new creatures in Christ we gladly surrendered 
our all to the Lord, that we might know his will and 
do it; and having accepted us in Christ, he informs 
us that it is his good pleasure that our entire life should 
be renewed, that we should discard entirely from our 
hearts, our minds, our wills, everything sinful, everything 
unholy, and that so far as possible our mortal 
bodies should be brought into subjection to our new 
minds, and that we should walk in newness of life, 
even on this side the vail— thus giving evidence of our 

R3166 : page 91 

sincerity, developing character and becoming meet "for 
the inheritance of the saints in light," in glory. Whoever 
is not disposed to walk in the Lord's ways of holiness 



and opposition to sin, and in cultivation of the 
mind, the spirit of the Lord, the holy spirit, surely 
deceives himself, if he thinks he has passed from death 
unto life, and that he is a new creature in Christ 
Jesus. 



R3166 : page 91 

REVIEW LESSON. 

--MARCH 29.- 

Golden Text— "Lo, I am with you alway, even 
unto the end of the world! "-Matt. 28:20. 

REVIEWING the lessons of the quarter, showing 
the missionary labors of the Apostle, and introducing 
to us a number of his colaborers, 

our principal thoughts may well be that the same gospel 
is still being preached— Jesus and the resurrection; 
—that the privilege of being ministers of this gospel, 
and colaborers with our Lord, is still open to us; that 
the rewards of such ministry may still be won by us; 
indeed, it is well that we get the thought that every member 
of the Church glorified will have been an active 
member of the Church militant— warring against the 
Adversary and his works, and influence. Whether our 
warfare be of the more public kind or of the more private 
sort, there must be warfare, and more than this, 
there must be progress and victory, else we can never 
be accepted of the Lord as "overcomers." 

Another thought should be borne in mind by us 
all; viz., that while we have gifts differing one from 
the other, and are, therefore, able to contribute to the 
Lord's cause relatively larger or smaller amounts of 
energy or service or wealth, the Lord in making his 
estimate will take knowledge of the spirit which actuated 
us, rather than of the results secured by our 
efforts; so that of some small talent it may be said, as 
it was said of the poor widow who cast in the two 
mites into the Lord's treasury,— that the smaller gift 
was more appreciated by the Lord than some of the 
larger ones. In view of this, let us see to it, not only 
that we do with our might what our hands find to do, 
but also that our every sacrifice and gift to the Lord 
and his cause is so full of love and devotion that the 
Lord will surely approve it; as done from love for him 
and his, and not from vainglory. 

The Golden Text of this lesson contains a precious 
thought,— that the Lord has been with his representatives 
in all their labors of love and self-denial, throughout 
the entire age, noting their efforts, assisting, encouraging, 
sustaining them, and surely watering and 
refreshing all who are making his service their special 



object in life,— ministering his grace to others, watering 
and feeding them. And if this has been true in the 
past, all through the age, how specially true we may 
realize it to be now, in the end of the age, in the time 
of harvest, in the time of our Lord's second presence! 
How we may realize that he is with us, in sympathy, 
in cooperation, in assistance, in sustaining graces- 
able and willing to make all of our experiences profitable 
to us, and to use us abundantly in showing forth 
the praises of him who has called us out of darkness 
into his marvelous light! 

Let these thoughts quicken us to fresh and greater 
energies, and to an appreciation of the fact that the 
things of this present time are but transitory (both its 
joys and its sorrows); and that the ambitions and hopes 
of the world are not worthy of comparison with these 
noble and laudable ambitions to serve and to please our 
Master, and to have his rewards— the chief of which 
will be fellowship with himself in glory, and the privilege 
of being colaborers with him in the blessing of the 
world,— the grand fulfilment of the heavenly Father's 
gracious plans for the world of mankind. 



R3167 : page 91 

ABLE TO COMPREHEND WITH ALL SAINTS. 

"PROCRASTINATION is the thief of time," is 
an old proverb and a true one: and time lost 
means opportunities lost, and the advantages 
and privileges which went with the opportunities, also 
lost. If Christian people (all the truly consecrated) 
could get the proper view of the divine plan, and could 
see clearly, with the eyes of their understanding, the 
great work which God is now doing amongst mankind, 
and could see their privileges in connection therewith, 
life would become much more real, much more earnest, 
to them than it is. We do not mention the world in 
general, but recognize it as having no hearing and no 
sight for divine things now;— being blinded by the god 
of this world, and deafened by the babel and clamor, 
which he induces and perpetuates for this purpose. 
Thank God for the gracious promises of the Word: that 
in the new dispensation, under Christ's Millennial 
Kingdom, all the blind eyes shall be opened, and all 
the deaf ears shall be unstopped. (Isa. 35:5.) But, 
seeing that the world is blind and deaf, we pause not 
to attempt a miracle with its children; but follow the 
Lord's injunction, and speak, so far as possible, only 

R3167 : page 92 

to those who have ears. "He that hath an ear, let 
him hear." 



Those who have heard in any measure,— who 
have seen to any extent,— who have tasted to any degree, 
that the Lord is graciously extending his favor 
toward all those who come unto him through the Redeemer, 
and who have thus come into the household 
of faith,— are privileged far beyond the masses of our 
race who are still aliens and strangers and foreigners 
to God. But one difficulty is, that through false doctrines 
instigated by the Adversary, believers have 
gained so wrong a conception of the divine plan, and 
of the divine character formulating that plan, that they 
not only do not love God with all their heart, but, on 
the contrary, they desire to have as little to do with 
him as possible;— as little as will secure their everlasting 
escape from an eternity of torture, which they 
have been taught to believe he has prepared for the 
great mass of his creatures. 

We cannot blame people, who view God and his 
plan from this false standpoint, if they take comparatively 
little interest in studying the Bible, which they 
believe is the revelation of these horrible preparations, 
—predetermined before the world was made. Our first 
effort in approaching the average Christian professor 
should be to anoint the eyes of his understanding with 
"the oil of joy," by briefly explaining to him the way 
of the Lord more perfectly. It is well to begin where 
God begins, and where the apostles begin the story of 
salvation; viz., with the cross of Christ. It is well to 
impress, first of all, that as a race we are all under condemnation 
through original sin, and that there is no 
escape for any, except through the Redeemer whom 
God has provided. Next, it is well to show just what 
the penalty is, that it is not eternal suffering,— torment; 
but eternal death, a death from which there 
could be no recovery,— annihilation. Next, it will be 
in order to show God's compassion in providing the 
Savior, who paid for us the very penalty against us— 
that in his flesh he "suffered, the just for the unjust, 
that he might bring us to God" (1 Pet. 3:18): that he 
did not suffer eternal torment, but the very penalty 
against us; viz., eternal death. Next, it will be in order 
to show that although the flesh of Christ was thus 
given up eternally, as man's ransom price, God nevertheless 
raised him from the dead, giving him a new 
life, a new being,— making him a "new creature;" 
and that accordingly he is no longer a man in the flesh, 
but is again a spirit being, now of the divine nature, 
far above angels, principalities and powers.— Eph. 1:21; 
1 Pet. 3:22. 

Next in order it will be proper to show how the 
death of Christ could effect all mankind;— that it was 
because Jesus took the place of father Adam, and thus 
redeemed his life;— and because the whole race was 
condemned in Adam, therefore his personal redemption 
would imply, legally and justly, that the penalty 
was sufficient for the sins of the whole world condemned 



in him,— and not condemned on their own account. 

Next in order we should show that the object 

in this purchase of the world, was, and still is, that 

every member of Adam's race might have an opportunity, 

as Adam had, of showing the Lord his willingness 

to be obedient to him and to his laws, and thus 

to obtain at his hand the great gift of everlasting existence. 

To Adam only this will be really a second 

chance, as his race has had no chance yet;— being born 

in sin and under its penalty of death. 

By this time your hearer should be ready to see 
that the trial which God proposes to give mankind is 
not such a trial as comes to a felon, a convict, before a 
criminal court,— to determine whether he is guilty or 
not guilty; for, on the contrary, in the case of mankind 
God already has determined that "all are guilty," 
that "there is none righteous, no not one." It is 
because such a trial would be a useless mockery, 
that nothing of the kind is proposed by the Lord, 
though this is the unreasonable thought common among 
his people. Seeing that we are hopeless as respects 
clearing ourselves, God has by his own plan and 
arrangement already paid the penalty for every man, 
—through the sacrifice of his Son. Hence, the whole 
world of mankind, when put on trial for life everlasting, 
will not stand trial as convicts, but as redeemed 
freed-men whose release from the original death sentence 
has been fully paid by the ransom-sacrifice of 
Christ. Their trial will be to determine their choice 
of lasting life or death— on God's terms— as Adam 
made choice in his trial;— to determine which they 
would choose after gaining a knowledge of sin and its 
penalty, everlasting death,— and a knowledge of righteousness 
and the reward of righteousness, life everlasting; 
—their choice being indicated by their obedience 
or disobedience to the divine mandates. 

Whoever follows the plan thus far, is prepared to 
see that God has not yet given to mankind in general 
the great trial, or opportunity secured for all by the 
sacrifice of our Lord Jesus,— for testing their worthiness 
or unworthiness of life everlasting. All who are 
not grossly blinded by error and prejudice can see that 
a full, fair opportunity forjudging between right and 
wrong, and for choosing the right and rejecting the 
wrong, has not yet come to the world as a whole. 
They can see that ignorance, prejudice and superstition 
are blinding the world still; and looking back 
along the aisles of history they can see that such blindness 
has been in the world for centuries;— since before 
the redemption price of the world was paid. 

R3167 : page 93 

If your hearer be of an inquiring mind he will now 
be questioning when or how a full knowledge and opportunity, 
or trial will, or could be extended to mankind; 



and this will be the favorable opportunity for 

reminding him of the Apostle's words, "God hath appointed 

a day [still future] in the which he will judge 

the world [not condemn the world, for the world is 

condemned already, for which reason Christ died for 

the ungodly;— but he will judge the world in the sense 

of granting all a trial] in righteousness [under righteous, 

favorable, just, reasonable conditions] by that 

man whom he hath ordained [the great Messiah, the 

Royal Priest, whose reign is to bring blessing and uplift 

to whomsoever will of all the families of the 

earth]." (Acts 17:31.) It is of these times of blessing 

and restitution that the Apostle Peter declares 

that all the holy prophets since the world began have 

spoken. (Acts 3:19-21.) And no wonder, since they 

spoke as oracles of God; for God has had this very 

purpose from the foundation of the world;— knowing 

in advance the course that sin would take, and the 

course which man would take under the delusions of 

sin, because of experience. 

BEGINNINGS OF COMPREHENSION. 

As the mental eyes and ears of the believer begin 
to take in this fulness of God's provision for his creatures, 
his former fears begin to subside; and he begins 
to get a realizing sense of the goodness and love of 
God, as never before. But still he will have queries. 
He will want to know when this day of which the 
Apostle speaks will begin;— the day of the world's 
judgment, or trial in righteousness, under favorable 
conditions. He will want to know why it did not begin 
immediately after our Lord's death and resurrection, 
—if it waited for and was dependent upon his 
atoning work. This will be the proper opportunity for 
opening before the eyes of his understanding another 
department of our heavenly Father's gracious plan; 
—showing him what is so clearly set forth in the Scriptures; 
viz., that the Father has purposed an elect and 
select Church to be as a Bride joined to Christ, her 
Lord and Redeemer and Bridegroom;— as a special illustration 
of divine mercy and goodness, sharing his 
glory, honor and immortality;— "changed" to the divine 
nature in the first resurrection. 

He now will begin to understand faintly what the 
Apostle meant when he declared, "Eye hath not seen 
nor ear heard, neither have entered into the heart of 
man, the things which God hath prepared [in reservation] 
for them that love him; but God hath revealed 
them unto us by his spirit." (1 Cor. 2:9,10.) He 
will begin to appreciate the fact that when we enter 
the Lord's family and become members of the household 
of faith, we are only on the threshold, of knowledge 
and appreciation, and have need of progress and 
growth. He will begin to understand the force of the 
Apostle's words when he said, speaking to Christians, 



and not to worldly people, "I bow my knees 

unto the Father,. ..that he would grant you... 

that ye, being rooted and grounded in love, may be 

able to comprehend with all saints what is the breadth 

and length and depth and height; and to know the love 

of Christ." (Eph. 3:14-19.) As again he says, "I 

cease not to give thanks for you, making mention of 

R3168 : page 93 

you in my prayers, that the. ..Father of glory may 

give unto you the spirit of wisdom and revelation in the 

knowledge of him, the eyes of your understanding being 

enlightened; that ye may know what is the hope 

of his calling, and what the riches of the glory of his 

inheritance in the saints."— Eph. 1:16-18. 

It requires time for heart and head so to expand 
as to take in a glimpse of such a wonderful blessing as 
this which God has provided for the "elect." But 
whoever gets even a faint glimpse of the greatness of 
God's favor toward the Church, will not be surprised 
that in the divine plan so liberal an allowance as nearly 
nineteen centuries was made for the calling and 
chastisement and perfecting of the saints for the great 
and glorious work to which they, as joint-heirs with 
Messiah, are called. Neither will they think strange, 
the fiery trials which try all of these whom the Lord 
our God calls, and accepts as probationary members of 
the elect Kingdom class. They will perceive, readily 
enough, that if it was expedient, yea, necessary, that 
our Lord Jesus, with all of his experience in the heavenly 
courts, must "learn obedience by the things which 
he suffered," and prove his loyalty to the Father by 
faithfulness even unto death, much more must his followers 
—whose previous history was that of sinners- 
be tried and thoroughly tested in respect to their loyalty 
to the Lord. 

From this standpoint, the experiences of Christians 
take on a totally new meaning; and those who 
have made consecration of themselves to the Lord realize 
that they are running for a mark, and for a prize; 
—no longer are their steps so unsteady, no longer are 
their hearts so faint and so careless, no longer do the 
world's baubles prove so enticing and ensnaring. God 
is thus working in them through the Word of his 
grace, through its exceeding great and precious promises. 
Through these he works in them to will to be 
faithful to him; and then to do;— conform their lives 
to the requirements of his Word. The same truth becomes 
also a power, a strength of God, in them, enabling 
them more and more to do those things which 
they should— the things pleasing in God's sight. 

In this view, all is clear and plain; not only do we 

R3168 : page 94 



see that God permits evil in the world that the world 
may learn certain lessons of bitter experience, as to 
the natural rewards of evil doing, but we see also a 
ministry of evil in respect to the saints— in their testing 
and polishing and refining; making them ready, 
and proving them worthy, as overcomers, to inherit 
the wonderful things which God has in reservation for 
the faithful. This will be, to the intelligent believer, 
a full explanation of why God has not yet undertaken 
the blessing of the world;— of why the promises, made 
through the prophets, of a coming time when the 
knowledge of the Lord will fill the earth, and the curse 
be rolled away, have not yet been fulfilled. They can 
see that it is the rolling away of this curse, the wiping 
away of all tears, the bringing of blessings to mankind, 
that is the very work for which God has commissioned 
his glorified Son, and for join t-heirship in which he is 
selecting the Bride, the Lamb's wife. 

From such a vantage point of view, the most sluggish 
intellect will catch wonderful and refreshing 
glimpses of glory and blessing that are to follow, as 
soon as the present "ministry of evil" shall have accomplished 
its work. Looking into the future they 
begin to realize something of the lengths and breadths 
and heights and depths of the divine plan, and they 
will be ready to exclaim, "Oh, if God's plan is so great 
that it has required such a broad foundation, such 
great preparation, in the person of our Lord, and in 
the persons of his people who will be joint-heirs with 
him in the Kingdom, how very great must be the 
blessing that shall be ministered to the world through 
these, when the appointed time shall come!" 

At first, the thoughts of the blessing coming to 
the poor groaning creation, and of the glories coming 
to the faithful and loyal and suffering saints, will overwhelm 
your auditor; and he can see and think of nothing 
else, for a while, than the stupendous grace of 
God manifested in this wonderful plan of human salvation. 
But, by and by, he will begin to think of 
himself, and what part he is privileged to have under 
the divine arrangement; and, as he sees a possibility 
of joint-heirship with the Lord amongst the faithful 
overcomers, he will find that all the exceeding great 
and precious promises of God's Word, and the new 
hopes inspired thereby, will be an energy and a power 
in his soul which he never before knew;— a purifying 
energy, a sanctifying power. "He that hath this 
hope in him purifieth himself, even as he is pure." 
Instinctively he will begin to heed the Apostle's exhortation, 
to "lay aside every weight, and the sin 
that doth so easily beset us; and to run with patience 
the race that is set before us in the Gospel."— 
Heb. 12:1. 

Soon after, various exhortations of the Word will 
have a new and a deeper meaning to him. As for instance, 
when he reads the Apostle's exhortation, "Let 



us cleanse ourselves from all filthiness of the flesh and 

of the spirit, perfecting holiness in the reverence of the 

Lord" (2 Cor. 7:1), his words, his thoughts, his actions, 

his clothing, his personal appearance, will all 

come under inspection from a new standpoint;— he is 

no longer a condemned sinner, but a justified and 

sanctified son of God;— his representative;— his ambassador. 

It will be a new thought to him, to some 

extent, that cleansing the flesh is a part of the sanctifying 

work; and that a cleansing of the spirit or mind 

or thoughts or intentions, is equally necessary,— in 

order to the attainment of a condition of heart pleasing 

and acceptable to the Lord. And although he will 

never attain the perfection in the flesh, because of 

inherited blemishes, he will, nevertheless, assuredly 

make considerable progress in this direction; and not 

to see some progress should be a cause of disappointment, 

and should lead to self-examination at the mercy-seat. 

(Heb. 4:16.) He will hear, moreover, the 

Apostle Peter's exhortation to the same class, saying, 

"Add to your faith virtue [fortitude]; and to virtue 

knowledge; and to knowledge self-control; and to 

self-control patience; and to patience godliness; and 

to godliness brotherly kindness; and to brotherly kindness 

love. For if these things be in you and abound 

they make you that ye shall be neither barren nor 

unfruitful in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ. 

...For so an entrance shall be ministered unto you 

abundantly into the everlasting Kingdom of our Lord 

and Savior Jesus Christ."— 2 Pet. 1:5-8,11. 



R3169 : page 94 

LIFE AND DEATH. 

So he died for his faith; that is fine- 
More than most of us do. 

But stay, can you add to that line 
That he lived for it, too? 

In his death he bore witness at last 

As a martyr to truth; 
Did his life do the same in the past, 

From the days of his youth? 

It is easy to die; men have died 
For a wish or a whim— 

From bravado or passion or pride- 
Was it harder for him? 

But to live— every day to live out 

All the truth that he dreamt, 
While his friends met his conduct with doubt, 

And the world with contempt;— 



Was it thus that he plodded ahead, 

Never turning aside? 
Then we'll talk of the life that he led— 

Never mind how he died. —Ernest Crosby. 



R3168 : page 95 

LETTERS OF INTEREST. 

DEAR MR. RUSSELL- 

My sister and I are forwarding our subscriptions for 
the WATCH TOWER for the ensuing year. You must get 
many letters of the sort that I am going to write to you, 
but you can never tire of hearing how our loving Father 
uses you for emancipating and feeding burdened and hungry 
souls such as we were before we read your books. We 
daily bless God for raising you up to be such an unspeakable 
blessing to us. The feast spread before us and the 
light shed upon God's Word almost overwhelms us at times. 
If you had known us two years ago! We were brought 
up with the doctrine of eternal misery of some sort for the 
vast majority, and only a few to be saved, drilled into us. 
We never really accepted it complacently, and in consequence 
we were in bondage for the struggling masses,— but 
I am sure you must understand all that we went through. 
For years we prayed that God would reveal himself in love 
to us but did not understand in the least how he would do 
it; and now he has; and how fully only those who have 
read and love your books know. We love the TOWERS 
and look for them. 

We both do what we can to spread the glorious gospel 
of the love of God, but are most surprised to find that professedly 
Christian, consecrated people will not search the 
Scriptures to see whether these things are so, and have simply 
repudiated the subject. We cannot understand it. We 
have been used of the Lord for ordinary professors of religion 
and for people of the world, and have found some of 
them really hungry. We understand our Lord's words 
now, "Ye shall know the truth, and the truth shall make 
you free." Yours in our Redeemer and Lord, 
(MRS.) E. NEWTON-England. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

Greetings to you in the Lord! My heart is filled with 
joy over the remarkable attention the Truth has drawn in 
the Carnegie Hall meetings, and what a joy it must be to 
you to be the instrument in the Lord's hands to convey 
the wonderful message to "whosoever hath an ear." May 
God's blessings continue to rest on you richly and abound, 
and on your noble coworkers in the Allegheny Church. 

Just a few words about the class here. I think it is 



because the Lord has been opening my eyes more and more 

each month and filling my heart with heavenly blessings 

that I am able to see the wonderful growth of the others in 

our class. The spirit of love and unselfishness is growing 

very rapidly, for which we greatly rejoice in the Lord. 

We meet every Sunday afternoon for Bible study, and Sunday 

night we use our new Bibles and DAWNS and TOWERS. 

Wednesday evening we have a prayer and testimony meeting, 

and the last Friday evening of each month we meet 

for a song service and a general good talk along the lines 

of the truth. 

There are quite a few getting interested and we feel 
quite encouraged. One of these was a very worldly man, 
and a chance (?) sentence or two of mine one day in the 

R3169 : page 95 

shop raised a question in his mind which I was only too 
glad to answer. The seed seemed to light on good soil, 
and I gave him the first volume to read, then the second 
and third. Of course profanity had to go, and then tobacco 
and so on, and he is really making remarkable 
progress. Your brother in the Lord, 

C. B. SHULL,-Ohio. 



DEAR FRIENDS :- 

Our Volunteer report is tardy, but the churches have 
comparatively few in attendance until the weather begins 
to be unfavorable at the Beaches, at which time also the 
tourists begin to reach here, making it more favorable to 
await. 

We received 14,000 TOWERS for distribution, only 
400 of which are on hand; these remaining ones we will 
see are properly disposed of. 

Our Volunteers have manifested more love and zeal, I 
think, than in the past, and feel they were disappointed to 
find the work completed for this time. We meet more 
opposition than ever in the past. One minister came out 
the church and said he would see to it that there were laws 
passed which would stop this distribution of literature. 
When he left his church his farewell sermon was against 
this truth. In private, this same man said he thought he 
would do God a service to take the lives of such people 
who held such devilish doctrines. 

We served about 1 10 churches in L A and about 

21 churches in surrounding towns. The friends at P 

served their churches alone this year. 

We thank you all for your share in this work, your 
labor of love, and are grateful for the privilege we have in 
service, and trust we may receive more ammunition for future 
work. Sincerely yours in Him, 

ROBT. NAIRN,-California. 



DEAR BRETHREN:- 

I received box of tracts some time ago with joy. It 
gives me joy to read the report in the TOWER at the last of 
the year— to know of the tons of glad tidings going forth in 
search of wheat grains. I have filled out and mailed all the 
addressed wrappers you sent me for India and other foreign 
countries, without the loss of one. I have, by the Lord's 
help, mailed over forty-seven thousand tracts since March 
26, 1901, including the India and foreign mail, besides 
about twelve thousand before that date, while I was not so 
deeply interested. As I am appointed by the community 
of this place and the Post Office Department to hold the office 
of postmaster, the Lord, I think, has opened a way for me to 
work. I wish to use it, so long as it will be opened, for the 
good work, as I fear soon we will not be permitted to distribute 
the glad tidings. The Lord said, "Work while it is 
day, for the night cometh when no man can work." 

Your unworthy servant in the Lord, 

J. L. FREED,— Pennsylvania. 



page 97 

SEMI-MONTHLY. 