From Our Readers
Soldier Turned Christian  My eyes were filled with tears when I read the article “Trained to Kill, Now I Offer Life.” (September 8, 1994) A Palestinian calling a Jew “brother”​—only in Jehovah’s organization can such unity be found!
K. T. O., Malaysia
Your Chop  Thank you for the interesting article “Your Chop​—Your Signature.” (May 22, 1994) My husband and I are studying the Bible with a Buddhist monk from Taiwan. He remarked on how accurate the article was! He then wrote his mother in Taiwan and had her send us a chop with our name engraved on it. We were thrilled!
K. J., United States
Boredom  I’ve just read the series “Is Your Life Boring? You Can Change It!” (January 22, 1995), and I have to tell you how much it helped me. I had never thought of myself as being bored, but I was very dissatisfied with my life because of my monotonous routine. The article made me look at things in a whole new light.
S. V., United States
Canary Islands  After reading the November 22, 1994, article “The Canary Islands​—Benign Climate, Seductive Scenery,” I want to express my appreciation for it and for similar articles in Awake! They heighten our awareness of and appreciation for our beautiful earth and Jehovah’s varied creations. Thank you for taking us on these exciting “trips.”
D. G., United States
Missionaries  I very much appreciated your excellent series “Missionaries​—Agents of Light or of Darkness?,” especially part six, “Making True Disciples Today.” (December 22, 1994) Our congregation has benefited a lot from working with a Gilead-​trained missionary couple. Their wise counsel and zeal have influenced me to make the full-​time ministry my career.
J. K., Botswana
Resisting Nazism  I was moved by the article “We Did Not Support Hitler’s War.” (October 22, 1994) It contained a picture of the “Solemn Declaration” of six Austrian bishops to support Nazism. One of those bishops was the very one who confirmed me in 1928 when I was a Jesuit student. I laugh at such “confirmation” coming from one who did not know how to be solid in the Christian faith himself! That war ended my affiliation with the Catholic Church. I also left my home country. Though I tried to resist the war in my own way, I did not have the strength of character of the Wohlfahrts. I still remember two of Jehovah’s Witnesses who refused to bear arms. They were instantly eliminated. I admire such ones.
P. K., Chile
Young People Ask  Thank you for the article “Young People Ask . . . How Can I Improve My Wardrobe?” (January 22, 1995) It made me get up and organize my bulging closet. Every day I was having a problem finding something to wear, despite having tons of clothing. But thanks to your helpful tips, doing so is now much easier.
T. B., Hawaii
Thank you for the excellent thoughts contained in the articles “Fads​—What Is Their Appeal?” and “Fads​—Should I Jump on the Bandwagon?” (November 22 and December 8, 1994) As a Christian elder, I confess that it is not always easy to avoid forcing my standards on others. But your phrases like “considering the feelings and attitudes of others” and “avoiding styles of dress and behavior that others may view as extreme” do reach hearts.
D. Č., Croatia

