Service Meeting Schedule
Week Starting October 13
Song 215
10 min: Local announcements and selected Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry. Encourage all to use the questions on page 1 for reviewing their notes in preparation for the audience discussion of the “Give God Glory” Convention program at next week’s Service Meeting. Using the suggestions on page 8, have two realistic demonstrations of how to present the October 15 Watchtower and the October 22 Awake! In each case, both magazines should be offered as a set, even though only one is featured. In one of the presentations, demonstrate making a return visit on a magazine-route call. Lay the groundwork for the next visit by drawing attention to the box “In Our Next Issue.”​—See the October 1998 Our Kingdom Ministry, p. 8, pars. 7-8.
20 min: “Serve Jehovah With Rejoicing.”a (All should have the January 2002 Our Kingdom Ministry insert with them for this discussion.) After discussing paragraph 4, mention that during November we will be offering the Require brochure and the Knowledge book. Briefly review one of the suggested presentations from the January 2002 Our Kingdom Ministry insert. Then show a practice session in which that presentation is demonstrated. Encourage all to prepare well for the ministry.
15 min: Conducting Bible Studies Brings Blessings. Talk and audience discussion. Relate a few experiences from our publications involving progressive Bible studies. (w00 3/1 p. 6; yb98 pp. 55-60) Invite the audience to comment on what we learn from the experiences and how we benefit from conducting Bible studies.
Song 172 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting October 20
Song 86
 5 min: Local announcements.
40 min: “District and International Conventions Stir Us to Give God Glory!” To be handled by an elder. Following an introduction of one minute or less, conduct an audience discussion of the convention program using the questions in the article. Apportion the time so as to accommodate all the questions, perhaps entertaining only one answer on some questions. Not all cited scriptures can be read in the time allotted; these are included for ease in locating answers. Comments should focus on the benefits of applying the things learned.
Song 112 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting October 27
Song 64
12 min: Local announcements. Accounts report. Remind publishers to turn in field service reports for October. Encourage all to review their notes from the special assembly day program for the past service year in preparation for next week’s Service Meeting. Using the suggestions on page 8, have two separate demonstrations of how to present the November 1 Watchtower and the November 8 Awake! In each case, both magazines should be offered as a set, even though only one is featured. In one of the presentations, demonstrate how to handle the conversation stopper “I’m not interested.”​—See Reasoning book, p. 16.
20 min: Use the Sword of the Spirit. (Eph. 6:17) Audience discussion based on the Ministry School book, pages 143-4. Invite comments on these questions: (1) Why do we use the Bible when responding to questions? (2) What does the name Jehovah’s Witnesses indicate about us? (3) What example did Jesus set, and how can we imitate him? (4) In the local territory, what are some effective ways to introduce Biblical thoughts? (5) Why is it good to read directly from the Bible whenever possible? (6) How can elders encourage others to make good use of the Bible? Have a well-prepared demonstration based on the exercise on page 144 in which a capable publisher uses at least one scripture in answering a question. Encourage all to make it their goal to use the Bible each time they give a witness.
13 min: Local experiences. Invite audience to relate experiences enjoyed in connection with attending the district convention or while witnessing informally at work, at school, or elsewhere.
Song 52 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting November 3
Song 147
 5 min: Local announcements.
15 min: Local needs.
25 min: Be Rich in Fine Works. (1 Tim. 6:18) Using the questions provided here, an elder conducts an audience discussion of the special assembly day program that was held during the past service year. Invite congregation to relate how they have been able to apply what they learned. (Portions can be assigned in advance.) Highlight the following program parts: (1) “Fine Works Bring Great Gain.” (Eccl. 2:11) Why do servants of God pursue the fine works described in God’s Word rather than the vain works of this world? (2) “Be Rich From God’s Standpoint.” (Matt. 6:20) How have some ‘stored up treasures in heaven,’ and with what benefits? (3) “Enrich Your Ministry With a Bible Study.” (om p. 91) What can help us to start and conduct a Bible study? (4) “Fine Works in This Time of Harvest.” (Matt. 13:37-39) What example of fine works did the early Christians set, and how has the Kingdom work expanded in our day? (5) “Let Your Fine Works Glorify Jehovah.” (Matt. 5:14-16) How have some ‘let their light shine’? (6) “Commending Youths for Fine Works in Praising Jehovah.” (Ps. 148:12, 13) How are Christian youths in our circuit giving praise to Jehovah? (7) “Continue in Fine Works and Reap Jehovah’s Blessings.” (Prov. 10:22) As we keep busy in fine works, what blessings can be reaped as an individual, as a family, as a congregation, and as a worldwide organization?
Song 180 and concluding prayer.
[Footnote]
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.

