Something Better Than Comic Books
IT IS understandable that some today should seek refuge in fantasy. They have grown up in a world that is morally and spiritually bankrupt. Religion has done little to satisfy the spiritual thirst of people. Politicians have often been wretched examples morally and have left their followers disillusioned. Popular philosophies have really broken down faith in God. Hence, it is no wonder that some youths experiment with everything from bizarre religious cults to drugs.
Fantasy and the supernatural, therefore, have a compelling attraction to some of these refugees from the world’s spiritual wasteland. But is wrapping oneself up in a cocoon of fantasy practical? No, for there is something better than fantasy.
If a person’s preoccupation with fantasy were to lead to his dabbling in the occult, he would be playing into the hands of one who has for centuries misled mankind​—Satan the Devil. Few people these days would confess a belief in the Devil. But the Bible assures us that he is a real, intelligent creature. “The whole world is lying in the power of the wicked one,” says the Bible at 1 John 5:19.
Pre-Flood “Supermen”
According to the Bible, this wicked spirit creature used disobedient angels to dominate the worldly scene. These angelic ‘sons of God’ became obsessed with the idea of having sexual relations with the “daughters of men” and somehow materialized to fulfill their selfish fantasies. Their offspring were a freakish race of giants called Nephilim, noted for their violent disposition. Along with their angelic fathers, they turned the world into a place of violence, and God was forced to bring that world to an end by means of a Flood.​—Genesis 6:1-7, 13; Jude 6.
Man has never forgotten these pre-Flood “supermen,” however. Likely, Greek mythologies about gods coming down out of heaven are but an echo of these real pre-Flood happenings.
In view of this a Christian avoids entertainment that borders on magic, witchcraft, spiritism and similar encounters with the supernatural. The Bible condemns all such.​—Leviticus 19:26, 31; Deuteronomy 18:10-12.
Nor are Christians impelled to retreat from the harsh realities of life in this system of things. They know that the Bible predicted these conditions and advises: “But as these things [the prophesied world conditions] start to occur, raise yourselves erect and lift your heads up, because your deliverance is getting near.” (Luke 21:28) This promised deliverance will come through the resurrected King Jesus Christ who has powers far outstripping any fictional superhero. (Revelation 19:11-16) His intervention in world affairs will mean destruction for corrupt governments and religions that have failed to satisfy the spiritual hunger of their supporters. (Daniel 2:44) His righteous heavenly government will take over the rulership of the earth and restore paradise conditions.​—Revelation 21:3-5.
These facts​—not fantasies—​merit your consideration, and that of your children. Jehovah’s Witnesses will be happy to examine the Bible with you so that you can understand the basis for this hope. Do not make the mistake of retreating into an unreal world of fantasy. Instead, turn to the promises of the Bible. They are encouraging, firm​—and REAL!
[Picture on page 11]
Bible stories​—far better than comics

