Can You Rejoin the Ranks?
1 During the last five years, thousands of regular pioneers found it necessary to leave the pioneer ranks. Were you one of them? If so, no doubt you had reason to relinquish this privilege. Perhaps it was something unexpected and beyond your control. Does that reason still exist? If health, financial problems, or family obligations made it necessary for you to stop, have your circumstances improved? Could you make some reasonable adjustments that would permit you to enjoy the blessings of regular pioneering again? Have you thought about reapplying?
2 As you know, good organization and careful scheduling are required if you are to succeed as a pioneer. While there is usually not a lot of time for recreation, a pioneer’s brief periods of relaxation often prove to be more satisfying and rewarding. (Prov. 19:17; Acts 20:35) By keeping busy in the service, you are protected from the influence of the self-seeking, take-it-easy way of life pursued by the world. Jehovah has promised that he will make you spiritually rich if you are self-sacrificing and put Kingdom interests first. You are sure to experience genuine joy and contentment by being wholehearted in Jehovah’s service.​—Prov. 10:22; Col. 3:23, 24.
3 Should the full-time ministry be viewed as a privilege open only to a special few? No. In view of our dedication vow, every Christian should give serious consideration to full-time service unless circumstances make it impossible.​—Mark 12:30.
4 If your health and Scriptural responsibilities clearly do not allow you to pioneer at present, you can be assured that Jehovah knows and understands. He will reward you for your faithfulness in what your circumstances permit. (1 Cor. 4:2; 2 Cor. 8:12) If, though, it now seems favorable for you to pioneer again, why not approach the presiding overseer and request an application?
5 Can Your Family Help? You may have left the ranks because you needed to care for family obligations. Is it possible that other family members are now in a position to give assistance that would enable you to reenter the pioneer work? For some, with just a little help in caring for certain responsibilities, pioneering can once again be attainable.
6 Good cooperation and a little extra effort on the part of other family members might make this possible. Help might take the form of assistance with finances or transportation, as well as regular appointments to work together in service. Likely there are other ways they can assist. If circumstances do not permit you to take up this privilege of service again, perhaps such assistance can be given to another family member who can do so.
7 Why not discuss this matter as a family? The prospects may be good if you make it a united project. If another pioneer can be added to the ranks, the whole household can rightly feel that they are having a share. Such a generous spirit will not only add to the Kingdom witness in the territory but will also draw the family closer together spiritually.​—Luke 6:38; Phil. 2:2-4.

