Keep a Positive Attitude
1 How thrilled we are to read about the marvelous increases taking place in many lands! Yet, we realize that in some areas Kingdom publishers often encounter apathy, indifference, or even outright resistance to our preaching work. How can we keep a positive attitude if this is the case in our territory? How can we ward off a negative attitude that would rob us of our joy or dampen our zeal for the work of making disciples?
2 A positive attitude will help us keep our balance. Even under trying conditions, we should not let negative thoughts dominate our outlook. Jesus set the perfect example for us. Relatively few people accepted what he taught. Many stumbled over his teaching. He faced situations that severely tested his endurance. Religious leaders criticized his work and plotted to kill him. He was spit upon, slapped, mocked, beaten, and eventually put to death. Yet, he found joy in the work he was doing. Why? He recognized the importance of doing God’s will, and he did not give up.​—John 4:34; 13:17; Heb. 12:2.
3 Maintain a Proper View of Our Ministry: To do this, we need to keep several factors in mind. Remember that we have a message that most people ignore or oppose. (Matt. 13:14, 15) Although the apostles were officially ordered to stop teaching on the basis of Jesus’ name, they remained faithful to their commission to preach, and the harvest kept coming in. (Acts 5:28, 29; 6:7) We know in advance that in some territories, comparatively few people will listen. (Matt. 7:14) Hence, we have cause to rejoice if only one person in our territory lends a hearing ear. Remember, too, that even those who oppose must be given an opportunity to hear. (Ezek. 33:8) Some opposers eventually change and become worshipers of Jehovah. When viewed properly, then, our ministry brings us a feeling of accomplishment, even if few listen. Our very presence at the doors with the message of God’s Kingdom is a witness.​—Ezek. 2:4, 5.
4 We have good reason to feel positive in our outlook. The prosperity of the worldwide work and the increasing evidence of the nearness of the great tribulation should motivate all of us to do our utmost in serving with godly devotion. (2 Pet. 3:11, 14) Zealous activity during August would be a fine way to show our appreciation for what we have learned. We also want newly associated ones to display a positive attitude toward using what they are being taught. If some of our Bible students have progressed to the point of being ready to become unbaptized publishers, the month of August may be an excellent time to get them started.
5 Whether serving as publishers or as pioneers, all of us are helped if we keep in mind that what Jehovah asks of us is not burdensome. (1 John 5:3) He promises to sustain us. (Heb. 13:5b, 6) In spite of public indifference, apathy, or resistance, we must be positive and keep on preaching because it is God’s will that we do so.​—1 Tim. 2:3, 4.

