Conch—A Taste of the Islands
By Awake! writer in the Bahamas
“Four conch snacks!” “One grilled conch and two conch salads!”
These are typical expressions of hungry patrons ordering food at local carryout restaurants here in the Bahamas. The tantalizing aroma of fried conch mingles with the salt air, stimulating the appetite. But just what is conch?
THE conch is a single-shelled marine mollusk, or sea snail. There are a number of varieties of this mollusk, including the hawk-wing, milk, rooster-tail, fighting, and queen, or pink, conch. The variety that is especially enjoyed as food here is the queen conch. It bears the Latin name Strombus gigas and is principally found in warm waters from Florida to Brazil.
The queen conch has a large spiral-shaped shell with a wide flaring lip, the adult varying in length from eight to ten inches [20 to 25 cm]. Visitors usually pronounce it “konch” and are quite surprised to hear the locals say “konk.” However, either way is acceptable.
Capture and Uses
As a youngster, Basil recalls going out on a boat with his father in search of conch. “My dad used a large cone-shaped bucket with glass at the wide end along with a long pole with two hooks at the end. He would dip the glass-bottomed bucket in the ocean so he could look down and locate the conch. As he held the bucket with one hand, he used the other to hook the conch with the pole and pull it into the boat.”
The popular method today is for a diver simply to go down and bring the conch up by hand. When diving in deeper waters, he may use a snorkel or if he has a government permit, an air compressor.
To extract the conch, a hole is made at the base of the shell. A knife is then inserted through the hole to nudge the conch to the entrance of the shell so that it can be pulled out. The conch has four main parts: the head, the internal organs, the mantle, and the muscular foot. Attached to the foot is a single brown horny plate, or operculum. A tough skin covers the foot, which is the part that is eaten. The skin and all inedible parts are cut away, leaving the sweet, white meat.
Conch is an excellent source of protein. It continues to be highly regarded for its therapeutic value. Many people recount experiences of remarkable improvement in their health after a diet rich in conch.
Today there is a thriving industry in conch-shell jewelry. The shell, with its pink flaring lip, is beautiful and very popular among shell collectors. However, the biggest use for conch is in pleasing the palate. Over the years, innovative cooks have come up with a variety of tasty ways to prepare this delicacy.
Mouth-Watering Treat
In the days before refrigeration was common here, conch was preserved by drying. First, it was tenderized by being beaten with a mallet. The meat was then hung in the sun for a few days or so to dry, or cure. Before it was cooked, the meat was soaked in water for a few hours to soften it. Many still enjoy the flavor of conch preserved in this way.
A favorite with locals and visitors alike is conch salad, which might be called conch sushi. Yes, the conch is eaten raw. The meat is cut out of the shell, and bite-size pieces are combined with celery, green bell peppers, hot peppers, onions, and tomatoes. Salt, fresh lemon, and orange juice are added. If you shudder at the thought of eating raw seafood, there are many recipes in which conch is cooked. A word of caution, though. When cooking conch, first tenderize it with a mallet. If you don’t, the conch will be tough and rubbery.
Conch can be steamed, stewed, jerked, grilled, cracked, made into burgers, cooked in rice or soup—the list goes on and on. Conch fritters and chowder are often served as appetizers. Basic recipes for preparing these dishes have been passed down from one generation to the next. So when you visit the beautiful isles of the Bahamas, do not return home without sampling conch. It will give you a real taste of the islands.
[Box/Picture on page 23]
Cracked Conch (Shown at bottom)
  Sandra, a local wife and mother, describes how she prepares delicious cracked conch: “First, tenderize the conch thoroughly. Then coat it with flour that is seasoned with salt and pepper, and dip it in egg batter. Fry the conch in hot oil until golden brown. Drain it on paper towels, and add lemon juice.”
  Conch prepared this way is usually served with French fries and lots of catsup or with peas and rice. Cracked conch may also be eaten with tartar sauce. Frozen conch is often exported, so you may be able to find conch in your area. Why not try it? You just may like it.
[Pictures on page 23]
Clockwise: Queen conch shell; conch fisherman using a glass-bottomed bucket and a pole; extracting the conch; conch chowder; conch salad; conch fritters; grilled conch with plantains and cassava

