From Our Readers
Victimized at Work  I was deeply touched by the series “Victimized at Work—What Can You Do?” (May, 8, 2004) I have personally experienced everything it described. I suffered religious discrimination at the hospital where I worked, and it affected my emotional and spiritual health. I am happy to know that I am not the only one who has had this very unpleasant experience.
J. C., Puerto Rico
I have experienced mobbing for several years and was close to having a nervous breakdown. I will do my best to apply your suggestions.
C. H., United States
Thank you for helping those of us who are being victimized and for assisting us in drawing closer to our compassionate God, who is aware of our plight.
L. W., United States
Our local congregation of Jehovah’s Witnesses featured this issue at places of business and encouraged owners to keep the article on file. Many expressed appreciation for the material.
V. S., United States
I had to quit my job because of verbal abuse. Please continue to publish articles that show us how to cope with problems.
T. Y., Japan
I offered the issue to my doctor, saying, “Perhaps one day you’ll have a patient complaining of stomach problems because of mobbing.” He said, “Not perhaps. I have a patient like that right now!” He promised to read the articles.
E. S., Germany
Since I don’t have my own apartment, I am forced to live with my sister and endure her verbal abuse. It has driven me to despondency. However, this issue of Awake! was just for me! Jehovah has truly comforted me.
S. A., Russia
Killer Plants  Thank you for the article “Danger—Killer Plants!” (May 8, 2004) I have been collecting and cultivating carnivorous plants for over 12 years. You achieved a marvelous balance between scientific accuracy and simplicity of presentation.
T. K., Germany
I am 11 years old, and my teacher assigned us to write about the Venus flytrap. That very week, this article came out—just in time!
R. S., Russia
I used to cultivate carnivorous plants and was moved by the article. However, the title was a little hard for me to accept. These plants may be a danger to some insects, but they are also clean, fragile plants. Some are even endangered species.
H. K., Japan
“Awake!” responds: Thank you for the reminder. Although our title served to attract the attention of readers, the article itself taught readers to respect and care for these plants.
Faith Under Adversity  I enjoyed the article “A Family’s Faith Under Adversity.” (May 8, 2004) I am ten years old and have Crohn’s disease. I spent most of last winter in and out of the hospital until my problem was finally diagnosed. This article really helped me to be more confident and able to deal with my illness. I look forward to living in Paradise, where we won’t have these problems anymore.
M. H., United States

