Where Six Continents Meet
By Awake! writer in Ukraine
DO YOU enjoy observing animals in their natural setting? If so, you would delight in a visit to Africa, Asia, Australia, Europe, North America, and South America all in one place. How is such a visit possible? By a trip to the Askaniya-Nova Biosphere Reserve in southern Ukraine. Here herds of wild animals from these six continents roam the plains and live in peace and harmony.
The history of the reserve goes back to 1883. That year a German settler named Friedrich Pfalz-Pfein set aside a piece of virgin steppe as a reserve. He already had a private zoo with over 50 species of birds and mammals there. Later, in 1887, a botanical garden was added. Presently the Askaniya-Nova Biosphere Reserve contains a botanical park, a steppe reserve consisting of over 27,000 acres [11,000 ha] of virgin prairie land, and a zoo.
Approaching the reserve, the botanical park comes into view first. Over the years a large variety of trees from many parts of the world have been brought here by scientists. The trees dot the park’s area of some 500 acres [200 ha]. Since the reserve is in an arid region of the country, artesian wells with irrigation ditches have been dug to water the trees and shrubs. The original landscape and irrigation system were awarded a gold medal at the Paris World’s Fair in 1889.
Animals From Six Continents
From the shady park, we travel to the sunny steppe, where herds of wild animals of some 50 different species roam the nearly 6,000 acres [2,500 ha] of fenced plains. First, let us observe some animals from Africa.
The Cape buffalo is one of the most famous and dangerous representatives of the big-game animals. It is impressive not only because of its size—about five and a half feet [1.7 m] at the shoulder—but also because of its massive, three-foot-long [1 m] horns. Since the males are unpredictable and are known to attack, getting too close to them is not recommended.
Another animal that catches our attention is the eland, an antelope of southeast Africa. Because hunting is prohibited in the reserve, eland have lived here in peace since they were first brought to this area in 1892. They pasture within view of visitors, of whom they have no fear. Some of the eland are even domesticated and can be milked just as one would milk ordinary dairy cattle. Their nourishing milk, with its high fat content, is used for medical purposes, such as treating stomach ulcers.
The emu, a large flightless bird, comes from Australia. It is the second-largest of all birds—only the ostrich is bigger. Some emus reach a height of six feet [1.8 m] and weigh 130 pounds [59 kg]. Though a net fence separates these birds from other animals, their area is large enough for them to run about freely.
A fascinating feature of the emu is that the unhatched baby birds react when they hear the sound of the male emu. For example, it is claimed that when a recording of the male emu’s call is played shortly before the eggs hatch, the movements of the chicks inside cause the eggs to sway back and forth. Yet, the chicks inside their shell do not react to the call of the female. Why not?
Although the female lays the eggs, the male emu broods them. He cares for them for about 50 days until they hatch, and then he cares for the chicks afterward. So even while they are still in the egg, the unhatched chicks already know who is taking care of them. By the way, these are no ordinary eggs—they are dark green and huge—weighing nearly two pounds [about 700 g] each!
The reserve contains herds of Przewalski’s horses. In 1899 they were brought here from the Mongolian prairies. It is believed that as a result of hunting and loss of pasture, Przewalski’s horses became extinct in the wild in the 1960’s.
Presently, approximately 1,100 Przewalski’s horses live in captivity in various zoos and parks, including about a hundred here in the Askaniya-Nova Reserve. Scientists are endeavoring to reintroduce these animals into the wild. Thus, 21 Przewalski’s horses were shipped back to Mongolia in 1992/93.
The most numerous of the species in this reserve is the spotted deer from China and Japan. Because of its spotted back, this graceful creature is also called flower deer. It is a beautiful animal, having a slim build and stately antlers, which are proudly displayed on its small head.
Gayals, huge semidomesticated Indian oxen, can also be seen peacefully pasturing in the steppe. In India these animals wander on their own in the forest during the day, and return to the village at night. Though in Askaniya-Nova they have neither forest nor village, the oxen seem comfortable on the local grassland with neighboring herds of animals.
The American bison, or buffalo, is impressive because of its power and size. About 150 years ago, millions of these giants roamed the North American prairies, but they were hunted to near extinction. This local herd of American bison is the only one of its kind in Europe. They feel at home on the steppe grasslands both in summer and winter.
South America is represented by the rhea (or nandu), a big flightless bird. It is similar to the Australian emu, reaching a height of five feet [1.5 m] and a weight of 110 pounds [50 kg]. Like the emu, the male rhea incubates the eggs. A characteristic difference is that emus are monogamous, whereas rheas are polygamous. Thus, three to five female rheas may lay their eggs in one nest.
The red deer and roe deer come from Europe. These are hardy animals that thrive on the steppe grass and can readily withstand both cold and heat. These deer are used to replenish reserves in different parts of Europe as well as areas set aside for hunting game animals. Shetland ponies arrived here at the Askaniya-Nova Reserve from Northern Europe in 1960. Since then their numbers have increased considerably.
The reserve is also home to herds of zebras, blue wildebeests (large African antelope), Asian wild asses, and saigas (Eurasian antelope), as well as a huge variety of birds. Some of the animals stay outdoors in the steppe all year, while others are taken to the farms, where they are sheltered during winter.
Maintaining This Natural Reserve
Today Askaniya-Nova is a study center for the Ukrainian scientific research institute. The personnel of the institute do extensive work in preserving the steppe in its natural state and in helping the animals to acclimatize to their new environment. Scientists are also working to improve the quality of the existing collection of exotic and rare animals.
Natural reserves can be found in different parts of the earth. You may find them on North and South American prairies and pampas, African savannas, Australian grasslands, and Asian and European steppes. Each has its own peculiar characteristics and variety of plants and animals. The international aspect of the Askaniya-Nova Reserve shows how animals from various corners of the earth can adapt to their surroundings and coexist peacefully.
With great anticipation, many people await the time prophesied in the Bible when God’s Kingdom will bring peace not only among humans but also among the many varieties of animals on the earth.—Isaiah 11:6-9; Hosea 2:18; Acts 10:34-35.
[Map on page 14]
(For fully formatted text, see publication)
Askaniya-Nova Biosphere Reserve
[Picture on page 15]
Eland
[Picture on page 15]
Cape buffalo
[Picture on page 15]
Emu
[Picture on page 16]
Spotted deer
[Picture on page 16]
Przewalski’s horse
[Picture on page 16]
American bison
[Picture on page 16, 17]
The reserve is also home to a great variety of birds
[Picture on page 17]
Rhea
[Picture on page 17]
Roe deer
[Picture on page 17]
Red deer
[Picture on page 17]
Botanical park
[Picture Credit Lines on page 15]
Eland and emu: Biosphere Reserve “Askaniya-Nova,” Ukraine; globes: Mountain High Maps® Copyright © 1997 Digital Wisdom, Inc.
[Picture Credit Lines on page 16]
Deer: Biosphere Reserve “Askaniya-Nova,” Ukraine; globes: Mountain High Maps® Copyright © 1997 Digital Wisdom, Inc.
[Picture Credit Lines on page 17]
Birds: Biosphere Reserve “Askaniya-Nova,” Ukraine; flowers and park: Olha Dvorna/Biosphere Reserve “Askaniya-Nova,” Ukraine; globes: Mountain High Maps® Copyright © 1997 Digital Wisdom, Inc.

