Vol. XXXVIII 


BROOKLYN, N. Y., OCTOBER 15, 1917 


No. 20 


PROPER AND IMPROPER JUDGMENT OF OURSELVES AND OTHERS 

"If we would judge ourselves, we should not be judged. But 
should not be condemned with the 

In this text the Apostle seems to be saying that if we as 
Christians would properly criticise, examine and correct ourselves
, it would not be necessary for the Lord to take us in 
hand and give us disciplinary judgments, or criticisms. But 
if we fail to do this judging of ourselves, then the heavenly 
Father must do itj for he has taken us into his family, under 
his parentaJ care. The object of this chastening would not 
be to injure us, however, but to prevent our being condemned 
with the world. 

We judge ourselves when we criticise our own conduct, our 
own words, our own actions, and try them by the principles 
which are found in the Bible — justice, mercy, and truth. As 
our Lord has taught us, if we find that we have done wrong 
to another, we should leave our sacrifice on the altar, and first 
go to make apologies to our brother. (Matthew 5:23) Thus 
we would be judging ourselves, obligating ourselves to do the 
right thing. When we have done wrong, it is not enough to 
say, "Yes I am wrong; but then, no one is perfect." To do 
so would not be to act in harmony with the spirit of our text. 
That spirit is that if we find ourselves to be in the wrong, then 
we have a sacred duty to perform — we must make the matter 
right, to the best of our ability. 

If the wrong has been along the lines of uncharitable 
thoughts toward anybody, it is not necessary that we go to 
that person and tell him about the matter. But we should 
remind ourselves of all the circumstances, and then judge ourselves
, give ourselves a good setting-down. We are obligated 
to give ourselves a lesson along this line. Thus we should 
manifest that our heart's intentions are right, and that we 
are, therefore, right at heart. 

We understand that the will of God concerning us is, that 
we should judge ourselves. If we find that we have injured 
another with our tongue, or in any other way, we should go 
to that person and make proper apologies, thus setting matters 
right. Then we should put upon ourselves a penalty that we 
shall not easily forget. If the paying of that penalty requires 
considerable humility, so much thS better. But if we neglect 
to punish ourselves, we would thus demonstrate that we are 
not in proper heart condition; and in that case the best thing 
that could happen to us would be for the Lord to give us a 


when we are judged, we are chastened of the Lord, that we 
world."— 1 Corinthians 11:31, 32. 

severe chastisement. This might not come on the same day or 
week or month, however, as the wrong-doing. But we may be 
sure that if we fail to do right in the matter, the Lord will 
take us in hand and give us nsome kind of trying experience 
which will teach us the needed lesson. He may permit somebody
 to do something to us or to say something about us that 
will ahow us wherein we have failed to do right. Or he may 
permit us to come into such a position that it will bring upon 
us some kind of disciplinary suffering. 

The object of this arrangement — that if we do not judge 
or criticise ourselves, the Lord will do so — is that we shall 
not come into condemnation with the world. During the next 
age the race of mankind will be on trial, on judgment. (Acts 
17:31) If we were of the world, our judgment would come 
then instead of now. But we are not of the world; for the 
Lord has called us out of it. We are new creatures in Christ, 
begotten of the holy Spirit of God. In our case it may be 
the same now that it will be with the world in the future; 
that is, we might be making marks upon our character which 
must be removed. If this is true, the Lord will discipline us 
for their removal, unless we come to realize the situation and 
remove the marks ourselves. Otherwise we should not be fit 
for the kingdom. In other words, if we belong to the church of 
Christ, we must receive our judgments and punishments now, 
during the present age. If we fail thus to chastise ourselves, 
then the Lord will do so for our growth in holiness. 
JUDGMENT NOT NECESSARILY CONDEMNATION 

We very frequently use the words judgment and opinion 
as synonyms, as expressing the same sentiment. A man's 
opinion of a matter is his judgment upon the subject. Whether 
he expresses it to another or whether he keeps it to himself, 
his judgment is his opinion. There may be times when it 
would be proper for us to have an opinion, or judgment, that 
we would not think it wise to express. For instance, our 
Lord said to his disciples, "I have many things to tell you, 
but ye cannot bear them now." (John 16:12) There were certain
 reasons why he withheld knowledge from them. So it 
might be with us. 

In the Scriptures the word judgment is sometimes used, in 
a special sense; namely in the sense of condemnation. This 


[6162] 


Octobek IS, 1917 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(307-309) 


judging, however, the Lord forbids his people to do. We may 
say that certain lines of conduct and certain words or acts 
are, in our judgment, out of accord with the Lord's standards 
of righteousness. This is our privilege. When a matter is 
known to be a fact, we ought to have an opinion. Whoever 
has no opinion, no judgment, of his own is unstable in character
. Every intelligent person should have an opinion upon 
every suibjeet which comes up for criticism. How much of his 
mind he might tell others or might reserve to himself would 
be for him to determine, according to his own best judgment 
in the matter, 

"JUDGE NOTHING BEFORE THE TIME 1 ' 

Another Scripture says, "Judge nothing before the time/' 
(1 Corinthians 4:3-5) This does not relate to the judging 
of ourselves, however, but to our judging of others. It is 
not for us to judge heart-intentions. We should not denounce 
people and declare them guilty of evil intentions. While we 
might think that certain conduct is wrong or that certain 
teachings are wrong, yet it is not for us to say that the individual
 is willingly wrong; for we are not able to read the 
heart of any one. God is the only one who knows to what 
extent people are willing sinners, wilful wrong-doers. In some 
cases it may be that they are under delusion, ignorance, superstition
. In other cases it may be that their environment 
gives things a different color from that which we would see. 
At the proper time and as may be convenient, we are to do all 
in our power to show such people the error of their course; 
but, having done so, we are not to attempt to harm them or to 
punish them for those things which we esteem to be wrong. 

This principle applies to the punishments which are inflicted 
by society, such as imprisonment, capital punishment, etc. 
The civilized people of the world have reached the conclusion 
that mankind cannot read the heart. Therefore the governments
 assign different degrees of punishment for different 
crimes, not as an offset for the crime, but in order to restrain 
evil-doers. As a result, the doer of wrong deeds is often put 
into prison for a term of years and -sometimes for life, 
that he may be restrained from further wrong-doing and 
perhaps reformed in character. Even in capital punishment 
the thought is not that the punisment is proportionate to 
the heinousness of the crime, but that the taking away of life 
is for the restraint of wrong-doing. Thus various methods 
of capital punishment have been invented in order that it may 
be done in as painless a manner as possible. Some claim 
that the breaking of the neck in hanging does not keep the 
criminal in suffering. Others declare that the electric chair 
is so constructed that the person 'wilt have no consciousness 
whatever after the electric current has reached him. So we 
see that the endeavor has been merely to curtail the wroog-doer 
from the privileges and liberties of life, according to the decision
 of those sitting as legislators and law-makers as to what 
would be the proper restraint for evil-doing. 

PROPER AND IMPROPER JUDGING 

Reverting to what the Scriptures say of the people of God, 
we may not judge in the sense of determining the degree of 
guilt resting upon evil-doers. Love always hopes for the 
best, and is not given to evil-speaking or to an expression of 
evil judgment. Love ever seeks to think no evil, but rather to 
think something favorable, kind, rather to put away anything 
in the way of bias, prejudice. Love is rather given to suppose 
that the individual whose doings are under criticism did not 
discern the right, did not see it clearly, or for some reason 
was led into error. 

The Master said, "By their fruits ye shall know them." 
(Matthew 7:18-20) This means that we are to notice the 
fruitage of life in ourselves, in the brethren and in our 
neighbors. In our own minds we are to judge and disapprove 
of what is evil. We should continually judge whether various 
acts and words are right or wrong. Every day we see and 
hear many things in life which would not be pleasing to the 
Lord. Therefore we can exercise our judgment in respect to 
all of these things and get the lesson out of them. This would 
not mean, however, that we would judge the people who do 
and say these reprehensible things. It would be highly improper
 for us to relegate them to the second death. While 
we may appreciate our Lord's statement that a good tree will 
bring forth good fruit, and while we may see that there is 
something wrong in the conduct of another, yet we must not 
forget that we are not competent to judge as to what degree 
of punishment his wrong conduct would deserve. Therefore 
we might make a great mistake in endeavoring to judge others 
and to decide what punishment they should receive. 

The Scriptures state that by and by there will he a* time 
when judgments will come upon all those who do wrong. Until 


that time comes, we are not to judge others either in our minds 
or in our words. All that we may be able to do is to judge 
of conduct — whether it is proper or improper; but we should 
keep our conclusions to ourselves and not express them to 
others. If we are to go through life telling what we think of 
this one and of that one, we shall certainly have a hard time 
of it. Let us, therefore, recognize the fact that we cannot 
judge the heart of any one, just a3 no human being can know 
our hearts as well as we know them ourselves. 

But in judging even ourselves we should use a certain 
amount of leniency, as the Apostle suggests. (1 Corinthians 
4:3, 4) His thought seems to be'that when we come to recognize
 how high the divine standard is, we might be too apt to 
judge ourselves too severely and not take into account the 
fact that the Adamic race is shapen in sin and born in iniquity. 
(Genesis 3:20; Psalm 51:5) Instead of condemning ourselves 
too harshly, we should rather think: "I feel greatly condemned
 for what I have done. But while I cannot make any 
good excuse for myself, I hope that God will be able to make 
some allowance for me in this matter. Perhaps he will see 
spme extenuating circumstance which I do not see.'* Thus, 
as the Apostle suggests, we would not judge even ourselves. 

Those who have the organ of self-esteem small and that 
of conscientiousness large are prone to see clearly all of their 
recognized imperfections and to suffer much from self-condemnation
. Such persons should endeavor to see matters as they 
really are and to judge themselves justly. In fact, all judgment
 should be just; for justice is the very foundation of 
the divine throne. Therefore we should endeavor to be just in 
our judgments to the very best of our ability. All of the 
Lord's people will find it profitable to ascertain their own 
gains and losses as new creatures, and to perceive how, when 
and where these experiences came to them in the constant 
battle with the world, the flesh and the adversary. Let them 
note the weaknesses and filthiness of their own fallen fleshly 
nature, and seek to cleanse themselves of these blemishes, in 
order that more and more the new mind will be given full 
control, and that every thought will be brought into captivity 
to the will of God as- expressed by Christ and illustrated by 
his example. 

GOD'S PEOPLE RESPONSIBLE NOW 

Those who are children of God expect shortly to be made 
judges of the world. (1 Corinthians 6:2, 3) Moreover, God 
is now seeking to develop in our hearts and lives, in our 
character, those principles of righteousness which he desires 
and which will be preparatory to our future work of judging 
mankind. Therefore unless we are just in our very hearts, unless
 we appreciate the principles of righteousness and rejoice 
to practise them, we shall not be fit for the kingdom. We 
should not he unjust even to an animal. Every creature has 
its rights; and we should £ive them those rights, leaving the 
results with God. Thus doing, we shall be preparing our own 
minds and hearts for the glorious conditions in reservation for 
those who love God supremely. 

CROWNS APPORTIONED ACCORDING TO JUSTICE 

The prize of our high calling will not be given to anyone 
on the basis of mercy or of favor. God shows mercy in connection
 with the weaknesses and blemishes against which we 
are striving; but he will not permit even one individual to 
enter the kingdom class whose character is not suitable for 
that high position. Those whom he approves for joint-heirship
 with our Lord Jesus must represent the principles of 
righteousness and must know how to apply these principles 
now. Whoever is not disposed to justice to such an extent 
as to be willing to suffer los3 rather than to be unjust will 
not have a share in the Messianic kingdom. 

Let us ever remember that if we are true, loyal children 
of God, all our unwilling blemishes are covered by the robe 
of our Redeemer's righteousness; and that if we are doing 
with our might what our hands find to do in this great matter 
of judging, criticising, ourselves with a view to improvement 
of character, and are dealing with all others along the line 
of the Golden Rule, we are thus demonstrating to the heavenly 
Father that we appreciate highly the principle which is the 
foundation of his government. If, moreover, we build upon 
this sure foundation a superstructure of love, we shall thus 
be blessed and made ready for the kingdom of his dear Son, 
our Lord Jesus Christ. 

Very few have been fully awake to the importance of the 
Golden Rule. Very few have been careful to practise it in 
all the details of everyday life. Let us remember that there 
is comparatively little time left for character-building, that 
even now the great Judge is at the door, and that the final 


[6163] 


(306-313) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


BROOKtYH, N. Y. 


testings are upon us. If we hope to be of the kingdom class 
we must make haste. This is a very solemn thought. Therefore
 we should make the effort to learn what it is that God 


requires of those who are to be kings, priests and judges in 
the Messianic kingdom, in order that we may be amongst 
those who will make their calling and election sure. 


DEFEAT THROUGH DRUNKENNESS 

[This article with the exception of the paragraphs below was a reprint of that entitled "Elijah's Work Before Ascension/' published
 in issue of September l 9 1915, which please see.] 
THE CUBSE OP INTEMPEBAtfCE 

Intemperance is one of the most dreadful curses afflicting 
humanity, and even those who are its slaves will admit the 
truth of this statement. Apparently every one who comes 
under the baneful influence of strong drink becomes more or 
less its slave — the more so in proportion as he has become 
weak through the Adamic fall and the six thousand years 
of increasing loss of physical and mental strength and vigor. 
Only those who realize that inherited weakness has much to 
do with drunkenness can sympathize with a fallen one, or 
rightly appreciate why intoxicants have so much stronger 
influence over some than over others. But while pity and 
sympathy are properly called for, yet these qualities must be 
exercised in moderation, if we would benefit the fallen and 
weak. None are so weak, so degraded, as to be without some 
base of character; and our aim should be to strengthen and 
build up character, encouraging and stimulating resistance 
to these weaknesses, rather than condoning them too freely. 

The weak and degraded should be encouraged to know that 
they have a will-power which will greatly assist them in the 
cultivation of character if they will use it. But all should 
know that the greatest strength and stimulus to character 
comes from above; and that the weakest, as respects depravity 
of the flesh, may obtain such help of heart and of intellect 
from the promises, exhortations, admonitions and encouragements
 of God's Word as will make them strong in the Lord 
and in the power of his might. We need power and strength 
of our own wilk daily in overcoming the weaknesses of our 
fallen flesh. More than this, we need "grace to help in every 
time of need"; and we need to learn whence it is obtained, 
and how to approach the throne of heavenly grace with confidence
, so as to obtain the needed blessing. 

Here comes in the necessity for an appreciation of the 
doctrines of Christ, to assure us that our weaknesses are 
understood and sympathized with by our heavenly Father in 
every proper sense, and that his provision in Christ is such 
that he can foe just and yet justify believers in Jesus — that 
lie can be just, and yet forgive us our sins and grant us needed 
strength and help in overcoming. 

To those wha have friends or neighbors addicted to intemperance
, over whom they desire to exercise a helpful influence
, we* advise that they appeal to the will, to the selfrespect
, and to the rewards of temperance and intemperance, 
viewed from a worldly and social standpoint. We also advise 
that they go further, and urge that in view of their weakness 
of will manifested by the intemperate the latter should recognize
 that while all men need the Savior and the help which 
he alone can give, yet the weaker the will, the greater the 


need. When we are weak in the matter of self-reliance, and 
are thereby led to make a covenant with the Lord and to lean 
upon his strength, then we are strong. — 2 Corinthians 12:9, 10. 

SPECIAL LESSON TO THE CONSECRATED 

We have no reason to think that any of our readers arc 
slaves to intemperance; for we know that whom the Son makes 
free is free indeed. Therefore we urge upon all that the 
greater freedom which we receive in Christ, through a clear 
knowledge of the divine plan, should lead us more diligently 
to bring every talent and every power of mind and of body into 
full subjection to the divine will and into the service of the 
divine purposes. Those who are imbued with this thought 
will surely realize that they have neither mental nor physical 
powers to dissipate — that they belong to the Lord and are to 
glorify him in their bodies and their spirits, which are his. 
(1 Corinthians 6:20) They will perceive that they are merely 
stewards; and that any misuse of talents, either through 
intoxication or otherwise, would be a misuse of their stewardship
, and would surely lead on to that condition in which the 
Lord could not say unto them, "Well done, good and faithful 
servant." 

But while disposed to discourage intemperance in respect 
to intoxicants of every kind, we feel that the special lesson 
needed by the Lord's people is in respect to the intoxicating 
influences of the world, as these come to us and affect us as 
new creatures in Christ. There is an intoxication in wealth, 
in luxury, in ease, which tends to say to the soul, "Take thine 
ease; forget thy covenant of sacrifice — to walk in the footsteps 
of Jesus and be dead with him to the world and its aims." 
There is an intoxication of pleasure, of fashion, of pride and 
fond desire, which appeals to the new creature very strongly 
through various avenues of the mortal body, and which seeks 
to intoxicate, to stupefy, the new mind, to make us dull of 
hearing as respects spiritual things, to make us lax as respects 
our sseal for the Lord, for the truth and for the brethren, and 
to make us covet the things that would be approved by the 
world and pleasurable to our own flesh, as well as harmonious 
to the wishes and exhortations of our friends. To all of these 
intoxicating allurements the answer must be, "No! We have 
covenanted our lives that henceforth we shall be dead to 
earthly interests and alive toward God. Our joys, pur pleasures
, our exhilarations, must be of the spiritual kind." We 
must become so enthused, so enraptured, with the heavenly 
things, with the joy and peace and blessing which accompany 
the eating and drinking at the Lord's table, and so filled with 
his spirit, that the intoxications of earthly joys will have 
less and less attraction for us. — Ephesiana 5:18. 


DIVINE TRUTH 


"All truth is calm, 

Refuge and rock and tower. 
The more of truth the more of calm, 

Its calmness is its power. 
Truth is not strife, 
Nor is to strife allied, 


It is the error that is bred 
Of storm, by rage and pride. 

Calmness is truth 

And truth is calmness still; 

Truth lifts its forehead to the storm 
Like some eternal hill." — 


-H. Bonar. 


NEHEMIAH'S PRAYER 

fThis article was a reprint of that published in issue of November 15, 1905, which please see.] 


CONCERTED VOLUNTEER PLAN 


Although we have announced that we would begin making 
shipments of the new "Volunteer issue 'The Fall of Babylon" 
early in October, it has since been suggested by some that 
all orders for the entire country J>e first listed, and then 
shipped so as to reach all classes about the same time; then 
the Society designate some particular Sunday as a Volunteer 
Day, on which date the friends all over the country will dis^ 
tribute this very important number, Wc think the plan a good 


one, and therefore suggest that all classes, including isolated 
friends, who have not yet sent in their order for this new 
Volunteer matter, do so at once that we may have same 
printed up and shipped in accordance with the foregoing 
program. We will then designate the date on which all the 
brethren, in every city, town, village and country district, 
may engage in this stupendous concerted distribution of 
"THE FALL OF BABYLON." 


CHARGES ANSWERED 

The Board of Directors have requested Brother Rutherford title, "Light After Darkness." This reply is not for general 
to prepare a reply to the paper recently issued under the distribution, but will be sent to any of the friends on request 

[6164] 


INTERESTING QUESTIONS 


THE THINGS WE ABB TO FOBGET 

Question. — "Forgetting those things which are behind." 
(Philippians 3:13) To what things "which are behind" does 
the Apostle refer in this text, and why should we forget them? 

Answer.— -St. Paul could not have meant by this that we 
should not have the things of our previous experiences in 
memory at all, that we should forget them all absolutely; 
for his writings show that he held his own past in memory. In 
our context he tells us of the things he had lost and the 
things he had gained; and these things of his past have been 
remembered to the extent that they have come down to the 
church for eighteen hundred years. The Apostle declared that 
he had suffered the loss of many things for the sake of the 
truth. He recounted the many persecutions and sufferings 
which he had endured, but said that he had borne all this 
willingly, gladly. He had relinquished all his worldly advantages
 because, as he said, these things had no particular value. 
They were as dross compared to hi3 opportunity of becoming 
a member of the body of Christ, of the church in glory. 

He was forgetting all these in the sense of renouncing them 
and easting them benind his back. He was forgetting — in the 
■H>nse of not dwelling upon them, being hindered by them — 
his previous failures te keep the law, his futile endeavors and 
inability to live up* to its requirements. He was giving up 
all his earthly ambitions, and was not mourning the opportunities
 in life that had gone from him because of his consecration
 to the Lord. He was doubtless seeking to forget his own 
personal weaknesses and failures in that he would not allow 
the memory of them to discourage him. But this did not mean 
that he so completely forgot them as to lose the benefit of the 
lessons which these weaknesses and failures had taught him. 

Our lives would amount to very little If we forgot all the 
past. What profit would it be to ourselves to have lived in 
the world if we forgot it all? The Apostle uses the word 
"forgetting" with somewhat the thought that it sometimes has 
now, when used in a sort of slang phrase. A man may say 
to his friend, "You did me a great kindness, and I would like 
to 'do what I can to repay it" And the friend replies, "Oh, 
forget it!" — that is, forget it in the sense of feeling under an 
obligation. And, so in the proper sense the Apostle was seeking 
to forget the things of the past. If he had made mistakes in 
the past, he was now seeking that all of his powers might be 
enlisted on the aide of righteousness. He might well forget 
these things in the sense of thinking of their being remembered 
against him, for they were all covered by the merit of Christ. 

So we hive made our peace with God. Having Christ as 
our Advocate and Master, we know that God has blotted out 
our failures from his book of remembrance. He no longer 
holds them against us. Therefore we should not lo3e time 
and strength in useless grieving over them. But we are to let 
them teach us lessons for the future. We are to forget the 
ambitions of the past, in the sense that we will not be controlled
 or influenced by them; for we have new hopes. We 
have the hope of association with Christ, of membership in 
his glorious body. We are to forget the worldly opportunities 
of the past that we ' sacrificed, even as St. Paul forgot the 
things which he sacrificed; as he no longer craved them nor 
sought them. 

There are some of the Lord's, professed people who have 
difficulty along this line. They say, "Oh, I sacrificed so much 
to become a child of God — I sacrificed so much!" And what 
they sacrificed is in their eyes too much. But it was not 
very much, whatever it was. The more we know of ourselves 
the more we realize how insignificant we are in ourselves, and 
how little of real value we could accomplish in our -own 
strength. And the more we know of the world and the things 
of the world the more we realize their emptiness and unsatisfactoriness
. So we decide that we will not think of some 


grains of sand that we dropped in order to take hold of the 
hand of the Lord; for we have glory, honor and immortality 
in view. 

St. Paul Baid he was glad that he could suffer something 
for Christ. And he was urging others to likewise rejoice in 
this great privilege, and inspiring his hearers with the courage 
to lay aside every weight and sin, and to run with patience 
the heavenly race. So all these glorious things God has promised
 are before us as Christians. Everything we had in the 
way of earthly ambitions or prospects or fame — these things 
are all behind us, and are nothing in comparison to the things 
we have already received and those we are hoping for, by the 
grace of God. 

TBESPASSES, NOT ORIGINAL SIN, BLOTTED OUT 

Question. — When the Apostle speaks of the sins that are 
past by the forbearance of God, we understand him to mean 
the sins that were forgiven when we accepted Christ and were 
begotten as new creatures. Suppose, then, that one so forgiven
 subsequently returns to wallow in the mire, would the 
sins that were past be revived against him, or not? 

Answer. — It is our understanding that in accepting the 
church the Lord accepts all of that number desirous of coming 
to the Father through him, and that he makes an imputation 
of hi3 merit sufficient to offset all their Adamic sin and 
weaknesses, in order that they may be made the righteousness 
of God through him. Being thus justified through faith they 
may have full peace with God, and. realize that old things 
have passed away and that all things have become new. We 
would think, therefore, that nothing in the past would be 
revived, jeven if they should commit the sin unto death; for 
all former sins were settled for. It would he the sin as a 
new creature that would bring his death — it would .not be 
necessary to go back to the past, when he was an old creature, 
to find something corroborating this. 

This blotting out of sins at. the glorification of the church 
does not refer to the blotting out of . original sin, but more 
particularly to the blotting out of those elements of sin that 
are in the flesh, those trespasses for which we need to go 
continually to God day by day and pray: 'Torgive us our 
trespasses!" All these are blotted out when the flesh itself 
shall have been relinquished and we shall have experienced 
the "change" to spirit nature. 

KNOWLEDGE PROPORTIONATE TO OBEDIENCE 

Question. — Is there any text of Scripture, or are there 
several texts — and if so, which? — that teach tjiat we must 
act upon truth when we receive it, before we may receive 
more truth! 

Answer. — "He that is faithful in that which is least, is 
faithful also in much." — Luke 16:10. 

"Whoso looketh into the perfect law of liberty, and continueth
 therein, being not a forgetful hearer, but a doer of 
the work, this man shall -be blessed in his deed." — James 
1:25. See also verses 22-24. 

"Study to snow thyself approved unto God, a workman 
that needeth not to be ashamed, .rightly dividing the word 
of truth."— 2 Timothy 2:15. 

"The path of the just is as the shining light, that shineth 
more and more unto the perfect day." — Prov. 4:18. 

"If any man will to do his will, he shall know of the doctrine
 [the truth], whether it be of God.'^John 7:17. 

"If ye abide in me, and my words abide in you, ye shall 
ask what ye will, and it shall be done unto you," — John 15:7. 

Again Jesus said, "He that followeth me shall not walk in 
darkness, but shall have the light of life."— John 8:12. 

All the Word of God indicates the necessity of continuance
, of growing in grace and in knowledge— growing up 
into him who in all things is the Head of the body, even 
Christ. — Ephesians 4:15. 


PRESENT BLESSINGS INCREASING DISCONTENT 


The question lias been asked us, Has the Millennium any 
relationship to present-day strikes, etc.? We answer that the 
grandfathers of those men and women who are now rising 
up against the present order, received very much smaller 
compensation, worked much longer hours and were much more 
contented and happy, than is the present generation. Something
 has come in which has changed this attitude of mind 
and has brought great blessing, great riches, and increasing 
discontent. That thing, we believe, is the dawn of the Millennial
 day, with the light that it brings— the enlightenment, 
the knowledge and realization of power on the part of the 
masses. 

Some, of course, will be willing to use their knowledge 
righteously. We hope that all Bible Students feel so. Others 
will be inclined to use their knowledge selfishly. Seeing that 


things are wrong they may lack patience, lack love, be unwilling
 to endeavor to adjust the wrong in reasonable and proper 
ways, as should be the case with those guided by the wisdom 
from above. Hence the world is getting more and more bitter j 
this dissatisfied condition of mind is increasing. Men are 
truce-breakers, breakers of agreements — anything to further 
their selfish interests. — 2 Timothy 3:1-5. 

We do not know the merits of each particular case, but 
we think that what we have said would be applicable anywhere
. We think it safe to assume that the men who strike 
at present would average $3.00 per day for about nine hours' 
work, and the nine hours' work would not be as laborious 
as labor was formerly; for now it can nearly all be done by 
machinery. But many laboring men, working for the Standard 
Oil Company, the railroads, coal corporations, etc., see that 


[6156] 


(315-316) 


(316-317) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, N. Y. 


in spite of paying good wages, these corporations are making 
much money. They read about the millions being paid in 
dividends. They feel in their own pockets. Not a million 
do they touch; and they wi9h there was a million there, and 
are envious and unhappy because it is not there. 
OMNIPOTENT POWER THE ONLY HELP 
The Bible points out this increase of knowledge of our 
day: "Many shall run to and fro'!; "Knowledge- shall be increased
"; "The wise shall understand" — the rest shall not 
understand, and "there shall be a time of trouble such as 
never was since, there was a nation." (Daniel 12:4, 10, 1) 
This is the prophetic view of the matter in advance. God 
permits the Millennial age to come in this way, in a measure, 
to demonstrate that it will not be rightly received and that 
selfishness would have gone on to even worse lengths if all the 


blessings of the Millennial age had been here before. The 
'World would have been in a worse condition, more discontented
. Jesus said that the discontent would go on to such 
a degree that "unless those days should be shortened there 
would be no flesh saved." (Matthew 24:22) Everywhere that 
spirit would go; and it is going everywhere. The Lord's 
Word seems to imply that this will be so until men shall learn 
that their happiness will come, not by might nor by power, 
but hy the Lord's Spirit. (Zechariah 4:6) As they learn this, 
they will see the great Ruler and his power rectifying things 
along the line of justice. Every evil of life shall thus be 
opened up to view, to correction; everything will be straightened
 out; and the world will begin to see the reign of holiness, 
of righteousness, harmony with God, justice, equity. Then 
the knowledge will do them good. 


RELATION OF EUROPEAN WAR TO ISRAEL'S HOPES 


We have been expecting great things for the Jewish people, 
and believe that these are on the way. Undoubtedly the war 
has a very important part to work out under divine supervision
, something that will be advantageous to the Jew, to 
Palestine, and eventually to everybody. We would not know 
how to forecast the future so as to say what effect the war 
will have; for if the Germans should win, then Palestine 
would remain under Turkish or German influence; and if 
the Allies should win, Palestine would come under the influence
 of the Allies, whose fraternal feeling for each other 
would lead them to protect each others' interests. 

We know the feeling of many of these countries towards 
Palestine. The Russians, for instance, treat the Jews very 
courteously when people of Russia go to Palestine — not, however
, with any feeling of friendship for the Jew. We know 
that the same is the general feeling throughout the world. 
Each nation would like to possess Palestine. It is not that 
Palestine is such a wonderful country, not that it will be 
greatly to the advantage of any of them to possess that little 
country; for it has not even one valuable port; but somehow 
all have an anxious desire for what is termed "the Holy 
Land." Russians, Germans, British and French — all are represented
 there; and they would not be willing to give up 
their hold on it unless there was some very special compensation
. 

As to the Jews themselves, we believe that they have more 
confidence in the Mohammedans, the Turks, who are their 
cousins by birth, than they have in any Christian nation. 
This is probably because they have been under the Turkish 
rule in Palestine, where Jews have had a better time than 
they are having in any other country. _ But we are not wise 
enough to do any guessing on this question. We simply know 
some of the facts as they stand today, and the great fact of 
the future as the Bible points it out, that Israel will again 
come fully into possession df their own land. 

We think that there are many Jew3 now in Russia, Poland, 
Germany, etc., who would be very glad had they gone over 
to Palestine when they had the chance. We understand that 
some of them are going over now, notwithstanding the war 
conditions. We had not so understood previously, but information
 has reached us that there is now a land immigration 
which is taking many Jews to Palestine. We are not, in any 
event, to expect that all the Jews will go there; no more 
than when God,, through the Prophet, declared that Israel 
would be brought again from the captivity of Babylon. We 
remember that many of them went into captivity to Babylon ; 
and that after being there, some of them for several centuries, 
the whole number that came out under Cyrus* decree was 
about 50,000, leaving the great mass of the nation "scattered, 
abroad," as we read in the New Testament — scattered amongst 
the heathen nations, preferring to live where they had become
 attached to the soil or land rather than to go back to 
Palestine. So we expect that the going back to Palestine will 
not include all the Jews now living, 'but merely representatives 
of the Jews, of the hopes of Israel. 

Without doubt great changes are just ahead, great favors 
and blessings, for the devout of the Jewish people who cling 
faithfully to the divine promises respecting them. However 
we are not to expect their full establishment as a nation 
through which tne Lord will operate, until after wars, revolutions
 and anarchy of the time of trouble have ceased, and the 
ancient worthies have been brought back from the dead in 
human perfection. On this point we here append a contribution
 from one of our readers, which agrees well with the 
presentations of Scripture Studies, Vol. 7, concerning the 
resurrection of the ancient worthies and their inheritance of 
the land: 


WHEN WILL ABRAHAM INHERIT^ THE LAND? 

I am basing my suggestions (a) pn the statement of 
Tabernacle Shadows, page 34, Par. 1, as .follows: "So, then, 
after the body of Christ completes the spiritual 'Seed,* that 
additional promise to Abraham respecting an earthly seed 
must have fulfillment," (Italics mine.) (b) Also on the fact 
that this additional promise is part and parcel of the great 
oath-bound Abrahamie Covenant; (c) on the reasonable inference
 that Hagar was a type of this additional promise, as 
was Sarah of the first promise to the spiritual seed; (d) on 
the belief that the 3960 years derived from Genesis 15:9 are 
creditably established as a chronological period; (e) and on 
the seeming discovery that the additional promise, of the 
earthly seed, was confirmed to Abraham ten years after the 
giving of the first or chief promise. 

Before Abraham moved into the I/and of Canaan there 
was the promise of a blessing. The ratification of the promise 
was contingent on his obedience to the divine injunction. 
When he began his sojourn in the land the promise came 
into being as a covenant exactly four hundred and thirty (430) 
years before the exodus. (Exodus 12:40, 41.) At the same 
time, Sarah came into existence as a type of the promise, or 
covenant, then made and pertaining exclusively to the spiritual
 seed.— Romans 4:13; Galatians 3:16, 17; 4:28. 

After the departure of Lot for Sodom, God made a certain
 promise respecting the land to Abraham — "All the land 
which thou seeest, to thee will I give it and to thy seed forever
." (Genesis 13 : 15) A certain command was annexed 
to the promise: "Arise, walk through the land, in the length 
of it and in the breadth of it." (v. 17) Abraham began 
at once to carry out this injunction. — V. 18. 

Subsequently, his faith having been satisfactorily demonstrated
, God ratified and confirmed to Abraham the promise 
of the land, apparently greatly increasing its scope, and made 
a covenant with Abraham concerning it. (Genesis 15:18) 
The date of the giving of this covenant is of great interest 
to Bible students. When was the promise of the land, pertaining
 exclusively to Abraham and his fleshly seed, ratified 
and confirmed as a covenant obligation, absolutely unconditional
, by Jehovah? 

"In the same day, God made a covenant with Abraham, 
saying, Unto thy seed have I given this land from the River 
of Egypt unto the great river, the river Euphrates," (Genesis
 45:18) Here, it seems to me, we have the second part 
or instalment of the great Abrahamie Covenant, afterwards 
confirmed by oath and called The Promise, although embodying
 distinct promises to different classes. (Rom. 4:16) St. 
Paul has shown distinctly that the first part of the covenant, 
ratified when Abraham became a sojourner in the land, pertained
 only to the spiritual seed, which seed is Christ. (Galatians
 3:16) Tlie Abrahamie Covenant here came into existence
, hut not as a whole — only as to its first section. The 
second section of the covenant, or second covenant, after* 
wards merged with the first into the one great unconditional 
oath-bound "promise," came into existence "in the same day" 
mentioned in Genesis 15:18. 

Now if we can find the date of this covenant respecting 
the land we shall, with reasonable certainty, be able to fix the 
date on which Abraham will inherit the land. God instructed 
Abraham to perform a certain strange ceremony of symbolic 
significance at the, time that he ratified the promise of the 
land and entered Into a covenant regarding it. This ceremony
 by which it was customary to ratify covenant engagements
 or contracts at that time was in order to strengthen 
Abraham's faith, in answer to his question, "Whereby shall 
I know that I shall inherit it?" 


[6156] 


October 15, 1917 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(317-318) 


JEHOVAH'S SIGNIFICANT ANSW2B TO ABEAHAM 

We need not suppose that Abraham perceived any symbolic
 meaning hidden away in the ages of the victims selected. 
This is one of the things "hidden from ages and generations
," but now made known unto us by the Spirit. The 
three beasts were each three years of age; the two birds were 
young birds. We quote the Biblical comment on Genesis 
15:9 — "A bird is usually considered young up to one year 
old. Figuring thus, the ages of the- animals represent 11 
years. Eleven prophetic years of 360 literal years each equal 
3,960 years, the time from the giving of this covenant to 
Abraham till the year 1915, when he will inherit the land." 
The method here used in obtaining the period elapsing from 
the giving of this covenant till Abraham should inherit the 
land is sound and in accord with other symbolisms under 
which God hid or covered information until due time for it 
to be known. The period of 3,960 years seems a well fixed 
chronological period. However, we are absolutely certain 
that Abraham did not inherit the land in 1915. It may not 
seem improper, therefore, for the Bible student to carefully 
analyze the above comment, seeking an explanation. In doing 
this we can find no fault with the assertion that the 3,960 
years begin to count "from the giving of this covenant"; yet, 
if the year 1915 is wrong as the date of the end of the 3,960 
years, certainly the date fixed on in the comment as the date 
from which the 3,960 years begin to count is also erroneous. 
Evidently the comment begins the 3,960 years with Abraham's 
entrance into the land, 430 years before the exodus, or the 
year 2045 B. C. That is the date of the giving of the covenant
, or the first feature of the covenant, meant for the 
spiritual seed only. It seems reasonable, however, that the 
period intervening until Abraham should inherit the land 
would begin with the giving of the covenant respecting the 
land. This is the covenant of Genesis 15:18. Regarding this 
as the second instalment of the great oath-bound promise 
(Genesis 22:16, 17; 26:3, 4), we are perfectly correct in saying
 that the 3,960 years begin with the giving of the covenant. 
The points in regard to the covenant which were not noted 
in the comment are these: 

1. Its two specific parts were given at different times. 

2. The natural and logical date for beginning the 3,960 
years would be the giving of the second part of the oathbound
 compact. This was "in the same day" on which the 
ceremony attending the slaughter of the victims recorded in 
Chapter 15 took place. There and then God established his 
covenant with Abraham respectinng the land. — Genesis 15:18. 

WHEN "SECOND PABT" OF COVENANT WAS BATIFXED 

Has God left us a clue to this date? We answer, that we 
believe he has and it is found in Genesis 16:3. It is a reasonable
 inference that the event herein recorded followed 
immediately upon those recorded in Chapter 15. It seems a 
plain deduction that Hagar was a type of the covenant or 
promise to the fleshly seed, typified by her son Ishmael. We 
are not speaking here of the Law Covenant, of which she 
was a type, but of the specific promise to the fleshly seed, 
included in and forming a part of the oath-bound covenant. 
The law was added 430 years after the promise to the spiritual 
seed of Genesis 12:3, and 420 years after Abraham took 
Hagar to wife. 

The promise, so firmly ratified respecting the land and his 
earthly seed, greatly stimulated Abraham's desire for a son, 
and moved Sarah. (Chapter 16:1, 2) So Sarah, anxious 
to help, offered Hagar to Abraham. "And Sarai, Abraham's 
wife, took Hagar, her maid, the Egyptian, after Abraham 
had dwelt ten years in the land of Canaan and gave her to 
her husband Abraham to be his wife," (V. 3) Here at this 
point Hagar came into existence as a type of that portion of 
the Abrahamic Covenant which exclusively pertains to the 
fleshly seed. Sarah became a type at the same time that the 
portion of the Abrahamic Covenant pertaining to the spiritual
 seed was ratified, when Abraham entered the land. Hagar 
became a type at the same time that the portion of the covenant
 respecting the fleshly seed's inheritance of the land was 
confirmed. This was ten years after Abraham entered the land. 
Hagar was, of course, a type of the Law Covenant and 
Keturah of the New. But these facts do not concern especially
 the present inquiry. It is true that the fleshly seed 
came under the law, out it is not true that Abraham or his 
seed will inherit the promise through (by keeping) the law. 
Abraham will inherit the land under the Abrahamic Covenant
 — that portion of it pertaining exclusively to him personally
 and his fleshly seed after him. — Genesis 15:7, 18; Acts 
7:5. 

There will be no slip-up. Abraham inherits the land by 
faith (as its reward) ; God's oath makes it certain, "The 
gifts and calling of God are without repentance." (Romans 
11:29) The promise respecting the land is as absolute and 
unconditional as the promise respecting the spiritual seed. 
"To the end that the promise might be sure to all the seed." 
— Romans 4:16. 

It seems a reasonable deduction from the foregoing that 
the date of the giving of the covenant respecting the land 
was coincident with the union of Abraham and Hagar. Here 
the 3,960 years begin to count. This union took place ten 
years after he entered the land. As he began his sojourn in 
the land in the year 2,045 B. C, it follows that the 3,960 years 
begin to count from 2,035 B. C. 2,035 plus 1,925 equals 3,960. 
Accordingly Abraham should enter upon the actual possession 
of his promised inheritance in the year 1925 A. D, 


REPORT 

Leaving Aurora, Illinois, our journey v was westward, the 
first stop heing at Spokane, Washington. Here about three 
hundred of the friends had assembled from nearby classes for 
a one-day convention. The morning was spent in praise, 
prayer and testimony, which was very edifying and profitable 
to all. In the afternoon the friends were addressed by Brother 
Rutherford on "The Bond of Completeness," text being taken 
from Col. 3 : 14. The speaker pointed out the necssity of 
putting on this bond of completeness as we near the end of 
our course. 

In the evening, a public lecture was given by Brother Rutherford
 at the Spokane Theater, the subject being, "Are We 
at the End of the World?" Fully 'two thousand people were 
present, many being turned away. This being a midweek 
meeting, it was considered unusually well attended. Interest 
was splendid and we hope much good may result. 

The next evening, the 16th of August, a public meeting was 
addressed by Brother Rutherford at the Everett Opera House, 
Everett, Washington, about twelve hundred being present. 
Just one year to the day prior thereto, the speaker had addressed
 an audience in the same Opera House with reference 
to the War, at which time he stated that the United States 
would be drawn into the war before another year. The public
 press at Everett commented on this fact and the fulfillment
 of this statement, which probably had much to do with 
bringing out many of Everett's most substantial citizens. The 
interest at the evening lecture was unusually good, many leaving
 cards signifying a desire for further information. 
TACOMA 00NV2HTI0V 

Tacoma, Washington, was a four-days convention, August 
16th to 19th, inclusive. The discourses were all listened to 
eagerly by the friends at each session of the convention, about 
fifteen hundred being present. The Photo Dbama of Creation
 was exhibited in the evening at the theater where the 


OF THE WESTERN CONVENTIONS 

convention was held, it being packed to overflowing at each 
session. Seventy symbolized their consecration to the Lord. 

Several months previous, the Mayor and Board of Trade 
of Tacoma had invited out Association to hold a convention 
at Tacoma, offering the use of the Stadium, which was accepted
. The Stadium is a mignificent structure built on the 
very banks of Puget Sound, with a seating capacity of more 
than thirty thousand, and the accoustics are so nearly perfect 
that when filled, everyone can hear a speaker addressing the 
audience in an ordinary voice. Some weeks after the invitation
 had been accepted, some of the ministers of the city 
of Tacoma objected to our using the Stadium unless it was 
agreed that nothing would be said derogatory to the clergy, 
and the Stadium Board asked that this limitation be put uponthe
 use of the place. We declined to accept it on these terms 
and had no idea of using the Stadium at all. The public 
meeting was advertised to l>e held at the Tacoma Theater, but 
it was evident that the Theater would not accomodate the 
people. The Mayor and Board of Trade then influenced the 
Stadium Board to withdraw all conditions on the Stadium and 
placed it at our disposal without restrictions. Only two days 
remained for advertising the meeting. The attendance Sunday
 afternoon was fully five thousand. The Mayor of the 
City presided and introduced the speaker, the subject being, 
"Are We at the End of the Worjd?" During the course of 
the lecture, Dr, Dyer, said to be the leading clergyman of 
Tacoma, took exception to some things the speaker said, came! 
to the platform and demanded that the Mayor suppress the 
meeting, which the Mayor refused to do; then, time and again 
he interrupted the meeting, going to the extent of standing on 
the platform and calling the speaker a liar three times. It was 
evident that the Audience was against him, and when the 
meeting was over, the minister left the auditorium amidst 
jeers and many of his own congregation were heard to say 


vn—22 


[6157] 


(318-309) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Bhooklyn, N. Y. 


that never again would they go to hear him. A great number
 of the audience left their address cards, signifying their 
desire to hear more. The interuption proved a splendid opportunity
 for a public witness to the truth, and again the 
Lord caused the wrath of man to result to his praise. 

On Monday evening, the 20th of August, a public meeting 
at Portland, Oregon, was addressed by Brother Rutherford, 
fully 1,200 being present. The interest manifested was very 
marked and many left their address cards. The day following
 there was a gathering of the friends at Salem, Oregon, 
being addressed by Brother Rutherford. 

From the 22nd to the 26th, inclusive, the convention was 
held at Oakland, California, Brother Wisdom being the chairman
. The other speakers of the convention were Brothers 
Anderson, Hadley, Heard, Talifaerro and Rutherford, about 
six hundred of the friends attended this convention, forty 
symbolizing their consecration. Sunday afternoon at Oakland, 
a* public meeting *was addressed by Brother Rutherford, about 
two thousand being 1 present. The same evening another public
 meeting was addressed at San Francisco, about one thousand
 being present. The attendance here was small, probably 
due to the fact that a street car strike rendered it difficult 
for the people to get to and fro in the city. This was a very 
blessed convention and everybody remarked that many blessings
 were received there. 

On August 31st to Sept 2nd, a convention of the I. B. S. A. 
was held at Los Angeles, California. It was not expected 
that more than four or live hundred would attend this convention
, but the attendance was fully eight hundred. Brother 
Heard was chairman here. The other speakers were Brothers 
Anderson, Wisdom, Hadley, Sexton, Lee, Sherman and Rutherford
. No public meeting was attempted at Los Angeles 
because it was the beginning of the Billy Sunday campaign 
and it was thought inadvisable to attempt a public meeting at 
this time, we preferring to wait a more opportune season. 
Fifty-six symbolized their consecration here. 

NOTICEABLE FEATURES OF THE CONVENTION 

At each one of the conventions above named, the spirit 
manifested was unusual. It has long been a custom at our 
conventions to have a committee to whom complaints would 


be referred. At these conventions there were no complaints, 
hence the trouble committee was without employment. There 
was a total absence at these conventions of gossip. The 
friends refused to discuss past troubles or disturbances. They 
seemed bent on dping but one thing, striving with earnestness 
and zeal to prepare for an abundant entrance of the church 
into the kingdom of our Lord. The Spirit of the Lord was 
everywhere manifest to a marked degree. All seemed to realize
 that the end of the harvest is very near, and the necessity 
of greater zeal and earnestness on the part of all the harvest 
workers. At each one of these conventions, at the conclusion 
of "Harvesters* Day," the enthusiasm and zeal to enter some 
branch of the work in these closing days of the harvest was 
everywhere marked. Many who had heretofore been in the 
colporteur work and required to stop, signified their determination
 to immediately return to it. Others who had never 
been colporteurs expressed a desire to immediately take up 
the work. Quite a number of brethren with ability offered 
themselves for the pilgrim service, some of whom have been 
selected and will shortly enter the w T ork. 

The Seventh Volume was enthusiastically received by most 
all who attended the various conventions, only here and there 
being an exception. At every convention resolutions were 
adopted by almost a unanimous vote approving the present 
management of the Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society 
and its officers, pledging unreserved loyalty to the Society. 
As an old soldier expressed it, "A good soldier always follows 
his regimental flag. The Watch Tower Bible and Tract 
Society is our flag. The Lord has used it all these years and 
continues to use it, and where he directs the work through 
it, we rejoice to follow." 

At every one of these conventions the friends could be 
heard enthusiastically saying, "This is the best convention I 
ever attended." The sweet spirit of love for the Lord and 
the brethren and loyalty to him and to his cause and to the 
channel he continues to use for the harvest was everywhere 
manifest. It was indeed good to be there, and reminded us 
that we are drawing nearer to the general convention of the 
church of the first-born where there will be fulness of joy 
in the presence of our King. 


"MEET FOR THE USE OF THE MASTER WE LOVE" 

[This article was a reprint of that published in issue of October 15, 1902, which please see.l 


INTERESTING LETTERS 


GREETINGS FROM AH ENGLISH P EI SON 
Dear Brethren in the Lord: — 

Greetings in the precious name of our dear Redeemer, 

Seeing that so many of our dear brethren in America are 
being affected by the new military measure, we are desirous 
of extending to them our warmest sympathy. 

We rejoice to know that so many of the dear saints of 
God are standing thus firmly by the principles of righteousness 
in this hour of trial. Our prayer on their behalf is that they 
may have the necessary grace sufficient in every time of need 
and that wisdom which cometh from above, so that they 
may be enabled to "witness a good confession" and copy 
the noble example of our dear Redeomer, following in his 
footsteps. 

We are realizing, perhaps more than ever, that here we 
have no continuing city, that in the world we must have 
tribulation, and that the child of (rod must suffer persecution
, for it is only "if we suffer with him" that "we shall 
reign with him." Nevertheless we are learning from our 


illustrious Example the power of the joy that is set before known. 


Now, however, we are enjoying a measure of ireedom, 
not being fully subject to either military or prison discipline
. We are rejoicing to be accounted worthy to suffer 
on account of the name of Christ, and we hasten to send 
these few words of sympathy and encouragement to all the 
dear ones who will be affected by the Military Service Act. 

We also pray the heavenly father's richest blessing upon 
the Bethel Family and send our fervent Christian Love. 

Your brethren and fellow-servants in the Lord, 

{Signed by 37 Brethren.) 

LEABNING TO KNOW HERSELF 

My Dear Brethren: — 

Greetings in the name of the King of kings! I feel so 
very grateful to the Lord that I have a deeper sense of appreciation
 for him and for the results of our deceased Pastor
's faithful service in his name. And while my heart is 
lauding, magnifying, and praising him, I impose on your 
valuable time and with a few pen words make my thanks 


us, and we are seeking to cheerfully endure all things that 
God in his providence sees fit to bring upon us. 

Daily do our prayers ascend at the throne of heavenly 
grace foT all the dear brethren throughout the whole habitable
 who are affected by the military, and we sincerely trust 
that the dear American brethren may continue firm and 
steadfast, rejoicing in tribulation, and faithful unto the end, 
in all things seeking to glorify the name of our Father in 
heaven. We know not what awaits us, but then again we 
do know that faith can firmly trust him, come what may. 

Under divine providence we have heen before tribunals — 
in the hands of the military — and also in prison, but God 
has blessed and kept us in all of our experiences. Our 
temperaments are varied, our experiences have varied, but 
we have all felt the power of a deeper and sweeter communion
 with our heavenly Father and the Lord Jesus. We 
all testify to the fact of our being drawn nearer to our 
dear Father in heaven as a result of these experiences. 


Especially good and valued are The Watch Towers. Each 
subject seems to be addressed to me. Some bring much comfort
 and are as apples of gold in pictures of silver; while 
others bring rebukes and corrections to Self. Yes, where 
I once thought T was "some one/* now I am learning to 
know myself; and I find much dross, not to be desired. How 
anxious I am to have this purged out of my life, and to be 
transformed into his likeness, from one degree of radiant 
holiness to another, as derived from the Lord! 

In order to help me remember I am an ambassador for 
Christ, I have taken this way as a helper: Each morning 
after worship I inscribe with ink on the palm of my hand, 
or on the arm, the Scripture citation for the morning, and 
also the Bethel hymn, bo that when Satan would overtake 
me I see the citation. In what a wonderful way the Lord 
speaks! This simple method recalls the text. I find that 
T can have the music of God's great plan ring through vofy 
heart and life every day and hour. 

[6158] 


OcroBis* 15, 1917 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(319-324) 


I pray earnestly for you, and surely the .Lord will recompense
 your work and a full reward be given you of him 
under whose wings you are come to trust. — Ruth 2:12. 

Your sister, striving for the kingdom, R. E. Lawkence. 

CONTINUED APPRECIATIONS OP VOLTJME SEVEN 

"I am glad I can recognize the Seventh Volume as the 
genuine article. It has proven a blessing to me, and the 
"penny* pay is more than satisfactory. It is more than I deserve
, just like all of our dear Lord's rewards to his little 
ones."— C. R. P., Ga. 

"We huve not ceased to thank the Lord for the 'penny' 
and the desire and hope of riding in the fiery chariot. The 
grand old plan gets bigger and grander all the time." — 
W. F. McL., Ala. 

"I cannot close without expressing my gratitude for the 
Seventh Volume, I am now reading it for the second time, 
and I thank the Lord that I have been privileged to receive 
this volume."— Mrs. C. J. P., Ohio. 

"We cannot express in words the joy and comfort the 
Seventh Volume brought to our hearts. We are filled with 
adoration and praise and thanksgiving to our Father. Have 
gone through the book once but am now reading it, looking 
up each reference; and oh, the truths that are thus hidden! 
What blessing it brings!"— Mrs. R. W. H., Ohio. 

"I have received a great blessing from the Seventh Volume. 
I believe that it has come at just the right time — a time when 
the church would have severe trials and bitter experiences." 
—J. A. M., Ind. 

"How we are rejoicing in the light of Volume Seven, and 
noting its perfect harmony and w)iy our beloved Pastor could 
not put that out on this 3ide the veil!" — Mrs. A. T. B., Kan. 

"Having just finished the first and second parts of Volume 
Seven, I wish to express my loving appreciation and gratitude 


for the great blessing and inspiration received as a result of 
this unfolding of present truth." — J. S., Ind. 

"I am reading the Seventh Volume, and I never was so 
happy in my life. It is just what we need in this trying 
hour."-^J. A., Pa. 

"The Seventh Volume does satisfy me fully. I cannot 
tell you the joy and comfort it has given me. I am reading it 
the fourth time and find it better each time." — W. F. S., Ua. 

"The Seventh Volume is grand. While we have long 
been looking for this work, it more than filled our anticipations
."— V. P. N., Ala. 

"I am rejoicing in the encouragement and help 1 am getting 
in Volume Seven. It ia a marvel, a wonder. Really, God is 
its Author."— F. A. L., Tenn. 

"All the friends here, without an exception, have accepted 
the 'penny' with joy and gladness, praising and glorifying 
God."— G. B. R., Mass. 

"The Seventh Volume grows better to me every page I 
read. The Lord has blessed ua greatly. It has drawn me 
closer to him."— L. T. V., ST. Y. 

"Thank the dear Lord for 'The Finished Mystery!* I have 
read it twice, the last time very carefully. I surely appreciate 
what is there written concerning the fallen angels. I have 
been beset by them, owing to my own weakness and my not 
keeping the vow strictly enough, and have only been saved 
from discouragement by the Lord's favor through the Resolve 
and the Towers and prayer. I was not fully confident, however
, that I had not lost my crown until I read the blessed 
Seventh Volume. I now understand why my experiences have 
been permitted. It (the Volume) has been like the angel of 
Gethsemane to me, the assurance that I am still in our 
Father's favor. I can go forward with renewed energy because 
more joyous zeal. We have already sold twenty-five. Please 
remember us in prayer." — E. B. A., Conn. 

