“Your Word Is Truth”
Is Yours the Right Religion?
JESUS CHRIST showed that not all persons practice the right religion, the one that leads to life. In fact, he explained that the majority of mankind would be misled into taking the broad road that leads to destruction. So he warned: “Be on the watch for the false prophets that come to you in sheep’s covering, but inside they are ravenous wolves.” (Matt. 7:13-15) The apostle Paul, too, revealed that false religious leaders would mislead many.​—2 Cor. 11:14, 15.
Are you sure that your religion truly has God’s approval? It is possible to make sure. Yes, you can determine for certain whether your religion is the right one. This can be done by examining whether its teachings and practices are in accord with God’s Word, which Jesus said is the truth. (John 17:17) It is a relatively easy examination to make. And if you should find in making it that your religion’s teachings and practices are not in keeping with the Bible, then it is not the right religion.
Are you willing to put your religion through such a test? There is nothing to fear, because if you have the right religion you can only be reassured by the examination. And if what you believe is not in keeping with the Bible, then you should welcome the truth, because it leads to eternal life.​—John 17:3.
To begin, consider some common teachings of religious organizations. Does your religion, for example, teach the popular belief that the human soul is immortal, that it cannot die? Note what God’s Word of truth says on this matter: “He hath poured out his soul unto death.” (Isa. 53:12, AV) “The soul that sinneth, it shall die.” (Ezek. 18:4, 20, AV) Is not the Bible answer obvious? It teaches that souls are mortal, that they can and do die. Does your religion teach that? It should if it is the right religion.
Another idea that many religious organizations have long taught is that hell is a place where only the wicked go, and that no one can ever get out of hell. Does your religion teach this? The Bible, however, says that Jesus Christ was in hell three days and was raised from there. In a Bible prophecy concerning him, it explains: “Thou wilt not leave my soul in hell; neither wilt thou suffer thine Holy One to see corruption.”​—Ps. 16:10, AV (15:10, Dy); Acts 2:31.
What, then, is hell? The Bible shows that hell is mankind’s common grave. And note what the Bible says: “Death and hell delivered up the dead which were in them.” (Rev. 20:13, AV) Yes, not only does the Bible teach that good as well as unrighteous persons go to hell, but it shows that those in hell are to be resurrected! (Acts 24:15) Does your religion teach this? Since the Bible does, the right religion will.
Examine another common religious belief​—that the dead are conscious. So many religions teach this. But on this matter the inspired Scriptures say: “The living know that they shall die: but the dead know not any thing.” (Eccl. 9:5, AV) Thus, according to the Bible, the dead are not conscious. However, they do have the grand prospect of being raised from unconsciousness by means of a resurrection from the dead.​—John 5:28, 29.
What about the common belief that God and his Son Jesus Christ are equal? Religions that teach the Trinity doctrine say that they are. However, Jesus said: “The Father is greater than I am.” (John 14:28) And the Bible, at Mark 13:32, says that the Father has knowledge of important information of which the angels and the Son are ignorant. Obviously, then, Jesus and the Father are not equal. Does your religion teach this? It should if it is in full harmony with God’s Word.
Can you see how such an examination of religious teachings can help you determine whether yours is the right religion? So, as you study God’s Word, continue to make such an examination. But, at the same time, examine the practices of your religion, for the right religion can also be identified by what it actually does or refrains from doing.
For example, does your religion use the name of God and magnify its importance? The Bible does. It says: “That people may know that you, whose name is Jehovah, you alone are the Most High over all the earth.” (Ps. 83:18)a Jesus made known God’s name Jehovah. In fact, he taught his followers to pray: “Our Father which art in heaven, Hallowed be thy name.” (Matt. 6:9, AV) And Jesus said in prayer to his Father: “I have made your name manifest to the men you gave me out of the world.” (John 17:6) Does your religion make known God’s name Jehovah?
Examine your religion further. Does it teach that ministers should preach from house to house? Jesus called right at the homes of people and instructed his disciples to do the same. (Matt. 10:12-14) The apostle Paul said of his ministry: “I did not hold back from . . . teaching you publicly and from house to house.” (Acts 20:20) Do your ministers preach and teach from house to house? Ministers of the right religion do.
Is your religion an integral part of this world and its politics? Does it encourage you to be? Of his followers Jesus said: “They are no part of the world, just as I am no part of the world.” (John 17:16) And James, a disciple of Jesus, wrote: “The form of worship that is clean and undefiled from the standpoint of our God and Father is this: . . . to keep oneself without spot from the world.” Is your religion without spot from the world?​—Jas. 1:27; 4:4.
Jesus Christ described how his true followers could especially be identified. He said: “By this all will know that you are my disciples, if you have love among yourselves.” (John 13:35) Does your religion bear this identifying mark of love? Does it instill in its members a love that is so strong that it remains true even in difficult times? The facts show that when worldly nations have gone to war, Catholics on one side have killed Catholics on the other side, and Protestants and Jews have done the same. Is this showing love for one another? Hardly. Yet, remember, Jesus said that genuine love among themselves would be an identifying mark of those practicing the right religion.
Has this brief consideration made you want to examine further? It is the wise and proper thing to do. You should make sure whether your religion speaks and acts according to God’s Word. (1 Thess. 5:21; 2 Cor. 13:5) By so doing you can come to worship God in the right way and thereby win his approval.
[Footnotes]
Some translations substitute the title Lord for the name Jehovah. However, in the original Hebrew the proper name of God appears. This name is usually translated Jehovah, but the Catholic Jerusalem Bible renders it Yahweh.

