Back to School Again
1 In the month of September, our young people are getting involved in the new school year. There are enjoyable things to anticipate, but there are also a few matters that can cause apprehension. Many youths will be assigned to different instructors, enrolled in new courses, and put in close association with students who are strangers. Our young people want to be cooperative with school authorities and congenial with their fellow students, but they should keep in mind that they have to guard against anything that could be spiritually detrimental.​—1 Cor. 15:33.
2 A major concern for Witness children and youths is to avoid the contaminating influence of the world, which permeates educational systems in many lands today. Christians young and old must be courageous in rejecting the worldly standards and thinking that are now being promoted regarding moral issues, and they must ‘keep on guard’ by consulting and being guided by Jehovah’s Word. (Ps. 119:9) Concerned parents need to be informed regarding what is included in the school curriculum in order to give appropriate direction to their children. If what is taught in school or elsewhere conflicts with the holiness and chasteness required of Jehovah’s servants, it must be avoided.​—1 Pet. 1:15, 16.
3 It is also quite common to encounter issues involving nationalistic ceremonies, holiday celebrations, sports activities, or social gatherings. The brochure School and Jehovah’s Witnesses is helpful to Christian youths regarding these matters. Potentially difficult situations may be surmounted or minimized when parents of young children take the initiative in approaching teachers with a copy of this publication. They can explain that this will help the teacher understand why Jehovah’s Witnesses choose not to participate in certain activities. Making this information available to the teacher can do much toward creating a spirit of cooperation.
4 Additionally, it would be good for Christian students to keep a personal copy of the School brochure with their study material at school. Opportunities often arise for giving a witness to other students who ask questions when attention is focused on our beliefs. Also, Witness children should carry on their person at all times their Advance Medical Directive/​Release card or Identity Card that is up-to-date, properly witnessed, and signed. Those who apply this admonition will surely be like the ‘shrewd one who has seen the calamity and proceeds to conceal himself.’​—Prov. 22:3.

