Expand Your Treasure of Kingdom Service
1 Jesus likened the Kingdom hope to a priceless treasure. (Matt. 13:44-46) Are we like the men in Jesus’ illustrations who sold all their possessions to buy something of greater value? If so, we will give God’s Kingdom first priority, even though it may involve inconvenience and self-denial.​—Matt. 6:19-22.
2 Since our Kingdom service is a treasure, it should be our desire to expand it. What does our personal course in life show? Are we expanding our Kingdom activity? We can do so by sharing in various features of the ministry, including house-to-house work, making return visits, conducting Bible studies, and witnessing informally.
3 ‘How Can I Expand My Share?’ With the start of a new service year, it is good for each one to review his personal activity to see what he might do to increase the time spent in the field ministry and ask: ‘Can I arrange my affairs in order to enroll as an auxiliary pioneer from time to time or even on a continuous basis? With a few adjustments, could I enter the regular pioneer service?’ New pioneers who enroll by September 1 qualify to attend the Pioneer Service School next year.
4 Some publishers have set a personal goal to do more informal witnessing. Often this activity produces excellent fruitage. Others may feel a need to improve in making effective return visits or starting new Bible studies.
5 If we conclude that our ministry is limited in some way, what can we do to expand it? Those who have successfully met higher goals recommend that we first make a determination to put Kingdom interests first no matter what. (Matt. 6:33) Faith and full reliance on Jehovah are necessary. (2 Cor. 4:7) Seek his help through sincere and persistent prayer. (Luke 11:8, 9) We can be confident that Jehovah will bless our genuine efforts to increase our share in his service.​—1 John 5:14.
6 Talk to other brothers and sisters who have successfully expanded their ministry. Ask them how they were able to overcome obstacles without getting discouraged. Their personal experiences may be just what is needed to convince you that an expanded ministry is not unattainable.
7 When you read articles in The Watchtower or Our Kingdom Ministry dealing with the field service, prayerfully consider how you can apply the suggestions to your ministry. Do the same when attending congregation meetings or assemblies. The suggestions offered in this article are based on a discussion that was part of the circuit assembly program for last year. It is the first of a series of articles designed to help us follow through on and apply the encouragement provided by that program.
8 Jesus took his ministry very seriously, making it a primary concern. He declared: “My food is for me to do the will of him that sent me.” (John 4:34) Do we feel the same way? If we do, surely we will find ways to expand our activity and share “good things” with others from our treasure store.​—Matt. 12:35; Luke 6:45.

