Service Meetings for September
Week Starting September 5
Song 5
10 min: Local announcements and appropriate Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry.
20 min: “Expand Your Treasure of Kingdom Service.” Service overseer and another elder discuss main points in article. Review congregation’s activity for the past year, giving commendation along with suggestions for improvement. Stress goal of increasing our personal share in the ministry.
15 min: “Cultivate Interest in the Live Forever Book.” Three or four publishers, including a youngster, discuss article and then have a practice session. They demonstrate two or three presentations and then review them, giving one another practical suggestions and commendation.
Song 32 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting September 12
Song 54
 7 min: Local announcements.
20 min: Christian Conduct in School. Discussion by elder with three or four teenagers. In school, our young people are subjected to a variety of pressures to compromise their respect for Bible principles. Much of this comes from activities not directly related to the classroom. Sports, dating, and social functions pose dangers. Elder discusses “Extracurricular Activities” with teenagers, using the School brochure, pages 22-5. Young people make comments showing they face pressures to participate in these things and so appreciate the counsel given.
18 min: “They Have Not Held Back From Witnessing.” Questions and answers. Highlight that even though all of us cannot spend the same amount of time in the ministry, we should find joy and strive to be whole-souled.
Song 60 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting September 19
Song 36
10 min: Local announcements. Read accounts report and any donation acknowledgments.
15 min: “Back to School Again.” Questions and answers. Highlight problems young people face and how parents can help their children.
20 min: “Starting Bible Studies With the Live Forever Book.” Discuss with audience. Arrange for two demonstrations using suggested presentations.
Song 67 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting September 26
Song 44
10 min: Local announcements. Invite audience to relate brief experiences placing the Live Forever book or starting studies in it.
15 min: Local needs. Or give a talk on article “Do Restrictions Discourage You?” from September 1, 1994, Watchtower, pages 27-8.
20 min: Offering The Watchtower and Awake! During October. Our magazines play a large role in the worldwide preaching work; this has been the means through which millions have heard the truth for the first time. Stress the importance of using them continually and offering them in door-to-door work even when other literature is featured. Mention benefits of weekly Magazine Day. Discuss how street work and store-to-store witnessing open up many opportunities for placements. Remind brothers to keep record of placements, with the goal of starting a magazine route. Explain that subscriptions can be offered on return visits when there is sincere interest. Emphasize the importance of preparing well before going out. Have three publishers, one of them a young person, demonstrate brief magazine presentations.
Song 76 and concluding prayer.

