Starting Bible Studies With the Live Forever Book
1 Love for people should move us to be prompt in returning to help those who are hungering and thirsting for the truth. (Matt. 5:6) We should take note of and cultivate any spark of interest we may find if we do not want it to die out. Preparation is the key to success.
2 Our goal should be to start Bible studies. (Matt. 28:20) The initial printing of the Live Forever book included these introductory comments: “This is indeed an excellent book to use in studying with everyone, young or old, no matter what their standard of education.” It is written in a way that makes conducting studies easier, enabling even newer publishers to have a share. Our success in starting new studies depends upon our effectiveness in making return visits.
3 How Can We Start Studies? When we return, it is usually good to tie in our discussion with some point or question mentioned on our initial visit. Perhaps you discussed the condition of the dead, leaving the question, “What hope is there for our dead loved ones?” Explain that the resurrection is not an unfounded hope; the Bible records numerous examples of resurrections that have already taken place. Review illustrations on pages 167-9. Then discuss what is stated in paragraphs 1 and 2 on page 166. If there is interest, offer to return to further the discussion.
4 You may have spoken to a parent who expressed concern about the increasing problems experienced in raising children. You might, in your own words, say something like this:
▪ “All parents want the best for their children. The Bible contains instruction that can help parents to train their children to find a satisfying life that has meaning and purpose. For that reason, we strongly recommend that families study the Bible together. [Refer to paragraph 23 on page 246.] The knowledge gained can bring everlasting blessings to the entire family.” Read John 17:3. Express your willingness to return to show the family how to get their study started.
5 If you are a young or a newer publisher and you spoke briefly about the Paradise hope on the first call, with the book open to page 3, simply express something like this:
▪ “The Bible promises that those who do God’s will can look forward to living in a world like this, where there will be happiness and peace. This book shows what we have to do to enjoy that blessing.” Briefly explain our study procedure, and offer to demonstrate it.
6 As Jesus’ disciples, we have an obligation to help people. (Rom. 10:14) If we placed literature or simply had a good conversation, we have a responsibility to cultivate the interest. (Matt. 9:37, 38) If we fulfill this assignment properly, all can share the blessings that result.​—1 Tim. 4:16.

