They Have Not Held Back From Witnessing
1 Our name, Jehovah’s Witnesses, identifies us and describes what we do. We bear witness to the excellencies of our God, Jehovah. (Isa. 43:10, 12) Each one must share in giving this witness if he is to become a member of the congregation. Witnessing is done primarily through our public ministry, which includes calling from house to house, doing street work, making return visits, and conducting Bible studies. All of us are rightly urged to reach out for a full share.​—1 Cor. 15:58.
2 Some members of the congregation, however, are limited in how much they can do. Serious illness or infirmity may keep them confined. Opposing relatives may raise imposing barriers. A young person may be restricted by an unbelieving parent. Individuals living in isolated areas without transportation may feel stymied. Natural shyness could cause timid ones to shrink back. Some publishers who find themselves in these or similar situations may feel that they are not measuring up as Christians because what they are able to do is much less than what others are doing and less than what they really want to do. There is no reason for them to belittle their own efforts. (Gal. 6:4) They can take comfort in knowing that Jehovah is pleased when they give their best in whatever situation they find themselves.​—Luke 21:1-4.
3 Finding a Way to Share: Thousands of experiences have been related showing how individuals in difficult circumstances have not allowed obstacles to prevent them from witnessing. Using their initiative, they have devised a great variety of ways to do informal witnessing. Those confined at home have used the telephone to open a wide door for witnessing. Every visitor is viewed as a potential listener. Even though a wife with an opposing family might not be able to witness in the home, she takes advantage of opportunities to speak to neighbors or others she meets in her daily routine.
4 A young person may be forbidden by an unbelieving parent to share in our public witnessing. Rather than accept that as an insurmountable obstacle, he may view his classmates and teachers as his personal “territory” and be able to give a fine witness and perhaps even conduct Bible studies. Many living in isolated localities have been able to share by writing letters. Those motivated by Christian zeal will always find some way to avoid becoming “inactive or unfruitful regarding the accurate knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ.”​—2 Pet. 1:8.
5 When it comes to our share in the witness work, Jehovah has set a uniform standard for all, namely, that we should be “whole-souled.” (Col. 3:23) Although the amount of time we spend and what we accomplish will vary, the underlying motivation is the same​—genuine love that emanates from “a complete heart.” (1 Chron. 28:9; 1 Cor. 16:14) If we are giving our best, we will never have reason to feel that we are lacking in faith or are useless as members of the congregation because the amount we are able to do is small. Like Paul, we can truthfully say that we have ‘not held back from telling the things that are profitable nor from teaching publicly.’​—Acts 20:20.

