Bolivia
SITUATED in the heart of South America, Bolivia has truly breathtaking natural features. Mountain peaks of the Andes reach up to 22,998 feet (7,010 m). Lake Titicaca, at an elevation of over two miles (actually 3,812 m) above sea level, is the highest navigable body of water in the world. To the east are mountain gorges, also vast prairies and forests of the lowlands.
The altiplano, or high plain, is an extensive plateau in the west. It lies between two mountain ranges, at an altitude averaging 12,500 feet (3,810 m). This highland is cold, rocky terrain, with very sparse vegetation. Though seemingly inhospitable, it is the home of stately llamas, alpacas, enormous condors, and many people. In fact, about two thirds of the nation’s population of some 6,400,000 is found here. Others live in the valleys and in the warm, humid lowlands to the north and to the east.
THE QUEST FOR POWER AND WEALTH
About the middle of the 15th century, Inca armies invaded the Bolivian highlands and proceeded to impose a new culture. In the following century the Spanish wrenched control from the Incas. Spanish conquistadores sought wealth, and in Bolivia they found fabulously rich deposits of silver and gold. Natives were put at forced labor, and slaves were imported from Africa to exploit the silver found at Potosí. By the middle of the 17th century, Potosí had become the largest city in the Americas, with a population of over 150,000.
The Spanish brought with them the Roman Catholic religion. This was imposed on many by force and was used as a means to control the people. However, the new religion permitted and absorbed many of the earlier practices and beliefs of the Incas, who worshiped the sun, the moon, and “mother earth,” which they called Pacha Mama.
Early in the 19th century, efforts to gain freedom from foreign domination led to independence. Simón Bolívar was proclaimed “Liberator,” and the country was named after him. Since then the government has changed hands many times.
This background greatly influenced the people’s reaction when the good news of God’s Kingdom reached them.
BIBLE TRUTH REACHES BOLIVIA
Pioneer ministers of Jehovah’s Witnesses had done some preaching in Bolivia. But the work of Kingdom proclamation got under way on a more consistent basis in October of 1945. It was then that Edward Michalec and Harold Morris, graduates of the third class of the Watchtower Bible School of Gilead, stepped down from a small two-engine plane. They had just arrived at the highest commercial airport in the world, at an elevation of about 13,500 feet (4,110 m). The sun seemed to be unusually bright and the sky a deep blue. They immediately felt the effect of the rarefied, brisk air because it was more difficult to absorb sufficient oxygen.
As the small bus on which they rode made its way out of the airport, they felt overwhelmed by an impressive view of La Paz in the spacious canyon some 1,500 feet (460 m) below. It seemed to be sequined with silver chips​—actually thousands of metal roofs reflecting the sun. The city was a labyrinth of narrow streets and winding passageways, interspersed with towering eucalyptus trees that had been planted in clusters. This was their missionary assignment.
Winding their way down the narrow road to the city itself, they passed other buses loaded to the hilt, people hanging out both front and back doors. As they began to get a closer look at the people themselves, everywhere they saw bronze-colored skin, dark eyes, and jet-black hair. Men were dressed in well-worn suits or sweaters and pointed wool caps with earflaps. Women were decked out with typical derby hats, knitted shawls, and multiple, full skirts. Some had a brightly colored striped blanket tied to their neck, and in this they cradled a baby on their back. In the markets, a cholita (a native woman of La Paz in her typical dress) could often be seen seated on a stool in the midst of her mountain of fruits or vegetables. In the center of the city, the small adobe dwellings gave way to colonial-type homes and modern hotels. As a magnificent backdrop to it all, far in the distance, was the enormous, snowcapped Mount Illimani.
THEY BROUGHT A PRECIOUS GIFT
The new arrivals were not in Bolivia simply for sight-seeing. Nor were they like the greedy adventurers and conquerors of the past. Instead of coming to take what they could, these men were bringing to Bolivia a gift, a treasure far more precious than silver and gold​—the truth of God’s Word.​—Prov. 8:10, 11.
During the next few days, they sought to obtain residence papers and to locate a place to live. Getting around this hilly city at an altitude of 12,000 feet (3,700 m) was not easy at the beginning. They were almost out of breath and their hearts were beating like trip-hammers as they struggled to communicate with people in broken Spanish. It was impossible for them to foresee all that was in store for them.
A full 85 percent of the adult population could not read. Two of the languages, Aymará and Quechua, were not even written. Thousands could not speak the Spanish language, though they were in the process of learning it. Suspicion of foreigners ran deep. Travel was dangerous. Poverty enslaved a great number to a 12- to 14-hour workday. Alcoholism and addiction to coca leaves, which are legally grown here, had undermined the moral fiber of many. Consensual relationships between men and women were common. Pagan mysticism permeated a predominantly Catholic population. Yet, in time each of those barriers would be overcome with the help of Jehovah’s spirit and his organization.
APPRECIATIVE RESPONSE TO BIBLE TEACHING
Equipped with a phonograph to play recorded Bible messages in Spanish and with a briefcase of literature, the missionaries began witnessing in their new territory. It was a struggle to climb the steep streets at this high altitude, but most people listened to the recorded message. Many accepted literature. Though some people were devout Catholics, it was not unusual to be told: “I’m an apostolic Roman Catholic, but I don’t like the priests.” In just two months the missionaries were conducting 41 home Bible studies.
One of the first to welcome the truth in Bolivia was a soft-spoken accountant, Carlos Arraya. His name was on the list of Watchtower subscribers given to the missionaries before they had left for Bolivia. He appreciatively studied the Bible with the missionaries in spite of their limited knowledge of Spanish. His spiritual progress was gradual but even, and in November of 1953 he was baptized in symbol of his dedication to Jehovah God. Later, as congregation overseer, he did much to strengthen his fellow Witnesses in La Paz. Though poor eyesight and advancing years have limited his activity of late, his love for Jehovah remains strong.
RELYING ON JEHOVAH IN THE MIDST OF VIOLENCE
Seven months after the first missionaries arrived, four more came. Alden Seeyle, his wife Mary, her sister Betty Jackson, and Elizabeth Hollins made up this group.
World War II had ended only a year earlier, and Bolivia was experiencing political upheaval. Fear of Nazi resurgence in South America and political rivalries led to explosive street demonstrations and assassinations. The president of the country was killed, and his body was hung on a lamppost facing the presidential palace.
Brother Michalec recalls that pools of blood on the sidewalk were not an uncommon sight. He reports: “One day as I watched from a vantage point, I saw a tank drive up on the lawn of a large house, aim its cannon, and blast right through the center of the house! I concluded that there was someone in there who wasn’t very well liked.” Elizabeth Hollins, who later became the wife of Ed Michalec, remembers: “At times it was impossible even to leave the house. In September as I was going through the main plaza on a bus, I saw three young men hung up on poles. Never having seen such a thing before, I let out a little cry. A woman said to me: ‘If you don’t like what you see, turn your head.’” These events impressed upon the brothers the need to rely heavily upon Jehovah, who was protecting them during those dangerous times.​—2 Chron. 16:9.
Amid the turbulence, the Word of truth was taking root in humble hearts. So, in September of 1946 the Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society established a branch office in La Paz to care for Kingdom interests in Bolivia. The rented apartment that housed the office also served as a missionary home. A few months later, when the first congregation in Bolivia was formed, this same apartment served as their meeting place. It was a modest beginning.
FEAR-INSPIRING TRIP TO THE YUNGAS
About this time, Brothers Michalec and Morris planned a trip to The Yungas, forested areas with many small villages in the lower valleys to the north of La Paz. They wanted to open up the Kingdom-preaching work there. As they climbed on the back of a truck along with other passengers, they had little idea of the fear-inspiring trip that awaited them.
After ascending to about 15,000 feet (4,600 m), their truck began a rapid, winding descent of thousands of feet in a short distance. The road, which seemed too narrow for the truck, was carved out of the sides of steep mountains. There were no guardrails, and in many places the cliff dropped almost straight down 1,000 feet (300 m) or more from the road! As Brother Michalec describes the trip: “The driver would charge down toward a hairpin curve. Hardly slowing down, he would frantically turn the wheel and barely make the tight maneuver without knowing if we would meet an oncoming vehicle!” The brothers tried very hard to put out of their minds what could happen if they did.
On one steep incline the driver suddenly slammed on the brakes to avoid hitting a huge condor that spread its wings across the entire width of the road. In some places, the mountainside was so straight up and down that the road had been gouged out of it to form a three-sided tunnel. As the truck went through, the passengers had to duck to avoid the rocky protrusions. And when they drove right through a waterfall, riders on the back were given a shower.
This taste of travel in the Andes Mountains made the brothers realize that once congregations were established in The Yungas, much love and extraordinary concern for the brothers would be required on the part of the traveling overseers.
Reaching their destination, the two brothers placed much literature with the friendly folk, planting many seeds of Bible truth. In the years to come, these seeds would contribute to the growth of flourishing congregations.
EXPEDITIONS TO OTHER LARGE CITIES
After returning to La Paz, Brother Michalec was soon on his way to Cochabamba, the second-largest city. This time traveling alone, he boarded a truck loaded with oranges. Gingerly climbing up onto the canvas that covered the fruit, he carefully spread his six-foot (1.8 m) frame as evenly as possible over the cargo to avoid crushing it. The truck headed south over a dusty, bumpy road. After snaking their way down through the mountains all night, they came into the delightful, temperate valley of Cochabamba. The city, with its palm trees and modern homes, seemed very pleasant in contrast to the barren altiplano.
The moderate climate had apparently attracted many priests and nuns from abroad, and these wielded strong control. Although quite a few of the people were skeptical when Brother Michalec called on them, he saw evidence of Jehovah’s direction. Brother Michalec visited a retired army colonel, a reader of our publications who seemed to show enthusiasm for the truth. The next day the two of them, traveling on bicycles, visited various ones this man had talked to about the Bible. One of these, a schoolteacher named Carlos Saavedra, showed genuine interest and was supplied with literature for him and his family to read.
After a week, Brother Michalec boarded an old passenger train for Oruro, the third-largest city at the time. It was a bleak, cold place on the altiplano, a railroad center for the nearby mining areas. Although the surroundings were drab, the people were generally humble and friendly. But Brother Michalec knew very little then about a certain devilish rite that enslaved many of these humble folk.
Among those contacted on this first visit to Oruro was a tinner, Raimundo Vásquez, who later served there for many years as congregation overseer. On a subsequent visit later that year, a Bible study was started with a young lady named Sofia Reynaga (now Flores). Very quickly she began to share Bible truths with others and was soon baptized. Although the beginnings were small, a congregation was formed in Oruro in 1947. The following January another congregation was established in Cochabamba.
The progress of individuals, however, varied. Sofia Reynaga married a man who was not a Witness and then lapsed into inactivity for nearly ten years. But in time, another Witness started a Bible study with her. The needed help was given to sound the truth down deeply into her heart. For 20 years now she has again been an active proclaimer of the Kingdom and she is a source of encouragement to newer ones in the congregation. Back in Cochabamba, the retired army colonel had helped others, but not until the late 1970’s did he become a baptized Witness. On the other hand, Carlos Saavedra and his wife were soon out in the field service. Their home became the Kingdom Hall, and Brother Saavedra was congregation overseer. Most of his children became Witnesses, and whole families of second- and third-generation truth proclaimers recall their first studies with Carlos. After 36 years of faithful service, he died in 1983.
LIBERATED FROM A DEVILISH GRIP
For centuries, since before the arrival of the Catholic priests, miners here in Bolivia have believed that the mines are controlled by an underground lord whom they call el tío (literally, the uncle). The Catholic Church, unable to uproot the belief, absorbed it and even promotes it. El tío now became the Devil, and the miners were taught to implore the “Virgin” for protection. Conditions in the mines contribute to the superstition.
Though the mine entrance may be covered with icicles, the heat inside these humid caverns can go as high as 120 degrees Fahrenheit (50° C.). The miners labor with heavy tools in dank hollows that lack sufficient oxygen and that are laden with dust and poisonous gases. Their mouths, stained dark green, give evidence of their addiction to coca leaves, which they chew in order to suppress hunger pangs and to make them feel more energetic. Such torturous conditions, combined with their pagan concept of hellfire, pave the way for veneration of the Devil.
Almost every mine has at its entrance a small niche for an image of el tío. Upon this idol, complete with horns and tail, are lavished offerings of alcohol, cigarettes, and coca leaves. It is hoped that this will persuade the Devil to protect the miners from death down under.
Before and during the annual festival featuring the Devil dance, large sums of money, often spent by those least able to afford it, go into elaborate costumes and the purchase of coca leaves and alcohol. The streets are filled with Devil dancers, who culminate their rite in the Catholic Church of the Socavón (Church of the Mines). Here they pay homage to the “Virgin,” chanting: “We come from hell to ask your blessing, all your sons of the Devil, little Mother of the mine shaft.” A special Mass is said by the Catholic priest for these “sons of the Devil.” During the days of the festival, chaos reigns as crowds of drunken men and women, covered with mud, confetti, and flour, throw water, sing out of tune, and fight. It is, as the apostle Peter wrote, a “low sink of debauchery.”​—1 Pet. 4:4.
As Jehovah’s Witnesses preached in Oruro and the mining centers they found many honesthearted persons who were disgusted with these superstitions and the ungodly practices to which they led. They rejoiced to learn about God’s purpose to make all the earth a paradise where righteousness will prevail. They appreciated knowing that God’s Word says: “Do not become unevenly yoked with unbelievers. For what fellowship do righteousness and lawlessness have? Or what sharing does light have with darkness? Further, what harmony is there between Christ and Belial [or, Satan]?” (2 Cor. 6:14, 15) It has been a struggle for many to break free from deeply rooted superstitions, from addiction to coca and tobacco, and from abuse of alcohol. But as they have been helped to gain spiritual freedom they have felt as did the Bible psalmist who wrote: “[Jehovah] has neither despised nor loathed the affliction of the afflicted one; and he has not concealed his face from him, and when he cried to him for help he heard.”​—Ps. 22:24.
BOLDLY PREACHING TO EVERYONE
By 1949, there were 13 zealous publishers in Oruro. Among them was a husky Lebanese named Seleme Wakin. He boldly witnessed to business associates, customers in his dry-goods store, and everyone else who would listen. One day at his store he began a friendly discussion with a priest. Seleme asked: “Mr. Priest [his manner of addressing him], why is it that the Church uses images when the Catholic Bible itself forbids them?” The priest responded: “Oh, it’s just those ignorant people out in the mountains who can’t read or write that worship them. The educated, intelligent people don’t worship them. They just have them as a reminder to worship God.” Right then a well-dressed lady from a prominent family came in. Turning to her, Seleme asked: “Lady, how do you consider your images? Do you have them just to remember God, or to worship them?” With a sweeping gesture, she responded emphatically: “I worship them!”
After selling his store, Seleme moved to La Paz to devote more of his efforts to the full-time ministry as a pioneer. On one occasion he loaded a suitcase with books and headed for the army barracks. He placed many of the books with the soldiers, and they invited him for a meal. They also invited a priest. It was not long before the soldiers had a lively interchange going between the two. The difference in Bible knowledge became very apparent, and the meal ended with a round of applause by the soldiers in Seleme’s honor.
Seleme frequently witnessed to high officials, placing Bible literature with them. He even secured an audience with the president of Bolivia and was able to give him a bold witness, which was favorably heard.
FIRST VISIT OF THE SOCIETY’S PRESIDENT
In March of 1949, the then president of the Watch Tower Society, N. H. Knorr, made his first visit to Bolivia, along with his secretary M. G. Henschel. On that occasion an assembly was held in La Paz. The main discourse began with remarks by Brother Knorr and then the rest was given by Brother Michalec. The concluding attendance was 56. A few more even arrived half an hour after everyone else had gone home! On this occasion the visitors saw firsthand what is meant by the hora boliviana (Bolivian hour), a joking way of referring to the people’s chronic habit of arriving late. But, despite the local habit, Jehovah’s Witnesses here begin their meetings right on time, as their Christian brothers do in other parts of the world.
After the assembly, much loving counsel was given to help organize and expand the Kingdom work in Bolivia. More missionaries would be sent, and it was recommended that the branch and Kingdom Hall be moved to a more central location. When this was done, meeting attendance began increasing in a big way, and groups sharing in the field ministry swelled to 20 or more publishers. Now attention turned to what was then the fourth-largest city.
FOCUSING ON SANTA CRUZ
Santa Cruz de la Sierra, located in the eastern lowlands, was almost isolated from the rest of the country. Access by land was possible only by one dirt road, and in the wet season the trip from Cochabamba could take a month. When more missionaries arrived in Bolivia, some of them, including John and Esther Hansler, were assigned to Santa Cruz.
Here in the subtropical lowlands grew totai palms, papaya, citrus, and those strange-looking toborochi trees with their potbellied trunks (also called palo borracho, meaning “drunken pole”). The streets were channels of sand and mire. Constant winds blew the sand into a person’s face and his food. Most interesting, however, were the people themselves.
While the altiplano folk were usually reserved, serious, and a bit skeptical of strangers, those in Santa Cruz were more jovial, carefree, and outgoing. Even their loud, boisterous music differed greatly from the more melancholy tones heard in the mountains. Many a night’s sleep was lost as a brass band played at an all-night party.
As the missionaries witnessed from door to door, people would often invite them in and listen for half an hour or more. Yet, friendly as they were, most were not particularly concerned about world conditions and were quite satisfied with their way of life. Sexual immorality was widely practiced. And, as for changing one’s religion, this would bring ridicule from an unending chain of relatives. Nevertheless, after three years it was possible to form a small congregation, and in time ten publishers reported. But it seemed that little more would come out of Santa Cruz then. So, when Sister Hansler became pregnant, the missionary home was closed.
The Hanslers chose to remain in Bolivia. This meant living in primitive quarters, sacrificing comforts. But they were blessed with four healthy children, all of whom became servants of Jehovah and all of whom are in full-time service or have had that privilege. John and Esther once more enjoy serving in their original assignment, Santa Cruz, as special pioneers.
A TIME OF REVOLUTION
During their first five years in Bolivia the missionaries had become accustomed to repeated political upheavals. However, in 1952, the civilian population began a rebellion against the government that resulted in one of the most fear-inspiring revolutions in the history of the country. In La Paz, rifle fire, machine guns and, occasionally, exploding dynamite could be heard in all directions. Mortar shells fired from the canyon’s edge high above the city fell on nearby homes. Ambulances rushed through the streets to pick up the wounded and the dead. The gunfire and bombing lasted for three days.
It was right at this time that preparations were being made for commemoration of the Lord’s Evening Meal. In La Paz, the missionaries could not imagine how anyone could get through the streets, so they prepared to have the Memorial by themselves. How surprised they were when others, who had risked their lives ducking bullets, arrived for this sacred meeting!
THE TRUTH MOTIVATES A WILLING HEART
In 1953, while a missionary was witnessing to a woman in his broken Spanish, a curious young man named Walter Martínez came near to listen. The missionary asked the young man if he would kindly read “The Purpose of The Watchtower” to the lady. He did, and she accepted the magazines. Then, after further conversation a Bible study was arranged with Walter. Three studies were held with him that week, and on Sunday he was at the congregation meeting.
Two weeks later, when the circuit overseer was visiting the congregation in Oruro, Walter took note of the invitation for all to share in the field service. In Spanish, “field service” is servicio del campo, and campo made him think about going out to the country for a picnic. “So, on Sunday morning, there I was,” Walter recalls, “the first one in the Kingdom Hall, all ready for the picnic.” When the others arrived, he thought it strange that no one seemed to have food, but, instead, all were obtaining books and magazines. Not wanting to be different, he obtained two books and 20 magazines. What he would do with them, he had no idea. But when they began to walk toward the market, Walter was struck with terror. “Oh, no!” he thought, “they’re going to sing in the market the way the evangelists do on Sunday mornings.” He tried to lag behind, with the thought of escaping unnoticed, but it did not work. What a sigh of relief he gave when they passed the market and kept walking! Now he was going to learn what servicio del campo was all about.
On arriving in the territory, the circuit overseer said to Walter, “I want to work with you.” Shortly Walter himself was giving enthusiastic presentations, placing all his literature that morning. Thereafter he progressed rapidly, was baptized and, in time, happily entered the pioneer service. Later, he and Jaime Valdivia were privileged to be the first Bolivians to attend the Watchtower Bible School of Gilead, after which they both served as traveling overseers in Bolivia.
A CATHOLIC SPECTACLE IN SUCRE
Although La Paz is the Bolivian seat of government, Sucre is the legal capital. In this region are the tarabuco people, whose menfolk wear helmet-type hats resembling those of the Spanish conquistadores. At an early date, the lower altitude and pleasant climate of Sucre also made it a favorite sanctuary for Catholic immigrants working at Potosí. And Sucre is proud to have more churches per capita than any other city in the country.
The Catholic heritage of the city deeply influenced the reception given the Kingdom message here. Priests warned their “flocks” not to listen to the Witnesses, and Catholic children were trained to harass the missionaries as they called at the homes.
To stimulate the Kingdom work here, a circuit assembly was scheduled for Sucre in 1955. Signs in store windows advertised the public discourse. However, as the assembly dates neared, the signs began to disappear. Storekeepers said that “Witness youths” had told them that the assembly had been canceled and that they had taken the signs away. Obviously, Catholic youths, pretending to be Witnesses, had been at work. The priests tried to get the owner of the hotel where the assembly was to be held to break the contract. But he refused to be intimidated.
As the assembly was about to begin, a gang of boys from the Sacred Heart Catholic School surrounded the hotel and began yelling and throwing stones. When the police dispersed them, calm temporarily returned. Then on the final day of the assembly, priests, women from Catholic Action, and angry students appeared. High on the church across the street, a powerful loudspeaker urged all Catholics to defend the Church and the “Virgin” against the “Protestant heretics.” Since many in the crowd were peaceful, the brothers seized the opportunity to witness to them. However, tension mounted when the enraged bishop of Sucre arrived.
The mayor and the prefect were already on hand, and they warned the bishop that if anything happened, he would be held responsible. When he calmed down, they permitted him to enter the hall. More police were summoned. The main discourse of the assembly was under way. As the discourse neared its end, a priest arose and asked to be heard. Brother Michalec, the chairman, walked over to him and told him that his questions would be handled afterward. The prefect and the mayor told one of the priests that their conduct had been disgraceful and said, “It’s time to leave.” “Who are you referring to​—them or us?” retorted the priest. “YOU!” answered the prefect. With that, the bishop, the priests, and their friends departed, ending the uproar.
The prefect and the mayor apologized to the brothers, assuring them that the actions of those fanatics did not reflect the sentiments of Sucre. Over the years most Bolivian officials have displayed a similar fair-minded attitude toward the work of Jehovah’s Witnesses. The brothers in Sucre felt that Jehovah had protected them through those officials, just as he had safeguarded the apostle Paul in ancient Ephesus when a religious mob was stirred up against him and his companions.​—Acts 19:35-41.
Despite the favorable outcome in Sucre on that occasion, meeting attendance temporarily dropped, and people seemed fearful about listening to the Witnesses. It was decided to concentrate more attention on Potosí.
POTOSÍ APPRECIATES TRUE RICHES
Potosí, which means “great wealth” or “mint of money,” was no longer the great metropolis that it had been in the 17th century. Most of the silver had been mined, and few vestiges of the city’s past glory remained.
Working at the breathtaking altitude of 13,000 feet (3,960 m), the missionaries climbed the hills of Potosí and placed much literature with the friendly folk. Response was excellent, and in just five years a congregation of 40 publishers was reporting.
In 1956, Richard Holman, one of the missionaries, began a study with the Ibieta family. Among those attending was eight-year-old Marco. The family made good progress for a time and became active as publishers. But in 1959 they left the congregation for unstated reasons. However, young Marco never forgot the zeal of Brother Holman, who had always come on time for the study, even on cold and rainy nights. Some years later in La Paz, Marco and his younger brother began studying the Bible once more. He relates: “My love for Jehovah’s organization, which had been dormant, began to surface and flourish as I acquired accurate knowledge of the Bible. The happy memories of our association with the Potosí Congregation were a great incentive for me to take the truth seriously. When we began to study again in 1970, I was right at the point of entering the university. But now nothing could replace my consuming desire to study the Bible.” Marco became a pioneer and, later, a member of the Bethel family in La Paz, where he now serves as a member of the Branch Committee.
BOLIVIAN WITNESSES OPEN UP NEW FIELDS
Particularly from 1956 on, an increased number of devoted Bolivian Witnesses took up the full-time ministry as pioneers and helped to open up new fields. Most of these brothers could speak Quechua, thus enabling them to reach thousands who had not yet heard the good news. Walter Martínez, Jaime Valdivia, and Jaime Barrery were among these zealous workers. Later, Joaquin Copa and Antonio Zamudio, along with others, joined the ranks. The strenuous efforts of these early pioneers led to the formation of congregations in Uyuni, Atocha, and other mining centers. They helped many families of miners, salt harvesters, and farmers to break free from religious superstition and to become loyal servants of Jehovah.
The self-sacrificing spirit of these pioneers was exemplary. Illustrating this, a special pioneer couple asked the circuit overseer to explain something they did not understand. Holding out a handful of checks, they asked, “What are these for?” Each month the Society sends a small allowance to special pioneers to help them with living expenses, since the amount of time they devote to preaching usually allows no time for secular work. This couple were simply grateful for the privilege of serving.
KINGDOM TRUTH REACHES THE TROPICAL BENI
Back in 1952, proclaimers of the Kingdom had visited the vast Beni region to the north. In this area, alligators and giant tortoises thrive. Here prosperous cattle ranches with private airplanes contrast sharply with the poverty of those who live in mud huts. The Catholic clergy have a reputation for favoring the rich, often being wealthy themselves, and many are notoriously immoral. The result has been a population of virtually atheistic Catholics. But there are heartwarming exceptions.
Thus, in one small village, the chief of police became very interested when Witnesses who were visiting the area explained their work to him. He even offered to help them distribute their Bible literature. As farmers came into town they gathered outside the police station to see what was happening, only to receive Bible publications from the chief. One man took 30 magazines to distribute to his neighbors. Meanwhile the missionaries were busy making calls from house to house.
In 1957, missionaries were assigned to the two principal cities in the area, Trinidad and Riberalta. They found that in most cases it was difficult to convince people that the Bible was not simply a man-made book with a moral code impossible to keep. But Felicia Chinchilla embraced the truth, and even when the missionaries were reassigned, she continued to serve faithfully. When near death, her main concern was that her children become worshipers of Jehovah. She asked the special pioneers in the area if they would adopt the girls. Though they were not in position to do that, they did promise to do all they could to help them spiritually. One of those girls, along with her husband, is now a special pioneer.
TIMES OF FIERY TESTING
The brothers had gone through a number of tests over the years, but the early 1960’s was a time when each one was finding it necessary to give evidence of the quality of his faith. There was considerable political tension in the country, and patriotic activities were frequent. Some did not clearly understand Christian neutrality and what was involved in shunning idolatry. (Matt. 22:21; 1 John 5:21; Dan. 3:16-18) Starting with The Watchtower of November 1, 1962, the brothers were fortified with a thorough discussion of what the Bible says about the Christian’s attitude toward “the superior authorities” and the matter of relative subjection. (Rom. 13:1-7) It was truly spiritual “food at the proper time.” (Matt. 24:45) Nevertheless some shrank back, fearing that they might lose their job or that their children might be expelled from school. But the majority, though suffering some abuse, have given evidence that their faith is strong and they have conducted themselves so as to have a clean conscience before God.
The following year, 1963, there was further testing and refining. It was necessary to disfellowship 17 persons, almost as many as during the previous 16 years. Some who were disfellowshipped had been associated for many years and were well known. There were those who found the judicial actions difficult to accept. But partiality is not to be shown in such sacred matters, and these developments put individuals to the test as to their loyalty to Jehovah and his visible organization.​—Prov. 24:23.
That same year, a missionary sister was found to have committed immorality in a small town near Santa Cruz. Though the case was given the necessary judicial attention, people in that town became antagonistic toward Jehovah’s Witnesses. It became almost impossible to witness at the doors there, so it was decided to transfer the pioneers to other areas. To this day, no congregation exists in that town, although some interest has been found lately.
In spite of these tests, during 1963 Bolivia passed the 500 mark in the number of Kingdom publishers. The year ended with a visit by Brother Henschel. Shortly before this, when in Liberia, West Africa, he had personally undergone a severe test of his Christian neutrality. The Bolivian Witnesses were deeply moved as he fortified them with an account of that experience, emphasizing the importance of courageous steadfastness.
LEGAL RECOGNITION AND THE BRANCH OFFICE
During Brother Henschel’s visit, construction of a new branch building was discussed. The first step was to get legal recognition of the Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society, and this was accomplished after a year of tedious paperwork. Next came the search for land​—not an easy task in a crowded city surrounded by steep mountains. Finally, in 1965, during a visit by Brother Knorr, arrangements were made to purchase property in residential La Paz, close to the center of town. When completed two years later, the building included a large Kingdom Hall and accommodations for 14 missionaries. This fine facility gave added evidence to the local Witnesses of the genuine interest of Jehovah’s organization in the Kingdom work in Bolivia.
A number of qualified brothers had, at various times, coordinated the work in the branch office in Bolivia. Edward Michalec, one of the original missionaries, had served in that capacity for about ten years. Later, J. R. Dickey, Harold Morris, Don Anders, Chester Krochmal, J. F. Millar, and Alden Seeyle all carried the load as branch overseers for varying lengths of time. Each one gave of himself willingly and made valuable contributions to the furtherance of the Kingdom work. In 1966, while the new branch facilities were being constructed, oversight of the branch was assigned to J. D. Rose, who had recently graduated from Gilead.
A FRUSTRATED SCHEME
About this time Santa Cruz was in the throes of change that would lead to its becoming the second-most-important city in the nation. Oil and gas had been discovered. The road from Cochabamba had been paved, and thousands of people moved into what had been a closely knit community of a few large families. Rapid increase took place in the congregation of Jehovah’s Witnesses there, and by 1966 more than 50 publishers were sharing in Kingdom service. More missionaries had just arrived in the city. Then, unexpectedly, the congregation overseer was called in for questioning by a certain official.
The room was filled with people the brother did not know, individuals who turned out to be news reporters. In their presence the official interrogated our brother about his secular work, which the official alleged was illegal. The brother assured him that his work was by no means illegal. He also explained that he had quit his job in order to take up full-time preaching activity the coming month. The official responded that he too was a “believer” but that the brother had committed “great errors.” After confiscating the personal documents of our brother and his wife, the official dismissed them.
The congregation overseer and another brother who worked with him secularly had realized that certain local firms had been concerned about business competition from them. Listening to the complaints, this official, a fanatical adherent of the Seventh-Day Adventists, schemed to involve the work of Jehovah’s Witnesses. What would happen?
Looking at the newspapers the next morning, our brother could hardly believe his eyes! In all four newspapers, front-page headlines dealt with the matter. One had his full name in bold letters and declared that an international embezzler had been detained in Santa Cruz! In another paper, the official besmirched the name of Jehovah’s Witnesses, claiming: ‘Jehovah’s Witness Alternates Sect With Illicit Business.’ The following day there was more front-page news of the same sort. This time announcement was made that it had been “discovered” that our brother had been an “adviser” of a previously deposed president, now in exile and viewed as an enemy! At the same time, radio stations were broadcasting the same news. The slanderous publicity continued week after week, for months.
Having no legal grounds to take action against our brothers, the official was obviously using a publicity campaign to stir up public opinion and possible police action. Expecting the worst, our brothers prepared for the police to pick them up. But they never came. And no one pressed charges in court. When Witnesses called from house to house, the people continued to listen, and Bible studies increased. It was as if they were blind to the newspapers and deaf to the radio. In time, that official was removed from office.
In the midst of these trying circumstances, the local brothers were assigned to present at a coming assembly the “Jeremiah” drama, relating vividly the persecution that that faithful prophet of God underwent. The excitement of recording and rehearsing the drama helped them to forget the storm clouds that hovered over them.
Although the congregation overseer did show some lack of balance under the great pressure that came upon him, he later qualified to enter full-time service as he had planned. Both he and the other brother are still pioneers and overseers in Bolivia nearly 20 years after the frustrated scheme of that biased official.
RAPID GROWTH IN SANTA CRUZ
Though the congregation in Santa Cruz suffered a temporary decrease, no permanent harm was sustained. The local Witnesses, encouraged by the missionaries, worked harder than ever. As was true of the first-century Christian congregation after Saul’s campaign of persecution ended, the brothers in Santa Cruz, too, ‘entered into a period of peace and upbuilding and kept on multiplying.’ (Acts 9:31) Their meeting facilities were soon packed out, and people were listening through the windows. A new Kingdom Hall seating 150 was built. In two years it had to be enlarged. The congregation divided and a large hall was erected on the other side of the city. Today there are 11 congregations in Santa Cruz, all together about 800 publishers, zealously proclaiming Jehovah’s Kingdom. Thrilling increases were also being experienced in La Paz, Cochabamba, Oruro, and the mining centers.
A FIRM STAND FOR TRUTH BRINGS GOOD RESULTS
Ignacia de Torres, of Santa Cruz, listened as her sister from La Paz shared Bible truths with her. Although Ignacia’s response was mild, the seed of truth began growing. In 1963, a missionary started a Bible study with her. But Ignacia’s husband, a tall, strapping policeman, severely opposed. He would fly into a rage and fire his police revolver into the air, while Ignacia and her children ran for cover.
One day he arrived when another missionary, Pamela Moseley, was conducting the study. Her ears tingled as he bellowed out fiery orders motivating a quick departure. Still, Pamela would not give up. One day when he stayed home to catch the missionary, Ignacia told him plainly that if he forbade her to study at home, she would go to the Kingdom Hall. “Now, isn’t it finer that I should study here?” she asked. With that, the opposition let up.
Ignacia continued to grow in love for Jehovah and for her Christian brothers. Often, she would freely use her nurse’s training to help brothers and sisters in distress. More important, however, was her zealous activity to free people in spiritual bondage. Following her example of devotion, three of her children also became Witnesses. After years of fervent prayers, one of her fondest hopes became a reality. Her husband, who had so strongly opposed, began to investigate the truth, and after ten years of Bible studies and many personality changes, he too was baptized in January 1984.
KEEPING THE TRUTH UNTARNISHED
Even as happened in the first century, human imperfection and weakness can affect the actions of Christians, including those in responsible positions. (Acts 15:36-40; Gal. 2:11-14) Thus, during the 1960’s some brothers became very critical of the Society’s representative in the branch and others closely associated with him. One of the traveling overseers who was well known sympathized with the complainers, even offering some of his own criticism. This brother felt that promoting social gatherings while visiting the congregations would help unite the brothers. However, these often resulted in large feasts with immoderate drinking. For those who had fought hard to overcome alcohol addiction, this proved to be a stumbling block. Some newly interested ones quit studying the Bible as a result of what they saw. A few, who sought to justify their conduct by what others were doing, later had to be disciplined because of excessive drinking.
Another brother in circuit work, one who had done much to help others, now began to set a poor example in regard to business matters. While a circuit overseer he postponed vital spiritual matters in order to care first for personal business affairs.
For a time it seemed that those who should have corrected matters were unable to do so in a spirit of self-control and peace. Yet, after some years, corrective measures were finally taken. (Gal. 6:1; Jas. 3:17) It also brought joy when some of those who had had spiritual difficulties worked toward restoration of a good relationship with Jehovah.
NEW BUILDINGS FOR TRUE WORSHIP
By 1969, there were 869 publishers and 24 congregations. However, most of their Kingdom Halls consisted of drab rooms that were rented. In one location the congregation met in a partially covered patio of a private home. But that presented problems when it rained.
The Trinidad Congregation became the first, with the help of a loan from the Society, to construct its own permanent Kingdom Hall. Many others followed​—in La Paz, Potosí, Oruro, Santa Cruz, Cochabamba, Tarija, and Sucre.
What is undoubtedly one of the highest Kingdom Halls in the world is located at Chorolque. Here a tin mine supports a population of a few thousand. The lips and faces of many people are bluish gray because of rarefied air. A goodly number of these mining families have responded to the truth. Their Kingdom Hall, built on a piece of land donated by the mining company, stands at an altitude of 15,748 feet (4,800 m)!
JEHOVAH PROVIDES ESCAPE
The Kingdom message was reaching into remote areas of the land. Not even the inhabitants of the villages on the enormous salt flat El Salar missed out on hearing the good news. But the reception was not always friendly. In Coquesa, where Brother Toribio Cruz lives, what occurred in 1970 gave evidence of how Jehovah helps his servants under such circumstances.
The district overseer, his wife, the circuit overseer, and a missionary couple made a visit to Coquesa. Only the circuit overseer was a Bolivian. And in a place where foreigners are viewed with great skepticism, their arrival caused quite a stir. The already tense situation became worse when the missionary brother made an unfortunate remark that was meant to be a joke. But it was not taken that way, and soon the whole town convened in the school to decide what to do about these foreigners. Sensing the danger, Brother Martínez, the circuit overseer, suggested that they leave right away. However, others decided to stay overnight and see what would develop.
The next day a messenger informed the brothers: “The town wants to hear you out, so please come to the plaza and instruct us.” Upon arrival there, it was noticed that three sides of the plaza were blocked. Suspecting a trap, the district overseer ran back to the car and shouted for the others to follow. The mob seized Toribio while the others tried to escape. Madly pursuing, some of the mob grabbed Brother Martínez’ scarf and cut the face of the missionary brother. Scrambling into the car, they sped away while the mob pelted the car with stones.
However, Toribio was in the hands of the mob. They beat him so savagely that he thought he was sure to die. But finally managing to break free, he started to run. With the mob close on his heels, he came to a deep, rushing stream​—too wide, he thought, for him to jump over. But he had no choice. He leaped with all his might. To his own disbelief, he made it! When the mob reached the water’s edge, they could only watch in amazement as Toribio disappeared from sight on the other side.
Covered with bruises and poorly clothed, he spent the freezing night on a nearby mountain. But Toribio’s unbelievable leap apparently convinced the people that his God had helped him. Instead of burning down his house, as they had done in the past, they left it untouched. He was able to return to town and live unmolested, and he is now the presiding overseer of the congregation there.
BREAKING THE SPELL OF THE LAKE
Lake Titicaca is at an elevation of 12,500 feet (3,810 m); it also has recorded depths of over 900 feet (270 m). On its waters can be seen totora reed boats, which provided the pattern for the papyrus reed vessel in which Thor Heyerdahl crossed the Atlantic Ocean. Still, there is more to this lake than meets the eye.
From ancient times, Lake Titicaca has been a focal point of mysticism. What effect would Bible truth have on the lives of people living in such surroundings?
Back in 1966, when a man threw out the book “The Truth Shall Make You Free,” his brother-in-law took it home. Though his knowledge of Spanish was limited, his native tongue being Aymará, he saw that the book had information about Jehovah God. This name, he realized, was in the Bible but was not being explained by the churches. From time to time he would travel to La Paz to obtain more literature. His relationship with Jehovah began to grow, and he shared with his neighbors what he was learning. In time he got baptized and later became a pioneer.
Others around the lake also began to embrace true worship. However, the majority in the area could not read and they spoke only Aymará. Visiting brothers noticed that some had not got rid of mystic objects they had used before becoming Witnesses. But when Bible counsel on this matter was explained in their native tongue, they quickly took it to heart. (Acts 19:19, 20; Deut. 7:25, 26) Costly costumes used in pagan dances, good luck charms for making land and cattle productive, utensils that were family heirlooms but that had been used for making offerings to false gods, crosses and false-religious literature​—all came out of hiding to be destroyed. One elderly sister had been completely bedridden until her daughter burned her pagan charms, but it is reported that she improved and never missed a congregation meeting thereafter.
GREAT INCREASE ON EL ALTO
In 1945, when the first missionaries landed at El Alto, site of the La Paz airport, it was nothing but a few scant adobe dwellings. But during the 1960’s, La Paz outgrew its land area, and a large satellite population developed high above it. About then, two young men from El Alto, Hugo Fernández and his brother, began attending meetings in La Paz. To get home they had a hazardous two-hour climb out of the canyon late at night. But they continued to come.
In time a full schedule of meetings was being held by the group on El Alto. Hugo spent entire mornings each week preparing meeting parts. It was hard work for him, but it contributed much to his spiritual growth. Shortly after his baptism he expressed to the circuit overseer his interest in being a pioneer. “Why not start right away?” asked the overseer. Hugo felt that he should work at his shoemaking for about six months more. “How many shoes can you make in six months?” the circuit overseer asked. Then he added: “How many lives are waiting to be saved?” Hugo thought about it seriously. By August 1, he was a special pioneer. He has seen the group on El Alto grow manyfold, till that original group has become four congregations of praisers of Jehovah.
LOVING CONCERN IMPELS TRAVELING OVERSEERS
When Brothers Michalec and Morris made their first perilous trip to The Yungas in 1946, they got a taste of travel in Bolivia. Now there are congregations in areas that are even more difficult to reach. Devoted traveling overseers and their wives have expended themselves to the limit to reach congregations and small groups in the most remote locations. Their travel often involves drastic changes of altitude. In many cases, the only way to get to a place is on foot, and some of these devoted brothers have walked up to 125 miles (200 km). Brothers Nahín Escalera, Wallace Liverance, Mark Pefferman, and their respective wives, have had a special share in this self-sacrificing activity.
Illustrating what can be involved is an experience had by Hugo Fernández, then a circuit overseer. Rains had turned the roads into slippery mire. With his motorcycle heavily loaded, he managed to cover about 90 miles (140 km) in eight hours. A swollen river many yards wide brought him to a stop. Nightfall was approaching. Staying out all night in the torrential rain was unthinkable. Crossing the river seemed impossible. He prayed to Jehovah, then decided to try to cross. He covered the motor with plastic and made the plunge. He relates: “Entering the river heavily loaded, I made great effort to control the handlebars through the strong cold current. Water splashed in my face, cutting off visibility, and I even felt I had water over my head. But before I knew it, there I was on the other side!” Moments later a car from the other direction tried it and stalled in the middle. How grateful Hugo was to Jehovah, who he felt had been the Provider of escape for him in that time of need. (Ps. 18:1, 2) He arrived safely at the next congregation. Since 1977, Brother Fernández has served as a member of the Branch Committee in Bolivia.
A MEMORABLE VISIT BY F. W. FRANZ
The visit to Bolivia in 1974 by F. W. Franz, now the president of the Watch Tower Society, is fondly remembered by the brothers here. Brother Franz was accompanied by two missionaries from the first Gilead class as well as by three other members of the Brooklyn Bethel family, all of whom at his instance had parts on the program. One of these had been a missionary in Bolivia for more than nine years and very much appreciated the opportunity to visit her “foreign assignment” again.
A special meeting was held in the Open Air Theater in La Paz, and a large audience assembled from many parts of the country. Here Brother Franz masterfully developed his talk around Psalm 91. At the outset it rained hard, but most of the audience remained in their seats for the full two hours. Some wondered, though, how Brother Franz was keeping his Bible and his notes dry. But watching closely, they realized that he was giving the entire discourse, including extended quotations from the Bible, not only in Spanish but also completely from memory.
The brothers were deeply impressed by Brother Franz’ love, simplicity and humility, and his willingness to stay up late to answer their Bible questions.
BRANCH COMMITTEE PROVIDES OVERSIGHT
When arrangements were made for a Branch Committee, instead of an individual, to provide oversight for the branch, a more balanced and comprehensive direction of spiritual matters was made possible. In 1977, Eldon Deane, who had a longtime record of full-time service in Argentina, was sent by the Governing Body to act as coordinator. He shares in Branch Committee responsibilities along with Hugo Fernández, Marco Ibieta, and Walter Meynberg, who has served in La Paz Bethel for nearly 20 years. Jehovah’s blessing on the arrangement has been evident.
PRIESTS FLEE FROM “BABYLON” TO COME CLOSE TO GOD
At an increasing rate, the ‘waters of Babylon’ have been drying up; yes, people are withdrawing their support from false religion. (Rev. 16:12) One who did this was a Jesuit priest. After studying the Bible with the Witnesses in Cochabamba, Julio Iniesta dedicated his life to Jehovah in his native Spain.a
Since early childhood Hugo Durán, originally from Vallegrande, had deeply felt the need to get close to God. He thought the best way to do this was to become a Catholic priest. But after devoting ten years to preparation for the priesthood, he felt farther from God than ever. He explains: “A personal encounter with God is impossible in the seminary. He has no name, no personality nor interest in men, since the idea that ‘God is dead’ prevails. We mainly learned an infinity of memorized rites, which, all gathered together, did not provide one single drop of life-giving water to quench one’s thirst. Once when our seminary needed money, the priests hired a woman singer for a fund-raising show. Even to look at a woman was sinful, we were taught, so their making us ‘sin’ just to raise money revealed their real hypocrisy.”
Finally Hugo left the seminary and got married to a former nun. He kept praying that somehow he might find God. About then a Witness visited his home in Santa Cruz, and after many conversations, a regular Bible study was begun. Now Hugo began learning who God really is. Instead of being a nameless, uninterested deity, he is Jehovah, a loving Father, one who cares for every vital need of his servants. (Ps. 83:18; Luke 11:2-4; Phil. 4:6) Though at first Hugo found some aspects of the truth difficult, he constantly prayed and finally became convinced. Since his baptism in 1973 he has helped many others to come close to God and he serves now as a loving Christian elder.
HELP PROVIDED THROUGH JEHOVAH’S ORGANIZATION
Certain disaster as a result of pursuing a course of self-destruction has been averted in many instances by means of the power of God’s Word. But, in the case of Carlos, a young jeweler in Santa Cruz, reading the Bible alone did not prove to be enough. Help was needed through Jehovah’s organization.
He frequently came home unconscious on the back of a drinking buddy, while his family watched in tears. In time the Witnesses contacted his wife, who found comfort in the Scriptures and hoped that the Bible would also help Carlos. Though Carlos knew he was in serious trouble, he was sure the Witnesses did not have the solution. Instead, when tempted to drink, he would try to think about his family or would recite devotions in a Catholic church. He even tried reading the Bible, but disliking the name Jehovah, he would substitute “God” for the name. Nothing that he tried worked.
His wife and his brother, who were now studying with Jehovah’s Witnesses, tried to talk to him about the Bible, only to receive insulting rebuffs. In spite of the apparent hopelessness of the situation, his wife kept praying for an opportunity to help Carlos change. One day, at a family get-together, the family asked if Carlos would like to accompany them to the Kingdom Hall. Not wanting to be discourteous, he agreed, with no thought of going inside. Upon arriving, however, his wife said: “Now that we’re here, why not go inside for a minute?” Very reluctantly, Carlos agreed. He stayed for the full two hours, and although he understood very little, he was impressed that everything that was said was backed up from the Bible. He attended two more meetings that week, and by Sunday he decided to study the Bible in earnest.
However, his drinking problem did not go away overnight. For eight more months he continued drinking heavily, often missing his studies and the meetings. The brother studying with him tried to impress on him the need to practice what he was learning, in line with Luke 6:46, which says: “Why, then, do you call me ‘Lord! Lord!’ but do not do the things I say?” But how could he conquer the craving for alcohol? Another brother suggested that he pray fervently to Jehovah right at the time when temptation arose. He tried that, and it worked! His once-shattered family became united as they all grew spiritually. His economic situation improved so much that he was able to start his own jewelry business. Carlos, his wife, and two of their children have been baptized. Those children are now pioneers, and Carlos is a Christian overseer. How fine the effects when individuals appreciatively accept the help that Jehovah provides through his organization to benefit from his Word!
GOD’S WORD SOFTENS HEARTS IN TARIJA
Though the inhabitants are calm and peaceful in disposition, Tarija proved to be ‘hard ground,’ spiritually speaking. The people in this part of southern Bolivia are quite set in their traditional ways. But by 1978 a congregation of 30 publishers was reporting here. Yet, many felt inadequate, apparently because of a somewhat critical attitude on the part of ones who had formerly taken the lead. Some who had shared earlier in proclaiming the Kingdom message had become inactive. However, with encouragement, 15 of these became active witnesses of Jehovah again. People in the community, too, showed a more receptive attitude as the Witnesses became more friendly and less argumentative.
Using trucks loaded first with 20, then with 30, 40, or 50 publishers, the brothers went out over stony mountain roads to work the rural villages. In a few years, some 35 villages dotting this mountainous region had been reached for the first time with the good news. Many chapacos (Tarija mountain folk) listened attentively as the Witnesses explained the truth with the help of My Book of Bible Stories and its beautiful illustrations. These preaching excursions helped the brothers to become more united and confident. In just four years the number of publishers more than doubled. Now two flourishing congregations are busy there reaching more honesthearted persons.
“JUST PLOWING THE SEA”?
Many years ago, a prominent Bolivian man warned the early Witnesses that their work would be in vain. Dramatizing his skepticism, he declared: “You’re just plowing the sea.” What he failed to understand was the power of God’s Word, the operation of Jehovah’s spirit, and the loving determination of his Witnesses.
True, it has presented a real challenge to make firm disciples in a country where, at the start, only 15 percent could read. But Jehovah’s Witnesses have taught hundreds to read and write so that they could personally read God’s Word. It is truly a joy to see elders who were once totally illiterate now giving assembly discourses, including explanations of deep spiritual matters.
The small group that met in La Paz in 1946 has now become 20 congregations in that city. Instead of just one family pursuing true worship in Cochabamba, there are at present six congregations. Three more are found in Oruro and two in Potosí. Throughout Bolivia there are over 85 congregations of Jehovah’s praisers. In spite of galloping inflation, paralyzing strikes, and very bad weather, the 1985 service year saw one peak in publishers after another, up to 4,207 in April. And the total in the various branches of pioneer service during April was 1,005​—24 percent of the total number of publishers! There is also good potential for an even greater number of praisers of Jehovah, as indicated by the Memorial attendance of 17,169, and that in the face of torrential rain. With patient cultivation, the Bolivian field has proved to be fruitful.
Like determined miners seeking valuable minerals, Jehovah’s Witnesses have used every means possible to search out those whose hearts are inclined toward righteousness. They have traveled by bicycle, motorcycle, riverboat, canoe, truck, airplane, horse, donkey, and especially on their own feet to reach remote populations with the Kingdom message. During the past four decades, upwards of 180 missionaries have shared in this work.
As Jehovah’s Witnesses in Bolivia intensify their witnessing during these final days of the old system, they continue to rest their confidence in Jehovah. Having in mind what he has done in their own midst, they feel as did the inspired psalmist who wrote: “Many things you yourself have done, O Jehovah my God, even your wonderful works and your thoughts toward us; there is none to be compared to you. Were I inclined to tell and speak of them, they have become more numerous than I can recount.”​—Ps. 40:5.
[Footnotes]
See The Watchtower, November 15, 1982, pages 10-15.
[Map on page 71]
(For fully formatted text, see publication)
BOLIVIA
  RIBERALTA
  TRINIDAD
  Lake Titicaca
  LA PAZ
  COCHABAMBA
  SANTA CRUZ
  ORURO
  VALLEGRANDE
  SUCRE
  COQUESA
  POTOSÍ
  UYUNI
  ATOCHA
  CHOROLQUE
  TARIJA
PERU
CHILE
ARGENTINA
PARAGUAY
BRAZIL
[Picture on page 74]
Edward and Elizabeth Michalec have had a fruitful ministry in Bolivia during the past 40 years
[Picture on page 80]
Harold Morris (center), one of the first missionaries in Bolivia, shown here with N. H. Knorr and M. G. Henschel in 1949
[Picture on page 82]
John and Esther Hansler (on right), with their four grown children, welcoming others to Kingdom Hall in Santa Cruz
[Picture on page 95]
Branch office in La Paz
[Pictures on page 100]
Charlotte Tomaschafsky (right), a missionary, witnesses to an Aymara family near Lake Titicaca. Reed boats are a common sight on the lake
[Picture on page 107]
Members of the Branch Committee have a combined total of 90 years of full-time service (From the left: Eldon Deane, Walter Meynberg, Marco Ibieta, Hugo Fernández)

