From Our Readers
Perfectionism  I want to thank you for the articles “Young People Ask . . . Why Do I Feel That I Have to Be Perfect?” and “How Can I Stop Trying to be Perfect?” (July 22 and August 22, 2003) My obsession with doing things perfectly had become a weight I could no longer carry; it was robbing me of my joy. For fear of saying the wrong thing, I even avoided commenting at Christian meetings. I am deeply grateful to Jehovah for these articles. They are helping me to keep my counterproductive thinking under control.
S. M., Italy
The articles are just what I needed to help me to deal with a problem I’ve had for 50 years. I thought that there was nothing wrong with trying to be perfect—that I was simply giving Jehovah my best. I wondered why I so often experienced difficulties with my children, coworkers, and Christian brothers. I realize now that some of my views are unbalanced and out of harmony with Jehovah’s thinking. By being “righteous overmuch,” I have caused desolation to myself and others. (Ecclesiastes 7:16) Overcoming this problem won’t be easy, but with Jehovah’s help I’m willing to try.
C. H., United States
The comments that perfectionism can immobilize you are so true! I’ve been frustrated over the years, wondering why I couldn’t accomplish things I so desperately wanted to do. And the points about not having friends—oftentimes no one seemed to want to be around me, but I couldn’t figure out why. Now I know that I have a long, hard battle ahead and that Jehovah will help me.
L. R., United States
I have struggled with this problem for years, always feeling that what I do is not good enough. I feel so relieved that I’m not the only one struggling with perfectionism.
A. B., Canada
I grasp mentally that nobody can be perfect, but my feelings push me to believe otherwise. It did me much good to read that Jehovah does not expect perfection from us and that what counts with him is what is in our heart. I am grateful for these articles.
S. K., Germany
Fear of failing has often held me back from taking action. I have learned that perfectionism causes chronic anger, pessimism, depression, and low self-worth. I still haven’t figured everything out, but I know that I want to develop a sense of humor about my mistakes.
A. I., Japan
I have suffered terrible mental stress and anxiety. I would berate myself, saying, “I am a worthless person.” Your articles presented a helpful outlook and warm encouragement. The heavy burden on my heart—the need to be perfect—has become lighter. The Scriptures have helped me to adjust my attitude and to develop a healthier outlook.
M. N., Japan
St. Petersburg  We thank you for the article “St. Petersburg—Russia’s ‘Window on Europe.’” (August 22, 2003) During our two-week honeymoon, we were able to see for ourselves the historic sights in St. Petersburg. Our visit to the branch office of Jehovah’s Witnesses, the Mariinsky Theater, the State Hermitage Museum, and Peterhof left an unforgettable impression on us. Thanks so much for this article. It served as our guide to this grand city!
A. and O. S., Russia

