When No One Will Ever Feel Lonely Again
THE record at Genesis 2:18 states that when the first human was created, “Jehovah God went on to say: ‘It is not good for the man to continue by himself. I am going to make a helper for him, as a complement of him.’” Humans were created to be with others and to depend on them.
The best Friend we can have is Jehovah God. The apostle Paul acknowledges Jehovah as “the Father of tender mercies and the God of all comfort, who comforts us in all our tribulation.” (2 Corinthians 1:3, 4) Jehovah himself expresses sorrow at the suffering of any of his servants. He is a God of empathy. “He himself well knows the formation of us, remembering that we are dust.” (Psalm 103:14) Do you not feel attracted to Jehovah God and grateful for his loving, kind, and understanding attention?
Jehovah Supports the Lonely Ones
In the past many of God’s servants experienced circumstances in which they felt lonely. To them, Jehovah was a source of support and comfort. Take, for example, Jeremiah, who was called to be a prophet when a young man. Among the 40 writers of the Scriptures, Jeremiah was perhaps the one who expressed the most about his personal feelings. He felt timid and inadequate when he received his first assignment from God. (Jeremiah 1:6) To carry it out, he had to rely fully on Jehovah. Truly, Jehovah was with him “like a terrible mighty one.”—Jeremiah 1:18, 19; 20:11.
Some 300 years before Jeremiah, when Queen Jezebel heard of the death of her Baal prophets, she vowed to have Elijah put to death. Elijah fled some 285 miles [450 km] to Horeb in the Sinai Peninsula. There he entered a cave to spend the night, and Jehovah God put this question to him: “What is your business here, Elijah?” Elijah explained that he felt he was the sole worshiper of Jehovah in all Israel, the only prophet left who was zealous for God’s service. Jehovah assured him that he was not alone. Jehovah was with him, and 7,000 of Elijah’s fellow Israelites were also with him, although unknown to him. Jehovah comforted and soothed Elijah and built up his faith. He touched Elijah’s heart, encouraging the prophet not to give up in his assignment. (1 Kings 19:4, 9-12, 15-18) If, like Elijah, we ever feel lonely or worthless, we too can pray to Jehovah for strength. Also, by using discernment, Christian elders can speak consolingly to faithful ones, helping them to see their role in the outworking of God’s purpose.—1 Thessalonians 5:14.
From these and other examples, we can appreciate Jehovah’s willingness to give support and loving comfort to those who feel lonely. Yes, “Jehovah will become a secure height for anyone crushed, a secure height in times of distress.”—Psalm 9:9; 46:1; Nahum 1:7.
A Man With Deep Feelings and Sympathy
Jesus Christ is an example of someone to be admired for his perfectly balanced emotions in imitation of Jehovah. Luke describes Jesus’ reaction when encountering a funeral procession in the city of Nain: “There was a dead man being carried out, the only-begotten son of his mother. . . . When the Lord caught sight of her, he was moved with pity for her, and he said to her: ‘Stop weeping.’ With that he approached and touched the bier, and the bearers stood still, and he said: ‘Young man, I say to you, Get up!’ And the dead man sat up and started to speak, and he gave him to his mother.” (Luke 7:12-15) Jesus’ emotions were stirred. He was a compassionate man. Imagine the happiness Jesus brought to the lonely widow when he restored her son to her! No longer was she lonely.
We can experience the reassurance of having in Jesus one who can “sympathize with our weaknesses.” He certainly sympathizes with upright ones who are lonely. Indeed, through him “we may obtain mercy and find undeserved kindness for help at the right time.” (Hebrews 4:15, 16) By imitating Jesus, we can develop sympathy for those who experience grief, affliction, and loneliness. By helping others, we are less likely to be lonely. But there is yet another way in which we can gain help in overcoming the negative feelings of loneliness.
Jehovah’s Word Can Help Us Overcome Loneliness
Many have found that “through the comfort from the Scriptures we . . . have hope.” God’s Word is full of practical counsel that can help us to overcome loneliness. (Romans 15:4; Psalm 32:8) For example, God’s Word exhorts us ‘not to think more of ourselves than it is necessary to think.’ (Romans 12:3) To apply this advice, we may need to make an adjustment in our thinking. Humility and modesty—having a realistic view of our limitations—will certainly help us develop balanced and reasonable expectations. God’s Word also counsels us to develop genuine personal interest in others. (Philippians 2:4) This is a two-way street. As you give of yourself, you will receive from others. This good fellowship helps to relieve feelings of emptiness and gives meaning to our lives.
The Bible encourages us as Christians ‘not to forsake the gathering of ourselves together.’ (Hebrews 10:24, 25) So engage in positive activities, such as attending meetings of Jehovah’s Witnesses regularly. Undoubtedly, Christian meetings can contribute to our spiritual, emotional, and physical well-being. Speaking to others about the good news of God’s Kingdom is an enjoyable way to fill our lives with wholesome activity. It keeps our mind focused in the right direction, fortifies our faith, and protects our hope.—Ephesians 6:14-17.
Draw close to Jehovah in prayer. David exhorted: “Throw your burden upon Jehovah himself, and he himself will sustain you.” (Psalm 55:22) By studying God’s Word, you will feel happy. (Psalm 1:1-3) If feelings of loneliness seize you, meditate on Jehovah’s loving care as revealed through his Word. The psalmist wrote: “My soul has been cleaving to the very dust. Preserve me alive according to your word.”—Psalm 119:25.
When No One Will Say, “I Am Lonely”
Jehovah God has promised us a new world free from anxieties, frustrations, and negative feelings. The Bible states: “He will wipe out every tear from their eyes, and death will be no more, neither will mourning nor outcry nor pain be anymore. The former things have passed away.” (Revelation 21:4) Yes, among those former things that will pass away are the physical, mental, and emotional pains that we experience today.
The earth will be full of friendly people, who will enrich our lives. Jehovah through his heavenly Kingdom in the hands of Jesus Christ will cure us forever of our loneliness. He will give us new and wonderful things to do in an earthly paradise. The day will soon come when we will never again say, “I feel lonely.”
[Picture on page 8, 9]
With Jehovah’s support we will not feel lonely, even when alone
[Pictures on page 10]
What do the Bible accounts of Jeremiah and Elijah teach us?

