From Our Readers
Accountability  Thank you for the outstanding series “Are We Accountable for Our Actions?” (September 22, 1996) I’ve found these articles to be remarkably effective in stimulating good discussions with lawyers, insurance agents, business executives, publishers, local government officials, and others I have spoken to in our city’s business district. I showed a city parking official the article “It’s Not My Fault.” She snatched the journal out of my hands, remarking that “few people admit to their own errors anymore.” She said she wanted everyone on the staff to read it.
B. S., United States
Good Times  Thanks for the article “Young People Ask . . . How Can I Have a Good Time?” (September 22, 1996) I am 15 years old, and there are many youths in our congregation. We often do things together. For instance, we might go preaching in the morning and then in the afternoon go for a swim. It’s great fun! Sometimes others from our congregation join in. And it’s comforting to our parents to know that we have the right kind of association.
I. W., Germany
Sickle-Cell Anemia  I have read and reread the article “Sickle-Cell Anemia—Knowledge is the Best Defense.” (October 8, 1996) It describes my situation! I have been living with this illness for 18 years now. Tears came to my eyes as I read it. I was happy to see that you thought of those suffering from this ailment.
R. S., Italy
I have sickle-cell anemia. I didn’t know so many others had it too. The article helped me understand why I have pain and how important it is to drink lots of liquids. My mom gave copies of the article to my teachers so they will understand my disease.
A. H., United States
I lost my younger brother to sickle-cell anemia. In Nigeria, 60,000 persons die annually from it. So the article came to grips with a real problem. Every Nigerian family should read this article. It was informative and was presented from a fresh perspective.
F. A., Nigeria
I cannot hold back from expressing how I feel about the article on sickle-cell anemia. I have endured the disease for 26 years now without this information. Thank you so much for it.
D. C., Zambia
Love That Binds  I want to thank you, dear brothers, for printing the article “The Bible’s Viewpoint: The Love That Binds.” (October 8, 1996) I have faced many tests of my faith over the years, including the sudden deaths of my parents. But the hardest test ever has come from someone within the congregation. This article has given me strength and comfort, as I see that Jehovah knows and understands my tears and the hurt and pain I have felt in my heart. I learned that even the apostle Paul suffered similar hurts. I trust that in time Jehovah will heal my wounds.
S. B., Canada
In this wicked system, it is easy to lose one’s focus on spiritual things. The article was very encouraging and motivating to me. Lately, I have been very stressed by the everyday anxieties of life. This article helped me appreciate the importance of relying on Jesus’ love, rather than on our imperfect emotions.
A. M., United States
I suffer from depression caused by a chemical imbalance. The article has helped me take another step in dealing with my depression.
B. U., United States

