From Our Readers
World Peace  The series “Is World Peace Just a Dream?” (May 8, 2002) is excellently written. All the politicians should read it. Your publications convey very well what a person should know and how he should live.
J. S., Czech Republic
A Youth’s Initiative  I’ve always wanted to tell you how much I appreciate the magazines, and I finally decided to do so after reading the article “Her Initiative Was Rewarded.” (May 8, 2002) I recently had an experience similar to Stella’s. It brings joy to my heart to know that there are young ones worldwide like myself who are putting Jehovah first in their life. Experiences like these are encouraging to everyone, both young and old.
L. P., United States
Animals  I just finished reading the article “Meet the Mysterious Snow Leopard.” (May 8, 2002) I love every one of the creatures that Jehovah made, especially the fuzzy ones! It angers me to read about how few snow leopards are left. Think of how Jehovah must feel about this.
D. R., United States
Hankul  I am 13, and I enjoyed the article “Let’s Try Writing in Hankul!” (May 8, 2002) For as long as I have been able to read, I have been very interested in foreign languages. I hope that you print more articles on foreign languages in the future!
B. J., United States
I am 11 years old, and what I found amazing is that Hankul can even be used on words that are not Korean. The concept was easy to understand. Thank you for publishing this article!
J. I., United States
Spiders  I was fascinated by the article “A Spider That Masquerades as an Ant.” (April 22, 2002) What a marvelous Creator Jehovah is! I look forward to life in the new world, when I will be able to learn more about the things he has created.
P. P., Sri Lanka
Convict Ships  I have been enjoying your magazines for more than 50 years. I recently read the article “Australia’s Infamous Era of Convicts.” (April 22, 2002) On page 13, you mention the loss of the British convict ship Amphitrite in 1883. I believe this is an error. According to my research, the ship was actually lost in August 1833. That would be well within the convict period discussed in the article, which ended in 1868.
D. B., Scotland
“Awake!” responds: The source for our article does state that the “Amphitrite” was lost in 1833. We apologize for the error.
Young People Ask  Thank you for publishing the article “Young People Ask . . . What if I Meet Someone From School?” (February 22, 2002) Many years ago I was a painfully shy teenage boy with a stuttering problem. The ministry was difficult for me, especially when I met kids from school. I know this article will be of immense help to other youths.
W. T., United States
Sound Advice  Thank you for providing such rich and informative reading material. Your articles cover a vast range of subjects, and unlike many publications, yours maintain an unbiased and respectful stance toward others’ beliefs. Awake! has become a close and inseparable friend, a source of sound advice that helps me to face life’s problems with hope.
N. P., Brazil

