VOL. XVIII. JANUARY 15, 1897. No. 2. 



CONTENTS. 



Item, About Traveling Brethren 18 

View from the Tower 19 

Program for a Triumphal Church 
Reign 19 

A Christian Nation 21 

An Evolutionist Enthroned Lord 

Archbishop, Primate of England 22 

Christian Fellowship 22 

The Lame Man Healed 25 

"They Had Been with Jesus" 27 

page 18 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
-ADDRESS TO- 
TOWER PUBLISHING CO., BIBLE HOUSE, 58 & 60 ARCH ST., 
ALLEGHENY (NORTH PITTSBURG), PA., U.S.A. 

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 

INCLUDES A SUBSCRIPTION TO "THE OLD THEOLOGY TRACTS "-QUARTERLY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, N.Y. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, 

OR REGISTERED. FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN 

MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS: 

Those of the interested, who by reason of old age or accident, or 
other adversity are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, 
if they will send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and 
requesting the paper. 



R2093 : page 18 

TRAVELING BRETHREN ON TIME. 



When you get word that any of the "Pilgrim" brethren are coming 
to your vicinity at a particular date, you may expect them and prepare 
accordingly. Do not delay arrangements for meetings until their 
arrival; else there will be little time left for meetings; for rarely do 
they remain over two days at one place. The routes are arranged in 
the WATCH TOWER office, and the time apportioned according to 
circumstances and interest— sometimes but one day at a place. 
These "pilgrims" are not slothful, but fervent in spirit serving 
the Lord; so arrange for two or three meetings each day, as will 
suit your convenience. Improve such opportunities for having your 
friends and neighbors, whom you have been trying to interest by conversations 
and reading matter, hear a connected delineation of the Plan 
of the Ages from the Chart of the Ages. We commend to you as a 
privilege the entertainment of these brethren of whose coming we send 
you notification (Heb. 13:2; Rom. 12:4-18); but they do not take up 
collections, all needful expenses being provided from the Tract Fund. 



R2091 :page 19 

VIEW FROM THE TOWER. 



TENDENCIES already noted, toward a combination 

of religious sentiments in sympathy with 

"political reform" movements, are step by step making 

headway, preparing for the predicted politico-religious 

"Confederacy." (Isa. 8:12.) These give evidence 

of four things: (1) that the "form of godliness" 

and outward ceremony flourish as the Apostle predicted 

(2 Tim. 3:5); (2) that personal, vital godliness 

and clear appreciation of the divine mind are decreasing; 

(3) that the nominal church contains so much of 
the world and its spirit as to be ready for the move; 

(4) that the worldly, while unconverted in the true 
sense, are greatly influenced by respect, fear and public 
sentiment, and see no danger from the movement. 

We are far from claiming, as many do, that our 
day is witnessing a general decline of moral and religious 
sentiment. On the contrary, we hold that these 
sentiments are more general perhaps than ever before, 
as witnessed by the philanthropies and charities of 
both public and private support, and the increase of 
humane and kindly sentiment. But we claim that 
while the civilized world is much brighter and better 
as a whole than it ever was, because of the diffusion 
therein of the Gospel light, yet the mass of the church, 
the light-bearers, are declining in intelligent faith and 
zeal and approaching the worldly standard about as 
fast as the world has been approaching the Christian 
standard, so that the world and the nominal Church 



have again come close together;— closer than at any 
time before during the present century; so close that 
to many it appears that, to fully install the Millennium 
—the triumphal reign of the churches— only the three 
following "reforms" are needed; viz.— (1) Insert the 
names of God and Christ in the United States Constitution; 
(2) compel professing Christians to take a 
more active part in politics, form Good Citizenship 
Leagues, etc., and learn to outwit Satan at his own 
game; (3) by so doing obtain prestige and power 
enough to influence legislation to the enactment of 
stringent Sunday laws which would at least make us 
look like a religious people; also suppress the social evil 
and break up present "rings," or else convert them to 
the new religio-political program. Later on it will 
do to enforce religious worship and have the public 
servants attest their fidelity by attending in squads and 
in uniform. The appointing of obligatory fast days and 
thanksgiving days as is and has long been the case in 
countries thoroughly dominated by Roman Catholicism 
will follow later. The next step would be to suppress 
all literature antagonistic to this union; symbolically 
behead it (Rev. 20:4— like John the Baptist) for pointing 
out the wrong of the professed bride of Christ being 
united to the world. Then, later, when questions 
would arise as to what would constitute Christian worship, 
the Supreme Courts could be called upon to define 
more and more explicitly what is, and what is not, 
Christian faith and worship. 

Such a reign of the churches will be but the counterpart 
to the reign of Papacy during the "dark ages," 
except that it will be a more enlightened reign, from 

R2091 : page 20 

the fact that general civilization has progressed, and 
general intelligence will have some weight. 

But that reign will be short. Worldliness, being 
merely covered with a thin outward veneer of religion, 
will speedily assert its true nature— selfishness, envy, 
malice, hatred and strife. But it will not be left thus 
to disintegrate: its fall will be sudden; it will be utterly 
disrupted by the "great earthquake" (Rev. 16:18), 
the revolt of the masses, precipitating the anarchy 
foretold in Scripture, in the midst of which the dominions 
of this world shall pass into the hands of the true 
Kingdom of God, when the true Millennial reign will 
begin. 

The fact is that the faith of the Church has always 
been the most pure and fervent when under opposition 
and even persecution from the world. There can be 
no ground for union between the Church and the world 
except as the Church wholly or in part loses sight of 
or abandons the divine program. Our Lord's example 
and precepts are applicable to all of his followers 
yet, and will continue to be so until the "present evil 



world" shall give place to "the world to come" and its 
Messianic Kingdom. Our Lord declared, "Ye are not 
of the world. I have chosen you out of the world. 
Marvel not if the world hate you, ye know that it hated 
me, before it hated you. If ye were of the world, the 
world would love its own." 

The present effort to unite the Church and the 
world more closely, like the successful efforts of the 
past, is only a trap and a snare by which the great Adversary 
would divert attention from the true work of 
the Church— her self purification and separation from 
the world, by which her light would shine upon the 
world with greater clearness, convincing of sin, of 
righteousness and of a coming judgment. 

But as in the past a falling away of the majority 
into worldliness served to separate the Lord's "jewels," 
so now such a separation is in progress. And it is for 
this "jewel" class that God is supplying the light of 
present truth;— clearer light on the "ransom" and its 
present and future results; on the "royal priesthood" 
and its present sacrificing and future glory; on Covenants 
and their fulfilment; on the Kingdom now in embryo 
suffering violence, and by and by in glory and 
power the blessing of all the families of the earth; on 
the fulfilment of prophecies which prove that we are in 
the "harvest" of this age, and that the great Reaper 
is present, "gathering together his elect," his jewels. 



The champions of Church and State have been rejoicing 
considerably over two incidents which they consider 
favorable to their cause,— 

(1) A Supreme Court decision which, although 
indirect, can be, and no doubt later on will be, construed 
to signify that the United States Government is 

in some sense a religious, a Christian government, and 
become a basis for Christian laws and regulations, and 
not merely laws of Justice. All should know how many 
narrow meanings have been given to the term, "Christian 
regulation," by various well-meaning, but grossly 
deceived, parties in the past. 

(2) President Cleveland in his last Thanksgiving-day 
Proclamation departed from all past usage by mentioning 

R2092 : page 20 

in it the name of Christ, and what might be 

construed as partisan politics in the suggestion of thankfulness 

that the Silver Party had failed to carry the 

election. His example was followed by the Governors 

of several States in their Proclamations. There is nothing 

in the Constitution giving any authority for such 

Proclamations: they are therefore merely suggestions; 

and in making the suggestions all previous Presidents 

have wholly separated politics, and in consideration of 



the fact that millions of citizens (including Jews, infidels 
and skeptics) do not acknowledge Christ, have 
merely suggested that thanks be rendered to Almighty 
God for his blessings, etc. The framers of the National 
Government were not devoid of religious sentiment, 
but they were logical when they said, "Who does not 
see that the same authority that can set up the Christian 
religion over all other religions, can with the same 
ease set up some particular sect of Christians in exclusion 
of all other sects?" Acting upon this thought, 
they sought to found a government of the people entirely 
free from religious bias, under which every citizen 
and stranger shall have liberty to worship God or 
not to worship him, according to his own conscience. 

So intelligent a journal as the Independent proves 
the wisdom of the foregoing, for while defending President 
Cleveland's proclamation, it says,— 

"Suppose the President had been a Roman Catholic 
and referred to the invocation of Mary as a mediatrix, 
he would have made a mistake, because the prevailing 
sentiment of the land would be against him." 

The intimation is that so broadminded a man as 
the Editor of the Independent would be inclined to allow 
the majority to rule the minority, especially if he were 
on the side of the majority. 

Indeed, the United States Constitution seems to us 
almost miraculous: we believe that God must have 
providentially guided in its preparation— so remarkably 
does it guard religious liberty even against the will of 
a majority; and that in a land where majorities rule in 
general matters. 

Considerable opposition was aroused by these two 
evidences of religio-political combination, as well as 
considerable approval; but the masses of the people are 
apathetic and care little one way or the other, and do 
not see the danger. In answer to criticisms the Cleveland 

R2092:page21 

Plain Dealer seems to suggest an Amendment to 
the Constitution, establishing rules (to be drafted by 
experts) for such occasions as Thanksgiving-day 
Proclamations. 

The Reform Bureau, commenting appreciatively 
on the proclamation, says,— 

"Thus at last we have a proclamation in accord 
with the Supreme Court dictum, 'This is a Christian 
nation.'" 

Again, in the Washington Evening Star, the same 
Bureau says,— 

"The Thanksgiving proclamation is in this respect 
the first one that might not have been appropriately 
issued in China or among the Choctaws, or wherever a 
Supreme Being is recognized. This is the first proclamation 
in accord with the long list of historic facts 
on the basis of which the Supreme Court said, on Feb. 



29, '92, in a unanimous opinion (Trinity Church case): 
'This is a Christian nation.' This proclamation, with 
the burial of the spoils system and the arbitration 
treaty, will make this administration distinguished in 
history above any other since the war." 

"On the other side we quote from the Chicago Israelite 
as follows:— 

"Between undue sensitiveness and a just appreciation 
of insult and rightful apprehension of encroachments 
upon liberty, there are great differences. No 
one familiar with the systematized efforts of the numerous 
Christian organizations to obtain recognition of 
Christ in the Constitution; of the tendency of the decision 
of the United States Supreme Court, that this is 
a Christian nation; and of the natural results which 
must follow upon the arrest and conviction of Seventh-day 
Adventists in various States of the Union, can view 
with indifference President Cleveland's departure from 
the precedents of all the presidents who have gone before 
him. Mr. Cleveland has done what no previous 
president has ever dreamed of doing, what all have 
taken pains to avoid doing.... 

"There is an untiring effort being made to turn 
this country into a Christian State and to place on a 
footing of toleration only, all those who do not profess 
the Christian religion. The danger of the eventual 
success of this scheme is much greater than many are 
inclined to believe. Eternal vigilance is the price of 
liberty, and it behooves every lover of freedom to be 
on his guard against its foes, and, more especially, 
against such an evident attack as is made in President 
Cleveland's message, whether it was intended or not. 

"Those who close their eyes to the strength of the 
movement which has for its aim the Christianization of 
our country, and the consequent death blow to all of 
its boasted freedom, either know little of what is going 
on or sadly underestimate the number and influence 
of those engaged in this revolutionary and retrogressive 
movement. Ignorance and indifference only 
can account for the tendency to make little of President 
Cleveland's breach of the unwritten law which has 
hitherto been held sacred. ...Those who are inclined 
to underestimate the influence of his action will have 
a chance to estimate it at its true value when the jubilations 
of Christianizing elements have had time to 
make themselves heard. That they will be heard in 
tones unmistakably loud, only those who know nothing 
of the fight being made can doubt." 



The desire to rule others and to compel obedience 
is very strong in some people. The Christian Standard, 
for instance, is urging a rigid religious observance of 
Thanksgiving Day, and would like to have all religious 
people oppose foot-ball and other recreative games on 



that day. 

The Christian Endeavor Society wants to make its 
mark also, and proposes another holy day. It proposes 
to give to Washington's Birthday a "religious tone." 

The Christian Endeavorer says:— 

"Many Christian Endeavor societies last year utilized 
Washington's Birthday for Christian Citizenship 
day. They found this plan to be helpful to the cause 
of Christian Citizenship.... 

"As Washington was distinctly a Christian citizen 
and showed his loyalty to his divine Master on every 
occasion, there is every reason why the celebration of 
his birthday should have a religious tone to it." 

It says that about six hundred C.E. Societies will 
follow the plan this year. It is proposed to make it 
general at the next convention. It will not be long, 
probably, until those who hold aloof from these church 
and world combination schemes will be esteemed religious 
anarchists. 

All this is of a piece with Rome's saint days, only 
modified to suit our times. 



Advocating Sunday observance before the "Iowa 
Sabbath Rescue State Convention," Rev. E. L. Eaton 
gave the key note of the present movement when he 
said,— 

"We want to touch legislation; we want to go over 
yonder into that Capitol building and sit there among 
the law makers with as much serenity and with as 
much right as do the lobbyists of the great corporations. 
We want to put our finger on the moral pulse 
of the legislature until they feel the power of our influence 
to the extent that they dare not refuse our 
demands. 

"He added that Catholics, Lutherans and all other 
Protestants could as brothers work together in a great 
cause that is worthy of their effort." 

As usual, false doctrine, ignorance of and opposition 
to the divine plan expressed in the Word, lies at 
the foundation of these well-meant but really evil 
movements. 

Let all who can read the signs of the times draw 
specially near to the Lord and his Word, and seek the 
more grace and wisdom to walk circumspectly and to 
labor while it is called day, before the night shall close 
our opportunities and indicate that the gathering of 
the elect is complete. 



R2092 : page 22 

The "Evangelical Alliance" has taken a specially 
active part in Christian Union efforts of late. It is 



worth while remembering that in this association directly 

the union movement took its start in the formation 

of the "image," as marked in prophecy, in 1846 A.D. 

It is altogether probable that it will also play an important 

role in connection with its receiving "life." — 

Rev. 13:15. 



A remarkable sensation was created in London recently, 
in connection with the public consecration of 
Rev. Dr. Temple as Archbishop of Canterbury, Primate 
of the Church of England, and next to the Queen the 
head of that church. As the ceremonies (which took 
place in the Church of Saint Mary LeBow) commenced, 
the Rev. Edward Brownjohn of Bath arose and solemnly 
and earnestly protested against the consecration, 
"on the ground that Rev. Dr. Temple was a confessed 
believer in the full doctrine of Evolution, a doctrine 
incompatible not only with the Bible but also with the 
Book of Common Prayer and Articles of Religion of the 
Church of England." 

The Queen's commissioners refused to entertain 
the protest of one man; and considering that they had 
the backing of practically the entire Church of England 
in favor of Evolution, and the Queen's choice of Primate, 
the ceremony proceeded. This was on Dec. 22, '96. 

On Jan. 8 the Archbishop was enthroned, as the 
following dispatch describes:— 

R2093 : page 22 

"The mandate for the enthronement was presented 
by the vicar-general to the chapter of Canterbury, 
in the treasury. After this ceremony the chapter proceeded 
to the deanery and conducted the archbishop to 
the great West door. The procession was then formed. 

The archbishop was attired in full archiepiscopal 
robes, his long scarlet train being borne by two boys, 
king's scholars of the cathedral school. They wore, 
according to immemorial custom, surplices of pure 
white linen, yellow sandals and little purple caps. 

"There was a dramatic incident as the archbishop 
was traversing the nave at the end of the procession. 
A voice shouted loudly: 'The whole proceedings are a 
fraud.' The interruption came from an elderly gentleman 
of clerical appearance. He was speedily and forcibly 
ejected amid considerable excitement. 

"The order of installation was read in Latin, and 
the archbishop was conducted to the marble chair, accompanied 
by the archdeacons of Canterbury. The 
marble chair, known as the patriarchal throne, is said 
to have been used by St. Augustine, and in it during 
many centuries the archbishops of Canterbury have 
been enthroned. 

"The new Archbishop of Canterbury is one of the 



most advanced Liberals among English churchmen. He 
is a professed advocate of Darwin's theory of evolution." 



The reaction in the Church of England against 
Papacy is showing itself in an increased desire to form 
a Universal Protestant Organization. The Bishop of 
Salisbury at a public meeting recently said, of the 
Pope's recent deliverance which repudiated Anglican 
Orders and union,— 

"It has set us free to do work which lies nearest 
hand, without so much regard to ulterior consequences. 
We are free to follow the path opened to us by a Divine 
Providence, and to create an independent world-wide 
communion." He suggests that the first step should 
be toward a union with Presbyterians. 



R2093 : page 22 

CHRISTIAN FELLOWSHIP. 



"He that hath my commandments, and keepeth them, he it is that loveth 
me: and he that loveth me shall be loved of my Father, and I will 
love him, and will manifest myself to him. Judas saith unto him, 
not Iscariot, Lord, how is it that thou wilt manifest thyself unto 
us, and not unto the world? Jesus answered and said unto 
him, If a man love me, he will keep my words: and my 
Father will love him, and we will come unto him, 
and make our abode with him."— John 14:21-23. 

IN these words the people of God have set before 
them the blessed privilege of intimate communion 
and fellowship with our Heavenly Father and our 
Lord Jesus, the privilege of a realization of the divine 
presence, of which the world cannot know, and which 
realized is an earnest of our inheritance with Christ beyond 
the vail of the flesh. If we be one with Christ 
here, his faithfulness is our assurance that nothing can 
separate us from him now or when we shall have finished 
our course and proved our faithfulness even unto death. 
"Who," says Paul, "shall separate us from the love of 
Christ? shall tribulation, or distress, or persecution, or 
famine, or nakedness, or peril, or sword?. ..Nay, in 
all these things we are more than conquerors through 
him that loved us. For,. ..neither death, nor life, 
nor angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things 
present, nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor 
any other creature, shall be able to separate us from 
the love of God which is in Christ Jesus our Lord." 
-Rom. 8:35-39. 
This is the blessed assurance of faith that springs 



spontaneously from the realization of a present and vital 
union with Christ. Such fellowship and intimate communion 
should therefore be the longing desire of every 
child of God, whose prayer and constant attitude of 
heart should be,— 

"O God, this is my plea,— whate'er the process be, 
This love to know." 

R2093 : page 23 

It is only in heart-to-heart fellowship that we become 
truly acquainted with another; and only so can 
we realize the depth and sweetness of divine love. But 
the conditions of this fellowship, the process by which 
we may come to really know him in whose favor is life, 
and his dear Son, our Redeemer and Lord, must not 
be overlooked. The conditions are that we have and 
keep the divine commandments. The having and keeping 
of the commandments, our obedience to the heavenly 
wisdom, constitute the proof of our love to God. 
Thus also is proved our love of righteousness; for the 
law of God is the law of righteousness, commending 
itself to the highest moral instincts of our nature. To 
the soul, therefore, that loves righteousness the commandments 
of the Lord are not grievous (1 John 5:3); 
for they are the expression of the most exalted virtue, 
the noblest benevolence, the purest love, and all the 
beauties of holiness. 

In the inspired words of the Lord and the apostles 
and prophets we have the divine will expressed, explained, 
illustrated and enforced, line upon line and 
precept upon precept. And yet, with all this teaching, 
it is possible, even for the consecrated people of God, 
to be forgetful hearers and readers of the Word, so that 
its most explicit directions for daily living, its most 
faithful warnings against snares and besetments, and 
its most careful expositions of the principles of righteousness 
and truth, may avail little or nothing in the 
education and training of character. "Therefore," 
says the Apostle, "we ought to give the more earnest 
heed to the things which we have heard, lest at any 
time we should let them slip;. ..for. ..how shall 
we escape [the wrath of God] if we neglect so great 
salvation"— the salvation which comes only through 
faith and obedience to the Word of the Lord diligently 
laid up in our hearts, and its principles carefully and 
prayerfully wrought out in our lives. (Heb. 2:1-3.) 
The promise of the divine favor and blessing is not to 
the forgetful, listless hearers who fail to apply their 
hearts unto instruction, but to the attentive hearers 
and faithful doers of the Word.— James 1:25. 

It is not enough, therefore, that we have read the 
Word of God and gained a general knowledge of its 
principles and precepts and the plan and purpose of 
our God: there is yet more, much more, to be learned 
and done. There must be a daily laying up of its 



treasures of wisdom and counsel in the heart, and the 
working out of its principles in the life. "Thy words 
were found, and I did eat them," said one of the saints 
of old; "and thy word was unto me the joy and rejoicing 
of my heart." (Jer. 15:16.) So must we also feed 
upon them in our hearts. 

Moses, addressing the typical people of God, shows 
with what carefulness God would have all his people 
regard his testimonies, saying, "Ye shall lay up these 
my words in your heart and in your soul, and bind 
them for a sign upon your hand, that they may be as 
frontlets between your eyes. And ye shall teach them 
your children, speaking of them when thou sittest in 
thine house, and when thou walkest by the way, when 
thou liest down, and when thou risest up. And thou 
shalt write them upon the doorposts of thine house and 
upon thy gates." (Deut. 11:18-20.) Joshua also said 
to them, "This book of the law shall not depart out of 
thy mouth; but thou shalt meditate therein day and 
night, that thou mayest observe to do according to all 
that is written therein."— Josh. 1:8. 

Again we read (Prov. 7:1-3), "My son, keep my 
words, and lay up my commandments with thee. Keep 
my commandments and live; and my law as the apple 
of thine eye. Bind them upon thy fingers, write them 
upon the table of thine heart." 

It is those who thus carefully lay up the treasures 
of divine wisdom that they may in deed and in truth 
live by them, that truly keep the commandments of 
God. It is very manifest that our Lord would have us 
apply not only our heads, but also our hearts, to the 
instructions of his Word. (Prov. 23:12.) This implies 

R2094 : page 23 

the study of ourselves, as well as of the divine Word, 
that we may see just what portions of the Word apply 
to our individual present necessities. We know that 
as members of the fallen race we are all afflicted with 
the malady of sin; and though through faith in Christ, 
our Redeemer, we are freely forgiven and reckoned of 
God as free from sin, even this reckoned standing before 
God, through faith in Christ's merit applied to us, 
is accorded to us only in view of our hatred of sin, our 
love of righteousness, and our earnest heart-desire to 
be pure and holy. It would indeed be a vain thing to 
trust for eternal life in the imputed righteousness of 
Christ, and at the same time to love and continue in 
sin. If any of the world of mankind do so in the next 
age, they will never reach perfection and eternal life. 
Accepting first, the favor of redemption through 
Christ they must then work out their salvation by obedience 
and persevering effort to eradicate sin and put on 
righteousness. The same principle applies also to the 
Church now on trial. We should ever bear in mind 
that justification through faith in Christ does not 



directly, and beyond all peradventure, insure to the 
believer eternal life; but it does secure that legal standing 
before God upon which believers, both of this age 
and the next, must work out their salvation with fear 
and trembling.— Phil. 2:12. 

Having, by faith, accepted this legal standing before 
God, our subsequent course of life must make 
manifest our heart-desires to be cleansed from all 
sin: "Shall we continue in sin that grace may 

R2094 : page 24 

abound? God forbid;" for if we continue in sin, the 
grace of God will not abound; and if we give up the 
struggle against sin and allow it to take possession of 
our mortal bodies, the grace of God must eventually 
be withdrawn. 

Sin is a disease inherited from our fallen progenitors: 
it affects one individual in one way and another 
in another: and even though, through faith in Christ, 
we are reckoned of God as free from sin, nevertheless 
the actual tendencies to sin are still present with us. 
Like the children of Israel, we are led into Canaan 
(the rest of faith and of the divine favor), but we have 
still a great work to do in the way of routing the enemies 
of righteousness long intrenched there; and for 
this work both persevering effort and divine grace are 
needed. While the precious blood of Christ applied by 
faith is the great atoning remedy for sin whereby we 
are justified to life, the only restorative remedies are in 
the law and testimonies of the Word of the Lord, all 
which would, however, be unavailing except as supplementary 
to the great atoning remedy; and these must 
be carefully and prayerfully sought out and applied with 
persevering effort for our cleansing and healing. To this 
end it is important also to remember that a correct diagnosis 
of our case is one of the first essentials to a cure. But 
who is sufficient for this?— "Who can understand his 
errors?" who is able to look into his own character and, 
without prejudice, to mark its defects? Surely none 
who are intoxicated with the spirit of the world, with 
pride, or selfishness, or vain glory. 

It is for this reason that the Apostle Paul counsels 
sobriety and humility, saying, "For I say, through the 
grace given unto me, to every man that is among you, 
not to think of himself more highly than he ought to 
think, but to think soberly."— Rom. 12:3. 

A sober estimate of self is a humiliating, not an 
exalting, exercise; yet it is healthful and beneficial. 
It reminds us continually that we are "men of like passions" 
with other men, and thus enables us not only to 
strive against our own weaknesses and besetments, but 
also to sympathize with those of others, and to bear 
with them as we wish them to bear with us. It makes 
us continually to realize that our fallen nature gravitates 
toward sin, and that we must resolutely strive 



against it or else float with its downward current to 
destruction. 

A sober estimate will remind us too of our mental 
infirmities; for, however favorably we may compare 
with some other members of the dying race about us, 
we are very imbecile as compared with human perfection. 
How slowly and laboriously does the mind act; 
how dull are the perceptive faculties; how inert the 
reasoning powers; how unskilled the judgment; how 
feebly we discern the great principles of truth, and 
how stupidly we go about applying them; how repeated 
are our blunders and failures, and how tedious and 
slow our progress ! Surely no man, however favorably 
he may compare with some of his fellows, has 
anything whereof to boast in a sober estimate either of 
his mental or his moral capacity or development as 
compared with the standard of perfection. 

In a sober estimate of character how painfully 
manifest are those overestimates of pride and vainglory 
which are due to the intoxicating spirit of the world! 
How unlovely it is, how absurd and ridiculous, how 
mean and contemptible, how vain and foolish! and how 
effectually it impedes progress toward actual perfection! 
No man can make commendable progress toward perfection 
in any direction who does not recognize his 
shortcomings. If we say we see, our blindness remains; 
if we say we are wise, our ignorance remains, and our 
folly is manifest to others while we glory in our shame. 
-Phil. 3:18,19. 

Such is the spirit of this world. It is blind to the 
highest interests and noblest ends of life; it intoxicates 
the mind and heart and sends the man staggering along 
the downward way to destruction, wise only in his own 
conceit. Against the intoxicating spirit of this world it is 
the duty of the Christian to set a vigilant guard. He 
has covenanted to live apart from the world with all 
its ambitions, pride and vainglory, and apart, too, from 
its selfishness, greed and strife. Let us, therefore, be 
sober and watch unto prayer; and let the burden of 
our prayer be, "Cleanse thou me from secret faults 
[show them to me that I may put them far from me]. 
Keep back thy servant also from presumptuous sins; 
let them not have dominion over me." "Search me, 
O God, and know my heart; try me and know my 
thoughts, and see if there be any wicked way in me, 
and lead me in the way everlasting."— Psa. 19:12-14; 
139:23,24. 

We need to know and clearly recognize our errors, 
if we would indeed be cleansed from every secret fault. 
If there be any secret fault in us, what though no human 
eye might detect it, if we are indeed lovers of 
righteousness, we will want the cleansing power of the 
Word applied to take it away, remembering always 
that "all things are naked and opened unto the eyes of 
him with whom we have to do."— Heb. 4:13. 

Yes, it is in the diagnosis of our case that we are 



most likely to err, and it is here that sobriety of mind 
and meekness are so much needed. Self-love does not 
like to admit the faults that are in us, to particularize 
them and look them squarely in the face with the 
searchlight of God's Word clearly revealing them. It 
is much more conducive to complacent ease of mind to 
generalize, and to overlook particulars;— to say, Yes, I 
know I am not perfect, etc., etc. But it requires a 

R2094 : page 25 

great deal more of moral courage to say, Yes, I see 
now, in the light of God's Word, that I have been selfish, 
or unkind, or unfaithful to my obligations, or 
whatever the fault may be. It requires meekness, humility, 
to admit these things, even to one's self; and 
still more, to confess them to those who have been injured 
or grieved by them. Yet how necessary are the 
recognition and the confession— the proper diagnosis 
of the case— to the healing. "Confess your faults one 
to another, and pray one for another," says the Apostle 
James, "that ye may be healed." (Jas. 5:16.) The 
recognition and the confession, as well as the prayer, 
are thus seen to be very important in order that the 
heart may be in the proper attitude to receive an answer 
to the prayer. 

Careful reflection will show at once how necessary 
to the cure is a correct diagnosis. For instance, suppose 
a case of extreme selfishness. For a time it moves 
along and prospers, and the disease grows worse and 
worse until, by and by, some of its bitter fruits begin 
to appear. Now if the patient fails to discern or admit 
the selfishness, he may regard the bitter fruits of it, 
not as the penalty for wrong-doing, but as sufferings 
for righteousness' sake. And with this incorrect diagnosis 
he may come to the Word of God and take away 
the wrong remedy. If he should go at all, he will 
probably look for words of consolation designed for 
those only who are truly suffering for righteousness' 
sake. And that will not help his selfishness, but will 
make it worse: he will go on cultivating the selfishness 
and take comfort in the promises that are not his; 
whereas, if he realized and admitted the selfishness, 
he would be considering the warnings against it and 
praying for grace to overcome it; he would be acknowledging 
it to those concerned, and endeavoring to make 
amends for it; and in so doing its bitter fruits would 
begin to wither, the peace of God would come into his 
heart, his heart would enlarge, and the love of God 
and of his fellow-men would begin to fill it. 

This is what it means to keep the Lord's commandments 
and to apply our hearts unto instruction. It 
means, not self-gratification, but self-abnegation, and 
self-purification: it means that, in meekness and humility, 
we must deny ourselves, and take up our cross 
daily, and follow Christ. This is the narrow way; walk 



ye in it. There is no other way to life, and certainly 

no other way to the Kingdom, than the way of righteousness, 

humility and true holiness, and of faith in 

the Lord Jesus Christ, whose abundant merit, applied 

by faith, will make up for all our deficiencies that are 

not wilful. It is those who walk this narrow way that 

may even now enjoy the sweets of fellowship with the 

Father and our Lord Jesus and with all who are led of 

R2095 : page 25 

the spirit of God. 

Let as many, therefore, as would follow on to know 
the Lord, whom to know is life eternal, studiously apply 
their hearts unto instruction, and in meekness and 
humility receive the ingrafted word, and let it do its 
purifying work. Hear the exhortation, "Submit yourselves 
therefore to God. Resist the devil, and he will 
flee from you. Draw nigh to God, and he will draw 
nigh to you. Cleanse your hands, ye sinners; and purify 
your hearts, ye double-minded.... Humble 
yourselves in the sight of the Lord, and he shall lift 
you up."— James 4:7-10. 

Paul speaks of the great profit to the Corinthian 
Church of their humble recognition of and godly sorrow 
for sin, saying, "Now I rejoice. ..that ye sorrowed 
to repentance;. ..for godly sorrow worketh repentance 
to salvation;. ..for behold this selfsame thing, 
that ye sorrowed after a godly sort, what carefulness it 
wrought in you; yea, what clearing of yourselves; yea, 
what indignation; yea, what fear; yea, what vehement 
desire; yea, what zeal; yea, what revenge [against the 
evil]. In all things ye have approved yourselves to be 
clear in this matter." (2 Cor. 7:9-1 1.) Such are the 
results of sober self-examination in the spirit of meekness 
and prayer and with a view to cleansing our hearts 
and minds from all the defilements of sin, both small 
and great. O Lord, keep thy servants in the way of 
thy commandments, in meekness and soberness, and 
let the rich reward of divine fellowship be ours, both 
here and hereafter! 

MRS. M. F. RUSSELL. 



R2095 : page 25 

THE LAME MAN HEALED. 

-JAN. 24. -ACTS 3:1-16.— 

"His name, through faith in his name, hath made this man strong 

THE stirring scenes of the Day of Pentecost were 

past, and this lesson introduces us to another 

notable discourse by the Apostle Peter, delivered probably 



not long after the day of Pentecost in company 
with the Apostle John. They had gone up to the temple 
at the hour of prayer. The clear intimation is that the 
apostles were praying men and that under the leading 
of the holy spirit they were guided in their ministrations 
of the truths connected with the new dispensation to 
the praying Jews, "devout" people, rather than to the 
godless. And so it is with the true gospel ever since. 
There is a message or a call to repentance which is 

R2095 : page 26 

applicable to every member of the human family; but 
the special message of the gospel is not to the unregenerate, 
but to the repentant, to the forgiven, to the 
reconciled. The Jews who assembled to worship the 
Lord at the temple were of course not believers in the 
Lord Jesus Christ, and therefore were not justified by 
faith in his blood, but, under their Jewish covenant, 
the Law covenant, and by means of its typical sacrifices, 
they were up to this time typically justified as a people, 
and the grace of God was offered to them from 
that standpoint: they were not treated as strangers, 
aliens, foreigners, but as heirs of all the divine promises 
and blessings. And as a people the Jews continued to 
occupy this position for three and one-half years after 
our Lord's crucifixion and their national rejection. 
The Lord's favor according to promise continued with 
them individually until the full end of their "seventy 
weeks."* 

(2,3) At that time hospitals, homes for incurables, 
blind asylums, poor houses, etc., apparently 
were not thought of, and were not instituted as we 
have them to-day in civilized lands; nor are they yet 
institutions in the East. Thus public alms-giving was 
probably considered a duty. We might here remark 
that, in our judgment, the course adopted by civilized 
nations of taxing all property and wealth for the reasonable 
and comfortable support of the incapables of society 
is eminently proper, and should be so completely 
carried out as to make public begging unnecessary. 

(4-7) Peter's statement would indicate that he at 
least was a very poor man. "Silver and gold have I 
none." Although he said, "Look on us," thus directing 
the cripple's attention to the Apostle John as well as 
to himself; yet, speaking of their financial condition, 
he does not say, "Silver and gold have we none." The 
fact is that there is good ground for supposing that the 
Apostle John had some property. We remember that 
our Lord with his dying words commended his mother 
to the care of John— possibly not merely because of his 
love for John and John's love for him, but also because 
John had some means wherewith to care for Mary. We 
remember furthermore that the account states that 
John took Mary "into his own home."— John 19:27. 

The Apostle Peter seems to have exercised his individual 



gift in the healing of the cripple— "Such as I 
have give I thee:" nevertheless, it was not in his own 
name that the miracle was performed, but properly all 
credit was given to the Lord Jesus. This was evidently 
not a case of "prayer cure," for we have no record that 
the Apostles prayed over the man, nor that they anointed 
him with oil in the name of the Lord. It was on the 
contrary an exercise of "the gift of healing," which 
was then with the Church for the purpose of introducing 
the apostles and the gospel which they preached. 

Although fully conscious of the power of God 
operating through him to perform the miracle, Peter, 
apparently to assist the exercise of faith on the part of 
the cripple, stretched forth his hand and helped him to 
his feet; thus illustrating the propriety of acting according 
to our faith, and permitting the influence of 
our faith to reach others in a natural and helpful 
manner. 

(8-10) It is very evident that the poor cripple was 
not an impostor, for such a one instead of leaping about 
and enjoying his blessing, and praising God, would 
have regretted any circumstance which would deprive 
him of the opportunity for preying upon the sympathies 
of the people in order to avoid working for a living. 

(11,12) We may reasonably suppose that the going 
of Peter at this particular time to the temple was 
of premeditation; we may suppose that he had been 
there frequently before; and that frequently before he 
as well as the others who attended at the temple had 
seen this same cripple. If Peter did not plan this particular 
visit and healing, we may reasonably suppose 
that the holy spirit planned and directed it for him. 
At all events the whole matter was very successful in 
that it drew the attention of the most devout, prayerful 
Jews to the gospel of Christ. The Apostle Peter 
was quick to use any and every opportunity to tell the 
good tidings. He began by modestly assuring the people 
that it was nothing wonderful in John and himself 
that had produced the miracle, and that the man was 
not cured either by their holiness or by their power, 
but by the power of the risen Christ Jesus. It is 
worthy of note that although in addressing the man 
Peter exercised his own faith only, yet now in speaking 
of the matter he associates John with himself as a 
sharer in whatever honor might belong to them as the 
instruments of God. How unselfish and how beautiful! 
What a lesson is in this verse for all who attempt 
any service for the King of kings. How necessary 
that we should realize not only our own insufficiency 
and nothingness in connection with the work of God, 
but how proper that self should sink entirely out of our 
thoughts and the glory all be given to Him whose 
right it is. 

(13-15) The apostles' discourse as narrated was 
a short one, but well directed and right to the point. 
Beginning with a statement by which his hearers would 



understand him to be also a devout Israelite, he proceeded 
directly to the point— Christ, a crucified and 
risen Savior. Nor did he spare his hearers, but drove 
home the truth that the nation of Israel were the real 
crucifiers of God's dear Son, even when a Roman 
governor found no fault in him and desired to set him 
at liberty. 



*See MILLENNIAL DAWN, Vol. II., Chap. 3. 
R2095 : page 27 

"Ye killed the Prince of life!" What a thought! 
They all realized themselves as death-condemned and 
dying creatures. They felt their need of life, eternal 
life, and had been praying for it and hoping that according 
to the divine promise it should come through 
Messiah, a Savior— a Life-giver, and now they were 
almost staggered by the Apostle's words, "Ye killed 
the Prince of Life"— the Life-giver! It is presumed 
that our Lord and the Apostles spoke in the Syriac 
language; and in the Syriac version of the New Testament 
the word "Life-giver" is used where in the English 
the word "Savior" occurs. The Apostle must have 
struck a very tender chord in the hopes and aspirations 
of these devout, prayerful Jews. We fancy them looking 
with incredulity, and saying within themselves, 
"Could it be possible that Jesus of Nazareth was indeed 
the Messiah, the Life-giver?" 

(16) While they were yet wondering on the subject, 
the inspired Apostle quickly drew their attention 
to the evidences before them in the healing of the 
cripple, which attested the truth of his declaration 
that Jesus was no longer dead but risen. Here was 
just such a miracle as those which he a few months 
before had performed in their midst. It was another of 
Jesus' miracles; the apostles themselves performing it 
in his name and utterly disclaiming any ability to do 
such things themselves. 

(17-21) Thus pointing them to the fact that Jesus 
was still a living, powerful, sympathetic and gracious 
Savior, he urged them to repent, assuring them that it 

R2096 : page 27 

was God's intention to send great blessings through 
Jesus and to send Jesus himself back again a second 
time: assuring them also that at his second coming 
there would be an abundance of such manifestations 
as these which they had just witnessed, saying,— 

"Times of refreshing shall come from the presence 
of the Lord; and he shall send Jesus Christ which before 
was preached unto you whom the heavens must receive 
[retain] until the times of restitution of all things 



which God hath spoken by the mouth of all the holy 
prophets since the world began." 

Note that the Apostle began by expressing confidence 
in the "fathers" and in Israel's hope, built 
upon Jehovah's promise to them. Note also that after 
connecting those promises and hopes with Christ and 
his sacrifice, and linking it with the cure of the cripple, 
he points them down to the Millennial age as the 
grand consummation-time for all the blessings, all 
the good things, which God had promised by the 
mouth of all the holy prophets since the world began. 
Is it any wonder that such testimony— both reasonable 
and comprehensible— delivered to such devout 
Israelites, drawn together by a desire to worship the 
Lord, resulted as it did, in the conversion of about five 
thousand? As in the case of those noted in our last lesson, 
these were the "wheat" of that Jewish age, which the 
Lord was gathering out preparatory to the blinding of 
all the remainder of that people for the period of the 
Gospel age, at the close of which their blindness will 
be turned away.— Rom. 11:25,26. 



R2096 : page 27 

"THEY HAD BEEN WITH JESUS." 

-JAN. 31. -ACTS 4: 1-14.- 

"There is none other name under heaven, 
given among men, whereby we must be saved." 

AS the apostles were preaching Christ, taking for 
their text the manifestation of his power 
through Peter in the healing of the impotent man at 
the temple gate "Beautiful," and while the devout 
worshipers heard them gladly and repentantly, the 
theologians were disturbed; it seemed monstrous to 
them that any but themselves should undertake to 
teach the people, and that the people were giving more 
interested attention to these "laymen" than they gave 
to them,— the chief priests, religious rulers and doctors 
of the law. In this they but manifested the usual 
worldly spirit, which in every religious system except 
the true one manifests special opposition to any light or 
teaching which does not emanate from those recognized 
as "ordained" teachers. True, these apostles were 
ordained by the very highest authority in the universe 
—the spirit and power of God, communicated by Christ; 
but such ordination, such authority to teach, was not 
recognized by those doctors of divinity who, like their 
successors to this day, failed to recognize the ordinations 
of God and merely recognize human authorizations 
to preach. 
Not only were they envious that others than 



themselves should have the ear of the people for religious 
instruction, but they had listened sufficiently to 
the discourse themselves to ascertain that the apostles 
were really imparting to the people some knowledge of 
spiritual things. The people were actually being 
taught, and that upon subjects concerning which they, 
the recognized doctors of divinity and theology, knew 
nothing and could teach nothing. If, therefore, such 
teachings were permitted, the worshipers would very 
soon know more than their religious rulers, which 
would never do. They were unable to teach the people 
themselves, and were not humble enough of heart 
to receive instruction, and hence were quite ready to 

R2096 : page 28 

be overcome by the spirit of envy, hatred and malice, 
against those whom the Lord had appointed and was 
using, while passing them by. They had power to stop 
the preaching and to imprison the apostles, and they 
made haste to use it. 

This same spirit was equally manifested, and even 
more unrighteously, by the Roman Catholics during 
the dark ages: they not only imprisoned but tortured 
and put to death those who ventured to instruct the 
people in spiritual things without their permission, ordination, 
etc. This same spirit was manifested to a 
considerable extent by the reformers also, we are sorry 
to say: Calvin, Luther, and numbers in authority in 
the Episcopal Church from the sixteenth to the eighteenth 
centuries were similarly grieved with efforts to 
instruct the people outside their own channels; and the 
same spirit to a considerable extent followed some who 
fled from persecutions, in the Mayflower, to this free 
land. We need not accuse any of these of intentional 
wrong: they lived in a time when religion and politics 
were blended, and they verily thought they did God 
service in opposing as they did that which they considered 
to be "heresy." Had they opposed the heresy 
with force of logic and Scripture merely, and sought 
thus to vanquish what they believed to be errors, with 
what they believed to be truth, they would not only 
have been worthy of approval, but also of admiration, 
and they might have been led into the truth; but their 
zeal misled them into the use of unjust means, and 
they more or less fought against God. But be it noted, 
all these improper efforts were unavailing to suppress 
the truth, and merely served to purify and refine the 
saints, as "gold tried in the furnace." 

Intelligence and liberty during the last century 
have to a large extent annulled the power of the spiritual 
rulers, and unwillingly confined their opposition 
against advancing truth to anathemas, excommunications, 
insinuations as to "unorthodox," and social 
ostracism. And as each reform grew in strength and asserted 
itself, these oppositions gradually died out;— as, 



for instance, the opposition to the "Quakers," to 
"Baptists," to "Disciples," and others. But as we read 
the signs of the times in the light of the divine revelation, 
we have every reason to believe that the present 
movement in favor of "Christian union" will eventuate 
in such a combination of all the powerful and influential 
religious systems as to affect politics and laws, 
and put into the hands of theologians the power 
to head off the further advance of divine truth and to 
stop the spirit-ordained ambassadors of Christ from 
teaching the people advanced truths respecting the 
close of this and the dawn of the new dispensation. 

Arrogantly accustomed to overawing the common 
people with their titles, learning and authority, 
the High Priest and all the priestly family, and 
the religious rulers, and elders, and learned scribes, 
met as a court to hear, to overawe, to browbeat and to 
condemn Peter and John for their temerity in attempting 
to teach the people. 

They were surprised when the two men whom 
they had judged from their general manner, dress, etc., 
to be "unlearned," not theologians, but of the "common 
people," addressed them meekly, simply, yet 
with holy boldness, concerning Jesus of Nazareth and 
his power to heal:— as much since his crucifixion and 
resurrection as before. Peter if speaking of himself 
might have been inclined to avoid mentioning the guilt 
of his hearers in connection with the crucifixion of our 
Lord; but as a chosen vessel for this very purpose he 
was specially under the control of the holy spirit; and, 
although in no bitter or acrimonious language, he told 
his hearers the plain truth concerning their guilt as 
the crucifiers of Jesus, and showed them from the 
prophets that they had set at naught the chief stone of 
the spiritual temple of God; but that nevertheless God 
had highly exalted him to be the Head over the 
Church, which is his body— the spiritual temple— into 
which we as living stones are being built up. 

There is no ambiguity in preaching done thus, 
under the inspiration of the holy spirit: it is direct, to 
the point. Peter did not say that Jesus of Nazareth 
was one of the great teachers of the world, and as worthy 
to be heard as Moses or Confucius or others; neither 
did he say, It makes no difference whether you ever 
hear of the historic Christ or not, as some false teachers 
now declare. Peter's spirit-inspired teachings were 
evidently not at all in harmony with what is known as 
the "new theology," nor with what is known as the 
"higher criticism," nor with what is known as the 
"broad theology," espoused by the Chicago Parliament 
of Religions, and advocated by many of the 
"great theologians" of our day. Peter gave the message 
direct and with force— "There is none other name 
given, under heaven or among men, whereby we must 
be saved." In these words he told his learned hearers 
that there was no hope of salvation in Moses and in the 



Law, any more than in the heathen systems of theology 
—that knowledge of, and faith in, and obedience to 
Christ was the only God appointed way of salvation. 

What could they say! What could they do! under 
such circumstances? They had utterly failed to 
overawe these humble fishermen, and instead had received 
a discourse from them, which was wholly unexpected 
under such conditions. They were not in 
the humble attitude of heart to be affected as were 
the three thousand who on the Day of Pentecost were 
pricked to the heart and converted; nor were they of 
the humble, worshipful, teachable spirit of the five 
thousand worshipers who had been converted by hearing 
the apostles in the temple the day before. They 
could do nothing but marvel. But they took knowledge 
of the fact, that the same meek and quiet spirit 
of Jesus was in these, his disciples, and the same powerful 
logic, directness of discourse and humility of manner. 

So let it be with each of us, the followers of Jesus! 
If we have opportunity for testifying to his grace and 
gospel, let us not fear to declare the whole counsel of 
God, but let us not do it rudely nor unkindly, but 
with the gentleness and force which are of the spirit of 
the truth. 



page 29 