R697 : page 1 



Virginia, June 1, 1886. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-As I know you must receive and 
answer many letters, I thought best not to trouble you unless I had 
somewhat to write. For the last sixteen years I have been an elder in 
the Christian Church here. About three years ago, seemingly 
providentially, my attention was called to a paper published by you, 
in which you clearly set forth the plan of God. I read it carefully 
and tried it by the only infallible rule, and have found it as far as I 
am able to decide, equal to the measure, and none have been able to 
prove the contrary. These truths have done my soul good. They 
seem to have become a part of my being. I have circulated them 
among all who would receive them, and to-day I find myself 
standing with a little flock of about fourteen, who are not ashamed 
to own their Lord nor to defend his cause, maintain the honor of his 
Word, the glory of his cross. 

A few months ago some of them proposed to withdraw from the 
Church. I advised not, in-as-much as our brethren, the disciples, had 
neither name nor creed to which we could object. But as they claim 
the Bible, the whole Bible, and nothing but the Bible as their creed, 
it is our duty to speak the truth with boldness, and if they object let 
them act accordingly. I made an appointment to speak on the 
subject of the ransom, but owing to sickness I could not attend. A 
large crowd met to hear myself and brethren of like faith denounced 
as heretics and disturbers of the peace of the community. On the 
following Sunday we renewed our appointment and filled it; but the 
opposing brethren engaged the resident Baptist preacher to meet me 
and reply. The fire was kindled; the next Sunday we met to search 
the Scriptures to see if these things were so. The Baptist preacher 
was present, and the search did not lead in the right direction for 
one who had been preaching the immortality of the soul and eternal 
torment for forty years, therefore he objected to the results, but 
failed to offer any proof, though we gave him an opportunity. 

The Church was next called together by my brother Elders to put a 
stop to this business. We complied with the summons and when 
arraigned we stated our position as plainly and simply as we could, 
and then asked them to prove us guilty before they condemned us. 
Finding themselves powerless to act, they deferred the case until 
the fourth Sunday in June, at which time we are told we will be 
tried by six Disciple preachers. 

R697 : page 2 



In the meantime the community was called together at the Disciples 
Church to hear the Baptist preacher preach our funeral and bury our 
doctrine beyond the power of a resurrection. The decision, so far as 
I have been able to learn is, that there is danger in preaching live 
men's funerals. He proceeded first, by throwing a stone at my 
character; second, by reading from a secular paper the horrible 
crimes and the dreadful threats attributed to the Nihilists, Socialists 
and Communists, and tried to fasten them with an iron bolt of 
slander, to what he was pleased to call Russellism, and as a result of 
their teaching; third, he found it more easy to misstate and 
misrepresent our position than to make the least attempt to prove it 
false. 

When he closed, he found we were ready to help him prove false all 
he had attempted to prove false, and it only remained for us to 
restate our position, fortify it with Scripture, and ask him to prove 
that false, before he condemned it. Now, Brother Russell, a man 
may slander my character, but he shall not slander the truth of God 
and go entirely without rebuke. 

Am I correct when I assert that you have never in any of your 
writings alluded to the crimes committed by Socialists, 
Communists, and Nihilists in any other light than that they are the 
works of Satan and the result of his unrighteous reign, save that you 
refer to them as an unmistakable prophetic sign, of the presence of 
the heavenly king? Please state in the next issue of the TOWER, 
that all who desire to know, may know how to render under unto 
Caesar the things that are Caesar's (though he may be ashamed of 
them) and to God the things that are God's. 

R698 : page 2 

Now Brother, I have a request to make of you~Although the truth 
has suffered no loss in all the fiery trials through which it has 
passed, but has come out pure and brighter, and we have been made 
stronger in each attack thus far, and while we are sure that the Lion 
of the tribe of Judah being present will defend his cause, yet we are 
compelled to look upon the fourth Sunday as a time of much 
interest to the cause of truth in this community, and knowing that 
those six preachers before whom our brethren would like to have us 
tried (though they have another object in coming) are all college 
students, and as I have not had the benefit even of a common 
school, I would like you to advise us as to the best course to pursue; 
and if you think best state for us our position as clearly, strongly, 
and simply, as possible, that we may compel them to prove us 
guilty of violating their creed (the Bible) before they condemn us; 
for from what you have already shown us, we have full confidence 
in you and will follow as closely as the occasion will allow, any 
advice you may think proper to give. 

Your brother in Christ. 



In reply:- 

DEAR BROTHER:~Yours of June 1 came duly and gave us much 
pleasure, as it always does, to hear of the spread of the truth and the 
blessing of the Lord's children with the liberty and joy which the 
truth affords. 

I am glad to see that you and the brethren with you, so fully 
appreciate the truth, and that for the time you have enjoyed it, you 
have been so strengthened and faithful as to be able to take the 
bold, firm stand your letter outlines. 

Your position is a correct one, in my judgment. The so-called 
Baptist and Christian denominations claim the Bible as the only 
standard of faith and practice, and in by-gone years laid great stress 
upon this in their discussions with other denominations. But the 
spirit of the world has crowded down their simplicity and spirit of 
Bible study about as with others to-day. It is now a freedom of 
name more than anything else, I think. 

Your faithfulness in not keeping your light under a bushel is 
bringing some of them face to face with the truth and with their 
claim to the Bible as their only creed. The responsibility is thus 
upon them. Let us hope that the meeting for the examination of 
your views may be marked by candor and honesty on their part, 
with a sincere desire to ascertain from a Bible standpoint what is 
truth. Let me suggest that, so far as possible, you allow this view of 
the matter to control your feelings toward them, and your 
utterances. A danger under such circumstances is to feel that it is a 
battle. Should they treat it thus, let your words be seasoned with 
grace. (Col. 4:6.) Let the spirit of the glorious truths you now see, 
so fill your heart that out of its fullness your mouths may speak to 
the Lord's praise, and to the enlightenment and profit of your 
opposers as well as the hearers. 

It would not be well that I should attempt to give you details. These 
must be found at the time, and must depend somewhat upon the 
course of your opposers. While preparing, as much as possible, by 
studying the subject and arranging plans of thought, for it is our 
duty to have the sword of the Spirit-- the Word of God, which is 
able to make us wise-well in hand, so that we shall be able to give 
to him that asketh us a reason for the hopes that are within us, yet 
back of all this, our strength and confidence should be in him who 
declares, "I will never leave thee nor forsake thee." The TRUTH is 
his and you are his-his ambassadors. He will give you a mouth and 
wisdom which none of your adversaries shall be able to gainsay or 
resist. (Luke 21:15.) 

I will venture a brief outline of the ground of our belief and 
confidence, which we believe gives absolutely no room for 
opposers of our faith to stand upon. They must either reject the 
Bible or accept its truth, or else evade the issue by sophistry, cutting 
short further Bible investigation. 



Protestant denominations generally still hold, at least in theory, to 
the Bible doctrine of the fall and condemnation of the entire race 
through the sin of their representative Adam and the redemption of 
all through the obedience and sacrifice of Christ. In this we rejoice, 
for while they cling to this sure foundation, there is good basis for 
scriptural reasoning; and for hope that they may be led into further 
and fuller truth. That the remedy will be co-extensive in its results 
with the evil, is clearly stated in 1 Cor. 15:22,~"As through Adam 
all die, even so through Christ shall all be made alive." 

Adam's one representative disobedience, brought the condemnation 
of God upon all. That condemnation was not to torment, but to 
DEATH. (Gen. 2:17.) Sin forfeited the right to life God had given 
mankind, and brought the actual literal death, no matter how many 
figurative deaths may be conceived of as attending it. By one man's 
disobedience death passed upon all, in that all partook of his 
imperfection and sin. (Rom. 5:12.) 

Christ Jesus (by the favor of God) gave himself a ransom for ALL, 
(1 Tim. 2:6,) so that as through Adam's disobedience, all were 
condemned to death, so through Christ's obedience unto DEATH 
all are redeemed, all are justified to have life. 

The only condition upon which any may ever have everlasting life, 
is obedient faith—faith in Christ's work as Redeemer, and obedience 
to God's law which his redemption and aid will make possible to 
all. Hence to be saved through Christ, each human being must hear 
in the sense of understanding or appreciating perfectly God's plan, 
and his responsibility toward it. And hence, also, unless all thus 
"hear" (John 5:25), all would not receive the benefit which Christ 
died to secure for them. And this God guarantees shall not be. 

Since many who occasionally see a Bible or hear a church bell are 
blinded and bound by "the god of this world"-- Satan, so that they 
cannot hear and see (understand or appreciate) the truth, it follows 
that unless there be a future age in God's plan in which Satan's 
power to deceive will be restrained, and the knowledge of the Lord 
caused to fill the whole earth, the ransom secured by Jesus will 
never be co-extensive with the evil and condemnation upon all 
through Adam's fall. 

But God's Word declares that Christ's sacrifice was the full 
equivalent of Adam's sin, and that the blessings flowing from his 
obedience will be co-extensive with the evil flowing from Adam's 
disobedience. It recognizes the necessity of another age to come, 
and promises that the Redeemer shall reign and bless all, and fill 
the earth with knowledge and bind the deceiver. Thus God's plan 
provides every condition necessary to the saving of all-knowledge 
and ability-and declares not only that Jesus gave himself a ransom 
for all, but also that it shall be testified in due time.-l Tim. 2:6. 
The Scriptures never intimate that the Gospel age is the due time 
for the world to hear, and be blessed by Christ. They teach that now 
only a "little flock" is sought by the Lord, and these are promised 



explicitly that they, as the Bride of Christ, or the members of his 
body, shall reign on the earth to bless all the families of the earth. 
And in the last revelation of God's plan, given by our Lord Jesus 
himself, he points us in symbol to the new order of affairs, and tells 
us that there and then, the Spirit and the Bride~the Church-shall 
say, "Come! and that whosoever will, may come" and partake of 
life as of a fountain of water, and by obedience live forever. 

For six thousand years God has permitted evil to reign and triumph; 
in the seventh, he will give power and dominion to Christ and the 
Church as his own representatives in the earth, to cleanse and bless 
all, and bring all, or as many as will, into perfect harmony with 
himself, whom to thus know will be life eternal. The basis of this 
plan is the sacrifice of Jesus Christ our Lord, begun at his 
consecration at baptism in Jordan, and completed on Calvary. 

Regarding Anarchism: No well-balanced mind could favor it, or 
conceive it an advantage to any class. Nevertheless God's Word 
clearly reveals the fact that this extreme of evil will be the means 
by which present empires will fall. Hence these will, in a measure, 
be God's instrumentality, even as he has often caused the wrath of 
man, as well as of Satan, to work out his plans. Another side of the 
question would show that there is a measure of right on the part of 
Labor, the ignoring of which is leading on to Anarchism. But this 
we must leave for a fuller consideration at another time. 

page 2 



California, June 3, 1886. 

DEAR FRIENDS :— I hope your list of workers in the vineyard have 
reported success so frequently that mine has not been missed. I 
have been working as all must every day and hour, wherever they 
are, but not in the wide field I would choose if it were mine to make 
choice. As I am not mine own, I accept all as the ordering of my 
never erring—Master. My dear parents are becoming feeble with 
age, and have been sick, lingering along and gaining strength 
slowly, till now they are able to go around, but cannot be left alone 
long. I am losing none of my interest, but watch the opportunities, 
and have used with care the precious "FOODS." I am intending to 
gather them in, to use again as soon as possible. Most of them were 
given to persons I met at different times, who seemed to be ready 
for the feast and were going to various parts. With this explanation, 
you will understand why my apparent success is small, and yet I am 
needing a fresh supply. I found a Swede who is a constant student 
of the Word. He comes around once a week with fish. The first time 
he came I gave him a Swedish TOWER, and next time he said he 
found it taught Bible doctrines all through, and I gave him a FOOD 
and some English TOWERS. 

Yesterday a physician's wife came here for the first time, and she 
said at once, and boldly, she had come to see what there was in the 



strange doctrine we taught, and she left with the promise to come 
often, and said she thought she was ready for the truth as never 
before, and would make it her study. She took my very last FOOD 
and two TOWERS. 

As soon as I can leave home I want to go to Sacramento to work as 
you have suggested. So please send me what is necessary, that I 
may be prepared to improve time on short notice, and I shall be 
grateful. 

I have no better way to give you an idea of how little time I've had 
than to say it took me three days to read the last precious TOWER, 
when usually I "literally devour" it almost without stopping, after 
which I leisurely re-read and turn to all the references. 

I had hoped that by examining the subjects carefully with my 
parents, they would be ready to "keep the feast" as commanded 
with me, but they could not see that it was an anniversary, and I 
kept it again alone, and yet not alone. One fully consecrated need 
never feel lonely. I knew the ones and twos would be remembered 
by the loved ones in congregated capacity. 

I am so anxious to contribute to the Tract Fund, but strange to say I 
have not a half-dollar, nor have I purchased an article of that value 
for six months. Yet I am perfectly contented~yes, so happy. God 
bless you. Good-bye. 

I am trying to hold myself in readiness to go especially with 
German TOWERS to San Francisco when the way is clear. I should 
have no other business only to "to do good and communicate," and 
would not be able to do much in short time without FOODS, 
TOWERS, etc. It only costs one dollar to go to San Francisco, over 
one hundred miles. Opposition steamer on now. I can rent a room 
and take meals at a restaurant cheap. May the Lord bless you is my 
constant prayer. Your sister, 



R698 : page 2 



Iowa, June 6th, 1886. 

DEAR FRIENDS: In your last TOWER we notice your method for 
distributing the German Tracts. We are willing to do all we can for 
the spread of the "glad tidings", happy if we can help in the great 
work, but how to go to work we hardly knew~this being a large 
town, and with many churches. We went to one German minister to 
find the number, but naturally he wanted to read the work before 
having it distributed. Now would it be right to distribute them at 
church doors without permission? and if we ask permission, will 
they not invariably want to read it first? and if they read it, will they 
not refuse? 

Please tell us what is right. It seems as though we were greatly 
hindered in doing any work in this way. Perhaps we yield to 



hindrances too easily. Pray for us that we may be upheld in this 
trying hour, only in the strength of the Lord can we stand. 

R699 : page 2 

Spiritism is at work in our neighborhood. One of my friends has 
turned that way, and she fain would have me go too, but I thank 
God that it has been made clear to me from whence this power is. 
Therefore I have had strength to resist it as well as to whisper a 
word of warning to others that perhaps would have been taken in 
the snare. 

Yours, in hope of eternal life. 



In reply:~We are glad of your zeal for the cause of truth. 
Persevere, God will bless and help you, though the adversary may 
seek to hinder and discourage at every step. God's favor is 
sufficient for us; and he will not suffer us to be tempted above that 
we are able to resist, but will with temptations, difficulties, etc., 
provide a way of escape if we are in earnest, and will but do what 
we can.-- 1 Cor. 10:13. 

Do not ask permission of any one to give the truth to the Lord's 
sheep—professedly our brethren. God sends the truth to such of 
them as the "god of this world" has not blinded with prejudice and 
traditions (2 Cor. 4:3,4), and you are God's messengers or ministers 
when thus serving him. His permission and approval alone we 
should expect. We live, thank God, in a land where we have the 
right-the liberty-to give to the people in their hands, food which 
they cannot get of the professed pulpits and oracles of truth. 

We suggest, then, that by visiting the various German Protestant 
churches you could judge of the attendance. And, that when ready 
and supplied with the reading matter by us, you could engage some 
to assist in the distribution, serving one or more churches each 
session until all have been served. If the church is a large one, it 
would probably require two or three to hand to each person without 
delay, as they dismiss. Take your stand at the curb so as not to be 
upon the private property of the church, and thus give no occasion 
for offence. 



R856 : page 3 



THE DIVINE WEAVING. 

ANONYMOUS. 



The weaver at his loom is sittings- 
Throws his shuttle, to and fro- 
Foot and treadle, hand and pedal, 
Upward, downward, hither, thither, 
How the weaver makes them go ! 
As the weaver wills they go! 
Up and down the web is plying, 
And across the woof is flying; 
What a rattling! What a battling! 
What a shuffling! What a scuffling! 
As the weaver makes his shuttle 
Hither, thither, scud and scuttle. 

See, the mystic Weaver sitting 
High in heaven—His loom below— 
Up and down the treadles go: 
Takes, for web, the world's dark ages- 
Takes, for woof, the kings and sages- 
Takes the nobles and their pages, 
Takes all stations and all stages; 
Thrones are bobbins in his shuttle, 
Armies make them scud and scuttle- 
Web into the woof must flow, 
Up and down the nations go! 
At the Weaver's will they go! 

Calmly, see the mystic Weaver, 
Throw his shuttle to and fro; 
'Mid the noise and wild confusion, 
Well the Weaver seems to know 
What each motion, and commotion; 
What each fusion, and confusion, 
In the grand result will show! 
Glorious wonder! What a weaving! 
To the dull, beyond believing, 
Such no fabled ages know. 
Only faith can see the mystery; 
How, along the aisle of history, 
Where the feet of sages go, 



Loveliest to the fairest eyes, 
Grand the mystic tapet lies! 
Soft and smooth, and ever spreading, 
As if made for angel's treading- 
Tufted circles touching ever: 
Every figure has its plaidings, 
Brighter forms and softer shadings, 
Each illumined— what a riddle !-- 
From a Cross that gems the middle. 
Tis a saying-some reject it— 
That its light is all reflected; 
That the tapet's lines are given, 
By a sun that shines in heaven! 

'Tis believed-by all believing- 
That great God, himself, is weaving, 
Bringing out the world's dark mystery 
In the light of faith and history; 
And, as web and woof diminish, 
Comes the grand and glorious finish, 
When begin the Golden Ages, 
Long foretold by seers and sages. 



R854 : page 3 



FORSAKING ALL. 



"Whosoever he be of you that forsaketh not all that he hath, he 
cannot be my disciple." Luke 14:33. 

The question of what is meant by "forsaking all," is seldom given 
a too literal interpretation by those who have something to forsake. 
On the contrary, most of the Lord's professed disciples seem to act 
as though the statement read, He that getteth not all that he can get, 
cannot be my disciple; for the getting, more than the forsaking, 
seems to be the aim of life with many, as with the world. 

As we are very anxious to be recognized of the Master as true 
disciples, let us endeavor to grasp his meaning, and then honestly 
and faithfully put it into practice in the affairs of life. 

In the preceding verses (25 to 32) the Master shows that he did not 
deceive any into becoming his followers by assuring them that it 
would cost little or no sacrifice, as so many of his professed 
ambassadors do to allure the unconverted into the various sectarian 
churches. No; he said, "Count the cost" before you take the step. 
Let the lines between the world and my disciples be clearly drawn. 
To hastily leave the world and put your hand to the plow as a 
servant of the truth, and then to look back and prefer the world, 
would not be well: for it would unfit you for the world, and you 
would not be fit for the kingdom of heaven. (Luke 9:62.) Count the 
cost deliberately first, then, if you like the conditions, come, take up 



your cross and follow me, in dishonor and sacrifice now, and to 
glory, honor and immortality hereafter, as joint-heirs with me in the 
kingdom. 

We cannot suppose the statement under consideration (which refers 
back, more or less, directly to the things mentioned in verse 26) to 
mean that a man should leave his family to starve; nor yet that he 
should forsake his "own life" in the sense of starving from neglect 
of the necessities of life; nor yet that he should leave "houses and 
lands" in the sense of abandoning them to go to wreck and ruin; nor 
yet in the sense of immediately converting them into money and 
making a wholesale distribution of the results to the poor. (Matt. 
19:21.) To so understand the Master would be to suppose his 
teachings contrary to common sense, and to other statements of 
Scripture, his own utterances, and also those of the Apostles. 

It was Jesus himself that reproved the Pharisees for making void the 
Law of God in saying that a son who would make a large present of 
money to the temple, might thereafter be excused from any 
responsibility to his parents in their support, (Matt. 15:4-6.) and 
shall we suppose that he would make void that Law in his doctrine? 
It was Jesus himself who, in his dying hour, remembered his own 
mother, and commended her to the care of John (John 19:26,27), 
and shall we suppose that he taught others to neglect their parents? 

It was one of the Apostles under the influence of the Spirit of 
Christ, elaborating the teachings of Jesus, who said that a man 
should love his wife and cherish her even as his own body, and as 
the Lord loves and cherishes the Church (Eph. 5:25), and surely he 
did not contradict the Master in this. It was the same Apostle who 
wrote that any professing to be Jesus' disciples who neglect and fail 
to provide for their own households are worse than infidels, and by 
such a course deny the true teaching of Jesus. (1 Tim. 5:8.) It is the 
teaching of the New Testament, that we should "Do good and lend, 
hoping for nothing" as a reward; that we should "communicate" and 
"lay by on the first day of the week" for the poor and for the Lord's 
cause generally; and that a man should labor, working with his 
hands, that he might have to give to the needy. (Luke 6:34,35; 1 
Cor. 16:2; Eph. 4:28.) All these injunctions would be 

R855 : page 3 

meaningless if we should understand Jesus' teaching to be that we 
were to give away every farthing to the poor: for then we should be 
the poorest of all the poor, and have nothing either to lend or to 
give. 

If then we are sure the Master did not mean for us to literally 
abandon, neglect, and summarily dispose of homes, families, life 
and means, what did he mean? becomes all the more pertinent and 
interesting. 

What did he mean then by the statement, "Sell that thou hast and 
give to the poor, and thou shalt have treasure in heaven; and come 



and follow me"? (Matt. 19:21.) We answer that Jesus put the matter 
in its fullest, strongest light. The conditions of fellowship with 
Christ in the heavenly kingdom are nothing less than the sacrifice 
of every earthly interest, and earthly life as well, in his service. But 
this service and sacrifice is a reasonable service, and never implies 
that we must become paupers to make others affluent. Had this 
young man consecrated himself and determined to give up all and 
follow Christ, and had he come to Jesus, saying, Master, I have 
determined to follow your counsel, to sell all and give to the poor, 
and to follow thee~How and where shall I begin? I have twenty 
houses and three farms and much cattle --which shall I dispose of 
first, and how shall I distribute the money? 

Jesus probably would have said, Present all these things 
unreservedly to God, and yield yourself as his servant also, and 
from that moment reckon yourself God's steward, commissioned by 
him to use all those goods, as well as all your personal talents, to 
his glory in serving those about you. As a servant who shall give an 
account, be neither wasteful nor penurious. Think not of these 
goods henceforth as your own, and talk not about giving them again 
to the Lord; for once given, they are his forever. Such portions of 
that consecrated property as you have need of, he permits you to 
use for your personal and family necessities; but a full realization of 
your sacrifice would not only hinder you from treating it [the 
money] as your own, and from being lavish in your expenditures, as 
you might have been when the money and property were yours, but 
should the necessities of the Lord's work require the last dollar, and 
leave you dependent on daily toil for sustenance, it should be 
heartily rendered, with the thought, It is the Lord's, and I was 
entrusted with it, to use it as he should indicate. The young man to 
whom Jesus spoke was "very rich"; and had he become a 
consecrated follower he might have been kept busy for many years 
disposing of his goods. There is no reason whatever for supposing 
that the Lord meant him to sell his houses at once and throw the 
money into the street to the multitude. The selling of that which he 
had would go on proportionately, as he could find uses for the 
money. 

This suggests another thought: It is a steward's place to seek and 
find places where he can dispose of the talents and moneys 
consecrated to the Lord, to the best advantage, as his sanctified 
judgment, under the guidance of the Lord's Word, may dictate. This 
our Lord's parables indicate (Luke 19:13; Matt. 25:15). He should 
not wait for the Lord or his cause to be hindered and embarrassed 
for money before giving it. To do so, would be to never give it; for 
the Lord never gets embarrassed.~Isa. 55:11; Psa. 50:12. 

Had the young man consecrated his wealth to the Lord's service as 
Jesus suggested, and then waited for Jesus to ask him for some of it, 
he would have waited and would have kept the money, but he 
would never have attained the kingdom and the Well done, good 
and faithful servant, enter the joys of thy Lord; thou hast been 



faithful over a few things, I will make thee ruler over many things 
and grant thee the handling of greater riches. On the contrary, the 
message to such will be, Thou unfaithful and indolent servant, thou 
hast been unfaithful in thy stewardship: take from him that which 
he would not use as he covenanted to do. 

Most of us, as God's consecrated stewards, take greater liberties 
than we ought with the Lord's money and talents entrusted to us. 
We should not be less careful than if dealing with fellow-men, but 
more careful, if possible, to be strictly honest. And while rendering 
unto every man his dues, we should most faithfully "Render unto 
God the things that are God's"~which we presented to him. 

If those who have forsaken all-consecrated all to the Lord's 
service—could but realize the matter as all done, as all His, how it 
would relieve them of battles with the selfishness which continually 
magnifies every little disposal of time or money to be a great and 
new sacrifice. Such a proper realization of the original sacrifice of 
all reverses the tables upon selfishness at once, and no longer treats 
the daily course as a self-denial, but a joyful service as Jehovah's 
steward, and accepts as fresh blessings from his hand all of even the 
commonest of life's favors. 

page 3 

-"Lay not up treasures on earth" and "Take no thought for to- 
morrow" crowded out this month,— will appear next. 



R855 : page 3 

PROF. SHEDD'S FOREBODINGS. 

The Sunday School Times reports Prof. Shedd as saying: "No 
theological tenet is more important than that of eternal retribution, 
to those modern nations, which, like England, Germany, and the 
United States, are growing rapidly in riches, luxury, and earthly 
power. Without it, they will infallibly go down in that vortex of 
sensuality and wickedness that swallowed up Babylon and Rome." 

No one believes more strongly in the certainty of divine retribution 
for sin than do we, and that the end of incorrigible sinners will be 
"the lake of fire which is the second death." But by "eternal 
retribution" Dr. Shedd means the doctrine of endless torment in hell 
for all who die out of this life unsaved, in the defence of which he 
has recently published a book. And his argument is for the 
expediency of holding on to that doctrine as a defence against 
threatening destruction. To this we reply :- 

1. In this momentous matter, only that which is true is expedient. 

2. Dr. Shedd's remedy has historically failed. It did not save the 
world from the fearful anarchy and social wreck of the French 
Revolution. 



3. The modern nations he refers to have not been restrained by it 
from developing the evils which he deplores. 

4. Perhaps the false view of God involved in this doctrine is largely 
responsible for this "departing from him, desiring not the 
knowledge of his ways." The current doctrine in the church on this 
subject, in hiding from men any hope for any class of mankind in 
any of his administrations beyond the grave, has concealed a part of 
his gospel, and denied his fatherhood. Wrong views of his relation 
to the race necessitate wrong views of his relation to individual 
men, and so sour and harden them against God. What the world is 
perishing for is the lack of the knowledge of God. 

5. If Dr. Shedd's doctrine is therefore now needful for the defence 
of society against ruin, it is so because it has helped to bring society 
into this state of danger by drawing a frowning mask over the face 
of God, and so repelling them from him. 

6. There are intimations in Scripture that there were to be larger 
unfoldings of the grace of God to mankind, as they were able to 
bear it. "Who gave himself a ransom for all; to be testified to in its 
own times" (1 Tim. 2:6). 

7. In the general decay of the old 

R855 : page 4 

doctrine of future punishment, which was doubtless a great restraint 
in ruder times, the world now needs a new presentation of the 
majesty and certainty of God's law of punishment. The church 
needs to be warned anew that "The Lord shall judge his people," 
and that "Our God is a consuming fire." The world needs a doctrine 
of punishment, not so vast and vague and inconceivable that both 
reason and conscience reject it, but one that shall convince them 
that, in all the laws of nature and of life and of human society, the 
eyes of the Lord are now "open upon all the ways of the sons of 
men; to give every one according to his ways, and according to the 
fruit of his doings," and that his great harvest law is surer than the 
motions of the stars, for this world and for all worlds. "Be not 
deceived; God is not mocked: for whatsoever a man soweth that 
shall he also reap." God's great love has provided a ransom for all 
from death; but even resurrection, which is to all a boon, must 
proceed according to this great law of harvest, and bring with it 
"judgment" for those "that have done evil." 

MR MOODY'S PREACHING. 

In this connection we refer to a letter of Dr. A. E. Kittredge in the 
Independent of January 28, describing Mr. Moody's late visit to 
Chicago, in which he indicates that the power of his preaching is 
largely due to his ability to impress men's minds with the 
conviction that God loves them. He quotes these as characteristic 
sentences from one of his sermons: 



"God always loves us. He hates sin, but he loves the sinner. He 
loves, because he can't help it." 

"There is one thing that death has never been able to conquer, and 
that is a mother's love." 

"Our love is changing, but he loves us right on, through all our 
sorrows and our sins." 

R856 : page 4 

"Because God is angry with the sinner, it proves that he loves 
him." 

"His love is unchanging, unfailing, and everlasting." 

These sentences illustrate how Mr. Moody, although holding 
theoretically the orthodox doctrine of an eternal hell, keeps it in the 
background, where he has no right to keep it, if true, and how he 
moves men by a fresh revelation to them of the fact that God's love 
for them is deeper than their sins. If God's love is "stronger than a 
mother's," if "death cannot conquer it," if it continues "right on, 
through all our sorrows and sins," and if even his anger is the dark 
side of his love, we may well ask what room is left for the creed 
doctrine that, for the sins of this life he will first torment the soul of 
the sinner in hell, and then raise him in body, in order to thrust him 
back to be punished "in body and soul, with unspeakable torments, 
with the devil and his angels, in hell-fire forever." (See questions 29 
and 89, Larger Catechism.) 

There is immense power in the long-concealed doctrine of God's 
love to men. And the proof that death cannot conquer it, as Mr. 
Moody affirms, is found in the fact that he gave his Son to effect 
the ransom of all from death, and that its conquests extend through 
the realms of the dead. The redemptive character of resurrection is 
the proof out of Scripture that men need, that God's love is stronger 
than death. Knowing this, there will be no longer any temptation to 
conceal from them the other side of truth, which is too much absent 
from Mr. Moody's sermons, that "he will render to every man 
according to his works," and that the atonement is not a makeshift, 
by which any man may escape the just consequences of his sins, but 
a wonderful alembic of love by which these necessary judgments 
are for us converted into the way of life. —Words of Reconciliation. 



R856 : page 4 

PONDER WELL 

THEY STAND OR FALL TOGETHER. 

--To admit God's justice, is to admit man's fair trial, and the justice 
of the penalty pronounced, destruction. 



--To admit the justice of the penalty, and the unchangeableness of 
God's character, is to admit that the penalty cannot be set aside or 
remitted. 

--To admit that the penalty cannot be remitted, is to admit, that 
either men will never be set free from it, or else that a ransom [a 
corresponding price] is his only hope. 

--To admit that the ransom has been paid by Jesus' death, is to 
admit that the penalty was death, and that restitution is assured. 

--To admit that God and his just laws change not, is to admit that 
man, when fully restored, will be again subject to the same laws, 
with their same blessing for obedience (life), or penalty for 
disobedience (death), which penalty upon such would be the 
"second death." 

--To admit that God's law was just, and man's trial full and fair at 
first, and that that law and its Author are the same forever, and that 
man will return to his former estate, is to admit that the same law 
will test the restored man, and that his will will be as free as at the 
first to choose obedience and life, or disobedience and the second 
death; and that the only difference will be the experience undergone 
in the present existence. 

--To admit the ransom and its necessity, and that the MAN Christ 
Jesus was that ransom, is to admit that he is no longer a man, unless 
he took back the price he paid for our recovery, which would hinder 
man's recovery from death. 

-To admit that Jesus was highly exalted in his resurrection to the 
express image of the Father's person, that he was made "a 
quickening Spirit" in his resurrection —raised a spiritual body-and 
that his conduct after his resurrection, and his appearance to Paul, 
who saw him "as he is," were wholly different from human nature 
or appearance, is to admit that he did not take back the ransom price 
laid down, but that he was in his resurrection made better than 
angels, as he had in becoming a man been made a little lower than 
the angels.-Heb. 1:4 and 2:7,9. 

-To admit that the true gospel Church of overcomers are called 
"the body"- "the bride" of Christ, and that they are being called and 
selected or elected from out of the world under "heavenly 
promises" of being made "partakers of the divine nature," like and 
with their Lord and head, is to admit that these promises are not for 
all, but are exclusively for the class called, and none other. 

-To admit that a "house of servants" of God was selected prior to 
this "heavenly calling" to "divine nature," and that not heavenly 
things but earthly things were promised them, is to admit that they 
are elected or selected for some good purpose in the divine plan, 
but not for the same purpose as the Church, nor under the same 
conditions. 



--To admit that the plan of God is one grand, harmonious whole, 
consistent in every part, is to admit all of these propositions, and to 
say that God, in the work of restoring the world, and giving each 
his individual trial for everlasting life, intends to use the two classes 
elected meantime, as the earthly and the heavenly "seed," in whom 
all the families of earth are to be blessed. 



R857 : page 4 

THE WORLD'S OUTLOOK. 

FROM A METHODIST BISHOP'S STANDPOINT. 

Bishop R. S. Foster, who is at present the central light of the 
Methodist Episcopal Church, is certainly getting his eyes open in 
some directions, though he is still in gross darkness. His utterances 
of late are calculated to startle Methodism, if not too sound asleep. 
In our January issue we noted his utterances relative to Roman 
Catholicism, in which, in an endeavor to show up as favorably as 
possible the progress of Christianity in converting the world, he 
closely hugged the Church of Rome, whose numbers are almost 
double those of the five hundred sects of Protestantism, and 
claimed that to make any showing at all, the Church of Rome must 
be counted in, because larger than all her daughters combined. 

After counting in as many as possible, the bishop reckons that there 
are in all 350,000,000 of nominal Christians, and 1,100,000,000 
heathen in the world: and of these Christians he says:~"And this 
number of their strength includes also all the thieves, ex-convicts, 
the debased, besotted, the speckled, and streaked in Christendom." 
And now his awakening mind goes out after the condition of the 
masses, and in the following words, clipped from his recent articles 
in the Independent, he tells us what their outlook seems to be from 
his standpoint. He says:- 

"The problem I deal with relates to this world. Have you ever 
visited heathen lands? Have you ever formed in your mind an idea 
of their actual condition? Any idea you may have formed will be 
inadequate, I am sure. It will take an effort if you have no 
experience to guide you, and even to reproduce it would be almost 
impossible. 

"Call to your aid all the images of poverty and degradation you 
have ever seen in solitary places of the extremest wretchedness— 
those sad cases which haunted you with horror after you passed 
from them, those dreary abodes of filth and gaunt squalor-crowd 
them into one picture, unrelieved by a single shade of tempered 
darkness or colored light, and hang it over one-half the globe; it 
will still fail to equal the reality. You must put into it the dreary 
prospect of hopeless continuance; you must take out of it all hope, 
all aspiration even. The conspicuous feature of heathenism is 
poverty. You have never seen poverty. It is a word the meaning of 



which you do not know. What you call poverty is wealth, luxury. 
Think of it not as occasional, not as in purlieus, not as exceptional 
in places of deeper misery, but as universal, continent- wide. Put in 
it hunger, nakedness, bestiality; take out of it expectation of 
something better to-morrow; fill Africa with it, fill Asia with it; 
crowd the vision with men, women and children in multitude more 
than twenty times the population of all your great cities, towns, 
villages and rural districts, twenty for every one in all your states 
and territories—the picture then fails to reach the reality. 

"Put now into the picture the moral shading of no God, no hope; 
these miserable millions, living like beasts in this world and 
anticipating nothing better for the world to come. Put into the 
picture the remembrance that they are beings who have the same 
humanity that we have, that are in this case; that there are no hearts 
among all these millions that do not have human cravings, and that 
might not be purified and ennobled; that these lands, under the 
doom of such wretchedness, might equal, and many of them even 
surpass, the land in which we dwell, had they what we could give 
them. Paint a starless sky, hang your picture with night, drape the 
mountains with long, far-reaching vistas of darkness, hang the 
curtains deep along every shore and landscape, darken all the past, 
let the future be draped in deeper and yet deeper night, fill the awful 
gloom with hungry, sad-faced and sorrow-driven women and 
hopeless children --it is the heathen world—the people seen in 
vision by the ancient prophet, who sit in the region and shadow of 
death, to whom no light has yet come, sitting there still, through the 
long, long night, waiting and watching for the morning." 

As he looks back at the fruitage of the past eighteen hundred years, 
the Bishop sees little hope for the dying millions, and finally seems 
to catch the thought expressed in the closing sentence above, that 
their hope lies not in the bringing to them of the Lamp of God's 
Word, but in the dawn of the morning. Would that the Bishop and 
others, could realize the logical force of his own admission. They 
would not then be forced into counting the "speckled and streaked" 
to make up a respectable showing of power to convert the heathen, 
but would realize that the present age is only designed to select a 
"little flock" to whom the Father will give the dominion and power 
to bless the world; and that when this little flock is selected, they 
with their Lord shall be the Sun of Righteousness, as it is written, 
"Then (after this age and after its harvest) shall the righteous shine 
forth as the Sun in the kingdom of their Father." Matt. 13:43. 

The Bishop in the above has drawn a dark picture of the present life 
of the heathen, but when he comes to contemplate the teachings of 
his own school of theology with reference to these miserable 
creatures, which claims that their future will be one of unutterable 
anguish and pain, to last not for a few years like their present 
troubles, but to be perpetuated throughout eternity by the special 
arrangement of their Creator, he allows his sense of right to 
overleap many of the barriers of his theology, and says:- 



"If the awful thought could once take possession of my mind, that 
the whole heathen world must of necessity be lost forever, simply 
because they are heathen, I would not send them a Gospel which 
reveals such a God. That grim thought alone would shut out all 
hope for the world, and make eternity itself a dungeon, no 
difference who might be saved. For how could any rational creature 
enjoy even a heaven with a God whose government would permit 
such a stain of shame and dishonor, of cruelty and injustice? It is 
dreadful enough to be compelled to accept the thought that an 
immortal being can by his own free guilt, work out a destiny of 
changeless evil. Convince men that there is a God at the head of the 
universe who, without fault of theirs or any chance of escape, will 
damn the dead, the living and the yet-to-live millions of 
heathenism, and you will make it forever impossible that he should 
be worshipped by any but devils, (and by them only because he 
becomes their chief,) and at the same time turn earth into a gigantic 
terror, whose ghastly horrors will admit of no relief." 

The Bishop is in a very dangerous condition. Mankind is always in 
danger of error in thinking unless their impaired reasoning powers 
and lack of knowledge are guided and assisted by divine revelation. 
The Bishop, in holding tenaciously to the traditions of Methodism 
(not the Scripture), and endeavoring to use his reason at the same 
time, is in great danger of infidelity. This very course has made all 
the great infidels-- 

R857 : page 5 

they held to certain preconceived but erroneous theories as the 
teachings of Scripture, and then used their reason as the Bishop 
does above. But it is unsafe to reason except in the light from God's 
Word. 

The Bishop above evidently attaches to the words lost and damn, 
not the Bible definition but that of the nominal church. In his use, 
these words mean --endless pain and woe, awful beyond 
description. Here is the Bishops danger: some one will sooner or 
later point out to him the fact that the Bible does teach that all men 
were lost and damned [condemned] back in Eden, because of the 
transgression of their representative Adam. Or he may of himself 
sometime lay down the standards of Methodism for a moment and 
open his Bible to some such texts as these, which teach that all men 
are lost until found or recovered --"The Son of man is come to seek 
and to save that which was lost" (Luke 19:10.), "If our gospel be 
hid it is hid to them that ARE lost" [not yet found] (2 Cor. 4:3.); or 
he might learn that condemn in the following texts is from the same 
Greek word as damn and hence that all men were damned through 
Adam's disobedience and all must stay damned [condemned], 
unless they escape from the condemnation that is upon the world, 
by faith in Christ's ransom (Rom. 8:1). This he might see from any 
of the following texts:~"By the offense of one [Adam] judgment 
came upon all men to condemnation [damnation];" "for the 
judgment was through one to condemnation [damnation]" (Rom. 



5:16,18.) "God sent not His Son into the world to condemn [damn] 
the world [they were already condemned] but that the world 
through him might be saved" [from the damnation or condemnation 
under which they already were through Adam's sin]; "He that 
believeth on him is not [longer] condemned, but he that believeth 
not is condemned [damned] already." (John 3:17,18.) 

If Brother Foster should find out that this (which he has long 
believed) is true, and really taught in the Bible, without first finding 
out in what way they were lost, and to what they were condemned 
[or damned] in Adam, with his old erroneous ideas of the 
significance of lost and damned and his new reasonings begotten of 
reflection, he would surely be in great danger of making total 
shipwreck of his faith, and of throwing aside the Bible and its 
teachings totally. As he himself says, above, he would find it 
"impossible" to worship God. And what is true of the Bishop is true 
of all who can and will think. 

Our hope and desire is, that finding his reason and his theology out 
of harmony, he may give his theology a thorough examination in 
the light of the Bible only. He has reached a crisis in his career, and 
by his bold utterance he has brought all that are awake in 
Methodism to the same crisis. Would to God that we might help 
them and keep them 

R858 : page 5 

from falling into the ditch of Infidelity, by calling their attention to 
the real facts with reference to the loss and condemnation entailed 
upon all through Adam, and to the full recovery of all from it by the 
ransom which Jesus gave for all. 

Existence, with its every privilege, was forfeited~lost, through 
Adam's sin. Death, extinction, passed as God's sentence [his 
condemnation or damnation] upon ALL. This extinction would 
have been the everlasting punishment of all, had God not come to 
man's relief, and because of his love provided that his Son should 
be our ransom [corresponding price or substitute], that whosoever 
believeth on him might not perish [be hopelessly lost in death], but 
have everlasting life, being thus recovered and released from the 
condemnation. If the loss be not rightly seen, the salvation from the 
loss cannot be rightly appreciated; neither can the price of our 
redemption —the substitution—be clearly seen and rightly 
appreciated. 

But we quote again from the Bishop: "I raise no question about 
whether these countless millions can be saved in the world to 
come." We wish that he would raise the question, and never rest 
until he finds what the Scriptures teach with reference to it, and 
then declare to the world his findings on so important a subject. As 
one whose life is professedly consecrated to this very object, he 
should speedily raise and Scripturally solve this question, and then 
not shun to declare the whole counsel of God, which is able to 
make him and all wise on the very question before us.— 2 Tim. 3:15. 



We are glad to note that the Bishop recognizes "a world [aion or 
age] to come M ~an age to follow the present one; and while thinking 
of whether the countless millions can be saved in that age to come, 
we suggest the Master's words and Paul's (Matt. 12:31,32; Rev. 
2:26, and 3:21; Rom. 6:3). Jesus says that all manner of sins shall 
be forgiven men except one kind [anytime], but that one can neither 
be forgiven in this world [age] nor in that which is to come; and 
that the little flock of faithful followers in this age shall, in the 
world to come, sit upon thrones judging. And Paul tells us that the 
world will be on trial during that age, saying, "Do ye not know that 
the saints shall judge the world?" 

Brother Foster continues: "I do not affirm that giving them [the 
heathen] the gospel will improve their prospects [of salvation in the 
world to come], or at all increase their chances in that direction." 
Here we see the brother's unsettled mind on the subject. From his 
standpoint, the prospects of the 1,100,000,000 heathen of to-day, 
and the billions of the past, hangs on the thread of "chances." 
Would that he, and all, could see the firm foundation laid for our 
faith in God's excellent word—that as surely as Jesus Christ by the 
grace of God "tasted death for every man," so surely it shall "be 
testified in due time" to every man whom he thus redeemed, 
purchased, with his own precious blood. Thus all must be brought 
to a knowledge of the truth, and be enabled to fully appropriate 
everlasting life. 

And now for our last quotation from this wonderful 
acknowledgment by the Bishop of his doubts and fears, hopes and 
uncertainties. He says: "Possibly as many of them [the heathen] will 
be saved without the gospel as with it." This is a dangerous 
statement. It indicates that the Bishop is cutting loose from 
whatever anchorage he has had in the word of God, and letting 
himself adrift on the sea of uncertainty, driven before the winds of 
his unruddered reason, which would surely wreck him upon the 
rocks of No Ransom and Evolution. When Brother Foster penned 
those words he surely forgot Peter's statement, "There is none other 
name under heaven given among men whereby we must be saved" 
than the name of Jesus. (Acts 4:12.) He surely forgot Paul's 
statement of the necessity of faith, saying that by the seemingly 
peculiar means of preaching it has pleased God "to save them 
which believe." (1 Cor. 1:21.) He surely forgot the apostle's 
argument on what constitutes hearing and faith (Rom. 10:13,14), 
saying, "Whosoever shall call upon the name of the Lord shall be 
saved. How, then, shall they call on him in whom they have not 
believed? And how shall they believe in him of whom they have 
not heard?" etc. It is not only unscriptural, but unreasonable, to say 
that ignorance is a ground of salvation; if so, why do we preach the 
gospel to any? why not leave all in ignorance, that all might be 
saved thus? If this view be correct, the gospel is the power of God 
unto damnation, instead of unto salvation-if without it, and in 
ignorance of it, all may be saved, while with its light the more will 
be lost. 



But here is the brother's mistake, he fails to see that the gospel 
belongs to the "world [age] to come" as truly as to the present 
dispensation. Gospel signifies good tidings, and consists of two 
main facts (though there are conjunctive ones), namely: I. Christ 
died for our sins; II. In him, through the merit of his death, all may 
have forgiveness—remission of sins, and full return to the lost favor 
of God, including life. During this age the gospel selects the bride 
of Christ and witnesses to the world. It selects the faithful from 
among those who have "an ear to hear." The gospel in this age is 
foolishness to many whom the god of this world hath blinded by 
error, etc. (2 Cor. 4:4.) But this same gospel is to do a great work 
for the poor blinded world in "the world [age] to come;" for it must 
yet be testified to ALL. It will then be proclaimed in power. Satan, 
who now blinds those that believe not, will be bound, that he may 
deceive the people no more, and the blind eyes and deaf ears shall 
see and hear, and the knowledge of the Lord shall fill the whole 
earth as the waters cover the sea. Then it will not be as now true, 
that three-fourths of the race are ignorant of the "only name," and 
the other fourth "speckled and streaked;" for it is written, all shall 
know him from the least to the greatest. And none shall need to say 
unto his neighbor, Know the Lord—for all shall know him. Jer. 
31:34. 

Ah! yes; the world is full of misery and suffering, groaning for the 
morning, and thank God the light now due and shining from God's 
Word points us to the fact that the night in which the Christ head 
and body is developed is about past, and the Sun-rise at hand-the 
manifestation of the sons of God for the deliverance of the groaning 
creation. Rom. 8:19,21,22. 

The precious blood will never lose its power till all whom it 
purchased-all the ransomed of the Lord, shall have heard the voice 
of their Redeemer calling them to everlasting life. All that are alive, 
and all that are in their graves, shall thus hear the voice of the Son 
of Man, and they that hear [obey] shall live-attain perfect and 
everlasting life.-John 5:25,28. 



R841 : page 5 



LIMP CHRISTIANS. 



"We may live to see men calling themselves Christians and 
differing in no sense from Mohammedans; in fact even now there 
are religionists among us who are not so near the truth as the 
followers of the false prophet. Oak has given place to willow; 
everybody has grown limp. Out of the generality of limpness has 
come an admiration of it. A man cannot speak a plain word without 
being accused of bitterness, and if he denounces error he is narrow- 
minded, for all must join the Universal Admiration Company or be 
placed under ban and be bowled down."-Spurgeon. 



R858 : page 5 

"BEHOLD, NOW IS THE ACCEPTED TIME; 

BEHOLD, NOW IS THE DAY OF 

SALVATION." 

2 Cor. 6:2. Isa. 49:8. 

These words of the Apostle, quoted from the Prophet Isaiah, are 
generally understood to be a call to the world to improve the 
present opportunity of accepting Christ by faith in order to 
salvation, with the warning that the present time furnishes the only 
opportunity, this being the day of salvation. 

But this is not the meaning of the text. Neither the Apostle nor the 
Prophet addresses the world. Both address justified, consecrated 
believers. The class addressed is plainly seen from Isaiah's 
prophecy, to be consecrated believers of the Gospel Age~the Christ 
head and body. It thus reads, "Thus saith the Lord, In an acceptable 
time I heard THEE, and in a day of salvation have I helped THEE: 
and I will preserve THEE, and give THEE for a covenant of the 
people, to establish the earth, to cause to inherit the desolate 
heritages; that THOU mayst say to the prisoners, Go forth; to them 
that are in darkness, Show yourselves. "--Isa. 49:8,9. 

It is the anointed, the Christ, head and body, selected and developed 
during the Gospel Age, which is to accomplish the great work here 
pointed out~the work of the resurrection, or restitution, in the next 
age, saying to the prisoners in death, "Go forth," and to those in the 
darkness or shadow of death, "Show yourselves." "Now," the 
Gospel Age now closing, has been the acceptable time for justified 
believers to offer themselves as living sacrifices, holy and 
acceptable unto God; because this age was specially set apart by 
God for the calling and development of this class of sacrificers 
whose sacrifices are now acceptable. 

"Now," or the accepted time, did not commence until the Gospel 
Age began, at Pentecost; or rather in the fullest sense it began with 
Jesus' sacrifice, dating from his consecration at baptism. The 
sacrifice of Christ, which actually takes away sin, was THE 
ACCEPTABLE sacrifice; and it must be an accomplished fact, 
before any of the condemned sinners could be actually legally 
justified, so as to be accepted as joint sacrificers and joint heirs with 
him. When the sacrifice had been made, any who trusted in it were 
legally justified, their sins being canceled, and the righteousness of 
Christ imputed to them by faith. 

Though justified thus by faith in Christ's redemptive work, none of 
those 

R859 : page 5 



justified in this age have been permitted to reach actual restitution 
to human perfection, that being the privilege not of this, but of the 
coming Millennial Age. But that right to human perfection and 
lasting life, having been secured for all, those who now by faith 
accept it, are reckoned as now possessing that perfection~as though 
now perfect men. Such during the Gospel Age have been invited to 
present themselves as living sacrifices to be used up in God's 
service, and the assurance is given that whoever thus sacrifices 
"NOW" during the acceptable time, is accepted of God, and shall in 
due time receive the reward of the crown, the throne, and the divine 
nature, as joint-heirs with Jesus Christ whose example they thus 
follow—after being justified by faith in his sacrifice for their sins. 

Those who before the death of Jesus our ransom, trusted in God's 
promises, and walked in obedience to God, were not actually 
justified until the only sacrifice which could take away sin, was 
actually 

R859 : page 6 

offered. Nevertheless their faith shall receive a reward in the times 
of restitution. But living before the "acceptable" time, they were not 
informed of the "high-calling" of the divine nature and joint- 
heirship, and therefore were not invited to thus offer themselves as 
members of the body of Christ and joint- sacrificers with him. "Now 
[the Gospel Age] is the accepted time." "Now is THE day of [the 
"great"] salvation." 

The class thus called and accepted, the Prophet declares is called 
and chosen for the special work of accomplishing the salvation of 
the world—their restitution from death to perfect life in the next age. 
Then that will also be a day of salvation, -a day of salvation for all 
the world. In that day men will neither be called nor permitted to 
offer themselves as living sacrifices, nor to deny themselves the 
comforts, joys and righteous liberties then provided for all, but 
simply to forsake sin and pursue righteousness. 

Paul, in referring to these words of the Prophet, urges those who 
have received this grace [favor] of justification, to see that they 
receive not this grace in vain- (2 Cor. 6:2). This leads us to 
consider how we could receive the grace of justification in vain. 

Since we may not in this age have an actual restitution to 
perfection, the only special advantage of being justified now, is that 
it affords us the opportunity of presenting ourselves as acceptable 
sacrifices, and candidates for the divine nature and joint-heirship 
with Jesus. Those therefore who have received the grace (favor) of 
justification through faith in the ransom, who realize that though 
still imperfect, they are reckoned of God as perfect so long as they 
rely upon the ransom, and who yet neglect to USE this reckoned 
perfection, and to present themselves covered by it, as acceptable 
sacrifices to God's service within the acceptable time, have received 
the favor of justification in vain; and consequently they are little, if 



any better off than the world, whose day of acceptance to favor is in 
the age coming. 

But those who have been justified, and who have also consecrated 
themselves as sacrifices, may also have received the grace of God 
in vain, if they turn back to the world and to the gratification of the 
flesh, despising or ignoring their covenant. 

If we would make our high calling and our election sure, we must 
fully carry out our consecration-even unto death. 

Paul had a very clear idea of what a life of consecration meant. He 
did not have the idea which many now seem to have, that it simply 
meant an easy-going tranquility of disposition which might win 
friends in every direction and be at peace with all the world. No, 
such is not the experience of those who are faithful at the post of 
duty; for those who will live Godly in this evil time, shall suffer 
persecution in some shape or form, and generally in many forms. 

Our consecration is to active service for the Master, and a patient 
uncomplaining endurance of whatever it may cost in the way of 
sacrifice. Faithfulness to our covenant will not shrink from any 
service because of the cost, and he that endureth unto the end shall 
receive the crown of life. Let us mark well the example and counsel 
of Jesus and the Apostles, that we may gain courage and strength 
by the way. 

Paul gives a vivid picture of the true Christian life which we cannot 
ponder too carefully: --"Giving no offence in anything [against the 
principles of truth and righteousness] that the ministry be not 
blamed. But in all things approving ourselves as the ministers of 
God, in much patience, in afflictions, in necessities, in distresses, in 
stripes, in imprisonment, in tumults, in labors, in watchings, in 
fastings; by pureness, by knowledge, by long-suffering, by 
kindness, by the Holy Spirit, by love unfeigned, by the word of 
truth, by the power of God, by the armor of righteousness on the 
right hand and on the left; by honor and dishonor, by evil report and 
good report; as deceivers and yet true; as unknown and yet well 
known; as dying, and behold we live; as chastened and not killed; 
as sorrowful, yet always rejoicing, as poor yet making many rich; 
as having nothing, and yet possessing all things. "~2 Cor. 6:3-10. 

What a nondescript is such a life before the world; yet how 
perfectly this marks out the course of the truly consecrated. It is not 
a life of easy lethargy; it is not a course that secures the approval 
and friendship of the worldly minded; it is not a course which 
secures present temporal advantage; nor is it a course agreeable to 
the flesh; yet in it, the "new creature" rejoices with joy unspeakable 
and full of glory, and in every condition gives thanks for the 
privilege of fellowship in the sacrifices and self-denials with Christ 
Jesus our Lord and Redeemer. 

In the little time which remains before the glorification of the 
remainder of the Body~the church, let us endeavor to make our 



calling and election sure, and thus prove that we have not received 
the grace of God in vain. If you have made the covenant of 
sacrifice, even at the eleventh hour, your sacrifice should be on the 
altar and the fire of zeal under it consuming your time, talents, 
reputation and all in the heavenly service. Let it be burning briskly, 
that the odor of sweet incense may ascend to God, that you may be 
fully accepted in the Beloved in this acceptable time, and be made 
partaker of the glory to follow-now at hand. 



R859 : page 6 

OUR RECKONED JUSTIFICATION AND ITS VALUE. 

While we walk now entirely by faith, and have no actual 
realization of the blessings promised through the redemption, it 
may be difficult for some to realize the full value of that which they 
now possess by faith. As the result of the sacrifice of Jesus Christ, 
we have redemption and remission of sins. That is, we are 
redeemed or purchased from under the penalty of sin—death, and all 
our sins are canceled, and are no longer counted against us. Thus 
we, who accept of this, God's arrangement for our release, have a 
clear title to lasting life as human beings. If not again forfeited, it is 
ours to all eternity; and with it will come all the blessings of perfect 
health, and everything which can conduce to perfect happiness. But 
we by no means enjoy any part of that inheritance now; it is all in 
the future, and at present we hold only our title to it. But the title is 
good; it has been thoroughly examined, and no claims can possibly 
be brought against it. It is as sure as though we were now in actual 
possession of it. This title is secured to us by the oath and covenant 
of God; and it will pass current in the bank of heaven at any time. 
God tells us that if we have full confidence in it, within a specified 
time (the Gospel Age), it can be exchanged for another-a title to a 
nature and glory grander even than the perfect human nature, 
namely, the divine nature; that we may be joint-heirs with his only 
begotten Son. We receive the title to this divine, spiritual 
inheritance, in exchange for the former title to the human 
inheritance. Yet the whole transaction is by faith. As yet we have 
not the actual possession of either. 

Those who have made this transaction are told to reckon themselves 
now, as "new creatures," partakers of the divine nature. Though as 
yet we are actually human, our human nature must soon terminate 
in death, after which our title to the new nature will be made good. 
How wonderful are the ways of God. How little the world dreams 
that God is so surely and silently working out his deep designs. But 
those who realize it by full and implicit faith, built upon the 
exceeding great and precious promises, rejoice with joy 
unspeakable and full of glory. Those who now hold this new title to 
the divine nature, have of course relinquished all former claims to 
the perfect human nature. All that earthly, human title passed from 



them when they exchanged it for the title to the new nature. The 
right to a restitution to human perfection was therefore given up 
forever by the consecrated ones, who have received the spirit of 
adoption to the spiritual nature. Whosoever, therefore, of this class, 
shall seek to save his human life, shall lose life~the spiritual life, 
which is all he now holds a title to. But whosoever, according to his 
covenant, shall lose, willingly sacrifice his life for the Lord's sake, 
shall find it.-- Luke 17:33. 

Let all who have it, hold on to the new title by faith and patience 
firm unto the end. 

MRS. C. T. R. 



R860 : page 6 

THE SIGNS OF THE TIMES. 

Now consider the subject of the signs of the times. Remarks on 
this subject are too often made which betray a want of intelligent 
comprehension of the natures of the signs that are according to 
Scripture to indicate the "time of the end." A careless reading of our 
Lord's prophetic discourse on the Mount of Olives seems to be the 
cause of much of this misapprehension. His predictions of wars and 
rumors of wars, famines, pestilences, and earthquakes, are quoted 
as if they and such like things were to be the signs of the end of the 
age. A little accurate attention to the order of his statements would 
at once show that, so far from this being the case, he mentions these 
as the characteristic and common events of the entire interval prior 
to his coming. Wars and calamities, persecution and apostasy, 
martyrdom, treachery, abounding iniquity, Gospel preaching, the 
fall of Jerusalem, the great tribulation of Israel, which has, as we 
know, extended over 1,800 years; all these things were to fill the 
interval, not to be signs of the immediate proximity of the second 
advent. How could things of common, constant occurrence be in 
themselves signs of any uncommon and unique crisis? What 
commoner all through the ages than wars and rumors of wars, 
famines, pestilences, and earthquakes? These, as marking the 
course of the age, can never indicate its close. What, then, are the 
signs we should expect? 

Many who perceive the folly of thus looking at every great natural 
calamity as a sign go to an opposite extreme, and expect wonderful, 
unprecedented, supernatural and impossible signs, basing their 
expectations on a literal interpretation of the symbolic 
hieroglyphics of the Apocalypse. Such signs would be so grotesque 
and absurd in character that it is an insult to human intelligence, not 
to say to divine revelation, to assert that they are to be expected. 
There is one simple and all-sufficient answer to this childish 
conception of the signs of the last days. Our Lord and his Apostles 
alike furnish the reply. 



Our Lord says: "And as it was in the days of Noe, so shall it be also 
in the days of the Son of man. They did eat, they drank, they 
married wives, they were given in marriage, until the day that Noe 
entered into the ark, and the flood came and destroyed them all. 
Likewise also as it was in the days of Lot, they did eat, they drank, 
they bought, they sold, they planted, they builded; but the same day 
that Lot went out of Sodom it rained fire and brimstone from 
heaven and destroyed them all. Even thus shall it be in the day 
when the Son of man is revealed." (Luke 17:26-30.) And the 
Apostle continues thus: "For yourselves know perfectly that the day 
of the Lord so cometh as a thief in the night; for when they shall 
say, Peace and safety, then sudden destruction cometh upon them as 
travail upon a woman with child, and they shall not escape." (1 
Thess. 5:2,3.) 

If any such signs, as are imagined by some, were to precede the 
advent, the state of society predicted in these passages could not by 
any possibility exist. If monstrous, unheard-of, supernatural, 
portentous events were to transpire, would they not be telegraphed 
the same day all over a startled world, and produce such a sense of 
alarm and expectation that buying and selling, planting and 
building, and marrying and giving in marriage, would all be 
arrested together, and "peace and safety" would be far from any 
one's lips or thoughts? And if one of the Apocalyptical prodigies is 
to be thus fulfilled, all of course must be so. Conceive a succession 
of such supernatural prodigies, and a world asleep in fancied 
security, and overtaken by sudden destruction. No, there was 
nothing special to alarm the antediluvians before the day that Noah 
entered into the ark; nothing special to startle the men of Sodom ere 
the fire from heaven fell; and like as it was in those days, so will it 
be in these. All going on just as usual, no single sign to attract the 
world's attention. "None of the wicked shall understand" the true 
state of affairs, only the "wise" enlightened by the word of 
prophecy. 

It will be objected, perhaps, but if the signs of the times, which we 
are expected to recognize, are neither ordinary natural events nor 
extraordinary unnatural ones, what are they? Scripture abundantly 
answers this inquiry. They are special, but perfectly natural events, 
occurring in a predicted order and at a predicted time, and various 
and widely differing events occurring in combination. They are not 
sudden, startling, newly-produced phenomena, but definite stages in 
long progressing movements, whose history was written twenty- 
five centuries ago. 

As to political signs, allow me to make a few simple suggestions. I 
met a gentleman who has long been a Christian, a student of God's 
Word, a worker in his service, and he said he had bestowed little 
time on the subject of prophecy. Now there may be many such: let 
me refer, for the sake of such, to a great political chart of the 
world's history contained in Dan. 2, and especially as compared 
with Dan. 7. There 



R860 : page 7 

we have in brief the history of the last twenty-five centuries. 

Let me suggest that Daniel is the introduction to John, the book of 
John the completion of Daniel. Daniel is first John; John is second 
Daniel. They are two parts of the same book, they treat of one 
subject, use the same symbols, employ the same hieroglyphics, and 
speak of the same course of events. These two books contain a 
series of visions in which the same ground is to a certain extent 
traversed again and again. The first vision in these two books is the 
simplest and most comprehensive. In that well-known vision, the 
fourfold image, representing the course of four great world- 
empires, Babylon, Medo-Persia, Greece, and Rome, we have a 
chart of Gentile history. 

And using the word chart reminds me of a very simple illustration 
that may be of value to some on the question of signs, and the point 
we have reached in the history of the world. Suppose you cross the 
ocean, and, traveling for many days or weeks, you reach a certain 
point of the voyage still out of sight of land, when one day you hear 
a rumor that the ship is approaching the port to which you are 
bound. You go to the captain, and inquire. "Yes, it is; we should 
sight the land at three o'clock this afternoon." "How do you know?" 
The captain unrolls his chart, and says, "There is the port; there is 
our present position." He lays his finger on the exact point reached 
by the ship. "How do you know we are there?" "Do you see that 
line drawn across the chart? that is our course: we have followed it; 
we are just there, and will sight land at three o'clock." You ask for 
evidence to reassure yourself and strengthen your expectation it 
shall be as he says. You ask for further light on the subject, for you 
cannot understand how he can be so sure. "Well, our voyage has 
run along such and such a course, we have come so many miles, the 
ship has kept the track marked there; on the way we have passed 
certain points, certain headlands, indicated there, as Ceylon, Adent 
and so forth, just as they are marked in the chart. Now the distance 
from Ceylon to the port we are making is so and so many miles; we 
have just run within twenty miles of it, and by three o'clock we will 
make the rest. The chart with the reckoning of time and distance 
shows exactly where we are." As he predicts so it comes to pass. 

It seems to me that in a somewhat similar way God's servants and 
saints are guided by His wondrous and infallible Word. He has been 
pleased in the Book to give us a chart of history, not merely history 
still future, but history now past; and it has been unfolded to us, not 
in dim light, but in a broad, clear light, and part of the light, a most 
important part of it, is prophecy with reference to the political 
history of the world, with reference to the political history of the 
great Gentile powers. What a marvellous thing it is when we 
consider that twenty-five centuries ago, when the times of the 
Gentiles were beginning, when the Jewish subjection had 
commenced~for God has cast down the throne of David for a time, 
and set up the Gentile powers~that at that time, twenty-five 



centuries ago, the course of Gentile power should be clearly 
foreseen and distinctly foretold, written and marked out in God's 
holy Word! It is written and rewritten, prediction multiplied on 
prediction, and the whole thing laid bear and unfolded; and all 
history itself has run on these lines exactly as foretold. 

I can only add on these signs, that each power has run its appointed 
course: the Babylonian empire rose, reached a certain point, and 
fell; the Medo-Persian empire succeeded, and reached a certain 
development, and also fell; the Grecian empire followed, and ruled 
and perished; then rose the Roman empire, passed through the 
course foretold, first united, then divided, just as indicated. 
Compare, I say, the Old Testament and New Testament predictions 
with the whole course of recorded history, and what do you see? 
History has run on the lines laid down; the predictions have been 
fulfilled, we know their fulfilment is sure. Babylon, Persia, Greece, 
Rome Pagan, and Rome Papal and persecuting all have come and 
gone, and here we are at the close of the last four empires; the next 
thing therefore to be expected is the manifestation, the shining forth 
of the kingdom of God which shall never end. 

Of course the history of the Gentile world is a different thing from 
the history of the Christian Church. Take then the latter: a great 
deal is foretold with regard to the history of the Christian Church. 
That church was to grow, according to prophecy. Beginning with 
small things it was to attain to a wonderful extent. From a small 
seed it was to spring into a great tree, spreading out its branches in 
which the birds of the air were to come and build. This wonderful 
change is foretold by the Lord Himself, by Paul again and again, 
and by John in still greater detail: all this has taken place. 

Now observe, further, the bearing of this on this signs of the times. 
As the Church in her infancy was told of her extension; as she at 
length reached maturity; as she who was so small became a great 
spreading tree, and as the birds of the air came and built in her 
branches; as all this has become history, as all has been fulfilled; so 
another event foretold has taken place. In the history of the Church 
there has been a great falling away from the faith, and that apostasy 
was distinctly foretold. I suggest, then, that this word of Paul to the 
Thessalonians, "That day shall not come except there come the 
falling away first" (the apostasy), is a most important sentence in 
connection with the question of ecclesiastical signs of our times. 
The subject there is ecclesiastical; the apostasy was to take place, 
not in the world, but in the Christian Church. Paul is writing of 
what is to take place in the Church, and of that pure and practical 
hope; and he is writing just there and then with reference to our 
gathering together to Him. And Paul says, "That day shall not come 
except there come the falling away first." I believe that just as I 
accept any other statement of inspiration. Therefore I am forced to 
take this position; if that predicted falling away in the Christian 
Church has not taken place, it lies between us and our gathering 
together to Him. 



But if, on the other hand, that predicted falling away has taken 
place, it does not lie between us and the coming of the Lord. If we 
compare this falling away in the Church with the passage with 
which you are familiar, "In the latter times some shall depart from 
the faith," the word in the original Greek is the same as in the 
passage in Thessalonians. When we compare the two together, 
surely we cannot evade the conclusion that they refer to the same 
thing. Now, the falling away in 1 Tim. 4, is described as "Giving 
heed to seducing spirits and doctrines of demons. ..forbidding to 
marry, and commanding to abstain from meats." Reading that, we 
cannot fail to recognize the portrait. 

Time would fail to do more than add this one thought by way of 
suggestion, that after the declaration that the day shall not come 
except there come first the apostasy, there is added a very solemn 
declaration indeed, with reference to the one whom the Reformers 
recognized as the man of sin, whose manifestation is described. I 
rejoice I have learned to look, as I have done for thirty years, on 
Scripture in the light of history, and on history in the light of 
Scripture. And that doing so I can see the fulfillment of this 
prediction in accurate accordance with prophecy, a fulfillment 
recognized by the Reformers, though denied by the Papacy. And 
this very prophecy led to the Reformation, as they recognized the 
necessity of separating from the foretold apostasy. There is no time 
for further details, but let us search and see. Do not let us imagine 
we have reached a termination in the study of such things, but let us 
seek to advance in the understanding of them.~H. G. Guinness. 



R860 : page 7 

STEPHEN'S DYING PRAYER. 

"And they stoned Stephen, calling upon God (R.V. "the Lord"), 
and saying, Lord Jesus, receive my spirit. And he kneeled down and 
cried with a loud voice, Lord, lay not this sin to their charge. And 
when he had said this, he fell asleep. "--Acts 7:59,60. 

As usually understood, the "spirit" referred to by the persecuted 
saint, is an immortal part in man, which, in the case of the pious, is 
borne aloft to the nightless world at the final hour. About to die, it 
is assumed that the martyr committed himself, or his spirit, to the 
Savior, in hope of enduring happiness as soon as liberated from the 
tenement of clay. A pleasing representation, no doubt; but one 
encompassed with difficulties we dare not overlook. 

This common view it is diametrically opposed to our Lord's 
testimony in the hearing of his Apostles immediately before his 
crucifixion:~"I go to prepare a place for you."~John 14:2. At the 
conclusion of their toils and pains were they appointed to go 
thither~as orthodoxy assures its disciples now? It seems not (v. 3)~ 
"And if I go, and prepare a place for you, I will come again, and 



receive you unto Myself, that where I am, there ye may be also:" 
words which may be regarded as explanatory of 13:33-36. When he 
rose in sublime majesty from the mountain top, the attending angels 
said to those who were spectators of his removal: --"This same 
Jesus, which is taken up from you into heaven, shall so come in like 
manner"~that is, quietly and unknown to the world~"as ye have 
seen him go into heaven; "--Acts 1:11. The doctrine of Scripture 
then is, there is no such thing as going to him at death; not one saint 
will be privileged to behold his face till he revisits this world, 
according to his promise. 

The Apostle Paul understood the Divine plan and ordination 
perfectly, and therefore anticipated neither reward nor inheritance 
till the Lord should be manifested a second time without a sin- 
offering unto salvation: --"I am now ready to be offered," he says, 
"and the time of my departure, "--that is, from life~"is at hand. I 
have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the 
faith: henceforth there is laid up for me a crown of righteousness, 
which the Lord, the righteous judge, shall give me"~at death? No!-- 
"At that day"~when he returns; "and not to me only, but unto all 
them also that love his appearing."-- 2 Tim. 4:6-8. Was not Stephen 
educated in the same grand, errorless, spiritual school? Knew he not 
that the Deliverer in whom he trusted had spoken in this manner: ~ 
"I will come again and receive you unto myself?" 

Following his hours of agony on the hill of shame, and when the 
last moment had arrived, the Man of Sorrows, after crying with a 
loud voice, closed his utterances with these words: --"Father, into 
Thy hands I commend my spirit; and having said thus, he gave up 
the ghost" (literally, out-breathed); that is ~died.~Luke 23:46. 
According to Matthew 27:50, He "yielded up the ghost" (literally, 
dismissed his spirit); i.e., drew his last breath, or ceased to live. 
Stephen, the earliest martyr among the disciples, appears to have 
imitated his Master in the closing scene. Jesus said, "Father, into 
Thy hands I commend my spirit." When the stones were cruelly 
battering his quivering form, Stephen appealed thus:~"Lord Jesus, 
receive my spirit." 

The original word used by the dying Lord, and by his dying servant, 
is pneuma, translated "spirit," and both passages are given in 
Robinson's Greek Lexicon of the New Testament as illustrations of 
the term, when indicating "the principle of life residing in the 
breath;" turning our thoughts back to the old record: --The Lord God 
breathed into his nostrils the breath of life, and man became a living 
soul.~Gen. 2:7. 

Taking this as undoubtedly correct, the right interpretation of this 
expiring witness' devout language is not hard to find. He called on 
his exalted Lord to receive back the life-giving breath, or to accept 
his life which he rendered up as a sacrifice on the altar of 
Christianity. Very different from the popular view, but quite in 
accord with the general teachings of Scripture, and the rest of this 
narrative itself. After exclaiming,-- "Lord Jesus, receive my spirit"-- 



did he pass upward to the heavenly abode? As a spirit, winged he 
his flight to the Redeemer's presence? No, verily: "He kneeled 
down, and cried with a loud voice,-- Lord, lay not this sin to their 
charge. And when he had said this, he fell asleep." He was stoned 
to death, he returned to the dust. For him there was no release till 
the "dead in Christ," during his presence and by his power, burst 
forth in the bloom and blessedness of immortality. —Selected. 



R861 : page 7 

IF YOU LOVE ME, LEAN HARD. 

The Boston Recorder relates the following: "Miss Fiske, while in 
the Nestorian Mission, was at one time in feeble health, and much 
depressed in spirits. One hot Sabbath afternoon she sat on her mat 
on the chapel floor, longing for support and rest, feeling unable to 
maintain her trying position until the close of worship. Presently 
she felt a woman's form seated at her back, and heard the whisper, 
'Lean on me.' 

"Scarcely yielding to the request, she heard it repeated, 'Lean on 
me.' Then she divided her weight with the gentle pleader, but that 
did not suffice. In earnest, almost reproachful tones, the voice again 
urged, 'If you love me, lean hard.' This incident is worth a whole 
volume of commentary on the nature of true love, which is happiest 
when it can do most for the loved one."~Sel. 



R860 : page 8 

QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS. 

Ques. Will God in love destroy any of his creatures? 

Ans. We think not. See the definition of love in our September, 
1884, issue. When God finally destroys any of his creatures, it will 
be because they have irrecoverably lost those traits of character 
which command respect, esteem, and affection; and because such a 
life, if prolonged, would only be productive of misery both to itself 
and others. In mercy, therefore, and not in love, God will finally 
destroy those who will not be recovered to virtue and purity. 

Ques. How may I know that I am begotten of the Spirit? 

Ans. By finding in yourself the mind of God controlling your life in 
its every particular. What is the mind of God? It is revealed through 
his Word to be a mind or will to suffer for truth even unto death, 
rather than to have, hold, or in any way assist error: It is a mind to 
learn and "know the truth": It is a mind to be free completely from 
the influence and power of error— "free indeed": It is a mind to obey 
the truth under all circumstances and at any cost. It will be in you if 
of the body of Christ, what it was in the head and early members, a 



mind to do the Father's will and to sacrifice all things of an earthly 
character to gain the heavenly riches and glories promised to the 
overcomers and joint-heirs. 

During the Christian Age the Spirit begets to heavenly hopes, by 
holding out in Scripture heavenly or spiritual rewards-life 
everlasting as spiritual beings. In the next age it will beget (hope 
and aspiration) to earthly life and human perfection, by holding out 
such, as the reward of obedience. The way during the Gospel Age 
has been difficult, and few have found it—few, comparatively, have 
been begotten to the new nature, but in the Millennial Age the spirit 
of truth and knowledge will be so diffused among "all flesh," that 
all may be begotten of it, to the grand hope of human perfection and 
life everlasting; and though not so grand as the spiritual, the 
conditions will be easier to comply with, as the same degree of 
sacrifice and self-denial will not be necessary under the favorable 
conditions of that age. 

Ques. If I understand you, you maintain that the number of those 
going to destruction finally will be small in proportion to those who 
will attain to everlasting life. The reverse appears to be taught in 
Matt. 7:13,14: "Enter ye in at the strait gate; for wide is the gate and 
broad is the way that leadeth to destruction, and many there be 
which go in thereat: Because strait is the gate and narrow is the way 
which leadeth unto life, and few there be that find it." 

Ans. This Scripture is applicable only in the Gospel Age. The only 
way of life that has been open during the Gospel Age has been the 
narrow way of sacrifice, in which few have cared to walk. The mass 
of mankind have preferred to walk in the easy way of self- 
gratification -the broad way which leadeth to destruction. In the 
age to come this will all be changed: those who are now walking 
the narrow way, will then have gained the great prize offered to 
them— immortality— the divine nature. A highway shall then be 
opened up for the world, and it shall be called the way of holiness. 
The stones (stumbling stones) shall all be gathered out, and the 
standard of truth lifted up for the people, and made so plain that the 
wayfaring man, and those acquainted therewith, shall not err 
therein. Isa. 35:8; 62:10. That highway will lead to the perfection of 
human nature. See "FOOD," page 127. 

Ques. Will those who in the next age shall be in, or under the 
kingdom of God as subjects, not share or partake of it, at least in 
some measure? 

Ans. Those who will be in the kingdom of God will not be the 
subjects of it, but the rulers in it. When the kingdom of God is fully 
set up, all men, whether good or bad, willing or unwilling will be 
the subjects of it; for the kingdom will be over all the earth. As 
every man within the limits of British territory is subject to the 
control of the British government, and is entitled to its protection 
and favors if obedient to its laws, or to its penalties if a violater of 



its laws: so every man will be a subject of the heavenly kingdom 
when it is established over all the earth. 

If by being in the Kingdom of God, you mean within its territory, 
and therefore a subject of it, then, in this sense, all men will be in it 
as soon as it is established. And to be thrust out of the kingdom, 
would mean to be thrust out of the earth-to die. 

But surely, this is not what Jesus meant when he said to the 
prejudiced and unbelieving Jews, "Ye shall see Abraham, and 
Isaac, and Jacob, and all the prophets, in the Kingdom of God, and 
yourselves thrust out." (Luke 13:28.) The hitherto unbelieving Jews 
will not be in power, and will not occupy the ruling positions of that 
kingdom (reserved for faithful Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and the 
prophets); but they will not be deprived of the blessings of that 
kingdom, which are for "all the families of the earth." In whatever 
way divine wisdom shall appoint, all will share its blessings. In 
some cases it will be severe discipline, in others less severe, until 
fully restored to perfection. 

Therefore if these subjects of the kingdom shall see Abraham and 
Isaac and Jacob IN the kingdom, and realize that they themselves 
are not in it, it is plain that only those in the ruling positions of the 
kingdom, were spoken of by Jesus as IN the kingdom. 

The subjects therefore will not be in the kingdom, in the sense in 
which Jesus used the expression; but will be under its authority and 
control. And under its dominion the obedient will be richly blessed. 
All who will fully and cheerfully submit themselves, will in the 
end, enjoy a full restitution to perfection; and in the end of the age 
when Christ gives up the kingdom to God the Father, the original 
dominion over the earth will be restored to the whole restored 
human race.-Matt. 25:34. 

The dominion given to them will be the same as at first given to 
Adam, and lost by him. It is now exercised by Satan who uses 
fallen man as his tool. It will be reclaimed and retaken by Christ 
who purchased it, ("the purchased possession") at the same time, 
and by the same precious blood which bought all, in order to restore 
all things (man and earth) to the original design of the Father, 
illustrated in Adam and his dominion. —Gen. 1:28. Psa. 8:6-8. 



R833 : page 8 

"ORDER is the sanity of the mind, the health of the body, the 
peace of the city, the security of the State. As the beams to a house, 
as the bones to the microcosm of man, so is order to all things." 



R861 : page 8 



THE HELPFUL MAN. 

"There is a man," said his neighbor, speaking of the village 
carpenter, "who has done more good, I really believe, in this 
community than any other person who ever lived in it. He cannot 
talk very well in prayer-meeting, and he does not often try. He isn't 
worth two thousand dollars, and it's but little that he can put down 
on subscription paper for any object. But a new family never moves 
into the village that he does not find them out, to give them a 
neighborly welcome, and offer any little service he can render. He 
is usually on the lookout to give strangers a seat in his pew at 
church. He is always ready to watch with a sick neighbor and look 
after his affairs for him, and I've sometimes thought he and his wife 
kept house plants in winter just for the sake of being able to send 
little bouquets to invalids. He finds time for a pleasant word for 
every child he meets, and you'll always see them climbing into his 
one-horse wagon when he has no other load. He really seems to 
have a genius for helping folks in all sorts of common ways, and it 
does me good every day just to meet him on the street."~Selected. 



R861 : page 8 

THE IMAGE OF CHRIST. 

The image of Christ, drawn by the pencil of the Spirit, to which 
Scripture directs our aim, is painted in such colors that it is 
impossible often to contemplate it without its irresistibly affecting 
the heart. As the bodily eye that has looked long at the sun retains a 
bright image of it, so the spiritual eye that gazes steadfastly on the 
face of Christ is filled with light. We carry this image with us 
wherever we go, and it blends with all our thoughts and actions. It 
never ceases to be a study to us, ever growing more bright and 
beautiful as we gaze upon it, revealing in contrast, more and more, 
every darkness of our own hearts. I have said, it is with us at 
conversion as it is in spring, when the sun melts the snow in the 
fields and on the mountain side; but upon the highest peaks, and in 
the deepest valleys, patches of it still remain. So the rays of the 
spiritual sun may penetrate our souls, and still there remains in each 
heart heights and depths where yet all is cold and hard. How much 
must yet be melted away, he is first aware who conscientiously 
yields himself up to the discipline of Scripture. The longer we 
contemplate Christ, the more do we discover how unlike him we 
are, how selfishness has penetrated our inmost nature, how poor we 
are in humanity, in love. When we enter this school of discipline, it 
does not seem so. This beholding ourselves in the image of Christ 
has the peculiarity, that whilst we more and more discover the 
darkness in us, upon us all the while unconscious, it is pouring its 
light. Paul has expressed this in a particularly rich passage in his 
letter to the Corinthians. He says: "But we all, with open face, 
beholding as in a glass the glory of the Lord, are changed into the 



same image from glory to glory, even as by the Spirit of the Lord." 
A wonderfully rich saying indeed. Just as when we behold 
ourselves in a metallic mirror, he would say, it spreads over us its 
own effulgence; so we Christians, looking with unveiled face at 
Christ, as into the mirror of humanity, are adorned with his light, 
made partakers of his Spirit, changed, as from glory to glory, into 
the same resplendent image. --Tholuck. 



R860 : page 8 

COME INTO THE SUNLIGHT 

"He that followeth me shall not walk in the darkness, but shall 
have the light of life." --John 8:12. 

My friend had some plants which had been all winter in a south 
window, where they had the sun. They looked bright and 
flourishing, and already blooming in the early spring. It was 
cheering to see the rich verdure and luxuriant bloom, and in my 
warm admiration I exclaimed, "How lovely! how charming!" 

But there was one which was unlike the others. It was withered and 
leafless. I remarked, "That one appears to be dead." She replied, 
"No, it is not dead. I have just brought it up out of the cellar. It was 
there all winter, shut out from the sun and air. Plants may live a 
long time in the dark and in an ungenial atmosphere, though they 
lose their foliage and their beauty; but it is wonderful how soon the 
sun will revive them and restore their verdure." 

Just so, I said, it is in regard to Christians. If deprived of the light of 
his face who is called the Sun of Righteousness --the joy of earth 
and heaven~how sad and forlorn they appear, no indications of 
spiritual life, no flowers of Christian experience, no fruits of grace, 
no beauty, no attraction. The secret is, they have been living down 
in the cellar, away from the bright sun, and in an unhealthy 
atmosphere. 

Poor, drooping soul, hast thou been down in that gloomy place, and 
has thy spiritual vigor died out? Now, stripped of thy sweet 
comforts, art thou despondently saying, "There is no hope for me"? 
Be not discouraged. Come right up in the sunlight, and the pure air 
of love, where Jesus lives, and where he wants us all to live. 

"Rise, he calleth thee!" This is the spring time. He would array thee 
in thy vernal robes, and deck thee with glory and beauty. Dost thou 
seem dead? no vitality left? Be not dismayed, for Jesus says, "He 
that believeth in me, though he were dead, yet shall he live." His 
life-giving beams can vivify thy soul much more speedily than the 
natural sun can revive withered plants. 

'Tis only to place thy poor, drooping heart beneath his blessed rays, 
and soon thou wilt feel new life and fresh vigor start through thy 
whole being, and thus in the garden of the Lord, thou wilt become a 



tree of righteousness whose lovely bloom and rich fruits will 
abound to the glory and praise of God. Come! Oh, come quickly 
into the sunlight!-- M. D. James. 


