A Letter From the Governing Body
Dear Fellow Witnesses of Jehovah:
What a delight it is to write to you dear brothers! We feel as did the apostle John, who said that he ‘truly loved’ his fellow believers and rejoiced that they were “walking in the truth.” (2 John 1, 4) Oh, what a blessing the truth is to all of us! The truth has set us free from Babylon the Great and its doctrines and traditions that dishonor God. Obedience to the truth has helped us become loving, kind, merciful people. And the truth has opened up the way for us to have a clean standing before God as well as the prospect of everlasting life.
How grateful we are, too, for Jehovah’s spirit, which daily guides and strengthens us! We are confident that you enjoyed examining various aspects of this loving provision from Jehovah at the recent “Guided by God’s Spirit” District Conventions. As world conditions worsen, it is essential that we rely on Jehovah’s powerful spirit to direct us through the momentous days ahead of us.
We feel sure that your hearts have been touched when reading the thrilling Yearbook accounts of our brothers who have endured so much suffering for their faith. And it is amazing to think that many of these faithful ones had been baptized only a short time when difficulties arose or were not yet baptized. How we love them for their loyalty and their stand for righteousness! Truly, their sterling example strengthens our determination to continue loyal to the Kingdom no matter what adversity may come our way.​—1 Thess. 1:6-8.
We know, dear brothers and sisters, that there are many problems both economic and otherwise that you have to cope with to keep your families bound together in love. For some of you, it is a challenge even to support the Kingdom-preaching work and other necessary congregation activities regularly and loyally. That is the reason why, after much prayerful discussion, we have made some adjustments in congregation meetings starting January 1, 2009. We trust that you will make the very most of these arrangements so as to spend more time in your personal and family study.
At the various assemblies and conventions this year, it has been a real joy to see so many who have qualified for baptism. Among them were some quite young in years. You parents are to be commended for raising your children to have an appreciation for the truth and for encouraging them to make a dedication to serve Jehovah when young. That such dear young ones face many challenges at school and yet have qualified to be baptized speaks very well of the home training they have received.​—Ps. 128:1-6.
Not to be overlooked is the commendable increase in the Bible study work​—and our hardworking missionaries and special pioneers have had a large share in this. All of us on the Governing Body greatly appreciate the important part our brothers and sisters worldwide play in saying “Come!” to honesthearted ones, inviting all who are thirsting to “take life’s water free.” (Rev. 22:17) We warmly welcome into our worldwide brotherhood the 289,678 who symbolized their dedication by water baptism this past year!
We can never remind ourselves too often of the words of the apostle John, who wrote: “The world is passing away and so its desire, but he that does the will of God remains forever.” (1 John 2:17) And to think that we are living so very close to the time when this world will ‘pass away’! How wise it is to center our lives on doing the will of God and ‘keeping on the watch.’ (Matt. 24:42) There will never be any regrets on our part if we do so, and we shall reap the benefits of Jehovah’s loving-kindness.​—Isa. 63:7.
We hope that the moving accounts from many lands contained in this Yearbook will serve as an encouragement to all of you to put Kingdom interests first in your life. We want to assure you that you are always in our thoughts and prayers and that we love you very much. May Jehovah pour out upon you his rich blessings.
Your brothers,
Governing Body of Jehovah’s Witnesses

