

STUDY ARTICLE 19


SONG 6 The Heavens Declare God’s Glory

Imitate the Faithful Angels


“Praise Jehovah, all you his angels.”​—PS. 103:20.


FOCUS
Lessons we can learn from the example of the faithful angels.


1-2. (a) How do we differ from the angels? (b) What do we have in common with the angels?

Your answers


WHEN Jehovah drew you to the truth, he invited you into a diverse and loving family of worshippers, which includes millions of faithful angels. (Dan. 7:9, 10) As we think of angels, we may reflect on how different they are from us. For example, the angels have existed far longer than we have been alive. (Job 38:4, 7) They are more powerful than we are. And they are holy and righteous to a degree that we cannot reach as imperfect humans.​—Luke 9:26.
2 However, despite these differences, we have a lot in common with the angels. For example, like the angels, we can reflect Jehovah’s fine qualities. We have free will, as do the angels. Much like them, we have personal names and distinct personalities as well as various responsibilities. And, similar to the angels, we have a need to worship our Creator.​—1 Pet. 1:12.
 3. What can we learn from the faithful angels?

Your answer


3 Since we have a lot in common with the angels, their good example can encourage and enlighten us. In fact, we can learn many fine lessons from them. In this article, we will consider how we can imitate the humility of the faithful angels as well as their love for people, their endurance, and their efforts to keep the congregation clean.
THE ANGELS ARE HUMBLE
 4. (a) How do the angels show humility? (b) Why are the angels humble? (Psalm 89:7)

Your answers


4 The faithful angels are humble. Although they are experienced, mighty, and wise, they obey Jehovah’s instructions. (Ps. 103:20) As they carry out their assignments, they never boast about their deeds or show off their superhuman powers. They happily do God’s will even when not credited by name.a (Gen. 32:24, 29; 2 Ki. 19:35) They refuse to accept any glory that belongs to Jehovah. Why are the angels so humble? Because they love Jehovah and deeply respect him.​—Read Psalm 89:7.
 5. How did one angel show humility when correcting the apostle John? (See also picture.)

Your answer


5 Consider one event that illustrates the angels’ humility. In about 96 C.E., an unnamed angel delivered an awe-inspiring vision to the apostle John. (Rev. 1:1) How did John react to the vision? He tried to worship the angel. However, that loyal spirit creature quickly stopped him, saying: “Be careful! Do not do that! I am only a fellow slave of you and of your brothers . . . Worship God!” (Rev. 19:10) What a humble response! The angel was not interested in glory or admiration. He immediately turned John’s attention to Jehovah God. At the same time, the angel did not look down on John. Although the angel had served Jehovah for much longer and was much more powerful than John, he humbly referred to the apostle as his fellow slave. And even though the angel had to correct John, he did not scold him or treat the elderly apostle harshly. Instead, the angel spoke kindly. He likely recognized that John was filled with awe.




The angel showed humility when dealing with John (See paragraph 5)




 6. How can we imitate the angels’ humility?

Your answer


6 How can we imitate the angels’ humility? We too can carry out our assignments without boasting or trying to take credit for our accomplishments. (1 Cor. 4:7) Additionally, we should not feel superior to others if we have served Jehovah longer than they have or if we have certain privileges. In fact, the more responsibilities we have, the more we should view ourselves as lesser ones. (Luke 9:48) Like the angels, we want to serve others. We do not want to promote ourselves.
 7. How can we show humility when we have to correct or counsel someone?

Your answer


7 We can also show humility if we have to correct or counsel someone​—a fellow believer or our child. When counseling, we may have to be firm. But like the angel who corrected John kindly, we can be firm without making the person being counseled feel crushed. If we do not consider ourselves superior, we will deliver the Bible-based counsel in a respectful and compassionate manner.​—Col. 4:6.
THE ANGELS LOVE PEOPLE
 8. (a) According to Luke 15:10, how do the angels demonstrate their love for people? (b) What role do the angels play in the preaching work? (See also picture.)

Your answers


8 The angels are not aloof, or detached, from humans. They love people. They rejoice when a sinner repents​—that is, when a lost sheep returns to Jehovah or when an individual changes his ways and comes into the truth. (Read Luke 15:10.) The angels are also actively involved in the Kingdom-preaching work. (Rev. 14:6) Although they do not preach directly to people, they may guide a publisher to someone who wants to learn about Jehovah. Of course, we cannot say with certainty that the angels were involved in any specific case. After all, Jehovah can use other means​—such as his holy spirit—​to help people or to guide his servants. (Acts 16:6, 7) Still, he uses his angels extensively. So when we share the good news, we can be confident that the angels will be there to support us.​—See the box “Their Prayers Were Answered.”b




A couple have just finished public witnessing. On their way home, the sister sees a woman who seems distressed. The sister realizes that the angels can direct us to those who may be searching for spiritual help. She feels moved to speak consolingly to the woman (See paragraph 8)




Their Prayers Were Answered
Is it possible that the angels were involved in any of the following experiences?
  While telephone witnessing with her mother, a 12-year-old publisher in Peru spoke with a woman who had been asking God to send someone to help her. The woman viewed the girl’s phone call as an answer to her prayers and welcomed a Bible study. Soon thereafter, she started attending meetings.

  A woman in Romania studied for a time but then stopped. Later, while working as a caregiver in Italy, she wanted to resume her study. Not knowing any local Witnesses, she prayed to Jehovah for help. Shortly thereafter, the family she worked for asked her to go to a store for them. They advised her not to engage the owner in conversation. “He is one of Jehovah’s Witnesses,” they said, “and he talks to his customers about the Bible.” Sure enough, the brother witnessed to the lady, who saw this as an answer to her prayers. She resumed her study and made fine spiritual progress. Impressed by her example, one of her sons also began studying the Bible and attending Christian meetings.

  A Witness couple decided to sell their car. When a man and his wife came over to look at the car, the Witnesses took the opportunity to explain that they were simplifying their lives and then talked about our Bible educational work. The husband of the couple interested in the car responded: “Yesterday I prayed: ‘Please, God, put someone on my path who can help me. I feel empty, and I need to find the truth.’” He viewed this chance meeting as an answer to his prayer. He and his wife accepted a Bible study, and their two young daughters also started studying. The family now attends Christian meetings.




 9. How can we imitate the angels’ love for people?

Your answer


9 How can we imitate the angels’ love for people? When we hear an announcement that someone has been reinstated, we can rejoice, as the angels do. We can go out of our way to welcome the brother back and confirm our love for him. (Luke 15:4-7; 2 Cor. 2:6-8) We can also imitate the angels by doing all that we can in the preaching work. (Eccl. 11:6) And just as the angels support us as we share the good news, we can look for ways to support our brothers and sisters in their ministry. For example, could we make plans to work with a less experienced publisher? Could we support older or infirm brothers and sisters so that they can have a share in the ministry?
10. What can we learn from Sara’s experience?

Your answer


10 What if our circumstances limit what we can do? We can still find ways to work along with the angels in the preaching work. Consider the experience of Sara,c a sister in India. After pioneering for some 20 years, Sara became ill and was permanently bedridden. Understandably, she was deeply depressed. But with loving support from her spiritual family along with regular Bible reading, Sara gradually regained a positive outlook. Of course, she had to adapt her ministry to her new circumstances. Since she could not even sit up to write letters, her ministry was limited to witnessing by telephone. So she telephoned her return visits, and they referred her to others who might be interested. The result? Within months, Sara had 70 Bible studies​—far more than she could manage! So she turned some over to others in the congregation. Many of the students now attend our meetings. How happy the angels must be to work alongside brothers and sisters, such as Sara, who do all they can in the preaching work!
THE ANGELS SHOW ENDURANCE
11. How have the faithful angels shown remarkable endurance?

Your answer


11 The faithful angels are outstanding examples of endurance. They have put up with injustice and wickedness for thousands of years. They saw Satan and many other spirit creatures who once served alongside them rebel against Jehovah. (Gen. 3:1; 6:1, 2; Jude 6) The Bible tells of one faithful angel who experienced direct opposition from a powerful demon. (Dan. 10:13) Furthermore, throughout human history, the angels have seen only a small minority of people pursue true worship. Despite all that, these loyal angels continue serving Jehovah with joy and zeal. They know that at the right time, God will remove all injustice.
12. What can help us to endure?

Your answer


12 How can we imitate the angels’ endurance? Like the angels, we may witness injustices or face opposition. But we share their conviction that at the right time, God will remove all wickedness. So like the faithful angels, we do “not give up in doing what is fine.” (Gal. 6:9) And God promises to help us to endure. (1 Cor. 10:13) We can pray to Jehovah for his spirit, which produces patience and joy. (Gal. 5:22; Col. 1:11) What if you face opposition? Trust fully in Jehovah, and do not be alarmed. Jehovah will always support and strengthen you.​—Heb. 13:6.
THE ANGELS HELP KEEP THE CONGREGATION CLEAN
13. What special assignment do angels have during the last days? (Matthew 13:47-49)

Your answer


13 During the last days, Jehovah has given the angels a special assignment. (Read Matthew 13:47-49.) The preaching work attracts millions of people of all kinds. Some of these people take steps to become genuine Christians, while others do not. The angels have been assigned to “separate the wicked from among the righteous.” This means that they are assigned to help protect the purity of the congregation. This does not mean that everyone who stops associating with us for whatever reason can never return; nor does it mean that there will never be problems in the congregation. Yet, we can be sure that the angels are working hard to help keep our congregations clean.
14-15. How can we imitate the angels’ concern for the spiritual and moral cleanness of the congregation? (See also pictures.)

Your answer


14 How can we imitate the angels’ concern for the cleanness of the congregation? By doing our part to keep our congregation morally and spiritually clean. To this end, we strive to safeguard our heart by choosing good associates and by rejecting any influence that seeks to corrupt us. (Ps. 101:3) We can also help our fellow worshippers to remain faithful to Jehovah. For example, what should we do if we learn that a fellow believer has committed a serious sin? Out of love for that person, we would urge our fellow believer to speak with the elders. If that person fails to do so, we would inform the elders about the matter. We want any spiritually weak fellow believer to get help quickly!​—Jas. 5:14, 15.
15 Sadly, some who commit gross sins have to be removed from the congregation. In such cases, we “stop keeping company” with them.d (1 Cor. 5:9-13) This arrangement helps to keep the congregation clean. Moreover, by choosing not to associate with those who have been removed, we actually show them kindness. Our firm stand may move them to come to their senses. If they do so, we rejoice, along with Jehovah and his angels.​—Luke 15:7.




What should we do if we learn that a fellow believer has committed a serious sin? (See paragraph 14)e




16. In what ways will you strive to imitate the angels?

Your answer


16 What a privilege we have to see into the spirit realm with our eyes of faith and to work along with the angels! Let us imitate their fine qualities: their humility, their love for people, their endurance, and their concern for the moral and spiritual cleanness of the congregation. If we imitate the faithful angels, we too can be part of Jehovah’s family of worshippers for all eternity.

HOW CAN WE IMITATE THE ANGELS’ . . .
  humility?

Your answer



  love for people?

Your answer



  efforts to keep the congregation clean?

Your answer







SONG 123 Loyally Submitting to Theocratic Order

a Of the hundreds of millions of angels, only two are named in the Bible​—Michael and Gabriel.​—Dan. 12:1; Luke 1:19.
b You can find more experiences in the Watch Tower Publications Index under the heading “Angels” and the subheading “angelic direction (examples).”
c Name has been changed.
d As explained in the 2024 Governing Body Update #2, if a person who has been removed from the congregation attends a congregation meeting, a publisher can use his Bible-trained conscience to decide whether he will give him a simple greeting and welcome him.

e PICTURE DESCRIPTION: A sister urges her friend to speak with the elders. After some time has passed and the friend has failed to do so, the sister informs the elders about the matter.

