Announcements
KINGDOM PREACHING RESULTS IN TRIUMPH OVER ENEMIES
The good news of the Kingdom is to be preached under all circumstances and against all opposition. It is remarkable that in spite of the most violent resistance the Kingdom message has continued to be preached, triumphing over its enemies. Nothing can prevent the fulfillment of God’s prophetic assurance that “this good news of the kingdom will be preached in all the inhabited earth for the purpose of a witness.” (Ps. 110:2; Matt. 24:14, NW) Again this month Jehovah’s witnesses everywhere are going into isolated towns and territories. Those who cannot share in unassigned territory service will present the offer of three books and three booklets in congregation territory. If you wish to share, write us for details.
A PRACTICAL DEFENSE
In what kind of defense do you place confidence? Some look to thermo-nuclear weapons, other people put their hope of security in money, still others claim education will level barriers. But to save one’s life the wise course is to heed the words of the One sent forth as the Agent of life: “This means everlasting life, their taking in knowledge of you, the only true God, and of the one whom you sent forth, Jesus Christ.” (John 17:3, NW) This knowledge can be found only in the Bible and Bible study aids that faithfully turn you to God’s Word. Three of such valuable helps are the bound books “This Means Everlasting Life”, “Let God Be True” and You May Survive Armageddon into God’s New World. Make a real defense for yourself and your family by carefully reading these books along with three free booklets on a contribution of only $1.50. Send today.
NOTICE OF ANNUAL MEETING WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY OF PENNSYLVANIA
The Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society of Pennsylvania will hold its annual meeting of members on Monday, October 1, 1956, at ten o’clock in the forenoon at the registered office of the Society, which is located at 4100 Bigelow Boulevard, corner of Parkman Avenue, in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.
Members of the corporation should be certain that the secretary’s office has the proper addresses to which to mail the usual letter of notice advising them of the meeting and in which the proxy forms are enclosed. We need to have all the proxies returned to the office of the secretary of the Society not later than the 15th of September. Each member should complete and return his proxy promptly whether he is going to be at the meeting personally or not.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES FOR THE WEEKS
September 16: ‘Judge, O Jehovah!’ ¶1-21. Page 489.
September 23: ‘Judge, O Jehovah!’ ¶22-24, and Maintaining Integrity. Page 496.

