Maintaining Integrity
“Who shall ascend into the hill of Jehovah? and who shall stand in his holy place?”—Ps. 24:3, AS.
 1, 2. (a) Why has Jehovah long tolerated evildoers? (b) How is vindication of Jehovah linked with his witnesses’ maintaining integrity today?
JEHOVAH could have destroyed his enemies, including the entire human race, long before this time for their lack of integrity and their opposition to him. History’s pages tell of uncounted bloody deeds, with but few outstanding individuals marked therein as those of whom the world was not worthy. Only through Jehovah’s great mercy and forbearance has the human race been permitted to live. This period of tolerance of evildoers has provided ample time for testing human integrity and for the gathering of the little flock of those who are not of the world as well as thousands of the great crowd of “other sheep.” Jehovah’s purpose is to give a mighty witness to his name before the world’s end, and this was foreshadowed in his dealings with Pharaoh of ancient Egypt. That ruler pictured Satan the Devil, man’s greatest foe, the god of this world or system of things. By Moses’ mouth, Jehovah informed him: “By now I could have thrust my hand out that I might strike you and your people with pestilence and that you might be effaced from the earth. But, in fact, for this cause I have kept you in existence, for the sake of showing you my power and in order to have my name declared in all the earth.”—Ex. 9:15, 16, NW.
2 God was entirely within his right in choosing to delay the execution of his enemies until his own due time. Who can find fault with him for this? “If, now, God, although having the will to demonstrate his wrath and to make his power known, tolerated with much long-suffering vessels of wrath made fit for destruction, in order that he might make known the riches of his glory upon vessels of mercy, which he prepared beforehand for glory, namely, us, whom he called not only from among Jews but also from among nations, what of it?” (Rom. 9:22-24, NW) We are glad for the undeserved kindness extended to us and we are happy to inform others during this limited time in which it is still available. (2 Pet. 3:15) For Jehovah will wipe out all worldly nations in his impending war at Armageddon and thereby, at last, after waiting 6,000 years, vindicate his holy name. We gladly enter with him into fulfillment of his purpose, proclaiming his name and mighty deeds throughout the earth; and thus we can maintain integrity.—Rom. 10:13, NW.
 3. What three enduring and endearing qualities will integrity-keepers continuingly exercise toward God and all his obedient creatures?
3 Jehovah having willingly endured reproach for good ends, it is becoming to us to endure, maintaining integrity, for the same reason. Remaining true to our God is only a reasonable requirement. To whom else could we be true? Who else is worthy or deserving? There are none like Jehovah, none who have his qualities and loving purpose, none who have done so much for us. Do we have the qualities for being true, for maintaining integrity? In the past we promised to keep integrity, and that for good and sufficient reasons. Today those reasons are just as good. Keeping integrity today is just as possible as at any other time. Should there be any doubt in your mind, you can think back, Where did you come from? Why did you start out on this road in the first place? (Heb. 2:1; 10:32) Jehovah did not fail you at any time that you earnestly called upon him. Keep calling upon him in prayer; prove to him your sincerity, and he will deliver you. This is our testing period. This is the destiny-making time. Those serving the old world will, in the end, be disappointed with its destruction; but those showing love, confidence and hope in the new world of Jehovah’s creation will exultingly share its joys and blessings for maintaining integrity.
 4-6. (a) How is maintaining integrity shown in Jehovah’s first commandment and in its application? (b) In his second commandment? (c) In his third commandment?
4 God’s law sets a right rule of action or principle, and his Word shows illustrations of its proper application. For example, the first commandment of his basic law given to ancient Israel is: “I am Jehovah your God, who have brought you out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of slaves. You must never have any other gods against my face.” (Ex. 20:2, 3, NW) Its application is illustrated in Jesus’ sermon: “No one can be a slave to two masters; for either he will hate the one and love the other, or he will stick to the one and despise the other. You cannot be slaves to God and to Riches.” (Matt. 6:24, NW) A further application is in the statements: “You were bought with a price; stop becoming slaves of men.” (1 Cor. 7:23, NW) “Little children, guard yourselves from idols.”—1 John 5:21, NW.
5 The second commandment prohibits making a carved image; it forbids one to bow down to such or to be induced to serve such, because Jehovah is a God exacting exclusive devotion. Jesus applied this commandment in refusing to bow to Satan or to render an act of worship to him. (Matt. 4:8-10) Jesus’ apostles Peter and John applied it in refusing submission to the Sánhedrin, which forbade them to speak of Jesus. They replied: “Whether it is righteous in the sight of God to listen to you rather than to God, make your decision. But as for us, we cannot stop speaking about the things we have seen and heard.” (Acts 4:19, 20, NW) They maintained integrity.
6 The third commandment states: “You must not take up the name of Jehovah your God in a worthless way, for Jehovah will not leave the one unpunished who takes up his name in a worthless way.” (Ex. 20:7, NW) Jesus applied it by showing we were not to involve Jehovah’s name in our promises and oaths and then not say or do the truth and thus swear falsely or perjure ourselves. Israel’s dreaming prophets did that, prophesying false things in Jehovah’s name. So Jehovah destroyed those God-dishonoring false prophets. (Jer. 23:16-32, AS) God’s sacred Record shows other similar examples, to guide his servants aright.—Ps. 119:105, AS.
EXAMPLES OF INTEGRITY
 7. What three ancient examples of integrity-keeping are strikingly matched today?
7 Among many examples of integrity, here we can profitably recall three well-known ones: (1) Joseph’s maintaining integrity by refusing to commit adultery with Potiphar’s wife. (Gen. 39:7-12) (2) The three Hebrews’ refusal to bow before Nebuchadnezzar’s golden image on the plain of Dura, regardless of threatened death in a fiery furnace. (Dan. 3:4-6, 16-18) (3) Daniel’s refusal to surrender his privilege to pray to Jehovah, in face of being thrown into a den of lions according to Medo-Persian law. (Dan. 6:7-10) These instances prove how keepers of integrity always respect and obey Jehovah’s word. Today Jehovah’s witnesses do likewise, as historical accounts and court records abundantly confirm.
 8. In what practical ways may today’s integrity-keepers constantly enlarge faith, hope and love?
8 To prevent our losing integrity the Creator has lovingly supplied abundant safeguards and adequate instruction. One of such aids is personal and congregational study of God’s Word the Bible. What a storehouse of spiritual riches is contained in God’s Word! In no situation that can confront us, in no difficulty or problem, is its advice or counsel inadequate. To continue walking in its progressively shining light we need to study the Bible with the aid of theocratically provided study helps. This magazine and kindred publications are Jehovah’s provision on his table, and we should be ungrateful were we to neglect or despise such provision. (Luke 12:33-37; Matt. 24:45-47) It strengthens our faith when we use that provision; it increases our hope and promotes growth of love. Never think that you get too much spiritual food during a week. Brothers at the Brooklyn headquarters of the Watch Tower Society normally find they are participating in meetings and listening to God’s Word during more than ten hours each week. In addition they do private study. Do you hear God’s Word for five hours or less, with very little private study? Proper feeding on spiritual food gives us strength. Isaiah said: “They that wait for Jehovah shall renew their strength; they shall mount up with wings as eagles; they shall run, and not be weary; they shall walk, and not faint.”—Isa. 40:31, AS.
 9. For maintaining integrity, how may we apply sound counsel Paul gave Timothy?
9 What advice did the aged Paul give to youthful Timothy, who was to continue shepherding Jehovah’s flock? He told him to continue applying himself to public reading, to exhortation, to teaching; to ponder over these things, be absorbed in them, that his advancement might be manifest to all. (1 Tim. 4:13-15, NW) By doing that, we also shall be neither inactive nor unfruitful in the accurate knowledge of Jesus Christ and in good works. (2 Pet. 1:8, NW) Peter and John were able to give a unique testimony before the Jewish Supreme Court because they had been with Jesus and learned of him. (Acts 4:13, 14) Stephen, a man full of faith and holy spirit, by his knowledge confounded the enemies of the good news, and they could not hold their own against the wisdom and the spirit with which he spoke. (Acts 6:5, 10, NW) Our Bible studies are upbuilding because those participating have studied. A public lecture about Jehovah’s kingdom is inspiring, helpful and instructive because each assigned speaker has devoted much thought and time to its preparation through study. The brothers came to the meeting to give, not just to receive. Sometimes a hostess spends much time in preparing material food, but an extra-big meal is not required, nor any entertainment practice common to the old world. Martha’s sister Mary, by choosing to take in spiritual knowledge, was commended by Jesus for having chosen that better part.—Luke 10:38-42.
10, 11. (a) Why and how are larger assemblies of Jehovah’s witnesses essential aids for maintaining integrity? (b) Why is proper prayer to Jehovah another essential aid?
10 To prevent loss of integrity Christian assemblies are another aid. Jehovah commanded males in Israel of old to appear before him three times each year at the place which he chose, in addition to their weekly gathering. Most frequently the entire family came along for worship. What was the purpose of those assemblies? Deuteronomy 31:12 (NW) explains: “Call the people together, the men and the women and the little ones and your temporary resident who is within your gates, in order that they may listen and in order that they may learn, as they must fear Jehovah your God and take care to carry out all the words of this law.” All assemblies, whether local or national or international, are for Jehovah’s witnesses—men, women, children, and every newly interested person of good will. Here we are together to listen, to learn, to fear and to obey all of Jehovah’s words. Paul advised: “Let us consider one another to incite to love and right works, not forsaking the gathering of ourselves together, as some have the custom, but encouraging one another, and all the more so as you behold the day drawing near.”—Heb. 10:24, 25, NW.
11 Jehovah has also provided the privilege of prayer to aid us in keeping integrity. Every faithful servant of God has prayed and ceases not to pray. Victory over our adversary the Devil would be impossible without prayer. But to be heard, prayer must be offered in sincerity to Jehovah in the name of Jesus. The prayer should be for Jehovah’s name to be sanctified, for his kingdom to come, and for his will to come to pass on earth as in heaven. Those first things for prayer were put in that prominence by Jesus. (Matt. 6:9-13, NW) To what earthly ruler could you find immediate access with matters that to him may appear trifling? Not one. “The eyes of Jehovah are toward the righteous, and his ears are open unto their cry.” (Ps. 34:15, AS) Let us therefore approach God with praise and thanksgiving, pouring out our hearts to him in behalf of others—including first Himself and His enthroned King and His dedicated people, as well as ourselves individually. James wrote: “A righteous man’s supplication when rendered with earnestness has much force.” (Jas. 5:16, NW, margin) We may request Jehovah’s holy spirit, wisdom and understanding, forgiveness and deliverance and necessary material things. Paul wrote: “Do not be anxious over anything, but in everything by prayer and supplication along with thanksgiving let your petitions be made known to God.” (Phil. 4:6, NW) “Better a poor man, who walks in his integrity, than one who is crooked in his ways, although he be rich.”—Prov. 19:1, AT.
12. Jehovah’s spirit of love plays what part in our maintaining integrity?
12 To keep us approvable by him God also gave us his spirit. It is “not a spirit of cowardice, but that of power and of love and of soundness of mind.” (2 Tim. 1:7, NW) There is no soundness of mind in this old system of things. It is entirely out of course, lacking in love and integrity as those qualities are now measured by the Judge of all the earth. (Isa. 28:16, 17, AS) In the old world often it is a question of whom you know and not what you are; and frequently business or professional ethics replace simple honesty. However, through his Word Jehovah has revealed himself as the personification of true love; he has shown us how love, not selfishness, is the ruling principle in his organization. Therefore if we have the love of God we shall love our brothers; for how can we love God whom we have not seen if we do not love our brothers whom we see? Love binds us to God and his organization in an unbreakable attachment, making us serve others because we have their eternal welfare at heart. Of that John wrote: “For this is what the love of God means, that we observe his commandments; and yet his commandments are not burdensome.” (1 John 5:3, NW) Of course not; they are for our good and their observance brings us many blessings now and eternal life in the end. “This is how love has been made perfect with us, that we may have freeness of speech in the day of judgment, . . . There is no fear in love, but perfect love throws fear outside, because fear exercises a restraint. Indeed, he that is under fear has not been made perfect in love.” (1 John 4:17, 18, NW) The more than half a million Kingdom publishers now active regularly in announcing Jehovah’s kingdom show they have God’s spirit of love, having thus far conquered the fear of man and Devil and delighting to keep integrity.
13-15. (a) For ‘thoroughly accomplishing our God-given ministry’ what nonessential practices may we thoughtfully curtail? (b) For the same end, what right practices may we increase and intensify?
13 This is not the time for anyone to become overcharged with the cares of this life, to become bogged down by unnecessary weights and burdens. It is not the time to take a side stroll in bypaths leading away from faithful performance of duty. Do not neglect Jehovah’s service through preoccupation with material things, such as secular work, family life, or personal pleasure. God will be angry if you beg off because you value earthly things more than heavenly. Luxuries of the present, such as the latest model automobile, you do not need in order faithfully to care for New World interests. Many so-called good things of this old world can become snares to us in our New World activity. Instead, by taking our God-given commission to heart and storing up heavenly treasure by helping others into the New World society, we practice the Scriptural advice to God’s ministers: “You, though, keep your balance in all things, suffer evil, do missionary work, thoroughly accomplish your ministry.”—2 Tim. 4:5, NW.
ITS IMPORTANCE IN ALL OUR RELATIONS
14 Integrity enters into every feature of the Christian’s life. Loyalty and obedience are required of us in all things. Obedience often has been a hard lesson for former children of disobedience to learn. How important, then, to have a good conscience and to follow the leading of God’s spirit and not the inclination of the flesh! Peter admonished: “Hold a good conscience, so that in the particular in which you are spoken against they may get ashamed who are speaking slightingly of your good conduct in connection with Christ. For it is better to suffer because you are doing good, if the will of God wishes it, than because you are doing evil.” (1 Pet. 3:16, 17, NW) Remember, keeping integrity never was easy; and the Devil and his hordes will make it even harder because he has but a short time. “Do not let yourself be conquered by the evil, but keep conquering the evil with the good.”—Rom. 12:21, NW.
15 “Put on the complete suit of armor from God that you may be able to stand firm against the machinations of the Devil; because we have a fight, not against blood and flesh, but against the governments, against the authorities, against the world-rulers of this darkness, against the wicked spirit forces in the heavenly places.” (Eph. 6:11, 12, NW) Our fight is not against human creatures or human governments. By now the rulers in every land should know that Jehovah’s witnesses are not interested in seizing political power that other humans have, or replacing it by another. Jehovah’s Christ is already the King of his New World, and in due time the political rulers in all this earth will become keenly conscious of that also. (Rev. 11:15-18, NW) Our work is to announce Jehovah’s kingdom under Christ and to liberate people of good will from Satan’s snare and his wicked spirits, even as we ourselves have been made free by Jehovah’s truth. (Ps. 117, AS; John 8:31, 32, NW) Only in this way can God-fearing persons, as well as we, keep integrity.
16, 17. (a) How are invisible but very powerful foes of Jehovah’s people continually conquered now? (b) Within Jehovah’s New World society how does maintaining integrity concern us?
16 Having agreed, from the time of our dedication onward, to follow the Lamb, Jehovah’s enthroned King of the new world, we can, under his leadership, conquer the old world and the wicked one. By faithfulness, by keeping integrity, we place in Jehovah’s hand the answer to Satan’s malicious challenge—the answer that Satan cannot refute, the answer that proves him to be a false accuser. “For this purpose the Son of God was made manifest, namely, to break up the works of the Devil.” “And they conquered him [Satan, the false accuser of Christ’s brothers] because of the blood of the Lamb and because of the word of their witnessing, and they did not love their souls even despite the danger of death.” “And this is the conquest that has conquered the world, our faith.”—1 John 3:8; Rev. 12:11; 1 John 5:4, NW.
17 But how does integrity influence our relation to our brothers? Jehovah now gives special privileges and responsibilities to servants in a congregation who willingly take the lead in labor and in care for Jehovah’s sheep. (Acts 20:28, NW) Mature publishers can aid others in the house-to-house ministry, taking them along, showing them how to preach and training them to become fellow witnesses. Husbands too will remain true to their wives, and wives to their husbands. (Eph. 5:33, NW) Integrity-keeping parents will similarly teach and train their children. “Children, be obedient to your parents in union with the Lord, for this is righteous: ‘Honor your father and mother’; which is the first command with a promise.”—Eph. 6:1, 2, NW.
18, 19. As integrity-keepers, what are our daily responsibilities and privileges toward so-called outsiders, whether unfriendly or friendly?
18 And how will integrity affect our relation to the worldly? Our commission is to do good to all, to injure none. (1 Thess. 5:15, NW) As far as possible our preaching and teaching work should be intensified as the world’s end draws near. This means to read from the Bible to the people in their homes, at their doors, wherever possible—outside and inside prison walls. Integrity maintained in camps of hard labor proves that now also Jehovah protects his people in the lions’ den. There they are happy because persecuted for righteousness’ sake. They do not complain, because the spirit of glory, even the spirit of God, is resting upon them. (1 Pet. 4:13-17, NW) Neither repetition of lies nor any propaganda flood of falsehoods can erase the word of God from their minds and hearts. No brainwashing can quench their burning faith, for they will be ready to punish all disobedience when their own obedience is fulfilled. (2 Cor. 10:3-6, NW) We are not double-minded. With firmness and discretion we resist Satan’s browbeating methods. (1 Pet. 5:6-11, NW) But strange as it may seem, we who have our physical freedom stand in greater danger than our thousands of imprisoned brothers. (Heb. 13:3, NW) Can we let trifling things interfere? Do we slack the hand? Do we make excuses? There is ingathering work to be done, a battle to be won! (Eccl. 11:4, AS) So daily give praise to Jehovah. Let us daily buy out the opportune time for ourselves, because the days are wicked.—Eph. 5:16, NW.
19 The integrity-keeper has clean hands and a pure heart because as a faithful watchman he continues to give the warning. (Ezek. 3:17-19, AS) With faithful David of old he can say: “I have not sat with men of falsehood; neither will I go in with dissemblers. I hate the assembly of evildoers, and will not sit with the wicked. I will wash my hands in innocency: so will I compass thine altar, O Jehovah; that I may make the voice of thanksgiving to be heard, and tell of all thy wondrous works. Jehovah, I love the habitation of thy house, and the place where thy glory dwelleth.” (Ps. 26:4-8, AS) The upright find the way of Jehovah a stronghold to them. He is a shield to those who walk in integrity. It guides and preserves them to everlasting life. (Prov. 10:29; 2:7; 11:3; Ps. 25:21) Satan and his crumbling organization alone will try to keep us from going on to maturity and pressing on to victory. Jehovah’s prophets of old endured and were faithful. With them Christ Jesus, his apostles and other faithful early Christians jubilantly joined in saying ‘Keep integrity!’ And now our present-day brothers, enduring great persecution, constantly add their voices in urging us to keep integrity! Jehovah’s mighty organization invisible and visible stands ready to help us maintain integrity.

