‘Judge, O Jehovah!’
“Jehovah ministereth judgment to the peoples: judge me, O Jehovah, according to my righteousness, and to mine integrity that is in me.”—Ps. 7:8, AS.
 1, 2. As to what creatures does Jehovah now express his judgment, and why?
TODAY we live in a period of judgment. The great Judge is dividing the righteous from the wicked. (Mal. 3:16-18, AS) Those who maintain soundness or integrity receive his approval. Those who do not recognize God and who do not obey the good news about his enthroned Son, our Lord Jesus, receive his adverse judgment. (2 Thess. 1:5-10; 1 Pet. 4:17, NW) Describing the lack of integrity among the professed people of God, his prophet Hosea said: “Hear the word of Jehovah, ye children of Israel; for Jehovah hath a controversy with the inhabitants of the land, because there is no truth, nor goodness, nor knowledge of God in the land. There is nought but swearing and breaking faith, and killing, and stealing, and committing adultery; they break out, and blood toucheth blood.”—Hos. 4:1, 2, AS.
2 These words predictively tell of a condition that in our day is increasing to an alarming degree. World-wide hypocrisy, injustice, falsehood, crime and immorality are rampant and spreading. Law-enforcing and welfare agencies, if themselves untainted, find their problems constantly multiplying. True, in the world there still are some honest persons, but too often those in political offices look for graft, bribes and gifts. Integrity is almost entirely forgotten. Also, there still are persons on earth who appreciate the value of integrity. These include such as the physician interested not merely in his profits but in the health of his patient; the lawyer who fights not merely for a large fee but for justice for his client; the clerk or the laborer who toils not just for silver but to give genuinely good service; and the person who truly loves honesty and does not merely practice being honest because it is good policy. Refreshing as it is to hear of integrity kept among men, there is yet a more important consideration; namely, the keeping of integrity with God. Such integrity-keeping by Jehovah’s slaves is praiseworthy and beautiful in his eyes. He will judge and in due time he will reward those practicing it.
 3, 4. (a) Why is accurate knowledge of Jehovah’s standards essential now? (b) How may human creatures justly exercise their free will?
3 When we turn our minds away from the downward course of men and from their self-made standards of conduct and consider instead the infinite Creator, we are amazed at his holiness, his perfection. The exactness of his justice, the depth of Jehovah’s wisdom, his long-suffering and obliging love and his irresistible power cause the understanding creature of flesh and blood to stand in wonder at the revelation of those attributes of his Creator. From intimate acquaintance with his Maker, Moses wrote of him: “Who among the gods is like you, O Jehovah? Who is like you, proving yourself mighty in holiness? The One to be feared with songs of praise, the One doing marvels.” (Ex. 15:11, NW) He it is that created man in his own image, with perfect freedom to exercise his own attributes of justice, wisdom, love and power as occasion required, yet wisely guided in their right use by the statement of God’s law. That divine law was given not to restrict man in the proper exercise of his liberties but merely to guard him against improper use of these powers, so as not to injure others or himself.
4 Obedience to Jehovah’s expressed law was a test of man’s integrity. Appreciation of his Creator should have prevented man from taking any false step contrary to God’s instructions, regardless of the inducing cause. As an inferior to a superior, man owed obedience, devotion and allegiance to his sovereign God, his lawgiver and judge. Surely the offspring of the perfect Creator should properly reflect his Maker’s perfection. To do less would be inconsistent. Although free to exercise his will, as free as his Maker, in thankfulness man should use his freedom to choose to do only right; hence to act constructively and in agreement with the work of his Father. Jehovah does not maliciously or mischievously destroy his own good creation. He is a God not of disorder but of peace. (1 Cor. 14:33, NW) Why should man act ruinously, destructively? Why cause disorder? Why bring bad and injurious effects into the perfect workmanship of his Father? Such misfortunes resulted from man’s failure to maintain soundness, holiness, integrity—man’s failure to heed the counsel of his perfect Lawgiver, the Judge of all the earth.—Gen. 18:25, NW.
 5. Prudent persons follow what course now, and with what result?
5 Jehovah himself sets us an example of perfect soundness or integrity. He always keeps his word and may always be relied upon. At Mount Sinai his prophet Moses informed the children of Israel in saying: “You well know that Jehovah your God is the God, the faithful God, keeping covenant and loving-kindness in the case of those who love him and those who keep his commandments to a thousand generations.” (Deut. 7:9, NW) To us who live today on earth he still manifests his love and faithfulness in numberless ways. “Jehovah is righteous in all his ways, and gracious in all his works.” (Ps. 145:17, AS) In other right words, the prophet David wrote of God’s dependability: “As for God, his way is perfect: the word of Jehovah is tried; he is a shield unto all them that take refuge in him. For who is God, save Jehovah? And who is a rock, besides our God, the God that girdeth me with strength, and maketh my way perfect?” (Ps. 18:30-32, AS) It is, then, only the course of wisdom and prudence for men to give heed to God’s instruction, for his word is reliable and trustworthy and all his commandments are faithful. Keeping these will enable one to maintain integrity and therefore to be adjudged worthy of the reward of life.
WHAT IS INTEGRITY?
 6, 7. (a) What is integrity? (b) What are some illustrations of its grandeur?
6 “Integrity” translates the Hebrew word tōm and its feminine form tum·mahʹ, both of which occur in the Hebrew Scriptures. Their meaning, as given by Prof. James Strong (1890), is “completeness, (moral) innocence”; and by Prof. Robert Young (1879), “perfection, integrity, simplicity.” These significant definitions call to mind the words of Jesus to the Pharisee who was versed in the law: “‘You must love Jehovah your God with your whole heart and with your whole soul and with your whole mind.’ This is the greatest and first commandment. The second, like it, is this: ‘You must love your neighbor as yourself.’” (Matt. 22:37-39, NW) To the young rich man Jesus also said: “If you want to be complete, go sell your belongings and give to the poor and you will have treasure in heaven, and come be my follower.” (Matt. 19:21, NW) In these sayings of Jesus we sense the depth of meaning to be given to our word “integrity”—generally defined as ‘state or quality of being complete, undivided, or unbroken; moral soundness; uprightness of qualities; honesty.’ Although the word “integrity” does not appear in the Authorized Version of the Christian Greek Scriptures, the above references show that the key thought is by no means lacking, and the word does occur at Titus 2:7 in the Catholic Douay and Confraternity versions and in the Revised Standard Version, it being translated “uncorruptness” in the New World Translation. Its importance to the royal priesthood is clearly called to our attention in the breastplate worn upon his heart by Israel’s high priest. In it were the u·rimʹ and tum·mimʹ, which word tum·mimʹ is the plural number of tōm. The expression “Urim and Thummim” is understood to mean “lights and perfections,” implying that the priesthood must be integrity-keeping light bearers.—Ex. 28:30, NW, margin.
7 What a beautiful quality integrity is! In Jehovah it is comparable to a great mountain, immovable, dependable, unchangeable. In human integrity-keepers of past time it may be likened to a firm boulder on a rockbound coast. Against it waves of an angry sea may dash; surging waters and spray at times may wholly cover it; filth and scum may surround it; yet there it stands—uncorrupted, unmoved, firmly rooted in its own sure place. Those who have integrity are like vessels of utility gracing the rich table of a noble house. In such a setting a simple pitcher of water can serve a good purpose when whole or unbroken; but if the pitcher leaks, it is as useless as a person of marred integrity. Consequently Paul admonished: “Now in a large house there are vessels not only of gold and silver but also of wood and earthenware, and some for an honorable purpose but others for a purpose lacking honor. If, therefore, anyone keeps clear of the latter ones, he will be a vessel for an honorable purpose, sanctified, useful to his owner, prepared for every good work.”—2 Tim. 2:20, 21, NW.
 8, 9. (a) How has Jehovah’s righteous judgment prevailed against the agelong challenge by Satan? (b) What excellencies of Jehovah can we profitably copy for winning his approval?
8 Our first human parents’ turning aside from righteousness and their thus losing integrity furnished a basis for the charge by the unfaithful one who became Satan—that all worshipers of Jehovah served him merely for the reward or bribe bestowed by him on them, and that, when tried, all would turn against Jehovah. That rebel’s boast before heaven’s holy angels was that even integrity-keeping Job, when put to the test, would renounce God to his face. (Job 1:8-11) Ever since, Satan has been the accuser of Christ’s brothers and all other true worshipers of Jehovah. The true God, having taken the initiative by inviting Satan’s challenge and accepting it, has given Satan ample time to prove his point, knowing that on this issue of integrity the faithfulness and unfaithfulness of all creatures can be determined. On this test the loyal creatures can be separated from the lawless, and the wickedness of Satan clearly revealed. In ancient time the issue was sharply drawn. Through display of his love and mercy, and at great cost to himself, Jehovah purposed to rescue some from among the sin-cursed descendants of Adam who, appreciating the issue involved, chose to maintain their integrity. (Rev. 1:4-6, NW) These, serving God not for selfish gain but out of love, uphold his side of the issue. (Prov. 27:11) Because of Jehovah’s gracious arrangement of undeserved kindness such integrity-keepers he eventually judges to be approvable.
9 The rebel’s challenge to Jehovah’s sovereignty and man’s failure to keep integrity did not disconcert or disturb the Creator in the least. In himself he had all the needed power to cope with any situation. Quickly he could and did rally his heavenly organization, his woman or wife, to his support. He purposed that one from among this organization would be the seed or instrument that would be permitted first to be bruised by Satan and then, in turn, would bruise the serpent’s head. (Gen. 3:15) He decided to select 144,000 integrity-keepers from among men, who, by following the example of this seed, Christ, would demonstrate their fitness to be adjudged worthy of living and reigning with him as his bride, the Lamb’s wife. (Rev. 14:1-4) These comprise the capital organization, the new heavens of the new world, which will undo the works of Satan and restore peace on earth to men of good will. (Rev. 21:1-3) To select, test and finally judge these integrity-keepers has required a long period of time, a period in which the righteous and the wicked have lived side by side, the latter repeatedly reproaching the name of Jehovah by word and deed. On God’s part this required great patience and long-suffering; it required his refraining from immediately destroying the wicked. So also on the part of the evil-hating integrity-keepers, Jehovah’s witnesses; these have remained steadfast, immovable in their devotion to God, “always having plenty to do in the work of the Lord.” (1 Cor. 15:57, 58, NW) Aptly Job expressed it: “Till I die I will not put away mine integrity from me.” (Job 27:5, AS) Will you be judged by Jehovah to be one of these present-day maintainers of soundness, an integrity-keeper?
10. Why now is the obligation of one dedicated to Jehovah of highest importance?
10 Without integrity it is impossible to win God’s judgment of approval. But, you may ask, how can I become an integrity-keeping witness of Jehovah? By repenting of your former wrong course, by exercising faith in the ransom sacrifice of Christ and then by dedicating yourself to Jehovah, for exclusively and eternally serving him. It means disowning yourself, setting aside your personal choices and preferences and, instead, adopting God’s—following Christ continually in doing the will of God as revealed in his written Word. This is walking according to the new world, a very happy way, a way contrary to this old corrupt system of things. In walking that way many have experienced deliverance from Satan’s power through God’s spirit and organization in tests under which flesh and blood alone would have failed. Having made this vow of dedication one must now fulfill it, for God has no pleasure in covenant-breaking fools. “When thou vowest a vow unto God, defer not to pay it; for he hath no pleasure in fools: pay that which thou vowest. Better is it that thou shouldest not vow, than that thou shouldest vow and not pay.” (Eccl. 5:4, 5, AS) Are you amazed? Are you inclined to ask: “Who, then, can be saved?” To a like question Jesus answered: “With men this is impossible, but with God all things are possible.” (Matt. 19:26, NW) Never can we let the requirements of this obligation fade from our minds. Whatever sphere of activity we undertake, whatever commitments we might make, whatever ambitions we might seek to gratify, Jehovah’s rightful claim, yes, his prior claim, to our exclusive devotion we must take into consideration. Accordingly, his prior claim upon us must limit or nullify other undertakings. Keeping integrity in his sight, according to the way he judges us as his exclusively devoted ones, must be foremost and first in our lives.
11. Jehovah’s approval of Christ Jesus after test indicates what as to Jesus’ followers?
11 To guide us in his right and joyful way, for his own name’s sake Jehovah lovingly admonishes us: “My son, be wise, and make my heart glad, that I may answer him that reproacheth me.” (Prov. 27:11) Proof that Satan’s accusation is false and that he is a liar can be established only by the integrity-keeping course of each one of us. Only then can Jehovah judge us as worthy of his approval. Will you gladly offer yourself as proof by remaining true to God? Christ Jesus our exemplar did; and he makes it possible for each of us to do as he did. He loved righteousness; he hated iniquity or lawlessness; therefore God anointed him with the oil of gladness above his fellows. (Ps. 45:7) You too can have gladness by winning God’s approving judgment now through keeping integrity. Without his approval there is no gladness. In failure to keep integrity there certainly is no gladness, “but there is a certain fearful expectation of judgment.” (Heb. 10:27, NW) For the joy that was set before him Jesus endured the torture stake, despised the shame, and has sat down at the right hand of the throne of God. (Heb. 12:2, NW) He made the Father’s heart glad; the Father made Jesus’ heart glad too. From the time of his dedication onward, when the heavens were opened to him and God’s spirit descended like a dove upon him, he was made glad by the reassuring words: “This is my Son, the beloved, whom I have approved.” (Matt. 3:17, NW) Shortly after this, when Jesus was tempted by the Devil to give to him just one act of worship, Jesus’ reply—“Go away, Satan! For it is written, ‘It is Jehovah your God you must worship, and it is to him alone you must render sacred service’”—must have made Jehovah’s heart very glad. (Matt. 4:10, NW) Throughout his entire ministry Jesus could say to his Father: “As for me, thou upholdest me in mine integrity, and settest me before thy face for ever.”—Ps. 41:12, AS.
JUDGED WORTHY TO LIVE
12, 13. (a) How did pre-Christian witnesses of Jehovah demonstrate their worthiness of life? (b) What issue was involved in the test upon Abel, and how in his case was that issue settled?
12 From very early in mankind’s history men have lived who merited Jehovah’s approval because they kept integrity. Their test was not for the purpose of determining whether the dedicated men are perfect in word or deed or in personality or not. That test was to determine whether they are completely and immovably devoted to Jehovah and his theocratic government or not. Faithful men and women mentioned in the eleventh chapter of Hebrews maintained integrity when put to the test even though many of them suffered horrible punishment. Of them the world was not worthy. In their lives we see illustrated examples of integrity.
13 About 6,000 years ago the first of these, Abel, successfully passed the test, winning God’s judgment of approval. In the brief recorded account of Abel’s life we see that the issue involved was that of pure worship. Both Cain and Abel brought offerings to God, but since their offerings were different we may reasonably infer that there was disagreement between the two brothers as to what was the right way of worship. God settled the dispute by accepting Abel’s offering and rejecting Cain’s. Mere formalism, lip service—indeed, anything short of true faith—are never acceptable to God and prevent one from seeing His righteous requirements. It is only through the recognition of a sacrificial victim in atonement for sin, and proper faith in that sacrificed life, that one can now approach God. (Heb. 9:19-22, NW) Abel, innocent of any wrong, maintained his integrity through right worship; whereas his brother, through false religion, became a murderer. Satan determined to make an example of Abel to others, showing them what to expect should they refuse submission to him. Jehovah approved Abel because of his pure worship, and it was for this that he suffered death at the hand of his enraged brother. “By faith Abel offered God a sacrifice of greater worth than Cain, through which faith he had witness borne to him that he was righteous, God bearing witness respecting his gifts, and through it he, although he died, yet speaks.” (Heb. 11:4, NW) Because ancient animal sacrifices, such as Abel’s, were merely typical of better and greater things that have now come, God does not require animal sacrifices today. Rather, he is well pleased with the “sacrifice of praise, that is, the fruit of lips which make public declaration to his name.”—Heb. 13:15, NW.
14, 15. (a) In giving proof of his integrity, what exemplary conduct marked the career of Enoch? (b) Of Noah?
14 Such approved public declaration even Enoch, “the seventh man in line from Adam,” fearlessly made. He refused to be frightened from his course of integrity despite the growth of false worship in his day. His walking with the true God, Jehovah, is the first recorded instance of such faithful action. Of Jehovah’s judgment coming upon all the ungodly Enoch prophesied: “Look! Jehovah came with his holy myriads, to execute judgment against all and to convict all the ungodly concerning all their ungodly deeds that they did in an ungodly way and concerning all the shocking things that ungodly sinners spoke against him.” (Jude 14, 15, NW) Thus is highlighted the requirement to declare Jehovah’s warning of coming judgment. Because the wicked refuse to heed, their destruction follows. Now we, even as Enoch, may walk with Jehovah by confiding in him, receiving his counsel, co-operating in achieving his objective and gladly sharing in the vindication of his holy name.
15 Like Enoch, “Noah walked with the God.” Of him it is written, “Noah was a righteous man. He proved himself faultless among his contemporaries.” (Gen. 6:9, NW) Noah went along with Jehovah in the execution of Jehovah’s purpose, serving as his witness, his loyal friend and companion. As time passed the line of demarcation between false and true worshipers became more pronounced. Outstanding in Noah’s career was the fact that for many years before the flood he was a preacher of righteousness. (2 Pet. 2:5) Amid a generation of ridiculers he demonstrated his faith by his great work of building the ark as Jehovah directed. It provided God’s salvation for Noah and his household. Immediately after the flood he established true worship. (Gen. 8:15-20, NW) Noah may frequently have expressed himself in words similar to those of Psalm 26:11: “But as for me, I will walk in mine integrity: redeem me, and be merciful unto me.” Jehovah did adjudge Noah as worthy of mercy by preserving him through the flood when the ungodly were destroyed.
16, 17. (a) As to Abraham, upon what was the judgment of Jehovah based? (b) How does the life course of Sarah further illustrate the high value of maintaining integrity?
16 Next consider anew Jehovah’s approving judgment of Abraham. “By faith Abraham, when he was tested, as good as offered up Isaac, and the man that had gladly received the promises attempted to offer up his only-begotten son.” (Heb. 11:17, NW) Abraham never wavered in obedience. Obediently he left his own country and wandered in a foreign land. Obediently he readily attempted to offer up his own son, through whom all of God’s promises were to be fulfilled. Obediently he instructed his household in true worship.
17 Abraham’s wife, Sarah, Jehovah also judged as having exercised faith of conquering power. Therefore she also is distinguished among the great “cloud of witnesses surrounding us.” (Heb. 12:1, NW) Satan tried to have her defiled so she would be unfit to bring forth a promised seed. Esteeming Jehovah faithful, who had promised, she maintained integrity by observing the proper theocratic relationship to her husband, and with him she triumphantly became heir of the favor of endless life.
18. What lessons may we draw from the patience of Job?
18 Best known to us as a man whom Jehovah judged with approval is Job of the land of Uz, whose name means “hated, harassed, persecuted.” Although not in the direct fleshly line of the promised seed, Job feared God and shunned evil. Satan probably thought: ‘When I turn his wife against Job he will give up just as Adam did; so Jehovah will have to condemn Job as he condemned Adam.’ But no, Job was different. When by Jehovah’s toleration Satan stripped Job of all his rich earthly property, even his loving children, and caused him intense physical suffering and mental anguish and to be reproached by his wife and harassed by his three friends, Job still held fast his integrity. Fearlessly he hurled the false accusation back into Satan’s face, proving Satan a liar. Job maintained fidelity to what he believed to be right, regardless of extraneous influences brought to bear against him. He insisted on his own innocence of any willful wrongdoing and still maintained his faith in and devotion to his Maker, Jehovah. Jehovah rewarded Job with restored health, with twice as much wealth, an equally large family and the high esteem of his former critics and persecutors, whom Jehovah now required to come to Job for intercession to obtain forgiveness from Jehovah. What an example of endurance! No wonder James wrote: “Look! we pronounce happy those who have endured.” (Jas. 5:11, NW) Adam, in contrast with Job, had been the receiver of everything and had been deprived of nothing when Jehovah put Adam to the test of integrity, in which he failed.
19. How was faithfulness without compromise shown in the life of Moses?
19 Finally, for our present study, Jehovah’s judgment as to Moses claims closest consideration. Satan’s philosophy is that every man has his price. But the riches of Egypt could not buy Moses. When grown up, he refused to be called the son of Pharaoh’s daughter, choosing to be ill-treated with the people of God rather than to have the temporary enjoyment of sin. “By faith he left Egypt, but not fearing the rage of the king, for he continued steadfast as seeing the one that is invisible.” (Heb. 11:24-27, NW) His demonstrating faithfulness in service, in risking life itself before Pharaoh and in leading a stubborn, faithless people for forty years amid many provocations, won for Moses Jehovah’s approval, in these words: “My servant Moses . . . being entrusted with all my house. . . . Why, then, did you not fear to speak against my servant, against Moses?” “He that constructed all things is God. And Moses as an attendant was faithful in all the house of that one as a testimony of the things that were to be spoken afterwards.” (Num. 12:7, 8; Heb. 3:4, 5, NW) Today, too, faithfulness in service without compromise is among the elements of exclusive devotion that Jehovah, the Judge of all the earth, rightfully exacts from every dedicated servant of his.
20. What seven desirable qualities were perfectly exhibited in what one person?
20 Now summing up these desirable qualities, namely, the practice of pure worship, walking with the true God, serving as one of Jehovah’s witnesses, obeying his instructions, exercising faith of conquering power, showing endurance under stress and faithfulness without compromise, we rightly think of them all as manifest perfectly in one person, Christ Jesus. To him there is no equal among Jehovah’s creatures. Providing the ransom sacrifice for obedient humans did not itself require that Jesus suffer reproach and persecution and finally pass out of this life in disgrace like a condemned criminal, seditionist and blasphemer. That part of the potion in the cup was poured into it by the Father to test to the limit the integrity of this Son of God and to prove the Devil a liar in his charge against God’s Son and to show Jesus’ unswerving support of his Father’s universal sovereignty.
21. How and why did early followers of Christ Jesus pass the test of integrity?
21 Christ Jesus’ faithful apostles and other early Christians followed his steps. To Jehovah they too proved themselves dependable. They were exposed to reproaches, tribulations, imprisonment and plunder, but they forgot not that they had an abiding possession in Jehovah’s new world. Perseverance in keeping integrity will pay off shortly to all now in the New World society.
JUDGED WORTHY TO DIE
22. Disloyalty of Jehovah’s chief enemy and his spirit associates provides what warning examples?
22 No understanding person desires to break his bond of friendship with his Creator. But some have done so with disastrous consequences to themselves. Heaven’s chief rebel and his long treasonable course is outstanding. He forsook his assigned honorable position of praising the Most High and chose instead to reproach Jehovah and to lead man to rebellion and destruction. In the role that this chief rebel chose to play there is no love, joy or peace. He aspired to exalt himself above his associates, but will shortly be brought down to the abyss—total, deathlike inactivity for a thousand years—”the uttermost parts of the pit.” (Isa. 14:15, AS; Rev. 20:1-3, NW) His disloyal steps were followed by the first human pair. Eve’s faithless acts, followed by Adam’s willful one, brought to both of them disappointment, suffering and death, and added woes to their offspring. Integrity-breakers have their price, and it may be as low as a little self-gratification. Recalling the days before the Flood, we find that some of Jehovah’s holy angels materialized in human form, desiring sexual intercourse with human flesh, contrary to God’s law. Here was Satan’s master stroke. Now he would have supermen brought forth by “the sons of God.” These materialized angels married daughters of men and to them these bore children called Nephilim or giants. This hybrid offspring did much to fill the earth with violence in the time of Noah. That generation failed to keep integrity. Against them Jehovah’s adverse judgment was expressed. There Satan saw his magnificent scheme frustrated when the floodgates of heaven were opened and his civilization on earth was washed out.
23, 24. What additional examples of broken integrity contrast sharply with examples of others who maintained integrity?
23 Almost thirteen centuries later Saul the son of Kish was in line for many privileges when God chose him to rule as Israel’s first king. At that time Saul considered himself quite unworthy, for he said he had come from the smallest tribe and his family was the least of all the families of Benjamin. He should have kept in mind the words of the man of God to the unfaithful house of Eli: “Those honoring me I shall honor, and those despising me will be of little account.” (1 Sam. 2:30, NW) But King Saul was disobedient to instructions and failed to keep integrity, turning instead to demonism. He lost his kingdom and his life. One of the original twelve apostles of Jesus forsook all to follow the Master. But though Judas Iscariot had many privileges, he let Satan enter his heart, surrendered to wickedness and became a traitor. For failure to keep integrity he lost his joy and took his own life.
24 “Upright men are guided by their honesty; but faithless men are ruined by their crookedness.” (Prov. 11:3, AT) In view of this, consider: Is Jehovah’s judgment for integrity-keeping worth while? All breakers of integrity have come to a sad end. You would not want to be judged as having followed their steps, would you? Contrast, then, the mentioned examples of integrity-keepers with these examples of integrity-breakers. Abel, who died for the cause of pure worship, will be resurrected; but Satan, who originated false worship, will be destroyed. Enoch by faith walked with God; but Adam, who heard God’s voice, deserted Jehovah’s way. Abraham was obedient under a great test; but King Saul was disobedient even in a little thing. Sarah exercised conquering faith, but Eve manifested none whatever. Job held to his integrity despite the loss of all things, but Judas discarded integrity for selfish gain. Moses rejected the lusts of Egypt and served amid hardships; but the rebellious spirit “sons of God” yielded to unnatural desires and forsook their heavenly assignment. Let none of us become blameworthy by Jehovah as breakers of integrity and reap his death penalty for covenant-breakers. Rather let us hold dear the glorious treasure of service, ever keeping in mind that Jehovah judges, as David said, “according to my righteousness, and to mine integrity that is in me.”—Ps. 7:8, AS.

