A Night to Remember!
1 “Keep doing this in remembrance of me”! (Luke 22:19) Once each year at the appropriate time Jesus’ disciples were to gather to celebrate the Lord’s Evening Meal, recalling as they did so his sacrifice, his pattern of life and his deep love for them. (1 Cor. 11:26; Matt. 11:28-30) Jehovah’s faithful people today still obey this command and so all who are physically able will assemble for this celebration after sundown, April 19, 1981.
2 On that night we should each carefully examine our personal relationship with Jehovah and his Son. Has what they have done in providing the sacrifice drawn us closer to them? It should. (1 John 4:9, 10) Has our conduct over the past year demonstrated this? (1 John 5:3) If not, then serious thought should be given to developing a closer relationship with them, making whatever adjustments are necessary. Remembering Jesus’ course of integrity and his example will help us to do this.—Heb. 5:8.
3 As we reflect on the significance of the occasion, how vital it is that we stay close to Jehovah through daily personal prayer, right conduct, field service and meeting attendance. Do not let this Memorial pass without meditation on Jehovah’s goodness, contemplating what can be done to draw even closer to him and strengthening our resolve to fulfill our dedication.
ARRANGEMENTS FOR FIELD SERVICE
4 We remember Jesus as a teller of the good news. By copying his example of preaching we can demonstrate our love for him. Well before the Lord’s Evening Meal, make full use of the special invitations printed for the occasion. If those you invite have never been to the Kingdom Hall, suggest that they attend meetings before Memorial so they can be acquainted with the location and the people they will meet there. Too, it would be good to keep a record of all you invite so that you can call back after Memorial to help them regularly attend the meetings and study the Bible.
5 If you are not able to share in visiting people in their home, could you call them on the telephone or write letters inviting them to attend? Why not make it a goal to invite at least two other persons besides those with whom you study the Bible? What about unbelieving family members, neighbors, or those with whom you work? As you explain to each one the importance of the occasion and why it is such a sacred night to Jehovah’s Witnesses, you will build up their understanding and strengthen your own appreciation.
6 The service overseer will make arrangements for special field service activity on the day of the Memorial. There will be no other meetings that day. (See Announcements.) Special attention will be given to making return visits on any who have expressed interest. Since the Memorial falls on Sunday when most people are free to attend, it should be possible to aid many more than usual to come to this most important meeting. As you speak with them, you will find helpful information in the article “Celebrating the Death of the Greatest Man Ever on Earth” in the April 1 Watchtower.
MAKING EVERYONE GLAD THEY CAME
7 We want everyone to feel welcome and to benefit from the meeting. Elders and ministerial servants should set the example in showing warmth and friendliness to all who come. Each of us will want to go out of our way to make others welcome. If there is time, show new ones around the Hall. Introduce them to others. Be alert for the opportunity to arrange for a Bible study. The brother giving the talk can especially make all glad they came by appealing to their heart with a clear, understandable talk, warmly delivered.
8 On this very special night, let us have uppermost in our minds maintaining integrity to Jehovah. In this we will copy Jesus. Let us, too, whether of the anointed or other sheep, manifest our unity with one another in pure worship. By our united, integrity-keeping course we will show that we are truly remembering the significance of that night.

