Meetings to Help Us Make Disciples
WEEK STARTING MARCH 1
Song 1
 8 min: Warm welcome to service meeting. Appropriate announcements from Our Kingdom Service and local announcements.
12 min: Talk on subject “By What System Is Your Family Governed?” (Watchtower, November 15, 1980) Emphasize importance of loving headship on part of husband and need for wife and children to respect headship.
20 min: “Presenting the Good News—With the Topic for Conversation.” Question-and-answer discussion of article. Demonstrate material in paragraphs 2 and 3. Encourage brothers to carry several appropriate books, such as Evolution, Peace and Security and This Life, to appeal to various householders. Be alert to use publication that will answer householder’s questions. Point to chapter and, if possible, read a few sentences from publication that will show the householder that he will benefit from the literature. Use headings and pictures in books. For example, using the Family Life book, the illustrations on pages 93, 100, 104, would be useful. Also, if the illustration on page 117 was used, one could use points from paragraphs 6 and 7 on page 116.
 5 min: Experiences from audience outlining favorable success in placing books during February.
Song 117 and prayer.
WEEK STARTING MARCH 8
Song 43
 6 min: Introduction and local announcements. Accounts report.
12 min: Consider Theocratic News and information on “New Tract to Use with Happiness Book.”
15 min: “Congregation Meetings—Part V: Benefiting from Public Talks.” Question-and-answer discussion of article. Invite audience to bring in points they have remembered from public talks that have affected their lives for good.
12 min: Discussion with audience on magazine day activity. Invite audience to comment on what they will say in offering magazines, what article could be appropriately highlighted in current issue and various opportunities available for placing magazines, such as house-to-house, street work, store-to-store. Speaker should prepare talking points from magazines to present to audience. Mention the well-pictured articles appearing the 15th of each month in The Watchtower. For example, the March 15 issue has an article on the subject “Do All Good Persons Go to Heaven?” This might be fine for return visits.
Song 109 and prayer.
WEEK STARTING MARCH 15
Song 67
 8 min: Introduction and local announcements.
15 min: Prepare locally, covering needs of congregation.
12 min: Congregation field service report. Service overseer should discuss this with audience, letting them know what congregation has done during the first six months of the service year. He should make practical suggestions on what may be done for all to be even more involved in declaring the good news of the Kingdom.
10 min: Discussion of Question Box, emphasizing how Bible study reports can help book study conductor to assist those in his group.
Song 95 and prayer.
WEEK STARTING MARCH 22
Song 52
 5 min: Introduction and local announcements.
15 min: Question-and-answer coverage of article “Have You Considered Serving Jehovah as a Pioneer?” If possible, part should be handled by qualified brother who is or has been in full-time service. Encourage as many as possible to share in auxiliary pioneer service in April.
15 min: Directing new ones to the organization. Interview ones in the congregation who have been successful in helping people to attend meetings. Outline specific steps that can be taken to direct new ones to the organization. For example, one brother had a photograph of the Kingdom Hall that he showed to new Bible students. In addition, he gave them a handbill, listing the five congregation meetings. For five weeks thereafter he would review each of the local meetings, encouraging his students to attend. Emphasize, too, inviting people to the special public talk on April 5.
10 min: Invite congregation to relate field experiences enjoyed. Endeavor to arrange these in advance, if possible.
Song 68 and prayer.
WEEK STARTING MARCH 29
Song 47
 5 min: Introduction and local announcements.
25 min: Question-and-answer discussion of “A Night to Remember!” On paragraphs 4-6 clearly outline field service arrangements to invite as many as possible to the Memorial. Review arrangements for what will be done for those who are shut-in, infirm, or may have problems in attending. Make mention of points from April 1, 1981, Watchtower, that may be used in inviting persons to attend.
15 min: Talk. Getting Ready for Two-month Watchtower Campaign. Show why we need to be thoroughly familiar with contents of each issue of The Watchtower and Awake! As brothers read articles, they can think of points to use in field service, perhaps marking them in personal copy. Chairman illustrates how this can be done, mentioning specific points that he is going to use when offering magazines. Get additional ideas from audience. Discuss need for enthusiasm for offering subscriptions. Let people know that we use the material in our lives and benefit from it spiritually. Have two realistic demonstrations: a brief presentation using one scripture and another with two scriptures. Chairman comments on need to adapt presentation to householder, religious attitudes and viewpoints.
Song 104 and prayer.

