Presenting the Good News—With the Topic for Conversation
1 Do you remember how happy you were when you learned of God’s purposes for the earth and mankind? This happiness led to your being conscious of your spiritual need and moved you to act upon it. As we speak to people at the doors we can help them to realize the same happiness. During the next few months we will be using Matthew 5:3 and Revelation 1:3 to help people become aware of what makes for happiness.
2 In March we will be offering one of the older 192-page books. April and May will find us in the Watchtower subscription campaign. Whatever publication you may be offering, your conversation could begin with Matthew 5:3. After introducing yourself you might say: “What do you think it would take for people to be happy? [Allow for response, and acknowledge what was said.] Jesus made some observations on what would make us happy in his Sermon on the Mount. At Matthew 5:3 he outlined a key factor that is needed. [Read.] Why did Jesus say that being conscious of our spiritual need would make us happy? Because it moves us to learn more about what God’s purpose is for mankind. The principles and laws outlined in the Bible are for our eternal good.”
3 At this point you may offer the publication or continue by saying, “At Revelation 1:3 Jesus said that persons would be happy if they ‘observed the things written’ in God’s Word. To help you understand the Bible and how it applies to you personally, we are offering this publication.” Then present offer, drawing attention to specific points that will help householder to see the value of the publication.
4 If you are speaking to a Jewish person, Psalm 119:2 could be used to show the importance of being aware of spiritual needs. Then reference may be made to Isaiah 25:8 or Isa 33:24 to show the promises God has made of earthly blessings for those who do his will.
5 The above approach, combined with a sincere desire to help people to become conscious of their spiritual need, could very well direct honest-hearted ones you meet toward the provisions Jehovah has made for their salvation.

