VOL. XXXV MAY 1 No. 9 

A. D. 1914-A. M. 6042 



CONTENTS 

Views From The Watch Tower 131 

Forebodings of the Duke of Bedford 131 

Proper Perspective of the Situation 131 

The Nations Hurrying to Armageddon 132 

We Fulfil Our Promise 132 

Waters of Euphrates Drying Up 133 

"Now is Our Salvation Nearer" 134 

Chronology Based Upon Faith 134 

A Scripture to Be Fulfilled 135 

Who Commits the Sin Unto Death-Part II 136 

Esau's Loss a Warning to the Church 136 

Who Commits the Unpardonable Sin 136 

"Where Are the Nine?" 139 

Messiah's Kingdom to Be Invisible 140 

"Days of the Son of Man" 141 

Saints on the Housetop 142 

Creation Photo-Drama 142 

Memorial Supper Celebration 143 

Renew Requests for Pilgrim Visits 143 

page 130 

FOR SCANDINAVIAN FRIENDS 

We learn that the Svenska Folkets Tiding has contracted 
with the Newspaper Syndicate for the regular publication of 
a full report of the Pastor Russell Sermons and the Brooklyn 
Tabernacle Bible Studies. This should prove a means of 
interesting some of your friends in Present Truth. A six-months' 
subscription may do it. The price is one dollar a 
year. Send your subscriptions to us. 



"SCRIPTURE STUDIES "-POCKET EDITION 

We have the Karatol edition of STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES 
in stock, 25c. each, postpaid. 

We have a new edition also on thin paper, red cloth binding, 
35c. per volume— $2.00 per set of six, in neat cloth holder. 
The set with THE WATCH TOWER for one year to any address, 
$2.65. 

Colporteur rates the same as on our regular cloth edition. 



1914- VOLUNTEER LITERATURE READY-1914 



All Classes desirous of engaging in the regular volunteering 
are invited to send in through their Secretaries information 
as to quantity of literature desired and proper place of 
shipment— not forgetting to mention the population of their 
city, and, if suburban towns are to be included, their population 
also. The quantity of literature should rarely exceed in 
number one-sixth of the population of the district, to give one 
paper to each English-speaking family. This Volunteer literature 
is provided free, including delivery charges. It furnishes 
a door of opportunity for the service of the Gospel 
to those who are seeking one. 



CLINTON AND COLUMBUS CONVENTIONS. 

The PHOTO-DRAMA OF CREATION will be presented each 
evening at both of these Conventions. Baptism symbolization 
opportunities at Clinton will be on June 29th, and at Columbus 
June 30th and July 3d. 

Brother Russell will be at Clinton on June 28th, 29th and 
30th; and at Columbus on July 3d, 4th and 5th. 

The Columbus Convention will hold over for July 7th to 
give three full presentations of the DRAMA there. 



BETHEL HYMNS FOR JUNE 

After the close of the hymn the Bethel family listens to the 
reading of "My Vow Unto the Lord," then joins in prayer. 
At the breakfast table the MANNA text is considered. Hymns 
for June follow: (1) 179; (2) 101; (3) 25; (4) 94; (5) 43; 
(6) 72; (7) 305; (8) 160; (9) 47; (10) 28; (11) 259; (12) 155; 
(13) 274; (14) 129; (15) 22; (16) 333; (17) 307; (18) 170; (19) 4; 
(20) 376; (21) 283; (22) 38; (23) 279; (24) 130; (25) 113; 
(26) 178; (27) 12; (28) 188; (29) 77; (30) 240. 



R5448 :page 131 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER 
"IN UGLY TEMPER" 
FOREBODINGS OF THE DUKE OF BEDFORD 



IN A LETTER of apology for absence from 
the dinner of the Bletchley (Bedfordshire) 
Working Men's Unionist Association, the 
Duke of Bedford says: 
"The prospects with which 1914 opens 



are nowhere encouraging. Unrest prevails 

in every quarter of the habitable globe— 

from China to Peru. The difficulties of 

Great Britain are as great as, if not greater 

than, those of her neighbors, and her means 

of defense are less, for her Constitution has been deliberately 

destroyed to serve the cause of party. 

"The House of Lords is only retained to supply the 
Radical Party with money for electioneering purposes. 
The House of Commons is muzzled and gagged, and the 
salaried representatives of the constituencies serve the 
electorate or earn their salaries, not with their brains or 
their judgment, but with their legs; they walk into the 
voting lobbies whenever the Government Whips give 
them their orders. Legislation is a mere question of shoe 
leather. 

"When constitutional safeguards are swept away and 
no guidance is forthcoming, the only method of expressing 
discontent which remains is civil war. This is what 
we are now finding. 

"Now a new danger looms before us. It looks as if 
the problem of naval defense would be shirked, that a 
body of men led by persons with ostentatiously German 
names may continue the support of the Radical Party. And 
meanwhile by assiduous appeals to envy, hatred and 
greed, Ministers have spoiled the temper of the nation. 
The nation is not only out of temper, but in an ugly 
temper."— London Daily Mail. 



The foregoing shows some of the troubles of worldly 
princes and aristocracy. We cannot avoid a feeling of 
deep sympathy for the aristocracy in their present conditions. 
Jesus long ago foretold the conditions of our 
day, saying, especially of the rich and titled, "Men's 
hearts failing them for fear and for looking forward to 
the things coming upon the earth"— upon society. Special 
privileges have so long been enjoyed by the aristocracy 
that it is only natural that they should feel that 
these privileges are theirs by Divine right. 

On the other hand, the world of mankind are learning 
how the control of the earth came into the possession 
of so few people in olden times. They are learning 
that in less civilized times the better educated and more 
influential gradually gathered property and titles into 
their own hands. These have been transferred to their 
children from generation to generation, and laws have 
been framed which recognize their titles, until now any 
other laws which in any measure abrogate the title, or 
limit the special privileges, are felt to be unjust, ungodly 
—robbery. 

Much could be said on both sides of the question. It 
is ours to consider God's view of the situation and the 
relationship of the whole to the Golden Rule— the Divine 
Law. Viewing matters from this standpoint, the majority 



can agree that even if there was an excuse in 

the past for the usurpation of titles, privileges and possessions 

of land, those privileges would cease with 

changed conditions. In other words, if there was in the 

past a time when the masses of the people were too ignorant 

or too superstitious to appreciate self-government 

and to exercise it properly, and if at that time it was in 

the interest of all that the land and the privileges were 

seized by the more fit of the race for the general welfare, 

this did not mean that matters must so continue forever. 

It did mean, rather, that with general education and general 

fitness for self-government all such privileges should 

be relinquished or abrogated. 

THE PROPER PERSPECTIVE OF THE SITUATION 

To state the matter in different terms: If the educated 
in times past believed that they followed the Golden 
Rule in seizing land and authority, the same Golden Rule 
would demand that their power be used in the public interest 
and welfare— that the public be educated and that, 
as the masses became capable of self-control, power and 
authority should be gradually delivered to them. The 
whole question, according to this standard of the Golden 
Rule, would therefore be, Have the masses yet attained 
that degree of development which would permit them to 
handle their own, or should the aristocracy continue to 
handle it for them under the plea that the public is not 
competent— not wise enough to manage its own estate? 

Whenever the majority of the people reach the conclusion 
that they are competent to manage their estate, 
and whenever they learn that God gave the earth and its 
fulness not to the few, but to the many— then the people 
will take up their own inheritance and exercise their own 
control; and in that proportion the titles of lords, nobles, 
dukes, kings and emperors will be merely empty reminders 
of a darker time. Thenceforth, either by Parliaments 
or Congresses, the people will manage their own affairs, 
using the ballot for that purpose. 

This condition of things, which has been coming upon 
the world gradually, is evidently quite right, quite in accord 

R5448 : page 132 

with the Golden Rule. True, it would have appeared 
nobler had the titled aristocracy voluntarily surrendered 
to the people their rights. But we must remember that 
all mankind are innately selfish, and hence disposed to 
look upon matters from the standpoint of their own personal 
interest and that of their families. It has been fortunate 
for the world's peace that this turning of their 
rights over to the people has been proceeding gradually, 
rather than by violent revolution. Inch by inch the people 
have been taking back their rights, in proportion as 
they became intelligent enough to appreciate them. Perhaps 
sometimes in their zeal, they desired too much or 



sought to grasp too much, or at least sought to grasp 
more than they were qualified to use wisely. 

No wonder if many of the aristocracy feel deeply 
grieved, as does the Duke of Bedford. No wonder if 
many of them have dark forebodings respecting the future. 
No wonder if it seems to them as if justice is 
being violated. They have lost the proper perspective of 
the situation. They fail to see that as elder brothers to 
the remainder of the race, they should recognize that the 
masses are no longer "like dumb, driven cattle." They 
should recognize that a great awakening has come within 
the last century, and they should be as anxious to turn 
over the inheritance to their brethren as the latter are 
anxious to receive it. 

THE NATIONS HURRYING TO ARMAGEDDON 

The political battle which has been in progress in 
Great Britain in recent years, and especially within the 
past two years, is exciting the astonishment of the world. 
Kings and princes and nobles are in alarm, fearful of the 
results. The Bible alone makes the situation clear. It 
alone shows us that the wonderful changes of our day 
are incidental to the transfer of the kingdoms of this 
world to become the Kingdom of God's dear Son. 

We should not be misunderstood, however: We have 
no thought that the change of parties or of party leaders 
or of party policies in Great Britain, or in any other nation, 
will make that nation a holy nation, a member of 
the Kingdom of God. Indeed, we have no reason to believe 
that Socialists as a whole would or could give the 
world the blessing of perfect earthly government, establish 
human rights, etc. On the contrary, we are to remember 
that while kings and princes have ruled sometimes 
with a heavy hand, nevertheless, in recent years at 
least, they have found it necessary to give the people and 
their interests greater consideration than ever before; 
and that their experience and their education doubtless 
qualify them above the average of their fellows for the 
management of large questions of national import. 

Besides, the sudden change would involve not only 
great hardship to these lords of the land, but probably 
great distress and hardship to the masses as well. Indeed, 
this is just what the Bible points out to us. We 
are living in the time of Christ's presence. The selection 
of the Church of Christ to be the Bride-Consort in the 
Kingdom is nearly completed. The Kingdom will, therefore, 
soon be established. But those possessed of the 
power and authority, not realizing this, are holding fast 
to all that was seized by their forefathers under different 
conditions. 

To our understanding, the Bible teaches that this conflict 
of interests is about to precipitate a great Time of 
Trouble, the like of which never was before. (Daniel 12:1.) 
Nobody wants the trouble, everybody will be injured 
by it, and yet everybody is rushing toward it. Both 



the aristocracy and the masses are goaded on by fear. 
The former fear the loss of their earthly all; the latter 
perceive that the money of the world, and the land, the 
basis of all wealth, are in possession of the aristocracy. 
The masses realize that, with the bountiful blessings 
which God has been pouring out upon the world during 
the past century through increase of knowledge and invention, 
the world is becoming fabulously rich; and that 
these riches are gravitating toward the same hands that 
control the land. They are fearful that if they do not 
improve the opportunities now passing, they or their children 
will in time again become slaves or serfs. Hence 
the turmoil of speech and the conflict between classes, 
which are hurrying us toward the vortex of the great 
Armageddon.— Revelation 16:16. 

MAN'S EXTREMITY GOD'S OPPORTUNITY 

Although we are powerless to hinder either party, we 
are deeply interested in both, and sympathetic toward 
both; our own best consolation and the best which we can 

R5449 : page 132 

offer to either party of the strife is that which we get 

from the Bible. It tells us that in the darkest hour, when 

human passion will have reached its climax in anarchy, 

there still will be hope— the brightest of all hopes. Following 

the dark hour of trouble will come the glorious 

sunrise of the Millennial Kingdom, scattering earth's ignorance 

and superstition. Then the Kingdom, taking a 

firm hold upon the race, will properly conduct humanity 

to the full heights of perfection lost in Eden, but redeemed 

for all at Calvary. With such a hope we may 

well possess our souls in peace, awaiting so glorious an 

outcome of the Divine Plan. 

Although we are not to be active in the strife on either 
side, we cannot be without deep interest in both sides; 
and we must, to the extent of our opportunities and influence, 
tell the good tidings of the coming Kingdom to as 
many of the warriors in that battle as may have the 
hearing ear. To whatever extent they shall be able to 
hear, to believe, they will have blessing, peace, comfort. 
It is the portion of the Church to be faithful to the principles 
of the Divine character and to make known the 
Divine Program, to bind up all the broken-hearted with 
the blessed Message of Divine mercy and to teach all the 
lesson of patient endurance, loyalty and faithfulness. It 
is ours, as the Apostle says, to "do good unto all men, but 
especially unto them who are of the Household of Faith." 

Whether or not the climax of this trouble should be 
reached in 1915, is not for us to say. We should even 
have no wish on the subject, except that God's will shall 
be done. As we note the rapid changes which have taken 
place in the public sentiment in Great Britain within the 
past year, we cannot doubt that if the Gentile Times expire 



with the close of this year, 1914, a very short period 

might accomplish the full inauguration of the Day of 

Wrath, in which, as foreshown in Bible imagery, the ecclesiastical 

heavens and the political earth will be consumed 

in a wild revolution of human passion, which will 

thoroughly melt, or disintegrate, the elements composing 

the present order of things— the social element, the political 

element, the financial element, the ecclesiastical element. 

We know, however, that the great God of Love is 

so wise that He has known long in advance every feature 

of the great conflict and conflagration; and that His arrangements 

are ample for the arrest of the trouble in due 

time, by the establishment of the Kingdom of His dear 

Son with great and glorious power. 

WE FULFIL OUR PROMISE 

We had expected that if the Gentile Times should end 
with the present year, this would surely mean that all the 
Bride class would participate in the First Resurrection 
change from earthly conditions to Heavenly conditions before 
the end of the present year. Although this was not 
stated positively, it was pointed out to be the logical conclusion. 

R5449 : page 133 

Now it does not look so. We see Scriptures 

which are not yet fulfilled and which, we are convinced, 

could not find accomplishment before the end of this year. 

Of course, our conviction along this line is no stronger 
than it previously was in the opposite direction. Of 
course, with God all things are possible. Of course, the 
Scriptures most distinctly tell us that the catastrophe will 
come suddenly— "as travail upon a woman with child"— at 
a moment as unexpected to the mother as to others. Hence 
it is not impossible that all of our expectations may be 
realized before the end of this year. We consider, however, 
that this is highly improbable. We desire all of our 
readers to know this, whatever influence it may have upon 
their plans and arrangements. 

As for the Editor, he will be just as pleased to have 
the Lord's will done in the one way as in the other. Indeed, 
if allowed to have a voice in the deciding of the 
matter, we would feel afraid to exercise such a privilege. 
The poet has expressed the thought, saying: 
"We are afraid to touch 
Things which involve so much." 

If the year shall pass without a special manifestation 
of Divine favor toward the Church in the way of resurrection 
change from earthly to spiritual nature, we shall 
know that we erred in judgment in respect to the time 
when this glorious event might be expected. The great 
fact would still remain, however, that the hope of the 
Church of God is the resurrection change, "when this 
mortal shall put on immortality"— "changed in a moment, 
in the twinkling of an eye." If it be the Divine arrangement 



that we should remain longer this side the veil, we 
doubt not that He will have some service for us to perform 
here. And whether our service be on this side of 
the veil or on the other side, we should be fully content, 
knowing that He is too wise to err; nor should we lament 
our misunderstandings. Rather, we should be glad and 
rejoice, and continue active in the Divine service, as glad 
to serve on one side of the veil as on the other, with the 
assurance that God's will is being done in us. 

There is still a possibility that we have made no mistake 
in respect to the time, but have erred in respect to 
the things expected. For instance, it may be that the 
Times of the Gentiles do expire with the present year, 
but that the Lord will not dispossess them nor take from 
them their earthly dominion so quickly as we had anticipated. 
Considering that they have been in power for 
2,520 years, dispossession in one year might seem very 
sudden— indeed, to accomplish it in five, or ten, or twenty 
years, might seem not an unreasonable time. 



WATERS OF EUPHRATES DRYING UP 
REVELATION 16:12. 
CHURCH LIFE IN GERMANY 

Germany is being overwhelmed with a deluge of infidelity, 
unparalleled in its entire history. The Monist 
Federation is endeavoring to draw together the cultured 
strata of the people into a solid phalanx against Christianity. 
The Social Democrats are pushing the general 
masses into a fanatical hatred of Church and State, and 
in the pulpits a Liberalism is spreading, which is almost 
utterly devoid of the Spirit of the Gospel. 

While in believing circles earnest efforts are being 
put forth for individual salvation, and Mission Work is 
being done amongst the people, to stem the destructive 
tide, it becomes more evident every day, that "the State 
Church is doomed in her struggle with Infidelity." 

General strike against the Church is the latest slogan. 
The "No-Creeders" (Monists) in league with the 
Socialists, convened mass meetings in Berlin, Brunswick 
and Saxony, in which every means of incitation was employed 
in an appeal toward a secession from the State 
Church. At these meetings over 1,300 persons signed a 
declaration announcing their intention to secede from 
the Church. Four thousand more followed, and according 
to judicial court-records received towards the end of 
December, 17,000 secessions took place in December up 
to the 23d, and the day after Christmas 8,000 more announced 
their intention. These are alarming figures! 

To the Socialists the Church Boycott is a political 
campaign issue. They aim at depriving the Church of 
her revenues and thus result in her overburdening the 



State. 

The following press reports may serve as a typical 
illustration of the mode of procedure in such meetings. 
Said Dr. Liebknecht: "The Church (especially the Prussian 
State Church) is not a religious, but a purely political 
Institution. She constitutes a blasphemy against the 
claims of early Christianity. She does not aim at the 
closer Union and Development of man with man, but is 
a conscious instrument of the Ruling Class for the oppression 
of the Masses, and blandly supports the Capitalistic 
Element under the protection of the State. As such 
the Church is additionally a bulwark of militarism. On 
the other hand, the so-called Christian Prussian State is 
merely a state of Classes, reared upon the canonization 
of those 'treasures which moth and rust corrupt.' To belittle 
this Prussian State is therefore our aim. One means 
to that end is a strike en masse, which is inevitable. 

"In the meantime, however, the 'Church Boycott' is a 
still more convenient and none the less effective means 
as a political onslaught. Thereby the Church can eventually 
be starved financially. Whoever has severed with 
the Church at heart, and continues to remain in her, is 
a hypocrite. Come out of the Prussian Military Church! 
Away from the Church and thus from the Prussian Feudal 
State!" Thundering applause followed this reasoning. 

The second Socialist speaker of the day summed up 
the matter thus: "Whoever does not secede from the 
Church, with which he has nothing in common, is a 
scoundrel! Every Socialist must secede, for the Church 
combats Socialism by every available means." 

The Post writes: "We attended one of the twelve 
Mass Meetings convened by the 'No Creeders.' We looked 
forward beforehand to an uncomfortable evening. Nor 
shall we say anything respecting the vitriolic remarks of 
the two speakers, who had not a single commendatory 
word for the Church, and seemed to know only Clerics, 
but no Ministers. The painful fact was more than apparent, 
that Socialism is merely another name for Infidelity. 
But one thing really horrified us: Such a degree 
of vulgarity, such degeneracy of mind, we had not 
deemed possible! Without exception, every one who even 
by vague allusion, ventured to take a stand for his Church 
was howled down, hissed from the rostrum and subjected 
to filthy invectives. While appealing to the true, inner 
sentiments of man, supposing that every man must at 
least hold a faith in something higher, 'Whew'! burst from 
a thousand throats, piercing whistles were given, and loud 
hoots and guffaws greeted such an accession. It seemed 
as if one were in an assembly of criminals, and not 
amongst men of feeling and sense. 

"To illustrate: When a minister ascended the platform, 
the following was heard, 'He looks it'! 'Old Sky-pilot'! 
And from another part of the hall the same evening 
we heard the following words aimed at the ministers: 
'Damned Rags'! 'Pig -priests'! A gentleman who 
interrupted was yelled at 'Rous mit the Parsonface'! At 



one time a vulgar interjection reached our ears, one from 
the 'underworld,' wholly unfit for print. 

R5450 : page 134 

"The ministers had been invited. A few courageous 
men ran the gauntlet, and undertook the difficult task of 
obtaining a hearing amidst these roaring waves. Then 
one of them ascended the rostrum, a spirited character, 
whose mild facial expression alone invited reconciliation; 
with quiet, well-weighed words (Pastor Le Seur from 
Gross Lichterfeld, Berlin), attempted to make clear to 
the assembly the seriousness of the problem, with which 
unscrupulous agitators were here playing football. He 
frankly admitted that the State Church manifested serious 
faults. He withdrew amidst a flood of derision, ridicule 
and insults. Then came a woman of the working 
class. She yelled to the ministers, who stood close to the 
speaker's chair: 'I can believe in ten thousand devils in 
this world, but not in your God, Sir Pastor!' And the 
masses yelled applause." 

In the Vossische Zeitung, Prof. Oswald, President of 
the Monist Federation, expressed the aim which he pursues 
in the Secessional Movement, as follows: "Thus far 
all attempts for emancipation from Church Rule through 
Science have been confined to the comparatively small 
'Upper Strata' of the cultured. The present movement is 
characterized, in that it takes hold, not only of the influential, 
but an exceedingly large number of our people, 
amongst Organized Labor. If the present movement assumes 
the proportion of an avalanche, which is very probable, 
in a short time it will be no more a question of 
thousands or tens of thousands, but of millions." 

In an article, "Decay of the State Church," Die Welt 
writes in conclusion: "The rule of the 'Liberals' incites 
the 'Positives' to leave the State Church. While on the 
other side, Tndifferents' are leaving in ever-increasing 
numbers. As a result, we may finally reach a state of 
things in Berlin, when the State Church will collapse."— 
Translation from Der Apologete, Cincinnati, Ohio. 



R5450 : page 134 

"NOW IS OUR SALVATION NEARER" 

ST. PAUL WROTE, "Now is our salvation 

nearer than when we first believed." (Romans 13:11.) 

God's people of today are 

surely justified in expressing the same sentiments. 

The salvation of the Church 

through the glorious "change" of the First 

Resurrection is nearing every day, we are 

sure, even though we do not know exactly 

how many days still remain before that 



glorious consummation. So also the world's 
salvation— the world's rescue from Satan, sin and death 
—is nearing every day, notwithstanding the fact that we 
cannot say positively just what day or hour Satan will 
be fully bound for a thousand years and the Messianic 
blessings begin to supplant and to roll away the curse 
which for six thousand years has rested as a great pall 
over humanity— a dark night, soon to give place to the 
glorious Millennial Day and the bright-shining of Messiah's 
Kingdom. 

Nothing could shake our faith in the Divine Plan of 
the Ages epitomized in God's great Oath-bound Covenant 
made with Abraham, confirmed unto Isaac and Jacob 
and Israel. There is absolutely no ground for questioning 
that all the families of the earth will eventually 
be blessed. There is no room to doubt that God has laid 
a broad foundation for that blessing in the sending of 
His Son, who became man's Redeemer. There is no reason 
for questioning the fact that the Church for more 
than eighteen centuries has been called out of the world 
to be sharer with her Lord in the sufferings of this present 
time and in the glories that are to follow. 

There is absolutely no question about the fact that 
"faithful is He who called us, who also will do it." We 
have His promise that "if we are children, then we are 
heirs— heirs of God and joint-heirs with Jesus Christ" 
our Lord. We have the Divine Word that Jesus the 
Head and the Church His Body, Jesus the Bridegroom 
and the Church His Bride, constitute the antitypical 
Spiritual Seed of Abraham, through whom, when glorified, 
God's blessing will be poured upon humanity. "If 
ye be Christ's, then are ye Abraham's Seed, and heirs 
according to the Promise" (Galatians 3:29), which 
promise reads, "In thee and in thy Seed shall all the 
families of the earth be blessed."— Genesis 12:3; 28:14. 

There is absolutely no ground for Bible students to 
question that the consummation of this Gospel Age is 
now even at the door, and that it will end as the Scriptures 
foretell in a great Time of Trouble such as never 
was since there was a nation. We see the participants 
in this great crisis banding themselves together under 
the leadership of Capital and Trusts, Labor and Trade 
Unions. The great crisis, the great clash, symbolically 
represented as a fire, that will consume the ecclesiastical 
heavens and the social earth, is very near. 

But when we have said this we have said about all 
that it is safe or proper for us to say. We have never 
claimed inspiration nor prophetic vision. All that we 
have ever claimed is that "Wonderful things in the Bible 
we see," and that the dearest is the love of the Heavenly 
Father and our Heavenly Lord Jesus, and that the time 
for the establishment of the Kingdom is very nigh. 

CHRONOLOGY BASED UPON FAITH 

We remind our readers here that in these columns 



and in the six volumes of STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES 
we have set forth everything appertaining to the times 
and seasons in a tentative form; that is to say, not with 
positiveness, not with the claim that we knew, but merely 
with the suggestion that "thus and so" seems to be the 
teaching of the Bible. The Berean Lessons are running 
now in Volume Second of STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES 
in order that all of our readers may have fresh in mind 
the Bible chronology as furnished there in Chapter II. 
We have pointed out that the chronology is the basis of 
nearly all the suggestions of prophetic interpretations 
set forth in STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES. We have 
pointed out there that the chronology of the Bible is not 
stated with great clearness, that fractions of years are 
ignored and that there are certain breaks in it. 

We have suggested that ordinarily the chronology 
would be quite insufficient as evidence and that our acceptance 
of it is based on faith— on the supposition that 
God wished to give us a chronology, wished that we 
might have some knowledge of the times and seasons, 
and yet wished that it might be so obscure and indefinite 
as to require faith on the part of His people. We 
pointed out further that we could not exercise that faith 
were it not for the fact that this chronology seems to 
be interwoven and interlocked with numerous prophecies 
—and these prophecies, in turn, interwoven and interlocked 
with other prophecies and fulfilments not dependent 
upon the chronology. Having thus set the matter 
before the minds of our readers, we asked each to judge 
for himself as to how much faith he would repose in the 
chronology and in the application of the prophecies connected 
with it. We announced that to our own mind it 
seemed reasonable to accept the chronology and the 
prophecies from this viewpoint. 

Having laid this broad foundation, having put all of 

R5450 : page 135 

our readers on notice to use their own judgment, we proceeded 
to use this chronology in connection with the various 
prophecies, drawing various hypotheses and conclusions. 
We did not in any case remind the reader 
afresh that all these conclusions were based upon the 
chronology, and that the chronology is admittedly supported 
by faith. We assumed that all intelligent readers 
realized this, and that all such were using their own 
judgment, not ours, in respect to the chronology and in 
respect to the applications of the prophecies along the 
lines of that chronology. We ask you all still to do this. 

The chronology still seems as strong as ever to the 
Editor. He sees nothing to alter or amend. Nevertheless, 
the Editor wishes to put all THE WATCH TOWER 
readers on notice, as he already has done twice this year, 
that to his judgment it now seems unreasonable to expect 
during the present year all that he had anticipated, 
as suggested previously. He sees no possibility that the 



Church Federation will reach its climax of organization 
and power, and then reach its fall, during the remaining 
months of this year. And he surely looks for this to occur 
prior to the full ending of this Gospel Age and the 
glorification of the last members of the Church, which 
is the Body of Christ. 

This does not prove the chronology wrong, nor does 
it prove that the Times of the Gentiles do not end with 
this year. It may be that Gentile Times will end before 
the ecclesiastical oligarchy attains sacerdotal power. We 
must wait and see. The Lord is still our Shepherd. No 
good thing will He withhold from those who follow Him 
as His sheep, harkening to His Voice and ignoring the 
voice of strangers. His promises will stand sure, and 

R5451 :page 135 

these, as all other things, shall work together for good 
to those who love Him— the called ones according to 
His purpose.— Romans 8:28. 

A SCRIPTURE TO BE FULFILLED 

The Lord declares through the Prophet David (Psalm 149:5-9): 
"Let the saints be joyful in glory: let them 
sing aloud upon their beds. Let the high praises of God 
be in their mouth, and a two-edged sword in their hand; 
to execute vengeance upon the heathen, and punishments 
upon the people; to bind their kings with chains and their 
nobles with fetters of iron; to execute upon them the 
judgments written. This honor have all His saints." 
Heretofore we had not questioned that this description 
of the glory of the saints applied to them beyond the veil 
—beyond the completion of the First Resurrection. But 
a more careful investigation of the words forewarns us 
that we may not be too sure in such a supposition. We 
suggest as a bare possibility that a time may come when 
a part of the saints will be in glory beyond the veil, and 
when those on this side the veil in the flesh will enter 
very fully into the joys of their Lord and into participation 
in His work. 

If we interpret the statement, "let them sing aloud 
upon their beds," in harmony with the significance of 
similar statements elsewhere in the Scriptures, the expression 
would signify that the saints in glory will be 
telling the good tidings of great joy— singing, presenting 
in melodious cadences the messages which none can learn 
except the one hundred and forty-four thousand. But 
the word beds here, in harmony with usage elsewhere in 
the Bible, would signify a rest of faith— that these saints 
were at rest in the midst of conditions to the contrary. 
This could hardly be the case if the reference be to those 
who have experienced the First Resurrection "change." 
Theirs will not be a rest of faith, but an absolute entering 
into rest. 

Again, while the high praises of God are in their 



mouth they have the two-edged sword in their hand, 
according to the prophecy. This "two-edged sword" is 
evidently, as elsewhere, the Word of God. We can 
scarcely imagine the saints beyond the veil as handling 
the Word of God. On the contrary, this would seem to 
imply that the saints described are on this side of the 
veil, using the Sword of the Spirit, which is the Word 
of God, in connection with the showing of high praise 
to God— clearing His name from the dishonor attached 
to it through the ignorance, superstition and creeds of 
the Dark Ages. 

The next statement, that these saints will use the 
"sword" to execute vengeance upon the Gentiles and 
punishments upon the people [of Israel], seems to 
imply that these saints, whatever their condition, will 
be in authority; for the Scriptural injunction to them 
elsewhere is that they should "judge nothing before the 
time." This Psalm, therefore, describes the time when 
they are to do a judging work in respect to the world 
in general, as well as in respect to Israel, God's people. 

A SOMEWHAT SIMILAR SCRIPTURE 

A somewhat similar description of The Christ in 
glory is given us in Revelation 19:11, where He that is 
called "Faithful and True" goes forth in righteousness 
to judge and make war. The Heavenly armies follow 
Him (V.14), and out of His mouth goes a sharp sword, 
that with it He should smite the nations.— V. 15. 

We know not why this prophecy speaks of Heavenly 
armies— in the plural. We merely suggest that the Heavenly 
army may possibly be in two divisions— one on this 
side of the veil, the other on the other side of the veil. 
We are waiting to see, and merely watching while we 
wait, and noting with possibly still greater care our 
Father's Word. We may be sure that if any commission 
be given to the Lord's people to execute judgment this 
side of the veil it would be so explicit as to leave no 
room for doubt, remembering that the Divine requirement 
throughout the Age has been that the saints of 
God shall be subject to the powers that be. Any change 
from this order to the effect that we should execute 
judgments upon them will need to be very positively and 
very clearly understood before being executed. 

Just how the kings and nobles— financial, political 
and social— will be bound, and just what kinds of fetters 
of strength will be used, we may not know until qualified; 
but the outworking of all these will be, as expressed 
in Psalm 149:9, "to execute upon them the vengeance 
written; this honor have all of God's saints." 
Whether we participate in this work on this side of the 
veil or on the other side makes no difference to us. In 
any event, whatever we shall do at any time under the 
guidance of the Lord's Holy Spirit will be in harmony 
with justice and all the time intermingled with sympathetic 
love. None except those possessing and controlled 



by this, the Holy Spirit of God, will ever be permitted 
participation in the Kingdom glories and power. 



"Be patient and submissive— strength is given 
For every step along the weary way. 

And for it all thou'lt render praise to Heaven, 
When dreary night gives place to Perfect Day. 

"Yes, Perfect Day, the day of God eternal, 
When not a shadow shall flit o'er the scene 

In that fair land where all is bright and vernal, 
And we will be with Christ and naught between. 

"Wait, then, dear heart; control thy sad emotion; 

God will subdue each angry wind and wave; 
And when the voyage ends across life's ocean 

Within the haven of sweet rest will save." 



R5451 :page 136 

WHO COMMITS THE SIN UNTO DEATH7-PART II 

BESIDES the two classes of those who are 

saved among the spirit-begotten, there is a 

third class— those who go into the Second 

Death. The "sin unto death" is not only a 

failure to do something which is good, but a 

positive doing of something which is evil. 

The Great Company do not turn to wallow 

in the mire of sin; but this class now spoken 

of is a class of spirit-begotten ones that 

gradually turn from their Covenant until 

they fall away entirely. They become covenant-breakers. 

They have covenanted to lay down their lives, and then 

they break that Covenant, and turn again to sin and to 

hopeless darkness. This course, being a sin against clear 

light and knowledge, is a sin unto death. 

Who or what is it that sins the sin unto death? "Whosoever 
is begotten of God doth not commit sin [wilfully]; 
for His seed remaineth in him, and he cannot sin." That 
which is begotten of God is the new mind, the new will; 
and the person having that new will, desiring to be in 
harmony with God, cannot sin the sin unto death as long 
as he has the mind, the will, the Spirit, of God. As long as 
his will is in harmony with God he cannot sin with wilfulness 
and desire. He cannot be in harmony with sin. The 
new mind cannot consent to sin. If there be a consent to 
sin, it is an evidence that the old mind has taken control. 

We may understand the subject more clearly, perhaps, 
by considering the action of Congress. Suppose that the 
Republicans represent the natural man, and that the Republican 
party had had domination for a long time. Then 



there came a change of administration. There was a new 
sentiment, a new mind, there were new aspirations. Another 
party was in power, and the majority of Congress 
became Democratic. What made the change in the action 
of Congress? It was the new vote. The majority carried 
the day, and decided upon a Democratic form of government 
to control our Legislative Body. But if Congress 
should again change and vote the old way, it would no 
longer be Democratic. 

Just so the New Creature came into control of our 
mortal bodies. Then if the new will should again change, 

R5452 : page 136 

and advocate as before the things of the flesh, the New 
Creature is changed again into the old creature. It is 
not the New Creature, however, that is wallowing in sin. 
The will has committed the sin unto death. THE NEW 
CREATURE IS DEAD. 

ESAU'S LOSS A WARNING TO THE CHURCH 

The illustration used by the Apostle Paul of Esau's 
seeking vainly with tears to regain his lost birthright, has 
a lesson of deep interest for us. It may be applied in one 
way to the condition of the Jewish people, who, having 
lost the great privilege, or opportunity, of becoming the 
Spiritual Israel of God, could not get again, as a people, 
that lost opportunity. That privilege had gone from 
them; they could not recover it, although this would not 
hinder any individual Jew from becoming repentant and 
from becoming personally a member of the Church class. 

However, the Apostle's words (Hebrews 12:16,17) 
seem to apply especially to the Church, and to our danger 
of losing our birthright, as New Creatures. Esau, "for 
one morsel of meat sold his birthright." He typified those 
Christians who barter their glorious inheritance as prospective 
heirs of the Divine nature and the Messianic 
Kingdom for the enjoyment of the fleeting pleasures of 
the present life— "a mess of pottage!" 

WHO COMMITS THE UNPARDONABLE SIN 

As to the general proposition respecting unpardonable 
sin, we have endeavored to point out in STUDIES IN THE 
SCRIPTURES that sins are unpardonable in proportion as 
they are wilful. The only ones, however, who can commit 
a fully unpardonable sin are those who have come into 
the Church— who have made a consecration of their life 
and have been begotten of the Holy Spirit. If such should 
fall away, it would be a final matter. 

Before coming into Christ, before receiving the Holy 
Spirit, transgressions might have been committed, but 
these transgressions would not have the same degree of 
responsibility as would those of a consecrated Christian; 
for after one has come into the Lord's family, there is an 



increase of light and knowledge, and therefore there 
comes increased responsibility. The Lord said that those 
who knew His will and did it not would receive many 
stripes; but those who knew it not and did it not would 
receive fewer stripes. Many of the Lord's people have 
committed more or less wilful sins, and have received 
stripes more or less severe. 

The Scriptures tell of a degree of wilful sin that 
would be unto death, and such sin is mentioned as a sin 
against the Holy Spirit. This, we understand, is a sin 
against clear knowledge— a perception of the wrong, and 
a transgression of God's Law wilfully, deliberately. The 
Jews who crucified Christ sinned against light and had 
great responsibility. However, the Apostle Peter says, 
"I wot, brethren, that in ignorance ye did it, as did also 
your rulers." (Acts 3: 17.) They realized not that they 
were crucifying the Lord of glory. But if any begotten 
of the Holy Spirit should join in any similar crime, we 
understand that this would be a different matter. The 
penalty upon such spiritually enlightened ones would be 
nothing short of the Second Death. 

The Apostle Paul points out why the Church can sin 
this sin unto death. He says that if we sin wilfully, after 
we have received a knowledge of the Truth, and have 
tasted the good Word of God, and have been made partakers 
of the Holy Spirit— if then we should fall away 
(not if we should stumble, but if we should completely 
fall away, turning again to sin), it would be like a sow 
that was washed which returned again to wallow in the 
mire. In such case, the transgression would be to the full. 

DID ADAM SIN AGAINST THE HOLY SPIRIT? 

In answering this question we need to have a clear 
conception of what constitutes the Holy Spirit. The 
Scriptural answer is that the Holy Spirit, in one of God's 
intelligent creatures, is the spirit of sonship. The brute 
creation do not have this spirit of sonship. They were 
not made in the moral image of the Creator. The angels 
have the spirit of sonship. Adam was created in the 
moral image and likeness of his Creator— a son of God. 
Therefore we should understand that he had this Spirit of 
the Father, the Spirit of sonship. 

When Adam became disobedient, it meant a forfeiture 
of the Spirit of sonship, and the casting of him out from 
all relationship to the Father. And this relationship to 
God was forfeited for all his posterity. But God has 
made an arrangement by which Adam may come back to 
Him— and all his children may come, if they will. This 
operation of uplifting and restoring mankind is in the 
Scriptures spoken of as an impartation, or pouring out, 
of the Holy Spirit. 

This has not yet come to the world, but is now fulfilled 
in the Church. The Church, accepted to a new 
nature, under certain special conditions are, during this 
Gospel Age, begotten to sonship and are classed as sons 



of God. This receiving of the Church into the relationship 
of sons now, and the blessing of the world later, is 
referred to in the prophecy of Joel. There the Prophet 

R5452 : page 137 

speaks of the Lord as "in those days," pouring out His 
Spirit upon His servants and handmaids; and he declares 
that, afterwards, He will pour out His Spirit upon all 
flesh— that they also may come back into sonship, into 
relationship with God.— Joel 2:28-32; Acts 2:16-18. 
Adam had the Spirit of God. It was received in a 
natural way; and had it not been for the fall, this condition 
would have been maintained, just as with the holy 
angels. These angels, not having forfeited this relationship, 
need not a special impartation of the Holy Spirit. 

COULD ADAM HAVE REPENTED? 

Would it have been possible for Adam to repent, after 
committing this wilful sin? The word repentance may 
be used in two different ways. We frequently use the 
word to mean penitence, sorrow over a fault, etc., but this 
common use of the word is not its full import. It means 
to get back, to return to a former condition; or to take 
an opposite course from that in which one has been 
going. Adam could have repented in the sense of being 
penitent; but he could not have repented in the sense of 
getting back to the place where he was before he sinned. 
That would require the paying the price of his sin by 
another. St. Paul said of Esau, that he was a "profane 
person," and "that afterward, when he would have inherited 
the blessing, he was rejected; for he found no 
place of repentance, though he sought it carefully with 
tears." (Hebrews 12:17.) Esau found plenty of opportunity 
to cry and to be sorry; but he did not find an 
opportunity to get back that which he had forfeited. And 
so with Adam. 

But such inability to repent is entirely different from 
what the Apostle means in speaking of the Church. He 
says, "If we sin wilfully, after that we have received the 
knowledge of the Truth, there remaineth no more sacrifice 
for sins, but a certain looking for of judgment, and 
fiery indignation, which shall devour the adversaries." 
(Hebrews 10:26,27.) There could be no repentance for 
these. Their hearts have become too hardened. They 
cannot be renewed unto repentance. (Hebrews 6:4-8.) 
But the provision for Adam is God's arrangement that 
Christ should taste death for him. But now, Christ dieth 
no more; therefore, whoever receives once the benefit of 
Christ's death and misuses it, comes under the sentence 
of death a second time, and from this, the Second Death, 
there is no recovery. 

GROUNDLESS FEARS OF SOME 



We believe that the majority of people who think they 
have committed the sin unto death are merely being tormented 
by fears; and that in most cases they need only to 
have better instruction respecting the Lord, His character 
and arrangement. We have had people come to us 
in great terror of mind, believing that they had committed 
the sin unto death, and that there was no hope 
for their reconciliation to God. Sometimes they have 
merely told us of their fears, and we were puzzled; for 
their apparent penitence and regret were favorable signs. 
In some instances, where they have told us the facts of 
the case, we have been able in five minutes to relieve 
them entirely, and to show them that they had altogether 
misunderstood the matter. This gave them much peace. 
One person told us that the trouble had lasted for eighteen 
years. Since then this person has been rejoicing in the 
Lord and serving Him very acceptably. 

But the proper thought is that one could not be 
brought back if he were of the kind that have wilfully and 
deliberately renounced the Lord. God is looking for a 
loyal people; and if any show wilful, intentional disobedience, 
they would not be fit to live at all. However, 
when we see repentance, we may take a hopeful view. 

SIN AGAINST THE HOLY SPIRIT UNFORGIVABLE 

We are to recognize a difference between a sin against 
the Holy Spirit and the sin unto death. In other words, a 
sin against the Holy Spirit may be of various degrees of 
heinousness in the sight of God. We might think of small 
sins and of great sins against the Holy Spirit. No sin 
against the Holy Spirit is forgivable. But some of these 
sins might be punished with stripes, and others with death. 

The Holy Spirit of sonship was not possessed by the 
Pharisees, to whom Jesus directed His words. But they 
had some knowledge of the light of the Holy Spirit in 
our Lord's person. The Holy Spirit was manifest in Him 
in a remarkable degree. The Jews were in different 
degrees of condemnation, in proportion as they had the 
eyes of their understanding open. Those who received a 
little knowledge, and refused that little, had less responsibility 
than those who saw more and refused it. And 

R5453 : page 137 

those who misrepresented Him were not so much sinning 
against Him as against the Holy Spirit in Him. 

Our Lord said that all manner of sin and blasphemy 
would be forgiven men except a sin against the Holy 
Spirit. This would not be forgiven them. The Pharisees, 
not having been received into God's family, nevertheless 
had a large measure of light, and therefore a large measure 
of responsibility. And when they, with much light, 
misrepresented it, this showed a measure of wilfulness on 
their part which, Jesus said, would be sure to have punishment. 
Very few, we may say, at that time, had so full a 



knowledge that they could be culpable in the fullest sense. 
THE SIN OF JUDAS 

The sin unto death is a full sin against the Holy Spirit, 
the sin against full light and knowledge, deliberate, wilful 
sin. We know of only one person who had such 
full light and full opportunity prior to our Lord's resurrection 
and the coming of the Pentecostal blessing; and 
that one person was Judas. His special light consisted in 
that he not only saw Jesus, and saw His miracles, and 
was a witness of His noble character, but Judas had 
himself received of this holy Spirit by impartation from 
Jesus, and had used it, casting out demons, etc. 

Jesus said, "Woe unto that man by whom the Son of 
Man is betrayed! good were it for that man if he had 
never been born!" (Mark 14:21.) Judas had a sufficiency 
of light, not to condemn him merely to stripes and 
punishment, but so to condemn him that he would have no 
further opportunity and hope. He had sinned against 
very great light. Aside from Judas we know of no 
other who has ever sinned the sin unto death, except 
those who may have proven unfaithful after having been 
begotten of the Holy Spirit as New Creatures, and who 
had thus received the mind of God, the Holy Spirit. 

TREATMENT OF SPIRITUAL SICKNESS 

The Scriptures also imply that any who have gotten 
into a condition of very low spirituality might have a 
possibility of recovery, not through themselves, but 
through the ministry of faithful ones of the Royal Priesthood. 
The Apostle James speaks of some who are "sick." 
He says to let such a one call for the elders of the 
Church, and let them pray over him, and that the prayer 
of faith shall recover him to God's fellowship— and he 
adds: "He that converteth [recovereth] a sinner from 
the error of his way shall save a soul from death." 
(James 5:20.) Apparently that soul is in death's throes; 
but if he manifest a sufficiency of faith, and will call in 
some true brethren and humbly confess his sin and ask 
for prayers, he would seem to be taking a step that would 
be considered favorably by the Lord, who might give him 
a further opportunity and trial. 

R5453 : page 138 

Our thought is that, ordinarily, there would be no need 
for the individual to confess his trespasses to any one, 
unless it were to a person who had been trespassed against, 
and to whom, therefore, apologies would be due. Otherwise 
our sins are to be confessed only unto the Lord, unless 
under extreme circumstances, where one had lost 
fellowship with the Lord, and felt that there was nothing 
for him otherwise but complete alienation from God. In 
the latter case, we would advise such a brother to call in 



the Elders of the Church and make a confession, that his 
sin against the Holy Spirit may be canceled. 

LYING TO THE HOLY SPIRIT 

Some have asked: Was the sin of Ananias and 
Sapphira unpardonable? We answer, It was an unpardonable 
sin; for Ananias and Sapphira are both still lying 
dead. They may have some future opportunity, so far 
as we know. It is not for us to determine the degree of 
wilfulness connected with their wrong-doing. The Lord 
only would be able to know, and He has not yet manifested 
His decision. It may be that they were merely cut 
off from the present life, and will have some opportunity 
in the future. If they were really begotten of the Holy 
Spirit, this could not be; for all those who are to have a 
part in the Little Flock or the Great Company receive 
their chastisements and purifying experiences in this life, 
and none of them will receive any punishment in the 
future life. The Apostle says we will not come into condemnation 
with the world. We receive our trial for life 
or death everlasting in the present time. 

In the day of the Apostles, when a partial community 
of interest was established, a number of the faithful sold 
possessions and contributed to the general fund. Although 
there was nothing compulsory upon any in respect to this 
selling of property and giving to the common treasury, 
the very fact that those who did so were highly esteemed 
in the Church would naturally become a snare to some 
who, without the real spirit of helpfulness and sacrifice, 
would desire to have the approbation of the brethren. 

STARTLING RESULTS OF WILFUL DECEPTION 

Ananias and Sapphira were of this class, desirous of 
the approval of the Church, yet deficient in the real spirit 
of sacrifice. They had a property which they determined 
to sell; and in order to pose before the believers as saints 
of a high order, they pretended to give to the general fund 
the full amount received from the property. Secretly, 
however, they had much less generous sentiments. They 
agreed together that they would retain part of the sale-money 
for future contingencies, yet would pass as sacrificers 
to the full amount. 

The wrong of their course is manifest. As the Apostle 
Peter declared, the property was their own, and after 
they had sold it they still had a right to do as they pleased 
with the proceeds. But they should have been honest 
about the transaction, and if they wished to give a tenth, 
a half, or all of the amount, it was a matter of their own 
business alone, and no one would have had the least right 
to find fault with or criticize them. The entire wrong 
consisted in the deception practised— the palming off of a 
part of the price as the whole, for the purpose of deceiving 
the Church and of gaining applause for an amount 
of sacrifice more than they made. As St. Peter said, they 



lied, not to man, but to the Holy Spirit of God. In this, 
and in this alone, consisted the sin for which they died. 

The record is that "great fear came upon all the company" 
—great reverence for God and for the Apostles, His 
representatives. It brought also a realization that consecrations 
to the Lord were far from meaningless forms. 
This meant, not only to those who had already espoused 
the Lord's cause, but also to all who for some time thereafter 
would identify themselves with the Church, that 
any who were insincere would best make no pretensions to 
discipleship. Quite probably the influence of the lesson 
lasted for a considerable time— during the lives of the 
Apostles. 

We may consider a lesson which may properly be 
learned from this incident of the past by the Lord's consecrated 
people of today. The lesson is that God desires 
"truth in the inward parts"— in the heart— and that any 
who have not this quality— candor, honesty, truthfulness 
—cannot be pleasing to God; and therefore cannot share 
in the glories to be dispensed shortly to the Elect class of 
this Gospel Age.— Psalm 51:6. 

As we look at ourselves, we come to realize how imperfect 
are all the members of the fallen race; and when 
we consider God's perfection, we can conceive of only 
one quality that the fallen creature could possess that 
would meet with Divine approval. That one quality is 
honesty. The true Christian must, in honesty, confess his 
own shortcomings, his own deficiencies. He must, in 
honesty, acknowledge that his sufficiency is of God, 
through Christ, and not of himself. He must honestly 
strive for the standard set before him in the Gospel. He 
must honestly admit that he cannot do the things that he 
would. He must candidly and fully accept the righteousness 
of God in Christ Jesus, as the covering for his 
blemishes. We are inclined to the belief that the greatest 
sin in the Church— amongst the consecrated believers 
—is the sin of dishonesty; the sin for which Divine disapproval 
is so excellently illustrated in the case of Ananias 
and Sapphira. 

This is an individual matter still, as it was in the days 
of the Apostles. Each individual of the Lord's people 
must answer for his own course, to the Lord Himself. 
It therefore behooves all who are seeking Divine approval, 
to see to it that they are not influenced by the 
prevalent disposition to hypocrisy, but that they deal with 
the Lord in purity and honesty of heart. They should see 
to it that, having covenanted to give to God and His 
service their all, they keep nothing back, but consider that 
their time, their influence, their means, their lives, are 
fully devoted to the Lord, and that they use these as His— 
as they believe He would wish to have them used— as 
faithful stewards. 



R5457 : page 138 



STRENGTH-DEVELOPMENT 

The strong right arm is only strong 

Because an active will 
Has made it serve. But were that arm 

Left idly hanging still, 
Twould lose the hoarded strength of years, 

And lose more rapidly 
Than it was gained, by Nature's law 

Of inactivity. 

'Tis true of souls. They gather strength 

With every cross they bear, 
With every humble sacrifice, 

With every heartfelt prayer, 
With every conflict bravely met, 

And trial bravely borne; 
With every throb of anguish felt 

When tender ties are shorn. 

The tears and toils of His dear ones 

Are wisely, kindly, sent 
By Him who knoweth what they need 

For soul-development. 
The path of idleness is one 

By vagrant children trod. 
They grow in grace most rapidly 

Who labor most for God. Unknown. 



R5453 : page 139 

"WHERE ARE THE NINE?" 

-MAY 31. -LUKE 17:11-19.- 

"Were there none found that returned to give 
glory to God, save this alien?"— V. 18. 

THE essence of our lesson for today is gratitude. 

It is a most reasonable trait of character 

and is frequently found even in the 

brute creation. It is impossible to imagine a 

perfect human being or an angel acceptable 

to God without this quality. We might almost 

say that the degree of our acceptance 

with God is measured by our gratitude. It 

leads to obedience to the Divine laws and 

regulations, whether understood or not. It 

leads to self-sacrificing labors in the service of God, and 

according to a Divine automatic arrangement has its 

blessings. 

Our lesson tells us that the Savior was approaching 
Jerusalem by way of Samaria and Galilee. It is surmised 



R5454 : page 139 

that this was His last journey to Jerusalem, which eventuated 
in His death. His fame had spread abroad; and ten 
lepers sitting by the roadside heard that Jesus of Nazareth 
was passing by. Immediately they called to Him as 
loudly as the hoarse whisper of their disease would permit. 
Ordinarily their appeal was for money; but in this 
case it was, "Master, have mercy upon us!" 

Lepers are a class greatly to be pitied. Their disease 
has long been considered incurable, and hence in the 
Bible it is symbolically used to represent sin. It is an 
affection which seems to corrupt the blood. The joints 
twist, decay and slough off. Under the regulations prevailing 
at the time of our lesson, lepers were forbidden 
to enter the cities, under the penalty of thirty-nine strokes 
from a rod. They had no means of earning a living, and 
were always dependent upon the charity of their friends 
or the public. Nor were they allowed to approach others 
nearer than about one hundred and fifty feet, for fear of 
contamination. Theirs was a living death. 

The ten mentioned in this lesson were drawn together 
by their common trouble which ignored the racial barriers 
between Jews and Samaritans. In answer to their cry for 
help, Jesus, although full of compassion, seemed to treat 
their appeal coldly. He merely said to them, "Go show 
yourselves unto the priests." According to God's arrangement 
with the Jews under their Law Covenant, they 
were to have no sicknesses except as these should represent 
sins; and the priests were to pass judgment upon 
cases of leprosy, determining whether or not the disease 
were indeed leprosy, etc. Our Lord's direction that the 
lepers go and show themselves to the priests implied a 
healing, and suggested that by the time that they should 
reach the priest they would be ready to have him pronounce 
them clean. 

The lepers must have had considerable knowledge of 
the power of Jesus, and must have exercised great faith; 
for instead of crying out for instantaneous healing, they 
followed His direction and started for the priest to have 
an inspection. Doubtless they hoped that by the time they 
should reach him they would be well and would receive a 
bill of health. They had gone but a short distance when 
they found themselves cured. We can well imagine with 
what joy they hastened to have the priest approve them 
in order to return to their families, their business, etc. 
Surely they almost ran, as they felt the exhilaration of 
the cleansed blood! But one of them slowed up and then 
turned back; probably the others in their exuberance did 
not notice this. Back he came and fell at the feet of 
Jesus, giving Him thanks. His was a grateful heart, and 
we cannot doubt that he will receive a blessing eventually, 
though he did not receive it then, for he was a Samaritan, 
an alien, a foreigner from the commonwealth of Israel. 



ANOTHER CRUMB OF FAVOR 

In his case, the healing was a "crumb from the children's 
table;" for the rich man had not yet died— God's 
favor had not yet departed from Israel. Jesus had not 
yet uttered the fateful words, "Your House is left unto 
you desolate." Nay, the favor to Israel continued three 
and a half years after their House was left desolate— individual 
favor. It was three and a half years after the 
death of Jesus before the individual favor to the Jews 
terminated to such an extent as to permit the Gospel to 
go to the Gentiles— Cornelius being the first to be accepted 
into fellowship with God.— Acts 10. 

Had the returning one been a Jew instead of a 
Samaritan, no doubt he would have been invited by Jesus 
to become one of His followers— "Come, take up thy cross 
and follow Me!" But because he was a Samaritan, Jesus 
merely said to him, "Arise and go thy way; thy faith hath 
made thee whole." We cannot doubt, however, that the 
Lord's providence followed this grateful Samaritan; and 
that when the time came for the opening of the door to 
the Gentiles, he was amongst those who gladly received 
the Message, and made a consecration to become an heir 
of God and joint-heir with Jesus Christ our Lord to the 
Heavenly inheritance. 

We are not to understand that our Lord's words, "Thy 
faith hath made thee whole," meant that it was the man's 
faith aside from Divine Power that made him whole, but 
rather that it was the Master's using the Divine Power 
in connection with the faith of the individual. The Power 
of God and the faith of the man co-operated for his healing. 
They did the same for the nine others who were 
healed. They also had faith and were healed, and as 
Jews under the Law Covenant, they had more ground for 
asking forgiveness and healing than had the Samaritan. 

TEN HEALED-WHERE ARE THE NINE? 

Jesus called public attention to the fact that ten were 
healed, but that only one had returned to give glory to 
God. True, He had not asked them to come back and 
offer praise and acknowledge the Divine Power wrought 
through Him! True, they did what He told them to do- 
went and showed themselves to the priest— and no more, 
going then about their business. 

Why did He not, before granting the healing, bargain 
with them, saying, If I heal you, will you consecrate your 
lives and become My disciples? Undoubtedly they would 
have agreed to this arrangement. Who would not agree 
to any terms to be rid of so loathsome and incurable a disease? 
Why did not Jesus take this method of adding to 
the number of His disciples? Undoubtedly the answer 
should be that He was following the spirit of the Father's 
dealings, which He expressed in the words, "The Father 
seeketh such to worship Him as worship Him in spirit and 
in truth." As the Father seeks no others, so the Son 



seeks no others. 

In this respect the preaching of Jesus and the Apostles 
is in strong contrast with much of the preaching of 
evangelists, revivalists, etc. Never did Jesus or the 
Apostles urge worldly people to become disciples of 
Christ. They merely preached, or declared, certain great 
facts, and accepted those who came under that kind of 
preaching, influenced by the great facts set forth. They 
reasoned of sin, of righteousness and of a coming time of 
decision, or judgment, and left the matter with the individual 
conscience. They stated that those who forsake 
sin and turn to God may have forgiveness and reconciliation 
through the merit of the blood of Christ. They told 
of a High, or Heavenly, Call for all such penitents who 

R5454 : page 140 

would consecrate their lives wholly to the service of 
God, Truth and righteousness, willing to endure hardness 
as good soldiers. 

We remember that on one occasion Jesus apparently 
reproved even a spirit of enthusiasm that might becloud 
the cool judgment, saying, "Sit down and count the cost." 
(Luke 14:28.) It has pleased God through the preaching 
of the Truth to call out the class which He desires to be 
joint-heirs with His Son. They are not to be brought 
into the family of God by prayers or by excitement, but 
by the declaration of the Divine terms and conditions. To 
such as accept the grace of God the urgent message goes 
out that they receive it not in vain; that, having put their 
hand to the plow, they do not look back; that, having enlisted 
as good soldiers of the Cross, they endure hardness, 
rejoicing in the privilege of service and sacrifice. 

The point we make is that according to the Bible, no 
attempts were ever made by Jesus and His Apostles to 
obtain recruits for the army of the Lord by a "hip -hip -hurrah" 
process. In this we are not criticising others, 
but merely calling attention to facts which have much to 
do with the guidance of all God's people who seek to 
know and to do His will. 

OTHER TENS, HUNDREDS, THOUSANDS 

Let us view the incident of our lesson symbolically. 
Let the lepers represent sinners who, coming to realize 
themselves unclean, cry out to the Lord for cleansing, 
thus impliedly acknowledging His greatness and power as 
the Son of God, through whom only is forgiveness of 
sin, and impliedly declaring themselves as desiring to be 
His followers, His disciples, persuaded that sin is injurious 
and resolved thereafter to walk in the Lord's 
footsteps, fighting against sin in themselves and everywhere. 
How many of the tens, the hundreds, the thousands, 
whose devotion and faith the Lord has accepted- 
how many whom He has healed, forgiven and received 
according to their profession of discipleship— really have 



become His true followers? 

How many who have declared to the Lord their unhappiness, 
their desire for forgiveness of sins, and promised 
life-long gratitude and devotion to Him, to have His 
favor, have forgotten their privileges; and after receiving 
a blessing have gone, one to his field, another to his merchandise, 
another to pleasure, another to formalism! How 
few have remembered their prayers to the Lord for mercy, 
their resolutions in respect to what they would do if their 
prayers were answered! 

A REVIVAL IS IN ORDER 

Many Christian people are growing in the opinion that 
we are living today in a time of crucial trial as respects 
those who have made a covenant with God. They believe 
that we are nearing the time when the Church, the 
Body of Christ, will be received by the Lord in the 
Resurrection change to be His Bride. As the Apostle 
wrote, "We shall all be changed, in a moment, in the 
twinkling of an eye"; for "flesh and blood cannot inherit 
the Kingdom of God." The call of this Gospel Age has 
been to the finding of these who are to constitute the 
Bride class, the associates of Jesus in His Kingdom. 

Of the Jews Jesus said, in a time of testing in 
the end of their Age, "They knew not the time of their 
visitation." Only the comparatively few were in the heart 
condition of nearness to God which enabled them to understand 
the character of the times in which they were 
living and the change which was in progress. The 
thought is that a similar change is upon us now, which is 
being discerned by those who have had the eyes of their 
understanding opened. 

The Samaritan in our lesson seems to represent a 
class of grateful followers of the Lord who seek to give 
Him glory in their words, thoughts and doings, while the 

R5455 : page 140 

majority of those who have similarly received His favor 
are disposed to pursue the ambitions and pleasures of 
the present life. Neglecting to take the path which the 
Master trod, they will not reach the glory, honor and 
immortality which He attained and to which He has 
called this class. A lower place must be for them. In a 
little while, according to the Bible, the glories of the 
Kingdom will be revealed to an astonished world, but the 
glories of the present condition of affairs will fade away. 

The true Wisdom that cometh from Above was manifested 
by our Savior, who counted not His life dear unto 
Him, who freely made Himself of no reputation that He 
might do the Father's will, and who is now highly exalted 
as a reward. St. Paul expressed the same thought, 
saying that he counted all things as but loss and dross 
that he might win a place in the Body of Christ— the 
Church in glory beyond the veil. Great as will be the 



blessings of the Millennial Kingdom to the world, the 
blessings which the Church will have will be transcendently 
better. 



R5455 : page 140 

MESSIAH'S KINGDOM TO BE INVISIBLE 

--JUNE 7.-LUKE 17:20-37.- 

"Behold, the Kingdom of God is in your midst."— V. 21. 

OUR understanding of the Master's words depends 

considerably upon the setting in 

which we see them. John the Baptist preceded 

Jesus and preached the Kingdom of 

God at hand. In due time he pointed out 

Jesus as the Messiah that should come, the 

Lamb of God. After waiting for months 

for Jesus to establish Himself as an earthly 

king, and finding instead that his own work 

was closing, he was put into prison by 

Herod. John then sent to Jesus to inquire whether or not 

He was the One that should come or whether they should 

look for another. He was disappointed in not seeing evidences 

of the Kingdom, as he had expected. 

The Scribes and the Pharisees heard of the claim 
that Jesus was the long-promised King who would set up 
His Messianic Kingdom, and they derided Him. They 
looked at His motley company of followers— publicans 
and sinners as well as honorable people, but none of 
special rank, influence or wealth. They considered Jesus 
a deceiver and His followers dupes. Our lesson tells how 
they attempted to expose what they supposed was a 
deception of Jesus, thus to turn away the delusion of 
His followers. Therefore they asked Him in public the 
question, When will God's Kingdom come? How long 
will it be before you set it up? 

Doubtless they purposed to entrap Jesus; for if He 
should say, A long time, His followers would be disheartened; 
if He should say, A short time, they would 
proceed to query, Where will You get Your army? How 
will You pay Your soldiers? How will You supply them 
with food? Will You go to Rome to battle with the 
powers that be, that our whole nation has been unable to 
cope with? etc. 

But these Pharisees got only as far as their first question, 
because the answer to it confuted them, and no 
doubt perplexed them. Jesus answered that God's Kingdom 
would not come with observation; that is to say, 

R5455 : page 141 

when the Kingdom should come, people would not see it. 



Proceeding, Jesus elaborated, saying that when the Kingdom 
of God should be established, people would not see 
whether it was here or there; for the Kingdom of God 
would be the Power of God exerted everywhere in the 
midst of the people. 

Our translation is faulty, though evidently not intentionally 
so, when it reads, "For, behold, the Kingdom of 
God is within you." The translators, had they noticed 
carefully, would have been on guard against saying that 
the Kingdom of God was within those Pharisees that 
Jesus had designated hypocrites, whited sepulchres, etc. 
A closer examination of the original would have shown 
that the text would better be translated, "The Kingdom 
of God is in your midst." 

A kingdom is always represented by its king. Jesus, 
as the King, was present in their midst, but they did not 
recognize Him. "There standeth One among you whom 
ye know not." Similarly, all through the Gospel Age, 
the Church of Christ, His "Body," has been undiscerned 
by the world. "The world knoweth us not, even as it 
knew Him not." For eighteen hundred years this has 
been true in this sense; but Christ and the Church in the 
flesh are not the Kingdom of God in the full, proper 
sense that the Bible promises it— a Kingdom of power 
and great glory. Christ and the Church have been only 
the incipient Kingdom, an embryotic Kingdom— the Kingdom 
class, preparing for investiture of authority in God's 
due time, which we believe is now near. 

This Kingdom is to be a spiritual one, and hence its 
rulers will be as invisible as are the angels and the 
Heavenly Father. Jesus declared, "Yet a little while, and 
the world seeth Me no more." What was true of the 
Head will be true of every member of the elect Body 
of Christ, the Church. "Changed in a moment, in the 
twinkling of an eye," the world will see them no more; 
"for flesh and blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of God," 
and flesh and blood cannot see that which is spiritual. 

During the Millennium, the Kingdom authority and 
power of God through Christ and the Church will be 
exercised amongst men; and yet they will not see it with 
the natural eye, but merely with the eyes of their understanding 
All the blind eyes will be opened. Thus every 
eye will see that the Kingdom is established; and every 
one will understand that He who suffered has entered into 
His glory, that the Church, His Bride, is with Him in 
glory, and that the blessings of the Millennium proceed 
from them.— Revelation 20:6. 

"DAYS OF THE SON OF MAN" 

Turning from the silenced Pharisees to His disciples, 
Jesus said, "The days will come when ye shall desire to 
see one of the days of the Son of Man, and ye shall not 
see it." This was astonishing news to the faithful. Yet 
they were accustomed to hearing from the Master things 
which they could not understand; such as that they must 



eat of His flesh and drink of His blood, that He must be 
crucified, etc. They took all these things figuratively and 
wondered what might be the real interpretation. How 
could Jesus be the great King, as they had expected, and 
yet they not see Him and His days? 

Jesus continued to discuss the enigma, saying, "They 
shall say to you, See here; or, See there: go not after 
them, nor follow." In a word, do not believe anybody 
who will thus tell you about My Second Coming; do not 
be deceived into believing that I will come in any such 
manner. I will tell you how I shall come: "As the 
lightning, that lighteneth out of the one part under 
heaven, and shineth unto the other part under heaven; so 
shall also the Son of Man be in His Day." 

This astounding statement is better understood when 
we translate the Greek noun astrape as "shining" instead 
of "lightning"; for evidently it refers to the sun, which 
rises in the east and sets in the west, shining out of the 
one part of the heaven even unto the other. But how 
will this represent the Son of Man in His Day? How 
will He be like the sun? We answer that the Day of 
Christ is a thousand-year Day, the Millennium; and our 
Lord's statement was one of the "dark sayings" of which 
Jesus said, "I have many things to tell you, but ye cannot 
bear them now," and promised that in due time the 
Holy Spirit would grant them an enlightenment, that all 
of His words might be clearly understood. This portion, 
now due to be understood, is therefore becoming 
clear to those of spiritual discernment. 

Then, that they might gradually learn that these things 
belonged to a distant time, Jesus explained that first He 
must suffer many things and be rejected of that nation. 
Coming back to an explanation of what would be the 
signs of His presence, in answer to their question as 
recorded in Matthew 24, He declared, "As it was in the 
days of Noah, so shall it be also in the days of the Son 
of Man." 

Here we have something definite, concrete. We know 
what to look for at the time when the Kingdom will be 
due for establishment— the time when the Sun of Righteousness 
will begin to shine forth from one end of 
heaven to the other. The signs of the times will not be 
in the outward condition of the world; for on the contrary 
everything will be going along in as quiet and 
orderly a manner as ever, just as in the days of Noah, 
just as before the Deluge came, and just as in the days 
of Lot, before the destruction of Sodom— they ate, drank, 
married, built, bought, sowed, planted, as usual. These 
things are not signs of wickedness, but are mentioned to 
show us that there will be no outward sign to indicate 
to the world the time of the Second Presence of Christ, 
when He will begin to deal with the world and to set up 
His Kingdom. 

THE DELUGE AND SODOM'S DESTRUCTION 



Why introduce these two pictures— the Deluge and 
the destruction of Sodom— in conjunction, while talking 
of the establishment of Messiah's Kingdom, which is to 
bless the world? The answer is that the Bible everywhere 
foretells that although Messiah's Kingdom is the great 
provision of God which will lift the curse and bring in 
blessings world-wide, nevertheless it is to be established 
upon the wreck of our present institutions. And it is this 
wreck of social, financial, political and religious institutions 
of the present time that Jesus illustrated by the 
Deluge and the destruction of Sodom. And His own 
presence preceding this Time of Trouble is to be unseen 

R5456 :page 141 

to the world, unknown to the world, unsuspected, unbelieved, 
until the cataclysm of trouble precipitates with 
suddenness. 

This is not a charming picture. We are glad that we 
may turn from it, and note the silver lining of the cloud, 
and the glorious blessings which will speedily follow the 
establishment of the Kingdom on the ruins of our human 
failures. 

Emphasizing the suddenness with which the calamity 
will overtake the world, Jesus said that on the same 
day that Lot went out of Sodom it rained down fire 
and brimstone from heaven; and He declared that 
thus it will be in the Day when the Son of Man is revealed. 
The Greek text shows a difference between the 
Parousia, or presence, of Christ before the Time of 
Trouble, and the later Epiphania, or revealing. 

The description of the revealing of Christ is given in 

R5456 : page 142 

the words, He shall be revealed in flaming fire. (2 Thessalonians 1:7,8.) 

Indeed, that Time of Trouble is frequently 

described symbolically in the Bible as a burning 

of the world— so much so, that all the creeds of Christendom 

express the thought that the earth is to be "burned." 

They overlook the fact that the heavens are to be 

"burned" also. 

In the symbolical usage of the Bible, the earth represents 
the social order of human affairs; the sea, the restless, 
discontented masses; the heavens, the ecclesiastical 
powers. St. Peter tells us that all these will pass away 
with a great confusion, and that instead will come the 
new heavens and the new earth which God has promised. 
(2 Peter 3:10-13.) The new heavens will be the new 
ecclesiastical society— the Church in glory, joint-heirs 
with Christ in His Kingdom. The new earth will be the 
new social order which Messiah's Kingdom will establish. 

SAINTS ON THE HOUSETOP 

Again recurring to the period in which He will be 



present before being revealed "in flaming fire," the Lord 
seems to assure us that all of His faithful ones will die, 
and be changed in the moment of dying, before the great 
trouble, the symbolic fire, will consume present institutions. 
In figurative language He says that in that Day 
(of His Parousia, presence, before His Epiphania, revealing) 
those on the housetop, with their goods in the house, 
should not leave to take them out. What is here meant? 

Briefly, we believe that the house represents the 
House of God, and those on the housetop represent the 
most saintly of the people of God. At that time such will 
come to realize the necessity for flight; and the question 
will arise, How much of their stuff, their valuables, will 
they seek to save? They are warned not to seek to save 
any of the stuff— considerations of social privileges, honor 
of men, sometimes titles of small offices; such as vestryman, 
deacon, elder, minister, etc. An attempt to save 
any of these things will mean disappointment. Everything 
must be forsaken, else the test of that time will not 
be successfully passed. 

Likewise, any in the field must not turn back. The 
field represents the world. And any of the Lord's people 
who have gone out into the world— who have left the 
church nominal— are not to go back; but learning the 
truth of the situation they are to flee to the Lord from 
the field. 

St. Matthew's account speaks of special troubles at 
that time upon such as are with child and give suck, which 
we believe is also symbolical, and refers to Christian 
people, seeking to convert the world and to teach beginners. 
These will be in special travail of soul, because of 
the change of dispensation and the call, "Come out of her, 
My people." It will be especially difficult for such to hear 
and to obey that call. 

In the flight from Sodom, Lot and his family were 
warned to make haste, and not even to look back to the 
things that were to be destroyed. So the Lord's people 
are not to look back at the things to be destroyed. Give 
them no thought. "Flee out of Babylon!" "Deliver every 
man his own soul!" Lot's wife, disobeying, looked back 
longingly to the things of destruction, and failed to escape. 
The Lord applies this illustration to His people, and 
urges that their flight be with a full renunciation of the 
things of the present time. Whoever shall seek to save 
his life must lose it. Whoever will lose his life will 
thereby be preserving it— gaining the everlasting life. 



R5456 : page 142 

CREATION PHOTO-DRAMA 

THE WATCH TOWER readers everywhere 
are enthused by the PHOTO-DRAMA OF 
CREATION. In response to our recent suggestion, 



we are flooded with applications 

from various Classes, giving the names of 

those appointed for the DRAMA COMMITTEE. 

We have answered many of these communications 

directly, but think it well to 

now give a general response and explanation. 

We started with the thought that the Association 
should put the DRAMA on in different cities and trust to 
voluntary support; but by the time we had gotten out 
twelve sets of the DRAMA, the expense was enormous— 
our express bills alone on printed matter, machines, etc., 
running up to $2,000.00 in one month, besides post and 
freight charges. Then came the realization that each 
one of those twelve sets could be serving four cities at one 
time. This meant four times the cost. We perceived that 
unless the Lord worked a miracle we would run out of 
funds, without accomplishing anything like the work we 
see before us to do. At the same time propositions began 
to come in from various cities and towns, assuring us 
that the I.B.S.A. Classes of these places would be glad 
to finance the DRAMA locally, if they were provided with 
operators, free literature, Pax Pins, etc. 

We take this to be the leading of the Lord's providence 
—an intimation that the Lord desires to give His 
people everywhere an opportunity to participate in the 
DRAMA'S great testimony in their own cities. We are 
following this plan now, and invite those classes of 
Bible students who desire to have the DRAMA to canvass 
the subject amongst themselves and then, through 
their Committee, to correspond at once with our office, 
advising us what they desire to do and are able to do in 
the way of meeting the expenses of presenting the DRAMA 
in their home cities. 

Such information should be sent to the Society's address, 
marked "DRAMA DEPARTMENT." Americans and 
Canadians should address Brooklyn, New York, Office; 
British Classes should address the London Office; 
Swedish Classes should address the Orebro Office; 
Danish Classes, the Copenhagen Office; German Classes, 
the Barmen Office; French and Swiss Classes, the 
Geneva Office. Act at once; and then, having done your 
part, wait patiently, assured that we will do all in our 
power to co-operate with you. 

On the same postal it will be well to state how many 
Sisters of medium age and of good address and good 
appearance would volunteer to serve as ushers, and 
whether or not one or two of them would learn to operate 
the phonograph under the instructor whom the 
Society would send. Advise also if there is a Brother in 
the Class of good address suitable to serve the DRAMA 
presentation as Floor Manager and who could, without 
injury to his interests, give the necessary time. 

We usually operate the DRAMA one week to each 
PART, afternoon and evening— four weeks to the FOUR 
PARTS. However, where very large Auditoriums are 
used or where the city is small, we sometimes run the 



FOUR PARTS in two weeks, beginning one PART with Sunday 
afternoon, another PART with Wednesday afternoon. 

Theatres are better places for the DRAMA than 
Churches, because Catholics do not care to go to Protestant 
Churches, nor Protestants to Catholic Churches, nor 
Jews to either— and all classes are interested in the 
DRAMA and it is for all. The dull season of the theatres 
has begun. Many of them are operating now at no 
profit; and, if run further, it would be at a loss. Under 
such circumstances, whatever amount is paid to the 

R5456 : page 143 

theatre people above the cost of light and janitorage is 
profit. Besides, many theatres are interested in bringing 
their name and location prominently before the public 
and would be benefited greatly by having the DRAMA. 

Under such circumstances the theatre owners often 
give us astonishingly low prices— five, ten, fifteen, twenty, 
twenty-five dollars per day, according to size and 
quality of the theatre and the size of the city. In no 
case should we use an inferior Auditorium, nor one in a 
poor location, even if it were offered free. Have these 
things in mind when writing to us. If you will, give us 
information respecting the best theatres, their seating 
capacity, the price at which they would be obtainable, etc. 

In any event, be sure to inform us very definitely just 
what amount of assistance your Class would need for the 
local presentation of the DRAMA. We must know this in 
every case hereafter, in order to know how to use the 
DRAMA most widely and how to use the Lord's money in 
connection with it most wisely. Give this immediate 
attention, if interested; for whatever is to be accomplished 
this Summer should be under way now, or projected. 

Toward fall there will be numerous Fairs and Expositions 
everywhere. The Fair and Exposition and Chautauqua 
Managers are interested in the DRAMA, as they 
would be in anything else that would help to attract to 
their enterprises. They frequently spend large sums for 
attractions. We have circulars to the effect that our 
Society is willing to supply the PHOTO-DRAMA OF 
CREATION free to those who proffer suitable Auditorium 
and other conveniences. We make no objection to the 

R5457 : page 143 

usual entrance fees charged by Expositions, etc., but 
merely require that the DRAMA shall be free to all those 
inside the grounds. Any of you acquainted with such 
Fairs may drop us a postal card giving us the date and 
the name and address of the Treasurer or Business Manager. 
Brooklyn address No. 124 Columbia Heights. 

In some places theatre managers are anxious for the 
DRAMA and are willing to show it free, provided that they 
are permitted to charge for one-third of their seating 
capacity as reserved seats. We have no objection to this. 



Evidently there are some people who would prefer to 
pay something, in order to have seats reserved. 



page 143 

RENEW REQUESTS FOR PILGRIM VISITS 

Please bear in mind that with this issue of the TOWER all 
requests for Pilgrim visits now on file expire. All who are 
desirous of securing the visits of the traveling brethren during 
the ensuing year should promptly notify us. No charge 
is made for this service, the expense being borne by contributions 
to the Tract Fund. The friends at each place provide 
proper places for the meetings, and are pleased to entertain 
the Lord's servants. 

We request that postcards be used in making applications 
for these visits, and specially desire replies to all of the following 
questions. The questions need not be repeated, but 
merely indicated thus: (a), (b), etc. 

(a) How many Bible Students in your vicinity use the 
STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES? 

(b) Are weekly meetings held? 

(c) How many are usually in attendance? 

(d) Where do you now meet on Sundays? (Give full street 
addresses and name of auditorium.) 

(e) At what hours are the Sunday meetings held? 

(f) Was a vote taken on the Pilgrim invitation? 

(g) How many voted for the invitation to be sent? 

(h) Do you desire Sunday appointments for Special Public 

Lectures? 

(i) How frequently do you desire such Special appointments? 

(j) Give seating capacity of Auditorium you could secure? 

(k) What attendance do you think could be secured for 

well-advertised public sessions in good Auditorium? 

(1) Would a suitable place be found for meetings not specially 

advertised? 

(m) Have the members of your class chosen leaders in 

accordance with suggestions of SCRIPTURE STUDIES, 

Volume VI., chapters 5 and 6? 

If so, give name and full address of each. 

(n) Give full names and full addresses of the two (2) to 

whom notices of Pilgrim visits should be sent. (Please 

notify Pilgrim Dept. as to any change or removal.) 

(o) If your town is not on a railroad give the name of 

proper railroad station at which to stop. 

(p) How many miles from station is meeting place, and 

which direction from station? 

(q) Would Pilgrim be met at station? 

(r) If not, how should Pilgrim get from said station? 

(s) Give writer's full name and address. 

(t) Any additional remarks. 



R5457 : page 143 

THE MEMORIAL SUPPER CELEBRATION 

So far as reports have reached us the celebration of the 
Redeemer's death this year has been one of the most interesting, 
most impressive and most widely observed. Naturally 
the larger number of reports represent small gatherings 
—fully in accord with the Master's promise that where two 
or three were met in His name, He would be in their midst. 

The reports show a steady increase in every direction over 
last year's reports. Be it remembered that these are not the 
names of persons or households that have been standing on 
a church register for a decade, and many of them dead and 
buried. Neither do these reports represent merely nominal 
church attendance. On the contrary, they represent people 
who with intelligence and deliberation have counted the cost 
and made a full consecration of themselves to the Lord and 
His service, even unto death. 

We give the showings of reports thus far sent to us where 
the Memorial was celebrated by thirty or more persons. On 
account of the fact that The Temple is being used for the 
PHOTO-DRAMA OF CREATION, the Tabernacle was used this 
year, but was taxed beyond its capacity. Suburban gatherings 
were proportionately larger; hence the real increase in 
the Brooklyn congregation was the less apparent: 

Brooklyn, N.Y 842 

London, Eng 741 

Chicago, 111 693 

Barmen, Germany 500 

Glasgow, Scot 464 

Boston, Mass 425 

Forest Gate, Eng 385 

Los Angeles, Cal 362 

Pittsburgh, Pa 345 

Philadelphia, Pa 317 

Seattle, Wash 219 

Minneapolis and St. Paul, 

Minn 206 

Toronto, Ont 204 

Cleveland, 203 

Vancouver, B.C 195 

Washington, D.C 192 

Portland, Ore 159 

Indianapolis, Ind 156 

Columbus, 144 

Providence, R.I 144 

Cincinnati, 140 

Copenhagen, Denmark 140 

St. Louis, Mo 136 

Liverpool, Eng 130 

Buffalo, N.Y 125 

Houston, Tex 121 

Dayton, 121 

Oakland, Cal 120 

Milwaukee, Wis 1 13 



Kingston, B.W.I Ill 

Bristol, Eng 110 

Winnipeg, Manitoba 105 

Baltimore, Md 102 

Sheffield, Eng 100 

Louisville, Ky 98 

Oldham, Eng 92 

Edinburgh, Scot 90 

Denver, Colo 85 

Birmingham, Ala 80 

Binghamton, N.Y 79 

Richmond, Va 79 

Bellingham, Wash 78 

Worcester, Mass 76 

Allentown, Pa 76 

Toledo, 74 

Tacoma, Wash 74 

Spokane, Wash 73 

Camberwell, Jamaica, B.W.I. ... 72 

St. Joseph, Mo 69 

San Francisco, Cal 69 

Hamilton, Ont 65 

Tampa, Fla 65 

Youngstown, 65 

Birmingham, Eng 64 

Springfield, Mass 63 

Grand Rapids, Mich 61 

Atlanta, Ga 60 

Memphis, Tenn 60 

Newark, N.J 59 

Altoona, Pa 58 

Hartford, Conn 57 

San Diego, Cal 55 

Nottingham, Eng 55 

Lynn, Mass 54 

Cumberland, Md 50 

Pasadena, Cal 50 

Dundee, Scot 49 

Wichita, Kans 49 

Schenectady, N.Y 49 

Valenciennes, Nord, Fr 48 

New Brighton, Pa 48 

Akron, 48 

Jackson, Mich 47 

Easton, Pa 46 

PortLimon, C.R 46 

Calgary, Alta 45 

Ancon, Panama 45 

Victoria, B.C 45 

Port Huron, Mich 45 

Middlesboro, Eng 44 

Scranton, Pa 44 

Rochester, N.Y 44 

Tamaqua, Pa 43 

Saginaw, Mich 42 

Topeka, Kans 42 



Terre Haute, Ind 42 

Jacksonville, Fla 42 

Knoxville, Term 40 

Des Moines, Iowa 40 

Oklahoma City, Okla 40 

Norfolk, Va 40 

Edmonton, Alberta 40 

Wheeling, W.Va 38 

Sharon, Pa 38 

York, Pa 38 

Duquesne, Pa 38 

Erie, Pa 37 

Chester and Moore, Pa 37 

Everett, Wash 37 

Gloversville and Johnstown, 

N.Y 37 

Lowell, Mass 37 

Belvidere, 111 37 

Greenock, Scot 37 

South Bend, Ind 36 

Chattanooga, Tenn 36 

Riverside, Cal 35 

Paterson, N.J 34 

London, Ont 34 

Syracuse, N.Y 34 

Wilmington, Del 34 

Warren, 34 

Sacramento, Cal 33 

Johnstown, 32 

Canton, 32 

Johnstown, Pa 32 

Brantford, Ont 31 

East Liverpool, 31 

Bradford, Eng 31 

Brockton, Mass 31 

Mattoon, 111 30 

Houston, Tex 30 

Santa Ana, Cal 30 

Watertown, N.Y 30 

Reading, Pa 30 

Tiffin, 30 

Fort Smith, Ark 30 



page 145 
