Jerusalem—Is It ‘Above Your Chief Cause for Rejoicing’?
“Let my tongue stick to my palate . . . if I were not to make Jerusalem ascend above my chief cause for rejoicing.”—PSALM 137:6.
 1. What attitude did many Jewish exiles have toward God’s chosen city?
NEARLY seven decades had passed since the first Jewish exiles had returned to Jerusalem in 537 B.C.E. God’s temple had been rebuilt, but the city still lay in ruins. Meanwhile, a new generation had grown up in exile. No doubt many of them felt like the psalmist who sang: “If I should forget you, O Jerusalem, let my right hand be forgetful.” (Psalm 137:5) Some did more than simply remember Jerusalem; they proved by their actions that it had ascended “above [their] chief cause for rejoicing.”—Psalm 137:6.
 2. Who was Ezra, and how was he blessed?
2 For example, consider the priest Ezra. Even before he returned to his homeland, he had zealously worked for the interests of pure worship in Jerusalem. (Ezra 7:6, 10) Ezra was richly blessed for that. Jehovah God moved the heart of the Persian king to grant Ezra the privilege of leading a second company of returning exiles to Jerusalem. Furthermore, the king gave them a large contribution of gold and silver “to beautify the house of Jehovah.”—Ezra 7:21-27.
 3. How did Nehemiah prove that Jerusalem was his chief concern?
3 Some 12 years later, there was another Jew who took decisive action—Nehemiah. He served in the Persian palace at Shushan. He had a prestigious position as cupbearer to King Artaxerxes, but that was not Nehemiah’s “chief cause for rejoicing.” Instead, he longed to go and rebuild Jerusalem. For months Nehemiah prayed about this, and Jehovah God blessed him for doing so. On learning of Nehemiah’s concern, the Persian king provided him with a military force and with letters authorizing him to rebuild Jerusalem.—Nehemiah 1:1–2:9.
 4. How can we show that the worship of Jehovah is above any other cause for rejoicing that we may have?
4 Without a doubt, Ezra, Nehemiah, and many Jews cooperating with them proved that Jehovah’s worship, centered in Jerusalem, was more important than anything else—that it was ‘above their chief cause for rejoicing,’ that is, above any other thing over which they might rejoice. What an encouragement such individuals are for all today who view Jehovah, his worship, and his spirit-directed organization in the same way! Is that true of you? Do you show by your endurance in godly works that your greatest cause for rejoicing is the privilege of worshiping Jehovah with his dedicated people? (2 Peter 3:11) As a further encouragement to that end, let us consider the fine results of Ezra’s journey to Jerusalem.
Blessings and Responsibilities
 5. What rich blessings came to the inhabitants of Judah in the days of Ezra?
5 The group of about 6,000 exiles returning with Ezra brought contributions of gold and silver for Jehovah’s temple. These amounted to some 35 million dollars at current rates. This was about seven times more gold and silver than the first exiles had managed to bring. How thankful to Jehovah the inhabitants of Jerusalem and Judah must have been to receive all this human and material support! But rich blessings from God also bring responsibility.—Luke 12:48.
 6. What did Ezra discover in his homeland, and how did he react?
6 Ezra soon discovered that many Jews, including some priests and elders, had overstepped God’s Law by marrying pagan wives. (Deuteronomy 7:3, 4) Rightly, he was very distressed over this violation of God’s Law covenant. “As soon as I heard of this thing I ripped apart my garment and my sleeveless coat, . . . and I kept sitting stunned.” (Ezra 9:3) Then, with anxious Israelites present, Ezra poured out his heart in prayer to Jehovah. In the hearing of all, Ezra reviewed Israel’s past disobedience and God’s warning of what would happen if they married the pagan inhabitants of the land. He concluded: “O Jehovah the God of Israel, you are righteous, because we have been left over as an escaped people as at this day. Here we are before you in our guiltiness, for it is impossible to stand before you on account of this.”—Ezra 9:14, 15.
 7. (a) What fine example did Ezra set in dealing with wrongdoing? (b) How did guilty ones react in Ezra’s day?
7 Ezra used the expression “we.” Yes, he included himself, though he was not personally guilty. Ezra’s deep distress along with his humble prayer touched the hearts of the people and motivated them to works befitting repentance. They volunteered a painful remedy—all who had violated God’s Law would send the foreign wives back to their homelands, along with children born to them. Ezra agreed to this measure and encouraged the guilty ones to comply. With the authority invested in him by the Persian king, Ezra had the right to execute all lawbreakers or to banish them from Jerusalem and Judah. (Ezra 7:12, 26) But it appears that he did not have to take such action. “All the congregation” said: “Exactly according to your word it devolves upon us to do.” Furthermore, they confessed: “We have rebelled to a great extent in this matter.” (Ezra 10:11-13) Ezra chapter 10 lists the names of 111 men who followed through on the decision by sending away their foreign wives and the children born to them.
 8. Why was the drastic action of sending away foreign wives in the interests of all mankind?
8 This action was in the interests not only of Israel but also of all mankind. If nothing had been done to correct matters, the Israelites could have been assimilated into the surrounding nations. In that case, the line of descent to the Promised Seed for blessing all mankind would have been contaminated. (Genesis 3:15; 22:18) It would have been difficult to establish the identity of the Promised Seed as a descendant of King David of the tribe of Judah. Some 12 years later, this vital matter was again given attention when “the seed of Israel proceeded to separate themselves from all the foreigners.”—Nehemiah 9:1, 2; 10:29, 30.
 9. What good counsel does the Bible give to Christians who are married to unbelievers?
9 What can Jehovah’s present-day servants learn from this account? Well, Christians are not under the Law covenant. (2 Corinthians 3:14) Instead, they obey “the law of the Christ.” (Galatians 6:2) Thus, a Christian married to an unbeliever complies with Paul’s counsel: “If any brother has an unbelieving wife, and yet she is agreeable to dwelling with him, let him not leave her.” (1 Corinthians 7:12) Moreover, Christians married to unbelievers are Scripturally obliged to work at making a success of their marriage. (1 Peter 3:1, 2) Obedience to this fine counsel has often resulted in the blessing that unbelieving marriage mates have had a change of heart toward true worship. Some have even become faithful baptized Christians.—1 Corinthians 7:16.
10. What lesson can Christians learn from the 111 Israelite men who sent their foreign wives away?
10 Yet, the case of the Israelites who sent their foreign wives away does provide a fine lesson for single Christians. These should not start courting members of the opposite sex who are unbelievers. Avoiding such a relationship may be difficult, even painful, but it is the best course in order for one to have God’s continued blessing. Christians are commanded: “Do not become unevenly yoked with unbelievers.” (2 Corinthians 6:14) Any single Christian desiring marriage should plan on marrying a genuine fellow believer.—1 Corinthians 7:39.
11. Like the Israelite men, how may we be tested as to our cause for rejoicing?
11 In many other ways too, Christians have made adjustments when it has been brought to their attention that they are heading in an unscriptural direction. (Galatians 6:1) From time to time, this journal has identified unscriptural conduct that would disqualify a person from remaining a part of God’s organization. In 1973, for example, Jehovah’s people came to understand fully that drug abuse and the use of tobacco are serious sins. To pursue a godly course, we must “cleanse ourselves of every defilement of flesh and spirit.” (2 Corinthians 7:1) Quite a number took such Bible counsel to heart; they were willing to suffer initial withdrawal symptoms in order to remain part of God’s clean people. Clear Scriptural direction has also been given regarding sexual matters, dress, grooming, and the wise choice of employment, entertainment, and music. Whatever Scriptural principles are brought to our attention, may we prove ready “to be readjusted,” like the 111 Israelite men. (2 Corinthians 13:11) This will show that the privilege of worshiping Jehovah in association with his holy people ‘ascends above our chief cause for rejoicing.’
12. What happened in 455 B.C.E.?
12 After reporting the episode involving the foreign wives, the Bible does not tell us what happened in Jerusalem for the next 12 years. No doubt, Israel’s neighbors became more hostile because of the cancellation of many marriage alliances. In 455 B.C.E., Nehemiah arrived in Jerusalem with a military escort. He had been appointed governor of Judah and had brought letters from the Persian king authorizing him to rebuild the city.—Nehemiah 2:9, 10; 5:14.
Opposition From Envious Neighbors
13. What attitude did the Jews’ false religious neighbors display, and how did Nehemiah react?
13 False religious neighbors opposed the purpose for Nehemiah’s coming. Their leaders threatened him by asking: “Is it against the king that you are rebelling?” Showing faith in Jehovah, Nehemiah replied: “The God of the heavens is the One that will grant us success, and we ourselves, his servants, shall get up, and we must build; but you yourselves have no share, nor just claim, nor memorial in Jerusalem.” (Nehemiah 2:19, 20) When repairs to the wall began, the same enemies mocked: ‘What are the feeble Jews doing? Will they bring the stones to life out of the heaps of dusty rubbish? If a fox went up against it, he would certainly break down their wall of stones.’ Instead of replying to these remarks, Nehemiah prayed: “Hear, O our God, for we have become an object of contempt; and make their reproach return upon their own head.” (Nehemiah 4:2-4) Continuously, Nehemiah set this fine example of reliance on Jehovah!—Nehemiah 6:14; 13:14.
14, 15. (a) How did Nehemiah handle the threat of enemy violence? (b) How have Jehovah’s Witnesses been able to continue with their spiritual building work despite fierce opposition?
14 To fulfill their important preaching assignment, Jehovah’s Witnesses today also rely on God. Opposers try to hinder this work by mocking. Sometimes, individuals interested in the Kingdom message give up because they cannot endure the ridicule. If ridicule fails, opposers may get angry and resort to threats of violence. This is what the builders of Jerusalem’s walls experienced. But Nehemiah refused to be intimidated. Instead, he armed the builders against enemy attack and strengthened their faith by saying: “Do not be afraid on their account. Jehovah the great and the fear-inspiring One keep in your mind; and fight for your brothers, your sons and your daughters, your wives and your homes.”—Nehemiah 4:13, 14.
15 As in the days of Nehemiah, Jehovah’s Witnesses have been well equipped to continue their spiritual building work in spite of fierce opposition. “The faithful and discreet slave” has provided faith-strengthening spiritual food, which enables God’s people to be productive even where the work is banned. (Matthew 24:45) As a result, Jehovah has continued to bless his people with increase throughout the earth.—Isaiah 60:22.
Internal Problems
16. What internal problems threatened the spirit of the builders of Jerusalem’s wall?
16 As the rebuilding of Jerusalem’s wall progressed and the wall got higher, the work became more difficult. That was when a problem came to light that threatened the spirit of the struggling builders. Because of food shortages, some Jews were finding it hard to provide food for their families and to pay their taxes to the Persian government. Wealthier Jews lent them food and money. Contrary to God’s Law, however, the poorer Israelites had to pledge their lands and children as security that they would pay back the money with interest. (Exodus 22:25; Leviticus 25:35-37; Nehemiah 4:6, 10; 5:1-5) Now the creditors were threatening to take over their lands and force them to sell their children as slaves. Nehemiah was incensed at this unloving, materialistic attitude. He acted quickly to ensure Jehovah’s continued blessing on the work of rebuilding Jerusalem’s wall.
17. What did Nehemiah do to ensure Jehovah’s continued blessing on the building work, and with what outcome?
17 “A great assembly” was arranged, and Nehemiah clearly showed the wealthier Israelites that what they had done displeased Jehovah. Then he appealed to the guilty ones, including some of the priests, to return all the interest they had taken and to return the lands they had illegally taken from those who could not afford to pay interest. Commendably, the guilty ones said: “We shall make restoration, and from them we shall ask nothing back. We shall do precisely as you are saying.” These were not idle words, for the Bible reports that “the people proceeded to do according to [Nehemiah’s] word.” And all the congregation praised Jehovah.—Nehemiah 5:7-13.
18. For what attitude have Jehovah’s Witnesses become known?
18 What about our day? Rather than be exploitative, Jehovah’s Witnesses are widely known for their generous attitude toward fellow believers and others who have been struck by adversity. As in Nehemiah’s day, this has resulted in many grateful expressions of praise to Jehovah. At the same time, however, “the faithful and discreet slave” has found it necessary to give Scriptural counsel on business matters and on the need to avoid the greedy exploitation of others. In certain countries it is common to ask for an exorbitant bride-price, but the Bible plainly warns that greedy persons and extortioners will not inherit God’s Kingdom. (1 Corinthians 6:9, 10) The good response of most Christians to such counsel is reminiscent of how those Jews saw the sinfulness of exploiting their poorer brothers.
Jerusalem’s Wall Completed
19, 20. (a) What effect did the completion of Jerusalem’s wall have on religious opposers? (b) What victory have Jehovah’s Witnesses experienced in many lands?
19 Despite all the opposition, Jerusalem’s wall was completed in 52 days. What effect did this have on the opposers? Nehemiah said: “As soon as all our enemies heard of it and all the nations that were around us got to see it, they at once fell very much in their own eyes, and they got to know that it was from our God that this work had been done.”—Nehemiah 6:16.
20 Today, enemy opposition to God’s work continues in various ways and places. However, millions of people have seen the futility of opposing Jehovah’s Witnesses. For instance, consider past attempts to bring an end to the preaching work in Nazi Germany, Eastern Europe, and many countries of Africa. All such attempts have failed, and many people now acknowledge that ‘it is from God that our work is being done.’ What a reward this has been to faithful old-timers who made Jehovah’s worship ‘ascend above their chief cause for rejoicing’ in such lands!
21. What significant events will be considered in the next article?
21 In the next article, we will review important events that led up to the joyful inauguration of Jerusalem’s rebuilt wall. We will also consider how the completion of a far grander city for the benefit of all mankind draws near.
Do You Recall?
□ How did Ezra and others rejoice over Jerusalem?
□ What errors did Ezra and Nehemiah help many Jews correct?
□ What lessons can you take from the accounts involving Ezra and Nehemiah?
[Picture on page 15]
Jerusalem, not his prestigious job at Shushan, was of chief concern to Nehemiah
[Pictures on page 16, 17]
Like Nehemiah, we need to pray for Jehovah’s guidance and for strength to continue in our all-important preaching assignment

