Making Good Use of Our Literature
1 How thankful we are that Jehovah regularly provides “food at the proper time” so we can understand his Word! This spiritual food is highly valued by all of us. When a new publication is released at an assembly we quickly get a copy, leaf through it eagerly, then read it at the first opportunity. Likewise with the magazines we get four times a month. As we regularly study the Bible and these publications we get to know Jehovah better, find out how prophecy is being fulfilled and learn to live better lives.
2 In field service, too, our literature is invaluable. We cannot remember everything we read, nor is there time to discuss it all at the doors, so the truth is available to others in printed form. It can be read at the householder’s convenience and many, in this way, have learned the truth.
3 However, we need to be balanced in our use of the literature in the field. Placing literature is not an end in itself. Paul says: “We are not peddlers of the word of God as many men are, but as out of sincerity, yes, as sent from God, under God’s view, in company with Christ, we are speaking.” (2 Cor. 2:17) We are not literature salesmen and we do not want to give others that impression. We are God’s representatives and want to discuss Bible truths with people whenever possible.
4 Is it necessary that we try to make the literature offer at every door? No, not if the person is opposed, not interested, or if other circumstances indicate that it would not be appropriate. Especially is this so in territory that is worked often.
5 When should literature be given away? If the one we are talking to appears to be interested and gives evidence of sincerity in saying he cannot afford to contribute for the literature, then, likely we would leave something for him to read, but, if it is obvious that the individual is not interested and the claim of having no money is a reflection of this lack of interest, then undoubtedly it would not be advisable to give the literature away. Each publisher would have to decide conscientiously what to do under the circumstances.
6 Good judgment must be used relative to leaving literature at the door when no one is at home, especially when the territory is worked often. If you feel that a magazine should be left, then by all means it should be pushed out of sight under the door so it will not act as a signal to thieves that no one is at home. We can always leave a handbill and these can much more easily be slipped under the door.
7 It is reported that in some congregations large numbers of magazines accumulate, get quite old and are never used. We want to avoid wasting literature. We should have the goal of ordering enough magazines but not more than we need. Each publisher should order what he believes is reasonable for his use and then if he places them quickly he can always use other literature. The elders can be alert to the needs of the publishers and adjust the order in harmony with what is realistic. If many magazines of a certain issue are not placed because of an assembly or bad weather, then all can be encouraged to put forth a special effort to use them the next week or so and thus get them into the hands of those who might read them.
8 Jehovah’s organization has certainly supplied us generously with literature to keep us spiritually strong and to aid us in the spreading of the good news. We can be confident that this fine provision will continue. Let us then make good use of our literature in magnifying His name.

