Your Service Meetings
WEEK STARTING OCTOBER 3
15 min: Song 32. Announcements, stressing care in handling subscriptions. Read Psalm 2:11, 12. Show need to stay in our refuge under God’s kingdom, inviting others to do the same. Isaiah 32:1, 2, 17, 18 describes the peace and security of those who are brought into the spiritual paradise. Identify the “princes” and show how they contribute to the restful conditions of the paradise. (See Watchtower 10/1/75, pages 604, 605, paragraphs 1-5.)
15 min: Helping Others to Wake Up. During October we will be seeking to start Scriptural discussions in our door-to-door work, using the Bible whenever possible. When we get a listening ear we will be glad to explain to the householder the benefits of regularly reading the Awake! and show how it can be obtained. (See Announcements for details of offer.) The October 8 issue will be a special one discussing the subject “Will Serving God Solve Your Problems?” Chairman can discuss with audience an article or scripture from this Awake! that might be especially appropriate in local territory so as to involve the householder in a discussion. Have well-prepared demonstration of a brief, simple presentation built around Psalm 146:3 and Ps 37:9-11 showing that men cannot solve our problems, but God can and will. However, publishers can use any Scriptural presentation they have found successful recently. You might use the illustration on the cover. Or you might turn inside to the article that deals with family life.
18 min: “The Pioneer’s Part in Gathering More of the ‘Great Crowd.’” Consider first half of insert on pioneer work, down to subheading “Encourage Pioneers.” Do this by questions and answers.
12 min: “Have You Offered to Conduct a Bible Study?” Talk, but draw audience into discussion appropriately. Song 113. Prayer.
WEEK STARTING OCTOBER 10
Making Good Use of Our Literature
15 min: Song 31. Discuss how the printed page has been used in “the time of the end” to spread the good news far and wide. Early Christians didn’t even have a personal copy of Bible for study or witnessing. We now have complete Bible in printed form, in variety of translations; especially appreciated is the New World Translation. (2 Tim. 3:16, 17) Jehovah is fulfilling promise given at Matthew 24:45-47 to have “faithful and discreet slave” bring us needed “food at the proper time.” Yearbook for 1976, page 22, paragraph 4, shows extent to which literature used world wide in past year. Glad to study it and to place it.
 8 min: Branch Letter. Talk, drawing audience into discussion occasionally. Mention that October 15 Watchtower is a special issue, and offer some suggestions for presenting it in the field.
 7 min: Have accounts report read and bring in any local announcements.
15 min: Why Do We Appreciate Our Literature? Interview a number of publishers as to why they appreciate the various publications supplied to us by the “faithful and discreet slave.” Might ask questions such as: How long have you been reading the Society’s literature? What especially attracted you to the publications when you first became interested? What do you do in order to arrange adequate time for reading? What is it that you particularly appreciate about the Awake!? What will you especially try to put across to the householder during October in describing Awake!?
15 min: “Making Good Use of Our Literature.” Questions and answers. While discussing appropriate use of literature chairman can extend a warm invitation to publishers to share in field service at congregation’s group field service arrangements. Song 7. Prayer.
WEEK STARTING OCTOBER 17
12 min: Song 27. Theocratic News. Local announcements.
10 min: Question Box, talk. Presiding overseer might handle this, drawing audience into discussion at appropriate points. Chairman will want to read carefully Question Box in Kingdom Ministry of January and February 1975 so that he can present a clear picture regarding which brothers might be used in various program assignments.
18 min: “Presenting the Good News—At Each Appropriate Opportunity.” First consider entire article by means of questions and answers and then use remaining time to hear brief experiences from audience of how some have taken advantage of various opportunities to give a witness. Would be good to arrange experiences in advance.
20 min: “The Pioneer’s Part in Gathering More of the ‘Great Crowd.’” Begin at subheading “Encourage Pioneers” and complete the insert. Discuss with audience by means of well-prepared questions. Express appreciation for local pioneers—special, regular and auxiliary. Remind congregation of some things that might help and encourage local pioneers, such as, assistance with transportation, working with them in the field service, and so forth. Song 8. Prayer.
WEEK STARTING OCTOBER 24
Serve Jehovah in Youth
10 min: Song 23. Introductory comments. Any needed local announcements. Suggest all publishers familiarize themselves with Youth book in preparation for November field service, selecting points to use in presentations. Plans for distributing Kingdom News.
20 min: “Serve Jehovah in Your Youth.” Discuss with audience by means of well-prepared questions. Look up, read and discuss as many cited scriptures as time permits, asking audience to make application.
15 min: Our Brothers Who Started Serving Jehovah in Youth. Interview a number of publishers who started serving Jehovah in youth. These can be either young publishers who have recently started serving or older publishers who have served for years but started as youths. Might ask questions such as: When did you begin serving Jehovah? How did you get the truth? What especially moved you to begin sharing in the field service? Do you recall what others, worldly friends and brothers, said at the time and how this affected you? What recommendations would you make to young Witnesses today?
15 min: “Like Slips of Olive Trees All Around My Table.” From Watchtower of June 1, 1976. Chairman should study article carefully in preparation. Can narrate introductory material briefly and then select those paragraphs that you feel would be especially beneficial in your congregation, have them read first and then invite audience to comment, making application, indicating what they feel is to be learned from the experience. Song 60. Prayer.

