Give Kingdom News No. 35 Wide Distribution
1 October and November will be busy months for all of us. During the first 11 days of October, we will offer individual copies of The Watchtower and Awake! Then, from Sunday, October 12, through Sunday, November 16, we will join in the worldwide distribution of Kingdom News No. 35. It will be our privilege to take an important message to all the people in our locality. It is the answer to the question, “Will All People Ever Love One Another?” During this special campaign, we will distribute Kingdom News No. 35 on weekdays. On weekends, in addition to presenting Kingdom News, we will feature the current issues of the magazines.
2 Who May Have a Share? As usual, the elders will be at the forefront of the work. Everyone enjoys distributing Kingdom News, and no doubt a great many publishers will enroll as auxiliary pioneers during one or both months of the campaign. Other publishers will want to spend more time than usual in the ministry.
3 Do you have a Bible student who is well along in his study of the Knowledge book and who will soon qualify to engage in field service? Perhaps he could become an unbaptized publisher in time to engage in the Kingdom News campaign. A simple presentation is all that is needed to introduce the tract. For example, one might say: “This message is so important that it is being distributed worldwide this month in 169 languages. I would like you to have your personal copy.” Even young children can have a fine share in this exciting work.
4 Book study conductors should encourage every member of their group to have a full share in the distribution of Kingdom News No. 35. There also may be publishers who have become inactive but who would again be active in the service if they received the needed encouragement. In advance of the campaign, the elders should visit each of these to see what can be done to help them accompany experienced publishers in this feature of the ministry.
5 When May We Meet for Service? All this activity will call for group witnessing arrangements that are both convenient and practical. Wherever possible, meetings for service should be organized for each weekday, on the weekends, and in the evenings. They should be held at times that will enable publishers and pioneers to take full advantage of the witnessing period. Arrangements also may be made to meet in the late afternoons for the benefit of school students, shift workers, and others. The service overseer should ensure that there will be plenty of house-to-house and business territory on hand so that everyone can share fully in the work. Where there are many publishers in an area, they should be discreet about how many work in a given section of territory.
6 What About Not-at-Homes? We want to speak personally to as many householders as possible to explain why they should read Kingdom News No. 35. So if no one is at home when you call, write down the address and call again at a different time of day. If by the last week of the campaign your efforts to contact these householders still have been unsuccessful, you may leave a copy of Kingdom News at the door in a place where it will not be seen by passersby. In residential areas, be alert to offer Kingdom News to individuals who may be walking along the street. When working rural areas and where there is more territory than can be covered during the campaign, a copy of Kingdom News may be left at not-at-homes on the first call.
7 What Is Our Objective? Congregations should endeavor to use their entire supply of Kingdom News to cover all their territory before the campaign ends on November 16. If your congregation’s territory assignment is quite large and if it is safe to work on your own rather than with a partner, you may find it practical to do so. This will enable you to reach as many deserving ones as possible with the good news. (Matt. 10:11) It may be advantageous to carry a few tracts in your hand and a Bible in your pocket or purse, rather than use a briefcase. Be sure to keep a good record of where interest is found.
8 Are You Ready to Start? The elders should anticipate how many extra magazines the congregation will need and should order accordingly. There is no need to order Kingdom News No. 35, since a consignment is being sent to each congregation. Special, regular, and auxiliary pioneers will have 250 copies each to distribute, while congregation publishers will be allotted 50 copies each. We have our work cut out for us. Are you eager to share in this delightful activity? No doubt you are. Let us give the important Bible-based message in Kingdom News No. 35 the widest possible distribution!

