Announcements
◆ Literature offer for May: God’s Kingdom of a Thousand Years Has Approached, with a booklet on a contribution of 50c. June: New World Translation, along with True Peace and Security book, on contribution of $1.25.
◆ When corresponding with the Society for any reason, pioneers should always use their name exactly as it appears on their Pioneer Identification and Assignment card.
◆ Many congregation reports postmarked after the tenth of the month are being received. Please submit the report each month no later than the sixth. (Organization book, p. 75, par. 1)
◆ Regular pioneers desiring to serve as temporary special pioneers, devoting a minimum of 150 hours a month to field service in isolated territory for two or three months during the summer, may write for further information. Each assignment is organized for a team of two. Before writing to the Society, arrangements should be made for a partner (give partner’s name when writing) and a car that is in good condition. Some financial assistance will be provided by the Society.
◆ If your congregation is overstocked with various publications, please review paragraph 10 in the Watchtower Cost List.
◆ On Monday, March 4, 1974, there will be no arrangement for tours of the Bethel home and factory because of the graduation of the Gilead class. On Saturday, April 13, the Bethel home and factory will be closed for spring cleaning. So there will be no tours on that day either.
◆ New Publications Available:
Organization for Kingdom-preaching and Disciple-making​—Afrikaans
Listening to the Great Teacher​—Greek, Yoruba
The Truth That Leads to Eternal Life​—Kikamba, Kissi
“This Good News of the Kingdom”​—Kikuyu, Maltese, Papiamento, Tongan
When All Nations Collide, Head On, with God​—Ibo
Divine Rulership​—The Only Hope for All Mankind—​Chinese, Efik, Yoruba
Divine Victory​—Its Meaning for Distressed Humanity—​Chinese
◆ Out of Stock in U.S.A.:
The Truth That Leads to Eternal Life​—Arabic, Papiamento
Young’s Concordance​—English

