Get a Firm Hold on the Real Life
525,007 Report Share in Field Ministry!
1 In rapidly increasing numbers, people are finding the real reason for life. They are learning that when they give of themselves in doing God’s will, there is genuine satisfaction. (Rev. 4:11) As a result, during December thousands more joined with us in the field ministry. In fact, the 525,007 who reported included 103,112 more than had shared just one year earlier here in the U.S. What a thrill to see such a marvelous increase in the number of praisers of Jehovah!
2 Putting forth more than the usual effort, we all had a part in distributing the 46,018,935 copies of Kingdom News No. 17 that were put into the hands of the public. During the month, the number of regular pioneers moved up to a new peak, and 15,734 others put forth special effort as temporary pioneers. All together, the report showed that over 3,600,000 more hours were devoted to preaching the good news than for the same month a year ago. What a grand witness was given!
3 Now we need to take practical steps to keep on in this right course, despite the problems and pressures associated with the breakdown of this present system. To do that we need to lean heavily on Jehovah for his spirit. How do we get more of this invisible force that gives proper direction to our actions and speech?​—Eph. 5:18.
4 If we build our lives around spiritual things, such as prayer, personal study and meditation, we are headed in the right direction. If we cultivate a desire to be present at the meetings, we are truly pursuing our goal. Further, if we develop a desire to be in association with spiritually minded people, surely this sort of spiritual influence will greatly help us to get a firm hold on the real life.​—1 Cor. 2:13; 1 Tim. 6:17-19.
5 During March, is it possible for us to lean even more heavily on Jehovah? If we do this, marvelous benefits will flow to us daily. We will be able to harness our thoughts more effectively to spiritual matters. (1 John 5:14; Prov. 15:28) And when we think about the spiritual events taking place in March, our hearts should move us to share in them as fully as possible. For example, we are in the third month of the Watchtower campaign and every day we can make, or take advantage of, marvelous opportunities to publicize Jehovah’s name. In addition to regular house-to-house calls and return visits, have you tried obtaining subscriptions through informal witnessing? You may be pleasantly surprised at your success in this field of witnessing.
6 Study on our part helps us to develop an even more prayerful attitude and a finer relationship with Jehovah. As we increase our knowledge and feel even closer to Jehovah God and Christ Jesus, unquestionably this will be a powerful aid in overcoming any obstacles we might experience in connection with our worship and in living our lives even as Jesus lived his life.​—Mark 9:23.
7 Moreover, as the upbuilding information that we constantly receive sinks deeply into our hearts, surely we will be motivated to share as fully as possible in the field ministry.​—Luke 6:45.
8 Undoubtedly one of the high points during March will be the special public talk on March 31, “Surviving on the Victorious Side at Har–Magedon.” Surely this will be a rewarding occasion for all of us. May Jehovah bless us as we continue to get a firm hold on the real life and aid others to do the same.
[Blurb on page 1]
Getting a Firm Hold on the Real Life.

