Getting Ready for the Memorial
1 Truly there are compelling reasons to obey Jesus’ command to celebrate the Memorial. Appreciating this in times past, our brothers have assembled, even under the most trying circumstances. One example of this can be seen in the 1974 Yearbook, pages 143-145. Why have our brothers in Germany and throughout the earth shown such great appreciation for this event? It is not only because we are commanded to keep this occasion, but also because of the spiritual benefits to ourselves and those who join with us.
2 The Memorial is a time for sober reflection on our own course as a Christian. It is a time to meditate on what we have done and what we are going to do with our lives in the future. It is a time to intensify our determination to do Jehovah’s will no matter what may come. Above all, it is a time to consider deeply the love of Jehovah in providing the ransom, as well as the love of Jesus, who willingly paid the ransom price so we might have hope. (John 15:13; Phil. 2:7, 8) How encouraging, how motivating it is to reflect on this marvelous provision!​—1 John 4:11.
3 Good planning, both individually and congregationally, will contribute toward all present getting the most benefit from the Memorial this year. The body of elders will be meeting early in March. During this meeting it would be good to make preparations for additional attendants, chairs, the emblems, proper ventilation and appropriate announcements. Since the Memorial will be the only meeting that day, you may want to have the Watchtower study at another time during the week. (Of course, all Memorial celebrations should begin after 7:00 p.m., daylight saving time.) Arrangements can be made for field service that Sunday, with special emphasis on inviting and bringing interested persons to the Memorial. With a special effort on the part of everyone we should have a fine attendance indeed.
4 Jehovah’s witnesses as a group are truly the happiest, most friendly people on earth. Yet on this special occasion it is well to plan in advance so that new ones in attendance feel so welcome that they will want to attend our meetings regularly. All of us can give more than the usual attention to welcoming newcomers, since some could easily be overlooked when so many are present. Why not plan to greet as many new ones as possible, engaging them in friendly conversation? If no one is studying with them, perhaps a study could be arranged. Such kindness may be instrumental in aiding more to make fine spiritual progress in the coming months.
5 May Jehovah’s rich blessings be upon our efforts individually and congregationally to get ready for the Memorial.
[Blurb on page 4]
Aid Interested Persons to Attend the Memorial.

