Presenting the Good News​—Informally
1 Many now faithfully serving Jehovah first learned of his purposes through informal witnessing. You may know of persons who have successfully aided family members into the truth. Others have thoughtfully spoken to friends, business acquaintances, fellow workers, teachers, schoolmates, visitors, neighbors, fellow travelers, and so on, thereby planting seeds of truth that took root in fine soil.​—Luke 8:15.
2 A major advantage of informal witnessing is the congenial, relaxed atmosphere in which it can be done. Much can be accomplished during a friendly discussion under favorable circumstances. In fact, it is possible in this way to reach persons who may never have heard the good news at their doors. Even a brief contact, such as that made on a bus, a train, an airplane, or in a waiting room, may stimulate a person’s interest to the point where the next Witness who calls will get a hearing ear.​—Prov. 15:7; Eccl. 11:6.
3 Some find it best when witnessing informally to make brief statements that will arouse a person’s curiosity and that may cause the person to ask questions about our message and work. Or, we may ask questions to stimulate a person’s thinking, and then show the Bible’s answer. As always, there is a need to be discreet and tactful. We should avoid wasting time with those not sincerely interested.​—Matt. 7:6.
4 We can casually mention to workmates or persons we meet every day what we have learned at meetings, at assemblies, in personal study, and so forth. Over a period of time these seeds of truth may take root and grow, even if the person is indifferent at first.
5 When witnessing informally to persons we have never met before, some find it helpful to engage in casual conversation with the individual for a few minutes, initially, to establish a rapport, or friendly spirit of communication. This can then be used as a “platform” from which to build a friendly discussion of God’s Word.
6 To be successful it is good to plan ahead for your informal witnessing by having with you one or more small books, such as Truth or Peace and Security, also magazines or booklets. In that way you have something to leave with the person to read, now that you have stimulated his interest.
7 As world conditions worsen, producing more and more anxiety among mankind, we have great joy in comforting those who are “sighing and groaning.” (Ezek. 9:4) Too, as we get closer to the “great tribulation,” informal witnessing may become one of the main preaching methods at our disposal. Why not develop ability in this work now?

