Showing Intense Love for One Another
1 Human imperfections and faults we all have. Working as closely as we do in the Christian congregation, there are occasions when problems come up and perhaps even get magnified out of proportion. But as we all know, one of the hallmarks of Christianity is agápe or principled love. What can we do individually and collectively to perfect this most important quality in our lives? Obviously we all want to make a contribution to the unity and harmony of the Christian congregation with which we serve. In this connection it may be helpful to review some of the circumstances with which some are confronted from time to time.
2 For example, you may be a sister who has been upset because an elder has counseled your son due to his conduct at the Kingdom Hall. Perhaps you feel inclined to find fault with his counsel or to reply with angry words against the brother. But would it not be good to remember that love “does not become provoked” and that “love is long-suffering and kind”? If we appreciate that our older brothers are interested in us and in our families and have no reason unduly to inject themselves into our family affairs, is it not possible for us to accept counsel in the spirit in which it is given? (Prov. 15:31; Ps. 141:5) It is true, of course, that the elders usually call these things to the attention of parents first, making recommendations to the parents and letting them handle the matter. However, if such things persist, such as misbehaving at the Kingdom Hall, then elders may choose to reason with both parents and child, giving appropriate counsel and help. We do have to maintain a certain decorum at the Kingdom Hall.
3 You may be one who feels that an elder should be a better speaker or a better organizer. Additionally, he may have little mannerisms that disturb you. Frankly, you may wonder about his qualifications. Perhaps you do not enjoy his talk from the platform and secretly resent his counsel to the congregation. In a situation like this, would it not be good to reflect on the fact that “love is not jealous” and that it “bears all things”? Perhaps you are assessing this brother from your own viewpoint or from a human standard; whereas, the qualifications for elders and ministerial servants are set forth in God’s Word. Moreover, love is not envious of good things coming to others, but rejoices in seeing a fellowman receive a position of greater responsibility. Is it not better to view this brother from his spiritual qualifications, overlooking his human imperfections and cooperating with him? (Heb. 13:7, 17) Obviously, the loving thing would be not to listen with a critical ear, but to profit from the counsel and instruction he gives, since what is really important is what comes from God’s Word, not who says it.
4 Finally, elders themselves need to be discreet, recognizing that of the one to whom much has been given, more is demanded. (Luke 12:48) Surely it would be inappropriate for elders to engage in vulgar speech or to present an image of accomplishing things in their own might, perhaps even bragging of their accomplishments, for love “does not behave indecently” and love “does not brag, does not get puffed up.” In giving counsel, in delivering talks, in shepherding and in teaching, yes, in all things, it is the responsibility of elders to set a loving, humble example, recognizing that they too have things to learn and that others also have good ideas. How important it is for all of us daily to demonstrate intense love toward one another.​—Jer. 9:24; 1 Cor. 1:31; 13:4-7.

