Young People Ask . . .
Alternative Rock—Is It for Me?
“I can relate to the songs about different problems and experiences we young ones encounter.”—15-year-old George.a
“It strikes a middle ground between pop and heavy metal.”—19-year-old Dan.
“It’s new. It’s different. It’s not mainstream, mass-produced music.”—17-year-old Maria.
ALTERNATIVE rock. Many young people enjoy listening to it. Some adults are disturbed by it. And most parents probably have little or no idea what it is in the first place.
Admittedly, it is not easy to explain exactly what alternative rock is. Originally, it was the music of youths who wanted something different, an alternative to the mainstream popular music heard on the radio. Some say it all began when local college radio stations gave airtime to some virtually unknown bands—musical groups that prided themselves on not having sold out to the commercial music industry. The new breed of musicians shunned major recording labels and mass-marketing techniques, such as music videos. Also, they wrote about subjects rarely covered in Top 40 songs.
Unlike heavy metal or rap music, alternative rock is not always easily recognized or categorized. Even experts in the music industry disagree as to just what alternative rock is. That is because, as its name suggests, it covers a wide variety of sounds, moods, and feelings. One young man said: “It’s very hard to classify. It covers a broad spectrum of today’s music.” Another young person ventured this explanation: “It’s not always hard or soft, fast or slow, upbeat or down.” One youth even admitted: “I’m not sure if I can say I like alternative rock because I’m not sure what it is.”
At any rate, the popularity of alternative rock has grown to the point that many of its more popular artists are now considered a part of the music mainstream. Also, parents appear to be less prone to object to it than to heavy metal or other earsplitting forms of rock. Indeed, few parents seem to know which groups or album titles are called alternative, anyway. Even so, there is a need for you to exercise a measure of caution when it comes to this music.
What Is the Appeal?
Consider, for example, why so many youths are attracted to this music. For many it is simply a matter of going along with one’s friends. It also provides a common ground for conversation or for activities, such as trading tapes and CDs.
For most youths, however, it is the sound and the message of alternative rock that makes it so appealing. In particular, many youths find that they identify with the experiences and feelings of the songwriters. A Time magazine cover series on this subject explained: “While pop songs are often about love, alternative lyrics are usually about tougher feelings: despair, lust, confusion. . . . If you are in your teens or 20s, chances are your family has been through a divorce. Alternative music has become an emotional sound track, speaking directly to unresolved issues of abandonment and unfairness.” Thus, a 21-year-old college disc jockey says: “It appealed to me and my friends because our generation is so dead to the world. There’s nothing waiting for us when we get out of school.”
Some Christian youths have likewise become fond of alternative rock. Naturally, most have avoided the harder, more rebellious, violent, or immoral songs. Even so, some of these young Christians have voiced reservations about the seemingly safer songs. Young Dan commented: “Some of the singers are known homosexuals and lesbians or drug users, and their lyrics reflect their life-styles.” Another youth, named Jack, says: “Some of the groups have an idea that no one cares about them, their problems, or the future of today’s youth, so they express this in their songs. Many have no motivation or hope.”
A Word of Caution
The Bible tells us that “the whole world is lying in the power of the wicked one,” Satan the Devil. (1 John 5:19) It should not surprise you, then, that music is one of the means Satan uses to mislead young people. Previous articles in this journal and its companion magazine, The Watchtower, have repeatedly demonstrated this fact.b The cautions that have been given regarding heavy metal and rap music are also appropriate when it comes to alternative rock. As the Bible puts it, “the shrewd one considers his steps.”—Proverbs 14:15.
For one thing, it makes little sense to follow after the crowd when it comes to your taste in music. Note this Bible principle, which can apply to letting others make decisions for you: “Do you not know that if you keep presenting yourselves to anyone as slaves to obey him, you are slaves of him because you obey him?” (Romans 6:16) For a Christian youth, the issue is not what is acceptable among one’s peers but what is “acceptable to the Lord.” (Ephesians 5:10) Besides, what kind of youths are drawn to alternative rock? Youths who seem to be happy, balanced, and interested in spiritual things? Or does it seem to find its audience primarily among youths who are disgruntled, unhappy, or even angry?
True, some youths with cheery, upbeat personalities may still be drawn to alternative rock. But consider this: Christians, young and old, have a bright future awaiting them. (2 Peter 3:13) The apostle Paul reminds us of the certainty of the fulfillment of God’s promises, saying: “It is impossible for God to lie.” (Hebrews 6:18) What point is there, then, in exposing yourself to the bleak, negative view of the future that some alternative rock songs express? Could becoming absorbed in music that expresses fear, despair, and hopelessness undermine your faith? Furthermore, what effect might a steady diet of such music have on your emotional outlook?
Be Selective
This is not to say that all music labeled “alternative” is necessarily harmful or offensive. But suppose you learned that someone was trying to poison you. Although you wouldn’t stop eating, you surely would examine your food carefully, wouldn’t you? Knowing that Satan is trying to poison your outlook and attitude should likewise make you careful about the music you choose. As the Bible says, “the ear itself makes a test of words, just as the palate tastes when eating.” (Job 34:3) Instead of blindly following the crowd, put the music you like to the test.
How can you do that? The box entitled “A Guide to Selecting Music” has some helpful suggestions that you might try. Also, try asking your Christian parents what they think of your music. (Proverbs 4:1) You may be surprised at their answers! Of course, your parents are older than you. Understandably, they may not share your taste in music. But if they dislike your music to the point of finding it offensive, degrading, or obnoxious, should you ignore what they have to say? The Bible says: “A wise person will listen and take in more instruction.”—Proverbs 1:5.
Consider how the music affects you. Does it make you feel angry, rebellious, or depressed? If so, these are warning signals that you should not ignore! Why not find music that relaxes or soothes you or that cheers you up?
Trends in music are constantly changing. Before long, some other style of music will be the latest rage. But don’t be swept along with these changing tides. Be discerning and selective when it comes to your music. Be sure that what you listen to is wholesome and upbuilding. (Philippians 4:8) Music can then be a valuable and enjoyable part of your life!
[Footnotes]
Some of the names have been changed.
See the “Young People Ask . . .” articles appearing in the February 8, February 22, and March 22, 1993, issues of Awake! See also “Guard Against Unwholesome Music!,” in the April 15, 1993, issue of The Watchtower.
[Blurb on page 22]
“While pop songs are often about love, alternative lyrics are usually about tougher feelings: despair, lust, confusion.”—Time magazine
[Box on page 23]
A Guide to Selecting Music
◆ Examine the album packaging. This will often tell you a lot about the music and the musicians themselves. Beware of album covers that feature violence, demonic symbols, bizarre dress and grooming, or nudity.
◆ Consider the message of the lyrics. These identify the thoughts and life-styles of the musicians. What ideas do they want you to accept?
◆ The overall sound of the music signals the mood and the feelings the musicians would like you to have—melancholy, joy, defiance, sexual arousal, tranquillity, or despair.
◆ Consider the general audience that is attracted to the music group. Would you like to be identified with that group of people and their attitudes?
[Picture on page 23]
Many youths identify with the lyrics of today’s songs

