From Our Readers
Unemployment  Thank you ever so much for the series “Unemployment—There Is a Solution.” (March 8, 1996) It came at a time when I was out looking for a job, but I could find none. I tried creating work at home, as you mentioned on page 11, and it is working for me. Thanks to Jehovah for you!
J. M., French Guiana
The articles described the situation in which I found myself recently. For a few months, I had to adapt to doing “all kinds of work,” just as one article said. But I did not get discouraged. I tried to have a positive outlook, and in the end I found a steady job. During that period, I had the help of my wife, who was very thrifty in doing the shopping. Thanks again for information that helps us to apply Bible principles in difficult situations.
U. C., Italy
I especially liked your box “Creating Work at Home.” I’m a regular pioneer, a full-time evangelizer, and for two years I operated a licensed home day-care center. I watched children before and after school and had a good income. It freed me for preaching during the middle of the day, and I worked only four hours each day. A lot of parents were grateful because quality care is hard to find. I hope others too can find employment that will help them in serving Jehovah.
T. K. L., United States
You suggested that unemployed people could privately take up upholstering, barbering, janitorial work, and so forth. You also said that under certain circumstances they could advertise their services free of charge or at low cost. Would this not be illegal in Germany?
R. T., Germany
Laws differ from country to country, and perhaps these suggestions would be illegal in some lands. That is why on page 9 we pointed out the necessity of knowing and respecting fiscal and tax laws before embarking on such a venture. Christians are obligated to obey the laws of the lands in which they live. (Romans 13:1)—ED.
Zoo  I really enjoyed the article “Studying the Bible—In the Zoo!” (March 8, 1996) I loved the information about the animals mentioned in the Bible. I never knew that zebras were mentioned in the Bible. I also loved the paragraph about ants. The article has encouraged me to research a different animal each month.
M. F., United States
My Dear Friend  I want to express my sincere appreciation for the enchanting article “My Dear Friend.” (February 22, 1996) It was delightful to read that such a beautiful friendship existed despite such a difference in ages. It illustrates that it is not essential for youths to have as their closest friends only those in their age group. There are many older ones who have much to offer in the way of experience, wisdom, and humor.
S. T., England
The article proved that young and old can get along well together and that young people can benefit from the rich experience of the older generation. I myself have spent many interesting and pleasant hours with an older friend. He has done much to help me deal with such problems as peer pressure.
W. S., Austria
Up till now I have never tried to learn from older ones. Thanks to this article, I now understand what things I can learn from such ones. I want very much to become a close friend of some older ones who are rich in wisdom.
R. K., Japan

