Respect for the Sanctity of Life Rewarded
GOD‘S Word reveals that the life of the unborn is precious. (Ex. 21:22, 23) Many today rejoice that they learned this vital truth and acted in harmony with it.
● This was the experience of a woman (not one of Jehovah’s witnesses) in Milwaukee, Wisconsin. On the advice of a psychiatrist she entered the hospital to have an abortion. Several hours before it was to be performed she walked down the corridor of the hospital to the waiting room. There among the magazines she spotted a copy of Awake! containing an article entitled “Millions Now Living Will Never Be Born.” She picked up the magazine and took it back to bed. Just as she started to read it, a nurse came by and asked, “Are you one of Jehovah’s witnesses?” And then quickly added, “Oh, no, you wouldn’t be in here for this if you were.”
Upon completing the article, this woman thought for a while, got in touch with her doctor and then left the hospital without having the abortion. Arriving home, she called a Witness family she had known, and through them arrangements were made for her to have a home Bible study. She is very happy that the counsel of the Bible prevented her from blotting out the life of her baby.
● A woman in South Africa had a similar experience. In the early part of 1972 she received an injection for a kidney ailment. About a week later she discovered that she had been pregnant at the time. Her doctor recommended an abortion, claiming that the injection would cause the child to be born either horribly deformed or imbecile. In view of her association with Jehovah’s witnesses, the woman felt that an abortion would be wrong but said that she would like a few days to think about it. The doctor agreed.
Her husband’s reaction was: ‘Why not discuss it with Jehovah’s witnesses? If it is wrong, then you will not have an abortion. But we shall trust in Jehovah and he will give us the strength to love whatever will be born.’
The wife did discuss the matter with the Witnesses and was strengthened and encouraged by their Scriptural answers. She returned to her doctor, telling him of her decision to keep the baby, come what may. A look of admiration came into the doctor’s face and he said: ‘That’s a courageous woman​—and I’ll help you to see your decision through.’
During the following months the Witnesses in the local congregation continued to encourage this couple, who remained calmly determined to do the right thing. At last a baby girl was born, perfectly formed in every way. What a time of rejoicing it was for them! Said the husband: “Think what we would have missed had we not done what was right!”
Surely there can be a fine reward even now from acting in harmony with God’s view of life.

