Are You Building With Fire-Resistant Materials?
1 Peter warned the early Christians: “Your adversary, the Devil, walks about like a roaring lion, seeking to devour someone.” (1 Pet. 5:8) Has the Devil lessened his attacks in our day? No, he has intensified them, knowing that his time is short. (Rev. 12:12) We can, therefore, expect that tests of our faith will become even more severe in coming days. How can you best protect yourself and your family so you may all survive these fiery tests? It is by making sure that your faith has been established on the right foundation and has been built with fire-resistant materials.—1 Cor. 3:10-15.
2 The precious metals and stones with which we build are the laws, commandments, principles and precepts as taught in God’s Word and as personified by Jesus in his life. We have learned these through our personal and congregational study and have reinforced them by our application of them in our life.
THE WATCHTOWER—A HELP
3 Has not your study of The Watchtower built up your faith with high-quality, noncombustible materials? Look back at the 1982 magazines with their articles on loyalty (March 15, June 1), the resurrection hope (April 1), how the Kingdom comes (May 1), conscience (July 15), guidance for youth (October 15), endurance (December 1) and love (December 15), to mention just a few. Were you not thrilled to learn or to review what the Bible teaches on these subjects and to see examples from the past and present of those who maintained their faith through trials? You likely felt, ‘If they could do it, so can I.’ Yes, The Watchtower has been and is a powerful help in strengthening our faith.
4 While the majority of the brothers have intensified their efforts to have strong faith and confidence in Jehovah’s sure promises, apparently there are some who have not been building with fire-resistant qualities. This shows up in little or no activity in the ministry, failure to attend meetings, or in allowing themselves to become involved in wrongdoing, which leads to being reproved or disfellowshipped. Those who are strong feel a debt of love to Jehovah to bear “the weaknesses of those not strong.” (Rom. 15:1; 13:8; Acts 20:35; Gal. 6:10) Their kindly, loving efforts are commendable and Jehovah has blessed them. But we should all see the need to develop Christlike qualities that can fireproof our faith.
5 An important beginning in the fireproofing program is personal study. Get to know Jehovah better by reading about his qualities, dealings, attitudes and purposes. Study the life and teachings of Jesus and imitate him by letting God’s thoughts govern your life. (John 14:9-11) Incessantly appeal to Jehovah in prayer. (1 Thess. 5:17) Act in harmony with your prayers and then respectfully accept and apply his answers in your life. You will find that when future fiery tests come your way, rather than being devoured, your faith will be refined and purified.
HELPING YOUNG, INACTIVE AND NEW ONES
6 A vital part of our ministry is using God’s Word to train our children and to help interested persons to make over their personalities. Recently, much commendable work has been done rebuilding the faith of inactive ones by having Bible studies with them. As we study with all persons we will want to educate, train and discipline them in heavenly wisdom and spiritual discernment. Help them to cultivate godly qualities, loyalty and devotion to Bible principles. They need to become true disciples of Christ. Help them to see how The Watchtower has assisted you. As their Christian personalities are developed through study and training, we will see them successfully face up to fiery tests. What a joy it is to know that with God’s help we can assist others to build fire-resistant qualities!
7 During April we will again have the pleasure of offering the Watchtower subscription for $3.50 a year. Recognizing its tremendous value and the influence for good it has had on our life, we should enthusiastically take advantage of every opportunity to encourage others to start reading it.
8 As Paul wrote at 1 Corinthians 3:9, we are “God’s field under cultivation, God’s building.” So we should let Jehovah do a building work in us by giving proper attention to the provisions he has made through his organization. As we draw closer and closer to the end, we can feel the pressures increasing. This does not make us give up or crumble under the heat that Satan is putting on us. Rather, we wisely build our defenses stronger by making sure we are building with fire-resistant materials.—Gal. 6:9, 10.

