Do Not Miss Special Talk
1 “Keep awake, . . . that you may succeed in escaping all these things that are destined to occur,” Jesus said. What is the big thing “destined to occur” before the generation of 1914 passes away? (Luke 21:32, 36) Is it not the “great tribulation such as has not occurred . . . until now”? (Matt. 24:21) Yes! And what is the first thing that will receive God’s adverse judgment and destruction in that “great tribulation”? Is it not Babylon the Great, the world empire of false religion? Yes, it is!—Rev. 18:21.
2 This being true, what a wave of excitement we felt sweep over us upon hearing the title of the special talk to be given on April 10! “Religion’s Time of Judgment” is the exciting subject. Does it not arouse a feeling of anticipation in you? What will the speaker bring out? A special outline has been provided for all those assigned to deliver this important talk.
3 Who will bring about the destruction of false religion? Has Babylon the Great already captured the attention of her enemies? How can genuine worshipers of God escape false religion’s time of judgment? According to Bible prophecy, what will follow the sudden and unexpected end of all false religion? Are you interested in the answers to these questions? If so, you will want to be present at the Kingdom Hall on Sunday, April 10, to hear the thrilling subject “Religion’s Time of Judgment” discussed by a qualified speaker.
4 Are we not living in exciting times? We see “anguish of nations” and the role religion is playing as it endeavors to stay astride the back of the “wild beast” even while meddling in its affairs. (Luke 21:25; Rev. 17:3-5) And what about the United Nations, as well as “the king of the north” and “the king of the south”? They are acting out their parts as foretold. Now is the time to “keep awake” so that we can “succeed in escaping all these things that are destined to occur.”—Dan. 11:40; Luke 21:36.
5 The special talk will help us to see how we and others can escape. Help others to see the value of spending 45 minutes learning about “Religion’s Time of Judgment.” Invite them. Remind them. Bring them.
6 A special announcement that none will want to miss will be made on this occasion. Congregations that are having the visit of the circuit overseer or attending circuit assemblies will have the same announcement made for their benefit as well.
7 As the end of the present ungodly system draws near, Jesus alerts us to keep awake! It is a time “for us to pay more than the usual attention to the things heard.” Paul asks the searching question, “How shall we escape if we have neglected a salvation of such greatness in that it began to be spoken through our Lord?” (Heb. 2:1, 3) Let us all encourage and help one another to be present for the special talk on April 10.

