Announcements
HOLDING FAST THE PUBLIC DECLARATION OF OUR HOPE—Heb. 10:23, NW.
Jehovah’s witnesses, having a definite hope, publicly declare what it is and their reason for holding on to that hope. This public declaration is in harmony with the direction of the Word of God, which says, “With the heart one exercises faith for righteousness, but with the mouth one makes public declaration for salvation.” (Rom. 10:10, NW) The distribution of literature is one form of making this public declaration, while obtaining magazine subscriptions is another. The latter activity will be followed during the month of October as Jehovah’s witnesses and their associates present opportunity to the people at their doors to subscribe for Awake! magazine. With this informative and Scriptural journal new subscribers will receive a premium of three booklets on vital Bible subjects. The subscription rate for one year, 24 issues, is $1. All may share in this activity.
“AWAKE!” BRINGS CONSOLATION AND HOPE
Thirty-six years ago a spiritual awakening began among true Christians that ushered in a “golden age” of blessings and spiritual insight into world conditions. Simultaneously the world’s skies darkened and fear for the future settled over the masses. To bring consolation to millions, a magazine was born that has had unrivaled success in its field. Attaining a circulation of 1,450,000 copies in this short span, its popularity is mounting with each issue. It is Awake! Are you a regular reader? If not, consider its value. Awake! reveals the real reasons for widespread delinquency. Untrammeled by tradition, it treats facts with positive clarity and truthfulness. And, unique in news publications, Awake! constantly points to the sure hope for mankind—the establishment of a righteous new world. Fear is replaced with assurance, uncertainty with knowledge, discouragement with confidence in the future. The cost? Only $1 for a year’s subscription of 24 issues. Send now and receive free with your first copy three outstanding printed sermons.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES FOR THE WEEKS
November 6: What Do the Scriptures Say About “Survival After Death”? ¶1-23. Page 592.
November 13: What Do the Scriptures Say About “Survival After Death”? ¶24-48. Page 600.

