People Who Enjoy Lives of Real Quality
THERE are people in over two hundred lands who have turned away from ways of life that were built on unsatisfying human philosophies. They have learned the value of the guidance found in God’s Word, the Bible. As a result, they are living rewarding, high-quality lives. Noting this about Jehovah’s Christian witnesses, the Trenton, New Jersey, Sunday Times Advertiser of April 7, 1974, reported: “In essence then their entire lives, the morality, the day-to-day interaction with their families, friends and coworkers, the goals and philosophy, are built on a literal interpretation of Biblical text.”
They simply believe what the Bible says about good-quality life, its counsel on morals, family life, human relations and work. And it works! They do not employ philosophies that pay lip service to the Bible while actually sidestepping its wise counsel. A joyful, harmonious life is the result.
Noting this, the article continues: “The claim to joy and harmony seems substantiated by a visit to a Kingdom Hall for a typical Sunday meeting. The first impression is of a family reunion. Families, many with infants or young children on their laps, greeting other families with warm handshakes, kisses and hearty hellos. Black and white couples intermingle, exchanging news, introducing guests. There is no formality. At one time or another in the meeting, it seems as if everyone is smiling.”
How does the application of Bible principles affect the day-to-day quality of life among these families? A staff writer from the paper visited the home of one young couple with a seven-year-old son to find out. She writes that she found an “immaculate home, much of which [the wife] has refurbished and decorated herself.” Her interview with this young mother revealed how Bible principles have improved the quality of their lives.
“‘We found out what real friends are. And we’ve become so happy together. . . . I go out of my way to fix myself up for [my husband] more. The Bible says, “Seek the advantage of the other person above your own,” and that is now how we live.’”​—1 Cor. 10:24.
“In return, [the wife] has seen a change in her husband she says she could never have dreamed.
“‘He used to spend every Saturday out in the woods hunting and every Sunday watching football. Business was very important to him. That’s all changed now. He sold all his guns and bought cameras and now we go out into the woods together and take slides of all the beautiful things Jehovah has given us. . . . we take our vacation by attending Bible conferences all over the world. We never used to travel. We were worried so much about money and furniture. But the Bible says, “Let your manner of life be free from the love of money.”’”​—Heb. 13:5.
They are anxious to share what they have with others so that they can improve the quality of their lives too. Says the reporter: “Today [the couple] lead a life built around their commitment to Jehovah. Both of them spend time in door-to-door service and [she] says she has had ‘many wonderful experiences bringing people Jehovah’s word​—I have literally seen it work miracles for people.’”
Another young husband in Massachusetts tells how he “lived the life-style that is generally associated with that of a musician” in a successful rock band. “Drugs and immorality were two things that were commonplace.”
“My home and family life were breaking down. About this time one of Jehovah’s witnesses came to the door.”
He, his wife and later his two friends accepted the free Bible study assistance offered by Jehovah’s witnesses. Within a year the quality of all their lives had changed drastically. “My friends and I all dropped out of the entertainment world, we stopped using drugs, and my two friends married their girl friends, whom they had previously been living with, and within a year all six of us were baptized, and are still faithfully serving Jehovah.”
Hundreds of thousands of people each year, responding to the counsel of God’s Word, are making the changes that bring true quality to their lives now. At the same time, they are filled with the grand hope of eternal life in God’s new order, where the quality of life will far surpass anything man has ever experienced.

