From Our Readers
“Awake!” Goes to College  I am an English professor, and I have been using Awake! magazines in my college composition courses for the past seven years . . . The articles in Awake! are not only entertaining and informative but also of the highest grammatical quality. I use them to cite proper use of punctuation, idiomatic expressions, figurative language, and diction.
J. D. G., United States
Life Beyond Earth?  Thank you for the revealing article “Is There Life Beyond the Earth?” (April 8, 1990) I had never before received a satisfying answer to this question. But the logical reasoning in your article, based on the Bible, helped me appreciate what a marvelous privilege we have in living on this unique planet.
A. A. C., Brazil
Selling Blood  The articles on “Selling Blood Is Big Business” (October 22, 1990) were of special interest to me, since I was offered a well-paying job drawing blood for a blood bank. After reading the material, I was convinced that this would be wrong. Although I could have used the money, I considered the harmful effects of blood and turned down the job.
R. M., United States
Mistaken Identity  In your November 8, 1990, issue about UFO’s, you refer to the “late Dr. James McCampbell.” Almost certainly you meant Dr. James McDonald, a scientist who died in 1971. As to myself, I have frequently been tardy, but some readers may be pleased to hear that I am not yet “late” in the terminal sense.
James M. McCampbell, United States
To borrow a phrase from Mark Twain, it would appear that the reports of Mr. McCampbell’s death have been greatly exaggerated. Sorry for the mix-up.​—ED.
Picking Movies  I am ten years old. Thank you for the article “Young People Ask . . . How Can I Pick a Decent Movie?” (August 8, 1990) Some time after reading it, I was tempted to watch a bad movie, but I remembered the advice you gave and refused.
M. B., United States
To be quite honest, there have been times when I have walked out on a movie. At other times, though, I have stayed when I should have left. I was afraid of displeasing my so-called friends when I should have been more concerned about displeasing God. I have found this information very helpful. Thank you so very much for caring about young ones.
G. B., United States
Lead Removal  We were quite surprised to read in your article “A Lead-Laden World?” (August 8, 1990) that ‘only a very expensive reverse-osmosis filter’ will effectively remove lead that has leached into one’s drinking water from house pipes. It is widely acknowledged that there are other ways of removing the lead.
G. J., United States
We are sorry if we gave the wrong impression. It was not our intention to exclude alternative means of lead removal, such as distillation systems.​—ED.
Garbage Glut  A friend of mine sent me a gift subscription to Awake!, and I find the material to be varied and interesting. I was filled with dismay to read the articles on the garbage glut (September 22, 1990) because I never thought that this matter was so complicated! Although I am not one of Jehovah’s Witnesses, I like the excellent topics published in your magazines.
L. R. A., Brazil

