From Our Readers
Loneliness  Thank you for the series “Loneliness​—What You Can Do About It.” (September 22, 1993) I cried from the first to the last page. It made me look closely at the feelings I’ve been having lately. I now realize that I’m not the only person who feels lonely. I just hope that I can take your advice and apply it in my life.
S. G., United States
I was deeply moved by those articles. I have been treated for major depression and find loneliness to be my biggest enemy. A depressed person struggles day after day to fight this silent killer. Articles like these are like a light in the tunnel ahead.
G. P., United States
I am 21 years old and serve as a ministerial servant in a congregation of Jehovah’s Witnesses. I have also served as a pioneer (full-​time evangelizer). But I’ve often battled with loneliness. Your articles were an answer to my prayers. My congregation elders have been very loving and helpful, but now I see how I can better myself. I have made many changes in attitude and actions.
R. P., United States
Recently I have been plagued by loneliness. I can’t tell you how desperate I have felt. But can you imagine my surprise on receiving the September 22, 1993, Awake!? I was speechless! I thanked Jehovah and read it as soon as I could. Thank you for that well-​written series with its sensible advice.
C. F., England
Twisted Love Stories  I was taken aback when I saw the “Watching the World” item “Love Story Twist.” (October 22, 1993) Before I began studying the Bible, I used to write these twisted stories about homosexual love. When I read the article, it struck home with me that I was still thinking about those stories, sometimes developing new ones in my imagination. Because you dealt with this subject, I have finally been able to stop this train of thought.
S. S., Japan
Religious Persecution  No other life story has touched me more than the one entitled “Oh, Jehovah, Keep My Young Girl Faithful!” (September 22, 1993) It reinforced in my mind and heart that no matter what I may have to go through in order to keep my integrity to Jehovah, he will always sustain me.
C. D., United States
It was impossible not to be moved by this life story. Our daughter Esther thought the article was marvelous! May Jehovah help our children to be just as strong in faith!
A. C., France
Thank you for the article “Victorious in the Face of Death.” (May 8, 1993) We enjoy religious freedom here. But I pray I can follow the example of these brothers and keep my integrity when it comes to other kinds of hardships.
S. M., Brazil
Appreciates Artwork  When I saw the picture of God’s new world on the cover of the October 22, 1993, Awake!, I was overjoyed. I kept staring at the picture, praying that I will be able to live there. I looked at it again a couple of days later, and it had the same effect. Thank you for such wonderful encouragement.
S. H., United States
I don’t know who your artists are, but their work is really impressive! Some of the most beautiful art I’ve ever seen is in your books and publications. I’m an artist myself, and I can appreciate truly excellent art.
D. W., United States

