The Bible’s Viewpoint
Help for Your Grief
“SORROW MAKES US ALL CHILDREN AGAIN​—DESTROYS ALL DIFFERENCES OF INTELLECT. THE WISEST KNOW NOTHING.”​—RALPH WALDO EMERSON, 19TH-​CENTURY AMERICAN POET AND ESSAYIST.
THE sting of death not only pains but numbs most survivors​—husband, wife, father, mother, son, daughter, or friend. The wise may ask questions but hear no comforting answers, and the strong may weep under the weight of grief but get no solace. Bible readers may be reminded of the outcry of David at the execution of treacherous Absalom: “My son Absalom, my son, my son Absalom! O that I might have died, I myself, instead of you, Absalom my son, my son!” (2 Samuel 18:33) This was not the cry of a king concerning a traitor; it was the cry of a father for his dead son. It may be that you too have had a similar feeling when bereaved.
During the time of deep grief, troublesome questions may come to mind. ‘Why did it have to happen? Did God know this would happen? If he did know, why didn’t he prevent it?’ Even though a person may be well versed in the Bible and know that the dead will be resurrected, nettlesome questions may require deep meditation for consolation and comfort.
Wrong answers do not bring true satisfaction, only false comfort. To be told that ‘God needed your loved one’ very often causes a turning away from God in a spirit of bitterness. The truth, as contained in the Bible, answers questions about grief and draws one closer to Jehovah God, rather than pushing one away from him. We are assured at 2 Corinthians 1:3, 4 that he is the Father of tender mercies and the God of all comfort.
God’s Knowledge and Power Are Balanced
Jehovah, the Almighty, knows all that happens in his vast creation. Psalm 11:4 assures us: “Jehovah​—in the heavens is his throne. His own eyes behold, his own beaming eyes examine the sons of men.” At Hebrews 4:13 the apostle Paul wrote: “There is not a creation that is not manifest to his sight.” God not only knows but he cares! Said Jesus: “Do not two sparrows sell for a coin of small value? Yet not one of them will fall to the ground without your Father’s knowledge. . . . You are worth more than many sparrows.”​—Matthew 10:29, 31.
Could God have prevented the untimely death of a loved one and the grief that followed? Yes, he could. “All things are possible with God,” stated Jesus. (Mark 10:27) Long ago, Jehovah hearkened to dying Hezekiah’s prayer and healed him and added years to his life. (Isaiah 38:2-5) There is no question about Jehovah’s ability to do all that he wills, but we must understand more about his will. We have all read accounts of people who were seriously injured or ill, and yet they lived. Did Jehovah intervene in their behalf?
Some people have extraordinary powers of recovery and a strong will to live. This may explain their seemingly miraculous recovery. Or some new treatment may have proved successful. Thus, we must not automatically conclude that Jehovah intervened.​—Philippians 4:13.
God’s Word Explains Why People Die
At Romans 5:12, the apostle Paul explains very simply that our forefather Adam rebelled against his Creator and was justly sentenced to death. Since we are his descendants, we are sinners and subject to death at any time. We have no guarantee of continuing life. Wise King Solomon of old makes it clear that time and unforeseen occurrence can befall anyone at any time, be it a fatal accident or a sudden terminal illness. Or one can be born with a congenital defect that shortens his life. Solomon also explains that with God there is a time and a season for everything. God has set a time to heal, not just one or a few, but all believing mankind during the reign of Christ Jesus.​—Ecclesiastes 3:1; 9:11; 1 Corinthians 15:25, 26.
Keep in mind this sobering thought: Christians are not exempt from the calamities afflicting the human race and are thus subject to experiences that are common to mankind. “The trials that you have had to bear are no more than people normally have.”​—1 Corinthians 10:13, The Jerusalem Bible.
The Way to Recovery
Death is a time for tears mingled with the greatest sincerity in beseeching Jehovah, the Hearer of prayer. Now as never before, draw close to God. Now as never before, pour out your heart in supplication for insight, for strength to readjust. The Bible encourages us to do just that. Peter says: “Throw all your anxiety upon him, because he cares for you.” (1 Peter 5:7) How comforting are the words of God at Isaiah 57:15: “This is what the High and Lofty One, who is residing forever and whose name is holy, has said: ‘In the height and in the holy place is where I reside, also with the one crushed and lowly in spirit.” The crushed one clings to the Father; there is a greater intimacy than ever before. “The nearer you go to God, the nearer he will come to you,” writes James. (James 4:8, JB) James assures us that God is willing to give us the necessary wisdom and strength for recovery.
In addition, you will find you will become a more compassionate person regarding the trials and adversities of others, more sympathetic. You will know more about how other people feel and how to offer words of comfort and hope. You may be able to aid a grieving one through his sorrow. Yes, you will have greater empathy for others in their distress.​—Philippians 2:1.
The loss of a loved one can be grievous and painful for a time, perhaps for a long time. Yet, in the end, it may yield a clearer view of the hope ahead, the hope of serving God free of painful experiences. We can even become stronger in our Christian personality.​—1 Peter 1:6, 7.
So despite the pain of grief, never give up! Let it be your resolve to continue serving God faithfully and loyally, to his glory and honor and to your everlasting salvation.
[Picture Credit Line on page 26]
The Day Before Parting by Jozef Israels: Gift of Alice N. Lincoln, Courtesy, Museum of Fine Arts, Boston

