How Will the Real New Age Come?
NEW AGE author Shirley MacLaine expressed a very common sentiment when she wrote: “I found myself thinking a great deal about what was going wrong in the world. You can’t avoid it when you actually see the destitution, the starvation, the hatred. I began traveling when I was nineteen, and now, at mid-​forty, I could objectively say things had steadily progressed downhill.”
Similarly, people everywhere are tired of religious hypocrisy and falsehood. They are frustrated by the negligence and inadequacy of governments. They are alarmed by the perceived casual attitudes and blunders of the medical establishment. And many are victimized by racist or sexist bias and bigotry.
A Realistic Solution?
There is no question about it, we desperately need a new world. But are New Age hopes realistic? Or is its portrayal of the future more akin to Hollywood’s science-​fiction movies? Does it seem prudent to put faith in prophecies based on forgotten traditions, ancient myths, and speculation?
Granted, many of the concepts adopted by the New Age movement may promote mental and physical well-​being in a limited way. Good nutrition, exercise, relaxation, and concern for the environment are all sensible aspects of life. Medical practitioners would probably have better success if they gave more attention to the emotional needs of the sick while caring for their physical ailments. But everyone gets sick sooner or later, and even the most healthy eventually die. We cannot fully enjoy life with the prospect of sickness and death hanging over our heads. Do New Age gurus give a plausible solution to these problems?
More and more people are sad and depressed, and the New Age movement can do very little about it. The International Herald Tribune of London noted: “If the 20th century ushered in the Age of Anxiety, its exit is witnessing the dawn of the Age of Melancholy.” The paper added that the “first international study of major depression reveals a steady rise in the disorder worldwide.”
The New Age movement, with its quasi-​religious aura, does not really satisfy the spiritual vacuum in modern society. At its best the perceived spiritual relief it offers is only momentary. Admittedly, conventional religion, especially Christendom, has not relieved the general spiritual starvation. One newspaper openly denounced the “failure of the Church to reach out to those feeling isolated, untouched, unloved.” The newspaper described modern religion as bland, “robbing the individual of any sense of a direct encounter with God.”
The Bible​—A Book of Answers
Christendom has adulterated and watered down Bible truths. Likewise, many New Age doctrines are also contrary to Bible teachings. Take, for instance, the New Age idea that humans can bring a solution to earth’s problems. The Bible clearly states at Jeremiah 10:23: “To earthling man his way does not belong. It does not belong to man who is walking even to direct his step.” Another scripture says: “Salvation belongs to Jehovah.”​—Psalm 3:8.
The Bible does not teach that humans have an immortal soul that lives as an independent entity, separate from the body. According to the Scriptures, the soul dies, and death marks the end of all thought and activity. (Numbers 23:10; 35:11; Ecclesiastes 9:5, 10) This clearly rules out the New Age concept of reincarnation.
Furthermore, communication with the dead is impossible. According to the Bible, any alleged communication with the dead is actually communication with demons​—spirit enemies of God and humanity. Therefore, God’s Law made the practice of spiritism, including every form of divination, astrology, and mediumship, a capital offense.​—Leviticus 19:31; 20:6, 27; Deuteronomy 18:10-12.
The Bible is the source of true spiritual healing. It has a body of teachings that help Christians to get in touch with their inner self and transform their personality. (Romans 12:2; 2 Corinthians 13:5; Ephesians 4:21-24) It teaches self-​discipline, soundness of mind, respect for self and others.
The Bible puts us in touch with the highest power in the universe, our Creator. (Acts 17:24-28) It shows that by exercising faith in the ransom sacrifice of his Son, humankind may attain to everlasting life in a paradise earth. (Romans 6:23) It provides satisfying answers to such questions as: Why has God permitted so much suffering? Who are the powerful entities in the invisible realm? Are they responsible for much of the so-​called paranormal phenomena?
For the future, the Bible promises perfect health and everlasting life and a new world of peace and harmony, with a clean environment, right here on earth. (Isaiah 33:24; 2 Peter 3:13) In that new world, humans will undoubtedly increase their knowledge and, under God’s direction, unravel many mysteries about the human body, our planet, and the rest of the universe. All of this will be accomplished by the power of Jehovah, a God who loves humanity.
Will You Be There?
However, the Bible also teaches that these blessings are available only to those who live in harmony with God’s laws. These laws are not oppressive. But they must be obeyed. (Proverbs 4:18, 19; 1 John 5:3) It is not possible to subscribe to unscriptural New Age thought and at the same time believe in the Bible.​—1 Corinthians 3:18-20; 10:18-22; James 4:4.
Therefore, genuine Christians avoid becoming entangled with the unscriptural thinking of the New Age movement. Sound judgment and reasonableness are needed. It should be noted that the “New Age” label has come to be widely used for things that did not originate with the New Age movement and that may not necessarily be unscriptural. This is true especially in the fields of health, nutrition, art, and music. Christians must therefore exercise discernment and intelligent balance while being sure to stay away from anything condemned in the Bible. Appropriately, Proverbs 14:15 wisely counsels: “Anyone inexperienced puts faith in every word, but the shrewd one considers his steps.”
Yes, the Bible is the key to true enlightenment. New Agers’ general disregard for the Scriptures can only bring more darkness to the world. But the Bible supplies spiritual light and the hope of a new world as promised by God: “‘Look! The tent of God is with mankind, and he will reside with them, and they will be his peoples. And God himself will be with them. And he will wipe out every tear from their eyes, and death will be no more, neither will mourning nor outcry nor pain be anymore. The former things have passed away.’ And the One seated on the throne said: ‘Look! I am making all things new.’ Also, he says: ‘Write, because these words are faithful and true.’”​—Revelation 21:3-5.

