A Letter of Appreciation
SOME months ago Awake! magazine received a letter from a young student in which she stated the following:
“Your journals are the most informative, easy to read and comprehend, timely, and encouraging journals I’ve ever read. They carry the truth of God’s Word in meticulous form. They handle the current events with understanding and hope for the future.
“The vocabulary used is easy enough for a young person to read, much easier than other magazines, encyclopedias, and reference books. And they are timely. I often wonder about something, and then there is the answer in the next issue.
“Being a high school student, I must do much research for reports and various projects, which requires many reference books. This is where your magazines have proved so helpful. I’m happy to say that the information for the majority of my projects has come from the magazines. It always seems that when I need a topic for a project, there it is in the magazine. Or when I’m studying something in school, an article on that very subject is there to help me understand it.
“For example, I needed a topic for a science project for the Science Fair that we are required to enter. It was to consist of three posters, a report, and a model. So I decided to do a topic that many people wonder about these days: the greenhouse effect. It was discussed in the September 8, 1989, Awake! I used the inside cover illustration for my idea for one poster and the illustration on page 7 for another. The third poster was on the layers of the atmosphere. I also used the information in the articles in my report. Everyone liked my project and the way I presented it, especially my biology teacher. He gave me an A, and I received the first-place award in my section of Ecology and Conservation.
“Then, in March, I needed a topic for my assignment in First Aid. I saw in the March 22, 1990, Awake! an article on asthma and treatment for it. I decided to use the picture on page 17 for the poster and the information for a report. I also received an A on this project.
“In our American History class, we studied ancient civilizations, such as the Maya, Aztec, and Inca, and wouldn’t you know, when I came home one evening, the May 8, 1990, Awake! was waiting for me in the mailbox. I took it out of its wrapper to go through it and came upon the article on page 13, discussing the Maya civilization. I was so happy. I immediately read the article and gave my history teacher a copy of it.
“Thank you for all this timely information, which truly makes doing these projects a learning experience and a joy instead of a burden. Indeed, the magazines are like precious gems. I would never want to part with them. They are truly helpful, especially for young ones such as I am, who can so easily be distracted. By reading the magazines, including the ‘Young People Ask’ articles, we are fortified with the strength to block these distractions out and keep our eyes on the prize of everlasting life. Thank you so much for your hard work in preparing these magazines for our understanding and enjoyment.”​—Contributed.

