From Our Readers
Global Brotherhood  I truly appreciated the information in the December 8, 1990, issue. I live in a family where there is racial prejudice, and this often irritates me. I’ve been waiting for information like this to share with them. Presented clearly and to the point, the articles should be beneficial in helping them understand why we should imitate God’s example of impartiality.
T. C., United States
Religiously Divided Homes  Thank you so very much for the article “Young People Ask . . . How Can I Live in a Religiously Divided Home?” (January 22, 1991) As my children and I read the article together, we felt as if you truly understood how painfully difficult a situation like this can be. It described many of the problems that we personally were facing in our own home. It was so encouraging to receive practical advice from the Scriptures!
D. H., United States
I too am growing up in a religiously divided home. Like the boy quoted in the article, I sometimes feel so sorry for my father because he is left alone in the house when we go to Christian meetings. At times I have been tempted to compromise my faith. After reading this article, however, I decided that while I must be kind and tactful to my father, I will also take great care to avoid spiritual pitfalls.
J. O., Japan
Taking Criticism  Ever since I became a Christian, my parents have been looking for things to criticize me for. This has been very exasperating. But your article “Do You Hate to Receive Criticism?” (February 8, 1991) has shown me how to deal with this situation.
M. M., United States
Instant Gratification  I must say ‘thanks!’ for the articles on instant gratification. (January 22, 1991) I have been struggling with this mentality, thanks to a diet of six hours of television a day during my childhood. Reading the articles refreshed my outlook.
R. D., United States
Smoking  I found a copy of Awake!, dealing with smoking, in a phone booth. (July 8, 1989) The skull on the cover was a real attention getter! I stopped smoking four years ago, but I passed the magazine on to one of my sons who smokes. I have three other sons who also need to quit. The articles were most informative and to the point. Although I am not of your faith, I respect it.
P. T., United States
My teacher smoked far too much, and every time she spoke to me, she smelled of cigarette smoke. I remembered the article with its ten ways to stop smoking. I took my teacher a copy and asked her three months later if she had stopped smoking. She told me that with the help of the magazine and effort on her part, she had stopped. She had been smoking for 25 years.
B. O., United States
Single Parent Households  I am a single parent, and with the pressures of raising and providing for my children by myself, I tend to become absorbed in how these things affect me, often feeling that I’m in this alone. Your article “How Can I Be Happy Living With Just One Parent?” (December 22, 1990) helped me to see things from another angle​—my children’s. I’ve come to realize that my feelings and needs aren’t the only ones to be considered.
P. G. B., United States

