
The Bible’s Viewpoint
Why Commend Others?

MANY people feel that their efforts go unnoticed by others. For example, workers often feel unappreciated by their employers. Many married people believe that their mate takes them for granted. And some children think that they can never meet the expectations of their parents. Surely, such feelings could be alleviated if we were all willing to commend one another from time to time.
Sincere words of commendation are not the norm in today’s world. This is hardly surprising, for the Bible foretold: “In the last days critical times hard to deal with will be here. For men will be lovers of themselves, . . . unthankful, disloyal.”—2 Timothy 3:1, 2.
Have you been given sincere commendation? Then you know how it can warm the heart and lift the spirit. “A word at its right time is O how good!” says the Bible. (Proverbs 15:23) The Holy Scriptures can help us to treat one another with kindness.
Look for the Good in Others
Because he is deeply interested in us, God notices and appreciates our fine qualities and deeds. The Bible assures us: “[God’s] eyes are roving about through all the earth to show his strength in behalf of those whose heart is complete toward him.” (2 Chronicles 16:9) When we show our love for God by obeying his laws, he is sure to notice it.
Jehovah God does not look for our faults. If he did, none of us could stand. (Psalm 130:3) Instead, Jehovah is like a miner who patiently sifts through piles of stones looking for precious gems. When the miner finds a gem, he rejoices. The rough stone may not look precious, but the miner sees its potential value. Similarly, when God searches our heart, he is looking for precious qualities, not faults. When he finds them, he rejoices. He knows that those qualities, when shaped and polished, can produce something truly valuable—a faithful and devoted worshipper of Jehovah.
We can learn from God’s example. When we look at others, we might be prone to focus on their faults. Yet, if we look at people as Jehovah does, we will search out their fine attributes. (Psalm 103:8-11, 17, 18) When we find their precious qualities, we can commend them. With what result? Our words will surely refresh them, and they may try even harder to do what is right! In turn, we will experience the joy that comes from giving to others.—Acts 20:35.
Acknowledge Fine Deeds
Jesus often noticed and acknowledged the fine deeds of others. Once when a frightened, sick woman discreetly touched his outer garment in order to be healed, Jesus commended her, saying: “Daughter, your faith has made you well.”—Mark 5:34.
On another occasion, while Jesus was teaching in Jerusalem’s temple, he saw many rich people dropping money into the treasury chests. Then he saw a needy widow drop in “two small coins of very little value.” Others had donated more money than she. Yet, Jesus publicly commended the widow’s sincerity, by saying: “I tell you truthfully, This widow, although poor, dropped in more than they all did. For all these dropped in gifts out of their surplus, but this woman out of her want dropped in all the means of living she had.”—Luke 21:1-4.
How can we imitate Jesus? The Bible says: “Do not hold back good from those to whom it is owing, when it happens to be in the power of your hand to do it.”—Proverbs 3:27.
Commendation Is Powerful
In today’s ungrateful world, we all need to feel appreciated and loved. When we sincerely commend others, we strengthen and uplift them. Our heartfelt praise prompts them to keep on doing their best.—Proverbs 31:28, 29.
The Bible urges all Christians: “Let us consider one another to incite to love and fine works.” (Hebrews 10:24) The world would be a different place if everyone showed personal interest in others, searched out their good qualities, and acknowledged their fine deeds. Truly, commendation is powerful!
HAVE YOU WONDERED?
● Why should we commend others for their fine deeds?—Proverbs 15:23.
● When Jehovah examines us, what does he look for?—2 Chronicles 16:9.
● When should we commend others?—Proverbs 3:27.
[Picture on page 29]
Do you notice and acknowledge the fine deeds of others?

