Announcements
● Literature offer for April and May: True Peace and Security​—How Can You Find It? for contribution of $1.00. June and July: You Can Live Forever in Paradise on Earth for contribution of $2.50. Reduced-size books are $1.25.
● Since many Service Meeting parts now feature or refer to Reasoning From the Scriptures, it is suggested that all include the Reasoning book with their regular meeting equipment.
● Service overseer should check to see that there is always an ample supply of House-to-House Record forms, Field Service Report slips, subscription slips, and so forth. If additional supplies are needed, please request these on the Literature Order form (S-14).
● Distributors’ copies of The Watchtower and Awake! may be released to the publishers for use in the field as soon as they are received, in issue date order. They should not be held for release at a later date. See Cost List, paragraph 49.
● District convention badge cards for 1986 in English and Spanish will be consigned and included with April literature shipments. It will not be necessary to order these. Based on the size of each congregation, consignments in lots of 25 will be made and the literature account will be billed at the rate of two cents per card.
● There will be a district convention in Anchorage, Alaska, July 10-13, 1986. It will be held at the Sullivan Arena.
● A limited number of 1984 English-language Watchtower and Awake! volumes are still available at $5.00 each. Also, the 1985 Yearbook in English is still in stock and may be ordered at $1.00 each.
● New Publications Available:
“Let Your Kingdom Come”​—Hindi
Life​—How Did It Get Here? By Evolution or by Creation?​—Afrikaans, Swedish
Sing Praises to Jehovah (Large size)​—Portuguese
Sing Praises to Jehovah (Small size)​—Chinese, Portuguese
Survival Into a New Earth​—Arabic
United in Worship of the Only True God​—Thai
Enjoy Life on Earth Forever!​—Ketchi, Kuna, Lushai, Nepali, Tamil, Telugu, Urdu
In Search of a Father​—Japanese
The Government That Will Bring Paradise​—Sesotho, Tswana
● New Cassette Recordings Available:
Album of Hebrew Scriptures​—Volume 1, Genesis to Ruth (set of 18 cassettes in album; congregation and public: $30.00; pioneers: $20.00)​—English

