Meetings to Help Us Make Disciples
WEEK STARTING MARCH 30
Song 142
10 min: Local announcements. Remind all of field service arrangements for the first Sunday of the month. Any desiring to auxiliary pioneer during April can still do so. Have publisher briefly demonstrate use of Reasoning book, pp. 179-80, to answer question “Why don’t you observe Easter?” Request all to bring the December 15, 1985, Watchtower next week.
20 min: “Be Aglow With the Spirit.” Questions and answers. On paragraph 3, present brief demonstration showing how a return visit for the purpose of rekindling interest can be made on a Memorial attender who studied previously. In conclusion, encourage all to make summer a spiritually refreshing time, not just a period of recreation and diversion. Announce how many have already signed up as auxiliary pioneers for April.
15 min: Topic for Conversation. Discuss and demonstrate topic, using current offer. May wish to read excerpts from True Peace book, page 8, paragraphs 11 and 12, to show superiority of peace and security God will bring in comparison to what men are seeking to do. Conclude demonstration with arrangements being made for return visit. May also demonstrate a publisher tying Psalm 119:165 in with articles on Bible found in April 1 issue of The Watchtower. Mention that April 15, May 1, and May 15 issues also have articles that can be tied in with the last scripture in Topic for Conversation. In this way, magazines can be presented when book offer is not accepted.
Song 162 and prayer.
WEEK STARTING APRIL 6
Song 122
10 min: Local announcements, Announcements in Our Kingdom Ministry, and accounts report. Ask brothers to bring April 15 magazine next week.
15 min: “Self-Control Vital for Christians.” Talk with audience participation, based on article in the December 15, 1985, Watchtower. Make practical local application.
20 min: “Presenting the Good News​—Through Effective Street Witnessing.” Questions and answers. After discussing material, demonstrate suggestions in paragraphs 3 through 5. Ask audience for additional suggestions that are effective in your territory. Encourage support of magazine activity this Saturday.
Song 107 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING APRIL 13
Song 101
12 min: Local announcements. Briefly demonstrate magazine presentations, using the April 15 issue. As time permits, ask audience for further suggestions on talking points.
18 min: “Work What Is Good Toward All.” Question-and-answer discussion. Read and discuss scriptures as time permits. Encourage all to welcome new ones.
15 min: Interview a few regular and auxiliary pioneers, inquiring as to what made them want to pioneer, how they arranged to pioneer, and what obstacles or problems they overcame. Prepare in advance so comments will be practical, helpful, and encouraging to others who are progressing toward pioneering.
Song 116 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING APRIL 20
Song 9
10 min: Local announcements. Also, “Make Good Use of Older Tracts.” Let congregation know which tracts are on hand. Publishers may have supplies of tracts at home that should be put into service bag for use in field. Only those still presentable should be used. Encourage all to share in magazine work on fourth Saturday of month.
20 min: What Do You Treasure? A talk with some audience participation, stressing keeping spiritual goals to the fore and maintaining confidence in Jehovah’s power to provide. Important to answer this properly since heart is centered on what we value most highly in life. (Matt. 6:21) Guarding heart, seat of motivation, and channeling its desire in right direction bear on our everlasting life. (Prov. 4:23) Taking a wrong view of material things, whether rich or poor, can lead to misplaced trust or becoming overly concerned about lack of material advantages. (Prov. 10:15; 18:11; Luke 12:15) Most valuable possession is a good relationship with Jehovah. (Ps. 63:3, 4; 73:27, 28) Material things will be of no value on day of judgment. (Prov. 11:4) Important to maintain proper balance now while pursuing spiritual goals. (Prov. 30:8, 9) Christians should be encouraging spiritual goals, such as auxiliary and regular pioneer service, Bethel and missionary service, or increasing and refining sacrifice of praise to Jehovah. No need for parents to fear they are jeopardizing future of young ones if they set spiritual goals before them. (Ps. 37:25) When important decisions in life must be made, do we prove that our affections are centered on Jehovah and Kingdom interests or on other things? (May get expressions from some in congregation who have set fine example in this regard.) Keep affections fixed on what is everlasting.​—Ps. 91:14-16; 2 Cor. 4:18.
15 min: Help Young Ones Share in Giving a Witness. Interview and demonstrations. Parents have primary responsibility to teach young ones from infancy. (2 Tim. 3:15) All can be conscious of assisting those of tender years when working in service with them. Young ones like to be involved when at doors instead of standing idle. Ask a parent or two with young ones how they involve their children in witnessing at the doors. If old enough, do they have service bag with Bible and literature? How do you introduce young ones and permit them to share in reading scripture or making offer? Briefly demonstrate how a young one can offer householder free tract when offer from older publisher is refused. Also, briefly demonstrate how parent or older publisher may introduce conversation and then allow young one to read scripture. Encourage all to be conscious of assisting young ones to share in giving witness at doors.​—See Matthew 21:16.
Song 210 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING APRIL 27
Song 108
 8 min: Local announcements and Theocratic News. Encourage all to share in service first Sunday in May.
22 min: “Use the Reasoning Book in All Features of Your Ministry.” Question-and-answer discussion handled by service overseer or other qualified elder. As time permits, show how introductions beginning on page 11 of Reasoning book under heading “Future/​Security” and on page 14 under heading “War/​Peace” can be used in offering True Peace book.
15 min: Arrange locally, or have talk on article “Young People Ask . . . ‘Can’t We Just Be Friends?’” (March 22, 1986, Awake!, p. 17)
Song 209 and concluding prayer.

