Presenting the Good News​—Through Effective Street Witnessing
1 “True wisdom itself keeps crying aloud in the very street.” (Prov. 1:20) Jesus Christ went from place to place, publicly teaching the good news. (Luke 8:1) Paul preached in the marketplaces, as is evidenced at Acts 17:17. Street witnessing is an effective way of reaching people with the good news today.
2 We can do street witnessing at bus stops, at entrances to train stations, in front of businesses, or near apartment buildings that are inaccessible to us. How about busy street corners or public parks? When doing street witnessing, we must be careful not to stand in front of display windows, block entranceways, or interfere with the normal flow of traffic.
HOW TO DO IT
3 Approach people! In doing this, we need to be selective. Some experienced publishers try to establish eye contact as they approach the person, and after a warm greeting, they go right into their presentation.
4 Brief presentations are usually best. Using a question or making a statement that will catch the attention of the passerby is quite effective. When presenting the April 8 Awake! you may want to say: “Good morning. Do you think that the world will ever kick the smoking habit? [Allow for a response.] This issue of Awake! discusses the question. These two magazines can be yours for 40 cents.” Or you may want to use the colorful illustrations on the cover to begin your presentation. When a person shows interest, you may be able to obtain his name and address, offering to call at his home to continue the discussion.
PREPARATION NECESSARY
5 To be effective in street witnessing, preparation is necessary. Endeavor to read the magazines ahead of time, and then select a point or two that you believe would interest others. It is helpful to rehearse your presentation with a family member or another publisher. This may help you to see where improvements can be made.​—Prov. 27:17.
6 If some apartment buildings in the territory are not easily accessible, street witnessing nearby may be a practical means of contacting the occupants. It may be best to do street work early in the morning as people leave for work or in the evening as they return home. Many encouraging experiences have been enjoyed by those sharing in street magazine work.
7 Yes, effective street witnessing will enable many more to come to an accurate knowledge of the truth. Let us do it with zeal and enthusiasm!

