Use the Reasoning Book in All Features of Your Ministry
1 Have you been using the Reasoning book in your ministry? Undoubtedly you have already considered various portions of it and have found it very helpful. Of course, it would be beneficial to read it through and become familiar with all the excellent information it contains. A pioneer brother reports that he and his wife have been studying a portion of it every day.
2 However, it is not necessary to have read the book completely in order to make use of it in the house-to-house work or when making return visits and conducting Bible studies.
HANDLING OBJECTIONS
3 Likely there are certain objections you encounter regularly as you go from house to house. These may hinder you in your efforts to capture the householders’ interest. They may say: “I’m not interested,” “I’m busy,” or “I have my own religion.” When such conversation stoppers become an obstacle, by all means take a moment between doors to fix in your mind one or more of the suggestions on pages 15-24 of the Reasoning book.
4 Your knowledge of the people in the territory will enable you to select a reply that will help you to continue your conversation. Try to use the wording just as it appears in the Reasoning book. It has been very well thought out and used successfully by experienced brothers. In time, you will be able to give excellent answers to a variety of conversation stoppers.
RETURN VISITS AND BIBLE STUDIES
5 On your initial visit, you may be able to determine that the householder is particularly interested in a certain subject. In preparation for the return visit, look for this subject in the index of the Reasoning book. If the matter is considered, you will find either a suggestion that provides a direct yet balanced approach or additional Scriptural information that will benefit the individual.
6 If a question arises on a Bible study and you determine that it would be best to answer it before you leave, check either the index in the back of the Reasoning book or the list of principal subjects in the front. For example, someone may have told the interested person that Jehovah’s Witnesses are a sect or a cult. The information you need is given on page 202. It is easily located by looking for “Jehovah’s Witnesses” under “Principal Subjects.” The specific information is even more readily found by looking up “Cult” or “Sects” in the index. Feel free to read the answer just as it appears in the book and discuss it further with the Bible student. Do not be concerned that the student observes you looking for additional information in this way.
7 Expressing her gratitude for the Reasoning book, one sister wrote: “Your tactful yet bold approach to various subjects that are often difficult to mention is a genuine blessing to us.” As we familiarize ourselves with this fine instrument and use it in the field, we will be more successful in reaching the hearts of those in our territory.

