“Be Aglow With the Spirit”
1 Having something good to share with others contributes to spirited activity. Therefore, we have good reason to be enthusiastic during April when offering the beautifully illustrated, updated book True Peace and Security​—How Can You Find It? World conditions make peace and security a most timely subject. Thousands of years of human failure have moved many to face the fact that man does not have the answers to his most pressing needs. But we know that God’s Kingdom is the answer. Our being able to point this out by use of God’s Word and our having this fine publication to offer should help us to “be aglow with the spirit” in our service during April.​—Rom. 12:11.
2 But placing the True Peace book is just a first step toward realizing our objective of helping truth seekers to take their stand on the side of God’s Kingdom. We need to return promptly and help interested ones to get a fuller understanding of what we initially shared with them. Otherwise, there is the danger that the wicked one will interfere and snatch away what has been sown in their heart.​—Matt. 13:19.
FOLLOW UP MEMORIAL ACTIVITY
3 We should also give further attention to those who attended the Memorial. Each year the Memorial attendance in the United States and worldwide is more than double the average number of publishers. What potential for more disciples! So, rather than allow the activity accompanying the Memorial celebration to wane, we should keep helping those who attended to make further spiritual progress. Are Bible studies being conducted with all whom you personally invited? If someone studied in the past, could a frank Scriptural discussion at this point open up the way for resuming a fruitful Bible study? What can you do to help these people while there is time?
USE THE SUMMER TO GOOD ADVANTAGE
4 A spirit of zeal moved over 100,000 in this country to serve as auxiliary pioneers last April. This surpassed all previous records for any one month. Have you made plans to join the pioneer ranks this April? Some who do may be able to continue pioneering right through the summer months or even take up the regular pioneer service.
5 Summer also affords opportunities to preach in areas that are seldom worked. During the 1985 service year, publishers, pioneers, and congregational groups aglow with the spirit worked all but 15 of 287 unassigned territories. One family of six felt greatly blessed because they shared in this special activity. They experienced greater unity as a family and became better equipped to handle God’s Word effectively.
6 Can you include working unassigned territory in your plans for this summer? If you are interested but do not know how to arrange for territory, the congregation secretary will be pleased to review with you the directions given to English-language congregations in the Society’s letter of January 1, 1986.
7 Another avenue for increased Kingdom activity is evening witnessing. During early evening hours, householders appear to be relaxed and more disposed to listen. No doubt many publishers will want to use the longer periods of daylight to reach people who are not normally found at home earlier in the day.
“DO NOT LOITER”
8 This is not the time to loiter at our business but, rather, to “be aglow with the spirit.” May we all prove ourselves industrious and willing workers. (Heb. 6:11, 12) Thoughtful planning now can make this summer a spiritually memorable one. Our being “aglow with the spirit” will produce positive results inside and outside the congregation.

