“Work What Is Good Toward All”
1 We rejoice to see so many new ones flocking into the congregation. (Isa. 60:8) One thing that attracts them to the truth is the love that is evident among Jehovah’s people. (John 13:34, 35) Were not many of us deeply impressed by the warmth and friendliness we experienced the very first time we entered the Kingdom Hall? Having personally experienced God’s love that flows through Jesus Christ and the Christian congregation, we are moved to “work what is good toward all” by assisting and encouraging others.​—Gal. 6:10.
HELP OTHERS PROGRESS
2 When we see someone at the meeting for the first time, do we endeavor to get acquainted? We should not feel that only the elders and ministerial servants have this responsibility. It is our personal obligation as well. (Rom. 15:7; compare Galatians 5:14 and James 2:8.) When many in the congregation welcome the new ones, they are impressed with the true Christian love demonstrated. God’s Word speaks very highly of showing love toward strangers. (See Matthew 25:35b and; 1 Timothy 5:10.) Such warmth and friendliness encourage a steady influx of sheeplike ones into the congregation.​—See Isaiah 60:5, 11.
3 Last month, many new ones attended the Memorial celebration, and these need help in order to make spiritual progress. If you know someone who attended the Memorial but who is not presently studying, why not try to start a study? Encourage him to attend the meetings and offer to accompany him to the Kingdom Hall. Encourage him to do personal study, and as he grows in knowledge and appreciation, help him to prepare to comment at meetings. Your patient, loving interest may lead to his gaining Jehovah’s blessing and everlasting life.​—Rom. 15:1, 2.
4 Young ones associated with the congregation are also “related to us in the faith” and need our help and encouragement. (Gal. 6:10) Even small children delight in attention from adults. Children who do not have parents in the truth especially need our encouragement. Youths who are orphans in a spiritual sense deserve our loving consideration and attention.​—Jas. 1:27.
ENCOURAGE PIONEERING
5 We all appreciate the personal interest that others take in us. Those who are working hard in the ministry, including regular and auxiliary pioneers, benefit greatly when we offer expressions of appreciation for their fine example and personal sacrifices.
6 When elders and ministerial servants can arrange their affairs to auxiliary pioneer from time to time or even get into the regular pioneer work, benefits extend to the entire congregation. (2 Cor. 9:2) If you are an elder or a ministerial servant, would reasonable adjustments in your life-style enable you to auxiliary pioneer from time to time or perhaps get into the regular pioneer work? If so, you will experience many blessings and will be in a better position to “work what is good toward all.” As we individually look for ways to help and encourage others, Jehovah will add his blessing.

