R425 : page 1 

VOL. IV. 

PITTSBURGH, PA., JANUARY, 1883. 

NO. 6. 



page 1 

ZION'S 

Watch Tower 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S 
PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED MONTHLY AT 101 Fifth Avenue, Pittsburgh, 

Pa. 



C. T. RUSSELL, Editor and Publisher. 



The Editor recognizes a responsibility to the Master, relative to 
what shall appear in these columns, which he cannot and does 
not cast aside; yet he should not be understood as endorsing 
every expression of correspondents, or of articles selected from 
other periodicals. 

TERMS OF SUBSCRIPTION. 

TERMS : —Fifty cents a year, postage prepaid. You may send 
paper money to the amount of two dollars, by mail, at our risk. 
Larger amounts may be sent by Drafts, P.O. Money Order, or 
Registered Letter, payable to C. T. RUSSELL. 

FOREIGN TERMS. 

Foreign Postage being higher, our terms to foreign subscribers 
will be 65 cents a year. Please send us no foreign money or 
postage stamps, as we can make no use of them. Remittances 
may be made by Foreign Postal Money Orders. 

TAKE NOTICE. 

This paper will be sent free to any of the Lord's poor who will 
send a card yearly requesting it. Freely we have received and 
freely we would give the truth. "Ho, every one that thirsteth, 
come ye to the waters; and he that hath no money, come ye, buy 
and eat— yea, come, buy wine and milk without money and 



without price. " And you that have it- "Wherefore do ye spend 
money for that which is not bread? and your labor for that which 
satisfieth not? Hearken diligently-and eat ye that which is good, 
and let your soul delight itself in fatness."- ISAIAH 55:1,2. 



page 1 

POSTAGE STAMPS are inconvenient to us, but if it is 
impossible for you to send us paper money, you may send 1 cent 
or 2 cent U.S. Stamps. Foreign stamps are useless to us. 



R425 : page 1 

"MILLENNIAL DAY DAWN" is not ready. It has been 
hindered by the extra labor attendant on the recent large issues. 
We hope to have it ready by Spring. The edition of old "Day 
Dawn" is exhausted. 



page 1 

GREAT care should be exercised in writing addresses plainly. 
Many neglect to sign their letters. Many more neglect to 
mention name of town or state. Sometimes we can guess by the 
aid of the postmark, but even then much valuable time is wasted. 
Please be very particular. 



WE offered the TOWER three months on trial, free. Many 
availed themselves of the offer and others sent us lists of names 
of friends they thought would be interested by the papers. With 
this number we complete the three numbers to about ten 
thousand such trial readers. [Oct., Dec. and January.] All of 
these who are interested, we hope to hear from at once. The 
Lord's poor who are interested, but unable to pay, should 
remember that they are welcome to the TOWER free, but must 
ask for it. We have extra copies of these three issues. 



R425 : page 1 

NEW YEAR GREETING. 

We take this opportunity of expressing publicly our thanks to 
our Heavenly Father for the blessings enjoyed during the year 
just ended. To us it has been a year of growth in grace, 
knowledge and love toward God. The path— the same path- 
shines more and more. It is the old path which our Father in love 
marked out before the world began. And the light is the same, 
but it, according to His promise, continues to shine "more and 
more unto the perfect day. " We hope that the experience of our 



readers has been similarly blessed. As under-shepherds, we feel 
a deep interest in the welfare of every member of the flock of 
Christ-over whom, circumstances under divine supervision hath 
made us overseers— to feed the Church of God, which he hath 
purchased with His own blood. (Acts 20:28.) 

The New Year suggests new resolutions. We trust that you have 
each resolved to do your share toward having the year 1883 
bring an increase of spiritual strength and development, by a yet 
closer study to show yourselves approved unto God. Laying off 
yet more fully the things of the old nature— self-love, self- 
esteem, self-gratification, self-exaltation, and the fear of man 
which bringeth a snare, and putting on the elements of the Spirit 
of Christ- self-denial, humility, brotherly kindness, charity and 
boldness for the truth. While we seek God's blessing upon the 
year commenced, let us remember that "The Lord resisteth the 
proud, and giveth grace (favors) to the humble." (1 Pet. 5:5.) Let 
us thus resolve, and thus perform, and we will surely have, our 
wish both for you and ourselves— a joyous and blessed New 
Year. 



R425 : page 1 

OUR NEW DRESS. 

The TOWER appears this month in a new dress— larger size, 
wider and longer columns, and new type, giving you over a page 
more matter. We hope it will give general satisfaction. Our 
printers urge that you will blame them lightly for the delay 
which these changes have necessitated. 



R425 : page 1 

VIEW FROM THE TOWER. 

There are two sides to every question, so also there are two 
views from the TOWER. The one is glorious, bright and 
encouraging, the other dark, and would be discouraging were it 
not that "the foundation of God standeth sure, having this seal, 
the Lord knoweth them that are His." (2 Tim. 2:19.) 

The dark outlook is that we see from the TOWER that another 
testing is in progress, and the adversary-Satan- presents errors 
under the guise of "light," and as his custom (Matt. 4:6) uses 
Scripture to accomplish his object -wresting it from its proper 
meaning. We are not surprised at this in one sense, because we 
have long seen that we are living in the "Evil Day" of which 
Jesus and apostles and prophets forewarn us, saying "that it will 
be difficult to stand-and not fall before the attacks of the 
enemy. (Luke 21:36; Mai. 3:2; Eph. 6:11,14,13.) Paul is very 
specific, and warns us that we will need the whole armor of 



God, because the conflict will not be with men (flesh and 
blood), but with the prince of darkness himself, whose "wiles" 
or deceptions he carefully mentions. (Eph 6:11,12.) Thus 
divinely forewarned of what we might expect in this day, we 
have been calling attention to the coming storm and dangers for 
some time, and endeavoring to have all the saints armed with the 
panoply of God, in order that whatever the test might be, ye 
might be able to withstand all the wiles and fiery darts of the 
enemy, and having done all, to stand. 

We have not the gift of prophecy, and could not tell you in what 
form, nor from what quarter the testing would come, for our 
adversary, the devil, is sure to bring the test from an unexpected 
quarter. This has ever been his policy. 

Our surprise is that some whom we had supposed to be well 
grounded upon the Rock foundation— our ransom— should be at 
all assailable from the standpoint of our redemption, and the 
nature of our Redeemer. Paul expresses the same surprise 
concerning some in his day, saying: "I marvel that ye are so 
soon removed from him that called you into the grace of Christ, 
unto another gospel: which is not another, but there be some that 
trouble you and would pervert the Gospel of Christ. " (Gal. 1 :6- 
8; notice also vs. 11,12.) 

As we had anticipated, our article, "An Unpleasant Duty," in last 
issue, was misjudged by some, as three letters received indicate. 
They hinted that our "DUTY" was too pointedly expressed, and 
that if we had said that we took a "different view" of matters, in 
a mild and very gentle way, it would have been more in the 
spirit of Christ. Our reply is, that our usual method is mild, 
especially when discussing differences of opinion relative to 
Christian faith, but when the foundations of all our faith are 
assailed by some among us attempting to teach, it is, in our 
judgment, the spirit of Christ to lay aside mildness and cry aloud 
so as at once to arouse all Israel to the danger of the hour. (Ezek. 
33:6.) 

Jesus did not hesitate to call doctrines and people by their true 
names. Please recollect that many of his utterances were far 
from "mild and gentle." While his utterances are devoid of all 
malice and hatred, they were often full of force and keenly to the 
point. Fear to speak the truth finds no place in the spirit of 
Christ. We feel sure that no candid reader can trace malice or 
hatred in our article referred to, and subsequent developments 
prove that we stated the matter none too strongly. 

Others, we are glad to know, rightly judged both of our motives 
and the necessity of the article. We extract a sentence from a 
letter of the latter sort, of which we received several: 

"Best thanks for the WATCH TOWER for December, in which 
you have performed An Unpleasant Duty,' as agreeably as 
possible, and respecting which it would have involved a serious 



sin not to have called attention to the present teaching of the 
'Day Star' after having recommended it." 

The importance of the subject is our excuse for devoting so 
much of the space of this number to its consideration. We trust 
that it will be helpful to you 

R426 : page 1 

to fully realize- 
How firm a foundation, ye saint of the Lord, 
Is laid for your faith in His excellent word; 
What more can He say than to you He hath said, 
You who unto Jesus for refuge have fled. 

It may be that the subjects treated will be very valuable to new 
readers and help to establish them firmly on the Rock. A testing 
on first principles seems peculiar at this late hour, yet, from 
present appearance, it seems to us that this will be the general 
line of attack in which the entire nominal Church is to be 
overwhelmed— in which "a thousand shall fall at thy side, and 
ten thousand at thy right hand, but it shall not come nigh thee, 
because thou has made the Most High thy habitation. " We hope 
that all will take their Bibles and refer to every text quoted in 
this issue and note the contexts. 

But we have very much to encourage and refresh us. Thousands 
of hungry hearts are upturned to God in thanksgiving for the 
blessed light now shining on and revealing the precious plan and 
promises of God. Thousands of letters tell of renewed faith in 
God and quickened lives resulting from even a first glimpse of 
"the riches of His grace," and the grandeur of the great plan of 
God for the salvation of all who die in Adam, based on the 
grand old rock of truth that we were "redeemed" -that "Christ 
died for our sins." Yes, praise the Lord, the general prospect was 
never so encouraging as now. But these new readers will find 
their love of truth and their reliance on and consecration to the 
Lord tested also. All must be tested; we are in the testing time; 
you should know to expect, that though these truths be in your 
mouths sweet as honey, yet after partaking of them you must 
expect to encounter bitter opposition from your old nature and 
your former friends. (Rev. 10:10.) Though you rejoice greatly in 
the strong meat of God's Word, yet you will find your after 
experiences with it to be bitter-friends and dear ones will 
oppose, and "ye shall be hated of all men for my sake and the 
Gospel's," yet rejoice and be exceeding glad, and 

Bear the cross, endure the shame, 
Supported by God's Word. 

Let us, then, stand the storms, 
It will not be very long, 
We will anchor by and by. " 



page 1 

We present you herewith extracts from a few of the many 
similar letters received daily: 

DEAR BRO.:-I have now mastered the "Food" after seven 
months' hard study, and believe it to be no more nor less than a 
revelation from our Heavenly Father. Next Sabbath I shall begin 
to preach for the first, on these blessed truths, regardless of 
friends or enemies. 

Send me 400 TOWERS (Oct. No.) and as many "Food" as you 
can spare, and I assure you that they will do as much good as 
any you ever had distributed heretofore. I am satisfied that I can 
get 500 subscribers in Orange and 500 in Rockland Counties. 
You shall hear soon. 

I shall use six months of my time now, just to distribute tracts 
and get subscribers for the TOWER. Help me by prayers and 
prompt returns. The "Food" and TOWER I distribute only to 
those whom I believe to be zealous Christians. 

Yours in the work, 



Dec. 25, 1882. 

DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:-The books ("Young's Concordance" 
and "Diaglott") came duly, and have proved a valuable help to 
me in studying the Bible. Heretofore I have been without a 
concordance, and have depended too much on the writings of 
others as a guide. Now I can judge for myself. I enjoy the study 
of the Bible more and more as the opportunities are increased 
for studying, and my love for my Savior is increased by the 
knowledge that I may be permitted to prove my following and 
"help fill up that which is behind of the afflictions of Christ. " 

Yours in brotherly affection, 



AUGUSTA, ME. 

DEAR BRO.:-I write this to thank you on behalf of both my 
wife and myself for the papers sent her, and also for the copies 
of "Why Evil was Permitted. " That little book has done more 
than anything I ever read to resolve and remove my doubts 
about 

page 2 

the Old Testament Scriptures, and by its help and the help of the 
Holy Spirit I am indulging a hope that I may yet come into the 
kingdom. For thirty years I have been one of those who could 
see nothing in Christianity but a bone of contention between 
differing professors and churches, but now, thank God, I am 
able to look beyond professors and churches, and to believe that 



"Christ came to seek and to save that which was lost. " Thank 
God for me and pray for us both. 

Yours in faith and trust, 



R426 : page 2 

WATCH TOWER TRACT FUND. 

At the commencement of another year it is proper that you 
should have a report from this fund. It will be found below. We 
regret that it shows us to be so much in debt. An error in our 
bank account misled us, else we should not have published the 
last 100,000 edition of the Oct. Z.W.T. However, they are 
printed and most of them in the hands of new readers and we 
have reason to believe, from the letters constantly coming to 
hand, that they are seeking out and nourishing truth-hungry 
saints. So what is the fund's loss is their gain. Then, too, perhaps 
our Father designed testing our faith. In everything let us give 
thanks. 

As will be seen below, the Fund is in debt over $2,500, and of 
course no further work can be undertaken by the Fund until this 
debt is paid. We regret this exceedingly, and partly because in 
our last issue we held out a hope to some, who have long desired 
it, that we would soon issue the October TOWER in German 
and in Swedish. 

A plan suggested to us is the only way out of the difficulty 
which we can see. It is this: We can start two sub-funds, one for 
the German and the other for the Swedish papers, and those 
desirous of contributing specially to these can thus do so. A 
Swedish brother has already sent $8.50 for the latter, and a 
German sister $3 for the former fund. When either of these 
funds shall amount to $200, we will commence to print and go 
as far as we can. Meantime we will, by the assistance of 
brethren, have translations prepared. 

STATEMENT. 

Total amount expended up to Jan. 1, 1882.$35,336.18 

Amount expended during 1882 5,945.20 

Receipts during 1882 3,373.86 

Deficiency or amount owing 2,571.34 

Amount expended for year 1882 5,945.20 

Total amount expended up to Jan. 1,1883.. .$41, 281. 38 

As the result of this year's expenditure we have to report the 

publication of "The Tabernacle" pamphlet 15,000 copies 

Extra issues of Z.W.T. for use as tracts 347,000 copies 

Leaflets, "The Minister's Daughter" 100,000 copies 

Total (nearly half a million) 462,000 copies 



Of the above publications we have on hand about 40,000 
copies, nearly all of which are the October (Tract number) of the 
TOWER. 

During the year we mailed about 15,000 copies of the "Food" 
pamphlet, but as these were accounted for in last year's report, 
they are not mentioned above. 

When it is remembered that the very large majority of our 
readers are of the "poor of this world," it will be seen that their 
interest in spreading the truth extends to their pockets, and of 
some at least it is true, "She hath done what she could." We 
hope as you view the above statement you will be able, 
notwithstanding the fact of our large debt, to thank God and take 
courage. If you could be in this office but one hour, and read 
some of the letters received, it would cause a renewal of your 
zeal and a redoubling of your efforts to spread the glad tidings, 
and thus preach the Gospel. 

C. T. RUSSELL. 

[N.B.-In this connection we would remark that the supply of 
"Food for Thinking Christians" and "The Tabernacle" pamphlet 
is nearly exhausted. We urge, therefore, that you use the October 
TOWER when giving reading matter to truth seekers, and if 
after reading it, they are anxious for more, loan them "Food," 
and afterward, "Tabernacle." Beware of choking "babes in 
Christ," therefore give only one tract or paper at a time. 
Remember Jesus' example in this respect— "I have many things 
to tell you, but you cannot bear them now."] 



R426 : page 2 

CHRISTIANITY AND ISLAM. 

"A writer in an eastern publication, who is not supposed to aim 
at a support of heterodoxy, in his work, attempts, in an elaborate 
manner, to show that of all religions, Christianity to-day is most 
assailed, and most in danger of overthrow, though it be not 
subject to the religious wars which afflict some nations 
professing other religions. 

The writer points to the fact that while Buddhism, 
Mohammedanism, and Judaism hold a firm grasp upon the 
nations which profess them, Christianity is assailed by the ablest 
minds of the world in its very midst, and atheism, or rather 
agnosticism, is rapidly increasing in every so-called Christian 
country. He points to heterodox rule in France, atheism in Italy, 
the almost general unbelief among the educated classes of 
Russia, the skepticism of Germany, increasing liberality of 
England and Scotland, and the remarkable latitude allowed to 
infidels in America, where the laws make no distinction on 



account of religious belief. And he concludes from this that 
Christianity is likely to fail and die sooner than the older faiths 
whose devotees hold to them blindly and unquestioningly. " 

We clip the above from a recent issue of the Pittsburgh 
Dispatch, as showing that thinking Christians, though 
unacquainted with the fact that the nominal Gospel church is 
rejected of the Lord, and therefore failing to discern the cause, 
are nevertheless noting its rapid decline. The world sees it; 
thinking Christians see it; and only the blind worshipers of these 
gigantic and corrupt systems fail to see it. 

The Editor, commenting on the above, remarks that, "The very 
fact that infidelity has so rapid a growth among Christians, 
where it could so easily be crushed out by law or force, is 
evidence that the devotees of Christianity are conscious of the 
strength of their belief, and that its ultimate destiny is to conquer 
the world-not by arms, but by gentle means. A religion which 
cannot tolerate opposition that pretends to be founded on reason, 
is a miserable faith, and can only be maintained by the grossest 
illiberality and persecution. Buddhism and Mohammedanism are 
like the old Inquisition. The infidel is hunted out of society or 
murdered outright. Christianity invites all fair and sensible 
opposition and reasoning. That Christian theologian who does 
his whole duty will never flinch from intelligent disputation; and 
if there is one fault to be still found with Christianity in its most 
liberal form, it is that it is yet too liable to apply opprobrious 
epithets to antagonists, instead of inviting them into the pulpit, 
there to give them an equal hearing. Too many Christian 
ministers act as though they fear the infidel speaker-fear that he 
can offer a more 

R427 : page 2 

specious argument than they, and fear that he will commend 
himself to a Christian audience more strongly than they. This is 
a deplorable weakness." He then adds, "Nothing is plainer than 
that liberal Christianity has itself brought forth infidelity, and 
that Christians will yet be compelled to abandon portions of 
their creed. Sectarianism will have to melt away. And when that 
point of development is reached where the simplest reason 
cannot see anything left that does the plainest violence to reason, 
the goal of Christianity will be reached. Then atheists and 
infidels in all guises will have to give up their extreme position 
and the factions can clasp hands in the common cause of 
advocating precisely those things that were taught by CHRIST, 
and not the forms and follies that are attributed to him by so- 
called Christians, who have no comprehension whatever of the 
real character of Jesus." 

We agree with this Editor that the clergymen who try to defend 
their creeds fear and tremble before the infidel, whose reason 
leads to conclusions so opposite to their time-honored traditions, 



for which no basis can be found, either in reason or in the word 
of God. An infidel is an unbeliever. It is one thing to be an 
infidel to the nominal Church, and quite another to be an infidel 
to Christianity. Many so-called infidels are much nearer to both 
the truth of Christianity and the practice of its principles than so- 
called Christians. 

All are really infidels who attempt to set up their own theories, 
and to twist some portions of the word of God to support them 
while they bury its plain statements to the contrary. The effort to 
do this has given rise to the Babylonish confusion in the 
Churches, all of which, though most opposite in doctrine, claim 
the Bible as their support. And finding that in order to gain a 
position of influence and respectability before the world, it is 
necessary to present an imposing appearance, they unitedly 
agree to term themselves the exponents of Christianity, and as 
far as possible to ignore doctrine. 

It is, indeed, no wonder that this so-called Christianity, with its 
mass of contradictions, and its hideous misrepresentations of the 
glorious character of the blessed God, has made so many 
thinking people infidels. Neither is it surprising that this house, 
divided against itself, is about to fall. 

Infidels conclude that as these are the exponents of Bible 
Christianity they want nothing to do either with Christianity or 
the Bible; and that any book which will support such gross 
contradictions, and whose teachings produce characters little or 
no better, and often worse than the world, must be a worthless, if 
not a positively harmful book, unworthily carrying an influence 
with it, because of its claim to be a revelation from God. And so, 
many conclude to discard the Bible entirely, and, as Mr. 
Ingersoll expresses it, to make the best of this world, and if they 
light on another, to likewise make the best of it, and to be happy 
and enjoy themselves as best they can, and let others do the 
same. 

The whole nominal system claiming the name of Christianity is 
out of harmony with Scripture teaching, and her creed- 
worshipers are all infidels to the Bible. They dare not open the 
book before a candid searcher after truth, to whom God says— 
"Come, let us reason together" -lest it reveal truth which will 
overturn their cherished creed. Shame and confusion of face is 
coming upon, and will cover, such God-dishonoring hypocrisy. 
No wonder that those "who teach for doctrines the 
commandments of men" tremble and cower before the reasoning 
infidel, as well as before the earnest truth-seeker, who 
persistently demands a "Thus saith the Lord" for his faith. 
Opprobrious epithets and denunciations become their only 
stronghold, while they warn others of the danger of using their 
reason and diligently searching the Scriptures lest they become 
infidels. Infidels to the Bible? No-infidels to church creeds. 



We praise God that by his grace we have been able to shake off 
the shackles that bind so many. Yes, we dare stand erect "in the 
liberty wherewith Christ hath made us free," and, defying the 
anathemas of a lifeless Church, we declare to the world that the 
Bible is indeed the revelation of a glorious plan, well worthy of 
an infinite God, that the nominal Christianity of to-day is a gross 
misrepresentation of its teachings, and that the ideal character of 
the Bible is never even approximately illustrated by any, except 
those who are truly students of its sacred pages, and imitators of 
its grand example. Let all true children of God search the 
Scriptures, and be able to give a reason for their hope. Then the 
goal of true Christianity will be reached. 



page 2 

"YOUNG'S BIBLE CONCORDANCE." 

To the Bible student, we can scarcely speak too highly of this 
work. It certainly ranks next to the Diaglott as a help to Bible 
study. In fact the help which these two works afford to persons 
possessing an ordinary knowledge of the English language is 
more valuable than two years spent in the study of Greek and 
Hebrew. 

This Concordance gives every English word in our Bible under 
its proper Greek or Hebrew heading, together with its literal 
meaning. Mr. Young, the author, is acknowledged to be one of 
the ripest Greek and Hebrew scholars living. 

We wish that all Bible students who read the TOWER might 
have this work, and thus be able to convince themselves of the 
significance of Bible terms in the original. To this end we have 
for some time been endeavoring to procure for you this work at 
a low price. Within the past week we have succeeded far beyond 
our expectation, and are glad to state that we can now furnish 
you "The Students' Edition"-the latest revised and most 
complete edition of this work published-(white paper, cloth 
bound, regular price $3.50) at half price, viz., $1.75, by express. 
If sent by mail, 5 1 cents extra, for postage. Those living at 
greater distance than 800 miles from Pittsburgh, or in places not 
very accessible for express, would probably find the mail the 
cheapest method. 

We still have some copies of the "Emphatic Diaglott" at $1.50, 
postage paid by us. 



R427 : page 2 



THE JOYOUS RESULT. 

In due time. After that ye have suffered awhile. In due season 
the Lord trieth the righteous. Hereby qualities are produced and 
brought out that otherwise were hidden and non-existent. The 
process is severe, afflictive, terrible sometimes, but the fruits, if 
we endure faithfully, are precious, grand, glorious— worth all 
they may cost, and how much more only eternity will reveal. We 
should not know all the pity and tenderness of the Savior, did we 
not suffer in the furnace. Are not our most exquisite religious 
enjoyments born of, or at least administered during severe trial? 
It was during Jacob's flight from his murderous brother-and 
himself was by no means blameless— that he had the vision of 
the ladder and angels. It was when Elijah was so distressed and 
disheartened that he wished to die, that the angels repeatedly 
awakened and fed him, and then the wonderful vision at the 
cave was added. It was right in the hottest possible furnace that 
the Hebrew children found the form of the fourth beside them. 
And Daniel, did it not pay for him to pass a night with the lions 
to find them turned into lambs by the power of a heavenly 
keeper? I judge Paul and Silas never regretted the inner prison 
and stocks after their miraculous deliverance. 

But have we not an experience of our own to tell us that it is in 
time of greatest extremity that heaven's richest grace is 
vouchsafed? We may have waited for the due time and become 
somewhat exhausted and disheartened, but the time of the 
singing of birds did come, and they sang never so sweetly! 

Fighting, waiting, struggling, trusting, 
Is He sure to bless? 
Prophets, fathers, martyrs, Christians, 
Answer yes. 

Fearest sometimes that thy Father 
Hath forgot? 

Though the clouds around thee gather, 
Doubt him not! 

Always hath the daylight broken, 
Always hath He spoken! 
Better hath He been for years, 
Than thy fears. 

-"Words of Faith." 



page 2 



'COMPOUND OXYGEN. 



In reply to the question, Whose preparation of "Compound 
Oxygen" did Bro. Sunderlin use? we answer, it was that of 
Messrs. Starkey & Palen, No. 1 1 17 Girard St., Philadelphia, Pa. 



On learning of the benefit derived from its use by Bro. S., we at 
once sought reduced prices with a view to introducing it to your 
attention cheaper than the regular rate. The above firm would 
make no concession (their price being $15), while with Messrs. 
Feltwell & Co. we were able to make arrangements so as to 
offer it to you at one-half the above price ($7.50). 

There is an immense profit in it, and if we had time, we believe 
we could have it prepared so as to furnish it to you for $3. It is 
not patented. 



R427 : page 3 



THY KINGDOM COME." 

There's a work to be accomplished, 
Such as earth has never known; 
There are mighty forces gathering, 
And their power will soon be shown. 

They are choosing such material, 
As will serve their purpose true; 
And when this shall be perfected, 
Glorious work on earth they'll do. 

They'll beat back the powers of darkness, 
They will overturn false creeds; 
They will work for truth and justice, 
Human rights and human needs. 

Tyrant rule they will abolish, 
And oppression's galling chain 
Will be broken once forever; 
For the Christ on earth will reign. 

His an everlasting kingdom 
Which shall never pass away; 
And its principles eternal 
Must o'er all the earth bear sway. 

Mighty minds, through all the ages, 
Have been working for the plan 
Surely to be consummated; 
"Peace on earth, good will to man. " 

Yes, there dawns a brighter era; 

We can see the rising day, 

When man, freed from error's teachings, 

Soon will learn the better way. 

Superstition's darkening forces, 
Which so long have forged their chains, 
Every day are losing power; 
Only seeming strength remains. 



428 : page 3 



Not the work of worldly wisdom, 
Not the selfish schemes of man, 
E'er will execute this purpose; 
Tis a higher, nobler plan; 

Supervised by the immortals, 
Who can clearly see the true, 
And who know the wiser methods, 
And the time, their work to do. 

You who see the day-star rising 
And can read the passing signs, 
Watch, and ready stand for action; 
Follow wisdom's high designs. 

Trust no selfish, vain pretension, 
For the work is all divine; 
And the kingdom, power and glory, 
Are, O Lord, forever Thine. 



-MRS. E. G. LAKE. 



R428 : page 3 

YOUR BUILDING. 

"Other foundation can no man lay than that is laid which is 
Jesus Christ. " "But let every man take heed how he buildeth 
thereupon. " "Now if any man build upon this foundation gold, 
silver, precious stones, wood, hay, stubble; every man's work 
shall be made manifest, for the day shall declare it, because it 
shall be revealed by fire; and the fire shall try every man's work 
of what sort it is. If any man's work abide which he hath built 
thereupon, he shall receive a reward. If any man's work shall be 
burned, he shall suffer loss; but he himself shall be saved; yet so 
as by fire." (1 Cor. 3:9,11,10-15.) 

The individual Christian faith is a building, and as such must 
have both foundation and superstructure. Every principle of 
truth or error adopted becomes a part of our faith-building. A 
building made of wood, and thatched with straw, may look well 
and for a time protect, but it will not endure like a better and 
more costly structure. So a faith building, constructed of men's 
traditions, may for a time look passably well, be less costly and 
more quickly finished than one built of the precious truths 
patiently quarried from God's Word. The former is easily swept 
away with the storm of infidelity which does not even shake the 
latter. The one will stand the test of fire and protect its owner, 
the other will but feed the flame and endanger the owner. 

The building of our faith God leaves largely with us. He 
furnishes a mine of truth, places the tools within our reach, and 



urges us to build well of enduring materials, adding faith to 
faith, virtue to virtue, knowledge to knowledge. Thus he would 
have us grow in grace and knowledge and love, following 
examples of building which he has furnished. 

"Other foundation can no man lay than that (which) is laid- 
JESUS CHRIST. " This statement of the importance of Jesus as 
the foundation of all faith toward God, is in full accord with the 
statement that "There is none other name under heaven given 
among men whereby we must be saved. " No other basis of faith 
will do -"Other foundation can no man lay." 

Those who are building on this foundation rock are Christians 
no matter how poor a faith they build thereupon. Even though 
they build entirely with the wood, hay, and stubble of men's 
traditions, yet as builders upon the Rock they are Christians. 
Though in this DAY OF THE LORD into which we have now 
entered their works shall suffer loss, yet such themselves shall 
be saved so as by fire. That is, though God has arranged that a 
fierce trial of faith is coming upon all who profess to be on the 
Rock, Christ Jesus, which will burn up, eradicate, destroy every 
vestige of error, every thing which is of man and not from God's 
Word, yet all who truly recognize the Rock and are built on it 
shall be saved. 

Those who build on the rock with the gold, silver, and precious 
stones of God's revelation by reason of this good and proper 
faith-building, are enabled to overcome the world and carry out 
their consecration acceptably to God through Jesus Christ. "This 
is the victory that overcometh the world, even your faith. " These 
overcomers who now "follow the Lamb" shall in due time be 
everlastingly united to Him whom "God hath appointed heir of 
all things." As such they are sometimes called Jesus' brethren, 
and sometimes by that close and endearing name —"The Bride, 
the Lamb's Wife," and as such we are to be heirs of God, joint 
heirs with Jesus Christ our Lord. 

Those who build with poor stuff, the wood, hay, and stubble of 
human traditions, we understand to be those who do not 
overcome the world, but who are ensnared and bound by the 
spirit of the world and hindered from carrying out their 
consecration. Having only the traditions of men, they lack 
protection against error, and the strength necessary to overcome 
the world which is obtainable only from the truth. All, then, 
should recognize the value of truth in enabling us to carry out 
our consecration vows of death to the world and its ambitions. 

If all Christians valued truth properly all would buy it and never 
sell it, though it cost time, inconvenience and self-denial to get 
it, and reputation and sacrifice to hold it. 

The class who, though consecrated, are building a flimsy faith of 
man's wisdom, we understand to be the "great company" (Rev. 
19:6; 7:9-17) who will come to spiritual conditions, but through 



great tribulation brought on them by their erroneous faith, all of 
which dross of error must be consumed. Thus they will be saved 
by that fire or purification. This is the class which follows the 
Bride company (Psa. 45:14,15) as Rebecca's maids followed her 
(Gen. 24:61). This is called the servant class in distinction from 
the royal class which reigns. These shall "serve God in His 
temple" and be "before the throne." Thus in symbol we see a 
distinction represented between this class and the overcomers, 
the royal bride who shall reign with Jesus in the throne. Notice 
that the different rewards of these two classes (both spiritual) are 
shown by many scriptures (see Rev. 7:9,10,13-17; 19:6,7; Psa. 
45:10-15). Therefore let all who seek the prize of our high 
calling take heed how (with what material) they build their faith 
even though on the sure foundation. 



R428 : page 3 

ON WHAT ARE YOU BUILDING? 

What we have just seen regarding faith structures is important, 
but our present question is yet more so, because if not on the 
rock foundation, Jesus Christ, all our faith is vain and all our 
hope delusive. 

To believe that Mohammed once lived and died on earth does 
not constitute us Mohammedans, nor give a basis for faith and 
hope of a future life; neither does the simple belief that Jesus 
once lived and died on earth constitute us Christians, nor give a 
basis of faith or hope of a future life. But the belief that Jesus 
died as our Redeemer— "died for our sins according to the 
Scriptures," "gave himself a ransom for all;" that "the Lord laid 
on him the iniquity of us all, and that by his stripes we are 
healed, " does constitute us Christians and give a firm foundation 
for faith that our sins are cancelled, and that in his due time all 
may be released from sin's penalty— death. 

Some build on right doing as a basis of hope that God will grant 
them eternal life. These build not on the Rock, Christ Jesus, but 
upon their own works. Of this class were the Jews, who sought 
to justify themselves. But Paul assures us that they had not a 
good foundation; for "By the deeds of the law shall no flesh be 
justified. (Rom. 3:20.) 

Others build their hope of salvation on the love of God. They 
feel sure that because God is very pitiful and of tender mercy, 
therefore he will ultimately, eternally save every one from death. 
Such seem to forget that God had the same love for mankind for 
the past six thousand years, yet he has permitted mankind to go 
down lower and lower into misery and death. We suggest to 
these that if God has so long kept love subservient to justice, and 
never overruled his original sentence of death, their hope rests 



on a sandy foundation; for his word declares "With him is no 
variableness, neither shadow of turning" and "He will by no 
means clear the guilty." (James 1:17; Exod. 34:7.) Such are not 
Christians because they build hope and faith on the love of God 
and not on the only foundation, CHRIST JESUS. The LOVE of 
God provided the foundation, but the love of God is not the 
foundation of Christian faith. 

Others build on the justice of God and boldly declare that God is 
bound by principles of justice, to save all men out of Adamic 
death. Their argument is that God placed man in his present 
condition of sin and misery and death, and that in justice to his 
creatures he must restore them. To those who thus reason and 
build their hopes of future life on God's JUSTICE, we would 
suggest that if this reasoning is correct, the many Scriptures 
which tell us that by grace (God's favor) we are saved, are all 
untrue, because if He is compelled to save men on principles of 
justice, then salvation is not of grace, but of justice. We suggest 
further, that if God is bound in justice to save all men out of 
death, it is proper to infer that God has 

R429 : page 3 

been unjust toward man for six thousand years. The inference, 
then, would be that God will sooner or later be compelled in 
justice to change his methods and do right— do justly by his 
creatures. 

You never said it thus? We presume not. Perhaps you never 
thought of the God-dishonoring conclusions to which your false, 
though seemingly plausible, premise would lead. If you had, 
doubtless you would not be building your hopes on God's 
justice-outside of his plan to redeem through Christ Jesus-for if 
he has been unjust for six thousand years, he might continue to 
be unjust indefinitely. 

None of these theories are scriptural, hence none of them are 
proper foundations for faith, and any building reared thereon is 
doomed to destruction. We ask the question, Can those who 
build on these sandy foundations be properly termed Christians? 
Is not a Christian one whose hopes of future life are built solely 
and only, on the rock foundation which God has laid- Jesus 
Christ? "Thus saith Jehovah, Behold I lay in Zion for a 
foundation, a stone, a tried stone, a precious corner stone, a sure 
foundation." (Isa. 28:16.) 

Paul also declares the foundation of all Christian faith, saying, "I 
delivered unto you first of all that which I also received (first of 
all), how that Christ died for our sins according to the 
Scriptures." (1 Cor. 15:3.) In the two preceding verses Paul tells 
us that this was the Gospel which he preached, which they had 
received, and by which they might reckon themselves saved. 
This is not all of the Gospel— good tidings-no, there is much 
more, but it all comes as a consequence of this fundamental or 



foundation truth; and without this faith in Jesus as our 
Redeemer, who died and gave his life a ransom for our lives, 
which were forfeited through Adam's sin, we must see that we 
are still guilty and condemned before God's law and could have 
no scriptural grounds for expecting future life. 

It is in vain that any tell us that they are building on Christ 
because they acknowledge Him as a leader and noble pattern. 
All men— yes, and devils too must acknowledge the grandeur 
and perfectness of Jesus' life; all must admit that he is a noble 
example, but to acknowledge Jesus as the foundation of faith in 
a future life, is to recognize the fact that all men are sinners, and 
as such JUSTLY condemned to death, and that Jesus is "the 
Lamb of God that taketh away the sin of the world; " and that 
thus, by paying the penalty of man's sins-death-he procured for 
all a release from death, a right to life. He justifies them, or 
makes them worthy of life, which in His due time he will give 
them. 

The plan of God, looked at from the standpoint of the inspired 
Word of God, recognizes the impartially just trial of Adam, his 
deliberate violation of God's just and easy requirement, and the 
justice of enforcing the penalty which God had threatened, viz., 
DEATH (not life in torment, but a loss of life totally). "In the 
day that thou eatest thereof-dying thou shalt die" (Gen. 2:17, 
Margin). God's foreknowledge of the consequence of Adam's 
sin cannot be urged against the justice of his trial, as the trial 
was the same and had the same results, as though God had not 
foreknown its result. 

God is not responsible for all the mental and physical 
imperfections of our race. These are traceable as results of sin to 
Adam their progenitor. Here is a thought not generally 
recognized, that God creates only perfect beings such as Adam 
was before sin; and all fallen, mentally and physically imperfect 
men and women, are not God's creation, but the offspring of the 
fallen Adam. These imperfections, therefore, are not chargeable 
to God, but to Adam's sin. All die, therefore, as a result of 
Adam's unrighteousness and not of God's injustice. If, then, God 
was just in condemning Adam, and in no way responsible to 
Adam's offspring, it must have been as Scripture states, "By 
God's grace (unmerited favor) we are saved." Yes, while we 
were in just condemnation as enemies and sinners, God so loved 
and pitied us that he gave his Son, that he "by the grace of God 
should taste death for every man. " To this agree the words of 
Scripture-- 1 Cor. 15:22; Rom. 5:12,17,19, and 11:32,33. If, then, 
the Scriptures are true, the theory that Jehovah has dealt unjustly 
by the race in condemning all to death, and the argument that he 
is bound injustice to restore them to life, falls. 

Looking from the standpoint of divine revelation, instead of 
purely human reasoning, we see that while love is a prominent 
factor in all God's plans and an element of the divine nature, yet 



his foreknowledge and omnipotence make it unnecessary for his 
love to come into conflict with his justice. God having justly 
condemned man as unworthy of life, love could not step in and 
reverse the decision and set the prisoner free without first 
satisfying the claims of justice. Should God do so we should 
properly consider him changeable; and not only so, but we 
should all see that either the first or the last decision was unjust, 
for if the first decision was just, then the reversing of it was 
unjust, and if the last decision be just, the first must have been 
unjust. God is just and true; in him is no variableness; He will 
by no means clear the guilty. The guilt of all our race was laid 
on Jesus, and the claims of justice were satisfied in his sacrifice. 
If we say we have no sin (and hence no need of a Savior to 
redeem from the consequence of it— death), "we make him a 
liar," for he declares, "There is none righteous; no, not one." 

When all were in this condition of sin and condemnation in 
which we could neither help ourselves nor each other, because 
all being from Adam were under the same condemnation, then 
God's love carried out a plan (already conceived) by which he 
could clear the guilty race and restore them to life and at the 
same time do it justly. He so loved the sinner, whom he had 
justly 

R429 : page 4 

condemned, that he gave his Son that he should taste death (our 
penalty) for every man; that he should be a propitiation 
(satisfaction) for our sins (the Church's), and not for ours only, 
but also for the sins of the whole world. (1 John 2:2.) Thus 
God's love and wisdom, operating in harmony with his justice, 
succeed in clearing the guilty without any injustice. Thus only 
can God be just and the justifier of sinners who accept of the 
ransom "when brought to a full knowledge of it." (Rom. 3:26; 1 
Tim. 2:4.) An earthly judge, before whom a criminal had been 
convicted and justly sentenced, could not justly set the prisoner 
free, nor declare him guiltless in the eyes of the law. But if some 
one came forward and paid the imposed penalty for the prisoner, 
the Judge could be just in justifying (declaring right in the eyes 
of the law) him whom he had formerly been just in condemning. 

We feel satisfied that few have seen into the "depths of the 
riches both of the knowledge and wisdom of God. " In wisdom 
and love all were judged according to the one representative 
whose example nearly all would undoubtedly have followed if 
they had been individually tried. If each of the one hundred and 
forty billions of human beings estimated to have been born into 
the world had been individually tried, and had yielded and been 
condemned as Adam was, it would have required as many 
perfect human beings to die for them, and thus pay their penalty 
and redeem them. 



But looking at it from God's statement, we see a depth of divine 
wisdom and economy in the plan adopted— the condemning of 
all through one man's disobedience, that he might have mercy 
on all through the sacrifice of another one as a sin offering. Note 
the force of the following Scriptures from this standpoint and 
their meaninglessness when otherwise viewed: "As in Adam all 
die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive." "As by the 
offence of one judgment came upon all men to condemnation, 
even so by the righteousness of one, the free gift came upon all 
men unto justification of life. For as by one man's disobedience 
many were made sinners, so by the obedience of one shall many 
be made righteous.... Where sin abounded, grace did much more 
abound: that as sin hath reigned unto death, even so might grace 
reign through righteousness unto eternal life by Jesus Christ our 
Lord. For what the law could not do in that it was weak through 
the flesh, God sending his own Son in the likeness of sinful 
flesh, by a sacrifice (see margin) condemned sin in the flesh. " 
"God hath concluded them all in unbelief, that he might have 
mercy upon all. " 

"O the depth of the riches both of the wisdom and knowledge of 
God: how unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past 
finding out!... Who hath known the mind of the Lord, or who 
hath been his counselor? Of him, and through him, and to him 
are all things; to whom be glory forever." (1 Cor. 15:22; Rom. 
5:18-21; 8:3; 11:32-36.) 

In conclusion: On what are you building your faith, my brother, 
my sister? On the sands of men's opinions and theories, or on 
the one rock foundation which God himself has laid?— Jesus 
Christ, "the Lamb of God which taketh away the sin of the 
world"-who "died for our sins." 

My hope is built on nothing less 
Than Jesus' blood and righteousness; 
I dare not trust the sweetest frame, 
But wholly lean on Jesus' name. 

His oath, his cov'nant and His blood, 
Support me in the whelming flood; 
When all around my soul gives way, 
He then is all my hope and stay. 

On Christ the Solid Rock I stand; 
All other ground is sinking sand. " 



R430 : page 4 

IT IS a good deal better to live holy than to talk about it. We are 
told to let our light shine, and if it does, we won't need to tell 
anybody that it does. The light will be its own witness. 
Lighthouses don't ring bells and fire cannons to call attention to 
their shining-they just shine.— Moody. 



R430 : page 4 

HENRY WARD BEECHER. 

In a recent issue we called attention to Mr. B.'s theology, 
criticizing it sharply, but not unkindly. A reader of the TOWER 
thinks we were misinformed through the meagre press reports of 
Mr. B.'s recent utterances before the Congregational 
Association, and has kindly sent us a full report of the same, 
revised and corrected by Mr. B. himself. It is our desire to do 
justice to all. We have examined said reports and here make 
some extracts and comments. 

Mr. B. says: "I believe miracles are possible now; they were not 
only possible, but real, in the times gone by— especially the two 
great miracles-the miraculous conception of Christ and his 
resurrection from the dead. When I give those up, the two 
columns on which the house stands will have to fall to the 
ground." 

On the subject of the atonement he says: "I am accustomed to 
say that Christ is in himself the Atonement; that he is set forth in 
his life, teaching, suffering, death, resurrection and heavenly 
glory as empowered to FORGIVE SIN, and to transform men 
into a new and nobler life who know sin, and accept him in full 
and loving trust. " "The Scriptures declare that the sufferings of 
Christ SECURED the remission of sins." "The Apostles 
continually point to Christ's sufferings. They inspire hope 
because Christ has suffered. They include in their commission 
that their joyful errand is to announce remission of sins 
BECAUSE of Christ's work." "I regard the statement in Rom. 
3:20-26 as covering the ground which I hold, and as including 
all that is known." [Please read.] 

If we consider Mr. B. from the standpoint of these remarks 
alone, we should have some reason to say that he is sound on the 
subject of redemption through the blood of Christ. But when we 
notice that throughout the whole statement of his views, the oft 
repeated Scriptural terms— ransom, bought, redeemed, 
propitiation (satisfaction)-are conspicuously absent from his 
confession of faith; that in the statement quoted he refers to the 
sufferings and work of Christ as the cause of the remission of 
sins; and that he says that nowhere does he find in Scripture 
statements of why the sufferings of Christ were necessary, or 
how they opened a way for sinners, it causes us still to doubt 
whether he appreciates the value of Christ's death as a 
satisfaction for sins, and causes the less wonder that reporters 
never correctly represent his views. 

We are still in doubt as to whether Mr. B. believes that "Christ 
died for our sins;" that he "gave himself a ransom for all;" that 



we were "bought with a price, even the precious blood of 
Christ. " We wonder from his own expression whether he 
believes the text he quoted (Rom. 3:20-26) as covering the 
ground which he holds. Does it cover all and more than he 
believes, when it says of Jesus, "Whom God hath set forth to be 
a propitiation (appeasement or satisfaction) through FAITH IN 
HIS BLOOD to declare his righteousness for (in) the remission 
of sins that are past"? 

Again, Mr. B. says: "Man is a being created in imperfection, and 
seeking a full development. Second, I believe him to be sinful. " 
"No man ever lived, and no man ever will live, that is only a 
man that was not a sinner. " Thus he charges the sin to the 
Creator and not to Adam, through whom the Scriptures affirm 
all were made sinners, and on account of whose disobedience all 
were condemned. (Rom. 5:18,19.) This Scripture doctrine of 
hereditary taint and condemnation he characterizes as "spiritual 
barbarism" (page 5), while on page 20 he makes what seems to 
our mind a complete contradiction of this when he says, "It is far 
easier for some to rise than others. Heredity has a powerful 
influence. " 

We think we see the cause of this stumbling in Mr. B.'s case. As 
a man he is noble, fearless, reasonable and benevolent. We see 
him struggling manfully with the theology of to-day, vainly 
endeavoring to patch it up, and make it conform to his sense of 
justice and benevolence. Personally we can but admire and love 
such a character, but we would that he, and all such, would lay 
aside all theological creeds and begin afresh the study of these 
subjects, using God's Word as the only standard. 

We suggest that he might find, as we have, that God CREATED 
only our first parents, and that they were perfect and sinless as 
narrated in Scripture. That our imperfection, and consequent sin 
through inability to observe God's perfect law, is chargeable, not 
to God's having imperfectly created our first parents or 
ourselves, but to the fact that we derive our existence in a 
natural way from Adam and Eve since their fall by God's 
arrangement, and hence we have the hereditary taint and 
imperfection originally from Adam, increased or decreased by 
each generation, but without hope of ever being able to extricate 
ourselves from this condition of sin and death. 

With this view it is easy to see why Christ died. It is easy to see 
that he came into the world, not to patch up God's imperfect 
creation and help to get it into good shape, but he came into the 
world to redeem from sin and its specified punishment-deafh- 
the race which, in its progenitor, God had created perfect and 
upright in his own moral likeness, but which, through sin, had 
lost all right to life. Since Jesus paid the very penalty which was 
against all— death, the sacrificing of his perfect humanity-how 
clear it is that all men are redeemed, or bought back from death, 
and re-established in a right to life (resurrection) through the 



ransom price given by our substitute, even the precious 
(valuable) blood (life) of Christ, which was "shed for the 
remission of sins that are pasf'-Adamic sins. 

How much in harmony with this are the statements of Rom. 
5:12,18,19. "By one man sin entered into the world and death by 
(as a result of) sin; and so death passed upon all men for that all 
have sinned. " "Therefore as by the offence of one judgment 
came upon all men to condemnation (condemning them as 
unworthy of life), EVEN SO by the righteousness of one (Jesus) 
the free gift came upon (to) all men, unto justification of life. 
(Life became a free gift because we had as a race forfeited our 
right to the life originally given to Adam.) For as by one man's 
disobedience many (all) were made sinners, so by the obedience 
(even unto death- Phil. 2:8) of one shall many be made 
righteous." Paul regarded this fact that God had condemned all 
in Adam and justified all in Christ as a master piece of wisdom, 
and we should so mould our faith according to God's Word as to 
have it so in our estimation. If our theology does not make it 
appear so, we should conclude that something is wrong with our 
theology, and at once set about the prayerful closet study of the 
Bible to have it made right. God will reveal his gloriously 
harmonious plan to every diligent and fully consecrated 
searcher. "Light is sown for the righteous." 

If Mr. B. considers himself misstated, and desires to correct our 
present understanding of his views, we shall be glad to furnish 
him as much space in a future issue as this article occupies. "Let 
God be true." 



R430 : page 4 

PRESENT DANGER. 

"Blessed is he that watcheth and keepeth his garments." 

The day of the Lord, in the beginning of which we are now 
living, is everywhere throughout the Scriptures referred to as a 
time of special trouble— beginning first on the Church. But why 
should it begin with the Church? or rather, why should not the 
Church be entirely exempt from it? Let us look first to see what 
is the cause of the trouble, and the question may be readily 
answered. 

The day of the Lord is the day when Jesus takes to himself his 
kingly power. The first work of the new king is the binding of 
Satan, the present "prince of this world," for "how can one enter 
into a strong man's house and spoil his goods, except he first 
bind the strong man? then he will spoil his house" (Matt. 12:29); 
and "For this purpose was the Son of God manifested, that he 
might destroy the works of the devil." (1 John 3:8.) Satan's reign 
has been one of terror under cover of the darkness (ignorance) of 



this world. But the present domination of evil is to end, and the 
prince of darkness (Satan) is to be bound. The kingdom of 
Christ is to bring joy and peace, and the nations shall walk in the 
light of it. (Rev. 21:24.) 

As the light of truth increases darkness (ignorance) must flee 
away, and Satan to that extent must lose his power. Light-truth, 
will be the chain which will bind evil in the coming age under 
the reign of Christ. And when the knowledge of the Lord fills 
the whole earth as the waters cover the sea, then Satan will be 
completely bound. Now, it will be clearly seen that the Church- 
those walking by the light of the lamp of truth-are the first to 
escape from the kingdom of darkness. Over them Satan first 
begins to lose his power, and he here discovers that the binding 
influence is at work. Since our Lord and King has come, the 
light of truth has been shining as never before. 

R431 : page 4 

It is not a supposable case that Satan will give up his dominion 
without a struggle, and this terrible struggle between light and 
darkness, truth and error, is now going on specially in the 
Church. Every new truth is confronted by some seemingly 
plausible error, and every old truth is assailed and unsettled in 
the minds of those not fully equipped for the fearful contest. 
Lukewarm and merely nominal Christians are little troubled 
about these things, and as long as they sleep on, ignoring the 
light that has come into the world, Satan can afford to let them 
alone. 

One of the devices of the adversary now, so closely resembles 
his policy in Eden, that if God's children will note it, they can 
but indignantly repulse his audacity. He first presented a 
temptation to Eve, attempted to prove the advantages of 
partaking of the forbidden fruit; reasoned that God was unjust in 
depriving them of it, etc. Eve replied, "God hath said, Ye shall 
not eat of it, neither shall ye touch it, lest ye die." But Satan said, 
"Ye shall not surely die. " The act of disobedience in eating that 
fruit was sufficient to accomplish the work of death. Obedience 
was the rock on which they stood in harmony with God, having 
the promise of everlasting life, but they left the rock and thus 
lost life and all claim to it. 

Death to all eternity, was the result of that act had not 
deliverance been provided through a Redeemer, who became 
man's substitute in death, thus ransoming him from the power of 
the grave. Faith in the efficacy of our ransom price -the 
precious blood of Christ— is now the only means of access to 
God's favor, the only sure foundation, the rock on which we 
may now stand. Those who come to a full knowledge of the 
truth in this age, may now be justified and at peace with God, 
standing on this rock by faith. All the world shall in the next age 
come to the knowledge of the truth, and can find favor with God 



only through acknowledging and resting on the merit of the 
Redeemer. And now Satan is again at work seeking by every 
means in his power to undermine and unsettle this foundation of 
our faith, trying to show that we need no Redeemer, and that he 
who claimed to be our Redeemer was a sinful man even as we; 
that his life was a forfeited life coming down from Adam 
through Joseph, instead of a new creation, perfect, from God his 
Father. Ah! but we reply, "God hath said," "There is no name 
given under heaven, or among men, whereby we must be saved, 
but the name of Jesus." "In him was no sin," and we are 
redeemed "with the precious blood of Christ, as of a lamb 
without blemish and without spot." 

Oh, says the adversary, that is not to be taken literally; those are 
only figurative expressions, and do not mean what they appear 
to. If you were only spiritually minded you would see that they 
mean the very opposite. Here is a sly appeal to the old pride 
which we had covenanted to crucify. Again, we reply, but God 
hath said, that if those who were once enlightened count the 
blood of 

R431 : page 5 

the covenant wherewith they were sanctified an unholy 
(common) thing, such draw back unto perdition (destruction), 
there remaineth no more a sacrifice for sins (Heb. 10:26-29)- 
such shall surely die. No, says the deceiver, ye shall not surely 
die, and then he quotes a text where it does not belong, saying, 
"God will have all men to be saved." This is true of the Adamic 
death— "God will have all men to be saved" from the first or 
Adamic death, and then to be brought "to a knowledge of the 
truth;" and after that, if they sin wilfully, etc., they die a second 
time, and there remaineth for such no more a sacrifice for sins. 
The ransom given was for Adamic sin, and releases only from 
the death which came by Adam. There is no ransom given and 
no redemption promised from the "Second death," which is the 
punishment for wilful sin after justification and enlightenment. 

The world is not thus enlightened yet, only God's children are. 
We, are already reckoned of God as having passed from death 
unto life, since justified by faith in the precious blood of Christ. 
And not only so, but being thus justified, and having presented 
ourselves as living sacrifices acceptable to God by Jesus Christ, 
we have access into this grace wherein we stand as "new 
creatures." Thus all our hope will be seen to depend entirely on 
our acceptance of Jesus as our Redeemer, Ransom, Substitute, 
his payment of our penalty. And, therefore, to all the dear 
household of faith we would say, Beware of the deceiver! This 
is his old battle-plan, and all should be able to recognize it. He 
still claims that the wages of sin is not death- "Ye shall not 
surely die. " And be assured that if this policy does not 
accomplish your overthrow, some other device will be tried. 



Let not the storm of his wrath sweep you off the Rock; keep 
your building on this foundation, and continue to build with the 
gold and silver and precious stones of truth. Most of those in the 
nominal Church have been building on this rock, but the 
material they have used was mainly the wood, hay and stubble 
of men's traditions. But the trial of this day shall try every man's 
work of what sort it is. The storms, and the floods, and the 
winds, and the hail shall beat upon your house, and the fiery trial 
shall prove all. "Who shall be able to stand?" All on the rock 
shall stand, though any whose building is of wood, hay and 
stubble shall suffer loss, and they shall be saved, yet so as by 
fire. Remember, "We wrestle not against flesh and blood, but 
against principalities, against powers, against the rulers of the 
darkness of this world, against spiritual wickedness in high 
places." (Eph 6:12.) 

Ne'er think the victory won, 
Nor once at ease sit down; 
The work of faith will not be done, 
Till thou hast gained thy crown. 

Since our sins were laid upon Jesus, and we by faith accepted 
him as our Redeemer, his righteousness has been laid upon us. 
Yes, his righteousness is our glorious dress. "Blessed is he that 
watcheth and keepeth his garments." 

MRS. C. T. RUSSELL. 



R431 : page 5 

IN DEFENCE OF TRUTH. 

In our last issue, in the article headed "An Unpleasant Duty," 
we called attention to the "Day Star," a paper which we once 
warmly commended to our readers, and which we were pleased 
to recognize as a co-laborer in the spread of divine truth. 

We called attention to the fact that the "Day Star" had recently 
left the basis of Christian hope, viz. : Redemption from sin and 
death by the ransom price-Jesus' death-and that it was 
evidently seeking to lead in a race for open infidelity by 
endeavoring (without cause) to throw discredit on the first 
chapters of Matthew and Luke, in order to support the erroneous 
claim that Jesus was the son of Joseph, and altogether born in 
sin and shapen in iniquity as much as any other man, having 
descended from the fallen Adam. 

As we stated then, we repeat now, that this has been to us a very 
unpleasant duty. We are sorry to lose the company of the "Day 
Star," which for nearly a year gave promise of being a faithful 
co-worker in the spread of "good tidings of great joy." 



Our grief is two-fold, however, for we not only mourn the loss 
of a fellow laborer, but we behold in it an "enemy of the cross of 
Christ," whose spread and increase means opposition to truth 
and increase of error. Nor have we any hesitation in saying that 
the fact that it still retains some of the truths of restitution will 
but aid in the overthrow of the faith of some, by reason of whom 
the way of truth shall be evil spoken of. (2 Pet. 2:2.) Restitution 
will be the bait, error will be the hook, and sophistry the line by 
which the unwary will be drawn into infidelity. Sadly we mourn 
our loss. 

We called attention to the "Day Star" because we wanted to put 
all on guard, for we well knew that all would not at once 
recognize the deadly mixture which is being presented to them 
under the cover of some truth. 

We knew, too, that many had been so long starved in Babylon, 
that having come to taste and see the goodness of God and the 
beauty of His plan for the restitution of all things, their appetite 
for truth was so sharpened that they could easily be poisoned if 
not shown the error-hence our word of caution. 

Arsenic is white and resembles sugar. If it were presented to you 
by a friend marked sugar, you would perhaps use it and be 
poisoned. The "Watch Tower" was the friend which handed you 
sample copies of the "Day Star" marked sugar, and now we find 
that it is changed to poison, though mixed with the sweets of 
restitution. Surely, then, if we did not cry aloud and properly 
label it poison, we should be guilty before God. (Ezek. 33:6.) 

Druggists are accustomed to put the label, "POISON," on all 
poisonous drugs, not to prohibit their use, but to prevent any 
from using them in ignorance of this true character. So with us, 
we do not seek to prohibit our readers from reading the works of 
Paine, Voltaire or Ingersol, or the "Day Star," but we want the 
latter as well as the rest labeled infidel. All except the latter 
claim to be 

R432 : page 5 

infidel, i.e., rejecters of the Bible's teachings. The latter, 
claiming to be a believer, is "privately" (i.e., under cover) 
denying the redemption, seeking to undermine the nature of the 
Redeemer, and to overthrow confidence in the value of the New 
Testament generally. 

In its last issue the "Day Star" takes notice of our "Unpleasant 
Duty. " It affects a tone of injured innocence, and claims that our 
saying that it was seeking to "lead in a race for open infidelity" 
is unjust; but in the same paper it shows that our statement had 
the best of foundation, for in another column we find that it not 
only rejects those chapters of Matthew and Luke which teach 
that Jesus was born of a virgin-conceived in her by the power 
of Jehovah-but rejects the inspiration and value of the New 



Testament Scriptures totally. We quote the following sentences 
from it: "We feel confident that the acceptance of the Old 
Testament writings and the rejection of those of the New 
Testament, not in accord with it, will free us absolutely from 
Babylon's isms." "We have more confidence in the authority of 
the Old Testament writings taken as a whole, and of their 
importance in arriving at the truth, than we have in the reliability 
of all the New Testament Scriptures." "We repeat, that all who 
would GROW must rid themselves of the childish idea that it is 
wrong to question the sense or application of a Scripture, even 
though it be made by an apostle. " 

Why, this is just what Ingersol and all other infidels would say 
of the New Testament; the only difference is that they would say 
the same of the Old Testament. And at the present rate of 
progress, the "Day Star" will soon pronounce the Old Testament 
as unreliable as the New Testament. Already we regret to learn 
its Editor scoffs at the narrative of Noah and the Ark as recorded 
in Genesis. 

And yet the "Day Star" states that it is misrepresented by us 
when we say it is on the race for open infidelity. Does our 
contemporary know the meaning of the word infidel? It signifies 
unbeliever-one who rejects the special inspiration of the New 
Testament— or one who denies that the man Jesus had Jehovah 
for a father. Since this is the unbelief of the "Day Star," why 
object to calling it by its true name, infidelity. It is those errors 
which are brought in "privately" (secretly under cover of truth) 
which the Scriptures call "damnable heresies." 

But we are not satisfied fully yet. The "Day Star" tells its readers 
that we misrepresent it when we say it denies that the Lord 
bought us; and it contends that it does believe and teach that 
"Christ died for our sins according to the Scriptures." 

The "Day Star" has fallen into a habit common to some other 
publications, of quoting certain passages of Scripture and 
claiming that they believe them, and giving the impression that 
those Scriptures are favorable to their theories, when such is not 
the case. For instance, such texts as the following are often 
quoted: "Who gave himself a ransom for all" (1 Tim. 2:6). 
"Christ died for our sins" (1 Cor. 15:3). "Ye are bought with a 
price" (1 Cor. 6:20). "Ye were redeemed ...with the precious 
blood of Christ" (1 Pet. 1:18). Then, in the very same paper, the 
idea of our being "bought" will be scouted as ridiculous. 

This conduct attempts to excuse itself by saying, "We do not 
believe that Christ died for any man's sins according to men's 
theories." Now, we ask, has any one the right to use the words 
ransom, redeem, bought, etc., and put a private interpretation on 
the meaning of those words in order to say he believes them? 
We think not. The "Day Star" is published in the English 
language, and common honesty demands that those words be 



used according to their true meaning and not according to the 
convenience of any theory. There are standard authorities on the 
meaning of both Greek and English words, and according to 
these the "Day Star" does not believe, nor teach, that Jesus was 
our "ransom," our "Redeemer," nor that we were "bought with a 
price." 

It has been shown heretofore in these columns, not only that 
these English words (ransom, bought, redeem) mean the giving 
of one thing instead of, or as a substitute for another, but also 
that the Greek words which these are used to translate are, if 
possible, still stronger expressions of the same idea. We have 
shown scripturally that Jesus was a perfect man, and though 
born of a woman, his life came not from man, but from God. 
"The angel said unto Mary (Luke 1 :35), The Holy Ghost shall 
come upon thee, and the power of the Highest shall overshadow 
thee: THEREFORE also that HOLY THING which shall be 
born of thee shall be called the Son of God. " He is here and 
elsewhere declared holy, undefiled and separate from sinners, 
even from his birth. Then he did not partake of the condemned 
or forfeited life of Adam through Joseph, but of a life as directly 
from God as was the first Adam's. We have shown that because 
thus born "holy," or sinless, he had an unforfeited life which he 
could give for the life of Adam and all who died in him. This he 
did. "He came to give his LIFE a ransom (exchange) for many" 
lives. (Matt. 20:28.) (See Rom. 5:18,19.) 

Of course when the "Day Star" claims that Jesus got his life 
from Joseph, and was as much born in Adamic sin as any other 
man, it must needs deny the meaning of the word ransom, 
because one sinner cannot ransom another. 

Now, we wish the "Day Star" to tell us, not what it does not 
believe, but what it does believe on this subject: Why did Jesus 
die? How does it effect our sins? How did he put away sin by 
the sacrifice of himself? In what way did he give "himself a 
ransom (Gr. antilutron -an equivalent price) for all?" In what 
sense was he a propitiation (satisfaction) for our sins? In what 
sense were we "bought with a price"? We desire an answer to 
these questions full and explicit for the truth's sake, and any 
evasion of them we will regard as an admission of the "Day 
Star's" inability to answer. These questions relate to the very 
foundation of Christianity. 

We have put these questions so pointedly that we hope the "Day 
Star's" private and peculiar and new use of English words will 
hereafter be understood. We esteem that method which attempts 
to palm off error under guise and cover of scriptural words and 
phrases, while ignoring their meaning, as the most insidious and 
injurious form of infidelity. We do not like to see the label 
"sugar" put on arsenic and handed to God's children without our 
emphatic protest and exposure of its true character. We are glad 
to know that some by use, have had their senses so exercised as 



to be able at once to distinguish between the truth concerning 
the restitution and the deadly error handed with it, which takes 
away the very and only basis of restitution— the ransom price. 
Put on the proper label, and then let every man who wants to use 
it do so, but so far as possible keep it out of the reach of babes. 



R432 : page 5 

CHANGE YOUR MINDS. 

[CONCLUDED.] 

At the dawn of the Gospel dispensation, when the star of 
Bethlehem had arisen, and was about to be manifested to Israel, 
John cried: "Reform, (change your minds), because the Royal 
Majesty of the heavens has approached." (Diaglott). His 
audience was made up of all classes dwelling in and about 
Jerusalem at that time, and doubtless all, or nearly all, were 
more or less under the influence of the teaching of the Jewish 
church. 

But was not the teaching of the Jewish church correct up to that 
time? asks some one: No, not altogether. 

True they had the law given by God to Moses, and it was "holy, 
just and good," but those Jewish doctors had, by their traditions, 
added to and taken from to such an extent that the minds of the 
people were corrupted, being taught "for doctrines the 
commandments of men. " 

The nominal Christian church of to-day occupies, in many 
respects, a position similar to the nominal Jewish church at that 
time. The idea that "salvation is of the Jews," was a deeply 
rooted one, but lacking the grand and glorious significance 
which attached to it in the mind of Jesus, when he gave 
utterance to the words. (John 4:22.) There is no doubt that the 
Jewish teachers of that time had taken great pains to instill into 
the minds of the people at large the idea that if they would enjoy 
a blissful hereafter they must attach themselves to the Jewish 
church; in fact, Jesus said they "compassed sea and land to make 
one proselyte." (Matt. 23:15.) But that their teaching was not of 
a nature to greatly improve their morals, we infer from the 
remainder of the passage just quoted. 

What was their doctrine and teaching, then, we may aptly 
inquire? 

Briefly, we may say, among other things, the Pharisees believed 
in the immortality of the soul, and in the eternal suffering of the 
wicked. The Sadducees, another class, disbelieved in the 
resurrection; neither did they believe in angel or spirit. How 
striking the similarity and effect of the teaching of these 
fundamental doctrines by the nominal church then and now! 



Both classes of Jews, by their traditional teaching, did away 
with the need of a resurrection; and though the Pharisees 
professed to believe it, yet they practically denied it; and the 
Sadducees, denying a future life, of course had no use for the 
doctrine of the resurrection. 

The tradition of the Pharisees that man does "not surely (really) 
die," but 

R433 : page 5 

only changes his mode of existence, could claim great antiquity, 
having been promulgated in the garden of Eden. (Gen. 3:4.) That 
our blessed Lord, when warning the disciples against the 
"doctrine of the Pharisees and of the Sadducees" (Matt. 16:6- 
12,) had especial reference to the state of the dead, we cannot 
doubt, for it is primary. 

If, to use the language of orthodoxy, "the soul lives after the 
body dies," then Satan's statement would not have 

R433 : page 6 

been a very killing thing, and the worst we could say of it would 
be, that he did not tell the whole truth; but Jesus said he was a 
murderer from the beginning, and that he is the father of lies. 
(John 8:44.) What was the first lie, if this was not it? We 
conclude, therefore, that he did a killing thing, that he told a 
murderous lie when he said "thou shalt not surely die, " and this 
in flat contradiction to God's words: "In the day thou eatest 
thereof dying thou shalt die. " One thing is noticeable; let the 
statements mean what you will, they do not agree. Which will 
you believe? 

What is the popular teaching upon this subject now? 

Just exactly what Satan taught then: man does not surely (really) 
die; his body dies, his soul still lives. 

Upon the capital which this statement furnishes, Satan has done 
business for thousands of years; but the light shines, day dawns, 
"the Royal Majesty of the heavens has approached," blessed be 
his name, and though man dies, he shall live again. Glory be to 
God! 

Knowing that the wages of sin is death, it is the greatest 
importance for us to find out how we can be saved from death, 
not from dying; for as all have sinned, all must die. 

Our inquiry is answered by Paul in 1 Cor. 15:22. As in Adam all 
die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive; "but every man in 
his own order." Ver. 23. This reveals the fact that there are 
different orders or grades of life. See also 1 Cor. 15:39-42, and 
"Food" page 134. And the term "salvation" is properly applied 
to either grade, because before they reach either order, they must 
have been saved from death. This shows that when speaking of 
salvation we should use some discrimination, as to what order or 



rank of salvation we refer to, and leads to the conclusion that 
those who are not in a given order of life are not necessarily 
eternally damned, nor cut off from every kind of life, but may be 
found in some other rank or order. After examining much 
scripture evidence upon this point carefully, we conclude that all 
men die, and that all men will live again; and therefore we 
change our mind as to there being but one order of life among 
the sons of God, redeemed from Adam's fall, and that only a few 
share in any manner in the merits of Jesus Christ's death. 

We once believed that only a few were brought to blissful life, 
and that all the rest were consigned to a miserable life, and in 
this misery were immortal, and this we called death. Now, as 
God's Royal Majesty has approached again, the darkness is 
being driven away, and we repent, (change our mind), regarding 
this doctrine, which has been made the evil instrument of getting 
money from the poor, who are made to believe that their dead 
friends are alive, and that a few prayers, paid for with their 
money; would get them from one rank of miserable life into an 
order of life more desirable. Into how many multiplied forms of 
evil this beginning of lies has grown; but we are glad we find 
space for repentance, and are permitted, "by patient continuance 
in well doing, to seek for immortality. " 

We said Satan has for a long time done business upon the capital 
growing out of this first murderous lie. 

Let us notice a few points: 

First; if men are dead they are not in torment, (this truth would 
ruin that slander upon God's mercy and justice), neither are they 
in heaven— hence; second; they would need a resurrection; and 
third; to have a resurrection there must be some one to raise 
them (a Savior), all of which might be dispensed with if man did 
not die. Thus the adversary has made many believe that they do 
not need a Savior, and that they receive communications from 
their dead friends. But says one: "Our Savior saves his people 
from their sins, and when saved from sin, they are saved from 
death. Ah, no, my orthodox (?) brother, your being saved from 
sin does not save you from death. Read more carefully, think 
closely. You are now living, your fathers have been living in an 
age where men do not die for their own sins. Adam, who lived 
in "the world that was," died from his own sin, and we have 
"sprung from the man whose guilty fall corrupts his race and 
tints us all. " "The fathers have eaten a sour grape, and the 
children's teeth are set on edge." (Jer. 31:29.) If you were to live 
a sinless life from the moment your sins were forgiven, you 
would die, but in the resurrection you would come up in a 
different order from what you would, if they had not been 
forgiven in this age. Do you say: "Well, if I am not saved from 
my sins in this world, I never shall be?" Then we should say, 
that will depend upon how incorrigible you are under the "many 
stripes" which you will certainly get, if you do not forsake sin in 



the coming age, for in that age every man who dies, dies for his 
own sin. (Jer. 31:30.) Now, as we said, you die on account of 
Adam's sin, and perhaps a little sooner on account of your own, 
but you must die anyhow; but in the age to come, if you will be 
obedient to the heavenly messengers (for then they shall all be 
taught of God), you may live forever. Perhaps you say: "Well, I 
don't believe we shall have any second chance for salvation if 
we are not saved here. " My dear brother, "of which salvation" 
are you speaking? Do you say you do not know but one 
salvation? 

In the sense of there being salvation only through Christ, it is 
true there is but one salvation, but in the sense of there being 
degrees or orders of life, it is plain there are more than one. The 
prize held out to view now, is, that under certain conditions we 
may be partakers of the divine nature, that prize can only be 
reached in this world (or age), for the very good reason that a 
part of the conditions can only be met in this age. Those who 
wish to be made like Christ, and receive the "great salvation" 
(become immortal), must suffer with him, must "fill up that 
which is behind of the afflictions of Christ." (Col. 1:24.) Those 
who are of this class, are chosen "through sanctification of the 
Spirit and belief of the truth." (2 Thes. 2:13.) May we be "kept 
by the power of God through faith unto (this) salvation?" Yes, 
this is the salvation now about to be revealed, of which the 
prophets have inquired and searched diligently, who prophesied 
of the grace that should come unto us, a salvation embracing 
things which the angels desire to look into. 1 Peter 1:3-12. 

Those who would be Christ's, can only become members of his 
body in this age: members of that anointed company of which 
Jesus is the chief or head. "Do you not know that the saints shall 
judge the world?" (1 Cor. 6:2.) Surely they are not judging the 
world now? Does some one say, "Well, then, what is meant in 
John 12:31, "Now is the judgment of this world?" Read on a 
little further, "Now shall the prince of this world be cast out." 
Who is the prince of the world? He is the one who now rules in 
the children of disobedience." (Eph 2:2.) Is he cast out? No. 
Well, the same "now" that applies to judgment," applies to being 
"cast out." Then the words of Jesus must have meant this: 
"now," i.e., by this arrangement of Christ's incarnation and death 
Satan is to be cast out. By this means will finally be 
accomplished the judgment of this world. The saints (partakers 
of the divine nature), are judged now, and will not come into 
judgment again. "He that heareth my word (they do not all hear 
who are spoken to), and believeth him that sent me, hath eternal 
life, and cometh not into judgment, but hath passed out of death 
into life." (John 5:24. R.V.) Does our orthodox (?) brother say 
"There, now stop right there; does that not prove that if we are 
saved from sin we are saved from death?" 



Well, let us see. How is he passed out of death into life? By 
judgment. 

O yes ! he is judged out, and cannot have another judgment 
passed on him. It is a legal proceeding, then, by the highest 
tribunal, and is a conclusive argument to prove that a judgment 
day is now in progress, and that this judgment will be executed 
(realized) when he stands up in the "first resurrection" with 
Christ's likeness, the conflict being over. He will then be 
immortal, and "cannot die any more," and will be in a fit 
condition to judge the world and angels. (1 Cor. 6:2-3.) 

"And it shall come to pass in that (judgment) day, that the Lord 
shall set his hand again the second time to recover the remnant 
of his people. " (Isa. 11:11.) Then Satan will be cast out, 
obstacles will be removed, "all shall be taught of the Lord" (the 
judicial body, the complete Christ), and doubtless nearly all will, 
under such circumstances, obey and accept of life. This will be 
everlasting human life in harmony, peace and filial obedience to 
God— the blessed estate which Adam lost— a gloriously satisfying 
portion to the natural man who cannot now, and never will 
comprehend spiritual things, because he never is to have them. 

A word more. 

Let us earnestly entreat those who by consecration have become 
"new creatures," (spiritual) and as such, are hoping for the prize, 
to remember Paul's words (and they may be emphasized now), 
in this time of worldly pressure and conflict. "This one thing I 
do, forgetting those things which are behind, and reaching forth 
unto those things which are before, I press toward the mark for 
the prize of the HIGH CALLING of God in Christ Jesus." Now 
is the special time of instruction for earth's future rulers. 

"Be wise now, therefore, O ye kings, be instructed ye judges of 
the earth. " 

Satan's first lie believed, would blind us to the whole line of 
God's truth and plan. We did believe it, but we now repent. 

J. C. SUNDERLIN. 



R434 : page 6 

ANCIENT NT. GREEK MSS. 

In our last issue we found fault with a contemporary's desire to 
set aside the first chapters of Matthew and Luke, and showed 
that its claim that the authenticity of these chapters was 
questioned by scholars, was untrue— which we repeat. We said 
that these chapters were recognized by the very best authority, 
viz., the three oldest Greek MSS. of the N.T.-the Sinaitic, 
Vatican and Alexandrine -whose value and age is in the order 
mentioned; the Sinaitic being the oldest and most complete. 



Replying to this, our contemporary, still attempting to set aside 
Matt. 1 , and Luke 1 , endeavors to cast discredit on the entire 
N.T., as well as these chapters. It attempts to show that these 
three most reliable MSS. are widely at variance, some omitting 
whole passages and books which others contain, and no two 
omitting the same chapters, verses and books, giving on the 
whole the impression that the whole matter is so mixed that it is 
totally impossible to reach any satisfactory conclusion as to 
what was, or was not written, by the Apostles. To prove this 
confusion of testimony, numerous quotations are made from the 
preface of Tischendorf s New Testament. 

We shall not consume our space with extracts from 
Tischendorf s preface, for, as promised, we shall arrange shortly 
that all who desire shall have opportunity of procuring these 
various readings and the explanatory preface complete.* Suffice 
it for the present for us to say that our contemporary so quotes 
and so argues as to give a false impression in this matter. If this 
is done knowingly it is a crime against truth- if done ignorantly 
it is a shame. 

Mr. Tischendorf favors the Sinaitic MSS. His claim is that the 
Sinaitic MSS. is not only the oldest, but also the only old MS. of 
the New Test, which is "perfect, without the loss of a single 
leaf." In proving this he refers to the Vatican MS., and says that 
from Heb. 9:14 to the end, the N.T. is missing from it. Referring 
to the next oldest MS., he shows the superiority of the Sinaitic 
over it, also, by calling attention to the fact that it is imperfect 
also, parts of the MS. parchment having been lost or destroyed 
during the twelve hundred years preceding its bringing from 
Alexandria. He shows that all of Matthew up to chap. 25 : verse 
6, is missing; also about two chapters in John, and nearly eight 
chapters in Second Corinthians. But he is not showing that these 
MSS. contradict each other, which is our contemporary's object, 
but that these chapters are missing; and hence he proves the 
Sinaitic most valuable, since not a single leaf of it is missing. It 
is truly remarkable that MSS. of such an age should be so well 
preserved. 

We repeat, then, that the narrative of Jesus' miraculous 
conception as recorded in the first chapters of Matthew and 
Luke, has the very best and oldest Greek MSS. to support it. The 
Sinaitic and Vatican, the oldest and best, contain both chapters, 
and the Alexandrine MS. contains the account in Luke; that in 
Matthew was missing— not omitted. 

The doctrine of the "Immaculate Conception," as held by 
papists, relates not to Jesus, but to Mary, his mother. Papists 
claim that Mary was immaculate (pure), free from Adamic sin, 
by reason of her mother's miraculous conception of her. It is one 
of the strong evidences of the purity of the old N.T. MSS. and of 
God's care in their preservation, that they are free from the 



doctrines peculiar to the "Mother of Harlots"-even though 
unwittingly one of them was hid in the "Vatican Library." 



*The New Testament, with various readings of these oldest 
MSS., will be duly announced in the TOWER as soon as ready. 
Some have already ordered and sent money for it. Please do not 
do so until it is ready and announced. 



R434 : page 6 

CANON OF THE NEW TESTAMENT. 

"The prophets" in the Christian Church, speaking themselves, 
under inspiration, and those having the Spirit's gift, "the 
discerning of spirits," acted as checks on the transmission of 
error orally before the completion of the written word. Secondly, 
it was under their inspired superintendence that the New 
Testament Scriptures were put forth as they were successively 
written. (1 Cor. 14:37.) "If any man.. .be a prophet or spiritual, 
let him acknowledge that the things that I write... are the 
commandments of the Lord." Thus, by the two-fold sanction of 
inspiration, that of the authors and that of the judges, the 
canonicity of each book is established. By God's gracious 
providence most of the books of the New Testament were in the 
Church's possession years before the death of leading apostles, 
all of them before the death of John. If spurious books had crept 
into the cycle of professedly inspired books, they would have 
been at once removed by apostolic authority.... The earliest 
notice of a collection is in 2 Pet. 3:1-6, which speaks of "all the 
epistles" of Paul as if some collection of them then existed, and 
was received in the churches as on a par with "the other 
Scriptures." The earliest uninspired notice is that of the 
anonymous fragment of "The Canon of the New Testament" 
attributed to Caius, a Roman presbyter. It recognizes all the 
books except Ephesians, Hebrews, James, the two epistles of 
Peter, and perhaps 3 of John. It condemns as spurious "The 
Shepherd, written very recently in our own times at Rome by 
Hermas, while his brother Pius was bishop of the see of Rome"- 
i.e., between A.D. 140 and 150. Thus the canon, in far the 
greater part, is proved as received in the first half of the second 
century, whilst some of John's contemporaries were still living. 
In the same age the Peshito or Syriac version remarkably 
complements the Muratorian fragment's canon, by including 
also Hebrews and James. In the latter part of the second century, 
Clement, of Alexandria, refers to "The Gospel" collection and 
that of all the epistles of "The Apostles." The anonymous epistle 
to Diognetus still earlier speaks of the "Law, the Prophets, the 
Gospels and the Apostles." Ignatius, of Antioch, a hearer of 
John, terms the written gospel "the flesh of Jesus," and the 



apostles, i.e., their epistles, "Presbytery of the Church." 
Theophilus, of Antioch, and Irenaeus term the New Testament 
writings "the Holy Scriptures." Tertullian uses for the first time 
the term, "New Testament," and calls the whole Bible "the 
whole instrument of both Testaments." 

R434 : page 7 

Thus there is a continuous chain of evidence from the apostles 
down to the third century. The quotations by the fathers (of 
whom, Origen quotes at least two-thirds of the New Testament), 
and the oldest versions, the Syriac, Latin and Egyptian, prove 
that their Scriptures were the same as ours. Eusebius, the 
ecclesiastical historian (A.D. 330), mentions all the 27 books of 
the New Testament, dividing them into the universally 
acknowledged and the debated; the latter the Ephesians, James, 
Jude, 2 Peter, 2 and 3 John, and Apocalypse "received by the 
majority," and at last received by all the churches when the 
evidence had been more fully tested. A third class he calls "the 
spurious," as the "Shepherd of Hermas," "the Epistle of 
Barnabas," "the Acts of Paul," which all rejected. Moreover, all 
our oldest Greek MSS. of the epistles contains those epistles 
once doubted by some; so do all the versions except the Syriac; 
see above.... The transition from oral to written teaching was 
gradual. Catechizing, i.e., instructing by word of mouth, was the 
mode at first, and "faith" then "came by hearing" (Luke 1:4; 
Romans 10:17), in which, however, there was always an appeal 
to Old Testament Scriptures (Acts 17:11). But that the orally 
taught might know more fully "the (unerring) certainty of those 
things wherein they had been instructed," and to guard against 
the dangers of oral tradition (illustrated in John 21:23,24), the 
word was committed to writing by apostles and evangelists, and 
was accredited publicly by the churches in the lifetime of the 
writers. The approach of their death, their departure to foreign 
lands, their imprisonment, and the need of a touchstone to test 
heretical writings and teachings in their absence, all made a 
written record needful. The cessation of miracles and personal 
inspiration was about the same time as the written inspired word 
was completed. Bishop Kaye (Eccles. Hist. 98-100) observes 
that Justin Martyr, Theophilus, etc., only make general assertion 
of miracles still continuing, being loathe to see what seemingly 
weakened their cause, the cessation of miracles; but they gave 
no specific instance.... With much good that is in the apostolic 
fathers, their works "remind us what the apostles would have 
been had not they been inspired, and what we ourselves should 
be if we had not the written word" (Wordsworth, Canon Scr., 
page 137). 

So far from there being a gradual waning of inspiration from the 
writings of the Apostles and Evangelists to those of succeeding 
Christian writers, there is so wide a chasm (the more remarkable 
as the early fathers had the apostolic writings to guide them) that 



this alone is a strong proof that the Scripture writers were guided 
by an extraordinary Divine power. Their previous habits (as 
being some of them illiterate, and all bigoted Jews) prove that 
nothing but Divine power could have so changed them from 
their former selves as to be founders of a spiritual and 
worldwide dispensation (see Luke 24:25-49), utterly alien to 
their Jewish prejudices. Their style accords with their supposed 
position, simple and unlearned (except Paul's), yet free from 
aught offensive to the polished. If it be asked why we do not 
receive the epistles of Barnabas and of Clement, the Acts of 
Paul and Thecla (one of the earliest apocryphal writings), 

R435 : page 7 

etc., we answer, not because (as Rome would have us say) the 
Churches could not err in judgment in rejecting them, but 
because, as a matter of evidence, we believe they did not err. 
These works were not received by contemporary Christians who 
had the best of opportunity of knowing evidences of authenticity 
and inspiration. If one or two cite them, it is an exception, not 
invalidating the otherwise uniform testimony against them. The 
internal evidence of their style is fatal to their pretentions. So 
"the Acts of Paul", Tertullian testifies its author was excluded by 
John from the office of presbyter for having written it. The New 
Testament is a complete organic whole, so that even one book 
could not be omitted without loss to the completeness of the 
Christian cycle of truth. -Fausett. 



R435 : page 7 

WORTHY OF ALL ACCEPTATION. 

From quotations given in another column from a contemporary, 
it will be seen that it boldly advances the teaching that the New 
Testament will not compare with the Old Testament as an 
authority; that if it be received as sacred Scripture at all, it is to 
be completely subordinated to the Old Testament, and that any 
doctrine or statement of the New Testament not supported by a 
similar statement in the Old Testament is unworthy of 
acceptance and belief. 

The basis upon which these conclusions are built is, that the 
Apostles were not inspired as were the Prophets, and hence they 
could judge of truth and error only as we do. 

If this be true, if this be new light, then we have all along been 
in darkness, and the poor Jew which Paul says was blinded was 
really in the light all the time, and the Christian Church, instead 
of walking in the path of light, has been in darkness from the 
Apostles down. Why, this is the exact teaching of Judaism. 
From such new light (?) we pray to be delivered. 



We wish to reply to the above, and to show that the basis is 
false, and the deductions consequently erroneous. First, 
however, let us remark, that if the above be true, if we are to 
believe only what is taught in the Old Testament, then our faith 
is vain, for in the Old Testament we find nothing concerning our 
HEAVENLY hopes. There is not in it a promise of a heavenly 
crown, not a promise of a spiritual body, not a promise to the 
"Royal Priesthood," not a mention of the "new creature." No, its 
choicest promises are all earthly, like that given to Abraham- 
"Lift up now thine eyes and look... for all the land which thou 
seest, to thee will I give it, and to thy seed after thee. " (Gen. 
13:14,15.) 

No, nothing was seen of the spiritual blessings in reservation for 
you (the gospel Church) until "our Savior Jesus Christ brought 
life and immortality to light through the Gospel." (2 Tim. 1:10.) 
These are not found in the Law nor in the Prophets' writings, but 
only in the New Testament. No, the very most we can say of the 
teaching of the Old Testament relative to "our high calling," is 
that it gave fleshly shadows of some of our blessed hopes. And 
these we should never have been able to understand any more 
than did they, but for the keys furnished by the Holy Spirit 
through the Apostles. 

Paul tells us that he had special revelations from the Lord (2 
Cor. 12:1-7; Gal. 1:12, and 2:2; Eph 3:3), and claims for his 
writings that they are specially inspired. (1 Cor. 14:37.) He even 
mentions those items of his teachings which were not "by 
commandment of the Lord." (1 Cor. 7:6.) 

The book of Revelation opens with the statement, that it is a 
revelation which God gave, not to the Prophets, but "to Jesus 
Christ. " Such a revelation would have been superfluous if the 
Old Testament contained all needful information. Peter also 
claims special inspiration, power and knowledge as an Apostle 
over and above the Prophets. (See Acts 5:2-5; 1 Pet. 1:10-12.) 

We claim, furthermore, that the operation of God's power- 
Spirit-on the Prophets was so different from the operation of 
the same Spirit upon the Gospel Church, that the humblest 
Christian may know more of God's plan than could the greatest 
prophet. Though there had not arisen a greater prophet than John 
the Baptist, yet the "least in the kingdom of heaven is greater 
than he. " (Matt. 11:11.) The prophets belonged to the fleshly 
house, we to the spiritual. "Moses (a prophet) verily was faithful 
as a servant over all his house (of servants), but Christ as a Son 
over his own house (of sons), whose house are ye— if, etc." (Heb. 
3:5,6.) Jesus tells us of our special privileges over the prophets 
and others, saying, "To you it is given to know the mysteries of 
the kingdom of Heaven, " and "Verily I say unto you, that many 
prophets and righteous men have desired to see those things 
which ye see, and have not seen them, and to hear those things 
which ye hear, and have not heard them. " (Matt. 13:11,17.) 



Paul tells the same story of how God had revealed to the Gospel 
Church that which had not been known previously. He says: "If 
ye have heard of the dispensation of the grace of God which is 
given me to you-ward; how that by revelation he made known 
unto me the mystery (as I wrote afore in few words, whereby 
when ye read ye may understand my knowledge of the mystery 
of Christ) which in other ages was not made known unto the 
sons of men, as it is now revealed unto the holy apostles and 
prophets (teachers) by the Spirit." (See Eph. 3:2-10.) Peter adds 
his testimony, saying: "Of which salvation the prophets have 
inquired and searched diligently, who prophesied of the grace 
(favor, knowledge) that should come unto you. Searching what, 
or what manner of time, the Spirit of Christ which was in them 
did signify when it testified beforehand the sufferings of Christ 
and the glory that should follow. Unto whom (the prophets) it 
was revealed that not unto themselves, but unto us they did 
minister the things which are now reported unto you by them 
that have preached the Gospel unto you with the Holy Spirit sent 
down from heaven." (1 Pet. 1:10-12.) 

If we reject the foregoing testimony of the apostles regarding the 
special revelation made to them, whereby they were able to give 
us a knowledge of the mystery hid from other ages, we should 
reject all of their teachings on every subject, since men who will 
lie are not to be trusted at all. 

Furthermore, we claim that though this favor of greater 
knowledge and revelation is to the humblest member of the 
Church, yet it came to us directly through the Apostles; and their 
writings are the basis of proper Christian faith to-day. We read 
that God hath set in his Church various members with various 
gifts for the edifying of the body of Christ, but first (chiefly) 
Apostles. (1 Cor. 12:28.) 

The Spirit has raised up in the Church evangelists, pastors, 
teachers, for the edifying of itself; but it never gave more than 
one head— Jesus— nor more than the original twelve Apostles. 
These are enough, they are still with us; we have their words of 
reproof, correction and instruction to-day, even better 
understood now than by those whom they more directly 
addressed. 

True, Paul was not of the original twelve, neither was he the one 
the eleven mistakenly appointed to Judas' place (They did it 
before the Pentecostal blessing); yet he not only informs us that 
he was specially appointed to be an apostle, but his teachings 
prove it. 

Paul, who had more abundant revelations than all the apostles, 
knew more about the "mystery" of the Gospel than he was 
permitted plainly to express to the Church then living— it being 
meat not then in due season. This he himself expresses, saying 
that he had learned "things not lawful to be uttered. " But though 



he was not permitted to utter all of "the deep things of God," 
nevertheless the fact of his possessing a knowledge of those 
deep things cast such a reflection upon all that he did write, that 
his words have been the basis of almost all the "meat in due 
season" furnished to the Church since. He himself tells us that 
an affliction was permitted (a thorn in the flesh) lest he should 
be exalted above measure by God's revelations to him. (2 Cor. 
12:7.) 

As it has been affirmed that the Apostles evidently made 
mistakes of quotation, and misapplied prophetic statements, we 
want to consider that feature of the subject. For this purpose let 
us have a careful 

BIBLE READING. 

We want to refer you to a number of prophetic statements, and 
have you note the connections closely and see that the 
statements which met a fulfillment in Jesus were so mixed up 
with other statements not specially applicable to him, that you or 
I or the Jew might have readily stumbled over them and never 
have thought of applying them to Messiah, had not the Holy 
Spirit brought these things to the attention of the Apostles. In 
fact, we know that the disciples understood not these things and 
saw not their true application until after Jesus was risen. (See 
John 12:16.) 

Turn to Micah 5:2, and see how obscurely the birthplace 
(Bethlehem) is mentioned. The birthplace is mentioned, and the 
humiliation, yet in so 

R436 : page 7 

disconnected a manner that though the Scribes and Chief Priests 
understood of his birthplace (Matt. 2:4-6), yet they could not see 
that as the Judge of Israel he would be smitten "with a rod upon 
the cheek." (Matt. 27:30.) 

Take another. Turn to Hosea 11:1 and find the record: "I have 
called my Son out of Egypt. " Nothing about the context would 
ever lead you to suppose this to apply to Jesus. It altogether 
seems to relate to Israel as an infant nation brought from Egypt. 
But when our attention is once called to it, we can see how the 
name Israel (prevailer) applied well to Jesus; and not only so, 
but that the coming of the nation Israel out of literal Egypt and 
the coming of Jesus out of literal Egypt (Matt. 2:20) are types of 
the coming of the entire Israel (the Church) out of the antitype 
of Egypt, viz., the world. 

Jer. 31:15 introduces Rachel weeping for her children in an 
entirely disconnected manner, and it could not be understood 
until fulfilled (Matt. 2:17). Rachel was the mother of two of the 
tribes-Joseph and Benjamin. Bethlehem was in the country 



apportioned to Benjamin, which tribe, with Judah, occupied 
Palestine at the time of the first advent. 

Look at Psalm 22. Any one might read that Psalm throughout 
and not doubt but that David was speaking of himself. And we 
doubt not that David thought the same; but Jehovah guided his 
utterance and made him thus to represent Messiah. 

Read Psalm 1 18:22,23,26, about the stone which the builders 
rejected, etc., which our Lord applied to himself (Matt. 21:42); 
yet these prophetic statements of Messiah evidently stand mixed 
up with David's own experiences. 

Look, also, at Isaiah 61. Here the prophet personates Christ, 
saying: "The Spirit of the Lord God is upon me, because the 
Lord hath anointed me to preach," etc. To all appearance the 
prophet was the person meant, yet when Jesus points out its 
fulfillment in himself (Luke 4:18) we see that in him its 
conditions were fully met. 

See Zech. 11:12. Here Zechariah was sold for thirty pieces of 
silver, and nothing in the connection indicates that he was a type 
or representative of Jesus, who was afterward sold for thirty 
pieces. 

But we must notice one Scripture which has been cited as 
specially misapplied by Matthew in chap. 1:23, viz., Isaiah 7:14, 
"Behold, a virgin shall conceive and bear a son, and shall call 
his name Immanuel." The objection is made that because this 
promise had a typical fulfillment at that time, as mentioned in 
chap. 8:3, therefore it could not have a reference to Mary and 
her son Jesus. We reply that its partial fulfillment at the time is 
no argument against its application to Mary as made by the 
Apostle. It would be equally consistent to argue that because 
thirty pieces were actually weighed out for Zechariah, therefore 
that prophecy could have no reference to Judas' sale of Jesus. 

On the contrary, it was not uncommon for Jehovah to deal in 
this very way— causing a typical fulfillment of a prophecy to 
transpire, and thus attract attention for a time away from the 
actual fulfillment. In this case of typical fulfillment we suggest 
that the prophet represented Jehovah, the prophetess represented 
the Virgin Mary, and their child represented Jesus. But is it 
objected that Mary's son was called Jesus, and not Immanuel? 
We reply that such shortsighted reasoning would make nonsense 
of both Old and New Testaments. How about the names given in 
Isaiah 9:6? "His name shall be called Wonderful, Counsellor, 
the Mighty God, the Everlasting Father, the Prince of Peace." 
Must we set aside this prophecy also, because the child was 
called Jesus, or shall we recognize the fact that many names, as 
well as many offices, are his? In answer we would say— his 
name has been called Immanuel. We 

R436 : page 8 



call him Immanuel (God with us), and the Church in general has 
recognized him by that name for eighteen hundred years. And in 
the incoming Millennial Age, when the knowledge of him shall 
fill the earth, all shall recognize him by his various and 
significant titles. 

In closing, we want to give one more illustration of a prophecy 
which has had one literal fulfillment, and is about to have its 
second or higher fulfillment- just as Isaiah's prophecy, above 
referred to, had one fulfillment in his day and another hundreds 
of years after at the birth of Jesus. Our illustration is Babylon. It 
was the chief empire of earth in Jeremiah's day, and his 
prophecy records in strong language its overthrow. It has been 
overthrown as foretold; but were it not that we see that there is a 
mystical, "Babylon the great, the mother of harlots," for whom 
the severest language applied to literal Babylon is intended, we 
should wonder indeed. 

Those who saw the fulfillment of Jeremiah's prophecy in the fall 
of the city of Babylon, doubtless concluded that a very strong 
description had been given of so commonplace an event as the 
overthrow of a nation; and having seen that one fulfillment, few 
realize that the real force of the prophecy is to mystic Babylon. 

We refer you to but one chapter out of many, in which 
statements once fulfilled are to have a second and larger 
fulfillment, just as Isaiah's prophecy of Immanuel had a second 
and complete fulfillment in Jesus' birth. Compare the following: 

Jeremiah 5 1:6 with Rev. 18:4. 

Verse 7 with Rev. 17:4 and 14:8. 

Verse 8 with Rev. 14:8 and 18:2,9,11,19. 

Verse 9 with Rev. 18:5. 

Verse 13 with Rev. 17:1,15. 

Verses 48,63,64 with Rev. 18:20,21. 

We conclude, then, that the New as well as the Old Testament- 
the writing of the apostles as well as that of the prophets-is 
worthy of all acceptation as divinely inspired. 



R436 : page 8 



THE GIFT OF HEALING. 

There is nothing strange in the fact that men of the world, 
people who have not become new creatures (by faith) in Christ 
Jesus, should doubt the power of God to heal diseases without 
any visible agency; but that any who have been "chosen through 
sanctification of the Spirit, and belief of the truth," should doubt 
it, is strange. 

We can hardly believe that any who are thus chosen do doubt, 
either God's power or willingness to heal in answer to the prayer 



of faith, without any visible remedial agent. Why should the 
child of God limit the power of Him "in whom we live, and 
move, and have our being?" But perhaps some who do not doubt 
the power of God, doubt that He has the will, or that He does in 
these days heal the sick in answer to the "prayer of faith. " 

For our part we do not doubt the power, nor the will, nor the fact 
that He does thus heal in answer to the prayer of those who are 
inspired with faith to ask for it. 

But as it is very desirable to be healed when suffering with 
diseases, the question naturally arises, "May all be thus healed?" 
We think we may safely answer, that if all men were thus 
inspired with faith, they might. By the term "inspired with 
faith," we mean, to be animated by the Spirit of God with faith. 

We will not here enter into a discussion of the different 
meanings of the word faith, which are so various, but only say 
that, as it is used here, it means confidence. 

Confidence or faith in what? In God's word. But, says one, "faith 
cometh by hearing." Yes, and "hearing by the word of God," and 
when the Spirit of God speaks the word to us, as it does 
sometimes, it inspires us with faith. 

How shall I then obtain that much to be desired object, 
inspiration of faith for healing? Find out if possible if it is God's 
will to heal you. But, says one who is very enthusiastic, surely it 
is his will to heal us, if we only will to have him, for 
"whatsoever things ye desire when ye pray, believe that ye 
receive them, and ye shall have them." (Mark 11:24.) But notice, 
it is as if he had said, "whatsoever things ye desire when ye 
pray," see that those desires are in accord with the Spirit and 
word of God, so that ye may have a foundation to "believe that 
ye (are entitled to) receive them, and ye shall have them. " If one 
were desiring to offer a petition to some earthly potentate, the 
proper thing would be to find how it could be done in harmony 
with His laws; and it is fully as important when offering a 
petition to the "King of kings." 

The apostle says, "Ye ask and receive not, because ye ask 
amiss." (James 4:3.) This is what Jesus wanted those to whom 
he was speaking to guard against, viz., careless asking; that 
whatsoever they desired there should be sufficient ground for 
believing they would receive, and when such was the case they 
would receive it. An all-sufficient ground for believing would be 
to know that it is His will. 

The leper offered a very good prayer (Matt. 8:2.) when he said, 
"Lord, if thou wilt thou canst make me clean. " He was inspired 
with faith as far as his knowledge went, and Jesus graciously 
supplied the missing link by saying, "I will." 

Now, let us suppose we are diseased and suffering. We wish to 
be healed. But are we sure that we do? The confiding child of 



God, he who has faith in His wisdom and love says, "If it is His 
will; He knows better than I do what evils I am exposed to, 
understands my 

R437 : page 8 

nature better than I do myself, knows what influence I would 
exert in whatever condition. If it is His will to rebuke the enemy 
now, Amen." 

But shall I try to find out what His will is in the matter? 
Certainly, for how can I ask "according to His will" (1 John 
5:14,15) unless I do? 

Then I will inquire if it is God's will that all diseases, and death 
even, should be removed now in this age? Manifestly not, for 
they are the penalty of sin, and the penalty must be executed 
(Gen. 3:16,19.) All the descendants of Adam must die, all must 
become acquainted with the exceeding sinfulness of sin by 
experiencing the sorrowful effects of it. Then only in 
exceptional cases can it be asked "according to His will." What 
are those cases then, those exceptions? Under what 
circumstances may I ask my Heavenly Father, in the name of 
Jesus, to heal or cure? Under the same circumstances that Jesus 
did. 

He was invested with the power of God (John 5:30), and used it 
to do miracles and thus attest His divine commission and glorify 
God in the fulfillment of the Scriptures (Matt. 8:17), giving to 
the world the assurance that in the fulness of time (Eph. 1:10), 
this same power manifested in the sons of God (Rom. 8:19), 
complete in him, should restore fallen humanity to its sinless, 
painless, physically and morally perfect condition. 

But does He not heal for any other purpose now? None that we 
know of. What is done now we understand to be done to attest to 
divinity and give assurance that He will "show the exceeding 
riches of His grace in the ages to come." (Eph. 2:7.) 

What, attest to divinity now? Yes, divinity operating through the 
chosen members of the body of Christ. (Eph. 1 :22,23.) Then, 
shall we expect that every member will be invested with the 
power of healing, and that this is an only evidence of 
membership in the body? Oh, no, certainly not, that which 
should be satisfying to us is that the gift of healing is retained in 
the body. 

We have many members in one body, and all members have not 
the same office, so we being many, are one body in Christ, and 
every one members one of another. " "Having, then, gifts 
differing according to the grace given unto us." (Rom. 12:4,5,6.) 
"Now there are diversities of gifts, but the same Spirit. For to 
one (member) is given by the Spirit the word of wisdom: to 
another the word of knowledge by the same Spirit; to another 



faith by the same Spirit; to another the gifts of healing by the 
same Spirit." (1 Cor. 12:4,8,9.) 

But do you ask, "Will my prayer of faith heal the sick, either 
myself or others"? Yes, your "prayer of faith" would, if you are 
an individual belonging to that member to whom the gift of 
healing is given. But if I am not, then how? In that case the 
Apostle James gives the best advice we know of: "Call for the 
elders of the church (congregation) and let them pray over him 
anointing him with oil in the name of the Lord, and the prayer of 
faith shall save the sick, and the Lord shall raise him up. " 

But when he calls for the elders he should use discrimination. 

As in the physical body we would not make use of the foot, to 
perform the work of the hand, so now; send for those elders who 
have the "gift of healing" if you know of any such, if you do not, 
you might as well not send for any. Those having the "word of 
knowledge," or the "word of wisdom," or the "discerning of 
spirits," though imparted "by the same spirit," would be of no 
service to you for healing, and you should not feel like chiding 
them for not possessing that gift, or for not being an individual 
belonging to that member whose office it is to heal. 

We have reason to believe that when the Lord is about to do 
through any member of the body, a supernatural work, he will 
make it known beforehand to that member through whom the 
work is to be accomplished. (Amos 3:7.) 

"The Spirit of truth will declare to you the coming things." (John 
16:13. E.D.) We understand by this and other Scriptures, that the 
Spirit of truth shows, not only the things of the coming age, 
referred to in God's Word, but impresses the member or 
members through whom God would do a work, that he is about 
to do it; and this is what we mean by being inspired with faith; 
and it is this inspired prayer, we think, which the Apostle James 
calls "the prayer of faith. " 

Let us not fall into the error of thinking that any individual 
constitutes a complete member of the body of Christ, for it 
cannot be that there are so many members as there are 
individuals; but all those having "the same office" constitute one 
member, and those having another office another member, and 
so on, and herein we see the significance of the provision made 
in the promise that two (or more) shall receive what they are 
agreed in asking (according to His will of course). (Matt. 18:9.) 
We see the beauty of many members constituting one body, let 
us not lose sight of the beauty of many individuals constituting 
one member; as there are in the natural body individual muscles, 
tendons, nerves, veins, &c, constituting one member. If we 
should bear this in mind, we should not feel any uneasiness 
because certain individuals of some member had not the 
qualities belonging to the individuals of some other member, but 
would allow the mind to dwell with delight upon the necessary 



difference between the individuals constituting the members, 
and the difference between the members themselves, and yet the 
beautiful oneness of the whole. One individual may sometimes 
represent a member, but it requires more than one to constitute a 
member. Therefore we can see that the different individuals in a 
member should be united in their petitions, and because the 
greater share of our spiritual wants are in common. 

It is no cause for discouragement, that we can see, because more 
have not the gift of healing, any more than it would be, that one 
person does not have more than two eyes, or a greater number of 
any members in the natural body. But it is blessed to know that 
the body of Christ is thus in connection with the throne of God. 
It is blessed also to know that there is yet an active member in 
the body, having "the word of wisdom, " and another having "the 
word of knowledge" imparted by the same Spirit, and so of other 
gifts and graces, and to each (member) is given the 
manifestation of the Spirit, for the benefit of all" (the members.) 
(1 Cor. 12:7 E.D.) 

So if one member, or individual of a member, has not a certain 
gift, for instance, the gift of healing, it may be benefited by 
some member that has. If one has not the word of knowledge it 
may be benefited by some member that has, and so on. 

Let us not despise each other's gifts, nor wish that we belonged 
to some other member, for "all these things performs the one 
and the same Spirit, distributing to each in particular as it will. " 
E.D. 

Neither should we despise our own gifts, and thus undervalue 
what God has given us. "If the foot should say because I am not 
of the hand, I am not of the body. Is it, therefore, not of the 
body?" We are glad and rejoice that the gifts of this Spirit are 
still manifested in the body, and among them, "the gifts of 
healing," but let us not all desire the gifts of healing, nor find 
fault with those who have them not, for "now hath God set the 
members, every one of them, in the body as it hath pleased 
him," and "if they were all one member where were the body?" 

So we see the need of a diversity of gifts. Hence "he gave some, 
apostles; and some, prophets; and some, evangelists; and some, 
pastors and teachers; for the perfecting of the saints, for the 
work of the ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ. " 

This is the work of the members now, "till we all come in (into) 
the unity of the faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God, 
unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the fulness 
of Christ." 

We are sorry to think that any should doubt that the gift of 
healing is still an office belonging to a member of the body of 
Christ, and we are somewhat surprised to see that some 



individuals of that member should think that any, or all of the 
other members, might, or should, have the same office. 

"But you earnestly desire (are we not too apt to?) the more 
eminent gifts, and yet a much more excellent way I point out to 
you," (in the thirteenth chapter of 1 Cor.) 

J. C. SUNDERLIN. 



R437 : page 8 



SOME OF YOUR DIFFICULTY. 

It may be that you do not have advantage of attending meetings 
where special and definite instruction is given upon holiness, it 
may be there is no one near you to whom you can open your 
heart fully and freely as to your religious experience, and thus 
your heart-longings and spiritual problems are kept in your own 
heart and closet. When you read or hear of the clear instruction 
and victorious experience that others have you feel like pining. 
Remember that this very solitude of soul may in the end work 
out for you a deeper and stronger experience in Divine things. 

page 8 

You are shut away from human help, God compels you to draw 
very near the original fountain of light; His loving voice 
penetrates your heart, calling you to be holy; the luke-warm 
souls about you have little or no interest in that which engrosses 
your thoughts; yet God's providence has put you in your present 
locality and sphere; He has His finger upon all your 
circumstances, and in answer to your tears and prayers He is 
making your deprivations and perplexities work out for your 
good. 

R437 : page 8 

Do not try to run away from your circumstances; some other 
place or surroundings may seem enchanting to your mind, and 
you fancy you could be holy much easier were your lot cast 
there or yonder. You forget that wherever you fly you must 
carry your poor self along with you, and those fancied 
circumstances of easy piety might prove your utter ruin. In your 
solitariness of soul you are drawn away from human aid that you 
may more truly be as a little babe with God and learn directly 
from His Spirit. Oh, lonely seeker after holiness, let nothing 
deter you; give yourself and your present surroundings utterly 
into God's hand; spend every hour in doing His will as it is 
revealed to you, and He can turn your apparent disadvantages 
into a throne of triumph. -GEO. D. WATSON. 



R438 : page 1 

VOL. IV. 

PITTSBURGH, PA., FEBRUARY, 1883. 

NO. 7. 



page 1 

ZION'S 

Watch Tower 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S 
PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED MONTHLY AT 101 Fifth Avenue, Pittsburgh, 

Pa. 



C. T. RUSSELL, Editor and Publisher. 



The Editor recognizes a responsibility to the Master, relative to 
what shall appear in these columns, which he cannot and does 
not cast aside; yet he should not be understood as endorsing 
every expression of correspondents, or of articles selected from 
other periodicals. 

TERMS OF SUBSCRIPTION. 

TERMS:— Fifty cents a year, postage prepaid. You may send 
paper money to the amount of two dollars, by mail, at our risk. 
Larger amounts may be sent by Drafts, P.O. Money Order, or 
Registered Letter, payable to C. T. RUSSELL. 

FOREIGN TERMS. 

Foreign Postage being higher, our terms to foreign subscribers 
will be 65 cents a year. Please send us no foreign money or 
postage stamps, as we can make no use of them. Remittances 
may be made by Foreign Postal Money Orders. 

TAKE NOTICE. 

This paper will be sent free to any of the Lord's poor who will 
send a card yearly requesting it. Freely we have received and 
freely we would give the truth. "Ho, every one that thirsteth, 
come ye to the waters; and he that hath no money, come ye, buy 



and eat— yea, come, buy wine and milk without money and 
without price. " And you that have it— "Wherefore do ye spend 
money for that which is not bread? and your labor for that which 
satisfieth not? Hearken diligently-and eat ye that which is good, 
and let your soul delight itself in fatness."- ISAIAH 55:1,2. 



page 1 

ADDRESSES should be very carefully written. When an 
address is changed, the former as well as the last address, should 
be mentioned. 



TAKE NOTICE: Those of our subscribers from whom we have 
not heard for over a year, will find a blue mark on their paper 
(thus [check mark]). Many of these will receive no more until 
we do hear from them, that they desire the visits of the TOWER 
continued. Those on the Lord's poor list, of which there are 
about two thousand, must also apply. There are few so poor that 
they cannot send a Postal Card. Those who do not value it 
enough to ask for it yearly would probably waste or destroy it— 
hence our particularity. We have no desire to keep a single saint 
from the Lord's table-the heavenly food-therefore let not the 
"Lord's poor" fear to ask-"ask and ye shall receive." See terms 
above. Any failure to receive your papers ordered, should be 
promptly reported. 



R438 : page 1 

VIEW FROM THE TOWER. 

The battle between truth and error- between Christ and Anti- 
christ still continues, and daily grows more desperate; but it is 
only beginning— "the battle of the great day of God Almighty." 
For the Lord hath a controversy with the nations (Jer. 25:31,32). 

Many of Anti-christ's followers are saints of God who have been 
deceived by the success and growth and almost universal power 
and influence of Anti-christ for 1300 years past. Though they 
find much contrary to the Word and Spirit of Christ, they are 
overawed and fear to question the authority which holds them in 
bondage. They enlisted in the various regiments (sects) 
supposing that this was necessary to the Lord's service. And, 
indeed, some of the enlisting officers (ministers, etc.,) are 
equally deceived, and verily think they are doing God service. 
The delusion of their chief— the adversary-by which he holds 
them under his control, is, that he advocates a form of 
Godliness, and keeps up a religious drill so incessantly, as to 
weary and prevent any, from even hinting at a scarcity of true 
religion, and to leave no time for Bible study. 



But Jehovah has an army— small at present, but increasing, 
which is daily liberating some saints from the bondage of Anti- 
christ, who when they find themselves by truth set free, become 
noble soldiers on the side of the Captain of Jehovah's hosts. It is 
because our Captain was so long absent (1800 years), that the 
Anti-christs became so powerful and deceived so many by their 
claim to be our Captain's representatives and to have the right to 
command his faithful. But our Captain is to take his great power 
and reign (Rev. 11:17). He has come at last, and a few armed 
and liberated by his truth have recognized him and are 
assembling to his standard. In the present phase of the battle 
carnal weapons have no part; it is at first the gathering of the 
Lord's bright ones (stars)-the assembling to his standard of the 
"outcasts" of nominal, spiritual Israel (Psa. 147:2-6). "Your 
brethren that hated you, that cast you out for my name's sake 
said, let the Lord be glorified; (we cast you out for the good of 
the cause of [anti]-Christ) but he shall appear to your joy and 
they shall be ashamed" (Isa. 66:5). "I wot that through ignorance 
they did it, as did also their rulers" (Acts 3:17). 

The saints in the Babylon company of Anti-christ, are kept from 
deserting by fear-fear that their Lord's cause will suffer, not 
seeing that they are using their influence against the Lord's 
cause by giving aid, comfort and strength to those who have the 
form of godliness only. But the "Herald's of Christ's Presence" 
are going among them and some are hearing the joyful message, 
despite the drumming and excitement kept up to hinder, and 
despite the call of officers that each must support the sectarian 
standard under which he is enlisted, and the cry that to desert 
these banners means to desert the Lord; yet those whose eye can 
see the real standard (God's Word) are preparing to put 
themselves under the proper flag, and under the true 
Commander and Captain, Christ Jesus. 

The picket lines are already engaged and soon every soldier 
must be under fire on one side or the other-on the side of truth 
or error— on the side of the Lord or on the side of human systems 
and creeds. Every true soldier, deceived by the pretentions of 
Anti-christ will have an opportunity of placing himself under the 
command of the true Lord; and He that doeth his will shall know 
of his doctrine and shall not be in darkness. (See 
TABERNACLE Teachings "-last part). 

In this work of announcing the King's presence, and calling out 
our enslaved brethren in the vast army of Babylon, each of us 
has a duty which is a privilege —even though they revile us at 
the time, the message must be given and the wheat will be 
selected. "Gather my saints together unto me, those that have 
made a covenant with me by sacrifice." (Psa. 50:5.) 

The cry is, "Babylon is fallen, is fallen (no longer recognized of 
God). Come out of her my people that ye be not partakers of her 
sins and receive not of her plagues." (Rev. 18:4) The Lord 



seeketh such to serve in his army as serve in spirit and in truth- 
heartily. 

Be not like dumb, driven cattle; 
Be a hero in the strife. 



Let us, then, be up and doing, 
With a heart for any fate; 
Still achieving, still pursuing, 
Learn to labor and to wait. 

The progress of the truth is encouraging. Very many ministers 
of Christ associated with the nominal Churches are becoming 
interested, and are coming to see a vast difference and 
distinction between what men call Churches and the ONE 
CHURCH mentioned in Scripture, "whose names are written in 
heaven. " We have now reached, we believe, fully nine-tenths of 
all the ministers in the United States with our October sample 
copies. By many, the truth is recognized as "Manna," and daily 
the mail brings many orders for "FOOD." In the last six months 
we have heard from about five hundred ministers, and how 
many more are drinking from the fountain of truth, aided by our 
little goblet, we know not. And how many write who do not 
inform us of their ministry, we know not. At all events, TRUTH 
is being presented even inside sectarian fastnesses, and is 
influencing, to a great extent, the pulpit utterances of to-day, 
even among those who have not the courage to openly assail 
error from "bread and butter considerations;" or who have not 
yet seen clearly that the entire nominal Church is spewed from 
the Lord's mouth— no longer his mouth-piece— and that loyalty to 
Him, demands the use of all their powers in tearing down the 
systems of error their tongues and influence once helped to 
establish. 

We rejoice to note this interest among ministers, not because we 
think them better or more acceptable to God, but because they 
have often special influence and powers which they can use; but, 
we confess, it is all the more difficult for these to overcome. 

page 1 

We make extracts, as usual, from letters received, which will 
give you some idea of how some receive and rejoice in the light. 



Lynchburg, Va. 

DEAR SIR:-It would be impossible to exaggerate the blessing I 
have derived from reading this truth. How it causes the scheme 
of God's plan to expand in glory and beauty is simply 
wonderful. May you be kept from error and stagnation. 



Yours in Christ, 

Americus, Kans. 

DEAR SIR AND BROTHER:-I received a number of the 
TOWER, and am well pleased therewith. As per your request, I 
send my name, and request you to send me a few copies on trial. 
Would like also to have a few copies of "Food for Thinking 
Christians." I want the truth, though it knocks "my Church" to 
pieces. Have been a Methodist minister for twenty-five years. I 
trust you may accomplish great good. 

Fraternally yours, 

Other letters unexpectedly crowded out. 
page 1 

LETTER FROM BRO. ADAMSON. 

I desire to note a few points of experience that may serve to 
comfort, cheer and strengthen the saints. 

Of godly parents, I had always a religious turn, but I failed to get 
as clear an idea of consecration as I wished. I never believed in 
lukewarm or disobedient Christians, but I had no wise, loving 
saints to confer with in my early religious experience. Few or 
none thought of the Bible as the only rule; therefore, I was 
sometimes cast down and discouraged. I never could join a 
church, or enter the ministry, though I had tempting offers of the 
necessary funds. And recognizing God's tender, guiding hand in 
all my leadings, I thank him that I never joined the nominal 
Church, nor entered the ranks of its ministry. And yet, I always 
worked heartily in all churches, Y.M.C.A., or other revival 
work. 

Two years ago I came to Columbus, Ohio, and found a copy of 
ZION'S WATCH TOWER at the Y.M.C.A. rooms. I was 
attracted at once, finding in it so much Gospel (good news) and 
so much better than I had. I went to Pittsburgh, and found the 
WATCH TOWER office; and in my inquiries for it among 
various religious newspapers, I found it had Scriptural marks of 
saintship-being ignored, "cast out," and "suffering reproach" for 
Christ's sake. 

I could hardly follow Bro. Russell in his explanations and see at 
once that there really is a plan of God in the Ages, and that all 
the Scriptures fall into line and harmonize with it. It was too 
good. 



Men are sometimes dazed by a bright natural light, and so also 
by bright unfoldings of the word. This was my case, and still 
pondering these things in my heart, I went East to attend Dr. 
Cullis's training school, and finding it unsuitable for me, I went 
on to Providence, where I acted with the Y.M.C.A. in a revival; 
thence to Bridgeport, Conn., where I attended the Mission 
revival services. From that I purposed to return to Boston again, 
but there was no opening except toward Pittsburgh. 

The six months of absence had been valuable to me, I had 
practiced consecration, and was better fitted to hear spiritual 
teaching than at my first visit. [How wisely our Father deals 
with his inexperienced children, and how necessary is the entire 
surrender of self to the reception of his truth.] I then saw that 
there is a grand, glorious Plan of God. For eight months I have 
been preaching this glorious Gospel in private houses, halls, 
street corners and Fair grounds. Sometimes the Lord would open 
a free hall, or one so cheap that I could pay the price. People 
listen eagerly from two to four hours to the Gospel which "God 
conceived at the first, then hid, then revealed" (Eph. 3:9,10). 
Even upon Fair grounds, some classes would listen hour after 
hour; then proceeding to the town or city, I would preach in its 
streets for hours to eager listeners. I reach specially three 
classes: 

1st. Consecrated Christians, whether in or out of the Churches; 

2d. Moral men who see the contradictions of prevailing 
theologies, and never would join a church; 

3d. Infidels. 

It is blessed to deal with the first class- "preaching the Gospel to 
the meek." It is also blessed to guide this second class in the true 
way. These, at least, are honest "poor," to whom Jesus said the 
Gospel is preached. And, third, how blessed to have the infidel 
come and say, "I will henceforth do reverence to the God I once 
despised, since I behold him merciful, just and loving. " Surely 
none are dumb who have learned to sing the "Song of Moses 
and the Lamb"; for out of the 

page 2 

abundance of the heart the mouth must speak. 

No one who knows the song well will say, I am not gifted. It is 
hid from the gifted class, and revealed to babes— the meek, who 
tell it whether gifted or not. Even if present rewards alone are 
weighed, I would not exchange places with the most eloquent 
man living, who knows not God's Plan in the Ages, and so 
cannot honor him fully. I have now a quiet, restful, unwavering 
faith and confidence in God in my work. I aim to do the very 
best I can, but not on the high-pressure principle some think so 
needful. I have no interest of my own, but find my all in God. 
Success, as the world counts it, will never follow preaching the 



real Gospel. Then, since my earthly fortunes can only change for 
the worse, and since God knows what his cause needs, and that 
his sons are working along, lovingly, as for a loving Father, why 
unrest? Let all who hear tell the good news to others and you 
will see how much more precious is this Gospel of Peace. 

Earnestly desiring the prayers of all the saints, 

Your brother in Christ, 

J. B. ADAMSON. 



R438 : page 2 

INSPIRATION. 

A beautiful landscape might inspire the artist or the poet, each 
in his talent. Circumstances, audiences, etc., may be said to 
inspire a public singer or speaker. Murder is sometimes inspired 
by jealousy, etc., etc. And the child of God should be so inspired 
by the teachings of Jesus, the Apostles, and Prophets, as to act 
and teach in harmony with them. 

But let no one forget that these, though proper uses of our 
English word inspired, yet, when used in Scripture the word has 
a much deeper meaning. It there means, that the "Scriptures 
given by inspiration of God" are given not by inspiration of 
circumstances, nor by inspiration of the teachings of others, but 
are a special inspiration, or infusion of knowledge direct from 
God. Thus only Apostles and Prophets ever spoke to the Church. 



R438 : page 2 

RESIST THE DEVIL. 

"Be ye angry and sin not; let not the sun go down upon your 
wrath; neither give place to the devil."— Eph. 4:26. 

This text has been misconstrued and very generally 
misunderstood. The common idea of what constitutes saintship 
is a life in which patience and calmness are about the only 
graces. The above text, among others, is supposed to favor a 
condition of drowsy indifference, frequently misnamed patience. 
Those who hold such views of saintship gauge their Christian 
standing by their ability to have no feeling upon any subject. To 
such, "overcoming" means in substance bridling their tongues 
and feelings-or never getting angry. 

We protest against this as another of the adversary's soothing 
drugs to lull the saints to sleep when they should be awake and 
on the watch. This is not the overcoming referred to in Scripture, 
and those who think so are deluding themselves, and need to be 



waked up, that they may "finish their course with joy" (Acts 
20:24). 

Do not misunderstand us. We recognize patience as one of the 
Christian graces-a grand quality-but it is not the chief grace; it 
is not the ruling or controlling grace. And patience ceases to be a 
grace entirely when exercised towards wrong and injustice. No, 
"brotherly kindness," godlikeness and charity (love) are all its 
superiors, and as such should control it (1 Cor. 13:13). Paul 
mentions three of the chief graces, saying: Now abideth faith, 
hope and charity (love), but the greatest of these is LOVE. 

Yes, LOVE is the chief grace, and should control all who are 
Christ's. This accords with Jesus' saying, "A new commandment 
I give unto you that ye LOVE one another. " And when 
explaining what would fulfill all the law, he explained that it 
would be Love to God and to men. Amen. Then let the grace of 
LOVE rule, for "He that loveth not, knoweth not God, for God 
is love." 

R439 : page 2 

But again, we must object to what is usually called LOVE. 
Love, scripturally considered, is not that easy-going indifference 
which, while self is comfortable, merely says: "I wish you no 
harm, and hope you'll find things to your liking"— which calls 
everybody brother and sister, and delights to be thought very 
broad and liberal on all subjects. No, scriptural love is of a far 
less general character than this. Less of the general "good luck" 
and more of the particular and careful love. 

Jesus and the Apostles recognized the grace of love as a special 
thing. Jesus loved all mankind— not in the sense of wishing them 
no harm, but to the extent that he "tasted death for every man. " 
But among men he had his special loves. "Now Jesus loved 
Martha and her sister and Lazarus" (John 1 1 :5). And among his 
disciples there was both "that disciple whom Jesus [specially] 
loved" (John 21:7), and the "devil," or adversary, Judas (John 
6:70). 

It should be recognized by all who study the teachings of Jesus 
and the Apostles that love was in them the controlling principle. 
First, love to God; second, love to the Church; third, love to all 
men. Jesus' love for the Pharisees did not hinder his exposing 
their true character, for he loved more the truth and the earnest, 
humble Israelites, indeed, who were seeking for truth. Hence his 
scathing rebukes to the nominal Jewish Church and to the error- 
blinded doctors of divinity of his day, whose teachings were 
misleading the people. Jesus' words of rebuke: "Ye blind 
guides," "hypocrites," etc., were doubtless supposed to be un- 
loving, harsh and impatient expressions, but we can see that love 
was the principle which controlled him and prompted those 
remarks -love for truth and for the truthseekers -true Israelites. 



When Paul (mildly?) said to a certain one, "0 full of all subtilty 
and all mischief, thou child of the devil, thou enemy of all 
righteousness, wilt thou not cease to pervert the right ways of 
the Lord?" (Acts 13:10), some would say Paul lost his patience 
and sinned, and that he allowed his love to give way to anger at 
having his teaching interfered with, etc. But we claim that true 
LOVE was the cause of the anger-love for truth, love for God, 
whose ambassador he was, and love for the people who were 
being deceived by the error. This view is sustained by the 
preceding verse, which says Paul was filled with the Holy Spirit 
when he uttered these sharp words of rebuke. Note, also, other 
similar expressions of Jesus and the Apostles: Matt. 23:13-33; 
16:23; Gal. 2:11; Phil. 3:18. 

"BE YE ANGRY." 

This is the counsel of Brother Paul; but "let not the sun go down 
on your wrath"; that is, let not your anger amount to bitterness, 
malice, hatred, but let it be only such as is controlled by love. 
"Neither give place to the devil. " Let not truth fall in the streets 
and error triumph over it. Every loyal soldier should lift high the 
royal standard of truth and right and valiantly defend it. 

Is it an evidence of saintship never to be angry? It is rather a 
sign of imbecility and lazy carelessness, for no one can live in 
the present age, in which the prince of this world (Satan) has 
control, without finding just cause, and that which should arouse 
a righteous indignation. Injustice and wrong should be met with 
indignation and rebuke by God's true children. 

If, as we pass through the streets, we see a dumb animal unjustly 
and wantonly abused, we should, if we possess a spirit of 
justice, feel angry. What action we should take depends on 
circumstances. If we are able to rebuke the offender, it should be 
done. It would be sin not to do so; it would be giving place to 
the devil. And if right to be angry over injustice done to a dumb 
brute, how much more sinful to give place to the devil by 
allowing injustice or wrong to be done to a fellow human 
creature! And if our love prompts to defend these, how much 
should LOVE to God prompt us to CONTEND earnestly for 
truth and to reprove error, especially such errors and perversions 
of his word as would tend to overthrow the faith of God's 
children! 

But beware. Note the word of caution: "Be ye angry and sin 
not." Anger prompted by love should be controlled by love. It 
must know no malice nor bitterness toward the individual who 
offends. Righteous indignation or anger, while it will pointedly 
and forcibly "reprove" and "rebuke," will yearn to see penitence 
and repentance. 

The danger is in extremes. Some get angry to the extent of 
bitterness and personal hatred. We are cautioned against this 



sinful extreme, as well as against the other sinful extreme of 
giving place to the devil and permitting personal expediency, or 
convenience, or indolence, to hinder us from nobly upholding 
the right. 

GOD'S ANGER. 

We should notice that anger, though always having the same 
signification, viz., displeasure and opposition, will lead to 
various actions, according to the nature of the being exercised 
by it. 

When we speak of an angry beast, it calls to mind the idea of 
mad ferocity and destructive, unreasoning rage. So, if we speak 
of an angry man, the impression of the effect of anger will 
depend on the extent to which the man is depraved. 

A perfect man could be angry at evil or injustice and his anger 
would be controlled by reason, justice and love. The more 
depraved the being, the more unreasonable and unjust will be his 
anger and the expression of it. 

If we think of a Christian as one filled with the spirit and love of 
truth and right, and under control of Christ's example and 
teaching, as being angry, we will conclude at once that his anger 
is a Godlike displeasure and opposition to something wrong, and 
that the anger is both caused and controlled by LOVE. 

So, when we think of an angry God, we look to his general 
character and nature in order to learn what effect anger would 
have on him and how he would deal with those with whom he 
might be angry. When we come to know Jehovah's character- 
that He is love, very pitiful and of tender mercy, and that justice 
is the foundation of his throne— it assures us that all of his 
dealings must be in harmony with these elements of his 
character. Thus we see, that though repeatedly expressed in 
Scripture, "God is angry with the wicked, " yet his anger is not 
the anger of injustice or malice, as of depraved men and devils, 
but an ANGER, displeasure, or opposition inspired by the 
LOVE of right and love for the creature which is injured by 
wrong and sin. 

God's anger, too, must be controlled by his justice and love. The 
punishment for sin must be neither more nor less than right-a 
just punishment. 

Now glance hastily at God's dealings with our representative 
Adam. God placed him on trial with the very simple 
arrangement that if he lived in harmony with, and obedience to, 
his Maker, he might live forever, and if he disobeyed he should 
die— lose his life and all right to it. How just this arrangement! 
God gave him life, and certainly had not only the power but the 
right to withdraw the life and allow the man to become extinct- 
"as though he had not been." This would be a reasonable 



punishment, yet a great loss, as Adam found, when, after 
enjoying life for a season, by a dying process, he finally lost it. 
Love could agree to this verdict of justice, because a life out of 
harmony with God must bring ever increasing trouble on the 
man and on his descendants. 

God's love and justice thus agreed to the penalty— cutting off 
from life the rebel who otherwise would have increased his own 
misery, yet it is apparent to all that malice or bitterness toward 
his creature is not shown. Nor could God be so, since his 
character is love. We have elsewhere shown that after having 
justly sentenced man to death— taken from him all right to live- 
God in LOVE marked out a plan by which whosoever will may 
again have life by a resurrection from the dead. This plan, as 
already shown, does not SET ASIDE the justness of God's 
opposition and displeasure and sentence of death on the sinner, 
but vindicates his justice and love by permitting the Lamb of 
God to take away the sin of the world by giving his life a 
ransom (equivalent price) for all. 

How grossly Jehovah's character has been misrepresented and 
his anger misunderstood for malice and bitterness by nearly all 
the nominal Churches of to-day! It is generally agreed, except 
by Calvinists, that Jehovah had none but good designs toward 
his human son Adam when he made him perfect and upright and 
placed him in Eden. When Adam sinned, all are agreed that God 
was angry, displeased, or opposed to his creatures. But more, it 
is claimed that his malice and hatred pursued them even beyond 
the tomb, and that when they died Jehovah exerted special 
power and continued their lives in some other place, generally 
called a "lake of fire" (by those who do not understand that 
expression in the book of symbols- Revelation). There, it is 
claimed, Adam has been kept in torture for over five thousand 
years. 

All will agree that no being could continue to burn so long 
without burning up; but it is claimed that God has become so 
angry about the sin that he will keep Adam alive forever in order 
to torment him. No one can assume that justice would require 
such a penalty for Adam's transgression, and certainly love finds 
no place in such dealing. Nay, more, it would be, as all who can 
and do reason must admit, a gross injustice, and if it were true it 
would give the lie to every expression of the love and justice of 
God in Scripture. But this is all a dark nightmare, conjured in 
dark ages of Papal priestcraft and without foundation in the 
words of inspiration. 

R440 : page 2 

What a blessed relief to awaken now in the morning dawn and 
see, as we now do, the justice and love displayed in the anger of 
the Lord— how all men were justly consigned to the state of 
death (sheol and hades, improperly translated hell in the Bible), 



and that because love has redeemed all, therefore all shall be 
resurrected and come back into life again (Rom. 5:18,19). 

How blessed to think of such a God whose justice and love have 
been exemplified in both our condemnation and redemption. 

Let us emulate our Father: "Be ye angry and sin not; let not the 
sun go down upon your wrath, neither give place to the devil. " 



R440 : page 2 

GLAD TIDINGS. 

In him all the fullness or perfection dwelt, and of his fullness 
have all we received. (John 1:16) They who get none of his 
fullness— have none of his righteousness imputed to them— reap 
no benefit from his sacrifice for our sins, and are poor and naked 
indeed— covered with the filthy rags of their own righteousness. 
Surely such are in the very gall of bitterness and bond of 
iniquity; yet, not realizing their condition, some such claim, that 
it will "be seen after all, that there is not so much difference 
between Jesus Christ and us." The Lord have mercy upon them! 

The same paper endeavors to show, in addition to the above, that 
Jesus was the son of Joseph, and by nature, consequently, as 
much a sinner as other men; that the account of the Shepherds 
and wise men coming to worship the babe, and angels singing at 
his birth, "Glory to God and peace toward men," is all nonsense; 
that the Apostles who claimed to speak as the "oracles of God," 
by special divine "revelation," were no more inspired than its 
Editor, and consequently their claims were false, and they were 
impostors and deceivers. This paper, after devoting about three- 
fourth's of its columns to this stuff, and about one-fourth to 
quotations and treatises on "The high calling," "The heavenly 
calling," "The body of Christ," etc., on which subjects it is 
inconsistent enough to quote from the very Apostles it considers 
liars and impostors, and no more inspired than its Editor, then 
names this mass, "Glad Tidings," and calls for help in spreading 
it before thinking people. 



R440 : page 3 

A FREE SALVATION. 

ROMANS 3:24. 

Nothing to pay? No, not a whit; 
Nothing to do? No, not a bit; 
All that was needed to do or to pay, 
Jesus has done it His own blessed way. 



Nothing to do? No, not a stroke; 
Foiled is the captor, broken the yoke; 
Jesus at Calvary severed the chain, 
And none can imprison His free man again. 

Nothing to fear? No, not a jot; 

Nothing within? No, not a spot; 

Christ is my peace, and I've nothing at stake; 

Satan can that neither harass nor shake. 

Nothing to settle? All has been paid; 
Nothing to anger? Peace has been made; 
Jesus alone is the sinner's resource; 
Peace He has made by the blood of His Cross. 

What about judgment? I'm thankful to say 
Jesus has met it and borne it away; 
Drank it all up when He hung on the tree, 
Leaving a cup of full blessing for me. 

What about terror? It hasn't a place 
In a heart that is filled with a sense of His grace. 
My peace is most sweet, and it never can cloy, 
And that makes my heart bubble over with joy. 

Nothing of guilt? No, not a stain; 

How could the blood let any remain? 

My conscience is purged, and my spirit is free; 

Precious that blood is, to God and to me. 

What of the law? Ah, there I rejoice; 
Christ answered its claims and silenced its voice. 
The law was fulfilled when the work was all done, 
And it never accuses a justified one. 

What about death? It hasn't a sting; 

The grave to a Christian no terror can bring; 

For death has been conquer' d, the grave has been spoiled, 

And every foeman and enemy foiled. 

What about feelings? Ah, trust not to them; 
What of my standing? "Who shall condemn?" 
Since God is for me, there is nothing so clear- 
From Satan and man I have nothing to fear. 

What of my body? Ah! that I may bring 
To God, as a holy, acceptable thing; 
For that is the temple where Jesus abides, 
The temple where God by his Spirit resides. 

What of my future? Tis glorious and fair, 

Since justified, sanctified, His glory I'll share; 

By his blood first redeem'd; by his grace then enthron'd, 

Side by side with my Lord, his Bride I'll be own'd. 

What, then, dost thou ask? O, glory shall follow; 
Earth shall rejoice in the dawn of the morrow. 



To rule and to bless comes that kingdom and reign; 
Flee then, shall sorrow, death, crying and pain. 



-Selected. 



R440 : page 3 

JUSTIFICATION DEFINED. 

"Being justified by faith, we have peace with God through our 
Lord Jesus Christ. "-Rom. 5:1. 

The word justification has two meanings which are closely 
related; one is to prove that a thing is right, the other to make a 
thing right which is wrong. 

Webster defines the word justify thus: 1. "To prove or show to 
be just or conformable to law, right, justice or duty— to vindicate 
as right. " 2. "To pronounce free from guilt-to absolve. " 

These terms are used in these two senses in Scripture. As 
illustrating the first definition, viz: proving or showing to be just 
and right, notice that our Heavenly Father is said to be justified 
and Jesus also. When John preached repentance for sins, the 
people who believed justified God; i.e., they acknowledged that 
God had been just in condemning and punishing them as sinners 
—his dealings were vindicated as being right. Jesus as a man was 
tried or tested in all points (the world, flesh and devil) as we are, 
"yet without sin" -"In him was no sin." He was "holy, harmless, 
separate from sinners." Jehovah was his judge, and he justified, 
i.e., declared him to have been proved right and just. He was 
vindicated as being right, or, as we read, he was "justified in 
spirit and received into glory." (1 Tim. 3:16.) 

His unspotted humanity he gave up to death, to pay for us the 
penalty of Adamic sin-death. Thus his death was not for his 
own sins but for ours. "He bore our sins in His own body on the 
tree. " "Jehovah (in harmony with his own desire) laid on him the 
iniquity of us all. " The man Christ Jesus gave himself (his 
manhood) a ransom for all. And one of the best evidences that in 
God's sight he was free from all sin, is found in the fact that 
though he gave his humanity as a ransom, yet God, while 
accepting the human sacrifice for our sins, raised Jesus to life on 
a plane far above the human. Had he been a sinner, this would 
have been impossible, for God's law condemns every sinner to 
death. 

Now notice the second meaning of justification— the making 
right of something which is wrong. This is the sense in which 
the term is applicable to us, who by nature are wrong and sinful. 

God cannot say arbitrarily, you are wrong and sinful as a 
violator of my just laws, but I will declare you to be right. No, 
he must be just-justice is the foundation of his throne; 



everything rests upon it. If you are imperfect and sinful he 
cannot say that you are righteous. If you were righteous he could 
not declare you a sinner, nor treat you as such. 

Do you remind us that there is none of the Adamic race 
righteous-no, not one— and urge that, therefore, God cannot 
justify any of us? We reply that he cannot justify us in the first 
sense of the word, as seen above, but there is a way which God's 
love and wisdom have 

R441 : page 3 

devised by which he can be just and the justifier of those sinners 
who believe in or accept Jesus. (Rom. 3:26). Thus our 
justification is in the second sense explained above; that is, we 
who are wrong, sinful, and condemned before God, are made 
right by having our sins and shortcomings settled by another-by 
having the perfections of another set to our account. Thus, we 
who were sinners were justified by God's favor, by the 
acceptance of the merits of Jesus as an offset to our demerit. 

But some one may raise the question as to what is the cause or 
basis of justification. One claims that it is by Jehovah's grace, 
and not because our ransom has been paid, and quote Titus 3:7, 
"Being justified by his grace." Another claims that we are 
justified, not by grace, nor by a ransom, but by faith, and quote 
Rom. 5:1, "Being justified by faith," Another claims the ransom 
as the basis of all justification, and refers to Rom. 5:9, "Being 
now justified by his blood" (death). Are there three ways to be 
justified? No, answers Jesus, I am the way.. ..No man cometh to 
the Father but by me. 

What can there be about believing in Jesus? Why not believe in 
Peter or Moses or Sampson or Isaiah or Jeremiah? Why could 
not God justify those who believe in these as well as those "who 
believe in Jesus?" There must be something special and peculiar 
about Jesus, something different from all other teachers and 
prophets that we may be justified through faith in him, and not 
by faith in them. 

Again, what is it to believe in Jesus? Is it merely to recognize 
the fact that such a person once lived in Judea and died on a 
cross? Surely not; many prophets perished in Judea; many 
persons died on crosses. 

In explanation, we suggest that if the context be studied these 
texts will be found harmonious. It is by Jehovah's grace or favor 
that we are justified, for 

Grace first contrived the plan 
To save rebellious man. 

We are justified by faith, too; that is, we must by faith grasp the 
agency of God's grace— the ransom— before we can realize its 
full blessing. But down under all is the ransom-Jesus' death-the 



basis of all justifying faith— the channel of God's grace. These 
three things: the value of the ransom as the power of 
justification, the grace which provided it, and the faith which 
appropriates it are all beautifully joined by Paul (Rom. 3:24,25). 
"Justified freely by his grace through the redemption that is in 
Christ Jesus, whom God hath set forth to be a propitiation 
through faith in his blood." 

The secret is, that Jesus died for our sins. But, does some one 
suggest, that as sin is the cause of all death, therefore Isaiah, 
Jeremiah, Peter and others died because of sin as well as Jesus. 
We answer, yes; they all died because of sin: all but Jesus died 
because of their share in the sin, because they were descendants 
of the condemned Adam, whose life was forfeited by sin. (Rom. 
5:18) Thus all but Jesus die because of the inherited taint. Jesus 
died because of sin, too, but not because of inherited taint or 
personal guilt. His life came direct from God and was 
unforfeited; but he died for our sins. "Jehovah laid upon him the 
iniquity of us all. " "Him who knew no sin (either personal or 
inherited) He made a sin offering (treated as a sinner) on our 
behalf, that we might become God's righteousness in him. " (2 
Cor. 5:21, Diaglott.) 

Ah, now we see why God justifies believers through Jesus and 
not through themselves, nor through apostles or prophets. Now 
we see why there is no other name given under heaven or among 
men whereby we can be saved from the penalty of the fall- 
death. It is because he gave his sinless, perfect humanity a 
RANSOM-substitute for ours. 

Did God unjustly lay upon the willing substitute the iniquity of 
us all? Ah, no; for the joy set before him he endured the cross, 
despising the shame. Therefore his present exaltation and glory. 
Wondrous wisdom of the infinite Jehovah! Who can find a flaw 
in his glorious plan or charge him with injustice? 

Now we see what it is to believe in Jesus. Not merely believing 
that such a man lived and died, but that he lived and died free 
from all condemnation and sin-attested and approved of God - 
and that his death was for our sins. And thus we see how God 
can justly justify those who believe in and accept of that 
sacrificial offering of the humanity of Christ Jesus. Now we can 
see that the sins and frailties of the Adamic family were 
cancelled by the ransom price which the second Adam gave. 
The first Adam's sins were imputed to the second, and the 
second Adam's human purity is imputed to the first and his 
children— when they believe. 

It is blessed to realize, too, that the spotless one who bought us 
with his humanity is now highly exalted to the spiritual 
condition and power, and thus as a new creature-partaker of the 
divine nature-he will continue to carry forward the Father's 
plan. Soon he will bring from the prison-house of death those 



whom he bought, that they all might be (thus) saved (from the 
penalty of Adam's sin) and come to a knowledge of the truth, 
viz. : that they, by faith in Christ, are justified freely from all 
things and may come to perfection and harmony with God as 
Adam before sin. 

How Paul brings out this doctrine of justification in Rom. 
5:18,19, showing the condemnation to death on all through 
Adam, and the justification out of death to life through Jesus 
Christ our Lord, to whom be glory throughout all ages. Amen. 

Justified freely by his grace, through the redemption that is in 
Christ Jesus, whom God hath set forth to be a propitiation 
(satisfaction) through faith in his blood; to declare his 
righteousness (right doing) in the remission of sins that are 
past... To declare, I say, at this time his (God's) righteousness: 
that he might be just and the justifier of him which belie veth in 
Jesus. (Rom. 3:24,25.) [Those who will study the chart in 
"Food," page 105, will be helped in the understanding of this 
subject.] 



R441 : page 3 

YOUR SANCTIFICATION. 

Order is indispensable in the study of the word of the God of 
order. Order is heaven's first law. Through lack of order many 
Christians confound sanctification with justification. 
Sanctification is a distinct, separate work, and never precedes, 
but should follow justification. The term sanctification means 
setting apart for a special work or office. It is partly our work 
and partly God's work. When justified from sin through faith in 
the ransom, we may consecrate, sanctify or set ourselves apart to 
the will and service of God. Then, when God accepts our 
consecration, he sanctifies or sets us apart to whatever work or 
office he pleases. 

This double work is made very plain in the language of Lev. 
20:7,8: "Sanctify yourselves, therefore, and be ye holy"; and 
again, "I am the Lord which sanctify you. " Compare, also, Rom. 
12:1 with 1 Thes. 5:23. 

It always has been and always will be a thing acceptable in 
God's sight for justified persons to sanctify or fully set 
themselves apart to his will and service. During the Gospel Age 
sanctification is a special privilege. The service to be performed 
and the office to be filled by those sanctified during this age is 
the grandest service and the highest office in the gift of Jehovah- 
-grand in its privilege of scattering universal blessing. 

No one can be sanctified who is not first justified by faith in 
Christ Jesus; for "God heareth not sinners "-the unjustified. 



Such cannot approach him. "No man cometh unto the Father but 
by me," are the words of our Lord. All who, during the Gospel 
Age, sanctify or set themselves apart to do the will of God find 
it his will that they "present their bodies living sacrifices unto 
God," which being justified, free from sin, holy, Paul assures us, 
will be acceptable unto God by Jesus Christ (Rom. 12:1). 

It is only when made whiter than snow by the redemption that is 
in Christ Jesus that any sinner can have communion with God or 
set apart himself in acceptable service. Thus we offer up* 
sacrifices acceptable to God by Jesus Christ (1 Peter 2:5). In a 
word, nothing imperfect or sinful is acceptable to God in 
sacrifice. Hence the necessity that all who would sanctify must 
be justified or freed from sin first; then, being made free from 
sin, you can bear fruit, you can do works acceptable to God by 
Jesus Christ. 

Thus we see that the ransom for our sins— Jesus' death— does not 
sanctify us, but it is the means of our justification, and 
justification must precede, or be a stepping-stone to 
sanctification. This relationship is clearly shown by Paul, who 
says: "Therefore, being justified by faith, we have peace with 
God through our Lord Jesus Christ; by whom also we have 
access by faith into this grace [sanctification] wherein we stand, 
and rejoice in hope of the glory of God" (Rom. 5:1,2). Every 
divine favor we enjoy comes by Jesus. Justification first, as the 
direct result of his death, then the acceptance of our sacrifice 
and consequent hope of glory, honor, immortality and joint- 
heirship with Jesus. 

If, then, our sanctification be the presenting of our justified 
humanity as a sacrifice or offering to God, when may it be 
done? We answer that it-the sanctifying for the high calling- 
could be done by justified believers at any time since Jesus died 
and rose and ascended, until the "royal priesthood" is entirely 
selected. The selecting of this priesthood commenced not with 
Aaron and Moses— no, these were only types 

R442 : page 3 

and shadows of the real-it began with Jesus, the High Priest of 
our profession. He was first selected as our Leader, Forerunner 
and Captain, and not until he had fully sanctified himself and 
sacrificed the human nature, thus finishing his course and 
opening for us a new and living way by justifying us-not until 
then did any follow him in sanctification and sacrifice. 



*The oldest Greek text— the Sinaitic MSS.- omits spiritual here. 
The propriety is seen when we remember that it is our human 
nature which is being sacrificed, as with Jesus. 



Even the disciples, though they had consecrated fully and had 
forsaken all to be his disciples-though they had thus done their 
part of the work of sanctification, yet God did not accept of their 
sacrifice until Jesus had actually paid their ransom price and 
ours, and presented it upon the "mercy seat." But immediately, 
when their justification was fully accomplished, the Pentecostal 
blessing— the sealing acceptance of their sacrifice— came. 

This Gospel Age, then, has been "the acceptable year (time) of 
the Lord"— i.e., the time during which God has accepted as 
candidates for the priesthood every heart presented in sacrifice - 
coming in the only name given. This acceptable time, to our 
understanding, is now ended-since October, 1881. The present 
time we believe to be not a 

R442 : page 4 

time for consecration with a view to the high calling, the 
priesthood, but rather the time for those who have so 
consecrated to finish their course with joy by fully carrying out 
their covenant of sacrifice. Soon the sacrificing and sufferings of 
the Church will give place to glory when she shall be united to 
her Lord, and when one with him she shall be Jehovah's channel 
for blessing the world. 

Yes, we believe that the quarrying of living stones for the 
temple is ended- we wait till the few now being finished and 
polished shall be perfected and fitted to their places, and then 
the structure will be completed; and the headstone shall be 
brought forth with shoutings of grace, grace unto it (Zech. 4:7). 
May the privilege 

Of the little while between 
In its golden light be seen, 

and let all the consecrated run with renewed vigor the remainder 
of their course. 

The present time, we repeat, is for the perfecting of those who 
have consecrated all to the Lord. It is a harvest rather than a 
sowing time, a gathering rather than a planting time. It is 
mentioned thus by the Prophets: "Gather my saints together unto 
me— those that have made a covenant with me by sacrifice"; 
"They shall be mine, saith the Lord of hosts, in that day when I 
makeup my jewels" (Psa. 50:5; Mai. 3:17). 

But while sanctification is spoken of as though it were 
completed at the moment of consecration, yet it actually is a 
progressive work to all whose earthen vessels were marred and 
tainted by sin. Even after the human will is subjected to the 
divine, we need, as did Paul, to keep our bodies under (1 Cor. 
9:27). 



SANCTIFIED THROUGH TRUTH. 

To enable us to be and to continue sanctified, God has provided 
a means, viz., truth. Not every truth-not historic or scientific 
truth—but as Jesus said, "Sanctify them through thy truth." Other 
truths are very good in their place, but it is a mistake to suppose 
that they sanctify. But what is God's truth? Jesus said, "Thy 
word is truth." God's word through the prophets? Yes, we have a 
sure word of prophecy to which we do well to take heed; and not 
only so, but God's more recent words through the Apostles also, 
for "all Scripture, given by inspiration of God, is profitable." 

But does some one inquire of the necessity of the New 
Testament and suggest that Jesus was sanctified by the word of 
God through the prophets? Our reply is, Not so; for Jesus 
himself was the living word- "the word made flesh." It is 
nowhere said that he was sanctified by the word of the prophets. 
They testified of, but not to, him. He was sanctified by the truth, 
but he himself said, also, "I am the truth" (John 14:6); and again, 
"I sanctify myself" (John 17:19). Ah, beloved! "This" is the 
living bread ("truth") which came down from heaven, without 
which all the words of prophets would have been meaningless 
and tasteless husks. 

For sanctifying power, Jesus pointed us forward to the truths to 
be revealed by the Spirit through the Apostles, saying: "The 
Comforter, which is the Holy Spirit, whom the Father will send 
in my name, he shall teach you all things and bring all things to 
your remembrance, whatsoever I have said unto you" (John 
14:26). He shall take of mine and show them unto you (John 
16:14). Any reference to the prophets was rather as 
corroborative of his own higher teachings (Matt. 24:15; Dan. 
1 1 :31). And thus all students have found it; the prophets' words 
are valuable as showing many of the interests of the Jew and 
natural men and events, but, except in types and shadows, 
discernable only by the Spirit's revelations through the Apostles, 
they contain little spiritual food. This is that bread which came 
down from heaven-this "grace and truth came by Jesus Christ"- 
-and since his ascension it has been revealed through his 
Apostles, who "preached the gospel with the Holy Spirit sent 
down from heaven"— to take of Jesus' things and show them unto 
"the sanctified in Christ" (1 Pet. 1:12; 1 Cor. 1:2). 

Since God's truth is the sanctifying power, how important that 
we should live "by every word which proceedeth out of the 
mouth of God" (Matt. 4:4). Let us seek and feed upon God's 
word in its purity, remembering that sectarian creeds and 
catechisms are so many attempts to "teach for doctrine the 
commandments of men" (Matt. 15:9), and that the result of even 
mixing truth with error is confusion-Babylon. 



R442 : page 4 



SANCTIFYING THE WORLD. 

Because we find that Jesus and the Apostles kept church and 
world separate in their teachings, we endeavor to do the same. 
We have just considered "your sanctification" (the church's) and 
now we glance at the world's privilege in this direction. The two 
are alike, yet different. Alike, in the sense that sanctification 
means consecration; different, because the consecration differs 
under the different attendant circumstances. 

The two occur at different times. The Church's consecration first 
in (this) the Gospel age; the world's afterward in the next or 
what is often called the Millennial age. Hence Jesus in the 
beginning of this age, though he loved the world so much as to 
die for them, and desired their sanctification as well as that of 
the Church, yet, knowing God's order, that the Church must first 
be gathered and perfected on the spiritual plane of being before 
the world on the earthly plane could be blessed through their 
ministration, prayed thus: (John 17:9,21,22), "I pray not for the 
world, but for them which thou hast given me" (specially 
selected by the magnet of truth to become Jesus' bride and joint- 
heir) "that they all may be one... as thou Father art in me and I in 
thee; that they also may be one in us. ..that they may be one even 
as we are one" (partakers of the divine nature" 2 Pet. 1:4), "that 
(when these are thus perfected in the divine nature) the WORLD 
may believe. 

Yes, deep hidden riches of grace for the world are at present 
obscured by the exceeding riches of God's grace and 
lovingkindness toward us who are in Christ Jesus (Eph. 2:6-8). 
The "royal priesthood" have consecrated to sacrifice during this 
Gospel age. The anti-types of the "Levites," who consecrate to 
service but not sacrifice must be fulfilled in the Millennial age. 
(See Numb. 8:24.) 

During the Gospel age the call has been, who will take up the 
cross and follow me (Jesus)? Who is willing to deny (ignore) 
himself and suffer with Christ in hope of reigning with him? 
Who will present his body-his human nature-a living sacrifice 
and become dead with him that he may also live with him? (2 
Tim. 2:12; Rom. 12:1 and 6:8.) 

In answer to this call for severe service, yet "reasonable, " when 
the reward is considered, few— a "little flock", a "royal 
priesthood"— have during 1,800 years heeded the call and been 
selected. How few, or who they are, we know not —God 
knoweth; but we know that Jesus is the high-priest of their 
profession, and those who shall be with him are called and 
chosen through sanctification of the Spirit and belief of the truth, 
(2 Thes. 2:13) and faithful. We know, too, that it includes all 
and only those who have made and kept a "covenant by 
sacrifice" (Psalm 50:5; Rev. 17:14.) 



The conditions of consecration for mankind in the next age will 
be not sacrifice of things lawful and right and good for the 
natural man, or the laying down of the human existence, but 
obedience to God and his law of love, which offers on the surest 
foundation everlasting life and blessing. Thus the prophets 
express it: "Serve the Lord with fear (respect) and rejoice with 
trembling." (Psa. 2:11.) "Hear (obey) and your soul shall live. 
Let the wicked forsake his way and the unrighteous man his 
thoughts, and let him return unto the Lord and he will have 
mercy upon him; and to our God, for he will abundantly 
pardon." (Isa. 55:2,7.) In a word, obedience to God will be the 
only requirement from all who, being justified by faith in Christ, 
would consecrate themselves fully to God. Nor would sacrifice, 
crucifixion, death be possible to those in that age, seeing that 
evil in all its forms is to be suppressed and all things brought 
under the control of good and right. It is because, in God's 
arrangement, evil (Satan) now rules the world, that 

R443 : page 4 

right-doing, truth and goodness are bringing reproach, 
crucifixion, and suffering: and this we have seen is to permit the 
sufferings and sacrifice not only of Jesus the high priest who, 
without sacrificing the human, could never partake "of the 
divine nature," by which they are clothed with power to bless 
and restore mankind. It will be apparent to all, then, that when 
the present triumph of evil gives place to the lasting triumph of 
righteousness, the very circumstances which now make sacrifice 
necessary to the overcoming of the world will be gone, never 
more to return; consequently the opportunity for sacrificing for 
right and truth will be gone. When the time foretold shall fully 
come, when "A king shall reign in righteousness and princes 
shall execute judgment in the earth"-then "In his day the 
righteous shall flourish" and the evildoer shall be cut off (Ps. 
72:7; 37:9). 

The original appointment of consecrated priests under the 
typical system numbered five, while of the Levites there were 
seventeen thousand one hundred and sixty appointed. (Num. 
4:36,40,44,48; Exod. 28:1.) 

The proportion of these numbers toward each other probably 
typifies the much larger proportion of those saved and 
consecrated in the next age as men, as compared with the "little 
flock" selected under the trying ordeal of sacrifice during the 
Gospel age to become spiritual beings,— "new creatures"— and to 
be made unto our God kings and priests to reign on the earth 
(Rev. 5:10). For a fuller treatment of this phase of the subject, 
see "The Tabernacle" pamphlet. 

It will be seen then, that if our time for consecration to sacrifice 
as priests is ended, the time for consecration for the Levite class 
is due to commence. How important, now in the little while 



which remains, that those who have thus consecrated to sacrifice 
with Jesus should make their calling and election sure by 
compliance. 

It may be asked, What is the practical difference between the 
two consecrations as they affect our daily life and actions? We 
reply, that the consecration or sanctification of the Levite class 
is merely to abstain from sin and do those things which are right, 
while those who consecrate as priests deny themselves those 
things which are rightly and properly their privilege as men. For 
instance: It is right that men should seek, by every lawful and 
proper action, to make themselves comfortable and happy in the 
world, to have a "good name; " to rightly value the esteem of 
their fellow-men, and to accept public office; to spend time and 
talent in science, music, art, etc. All these things, if sought in a 
sinless way, are proper to consecrated MEN-Levites-but not 
for the new creature, not for the royal priesthood. The latter is to 
be careful for nothing: ease, comfort, reputation, honors of earth, 
are not to be considered, except to remember that these are as 
dross when compared to the higher office and honors promised 
to the sacrificers. This class -the priests-have no time for 
concerts, games, science, art, music, etc., even though they be 
sinless, (except such as are necessary to health) because all their 
time, money, and talents are consecrated to be sacrificed from 
self to the Lord's service. "As it is written, for thy sake we are 
killed all the day long; we are accounted as sheep for the 
slaughter. " "In all these things we are more than conquerors 
through him that loved us "-"Heirs of God, joint heirs with Jesus 
Christ our Lord, if so be that we suffer with him, that we may be 
also glorified together. For I reckon that the sufferings (losses, 
deprivations, self-denials) of this present time are not worthy to 
be compared with the glory which shall be revealed in us." 
(Rom. 8:17,18,36,37.) These distinct consecrations are further 
shown in article, "Two Baptisms," in another column. 



R443 : page 4 

"WHOSE SON IS HE." 

MATT. 22:42. 

It seems as though evidence of the presence of Christ Jesus is 
every day accumulating. 

It is a curious fact that the same thing which was the cause of 
division during the ministry of Christ Jesus on earth, is the cause 
of division now. The same questions which were agitating the 
people then are agitating them now. It seems as though the 
sifting is going on from one grade to another. What does not 
cause separation at one time is only reserved to cause separation 
or division a little farther on. The question, a short time ago, 



was, When and how does Christ come? Then, a little after, Has 
he come? Is he present? 

There was a test question then, but it was the test for that time— 
for that sifting. Now, there is another test, and it is a noticeable 
fact that the present test is the one which occupied the minds of 
the people about six months after the third Passover which was 
observed by our Lord; that is, about six months before his 
crucifixion. It was at the Feast of Tabernacles, "the last great 
day (the eighth) of the feast." (John 7:37.) Some said one thing 
and some another, some thought he was the Christ, and some did 
not (verses 40,42). "So there was a division of the people 
because of him" (verse 43). 

About that time, in a conversation with the Pharisees, Jesus said 
(John 8:18,) "The Father that sent me beareth witness of me." 
"Then said they unto him, Where is thy Father?" (vs. 18,19.) 
Jesus answered, "Ye neither know me nor my Father; if ye had 
known me, ye would have known my Father also. " If JOSEPH 
had been his father, this would not have been the fact, for his 
("supposed") "father and mother" they knew. (John 6:42.) "He 
being (as was supposed) the son of Joseph." (Luke 3:23.) Some 
suppose the same thing now, and remind us very much of those 
Pharisees then, who, after a lengthy conversation, (in which 
Jesus refers to the fact that they were "doing the deeds of their 
Father") said, "WE have not been born of fornication; we have 
One Father, God" (John 8:41). (See E.D. for text and rules of 
emphasis), which evidently was a sarcastic intimation that he 
had been born of fornication, which if Joseph were his father, 
would have been true. But even if Joseph was not his father, yet 
if he came into the world by natural generation, it would have 
been true, for he was conceived before Joseph had taken Mary 
as his wife. 

Suppose, as the editor of the "Day Star" teaches, that Jesus was 
brought into the world just as other men are, i.e., according to 
natural laws, can its editor give us any good reason from the Old 
Testament writings or the new, why God should have chosen to 
have his son (or, as perhaps the editor of the Star would say, he 
who was to become his son) enter the world in a way that would 
seem to give sanction to the violation of his own moral law? 

The editor of the Star uses three columns of his paper to meet an 
argument which, we should think, no careful Bible scholar 
would offer, viz., that the sign, "Behold a virgin shall conceive 
and bear a son, and shall call his name Immanuel," was given to 
Ahaz in particular; whereas the prophecy reads, "Hear ye now, 
O house of David. " He quotes from Young's Concordance 
showing that it was "announced to Ahaz and the people of Judah 
as the sign that God would give them deliverance from their 
enemies" (the italics are ours), and then says that "the birth of 
Jesus, which occurred in the neighborhood of 700 years after 
Ahaz slept with his fathers, could have been no sign to him that 



God would protect him from the two kings who purposed doing 
him evil. Now, is it possible that this editor supposes that this 
remarkable sign was given to Ahaz particularly (and when he 
would not ask for it) and related only to his difficulty with those 
two kings? 

No, he evidently does not, though the above has that look, for in 
another place in the same article he says, "Because of their 
desire God promises a sign, which 

R443 : page 5 

is to be a son conceived of a virgin, whose name is to be called 
Immanuel." He moreover says, "that wayfaring men' though 
fools," should see that to be any sign to Ahaz, the child must 
have been born shortly after the prophecy was given. " Now, any 
intelligent, careful reader can see that such a use of language as 
this would render much that Jesus said of no use to us now. 
Such words as "ye," "you," and "we," used by Christ and the 
writers of the epistles, would only have reference to those 
present at the time the words were spoken, e.g., "Go ye and 
teach all nations;" "lo, I am with you always." But as he does not 
believe that the birth of Jesus was a fulfillment of that prophecy, 
but believes that it was fulfilled in time to be a sign to Ahaz 
touching those "two kings," Will he tell us (we do not want to 
"challenge" him) when that prophecy was fulfilled? Surely the 
fulfillment of so remarkable a sign as that, which he allows God 
promised, (and this, too, in "the O.T. writings,") would not fail 
to be plainly recorded. We shall wait with interest for his 
answer. 

Again, in the same article, he says the child "was to eat butter 
and honey, that he might know to refuse the evil and choose the 
good" (ver. 15.) "Now," he continues, "to be consistent, we must 
admit that the honey represents good and the butter evil, or vice 
versa," (we do want to be consistent and will admit it,) "and 
further, that if the child was to eat both, then IT FOLLOWS that 
he must participate in both good and evil DEEDS." Hold! If that 
is what you call consistency we did not understand the meaning 
of the word, for this is illogical, the inference is wrong. 

He then adds: "If this is applied to Jesus, then it makes him a 
sinner." Now, we will admit, that "if this is applied to Jesus" in 
that way "it makes him a sinner," but we would not wish to 
endorse 

R444 : page 5 

so lame an application as that. He still further adds, that this 
"places him in exactly the same position as Adam, who had to 
do wrong in order to know good and evil. " Now, we will try to 
be consistent and admit that such an application would do all 
that; but the application comes from the illogical deduction that 
evil necessarily implies evil DEEDS, which requires no 



argument to refute. We regard it as impossible to have placed 
"Jesus in exactly the same position as Adam," except as to 
purity, for Adam had no view of misery and death which Jesus 
had. Jesus felt the evils of sin without sinning; he "ate butter and 
honey," good and evil, but not evil deeds. He suffered on 
account of others (not as a substitute in suffering) who evil 
entreated him, who, on account of their blindness, occasioned by 
the fall, misapplied his teaching, etc. There were many ways in 
which he "ate" (experienced) evil. Lazarus, his friend, died on 
account of the fall, and that caused Jesus to sorrow; and the hard 
heartedness of the Jews, as shown at the grave, caused him to 
"groan in spirit." 

Now, with this long line of evil, misery, pain, dead and dying 
men before him, must Jesus "participate in both good and evil 
deeds in order to be able to choose between the two?" 

Can any one think this is so, and Jesus living by faith too? 
Considering, too, that he understood the Scriptures (Old 
Testament writings) so well that he puzzled the doctors when he 
was only twelve years of age, and yet did not know how to 
refuse the evil and choose the good, but, like Adam, (who had 
no such exhibition of the effects of sin) "had to do wrong in 
order to know good and evil?" Now, must we admit all this "to 
be consistent"? Would such admission be consistent? 

The article from which the above quotations are made is not 
inaptly headed "Misapplications." 

In the same number, under a subheading of "Childish Idea," the 
writer says: "When Jesus said Sanctify them through thy truth, 
thy WORD is truth' (John 17:17), He must have referred to the 
OLD TESTAMENT WRITINGS, for the New were not then, 
nor for some time afterward, in existence. " 

Now, let us turn to the first chapter of John, where exactly the 
same word in the original is used, and let us read, in parenthesis, 
this application: "In the beginning was the Word (Old Testament 
writings), and the Word (Old Testament writings) was with God, 
and the Word (Old Testament writings) was God. The same was 
in the beginning with God. All things were made by (or through) 
him" vs. 1-3. "And the Word (Old Testament writings) became 
flesh and dwelt among us, ...full of grace and truth" (verse 14). 

It goes on to say: "This is authority sufficient for us, for Jesus 
was also sanctified by the truth" (John 17:19). Now, is it not 
strange that it should make such a statement as that, and then 
give a scriptural reference as though the Scripture referred to 
substantiated the statement? But, on looking at the 19th verse, 
we find Jesus saying: "And for their sakes I sanctify MYSELF 
(i.e., set apart, consecrate), that they also may be sanctified in 
truth." [See E.D.-R.V., and Rotherham's translations.] In 
harmony with John's statement quoted, is another statement of 
Jesus (recorded by John 14:6), "I am the Way and the Truth and 



the Life," and we can see that through him, "the Word," and "the 
Truth and the Life, " they were sanctified, while he sanctified 
himself. 

While it is true that we should search the Scriptures (Old 
Testament writings) for they are they which testify of Christ 
Jesus, let us not forget that they are God's written word, and 
could not be fully understood until God's living Word (Jesus 
Christ) came and stood beside them, showing their signification, 
and what would be accomplished for the world when the body, 
(the Church) of which he is the head, should be complete. 

While we have been writing the above, our heart has gone out in 
loving sympathy and tender regard for him whom we love, yet 
see to be in error. We have not written to be sharp or sarcastic, 
nor bitter; but there are many things lately put before the public 
in the "Day Star" that are made to appear crooked, and, with 
such applications as those referred to, cannot be otherwise than 
crooked; and have a tendency to mislead, and, as we have been 
asked more than once, in person and by correspondence, for an 
expression of our views, we have felt it necessary to define our 
position as to these things. 

We can but hope that the editor of the "Day Star" will yet see, 
how hard it is to harmonize Scripture on that line. 

If any will admit the supernaturalness of the Scriptures, and of 
Jesus who was the fulfilling of them (Old Testament writings), 
letting go of naturalism, and not reasoning after the method of 
the materialistic school part of the time, and as a Christian part 
of the time, we think he will see that the first man (Adam) was 
of the earth earthy, and that the second man (Adam) was the 
Lord FROM heaven; and that, with the POSSIBILITIES which 
he possessed of transmitting a perfect race, he gave himself 
(thus sacrificing all the POSSIBILITIES of a sinless man) as a 
ransom for the race, who had suffered the penalty of death, for 
their sins, and could only rise when there should be "found a 
ransom. " HE took their place. "Wherefore God also hath 
HIGHLY exalted him"-"glorified him with (in addition to) the 
glory which he had with the Father before the world was." 

We would seriously ask the editor of the "Star" to give us a good 
reason why the peculiar language— "I will put enmity between 
thee and the woman, and between thy seed and her seed," (Gen. 
3:15; Gal. 4:4), and "Made of a woman"-if there was nothing of 
more than ordinary significance attaching to it? Is it not obvious 
that if Jesus came into the world, just as "we all" have, there 
would be no force to this language and no occasion for using it? 

So we say, in answer to the question which we have used for the 
heading of our article, "Truly this WAS the Son of God" (Matt. 

27:54). 

J. C. SUNDERLIN. 



page 5 

"Preach the Word; be instant in season and out of season [i.e., 
when it suits your convenience and when it does not]; reprove, 
rebuke, exhort, with all longsuffering and doctrine. " (2 Tim. 
4:2.) 



R444 : page 5 

TWO BAPTISMS. 

Although this subject has already been treated at length in these 
columns, the many inquiries from new readers make its 
consideration again necessary. 

Immersion or baptism (Greek-dipping) in water, as practiced by 
John the Baptist and afterward by our Lord and his disciples, 
had a different significance at first among the disciples from 
what it came to have after the Spirit dispensation was fully 
opened and its teachings received. 

John came and his disciples, preaching repentance of sins, and 
used immersion as a token or sign of the putting away of sin by 
the repentant one. Not that the immersion put away the filth of 
the flesh-sin-but it illustrated it. Jesus' disciples did a similar 
work among the people (John 4:2). And after Pentecost, even, 
the Apostles, for a time at least, used the emblem in this same 
way. For instance, Acts 2:38,41; 8:12,13,38. In each of these 
instances open sinners were to exemplify the putting away of 
their sins, and this, indeed, is the usual significance of the 
ordinance among Christians to-day. 

But baptism came to have a new and very different significance 
to the Apostles, under the guidance of the Spirit, as they came to 
discern its deeper meaning as illustrated both by the words and 
act of Jesus. In Jesus' case, surely, it did not typify a putting 
away of the filth of sin, for the question he put, but which his 
opponents never answered, was, "Which of you convinceth me 
of sin?" and the record is that "in him was no sin." 

Jesus' baptism or immersion into water typically expressed his 
death, into which he voluntarily went for our sins. It represented 
the full consecration of his will to the Father's purposes and 
plans for our redemption. It was when "Jesus began to be about 
thirty years of age"— manhood according to the law —and 
therefore, the proper time for him to sacrifice his fully- 
developed manhood. And the act of baptism represented in the 
one act of going down into the water and rising from it, his 
going down into death, and his trust in the Father's promise that 
he should not be left in death, but should have a resurrection. 
(Psa. 16:10; Acts 2:31) 



When Jesus presented himself to John-regarding it, and 
properly, as the symbol of repentance and reformation -John 
was surprised and said, "I have need to be baptized of thee, and 
comest thou to me?" He recognized Jesus' sinlessness and knew 
that he needed no repentance. Jesus answered, "Suffer it to be so 
now, for thus it becometh us (the church of which he was the 
head) to fulfill all righteousness." And his death, which his 
immersion symbolized, was indeed the fulfillment of all the 
righteous demands of justice against the condemned race of 
Adam. 

That which was expressed in that brief, symbolic act, was fully 
carried out in the three-and-a-half years of his ministry-for 
during that time he died daily, or was continually giving his life 
strength-sacrificing himself-for the sake of the Lord's truth, the 
Lord's children, and humanity in general. The act of immersion 
meant in symbol all that sacrifice which, commencing at Jordan, 
was completed at Calvary, and also his triumph as a new 
creature in the resurrection. Baptism into death meant sacrifice 
and suffering unto the end, both to Jesus and his followers-all 
who would share the present sufferings and the final glory. 

R445 : page 5 

To all who would share the heavenly glory, the question comes 
as it did to James and John, "Are ye able to be baptized with the 
baptism that I am baptized with?" (Matt. 20:22). And if we have 
indicated our willingness, we have the promise that the ability 
shall be supplied; for our leader is our surety. And again, Jesus 
says: "I have a baptism to be baptized with, and how am I 
straightened until it be accomplished" (Matt. 20:22; Luke 
12:50). All must see that not the watery-symbolic death, but the 
reality, is here referred to. 

After Pentecost, under the leading of the Spirit, the Apostles 
came gradually to apprehend this deeper and more forcible 
significance of baptism when applied to Christians— to those 
who sought to follow the Master's footsteps of self-denial and 
crucifixion of the flesh to heavenly glory-the first resurrection. 
If by any means they might know him and the power of his 
resurrection (to spiritual conditions) and the fellowship of his 
sufferings, being made conformable unto his death (Phil. 3:10). 
They came to see that to be baptized with his baptism meant 
much more than John's, much more than putting away the filth 
of sin; that it now meant consecration— to sacrifice— of that 
which already was justified in God's sight. Hence it is that we 
find Paul so ably teaching and exhorting believers, who were 
already justified from sin by faith in the Redeemer, to put on 
Christ by baptism; to become members of the "little flock"- 
"members of his body"— by being immersed into Christ. We 
quote his words: 



"Know ye not, that so many of us as were baptized into Jesus 
Christ, were baptized (immersed) into his death? Therefore, we 
are buried with him by baptism into death: that like as Christ 
was raised up from the dead by the glory of the Father, even so 
we also should walk in newness of life"— walk as those having 
heavenly, not earthly, hopes and aims. How different is this 
meaning to the saints from that conveyed by John's baptism? So 
different, indeed, that the Apostles soon came to see that John's 
baptism, though the same in outward form, did not at all 
represent a baptism into Christ, and some who had been once 
baptized with the idea of putting away sin-filthiness were 
commanded to be baptized again, and thus express the new and 
deeper meaning to baptism (Acts 19:1-5 and 10:48). 

From these few brief testimonies we hope that all will be able to 
recognize the two baptisms (two in import; one in outward 
form). All may add to the evidence by the use of Bible 
references or a concordance. And let all clearly distinguish 
between the heart- work which is the real, and the watery-type, 
which is the shadow. All should see, too, that the outward form 
has even greater weight and is the more proper to be observed 
by those who see the reality. We must not only believe with the 
heart, but also confess with the mouth— a symbolic act. 

The immersion, which typifies a death of the human nature, we 
regard as being no longer proper, except for those who, in heart, 
had already made the consecration— presented themselves living 
sacrifices, as shown in preceding article on Sanctification-but 
who may not before have seen the beauty, significance and 
propriety of the symbol. But immersion, as practiced before the 
Gospel dispensation-called John's baptism, or the baptism unto 
repentance, as indicating a change of life, and thereafter a 
putting away of the filth of the flesh-is now in order again, as 
illustrating the very consecration that natural men should make 
to come into full harmony with God. 

Does Paul dissent from this statement concerning two baptisms 
when he says, we have "one baptism?" No, he addressed the 
Church, those following in Jesus' footsteps, being baptized, not 
unto John's baptism, but into Christ- into the anointed company 
of which the anointed Jesus is the head. Some inquire, Who 
could properly administer the ordinance? We answer, any one, it 
matters not who, but all our preferences would naturally lead us 
to prefer that the administrator should be a brother in Christ. The 
formula of words, which it is our custom to use toward those 

being immersed into Christ, is as follows: "Brother , 

in the name (by the authority) of the Father and of the Son and 
of the Holy Spirit, I baptize thee into Christ. " Our formula for 
those now covenanting to renounce sin and pursue righteousness 

is, "Brother , in the name of Jesus Christ, thy sins be 

forgiven thee; go and sin no more." 



page 5 

"If ye continue in my word... ye shall know the truth." (John 
8:31.) 



R445 : page 6 

"BEFORE ABRAHAM WAS, I AM." 

The spotless purity, the marked intellectual superiority, the 
humble dignity, the meek gentleness, the bold and 
uncompromising sense of right, linked with benevolence and 
untiring self-sacrifice, marked Jesus as a man peculiar and 
separate from all other men. In his day "he taught as one having 
authority, " and men said, "Never man spake like this man. " 
Whatever others may think or say of him, he claimed to be the 
sent of God, saying, (John 6:38), "I came down from heaven. " "I 
am the living bread which came down from heaven." (verse 51.) 
The Jews disbelieved this claim, and said, "How can this be?" 
And many of his disciples, when they heard it, said, "This is a 
hard saying, who can hear it?" (verse 60.) 

"When Jesus knew in himself that his disciples murmured at it, 
he said unto them, Doth this offend you? What and if you shall 
see the Son of Man ascend up where he was before?" But "from 
that time many of his disciples went back and walked no more 
with him" (verses 61-66), because of this claim of heavenly 
origin and pre-human existence. 

Again, we find him before the Pharisees declaring the same 
truth, saying, "I know whence I came and whither I go.. ..I am 
from above, I am not of this world;... I proceeded forth and came 
from God; neither came I of myself, but he sent me.... It is my 
Father that honoreth me, and if I should say I know him not I 
shall be a liar" (John 8:14,23,42,54,55). Then said the Pharisees, 
"Art thou greater than our father Abraham?" Jesus answered, 
"Your father Abraham rejoiced to see my day, and he saw it and 
was glad. " "Then said the Jews unto him, Thou art not yet fifty 
years old, and hast thou seen Abraham? [Abraham had been 
dead two thousand years.] Jesus said unto them, "Verily, verily, 
I say unto you, BEFORE ABRAHAM WAS, I AM. " (John 
8:53,56-58). 

There is no mistake about that expression. The Son of God had 
not yet tasted death; the birth of the human was only a 
transference of the life-principle from spiritual to human 
conditions; the being, the individuality, was the same. Jesus as a 
man recognized himself as the same being— the Son of God. (See 
"Food for Thinking Christians," chap. "Narrow Way to Life.") "I 
AM" expresses his continuous existence, and identifies Jesus of 
Nazareth with the "only begotten" and "first-born of all 
creation. " Did the Jews believe this wonderful truth? No, they 



took up stones to stone him. Jesus' teachings only convinced the 
meek. ("The Spirit of the Lord hath anointed me to preach good 
tidings to the meek."— Isa. 61:1.) 

Referring again to the saying of Jesus (John 6:62), "What and if 
ye shall see the Son of man ascend up where he was before?" 
and comparing it with Mark's statement (chap. 16:19), "He was 
received up into heaven and sat on the right hand of God, " we 
can only conclude that before his advent to earth he occupied the 
right hand (or chief position) on the heavenly or spiritual plane; 
not the Father's position, but the chief position at the Father's 
right hand— right hand signifying the chief place of favor and 
power. But the right hand position before his advent to earth was 
not so exalted as his present position at the right hand of 
Jehovah; for because of his humiliation and obedience even unto 
death "God hath highly exalted him" (Phil. 2:9), and given 
additional honors and glory; and those honors shall magnify and 
multiply with the revolving ages. 

Again, Jesus had been explaining the truth to Nicodemus, but 
Nicodemus was slow to believe, and Jesus by way of reproof 
remarked, "If I have told you earthly things and ye believed not, 
how shall you believe if I tell you heavenly things?" Then he 
intimates that no one else could teach him those heavenly 
things; for "No man hath ascended up to heaven, but he that 
came down from heaven, even the Son of Man",* consequently 
no one else knew the heavenly things. Then Jesus proceeded to 
explain that "God so loved the world as to give his only begotten 
Son" (a son on that higher plane before he was sent) to redeem 
men (John 3:12-17). 

If Jesus had been conceived and born in the usual way, that is, in 
sin, even as others, we must conclude either that he was an 
impostor who sought to delude his followers into thinking him 
some great one, or else conclude with the Jews that he had a 
devil and was mad (insane). But in him was neither guile 
(deceit) nor any other sin. Therefore, with confidence, we mark 
and weigh his words when again we hear him say (Matt. 1 1 :27), 
"No man knoweth the Son but the Father, neither knoweth any 
man the Father save the Son, and he to whomsoever the Son will 
reveal him. " 

Strange language! Did not the disciples know Jesus as a man? 
Yes, but as we have seen, they understood not the secret of his 
wonderful being-his pre-human 

R446 : page 6 

glory and the mystery of his incarnation. Jesus was just 
beginning to reveal himself to them as they were able to receive 
the truth. And he had yet many things to tell them which they 
were not then able to bear, but which the promised Spirit 
through the Word has since made plain. Whence that intimate 
knowledge of the Father which he here claimed? We find 



answer in the texts we have just considered. But look again and 
we shall find further testimony. (The same knowledge is alluded 
to by the Prophet Isaiah, chap. 53:11, "By his knowledge shall 
my righteous servant justify many.") 



*The oldest and most authentic Greek MSS., (Sinaitic and 
Vatican) omit, with evident propriety, the words "which is in 
heaven" after this text. 



Turning to Prov. 8:22-30, we find that this same Jesus whom 
Isaiah calls "The Wonderful, Counsellor," etc. (the same being, 
though known by many names,) Solomon speaks of as Wisdom 
personified, saying: "Jehovah possessed me in the beginning of 
his way, before his works of old. I was set up from everlasting, 
from the beginning, or ever the earth was. When there were no 
depths, I was brought forth; when there were no fountains 
abounding with water. Before the mountains were settled, before 
the hills was I brought forth; while as yet he had not made the 
earth, nor the fields, nor the highest part of the dust of the world. 
When he prepared the heavens I was there: when he set a 
compass upon the face of the depth: when he established the 
clouds above; when he strengthened the fountains of the deep: 
when he gave to the sea his decree, that the waters should not 
pass his commandment; when he appointed the foundations of 
the earth; then I was by him, as one brought up with him; and I 
was daily his delight, rejoicing always before him." Would any 
inquire- of whom born? Let the Psalmist answer, "From the 
womb of the morning" (Psa. 110:3). 

In what perfect accord is this with the statements of John 1:1-18, 
(See Dec. issue "Consider him"-read it) which not only shows 
his intimate acquaintance with Jehovah and knowledge of his 
plans, but exhibits him as his honored agent in their 
accomplishment. 

When we consider the length of time that must have elapsed 
during the creation of the material universe (See art. "The 
Creative Week, " in a former issue —read) we may have some 
idea of our Lord's intimate and long acquaintance with Jehovah 
and his plans. No marvel, then, that Jesus said, "No man 
knoweth the Son but the Father; neither knoweth any man the 
Father save the Son. " And again, "O righteous Father, the world 
hath not known thee but I have known thee." (John 17:25.) 

The key to his knowledge of heavenly things is furnished us in 
John 3:31,32. "He that cometh from above is above all: he that is 
of the earth is earthly and speaketh of the earth; he that cometh 
from heaven is above all. And what he hath seen and heard, that 
he testifieth. " No wonder that some said, "Whence hath this man 
this wisdom." It was his knowledge of heavenly things, as well 



as his faith in the Father's promise, which enabled him to 
overcome the world and present an acceptable sacrifice for our 
sins. As it was written, "By his knowledge shall my righteous 
servant justify many. " 

"O that all of God's dear children would be more earnest in 
studying the Scriptures, for, said Jesus, "These are they which 
testify of me. " (John 5:39.) As we are able to bear it, the glories 
of Father and Son, and our promised glory through them, will be 
made very clear to us. "He (the Son) was in the world, and the 
world was made by him, and the world knew him not," and still 
does not know him. Only those who humbly walk by faith in the 
light of the sure word will know him, until his glory and power 
shall be revealed, so that all flesh may see it together. 

Very soon we know that his power shall be universally felt, and 
the Psalmist intimates that his power, displayed in restoring and 
perfecting all things, will at least equal his power, as Jehovah's 
agent, in creating them. "Thou hast the dew (freshness, vigor) of 
thy youth. "(Psa. 110:3.) 

With all this united testimony of the Holy Scriptures before us, 
What child of God could longer doubt the pre-human existence 
and glory of our blessed Lord, or the sincerity of his own prayer, 
"Father, glorify thou me with the glory I had with thee before 
the world was?" 

In no other way can we understand how "He was rich, yet for 
our sakes became poor, that we through his poverty might be 
rich." (2 Cor. 8:9.) As a man he had none of this world's goods. 
True, he was rich in wisdom, grace and understanding; but did 
giving these make him poor? Did he become poor in wisdom or 
grace for us? By no means. No, Jesus and the Apostles tell us of 
the glory he had with the Father before the world was. There 
was the wealth which he left— humbling himself and taking the 
form of a servant, etc., (Phil. 2:7) that we through that real 
poverty might become rich. 

In no other way can we understand Jesus to be the Alpha and 
Omega, the beginning and the end, the first and the last, as he 
claims in his revelation to John, (Rev. 1:8; 3:14; 21:6; 22:13) 
than as the Scriptures harmoniously teach, that as Jehovah's 
agent he is the beginner and finisher of the wondrous plan, 
though not its author. In a word, he was the only direct creation 
of Jehovah, all other creations being through him as his agent or 
representative; as we read: "To us there is but one God —the 
Father-of whom are all things and we in him: and one Lord- 
Jesus Christ-by whom are all things and we by him." (1 Cor. 
8:6.) 

"He is the first-born of every creature; [born before all creation] 
for by him were all things created that are in heaven and that are 
in earth, visible and invisible, whether they be thrones or 
principalities or powers; all things were created by him and for 



him: and he is before all things and by him all things consist. 
And [he is also the first to partake of the divine nature,] he is the 
head of the church, who is the beginning, the first born from the 
dead-that in all things he might have the pre-eminence. " (Col. 
1:15-18.) 

Bride of the Lamb, here view your Lord, 

His glory's veiled to other eyes than thine; 

For other ears— came not the word; 

They'll know, when in his glory thou shalt shine. 

MRS. C. T. RUSSELL. 



R446 : page 6 

A FORMER PASTOR'S LETTER. 

C. L. CONNELL, 

Townsendville, N.Y. 

Dear Brother: Your note, stating that you and the Church of 
which you are the pastor, desire me to write to you, is at hand. 
Not doubting the general interest of yourself and those for 
whom you speak, in the welfare of a former pastor whose 
relations were mutually of the most amicable kind, I still 
suppose that it is particularly on account of my having 
withdrawn from the ministry and membership in the M.E. 
Church that you desire to hear. To those who listened to my 
preaching during my pastorate at Townsendville, it is 
unnecessary to state that I was at the time a Methodist. My 
notions of the teachings of Scripture were gained while yet a 
child. They were taught me by Methodist parents, in Methodist 
Sunday-schools, from Methodist pulpits. 

I find that years before I was capable of forming for myself 
intelligent opinions concerning even the general scope of 
Scripture teaching, they had already been moulded, and I had 
unquestioningly accepted the opinions of others and made them 
my own. I am now disposed to believe, however, that it was 
with some degree of mental reservation that I accepted some of 
the doctrines of orthodoxy. How else could I, while professing 
to believe in endless torment for the unrepentant, associate with 
them, accept their many kindnesses, and speak to them from the 
pulpit on themes often tending to divert their attention from, 
rather than attract it toward, so horrible a fate. I believe, 
however, that by the churches I served I was adjudged faithful to 
my duties; and though coming short of my own model of what a 
minister of Christ should be, I have the happy consciousness of 
having ordinarily walked up to the degree of light I possessed. 
To relate my varied and peculiar experiences after resigning my 
pastorate at Townsendville, would transcend the limits of an 
ordinary letter, and perhaps would be without interest to those 



for whom I write. Suffice it to say, that after about two years of 
such experiences, there fell into my hands, providentially as it 
seems to me, a publication which was the means of a decided 
change in my understanding of much of God's Word; a change, 
however, which led me to much more exalted views of the 
character of God, and served to harmonize many passages in his 
Word, which before appeared either unmeaning or 
contradictory. 

Though disposed to look with much suspicion on all that cast a 
doubt on orthodox teachings, I nevertheless found them so 
fatally assailed by God's own Word, that my prejudices one by 
one yielded, and the foundation, having given way, the 
superstructure crumbled and lay in a mass of ruins at my feet. 
You are now ready to ask, which of these doctrines appear to me 
to be out of harmony with the teaching of the Word. The present 
opportunity will allow me to speak of but few of these, and I 
will select such as I trust will appear plain to you. Orthodoxy 
teaches that the present life irrevocably determines the future 
condition of every human being. Though it is nowhere stated in 
Scripture that there is not for any a probation after this life, it is 

R447 : page 6 

preached and enforced much more vigorously than many things 
which the Bible does affirm. 

If it be true, as preached, that there will be no probation after 
this life, then surely much the larger part of the human family 
never have a probation. No person can be said to have a 
probation until made acquainted with that for which he is to be 
held accountable. Besides, if there be no future probation, many 
passages of the sacred Word, are to me unmeaning; nay, more, 
are positively contradictory. Please notice Luke 2:10: "Behold I 
bring you good tidings of GREAT JOY, which shall be to ALL 
PEOPLE." 

We are all aware that a large majority of the PEOPLE who have 
lived and died, even since these words were uttered, never heard 
of the event here referred to. In what sense, therefore, has it been 
GREAT JOY to them? What possible advantage can they have 
derived from it? 

Again, in John 1:9, it is stated of Jesus, "That was the true light 
which lighteth EVERY MAN that cometh into the world." How, 
permit me to ask, has he lighted those millions of the race who 
never heard of him? How can this be true, unless there is to be a 
trial for them in the future in which this light shall be received? 
Again, in 1 Tim. 2:6, it is stated that Christ Jesus gave himself a 
ransom for ALL, to be testified in DUE TIME. Now, we all 
know, that it has not yet been testified to ALL. 



But, if this Scripture be true, it will be; so we can reach no other 
conclusion than that the DUE TIME-God's DUE TIME-for 
much the larger part of the 

R447 : page 7 

human family to receive this testimony will be FUTURE. 

I might cite many other passages that are susceptible of a 
rational interpretation only in this light, but surely they will 
occur to your minds. 

But, you may ask, why is it not taught in the Scripture, if there is 
to be an opportunity for those who have never heard of him of 
whom it is declared, "There is no other name given under 
heaven, among men whereby we must be saved?" To this I 
answer, it is so taught, and not in a single text merely, but in 
many Scriptures. Before referring you to such teachings, 
however, permit me the remark, that the doctrine of a future 
probation for the world is not more strange to nominal 
Christianity to-day than was that of a salvation for the Gentiles 
to the Jewish Church at Christ's first coming. In illustrating my 
position, I will call attention to a single instance from Scripture; 
not because it does not contain others, but because the limits 
prescribed me will not permit their notice. This one instance, 
however, will be sufficient, I trust, to answer every reasonable 
objection. 

We will select what is usually regarded as the most marked 
illustration of Divine wrath, viz.: the Sodomites. Now, if we can 
show from the plain statements of God's Word that these people 
are to come back to life, in order that they may have an 
opportunity of having it testified to them that Jesus Christ gave 
himself a ransom for all, of believing this testimony if they will, 
and of receiving the benefits of belief, viz.: justification: if we 
make this plain, then we think the case of the others will appear, 
at least, very hopeful. But, first, let us learn from the Great 
Teacher, who "knew what was in man, " what he thought of 
these Sodomites. 

In his preaching he compared them with the Jews, and 
particularly with the people of favored Capernaum (Matt. 
1 1 :23,24.) Jesus here says, "If the mighty works which have 
been done in thee, had been done in Sodom, it would have 
remained until this day. But I say unto you that it shall be more 
tolerable for the land of Sodom in the day of judgment than for 
you." 

Thus we see that it was for want of light that these people were 
destroyed. We see also that Jesus teaches a time of retribution- 
future- which shall be tolerable for ALL, even for the people of 
CAPERNAUM, who rejected Jesus and his miracles; and yet 
MORE TOLERABLE for the SODOMITES that perished in 
ignorance. Are we not all ready to say, this is surely, as we have 



a right to suppose God would deal, with those to whom in their 
lifetime he had never given light and knowledge? 

Now, turn if you please to the prophet Ezekiel, 16th chapter, and 
see that God is teaching the Jews of their final restoration to the 
"land of promise," as he had long before promised to Abraham. 

Please bear in mind that the prophet is writing about 1 ,000 years 
after the destruction of this people, and that Jesus says (Luke 
17:29), "It rained fire and brimstone from heaven and destroyed 
them ALL. " Notice now, that in the 46th verse the prophet refers 
both to the people of Samaria and to those of Sodom, and in the 
53d and 55th verses plainly states that these people who were 
ALL destroyed SHALL RETURN to their FORMER ESTATE. 
In the 60th and 61st verses it is again stated that God will 
establish with Israel an everlasting covenant, and that he will 
give to her Samaria and Sodom for daughters (that she may 
instruct them and bring them into harmony with God's plans). 
Thus we see that the promised blessing to Israel is not alone for 
herself, but that she may be God's agency in extending light and 
knowledge to "ALL PEOPLE." 

How well this comports with Peter's words (Acts 3:21), in which 
he declares the "times of restitution of all things, God hath 
spoken by the mouth of all his holy prophets since the world 
began. " A careful study of these holy prophets can scarcely fail 
to discover this glorious doctrine of a restitution of all things 
interwoven in all their writings. We are able in this light to 
comprehend John's definition of God's character-(l John 4:8) - 
"God is love. " Is it not notably the case that the fear of future 
torment is the principal incentive held out to induce men to 
come to God? John says, however, that-"He that loveth not 
knoweth not God." 

Another teaching of the nominal Church, which I believe to be 
at variance with the teaching of the Word is, that all believers 
are to be of the body or Bride of Christ. The Bible teaches that 
the result of belief is justification to that condition which Adam 
forfeited by his disobedience. He forfeited human perfection; 
moral-mental— physical. Belief in the atonement is the one 
condition to its final recovery. The conditions to the high calling 
of God in Christ Jesus (Phil. 3:14); the holy calling (2 Tim. 1 :9); 
the heavenly calling (Heb. 3:1), are far different. These require 
not only justification, but that their justified human nature shall 
be presented to God a living sacrifice-conditions which never 
were required until the narrow way to life was opened up by 
Jesus Christ (Heb. 10:20; Matt. 7:14). Those who follow Jesus' 
footsteps in this narrow way are promised immortality "For as 
the Father hath life in himself, so hath he given to the Son to 
have life in himself" (John 5:26); and we (his body) shall be like 
him (1 John 3:2), spiritual beings, no longer human, but 
partakers of the Divine nature. 



By rejecting the Bible doctrine of a future probation-after the 
dead shall have heard the voice of the Son of God and come 
forth, as illustrated in the case of Lazarus, the widow's son and 
others- by rejecting this and other Bible teachings, the nominal 
Church has been thrown into confusion and led into many 
errors. 

That this confusion and these errors have largely contributed 
toward bringing about a rapid increase of infidelity, both within 
and without her own pale, I firmly believe. What is the spiritual 
condition of the Church to-day? Where are the wonderful 
revivals of former years? Alas, they exist only in name, or are 
the result of the efforts of a few professional revivalists. The 
barriers that formerly separated between the Church and the 
world are mostly swept away, and the man of fair worldly 
prospects, with whom she refuses to share all her privileges, 
must fall below the world's standard of morality. 

These, dear brethren, are some of the causes which led me to 
sever a connection, which I once so highly prized, and to accept 
doctrines which, though they may bring reproach and obloquy, I 
believe to rest on the foundation of the Prophets and Apostles, 
Jesus Christ himself being the chief corner stone. 

Commending you to God, who is able to make all grace abound 
toward you, and trusting that this letter may lead you to a more 
careful study of His Word, which only is able to make you wise 
unto salvation, and to trust less in human creeds and traditions, I 
remain, 

Your servant, for Christ's sake. 

S. T. TACKABURY. 

Fostoria, Ohio, Feb. 6th, 1883. 



R447 : page 7 

"THE WORLD'S HOPE." 

An exchange by this name comes to our table. Its hope for the 
world is very much confused. It falls into the error of supposing 
that a perfected human nature would be a "Divine nature," and 
evidently does not see that the "Divine nature" is higher than the 
"nature of angels," though both are spiritual. It seems blinded by 
its theories to all differences of nature among spiritual beings. 

From this false premise it gets into a terrible confusion relative 
to man— his past and future condition. It fears to say, as the 
Scriptures teach, that Adam was perfect, lacking experience, 
because this would prove that a perfect man could never become 
more than a perfect man-could not increase in perfection by 
becoming a spiritual being, any more than would the perfecting 
of a dog cause him to become a man. Such conclusions it cannot 



reach, simple and logical though they be, because it has a theory 
that a perfect human nature is a 

R448 : page 7 

spiritual nature, which is a divine nature -the absurdity of which 
needs scarcely to be mentioned. If a human nature is a spiritual 
nature, why does Scripture mention them as distinct and 
separate? 

Its conglomerate theory seems to be, as nearly as we can arrive 
at it by its illogical deductions— that God made men bad,— evil,— 
imperfect,— about as all are now; and that he fettered man with 
this evil nature, in order that he might develop strength by 
breaking his own chains, freeing himself. And this is really its 
hope for the world-mat each individual (the devil not excepted) 
will eventually succeed in breaking the chains in which God had 
fettered him, and that finally all will unite around the throne in 
heaven as partakers of the perfect (human-spiritual-divine- 
which?) nature. 

In this theory there is no need of a Savior to redeem or ransom 
men. No, each must fight his own way through,— or, as this 
paper expresses it, each must destroy the enmity for himself. 
According to this unscriptural theory, Jesus was a benefit to men 
only by setting a good example as a pattern. But, tell us, Why 
would not the good example of Abel, or Enoch, or Isaiah, or 
Jeremiah have been equally forcible? These were noble, self- 
denying heroes for truth, and suffered even to being stoned and 
sawn asunder. Their examples of how to live and how to die, for 
truth and righteousness, were good. 

But we need not dwell on the inconsistencies of such a theory; it 
must be apparent to all familiar with Scripture, that such a 
theory gives the lie to the teachings of the Apostles relative to 
the introduction of the present condition of sin, imperfection and 
death. They teach that "by one man's disobedience many (all) 
were made sinners," and that death and misery is the result, and 
not that it is the result of God's having imperfectly done his 
work in creating man. In harmony with this, too, is the Apostle's 
statement, that Jesus by his death destroyed the enmity (curse) 
for all who had been cursed in the first man's disobedience. He 
was "made a curse (he suffered as an accursed one) for us" (Gal. 
3:13. See Rom. 5:17-19). 

Our object in calling attention to this contemporary is, that we 
wish to awaken and put on their guard, any of its readers whom 
we may reach, against its teachings on the fundamental 
doctrines of our Christian religion, as pointed out in our last 
issue under headings- "Your building," and "On what are you 
building?" 

This paper denies and ignores the very basis of true hope for the 
Church or the world- viz.: The Ransom-our being "bought with 



a price." It claims that the Adamic race needed no ransom. This, 
as we have heretofore shown, is the impending avalanche of 
unbelief, denying that the Lord bought them (2 Pet. 2:1). This is 
the rock which Christendom is even now striking against and 
being broken in pieces. (Matt. 21:44) 

If this contemporary plainly stated itself as numbers of others 
do, we should have no special need to single it out among others 
for criticism. But it does not. It covertly attempts to steal the 
hearts of God's children and engraft this "damnable heresy" (2 
Pet. 2:1) upon their minds, by quoting freely enough of the 
passages which contain the words "bought with a price," 
"redeemed," "ransom," etc., disclaiming, without attempting to 
disprove their meaning, or to deny their genuineness. 

It insinuates and argues in such a way as to rob these words of 
their correct import in the mind of those who possess no English 
dictionary, or are too careless to use it; or who presume, that the 
English words may have a different significance from the Greek 
ones which the Apostles used, but which they do not understand. 

We have heretofore shown that the Greek words rendered 
"bought," "ransom," "redeem," etc., in referring to the work of 
Jesus for men, are no less pointed, but, if possible, more so than 
their English equivalents. So far, then, from being an exponent 
of the world's hope, or the church's either, our contemporary is 
being used by the adversary in a covert, and therefore all the 
more dangerous way, to undermine the only hope held out for 
the world in Scripture-the ransom. 

To put this matter fairly before its readers, (to most of whom we 
send a copy of this issue) we shall propose to it the same 
questions which in our last we propounded to the Day Star, and 
which it has not answered-probably because it did not wish so 
plainly to show its real belief. We are well aware that neither of 
these contemporaries will relish these questions. 

We have tried to so state them that any attempt to dodge the real 
issue, will, we hope, be so apparent as to attract the attention of 
any who might be inclined to think our criticisms too severe. 

The questions are as follows:— 

(1) Why did Jesus die? 

(2) How does it affect our sins? 

(3) How did he put away sin by the sacrifice of himself? 

(4) In what way did he give "himself a ransom (Greek, 
antilutron— an equivalent price) for all?" 

(5) In what way was he a "propitiation (satisfaction) for our 
sins?" 

(6) In what sense were we "bought with a price?" 



Now, fair warning; if our contemporaries do not answer these 
queries fully and squarely, it can only be construed as moral 
cowardice, and certainly will substantiate our claim that they are 
dealing underhandedly with their readers, and "handling the 
word of God deceitfully." (2 Cor. 4:2) The questions at issue are 
not trivial-not such as brethren might honestly differ on; for 
they are the very foundation of Christianity, without which the 
whole doctrinal structure reared by the Apostles falls. 

But let it be remembered, that we have nothing but kindly 
personal feelings toward the Editors of these two papers; with 
both of whom we are on intimate and friendly terms. It is error 
and falsity which we oppose, not men. This is true of Mr. 
Ingersoll also. Personally, we esteem him a polished gentleman, 
while we cannot but gainsay his infidel teachings. We take the 
side of inspired record as against every phase of infidelity; but 
we cannot but admire most, those opponents who honestly 
differ, and honestly state their differences, instead of using a 
Scriptural form of words and denying the power and meaning 
thereof. 



R448 : page 7 

DID PAUL MISQUOTE? 

A contemporary, whose editor considers himself as much 
inspired as Jesus and the Apostles, points us to a misquotation of 
prophecy by Paul as a proof of his unreliability. 

The claim is, that Heb. 1 : 10 is a misquotation of Ps. 102:23-27. 
Heb. 1:10-12 reads, "Thou, Lord, in the beginning hast laid the 
foundation of the earth, and the heavens are the works of thy 
hands. They shall perish, but thou remainest; and they all shall 
wax old as doth a garment, and as a vesture shalt thou fold them 
up, and they shall be changed: but thou art the same, and thy 
years shall not fail." Paul quotes these words from the Psalms, 
with others, to prove that Jesus was not only superior to other 
men, but higher than angels also. 

Our contemporary has recently been employed in attempting to 
prove that Jesus was no more than any other man, and, as the 
Jews had said, the son of Joseph. Of course, if our contemporary 
is right, Matthew and Luke and Paul and all the Apostles were 
wrong. If Joseph was his father, he of course had no pre-human 
existence, and Jesus' reference to having had glory with the 
Father before the world was, was so much untruth and 
deception. Therefore, it well suits our contemporary's purposes 
to try to prove that Paul was a blunderer, no more inspired and 
not nearly as smart as our contemporary, for it is sure it has 
found one of Paul's "mistakes" in quoting. It generously says 
that Paul got most of the quotations correct, but thinks he 



needed its superior wisdom to settle the above quotation 
properly. 

This is an important point. If Paul made "mistakes," let us know 
of them, 

R448 : page 8 

for, of all the Apostles, he expresses most pointedly all our 
hopes concerning the future glory and reign with Christ. But if 
we find Paul in error, let us set it down that he was either a 
deceiver or a deceived man himself when he tells us that he 
spoke by God's authority. In either case all his teachings should 
be cast aside as unworthy of our study or faith. If his statements 
are untrue on one point, it must be that he is uninspired; and, if 
so, he is unworthy of being quoted as authority on any subject. 
But if, on the other hand, we find Paul right and our 
contemporary wrong, then let our contemporary give up its 
claim of superior ability and discernment over Paul, and let it 
admit that it is not inspired, as he was, to express the truth. And, 
in that event, let it also admit that Jesus had a pre-human 
existence, at which time he was Jehovah's honored agent by 
whom he "laid the foundations of the earth." 

The argument is that Psalm 102:19-27 refers to Jehovah as the 
one who laid the foundations of the earth, etc., and does not 
refer to Jesus at all. Let us look and we will see that it does 
apply to Jesus, and that the Apostle was correct in his 
application of the statement. We quote Psalm 102:19-27, 
punctuating to give proper sense. * 



*It should be borne in mind that punctuation is a modern 
invention, and not inspired. The Scriptures were previously 
without any punctuation. The punctuation is manifestly wrong in 
several places. The above is one instance. 



R449 : page 8 

"For he hath looked down from the height of his sanctuary; 
from heaven did Jehovah behold the earth. To hear the groaning 
of the prisoner, to loose those that are appointed to death: To 
declare the name of Jehovah in Zion and his praise in Jerusalem, 
when the people are gathered together and the kingdoms to 
serve Jehovah. [Now Jesus is represented as speaking at the time 
of crucifixion.] He weakened my strength in the way, He 
shortened my days. I said, O my God, take me not away in the 
midst of my days. [Hear Jehovah's answer to that heart prayer.] 
Thy years are throughout all generations. Of old thou hast laid 
the foundations of the earth, and the heavens are the work of thy 
hands; they shall perish, but thou shalt endure; yea, all of them 
shall wax old like a garment: As a vesture shalt thou change 



them, and they shall be changed; but thou art the same, and thy 
years shall have no end. " 

Paul is correct; we will stand by his exegesis. 
R449 : page 8 

THE PRIVILEGE AND 
BLESSEDNESS OF GIVING. 

The provision of the gospel, that is, the catalogue of blessings 
enumerated in the "good news" is so extensive, that the 
partakers of them, if not somewhat cautious, are likely to 
overlook some of the best things, and so deprive themselves of 
some advantages which they might otherwise enjoy. 

Another way in which we lose rich blessings is through the error 
of judging (weighing and measuring) them according to worldly 
standards. 

The position of those "of this way," those who, by "searching 
the Scriptures daily," have found that "these things are so," is so 
changed from what it was not very long ago, that they have not 
always, perhaps, comprehended the situation, and so have not 
perfectly adapted themselves to circumstances. 

The calls upon us for pecuniary aid, when attached to societies 
having a salaried ministry and costly services, were so 
extensive, and sometimes so burdensome (Matt. 23:4), that 
when the burden was removed, there was a tendency to run to 
the other extreme, and carry no burden at all, whereas we should 
not forget that we are still to "bear one another's burdens, and so 
fulfill the law of Christ." 

The fact that our public services are conducted, and our 
assemblies convened and dismissed without any collections to 
defray expenses, may have caused some to conclude, without 
much thought upon the subject, that there are no expenses, but a 
little thought will at once dispel such a conclusion and show that 
some are bearing so much pecuniary burden, for the sake of 
others, that their financial sinews are shrinking from over- work 
and exhaustion, and thus their usefulness is impaired; and not 
only so, but those who have not been conscious of the 
surroundings and have not fully taken in the situation, have been 
losers from lack of exercise in that direction. 

It has been our lot to be so situated during a good portion of the 
last three years, as to become somewhat acquainted with the 
working of some parts of "this body," and so have come to the 
conclusion that very likely many of the individuals who make 
up the members of this body would, if their attention were called 
to it, cheerfully contribute that which would be for the growth 
and perfection of the whole, which is "knit together in love" 



(Col. 2:2,19). When we consider the glory and extent of the 
blessings which the great Head of the Church has wrought out 
for the world, and then remember that we are now walking by 
faith and not by sight, it is not hard to fully concur with the 
statement made by the Spirit through Paul, that it is more 
blessed to give than to receive. (Acts 20:35). It is a blessed truth 
that the entire employment of the true Church, "which is his 
body," may be summarized in the word giving. 

When the glorious import of the Good News comes to be 
understood and fully comprehended, and we accept of the 
conditions of the "high calling," and receive the "adoption of 
sons," we then begin our everlasting, blessed and eternal 
employment of giving. Having given ourselves freely and fully, 
we do not find it hard to give everything else that we have, 
following the example of him who gave himself for us, and of 
his Father who gave the Son, and will "with him also freely give 
us all things." In fact it is our glory to give, and we shall never 
be impoverished while the Almighty God is pouring into the 
vessel from which we are taking out. The princely endowment 
of his body, the Church, is such, that its grandeur and glory are 
manifested chiefly, if not wholly, through its munificence. Let 
us, then, consider a few thoughts bearing upon this subject 
which are important at this time. 

We notice from the statement made in the last WATCH 
TOWER, that the expenditures of the last year have overrun the 
receipts well toward one-half, which, it is fair to suppose, would 
not have been the case if the brethren generally had been fully 
aware of the needs of the "Tract Fund. " We were much 
surprised at the statement furnished; for, knowing some things 
in connection with the publishing department, we had supposed 
the expenditures must be considerably more, and also that the 
receipts would have been proportionate. 

As it has been brought to our notice thus in the Jan. number, it is 
right to expect that the deficiency will not long exist; but lest we 
might, in the multiplicity of our cares and other thoughts, forget 
it, it will be well for us to write upon our memory some 
scriptural reasons for giving, together with a few thoughts 
naturally growing out of them. "Freely ye have received, freely 
give." (Matt. 10:8). This was said to those who were sent out to 
"the lost sheep of the house of Israel, " and referred to the gift of 
healing, etc., which had been imparted freely to them, and which 
they were to freely use for the good of their fellowmen; but, on 
the other hand, they were told to make no provision for their 
own physical necessities; (9th and 10th verses) showing, we 
think, that they were expected to be so thoroughly engaged in 
that work, together with proclaiming "the kingdom of heaven is 
at hand," that they would not have time to "labor for the meat 
that perishes," and would be provided with what their physical 
needs required by those to whom they ministered. This 



illustrates the present condition of things; we are again in the 
harvest time; theirs was the harvest of the Jewish age, ours the 
harvest of the gospel age. 

Some of our brethren are giving their whole time and available 
means to the work, some traveling and preaching the good news, 
some distributing tracts and papers, and some superintending the 
publication of papers and tracts, but all for the same purpose, 
"for the edifying of the body of Christ," which is an 
indispensable work, especially at this time. Surely we will not 
let it lack efficiency for want of pecuniary aid. We have a 
precedent for helping our preaching brethren on their way, in the 
example of Paul, who expected to be brought on his way by the 
brethren at Rome. (Rom. 15:24). Now, we would like to make a 
suggestion which was suggested to us while reading Luke 11:7- 
9, and Luke 10:7; it is the propriety of our traveling (teaching 
and lecturing) brethren laying aside all reserve and asking our 
brethren where they are ministering (serving) for such things as 
they need, and for those others needing where they minister in 
other places. We think the brethren served would be pleased to 
have them do so, and we think their needs would be promptly 
supplied; for it would be understood that it is not asking alms- 
"for the laborer is worthy of his hire"— and if the laborer is not 
hired, if the labor is desired and is accepted, it is equivalent to 
hire. 

Any one who is teaching by accommodation of the brethren, 
would not, in our opinion, be infringing upon any rule of 
courtesy if he should, in an unobtrusive manner, make his needs 
known. 

Some, perhaps, might be found who would think that because 
Paul labored sometimes with "his own hands" to supply his 
needs and those who were with him, our preaching brethren 
might do the same. No doubt that every one of these teachers or 
preachers would be quite as willing to labor with hands as head, 
if the will of the Lord was so, but the time, of course, would 
have to be taken from that which otherwise would be filled with 
gospel work; so, to the brethren visited, whether by person or 
papers and books, it would prove an actual loss. 

We think Paul refers to this fact (of "laboring with his own 
hands") as a gentle reminder that he had found it necessary to do 
so, else his needs would have been unprovided for, thus showing 
their duty. 

Whether they felt any compunction or not for laying this 
necessity upon him, and realized the loss which they had thus 
sustained, they doubtless felt no less sad on account of the 
mention of it in connection with the thought that they should 
"see his face no more," and it might have had something to do 
with their weeping as they "fell upon his neck and kissed him. " 
(Acts 20:34,37). 



But how can the requirements of the laborers and the expenses 
of publications be met? For "not many mighty" (nor rich), "not 
many noble are called," and "God hath chosen the poor of this 
world, rich in faith. " How can better directions be given in 
answer to the last question than are given in the 16th chap, of 1 
Cor., 2d verse? "Upon the first day of the week let every one of 
you lay by him in store, as God has prospered him, that there be 
no gatherings (collections) when I come. " 

In connection with the expenses spoken of, there are the Lord's 
poor, 

R450 : page 8 

who are poorer than we, and who, in connection with the 
ministry of the word, should not be forgotten. How appropriate 
this direction of Paul's to be systematic in the work of giving, 
and systematic in the manner of providing the means to give, 
and systematic as to the time of "laying by the funds for that 
purpose. " 

There are very few so poor as to be unable to contribute 
something which shall help to spread the good news of God's 
plan to save the world; the glad tidings that the works of the 
devil are to be destroyed. If we cannot give much, let us not 
deliberately conclude that we cannot give anything, but let us be 
encouraged with the thought of the value which the Master set 
upon "two mites," if we cannot give more. (Luke 21:2,3,4). 

It is blessed to think that the Lord does not estimate the amount 
we give according to a worldly standard, but according to the 
intent and desire of the giver. 

There is a good lesson and much truth conveyed in the story of 
the wealthy old Scotchman, who, when the contribution box was 
passed, put in what he supposed to be a penny, but which proved 
to be a gold piece of some considerable value; when he had 
made the discovery, but too late to correct it, and wished credit 
for the amount actually put in, the shrewd deacon told him they 
could give him credit for no more than the Lord did, which was 
only for that which he intended to put in. 

Some might be inclined to think that was unfair of the Lord and 
the deacon, but the Lord balances the account by reversing the 
order, and giving credit for more than is put in where the desire 
exceeds the ability. 

The writer's desire is that our minds (his own as well) may be 
refreshed upon this subject, and "stirred up by way of 
remembrance." "If ye know these things, happy are ye if ye do 
them. " If, therefore, ye have been unfaithful in the unrighteous 
mammon, Who will commit to your trust the true riches? (Luke 
16:11). How can we expect to be entrusted with heavenly things 
while we set a higher value on earthly things? To be entrusted 
with treasures that wax not old while we cling with tenacity to 



treasures that decay? We who have been so sumptuously fed, 
both by visitation of the teaching brethren and through the 
medium of the publications, would sadly feel it if those sources 
of supply were cut off and withdrawn from lack of funds to be 
carried forward. 

But we will not anticipate any such thing, feeling sure that the 
bare mention of the matter will quicken us, and cause us to obey 
an injunction which, perhaps through carelessness, had been 
neglected, but which is as imperative as other divine precepts. 
We are persuaded that these suggestions will be carefully 
considered and acted upon, and that all will cheerfully do what 
they can as an evidence of their love of the truth, for "the Lord 
loveth a cheerful giver" (2 Cor. 9:7). "He that giveth, let him do 
it with simplicity (Rom. 12:8). Some additional thoughts upon 
this subject may be had by reading the last short article in "Food 
for Thinking Christians." That the Lord will help us all to see 
the privilege and blessedness of giving is the prayer of the 
writer. 

J. C. SUNDERLIN. 

[We are not beggars-none of God's children should be; and we 
have studiously avoided the "dunning," so common among 
others. Yet, we have felt that some of the saints were in danger 
of losing the blessing above mentioned. When the above article 
from Bro. S. came to hand (unexpectedly to us), we concluded it 
to be expedient for you, as well as providential, and hence 
publish it. But remember that Jehovah is not impoverished, and 
his cause shall not suffer from lack of funds, even though he so 
arrange as to make our assistance seem needful. "He will carry it 
through," and the blessing will be to those who are faithful 
stewards-faithful in little or faithful in much. -ED.] 



R450 : page 8 

PITTSBURGH CHURCH MEETINGS. 

The place of meeting has been changed, and is no longer at 
"Curry Institute Hall," but has removed to the "Grand Army 
Hall," No. 101 Federal St., Allegheny City, just across the river. 
Readers and friends will be warmly welcomed at our new and 
more comfortable hall. Preaching every Lord's day afternoon at 
3 o'clock, and Bible reading at 7:30 P.M. of the same day. 



page 8 

SAMPLE COPIES of the Tower, will be sent to those who 
request them. Order all you can use judiciously. Any new reader 
who desires to have the Tower on trial three months FREE, can 
have it on application. 



THIS ISSUE fairly represents what we design shall be the 
future appearance of the Tower. It is an improvement over every 
former issue. 



R450 : page 1 

VOL. IV. 

PITTSBURGH, PA., MARCH, 1883. 

NO. 8. 



page 1 

ZION'S 

Watch Tower 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S 
PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED MONTHLY AT 

101 Fifth Avenue, Pittsburgh, Pa. 



C. T. RUSSELL, Editor and Publisher. 



The Editor recognizes a responsibility to the Master, relative to 
what shall appear in these columns, which he cannot and does 
not cast aside; yet he should not be understood as endorsing 
every expression of correspondents, or of articles selected from 
other periodicals. 

TERMS OF SUBSCRIPTION. 

TERMS : —Fifty cents a year, postage prepaid. You may send 
paper money to the amount of two dollars, by mail, at our risk. 
Larger amounts may be sent by Drafts, P.O. Money Order, or 
Registered Letter, payable to C. T. RUSSELL. 

FOREIGN TERMS. 

Foreign Postage being higher, our terms to foreign subscribers 
will be 65 cents a year. Please send us no foreign money or 
postage stamps, as we can make no use of them. Remittances 
may be made by Foreign Postal Money Orders. 

TAKE NOTICE. 

This paper will be sent free to any of the Lord's poor who will 
send a card yearly requesting it. Freely we have received and 
freely we would give the truth. "Ho, every one that thirsteth, 
come ye to the waters; and he that hath no money, come ye, buy 
and eat— yea, come, buy wine and milk without money and 



without price. " And you that have it- "Wherefore do ye spend 
money for that which is not bread? and your labor for that which 
satisfieth not? Hearken diligently-and eat ye that which is good, 
and let your soul delight itself in fatness."- ISAIAH 55:1,2. 



R450 : page 1 



THE PASSOVER. 



For some years past it has been our custom to meet on the 
anniversary of the typical "Passover, " to commemorate the real 
Passing over of the Church of the First-Born because of the 
death, the shedding of the blood of the real Paschal Lamb- 
Jesus. 

This we do in compliance with our Lord's request: As often as 
ye do this do it (henceforth) in remembrance of me (the real 
lamb, and your consequent passing over, or justification through 
his blood). 

Reckoned according to Jewish time, Lord's day, April 22d, is the 
Passover, the anniversary of Jesus' death. It will be celebrated by 
the Church here, and, we doubt not, that the twos and threes 
scattered abroad will suitably commemorate it by meeting and 
considering Him, while they use the bread and wine which 
emblemize his broken body and shed blood-the price of our 
ransom -"shed for the remission of sins." 

The subject will be more fully treated in our next issue. 



R450 : page 1 

TESCHENDORF'S NEW TESTAMENT. 

This work is the common version of the New Testament, with 
the various readings of the three oldest Greek MSS. at the foot 
of each page. Its value, in determining the reliability of any 
disputed passage of Scripture, will be recognized at a glance. 
The Sinai tic MS. is beyond all question the very oldest and most 
correct of all MSS. It is the highest authority for the genuineness 
of every passage which it contains, and its comparison with 
others more recently written, shows that while our commonly 
received text is wonderfully free from corruption, it, 
nevertheless, contains many trifling errors, as well as a few 
important interpolations. This work contains as well, a history of 
the finding, etc., of these old MSS. 

As promised, we have made arrangements by which we can 
furnish you with this valuable work at a reduced price. We can 
mail to you, post-paid, a complete copy, in paper covers, on 
receipt of 35 cents-at once. We have written to the foreign 



publishers of a cloth edition, and will be ready to report the price 
of cloth bound in a month or so more. 



R450 : page 1 

VIEW FROM THE TOWER. 

His servants ye are to whom ye render service. (Rom. 6:16.) If a 
man shall say I am a servant of God and a laborer in His 
vineyard, yet, if he be engaged in sowing error, in teaching 
traditions of men, etc., he is really serving the adversary- the 
Devil. 

Thus it was with Saul: He verily thought that he did God service 
in persecuting Christianity, yet, when he came to know better, 
he found that he was one of Satan's foremost servants in 
opposing truth and the Lord and His Church. 

So with Peter; when he began to dissuade Jesus from complete 
sacrifice, saying, "Be it far from thee, Lord," Jesus recognized 
Peter as the agent or servant of Satan, tempting him, and hence 
replied to him, "Get thee behind me, Satan; for thou savorest not 
the things that be of God but those that be of men. " (Matt. 
16:23.) 

So with us: let us remember that not every one that saith, Lord, 
Lord, shall enter the kingdom, but he that doeth the will of my 
Father which is in heaven. How important, then, that we not 
only feel favorable to the cause of truth— the cause of God— but 
that we let our good feelings influence our actions and words, so 
that we shall not merely not oppose truth, but make sure that we 
are servants of truth, else we may be really servants of error. 

Would that all would awake fully to a realization of the 
importance of guarding every little deed of life, and not only 
know that they are busily engaged in the vineyard, but make 
sure that 

R45 1 : page 1 

their labor is such as the Master will approve. Beware, then, that 
Satan does not get possession of your talents, and, under the 
guise of working for Jesus, really use your powers against the 
truth. This is the position of many in the nominal systems, called 
churches, and of many also who have become measurably free 
from them. Do you speak of the unfolding truths of God's 
word?— then seek to have it as pure and free from error as 
possible— only wheat. Do you seek to scatter reading matter to 
give enlightenment?-then be sure as possible that it is clean 
seed- not largely mixed with error; for while truth sown will 
bring forth good fruit, error sown will bring forth very evil fruit. 
To the extent that we sow truth we are God's servants, and to the 
extent we spread error, we are the devil's servants. His servants 



ye are to whom ye render service. Let us keep this in mind— it 
will double our usefulness as servants of God; for, as seen from 
the TOWER, many to-day verily think they do God service, who 
really are opposing God's way, plan and truth; though with Peter 
we might say, "I wot that through ignorance ye did it." (Acts 
3:17.) 

Most of our readers have read the pamphlet issued from this 
office over a year ago, entitled, "The Tabernacle and its 
Teachings"; but reading on this subject is not enough: it requires 
study. If all could see the force and meaning of the typical 
sacrifices for sins, they would be much better able to appreciate 
the anti-typical sacrifices which really put away sin. If all would 
fully equip themselves with the armor of God, they would be 
much better able to withstand all the fiery darts of the adversary, 
and would be in no danger of having their faith in our ransom 
overthrown. 

Let us, then, urge upon all the absolute necessity of devoting 
time to the study of those types, which we are able to understand 
and appreciate, by reason of the light thrown on them by the 
Apostles' writings. All who have not had the "Tabernacle" 
should order it. (It is Free.) And be not content with reading it 
once or twice, but study till you do comprehend the lessons of 
the Tabernacle. You will find that every feature of the glorious 
plan of God is very clearly presented in these Tabernacle types; 
in fact, the minuteness of the portrayal must astonish all. We 
know of no more strengthening and nourishing spiritual food 
than is afforded us in the study of these wonderful pictures. 

Instead of remarking on the condition of the work, we herewith 
present to you more than the usual number of letters from 
various sections, which tend to show the interest and progress of 
the truth better than we could otherwise express it. These are but 
a few of many of similar expression: 



Gold Hill, N.C. 

BRO. RUSSELL:-I am thankful for sample copy of Z.W.T., 
which I received a few days ago. I am a minister of the M.E. 
Church. For years I have believed denominationalism was a 
positive disadvantage to the work of Christ in our own midst, 
much more so in heathen lands. In fact, I cannot see how they 
succeed among them at all with so many advocates of such a 
diversity of creeds. Surely there is a more excellent way. The 
positions you take are certainly tenable; the elucidations of 
Scripture are clear and forcible. I think you have struck the key- 
note, and all the truly pious will hear. Those who like their 
creeds better than they do their Lord, will surely feel and lament. 

Truly yours, 

page 1 



Nicholas, W.Va. 

DEAR FRIENDS :-I write this morning to thank you for your 
part in bringing to me precious words of life and encouragement 
through your publications. Yes, "the truth has become very 
bitter," though exceeding sweet at first. I am utterly alone here, 
having nothing for my portion but God's truth. But a rich portion 
it is, embracing, as it does, a mighty and a perfect Savior, who is 
able and graciously willing to break the bands of slavery and set 
the captive free; yet, as the fires are being kindled around me, I 
feel that I still need encouragement that my faith, under the 
heavy trials, may not grow weak or fail. The prospect is, that 
there will be none with whom I may worship (unless, perhaps, 
my wife), and that my name will be cast out as evil and my 
words as a snare. But the Lord hath comforted me; and I write 
more particularly for your encouragement, that you may the 
more effectually labor in the blessed work of feeding the 
hungry, comforting the depressed, setting free the captive, 
giving light to those sitting in darkness, and saving the 
perishing, by publishing the glad tidings of salvation to all. My 
dear wife is yet in darkness, but I hope that, by the tender 
mercies of God, she, too, may be released from bondage. She 
says it is "getting light. " Let us thank God. 



Rupert, Vt. 

C. T. RUSSELL:-Dear Bro.:-Many thanks for the WATCH 
TOWER. I am among those who, having come out of Babylon, 
(confusion) are trying to proclaim the "glad tidings." Called of 
God to the ministry in my boyhood, studying with that object in 
view, lack of means, failing health, disappointment, years of 
doubt and conflict, constant conviction of duty- "Go, preach the 
word" ringing in my ears day and night-I said, "Lord, I cannot 
preach in connection with sectarian creeds or churches." O, how 
at that point I cried to God for light! and, praise his dear name, 
the light came. Like the breaking of a summer morning, it 
illuminated my soul. The Bible became a new book to me. In the 
light of its truths, I saw God, a being worthy of worship. Then 
came the TOWER and other publications -God sent them— and 
more and more the way of salvation opened to my 
understanding. I had been like a lost child, wandering in the 
forest at night, hearing Father's voice, but not knowing which 
way to go. Now I can better understand why God has thus led 
me. The way has been dark, but morning cometh! With the same 
divine commission, free, thank God, from the mazes of theology 
and sectarian influence, and with a gospel of which I am NOT 
ashamed, how the future glows before me! For the light of 
PRESENT TRUTH, thank God ! thank God ! ! 

Can you furnish me with a chart large enough for use in church 
or lecture-room? 



Have scattered some sample copies of THE TOWER you sent 
me, and can use more in that way. 

Believing that the Master has work for me in the great harvest- 
field of the gospel age, I do desire to work in harmony with him, 
along the line of "present truth. " Should like to become better 
informed regarding your methods of work, etc., for "in union 
there is strength. " 

Yours for Jesus, 



R451 :page 1 

Baltimore, Md. 

DEAR SIR AND BROTHER:-I have carefully read and re-read 
"Food for Thinking Christians," and I have become deeply 
interested in the soundness of your position. I am a "converted 
Jewish teacher," and have been laboring independently among 
my "brethren of the flesh. " I certainly believe that "much good" 
may be done among the people with whom I daily have to do by 
a judicious circulation of such wonderfully clear Bible truth 
among them. Please send me, if convenient, "The Tabernacle 
and its Teachings." I hope soon to introduce publicly these 
teachings among the people, and will earnestly endeavor to 
interest them in these clear and telling facts. 

May God bless your every effort to propagate Bible truths. 

Your brother in Christ, . 

Missionary to the Jews. 

page 1 



Birmingham, England. 

DEAR SIR:-I have just been reading your "Food for Thinking 
Christians," and am delighted to see therein the mysteries of 
God's Word so lucidly explained, as to be clearly understood by 
an average, careful reader. The book was put into my hands last 
winter as I 

page 2 

passed up a main thoroughfare in the above town, on my way 
home from work, and just scanned over and put aside to make 
way for more interesting literature as I then thought. But, the 
other day, having no other book handy, I picked it up and had 
not read two pages before I was convinced it was no ordinary 
book. Indeed, for the last fortnight, I have been absorbed in its 
contents at every spare moment. Seeing your generous offer to 
forward a few, if they can be judiciously disposed of, I would 
request you to kindly forward me a few of this, or "The 



Tabernacle and its Teaching," which I would like to distribute 
among my friends. 

Thanking you for this first one and any others you may send, I 
remain, Yours very gratefully, . 



Hillsboro, Ills. 

DEAR BROTHER:-I have received and read the little work, 
"Food for Thinking Christians." I am perfectly astonished. Can 
it indeed be true? I am trying to read my Bible as I never have 
read it before. I have been a Christian forty-one years, and a 
Baptist all that time. I never heard of such a gospel before. It 
causes my heart to rejoice in gratitude to the great Father for his 
love, with my eyes only partially open. 

Respectfully, 



Goshen, N.Y. 

DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:-I now send you another week's work- 
-lists for the TOWER. The interest of the people here at the 
reading of Z.W.T. is great. I feel like going from county to 
county the coming year, and scattering "God's truth. " As I 
cannot afford to buy a horse, which I much need, I have to go on 
foot; but I am no better to go thus than the Lord was. I meet with 
the best results and the worst together. I have set my face like 
flint to the world, and shall keep on until I reach the prize 
(immortality). I expect every issue of our county paper to have 
some express themselves against the WATCH TOWER; but I 
have looked in vain so far. More speak well of it than I expected 
would. I am trying to get one hundred yearly subscribers here 
soon. I am out of "FOOD," but shall wait until it can be sent me. 
Some here are so much interested with the reading matter that 
they send word by mail to have me call and explain the blessed 
truth more fully. Last night two families met, where they sent 
for me, and when I opened my mouth the Lord filled it with the 
restitution of all things. Night before last I was at 

Bro. 's for the first time. He said he was so glad that 

God's plan was now so plain; that he wished to make my 
acquaintance, and hear from human lips the blessed truths; and 
when the time came to part, he said, O, glory to God, we could 
talk about this until morning and would not get weary. It is good 
news ! To-morrow I have three calls to make upon anxious 
inquirers for the truth. So, you see, I work both day and night. I 
had better tell you how it is with me. I am, or was, a Baptist 
preacher. My name still appears on the list of ministers of their 
Association. But when I got the "Food," I began to read it, and it 
was food; and so I kept on eating, and am never done. My name 
will undoubtedly soon be erased from the Association. My 
brethren begin to lament my fall; but, glory to God, I rejoice in 



my rise. Yes, I am much higher than I ever was. I see God's 
love, and not hatred. Above all you do, Brother Russell, "keep 
little and humble," and to God be all the praise. I pray for you. 
Pray that God will open the way that I can scatter the truth more 
abundantly. With much love and prayer, I am 

Your brother in Christ, 



Yankton, Dakota. 

DEAR BRO.:-"Oh that men would praise the Lord for his 
goodness and for his wonderful works to the children of men!" 
Having been much given to fasting and prayer for divine 
illumination, and for wisdom to more fully understand the 
blessed word, God is wonderfully answering our prayers 
through the Z.W.T. publications. I never shall be able to 
sufficiently praise God for the light we have received. Three 
days ago I received five more "Foods," which are being fed to 
hungry souls, some being sent to Minnesota, Montana, Iowa, 
&c, to those who will prize them, read and distribute to others. 
Some we have heard from are bearing glorious fruit. How 
quickly holy souls receive and believe when they see the 
precious truth of God! How ashamed we are and abased before 
God to think we have dishonored his word all these long years; 
but glory, honor and praise to Him who, in answer to prayer, has 
enlightened our minds with the truth. Our hearts are full of 
praise day and night that it has reached our ears. And now we 
want everybody to know the truth. Let us keep humble and fully 
consecrated. 



New York. 

BRO. C. T. RUSSELL:— I have once before— last year— received 
a number of "the Watch Tower," and a tract, "Food for Thinking 
Christians;" but at that time I could not appreciate the truth and 
cast them away; now I love it, as far as I can see it and know it. 

I had entered the Theological Seminary in this city to prepare 
myself for the ministry; but to-day I make up my mind to leave 
it: I feel constrained now as before, to drop Theology and turn to 
the Word of God alone. I will rather be a simple servant of God 
than a minister, though that has been my ambition since my 
youth. God bless your labors. 

Yours truly, 



New York. 

MY DEAR BROTHER:-You are so overburdened with letters 
that I scarcely know whether I ought to write you at all. I have 
been a regular minister for more than thirty years. Ever since I 



heard Bro. Wm. Miller (I was quite young then) I have been 
deeply interested in the blessed idea, "Our dear Lord will soon 
come again. " Some years ago, before you commenced the 
publication of the WATCH TOWER, I was among those who 
were looking and hoping. And now I want to say my heart is in 
deep and happy sympathy with the doctrines so ably advocated 
in the paper you publish. Though when I came to this place but 
very few here knew or cared anything about these things. I may 
say the most spiritual-minded of my people have come to hold 
the "like precious truth," and I freely teach and preach our 
glorious belief. 

The bundle of the October issue you sent me has been 
distributed to those who seem hungry for the truth. I could easily 
dispose of more than twice as many more to good advantage. 
May God most abundantly bless and reward you ! For the past 
few years I have had a great many more calls than I could 
possibly fill, and often get letters of inquiry to which I can best 
reply by sending some of your papers or tracts. 

Yours in the Master's service, 

R451 : page 2 

Palmyra, 111. 

MR. C. T. RUSSELL:-My Brother in Christ:-I would not have 
you regret that you published so many good tidings that it 
caused you to come out in debt. God will surely provide a way 
out of the difficulty. If you had published less, perhaps I might 
have been one that would have received less. With this I send 
my mite as expressive of the deep gratitude I feel; and if I could 
send the whole amount of the indebtedness, that could not 
express the thankfulness I feel that I have been brought into a 
knowledge of the truth. If you could know how low in the 
slough of despond I was, through sickness and the loss of loved 
friends, and then know the ecstasy of joy I now feel, you could 
then realize the value of this truth to me. I cannot describe to 
you the darkness I was in when I first took up the "Food. " I read 
a little while and then said it could not be true. I laid it aside but 
only to take it up again, and as at last the beauty and symmetry 
of God's plan dawned upon me, I was filled with love and praise 
to him. I have been a professed Christian for many years, but 
now I feel as if I had all my life been wandering through a 
rubbish heap, searching for something I hardly knew what. At 
last I have found it. My treasure that was lost is found, and it is 
free from rubbish. And, as though to make my joy complete, my 
loved companion has also been brought to a knowledge of the 
truth, and, together, we study God's blessed Word and praise His 
name. Our Bible is a new book. Only last night my husband 
said, "Well, if I did not know we had the same old family Bible, 
I should think we had a different translation. " But I could not 
tell you the half if I wrote all day. I can only say, 



"Praise God from whom all blessings flow." 

We carefully distribute and loan all extra papers and tracts we 
receive, and pray that they may fall on good ground and bring 
forth abundantly to the glory of God. May His blessing rest 
continually on you and your work. 



R451 : page 2 



THE ENEMY.--NO. 2. 



We have received some questions relative to statements made 
in an article in the December number under the above heading, 
which it will be a pleasure to answer, that we may remove 
misapprehension, though we had hoped that the pointed 
Scriptures referred to would have been sufficient to meet all 
objections to the position taken. It seems to be thought by some 
that the position taken by us leaves our destiny, and the destiny 
of our children, irrevocably in the hands of the enemy, which, of 
course, would be an awful thought, and as far from the belief of 
the writer as it evidently is from the teachings of the Scriptures. 
Our friends who object to the statement "that he (Satan) is our 
enemy, and that he is the cause of sickness, pain and death, and 
ought always to have the credit (?) of it" (blame of it), say 
nothing about the plain statement in Heb. 2:14, to which we 
referred, and which we think there is no possibility of explaining 
away. 

If he (Satan) "has the power of death," as the Apostle declares, 
no amount of cavil will change it, and we must seek for its 
harmony with other Scriptures without changing it, and must 
conclude, we think, that sickness and pain are also in his power. 
Now, let us briefly ask our friends to carefully re-read the article 
referred to, and compare Scripture with Scripture, bearing in 
mind the following thoughts: The account in Job to which our 
attention has been called, beginning with the first chapter, is a 
statement of a conversation between the Lord and Satan. (Job 
1:7-12.) The writer of the book of Job, whoever he was, tells us 
what the LORD said, what Satan said, and what Job (2nd chap., 
10th verse) 

R452 : page 2 

said. Now, Job evidently knew nothing about the conversation 
between the LORD and Satan, else he would have known that 
Satan was afflicting him, and that God had consented to let 
Satan and the world, through succeeding generations, know of 
his (Job's) integrity and faithfulness. Not knowing of the 
arrangement to prove him, Job attributes it (the evil) to the Lord, 
though in his devotion he is assured it is for good. His three 
friends also attribute it to the LORD, but consider it a judgment 
upon him, while Job claims his justification before the LORD. 



Now, the first thing for us to do, in deciding as to the correctness 
of the position, is to decide as to who afflicted Job. Did not 
Satan ask the Lord to? (1st chap., 1 1th verse.) Did the LORD 
consent to it? Is the 12th verse of the 1st chapter obscure or 
plain when it says, "ALL that he hath is in thy power"? Then in 
the 2d chapter, 4th to the 6th verse, Satan is permitted to lay his 
hand upon Job's person, but, during this transaction, to spare his 
life. Now, the conclusion, and the only one we can arrive at 
from the evidence, is that this whole transaction was for the 
especial purpose of showing the integrity of Job, and of 
displaying to the world his faithfulness to God. The conviction 
was rooted deep in the mind of Job that God was his friend, and 
would in the end protect him, though evil might for a time seem 
to prevail over him. In this Job was right, and did "not charge 
God foolishly." 

We conclude, also, that Satan cannot afflict God's children 
beyond what is the penalty for sin, except by especial 
permission, and that permission will not be given except where 
it will result in greater good to the subject and greater glory to 
God, as was this case with Job. 

But the good result is not of Satan, but of God, who "will not 
suffer us to be tempted above that we are able. " We understand 
these Scriptures, in harmony with others, to teach that the 
LORD, in his general dealings with mankind, has permitted or 
allowed Satan, the adversary, to be the willing medium through 
which the penalty of sin should be meted out; that, while he "has 
the power of death" (Heb. 2:14), it is an under or subordinate 
power which he has grasped as an usurper— just such a power as 
Jefferson Davis had during the Rebellion; that in due time God 
will "destroy him that hath the power of death"; that is, the 
devil, and deliver them who, through fear of death, were all their 
lifetime subject to bondage. 

Then our children shall come again from the land of "the 
enemy." (Jer. 31:16.) "Blessed be the name of the LORD." 

J. C. SUNDERLIN. 



R452 : page 2 

CHRIST SHALL MAKE US FREE. 

GALATIANS 5:1. 

If any class of men in the world are free, it ought to be the 
Christian. 

But that which is freedom to one, is bondage to another, as men 
are bound, some to one thing, and some to another. Is there a 
remedy for this evil, and what is the cause? We are what we are 
by education, being governed to a greater or less degree by our 



surroundings; imbibing both truth and error with equal zeal, 
according to the faith reposed by us in our guides and teachers. 
And while in many instances these divers opinions may not be 
of vital importance, it is a question of truth and error, and where 
two differ, one must be wrong, and sometimes both; we are not 
accountable for having imbibed errors from our teachers, but we 
are accountable for rejecting a truth when it is properly 
presented. 

Dear reader, to what age, or class of men, or code of tenets, have 
you obligated yourself in your religious or irreligious opinions? 
Wisdom did not die with any particular age or class of men. To- 
day we have the same Bible, and with it, revisions by the ablest 
scholars. It is not only our privilege, but absolute duty, to read it; 
not "as through a glass darkly," where all seems mystical and 
uncertain, but by the light of the noon-day sun, which is free as 
the blessed Word itself. No longer is the Bible chained as Luther 
found it; no longer should our conscience or affections be 
chained to any creed, written or unwritten. Who is our master? 
To whom are we bound? Is freedom, then, a myth, a mockery? 
Can we, with an open Bible before us, shift our religious 
responsibilities upon our would-be teacher, and sit dreaming 
under the sound of his monotonous discourse, just as a man will 
buy a through ticket and take passage on a train for a strange 
country, consigning himself wholely to the care of the 
conductor? Is this freedom? Is it "fighting the good fight of 
faith?" Is this you? Wake up. -Investigator. 



R452 : page 2 

NOTE THE DRIFT. 

THE Presbyterian Journal asks: 

"Do the editors of The Independent and the Mirror and any other 
Congregationalist ministers hold the need of a probation in the 
future for those who die in infancy? We Presbyterians believe in 
the salvation of the infant dead, though often charged with the 
contrary view." 

We believe that, if any infants die without having come in this 
life to an age of moral accountability, they will be held to moral 
accountability as soon as they begin to distinguish good from 
evil in the next world. If then they choose good, as we believe 
they will, with the light of eternity upon them, they will be 
saved; if they choose evil, they will be lost. If that is future 
probation, we are willing to have it called so. -The Independent. 

R452 : page 3 



HIS WILL, NOT MINE, BE DONE. 

O thou of little faith! why dost thou fear? 
Didst thou forget that Jesus was so near? 
And hast thou thought that thou must walk alone, 
Forgetting that His arm was round thee thrown? 

Aye, more than this, thou'rt held within His hand, 
And 'twas Himself that hath thy trial planned! 
There was a need be seen by Eye Divine, 
Although, perchance, not visible to thine. 

And wherefore would'st thou see? Thou canst not tell 
If what thy heart contends for would be well; 
Perhaps thy hopes fruition would be vain, 
Or prove a life-long discipline of pain! 

Hast thou not seen in retrospective life, 
That will of God, which caused thee bitterest strife, 
Hath turned to sweetness-while the thing He gave 
To suit thy will, grew darker than the grave? 

There's rest supreme for souls that choose His will; 
A blest security from every ill; 
The things God chooses for us never fail! 
They have their anchorage within the veil. 

-Mrs. H. W. Brown. 



R452 : page 3 

THE THRONE OF DAVID. 

"For unto us a child is born, unto us a son is given; and the 
government shall be upon his shoulder:.... Of the increase of his 
government and peace there shall be no end: upon the throne of 
David and upon his kingdom, to order it and to establish it with 
judgment and with justice, from henceforth even forever."- Isa. 
9:6,7. 

This prophesy seems to be a continuation of that in Isa. 7:14- 
" A virgin shall conceive and bear a son. " And thus we read, 
Matt. 1:21-23; also, in Luke 1:27-35. "Behold, thou shalt 
conceive, and bring forth a son, and shalt call his name Jesus. 
He shall be great, and shall be called the Son of the Highest; and 
the Lord God shall give unto him the throne of his father David: 

R453 : page 3 

and he shall reign over the house of Jacob forever, and of his 
kingdom there shall be no end. " "The Holy Ghost shall come 
upon thee, and the power of the highest shall overshadow thee, 
therefore, also, that holy (sinless-undefiled— pure) thing which 
shall be born of thee shall be called the Son of God. " Peter 
asserts that David knew "That God swore to him, with an oath, 



that of the fruit of his loins he would cause one to sit upon his 
throne." (Acts 2:30.-- Diaglott.) 

Two leading questions are propounded to us on this subject, 
which we will answer in their natural order: 

(1) If Messiah was to be of the fruit of David's loins-of the seed 
of David -the heir of David's throne— was it not needful that he 
should have a human father of the Davidic line? 

We answer, No ! The propounding of this question shows a 
misunderstanding of the laws of generation which any 
physiologist or the most illiterate physician should be able to 
explain. Inheritance and royalty to-day, as always, is reckoned 
through a mother as well as through a father. Thus it was with 
Jesus; his mother was a daughter of David— of the seed and loins 
of David -hence her offspring was not only her son, but through 
her the son of David. 

A good illustration of this principle of inherited royalty through 
a mother, is furnished in the heir apparent to the throne of Great 
Britain-the Prince of Wales. He is heir of all that inheritance 
not through his father, but through his mother, the present 
queen. 

In Jewish genealogies it was customary to reckon lineage 
through either parent. According to their custom, and indeed, 
among all civilized people to-day, at marriage the wife becomes 
a sharer in the interests of the husband; she leaves her father's 
house and name to share that of her husband. Mary was thus a 
sharer with Joseph when Jesus was born (though not when he 
was conceived— Matt. 1:18) hence, the genealogy of Joseph is 
given in Matt. 1:1-16 -the son of Solomon the son of David. 

Another custom of that day was to reckon the genealogy through 
the wife's ancestry and treat her husband as in her stead the son 
of her father. (To-day we would call such— a son-in-law.) The 
seed of Abraham and David is thus traced, through Mary's 
ancestry, in Luke 3:23; and here Joseph is called the son of Heli, 
Mary's father, who was the son of Nathan the son of David. 

(2) The second question propounded is: If Jesus is to "sit on 
David's throne, " Does it not prove that in his Millennial reign he 
will be a fleshly being -a glorified man? 

We answer, No ! "Though we have known Christ after the flesh, 
yet now henceforth know we him no more" thus. (2 Cor. 5:16.) 

The inquirer should candidly ask himself, What is meant by the 
"throne of David"? Does it mean the seat or bench upon which 
David sat, and which ages since has crumbled into dust? 
Assuredly not. While the royal seat is often called a throne, yet 
in reality it only represents the sovereign power and dignity of 
office, which is really the throne. Thus, we say that Queen 



Victoria is on the throne of England, referring to her office of 
power and rulership as the head of the government. 

Thus, Christ Jesus shall become, not only the recognized ruler 
and governor of Israel (over which David's throne extended), but 
more— over all the nations and families of earth. Hence, we read 
of "the increase of his government" over that of David; and his 
government, unlike David's, shall not be disturbed by rebellions, 
etc., but it shall be at peace and in control of all. In all the 
increased government he shall have lasting peace, and his 
government not come to an end forever, (to the age) i.e., until he 
shall put down all opposition and subdue all things to his will. 
Then, in the end of the Millennial age, he shall deliver up the 
kingdom (control) to God, even the Father-presenting to him 
the justified and perfectly restored of the human race, who 
thereafter shall be directly amenable to the Father. (See 1 Cor. 
15:24,25.) 

The dominion or rulership of earth was first bestowed on Adam. 
Jehovah crowned him with glory and honor and set him over the 
works of his hands, saying: "HAVE DOMINION over the fish 
of the sea, and over the fowl of the air, and over every living 
thing that moveth upon the earth" (Gen. 1:28 and Psa. 8:5,6). 
The father of lies seduced Adam into disobedience and death, 
and robbed mankind of the DOMINION, and he thus became 
"the prince (ruler) of this world," making the once rightful 
monarchs of earth his slaves and emissaries— led captive at his 
will. 

But the great Jehovah had foreseen all this, and was not taken 
unawares. Although he has permitted the usurpation of earth's 
dominion for 6000 years, his design is to "set at liberty the 
captives," breaking the chains of sin and death in which "the 
whole creation groaneth and travaileth in pain together," 
DESTROYING (in a legal manner) the great captor-death-and 
him that has the power of death, that is, the Devil. (1 John 3:8; 
Heb. 2:14.) To this end a Savior-a Mighty Deliverer -was 
provided who, in the days of his FLESH, gave his flesh-his 
human nature— a ransom for the condemned human race, that 
thus the captives might legally be set free (from sin's wages- 
death). Having thus redeemed (bought back) the inheritance 
(earth) and the inheritor (mankind), this mighty Savior is about 
to put those whom he bought with his own precious blood into 
possession of their lost dominion-this will be the salvation of 
the world. The deliverance only tarries until the appointed limit 
of evil has been reached, which was necessary to discipline the 
world and develop a peculiar people for his name, to be the 
Bride, the Lamb's wife, and, by union with him, joint-heirs of 
His inheritance. 

When thus exalted, Will they be visible to men? We reply, that, 
to be a ruler, does not imply being seen. The Queen is Empress 
of India-she rules it through the agents of her government. 



Millions of her subjects respect and recognize her authority that 
have never seen her. Could it not be thus with Christ's kingdom? 
They who will receive Christ's representatives will be receiving 
him, even as those who received him received the Father who 
sent him. (Matt. 10:40.) 

The word see has a fuller meaning than eyesight. It is to know- 
to recognize; thus Jesus told the disciples of the Father, "whom 
no man hath seen nor can see," (1 Tim. 6:16) saying: "He that 
hath seen me hath seen the Father," and "from henceforth ye 
know him and have seen him." (John 14:7,9.) The disciples 
could come to a knowledge— recognition— of the Father by a 
recognition of his attributes in Jesus. So the world will all come 
to see or recognize Christ and his government as exemplified 
through the earthly agents of the kingdom. Thus it is that even 
the blind can see— recognize; thus we now endure as seeing 
(recognizing) him who is invisible to our natural eyes. 

We have heretofore shown that Jesus is not a glorified man now. 
If we want to see a glorified man and a sample of what all men 
may become in the restitution, we must look back to Eden and 
see Adam before the fall, crowned with glory and honor, and 
only "a little lower than the angels" (Psa. 8:5); or, look back 
about 1800 years, and we see another perfect,— sinless,— glorious 
man: "We see Jesus, who was made a little lower than the angels 
for the suffering of death, crowned with glory and honor; that he 
by the grace of God should taste death for every man." (Heb. 
2:9.) 

He was a glorious man when on earth, having left a higher glory 
thus to redeem us. But, though put to death in the flesh— a 
glorious man,— he was raised to life by the Father— a quickening 
spirit-a spiritual and not a human or fleshly being. [See 
"FOOD," page 56.] Now he is a new creature, and instead of 
having the glory of a man, (which is a little lower than the 
angels) as before, he now is a sharer in the glory of the Divine 
nature, "Being made so much BETTER than angels, as he hath 
by inheritance obtained a more excellent name than they. " 
(Compare Heb. 1 :4 and Phil. 2:7-9.) 

Earth's king for the Millennial Age will be a spiritual ruler, 
invisible to the natural eye of men— visible only to the eye of 
their understanding as they shall become able to recognize him. 

The present prince of the world- Satan-is a spiritual being; 
hence his kingdom is invisible, except as it operates through 
earthly governments and individuals as its agents. So, also, is the 
new empire, the kingdom of God. 

The differences between the two empires we need scarcely 
mention. One presents temptations, and leads into sin, misery, 
degradation and death; the other will deliver, enlighten, elevate 
and restore men to happiness, life and glorious manhood's first 
estate and dominion. 



David's throne or dominion over Israel was a type of Christ's 
subjugation of the world and his dominion over it. We have seen 
that the dominion of earth was given to Adam, who was robbed 
of it by the present usurper- Satan. While it was yet in Satan's 
control, God separated one small nation from others. Of Israel 
he made many types. Their Levites typified the justified; their 
priests typified the little flock or royal priesthood; and Israel 
itself is often used to represent the world of mankind. 

God established his kingdom in the hand of David, first over 
Judah (type of all fleshly Israel), and secondly over Israel as a 
whole (type of the whole world); for thus shall it be in the 
establishment of the real kingdom of God which David's 
shadowed forth. It will be over Judah first (over Israel according 
to the flesh), and afterward the whole world shall receive and 
own him Lord of all. 



R454 : page 3 

WAITING FOR JESUS' COMING. 

Many Christians to-day are waiting for Jesus' coming. A similar 
class lived at the first advent who, nevertheless, when he had 
come, could not believe it. They received him not, but rejected 
and slew him, because he came not in accordance with their 
earthly ideas. 

Similar earthly ideas blind the eyes of most Christians now. 
They, like the Jews, are looking for an earthly king. It seems 
strange that they cannot realize that, since his resurrection, he is 
"the express image of the Father's person" -"whom no man hath 
seen nor can see"-for "God is a Spirit," (spiritual being) and "a 
spirit hath not flesh and bones. " You could not see an angel 
(spiritual being) without the performance of a miracle to reveal 
him, though he might be personally present unseen. Then, why 
claim that Jesus could not be personally present, yet unseen? 
The difficulty arises from the confused ideas held on the subject 
of animal (human) and spiritual bodies. "If there is an animal 
body, there is also a spiritual body," says Paul (1 Cor. 15:44 - 
Diaglott), and we wish that all could realize this. They are 
distinct and separate. You cannot have both at the same time; 
they belong to two different natures. The one body and nature is 
the earthly; the other, the heavenly, is promised to the 
overcomers; and the promise of it is properly called a "heavenly 
calling." (Heb. 3:1.) We do know what the earthly is, while we 
do not know what a heavenly, or spiritual body, is. "It doth not 
yet appear what we shall be" -hence it must be very different 
from our present animal body. (1 Cor. 15:38-44; and 1 John 
3:2.) Jesus and angels are spiritual beings, and it is by reason of 
the difference between their nature and ours that we cannot see 



them with our natural eyes unless they appear to us (manifest 
their presence by a miracle.) 

It is, or should be, well known to all of our readers, that 
"ZION'S WATCH TOWER" is a HERALD OF CHRIST'S 
PRESENCE. We do not mean in any mythical sense; we do not 
mean that he is present by his spirit or will, as exercised in and 
over his Church, as throughout the entire age; but we mean that 
he is present now in the manner and sense promised throughout 
Scripture; present not without a body, but a spiritual being. 

We know of his presence, not by the light of human science, but 
by the light of God's Word. We know of his presence, not as 
men recognizing a man, but as new creatures recognizing our 
Head, our Captain, our Bridegroom. We see him not by human 
sight, but the eyes of our understanding, being opened and 
enlightened by the light of our lamp, we see him, whom we love 
and adore, present to test those who claim to be his, and to select 
his "faithful," "undefiled," "chaste virgin" -to "make up his 
jewels": those who are accounted worthy to "follow the Lamb 
whithersoever he goeth," and to be his joint-heirs, glorified 
together with him "the Bride, the Lamb's wife. " (Comp. Rev. 
14:4,5 and 21:9.) 

He is present, not only to establish his kingdom and glorify his 
saints, but also to break in pieces and consume all earthly 
kingdoms, and to bind Satan by overthrowing his power. Thus 
he will liberate mankind-the Jew first and also the Gentile-and 
bless all the families of the earth. 

None, familiar with Scripture, will question that this is the order 
of the Lord's work as therein revealed. By a parable he showed 
that he would first reward his faithful ones, and then proceed to 
deal with the world. In the establishment of his kingdom he first 
comes, secondly organizes his own kingdom, thirdly uses his 
kingdom power to overthrow evil and error and present 
kingdoms of earth, at the same time beginning the restitution of 
Israel as a first step in "the restitution of all things spoken. " 

But while this is plainly the Scriptural order of Christ's work, 
and while we see Israel's restitution commencing, and the 
nations on the brink of overthrow, while the nominal Church has 
been passing through the time of trial and testing, which is 
rapidly sifting out the true and ripe wheat, gathering the jewels- 
the virgin of Christ-yet many are hoping that Jesus will come 
soon. "Ye fools and blind," can ye not discern his presence by 
these things transpiring all around you? These are the signs 
(evidences, indications) of the Son of man. They indicate that he 
has come and has already commenced his work. 

Though the signs of the times add increased light, yet, by the 
light of the Word, we discerned his presence years 

R454 : page 4 



before any of these outward signs corroborated its teachings. 
Thank God that we have a more sure word of prophecy (surer 
even than these outward signs), whereunto ye do well that ye 
take heed, as unto a lamp that shineth in a dark place, until the 
day dawn. (2 Pet. 1:19.) 



R454 : page 4 



'CONDEMNED SIN. 



"For what was impossible for the Law in that it was weak 
through the flesh, God having sent his own Son in a form of the 
flesh of sin- even by an offering for sin— condemned sin in the 
flesh; so that the righteousness of the Law may be fulfilled by us 
who are walking, not according to flesh, but according to 
spirit. "-ROM. 8:3 -Diaglott. 

The common version of this text is frequently misconstrued by 
some. It reads: "God sending his own Son in the likeness of 
sinful flesh," etc. Some, who have a theory to support, would 
have us understand this-God sent his Son in the sinful likeness 
of flesh-and have us draw the inference that he took a sinful 
nature and was with us under the same condemnation. That this 
is not the teaching of the Apostle should be obvious to every 
intelligent and candid reader. The imperfections of mind and 
body, now so common to our race, are the direct traces and 
marks of either personal or inherited sin; while we know that 
Jesus had neither. In him was no sin, hence no evidence or 
marks of it. 

The likeness (or form) of sinful flesh simply means not angelic 
or divine, but the human form. Among the imperfect 
representatives of human likeness to-day there is much variety; 
there are many degrees of imperfection; the perfect human being 
is the standard; yet all are said to have the same likeness as 
Adam, who was perfect before sin. Adam had the human 
likeness— the same likeness that sinful flesh yet has: hence Jesus, 
also, as a perfect man, had the same likeness or form as sinful 
flesh -the human. 

Jesus experienced the woes and sufferings of humanity without 
sharing in the imperfections and sins. He suffered for and with 
those around him, and made use of his own vitality in healing 
their diseases. Doubtless, on many an occasion, it might have 
been recorded, as in Mark 5:30; Luke 6:19 and 8:46, that the 
power or virtue which healed the sick "went out of him." Thus, 
he "himself took our infirmities and bare our sicknesses." (Matt. 
8:17.) It is the most refined and perfect organisms which can 
suffer most. 

To appreciate the drift and force of the Apostle's teaching in this 
passage, we must remember that he is explaining the value and 



use of the Law given to Israel, through Moses, and its relation to 
Christians. He handles it fully, for he writes to those who know 
the Law. (Chap. 7:1.) 

Glancing back we find his argument to be that the slightest 
command of God is a Law, and the smallest violation of Law is 
sin; and the wages of the smallest sin is death— the extinction of 
existence. (Ch 6:23.) Thus, it will be seen, that to be imperfect 
in the smallest degree meant inability to keep God's Law, which 
meant sin and its punishment. Hence only one man was tried, 
and that on only one point of Law. When he disobeyed in a very 
small thing— his was not a flagrant crime— he was a violator of 
Law-a sinner-under condemnation of death. All his offspring 
would, of course, partake of his imperfection, sin and death. 
(Ch. 5:18.) 

This fact of inherited sin and imperfection, and the necessity of 
an atoning sacrifice to God on account of it, and as a clearing 
from its condemnation and punishment, is recognized in every 
sacrifice offered by the Patriarchs. 

But mankind did not really recognize the depth of degradation 
into which they had been plunged by sin working in their nature; 
and lest any should say, Would that Jehovah would clear me 
from the guilt of Adam's sin, for then would I show myself 
approved unto God worthy of life; therefore God gave an 
exhibition of the perfection of His Law, and showed before 
angels and men that it is impossible for any imperfect being to 
keep a perfect Law. He gave Israel a typical "Day of 
Atonement," and a typical justification from Adamic sin, by 
typical sacrifices for sin, which could never (really) take away 
sin; and then, at the hands of Moses, he delivered to them the 
Law at Sinai, declaring that "whosoever doeth these things shall 
live"-by reason of their obedience would never die. (Chap. 
10:5; Gal. 3:12; Lev. 18:5.) Israel was jubilant, and eagerly 
promised —"All that the Lord hath spoken we will do." (Exod. 
19:7,8.) 

But, alas, for poor humanity's self-confidence; that which they 
thought would be a means of gaining life, was found to 
emphatically condemn all under it to death, as transgressors 
unworthy of life. (Chap. 7:10-13.) As throughout that Jewish 
age, hundreds and thousands attempted to keep the "Law 
ordained unto life, " but were unable, it proved either one of two 
things: either that the man was as God claimed, unable to help 
himself back to 

R455 : page 4 

perfection, even if justified from Adam's sin, or else that the 
Law given was too severe. 

Paul's argument is to show that the Law was not too severe. He 
claims that the Law is holy— the commandments of the Lord 



holy, and just, and good for man: that the trouble is that man is 
imperfect-depraved— sold under (into slavery to) sin by his 
forefather's transgression. (Ch 7:12-18.) The question was, then, 
Would God modify his just, holy and good Law, so as to excuse 
a certain amount of sin, and let those live who were imperfect? 
We answer, No; this would have been a violation by God of his 
own Law— such a Law would have been imperfect— such a 
course would have been to justify sin instead of justifying the 
sinner from the sin. And thus Paul argues, "If a Law could have 
been given which would have given life" back to man, then 
undoubtedly God would have provided man with that Law, and 
not have sent his Son to be our ransom and the propitiation for 
our sins. (See Gal. 3:21.) But God is the author of only right and 
perfect Laws. He cannot look upon sin with any degree of 
allowance; hence the Law still remains, and will to all eternity- 
"The soul (being) that sinneth it shall die"-be cut off from life. 

But, seeing how many had tried to justify themselves before 
God, by attempting to keep His Law, and, realizing that some of 
these were indeed excellent men, it would not be surprising if 
men should feel that their natural depravity was not so very 
great, and surely the Law must be too severe. To give man 
unquestionable proof of the justness of his Law, and the 
possibility of a perfect man's keeping it, was a part of Jehovah's 
plan in connection with the redemption of sinners. 

Hence, when Jesus came to redeem men, he was tempted 
(tested) in all points-by the world, the flesh and the devil. He 
was born under the same Law which had been condemning 
others for over 1,800 years. And the fact that he as a man-a 
perfect man- did keep the perfect Law, is a part of the proof 
Jehovah offers us that the Law was not too severe, but the fault 
had been that all were under the curse -imperfect-and therefore 
could not keep it. 

This is exactly Paul's argument where our text is found. Jesus' 
life, instead of proving that the Law is imperfect, and that, 
therefore, God should cast it aside, proved the very contrary-it 
set the seal or mark of approval and righteousness to the Law, 
and of condemnation to the race of sinners. But notice, Jesus not 
only sanctioned the Law and met its requirements by his own 
obedience to it; but more, he met its requirements upon the 
condemned race by giving himself (as a spotless human being) a 
ransom for them. Thus he purchased the Law's claims upon the 
entire race. And it is elsewhere declared to be his plan— in due 
time to assume control of his "purchased possession," and to 
subdue and restore whosoever will of the race to the original 
perfection, where they shall be able to keep God's perfect Law 
perfectly, and have a right to life as a result. When he shall have 
done this, he shall deliver up the kingdom (dominion) to God, 
even the Father. 



Now, note the fullness and power of our text. What was 
impossible for the Law [to do for us, viz., give us a right to life] 
in that it was [powerless, owing to the weakness and 
imperfection of our sin-stricken flesh,] God accomplished in 
another way— not by giving another, an imperfect Law, but, on 
the contrary, proving the Law given to be just and holy-by 
sending his Son in a human form—the same form as that of the 
sinners who had been condemned-a second MAN. He not only 
proved the Law to be just and good, but then, by an offering 
FOR our sins, condemned sin in the flesh, so that the 
righteousness of the Law may be fulfilled in us [who accept of 
his sacrifice for our sins,] who walk not after [in pursuit of] the 
flesh, but after [in pursuit of] the spirit [meaning or intent] of the 
Law. 



R455 : page 4 



CHRIST IN YOU. 



Those who accept of Christ's teachings and follow him in entire 
consecration of every power and talent to God's service, become 
infused with the same desire to do the will of their Father in 
heaven. These have the same mind as Jesus— a mind, or will, to 
sacrifice self in the carrying out of God's plans-a spirit, or 
mind, dead to the praises and scoffs, the hopes and fears of the 
world, but alive and active to the heavenly smiles or frowns, 
prizes or losses. 

The spirit or mind of Christ thus received, bears fruit in every 
action, word and thought; some of which are mentioned by Paul- 
-love, joy, peace, gentleness, meekness, patience, godliness 
(God-like-ness). 

These graces, these fruits grow gradually —the rapidity of the 
growth depending upon the nature of the soil, the purity of the 
seed, (example followed) and the amount of moisture and 
sunlight of truth (the Word) with which the ground and seed are 
supplied. 

If we would have increase of the spirit of Christ and bear much 
fruit, how important that we be particular to have pure seed- 
following only our Master— and that we keep out from the 
shadow and shelter of all human creeds and let the sunlight of 
heaven and the refreshing dew of truth into our hearts, by lifting 
them to heaven for these, as do the flowers for the natural. Such 
shall receive from the heavenly store-the Word. 

This continual and increasing growth of the fruits is not only 
expressed by Jesus as above, but the Apostles urge the "increase 
of the fruits of your righteousness," and that we be "filled with 
the fruits of righteousness." (2 Cor. 9:10; Phil. 1:11.) 



As it is natural for a good tree to bring forth good fruits; so all 
who have received really of the spirit of Christ will ultimately 
show it. It was Jesus who said, "By their fruits ye shall know 
them." 

Christianity is much misunderstood to-day, and many that bear 
thistles are members of the nominal Church and thus pretend to 
be members of the "true Vine"; but by their fruits ye shall know 
them. "If any man have not the spirit of Christ, he is none of 
his." (Rom. 8:9.) This is a searching test for all; let us each apply 
it to ourselves. Do I, as Jesus, "do not mine own will," but 
God's? Do I seek to please not myself, nor my fellows, but God 
only? Do I present myself daily and hourly a living sacrifice, for 
right and truth, and in just the way Gods Word (not my feeling) 
directs? If so, this is Christ in me, and is a good basis for the 
"hope of glory" promised to those who walk in his footprints. 

This spirit of Christ-or renewed mind-is the anointing which 
ye have received, and it is an evidence to you and to others that 
your consecration is complete; that you are begotten to the 
higher (divine) nature which God has promised to those who so 
walk in the Spirit; that you are members of the Christ (the 
anointed body, of which Jesus is the head). 

So, then, Christ is manifest in your mortal body. (2 Cor. 4:1 1.) 
When the world sees you it sees a member of the Christ, not in 
glory, but in the flesh; and in us as in our Head, only to a less 
degree, it is still true-God is manifest in the flesh. (1 Tim. 
3:16.) 

Thus, for "me to live is Christ" (Phil. 1:21). In this sense, Christ 
in the flesh is still in the world as its teacher and reprover- 
illustrating the word and love of God. All the body following the 
Leader have been "despised and rejected of men." There is no 
beauty in any of them that they should be desired of the world. 
Soon, when manifested with the Head, as the agency for 
blessing the world, they will desire them. They desire 
deliverance from the bondage of corruption into the liberty of 
sons of God, and will soon come to know him whom, for 1 800 
years, they ignorantly rejected, thinking him weak and 
powerless. Then, "The Desire of all nations shall come" into 
power and glory for their deliverance. 

During all the ages we find it true, and an evidence that we are 
in the Leader's footsteps, that the world loveth us not. Jesus said, 
"Marvel not if the world hate you: ye know that it hated me 
before it hated you. " "If ye were of the world, the world would 
love his own. " "In the world ye shall have tribulation. " And 
"Whosoever will live godly shall suffer persecution. " 

Any who think they are being carried to glory on "flowery beds 
of ease, " should awake to the fact that our Master trod the 
narrow, thorny way. Now is not the time to glory in ease in the 



lap of the world, but a time to "fill up that which is behind of the 
afflictions of Christ. " 

We suffer as members of the Christ of which the Prophets spake 
when they testified beforehand the sufferings of Christ (during 
this age) and the glory that should follow. 

To him that overcometh— self, ease, the world— even unto death, 

"Shall be the victor's crown." 



R456 : page 4 

SANCTIFIED AFFLICTION. 

"Our light affliction which is but for a moment, worketh for us 
a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory, while we look 
not at the things which are seen, but at the things which are not 
seen. " 

This little adverb while is the hinge on which the door of 
entrance to the glory hangs. 

Our afflictions do not work out for us this glory, because we are 
continually looking at our business, our family, the world and its 
pleasures, and the many other things the enemy places about us, 
on purpose to keep us from looking at the things unseen by 
mortal eyes. When our Father permits the enemy to try us by 
unusual suffering, whether in mind or body, then we are 
compelled to cease our anxious chase after the things seen. 
When fever racks our brain, and Satan assaults us with doubt as 
to the character of our living Father, then our spirits are drawn 
by unusual power to cry out: Lord save from the evil— raise thy 
standard against him who hindereth me. 

What are these unseen things we are to look at, which have such 
charming power, such a quieting and peaceful influence over the 
whole man?- "Looking unto Jesus" the author and finisher of 
our faith. This passage answers the question. He is unseen by the 
man dead in trespasses and sins, but clear to the eye of the new 
creature, begotten by God through the operation of the Holy 
Spirit. Wonderful begottenment -life in death— growing daily by 
looking at the things unseen. 

Lord Jesus, whom have we in heaven but thee, and there is none 
on earth we desire beside thee. Sweet belief. We may lay all our 
loves, all our gifts, at the feet of such a giver, and worship Him. 
Looking at the things he does for us compensates even now for 
all the suffering we endure. We look at Him and think of his 
declaration: "Where I am, ye may be also. " He is our Prophet. 
"If I be lifted up I will draw all men unto me. " 



I think of him thus as my High Priest, not taking the blood of 
others, but presenting his own life as a sacrifice —a ransom— a 
propitiation- which 

R456 : page 5 

unites fallen man with heaven-a glorified being, unblamable, 
complete, wanting nothing, and perfectly holy, in the presence 
of our Father. 

I think of Him as King, having left our Father's throne, and 
about to sit on his own throne, conducting us, his bride, to share 
in regal glory, all the Father hath given him, from the rising of 
the sun to the setting of the same. 

And surely every earthly good, every earthly love, fades into 
insignificance while WE look thus at the things unseen by 
mortal powers, and we sigh for the hours to speed on to that 
One, so near, when we shall see Him as He is, and be satisfied. 

"We speak that we do know, and testify that we have seen;— and 
sanctified affliction, in late serious sickness, has enabled us to 
write our testimony with that of our Bro. Sunderlin, to wit: Our 
Father ordered it for good, while Satan meant it for evil. 
"Looking unto Jesus," we rejoice in tribulation, when it worketh 
such weights of glory. 

W. V. FELTWELL. 



R456 : page 5 

PERFECTING THE NEW NATURE. 

"For it became him, for whom are all things and by whom are 
all things, in bringing many sons unto glory, to make the 
Captain of their salvation perfect through sufferings."— Heb. 
2:10. 

Jesus was not made perfect as a man; for as such he was 
perfect, else he could not have been our ransom. One imperfect 
being could not redeem other imperfect beings. As shown in the 
typical sacrifices for sin under the law, the sacrifice must be 
without blemish. So, too, with the antitype-the real sin-offering 
—the Lamb of God, that took away the sin of the world, was 
perfect— without a single blemish- "a lamb without spot." 

God only created two men— the first man Adam; and the second 
man, the Lord from heaven— the man Christ Jesus, who gave 
himself a ransom for all. Both men were perfect. The first lost 
his perfection through disobedience, and involved his race in 
ruin. The second retained his perfection and right to life by 
obedience— but laid down or sacrificed those rights as a ransom 
for the life of the first man and his race-thus justifying the 
Adamic race to the human life and perfection lost. 



To suppose imperfection in Jesus, as a man, is to suppose sin in 
him, because imperfections are marks of sin. And, on the 
contrary, if he was perfect as a man, he could not be made 
perfect as a man; hence, we say, he was not thus perfected. 

To appreciate how he was perfected, we must recognize the fact 
that there are various planes of being in God's universe, and 
perfection on each plane. Thus, there is a perfection of the 
Divine nature, another perfection of the angelic nature, another 
of the human nature, another of the dog's nature, and another of 
the fish, etc. These various natures are sometimes divided into 
two general classes: All earthly natures are called "animal," 
though each animal has a perfection of its own; all heavenly 
natures are called spiritual, though each grade of spiritual being 
has a perfection of its own. 

The lowest grade of spiritual beings known to us— angels— is 
superior to the highest grade of earthly beings— man. (Psalm 
8:5.) The highest plane of spiritual existence-the Divine nature- 
- is superior to all other grades of spiritual nature, as the highest 
grade of animal nature— the human— is superior to other animal 
or earthly natures. (See "Food"— page 134.) 

Jesus, before he became a man, was a spiritual being, of a nature 
superior to angels, because, when he was about to humble 
himself and lay aside his glory to become man's ransom, "he 
took not on him the nature of angels," but came still lower, and 
"was found in fashion as a man." We know, too, that though he 
had "a form of God" (a spiritual form), yet he could not have 
possessed the Divine nature then, because the divine or 
immortal nature is deathless- death-proof. It is an impossibility 
for an immortal being to die. Jehovah cannot die, and we know, 
therefore, that had Jesus been a partaker of that nature he need 
not have come into the world to die for our sins; for, if immortal, 
the most he could have done would have been to pretend to die 
and pretend to be raised to life again. Such an idea would be 
charging Jehovah and our Lord with hypocrisy and deception. 

The divine nature was part of the reward for our Lord's sacrifice. 
His gaining the divine nature depended on the sacrificing of his 
human nature. As the sacrificing of the human rights and 
privileges progressed, his right to the divine was increased; 
when the sacrifice ended at Calvary, the full right to the divine 
nature was secured. To this agree the words of the Apostle: He 
was obedient even unto death— "Wherefore, God also hath 
highly exalted him, and given him a name above every name. " 
(Phil. 2:9.) Here we see the perfecting-it was the divine nature 
being perfected by the obedience of the already perfect human 
nature. See also, "Jesus Made Perfecf'-Z.W.T., Jan., 1882, page 
3. 

Let us add, that such, also, is the perfecting now in progress in 
the "Church which is his body. " We are called in him, as joint- 



heirs, to share this high calling-the divine nature. (2 Pet. 1:4.) 
We seek not and expect not the perfecting of the human nature, 
but, realizing its justification by our ransom price— Jesus— we 
sacrifice it to obtain the other: We are new creatures in Christ 
Jesus, and, as such, labor and wait for that divine— immortal- 
perfection promised us, when we shall be like him who is "the 
express image of the Father's person. " 

The next age will witness the perfecting of the human nature and 
blot out all the marks of sin and imperfection, and man will 
again be very good in the sight of the perfect Creator. 



R456 : page 5 

WHAT IS DUTY. 

Fairview, Pa. 

DEAR BROTHER IN CHRIST:-I presume you have but little 
time to read letters of a personal character. I will, therefore, beg 
pardon for this intrusion and ask your attention for a few 
moments. First of all, many thanks for the TOWER. Personally, 
you are unknown to me, yet known as I see you in your words- 
asking our Lord daily to guide your pen and lead you by His 
Spirit into all truth. 

About two years ago I was lead to seek earnestly for a higher 
type of Christian life. I sought, through study of His Word, 
asking for the teachings of the Holy Spirit. I was not 
disappointed. When the "Food" was distributed in Erie, I found 
a copy which had been thrown aside, and, I bless God, it met the 
exact wants of my soul. The book harmonized with views held 
for years, but held under proscription. Yet I have still 
maintained my Church relations. 

This brings me to the point: Shall those whom God thus 
enlightens, and brings out of the bondage of creeds and 
confessions, remain in these cold, lifeless organizations? While 
in the 

R457 : page 5 

Church we must study its peace and harmony-here is the rub; if 
these advance views are touched, a ripple is started which runs 
through the body, and Bro. A. is disturbed and Sister B. is 
disquieted. Finally it gets to the preacher's ears; he thinks he 
sees the wolf coming, so he takes his gun (discipline of his 
Church) and starts out to quiet the restless one. All this can be 
borne, but what is duty? Shall we remain and drop down to their 
level; for as sure as face answereth to face in water, just so sure 
"like priest like people." 

But, says one, The Church is a mighty power for good in the 
world, stand by her. Yes, but consider God's dealings with the 



Jews— the charge of Moses and Joshua— that the perpetuity of the 
Jewish nation was conditioned upon its devotion to God. They 
forsook Him and He abandoned them. Other cases might be 
cited from His Word, but space forbids. Evidences of national 
decay were apparent for years with the Jews; and in the Church 
now, certainly if anything is visible it is spiritual dearth-decay- 
a pale, sickly light shed from a lamp obscured by creeds and 
catechisms, devoid of spirit and power. It is a fact that the 
Church is falling off in membership, to say nothing of 
spirituality. If I were to say she has a name to live and is dead, 
would it be too strong? Now, shall the man or woman whose 
heart God has aroused to leave past experiences, and press 
forward after new attainments in the divine life, be entangled 
and tied to this dead body in hope of awakening it to life? Or 
shall he step out into the liberty of a son of God? Please give me 
your opinion, and may the Spirit direct your words. 

Yours in Christ, . 



Many letters of similar import to the above have come to us 
recently. In replying to this brother publicly we answer all. 

First, we would say, that we would never have any feel that their 
correspondence is an intrusion. Though time will not permit 
prompt replies, and some must remain unanswered personally, 
every letter is carefully read in order that we may know the 
necessities of our fellow-travelers in this difficult way, and, by 
the grace of God, be enabled to reach a helping hand where most 
needed. The assurance, also, of your prayers and sympathies, 
and that the truth is building you up and making you free, as 
well as the many suggestions and queries received, which send 
us to dig deeper into the wonderful mine of truth-all working 
together- tend to strengthen and cheer us and to edify the 
Church. Therefore, let us hear from you, but let love and 
patience have their perfect work. 

In answer to the above question we would say: To all who 
realize the Babylon (confusion) condition of the nominal 
Church, give earnest heed to the words of our glorified Lord, 
"Come out of her, my people, that ye be not partakers of her 
sins, and that ye receive not of her plagues." (Rev. 18:4.) 

Rev. 3:15-17 is an exact pen picture of this last phase of the 
Gospel Church. Their lukewarm condition is the most 
undesirable, because most dangerous. If the mass of the nominal 
church were "hot"-full of warm and loving devotion to God- 
she would be a delight to the Lord and a power in the world. Or, 
if she were "cold"-making no pretensions whatever to be 
exponents of his truth-she would not dishonor and misrepresent 
him. But, alas ! she is lukewarm, and therefore she is spued out 
of his mouth. 



Some tell us they cannot understand how the organizations 
formed by such good men as Wesley, Calvin, Luther, Knox and 
others can be properly considered parts of Babylon. "Were these 
not earnest and devoted followers of the Master?" Yes, we reply, 
we esteem all those our brethren who fearlessly stemmed the 
tide of popular opinion and braved persecution on every hand 
for the truth's sake. We believe they received and walked in the 
light due in their day. And so far as we are able to judge, the 
Reformers as well as many in humbler stations, whose names 
have not come down to us, were overcomers —part of the "little 
flock" whose names are written in heaven. But in the vast 
organizations who now call themselves their followers, how 
much do we find of their spirit of sacrifice, of love of truth, of 
humility and separation from the world? Alas, it takes little 
discernment to see that only a form of godliness remains. 

We call attention to this fact as foretold in our Lord's Revelation 
to John (Chaps 2 and 3.) Notice, that to every stage of the 
Church except the last, the Master has some word of 
commendation, but in this— the Laodicean stage— he finds 
nothing to commend. Do they point to their mighty works? Yes, 
says the Lord, "I know thy works;" nevertheless, "I will spue 
thee out of my mouth. " They say they are "rich and increased in 
goods and have need of nothing," and know not that they are 
wretched and miserable and poor and blind and naked. " She is 
counseled to "buy" (at the expense of reputation and worldly 
interests) "gold tried in the fire" (divine treasure) "and white 
raiment," (justification by an intelligent faith in Christ as the 
Redeemer) and to anoint her eyes with eyesalve (the spirit of 
humility and teachableness) that she may see. And he says, 
"Behold I stand at the door and knock:" (I am present) "If any 
man" (in this great system so completely joined to the world and 
overcome by "the abundance of her delicacies") "hear my voice 
and open the door, I will come in to him and sup with him and 
he with me. " 

Notice, that this is an individual matter now. It is not the church 
nominal which is to be fed; they are not hungry. But it is the 
individual Christians of the true Church, the eyes of whose 
understanding have been opened by the eyesalve. Such only 
hear-recognize the knock which indicates the Master's 
presence. Such only open to him, and such only he feeds. 

Though, as a system, the nominal Church is cast out as was her 
type, the Jewish Church, in the harvest of their age (Matt. 
23:38), here as there our Lord recognizes the true wheat which 
he has permitted to grow together with the tares until now. 
(Matt. 13:30.) And just as surely as we are in the harvest, so 
surely is separation now due and is taking place. The command, 
"Come out of her," was not given until after the announcement, 
"Babylon is fallen." 



Look again at Babylon. As you suggest, if you remain there you 
must submit to its fetters. Your very presence binds your 
influence to its systems. You dare not declare the whole counsel 
of God, lest it condemn them and call you out from among 
them. But this is just what he would have us do— "Declare the 
whole counsel of God," and "come out from among them and be 
separate." (2 Cor. 6:14-18.) 

When our Lord says, "Come out of her, my people," who are 
we, that we should enter our protest, and say, It is expedient for 
the good of others that we should stay in? We cannot stay in 
after we have heard the Master's voice calling us out, without 
partaking of her sins-specially that one of rejecting His truth. It 
is not enough that we come out in spirit, while personally we 
remain there, giving it our influence and support. Obedience to 
his command, both in spirit and in letter, is well pleasing in his 
sight. And not only so, but prompt obedience. We note our 
Brother Paul's noble example in this respect: "Immediately I 
conferred not with flesh and blood, but went," etc. 

It would be useless, indeed, to attempt to prop an institution 
which God has doomed to destruction. And just as surely as we 
now see the marked evidences of her spiritual dearth and decay, 
so surely shall Babylon fall into utter ruin. Let us rather trust the 
Lord's judgment as to expediency, and boldly step out into "the 
liberty wherewith Christ hath made us free. " 

Trusting him we cannot stray, 
We can never, never lose our way. 

You were right in answering we belong to the Church of Christ. 
His espoused virgin Church should own no other name than his. 

One brother says, I don't exactly see how you can get along and 
accomplish good without organization. Why, our dear friends, 
we have the most complete organization, in perfect working 
order. It is fully under the direction of our present Lord and 
Head. (See article, "The Ecclesia" in October issue.) And it is 
accomplishing grand results. Saints are being cheered, 
strengthened and inspired with new zeal in running the heavenly 
race and in proclaiming the good tidings; thousands of 
Christians are searching the Word of God as never before. Helps 
to Bible study are in increasing demand. Many infidels are 
looking with astonishment at the book they so long discarded 
and saying, After all it must be true. And already the light is 
beginning to shine out on the world, and many are saying, This 
God of love shall have our love and service in return. 

Let us not be afraid to step out on God's plan. It is sure of 
success. Work in harmony with him, though 

R457 : page 6 

you may not see the end from the beginning. The end will be 
glorious. 



Judge not the Lord by feeble sense, 
But trust him for his grace; 
Behind a frowning providence 
He hides a smiling face. 

His purposes will ripen fast, 
Unfolding every hour: 
The bud may have a bitter taste, 
But sweet will be the flower. 

Your sister in patient waiting, 



MRS. C. T. R. 



R458 : page 6 

QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS. 

Q. Wherein consists the difference between "the Bride" and the 
great company if both have spiritual bodies? 

A. Angels are spiritual bodies; but "unto which of the angels 
said God at any time, Thou art my son, this day have I begotten 
thee?" (Heb. 1:5.) But "when he bringeth the first-born (Jesus) 
into the world (first-born from the dead, to the divine nature, at 
his resurrection) he saith, "Let all the angels of God worship 
him"— render the homage due to his nature and office. (Heb. 
1:5,6.) He became a partaker of the divine nature, and it is fitting 
that all other forms of life should worship divinity. "God hath 
highly exalted him (Jesus) and given him a name which is above 
every name, that at the name of Jesus every knee should bow, of 
things in heaven (heavenly beings-angels) and things in earth, 
(men) and things under the earth, (the dead when raised to life) 
and that every tongue should confess that Jesus Christ is Lord 
(master, ruler) to the glory of God the Father." (Phil. 2:9-1 1.) 
From 1 Cor. 15:40,41 we learn that there are different degrees of 
glory on the celestial, or spiritual plane, illustrated by sun, 
moon, and different stars, just as verse 39 calls attention to the 
fact there are different degrees of glory on the terrestrial, or 
earthly plane. 

Though both companies will be spiritual beings, the Bride is 
joint-heir with her Lord, who is "appointed heir of all things; 
being made so much better than the angels, (other spiritual 
beings), as he hath by inheritance obtained a more excellent 
name than they." (Heb. 1:2-4.) Thus, though the "great 
company" will be the companions of the Bride, spiritual beings, 
(Psa. 45:14; Rev. 7:15) there will be a very great difference in 
the degrees of glory. (See "Food," page 134 and 121.) 

Q. What is the work of the Bride in making herself ready? 

A. The Bride, as we have seen, is a company composed of many 
members. Paul says, "Ye are the body of Christ and members in 



particular"; and again, "Ye are members one of another"; and 
one is not to say to another, I have no need of you: The foot 
member must minister to the hand and the hand to the foot, and 
all, by a mutual and vital union of spirit with the Head, are to 
build each other up. (Jude, verse 20.) All the members have one 
aim, one joyful hope, one work of preparation- adorning for the 
marriage. She is to put on the spotless robe of Christ's 
righteousness (imputed to her by faith in the ransom) and to 
keep the same "unspotted from the world. " And not only so, but 
she is to adorn it with fine "needle work." (Psa. 45:14.) The 
Christ-like character is to be wrought out in her life. As Paul 
expresses it, she is to "add to her faith" the various Christian 
graces. We must help one another in this important work. 

Each member has a work to do in the making ready: Some may 
travel and preach, some may write, some publish the grace of 
God by printing it, some may teach more privately, some may 
publish it by furnishing of the Lord's funds entrusted to their 
care, some may seek out the "meek" (see Isa. 61:1) and put 
words in their ears and reading into their hands, and the work of 
all is thus to build up yourselves in the most holy faith. It is thus 
that the "Bride makes herself ready." It was by the faithfulness 
of some of the other members that these "glad tidings" ever 
reached your ears and gladdened and sanctified your heart; and 
now you, if a member of that company, are doing what you can 
to "make ready" others. To be ready to help each other, we must 
diligently hearken and incline our ear to the word of truth, forget 
the world and worldly associations. (Psa. 45:10.) "So shall the 
King greatly desire thy beauty; for he is thy Lord." (verse 11.) 

Q. Please explain 1 Pet. 3:19,20. 1 have not gotten clearly in 
mind what becomes of the spirits of men from death until the 
resurrection. 

A. (By Bro. Smith.) Does not the Scripture you quote state the 
condition of "spirits in prison"? The first question that would 
naturally occur, in examining this passage, would be, When did 
Christ preach to them? We find the answer in verse 20: "When 
once the patience of God waited in the days of Noah." Gen. 6:3 
refers to Noah's days: "The Lord said, My spirit shall not always 
strive with man. " It is not unreasonable, then, to say he was at 
that time striving with man. 

The general belief, that Christ preached to these spirits during 
his death, we think, unscriptural, for then other spirits than those 
of Noah's day could have heard him. 

None knew better than Jesus that Scripture: "There is no 
knowledge nor device in the grave; " hence he would never go 
there to preach. Isa. 42:7; 49:9 and 61:1 state that Christ is to 
deliver death's prisoners. He did not do so at his first advent 
(excepting the temporary deliverance of Lazarus and a few 



others), but will in due time set at liberty all the captives and 
open the prison doors of hades (the tomb) to all captives. 

Our understanding, then, of 1 Pet. 3:19,20 is this: Those of 
Noah's day who were disobedient, and to whom Christ preached 
by Noah, are NOW in prison. If any Scripture teaches otherwise, 
we shall be glad to have our attention called to it. 

Q. "Would not an earnest, aggressive organization (or sect), 
built upon scriptural lines, be the best means of spreading and 
publishing the real Good Tidings? We must have fellowship and 
sympathy. Union is strength. It is not the skirmishers that win 
the battle, but the disciplined and solid battalions." 

A. We believe that a visible organization, and the adopting of 
some particular name, would tend to increase our numbers and 
make us appear more respectable in the estimation of the world. 
The natural man can see that a visibly organized body, with a 
definite purpose, is a thing of more or less power; therefore, they 
esteem the various organizations, from which we have come out, 
in obedience to the Master's call. But the natural man cannot 
understand how a company of people, with no organization 
which they can see, is ever going to accomplish anything. As 
they look upon us, they regard us simply as a few scattered 
skirmishers-a "peculiar people"— with very peculiar ideas and 
hopes, but not worthy of special notice. 

But, though it is impossible for the natural man to see our 
organization, because he cannot understand the things of the 
Spirit of God, we trust that you can see that the true Church is 
most effectually organized, and in the best possible working 
order. (See the plan of our organization, as stated in October 
issue, under the caption "The Ekklesia. ") The Apostle Paul urges 
all to unity of faith and purpose (Phil. 3:15,16- Diaglott.) All 
led by the same Spirit may and do come to a knowledge of the 
same truth. Under our Captain, all the truly sanctified, however 
few or far separated in person, are closely united by the Spirit of 
Christ, in faith, hope and love; and, in following the Master's 
command, are moving in solid battalions for the 
accomplishment of his purposes. But, bear in mind, God is not 
dependent upon numbers (See Judges 7, as an illustration). 

Recognizing this organization, which is of the Spirit, and 
desiring no assimilation whatever with the worldly, who cannot 
see or understand it, we are quite willing to bear the reproach of 
a peculiar people. We always refuse to be called by any other 
name than that of our Head -Christians-continually claiming 
that their can be no division among those continually led by his 
Spirit and example as made known through his Word. 

We disown none of our Lord's dear children. The weakest child 
of the household of faith (in Christ, our Redeemer) we gladly 
recognize as our brother. Some, in ignorance of their privilege 
of the communion of saints, are mixed with the various worldly 



organizations, to their great detriment. Though we cannot follow 
them there, we gladly welcome them when they come among us. 
Wherever we have hope of finding any such, in the various 
nominal Churches, etc., we tell them the "good tidings of great 
joy," and, by word and example, say, "Come out from among 
them (the worldly, though professing Christians) and be ye 
separate. " How could we deliver this message if we were not 
obeying it? We have unbounded faith in our Captain; and this 
perfect organization, invisible to the world, marches on to 
certain and glorious victory. 

From victory unto victory, 
His army he shall lead; 
'Till every foe is vanquished, 
And Christ is Lord indeed. 



page 6 



FROM BROTHER BLUNDIN. 



MY DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL: I am hungry, not, however, 
for the carnal things of this life-for I have no pleasure in these 
now and rejoice not in them-but rejoice in the truth, for I have 
tasted of the Good Word of God and have found it rich food. 
Oh, so rich that I cannot but hunger for more! and our beloved 
Father continues to give me the blessing promised to those that 
"hunger and thirst after righteousness; for they shall be filled." 
Join me in saying, Glory to his name, for he hath revealed unto 
us, who are not the great men nor the wise men of this world, his 
purposes in Christ, hid from the ages, but now made manifest 
unto us who are living in the end of this Gospel age. To him be 
the glory and the honor for the power of that grace given unto 
me, to "Comprehend, with all saints, what is the length and 
breadth, and know the love of God which passeth all 
knowledge," and, by the power of his grace working in me, 
every thought and every action of my being is being wrought on 
and brought into subjection to his will-for "Whatever is not of 
faith is sin. " 

He has captivated my being, and day and night (when awake) I 
adore and bless him, and rejoice in the hope set before me, 
which is so supremely grand that I can now thank God that I was 
ever born, and that it is my privilege to walk in the footsteps of 
my Lord Jesus, that I may be partaker with him in bringing the 
world into unison with the mind of our God. And, by the 
strength of the grace given unto me, I am ready to bear all things 
that I may attain to that grace (favor) that shall be brought unto 
us at the revelation of our Lord Jesus; for "his reward is with 
him (for us who shall reign with him) and his work before him;" 
(Isaiah 60:10) "for all the ends of the world shall remember and 
turn unto the Lord." (Psa. 22:27.) 



I not only constantly pray, but earnestly seek, that the will of 
God may be wrought in me to the uttermost, that his name may 
be glorified in me, and he does graciously grant unto me 
opportunities of manifesting his name, by unfolding these 
beautiful truths that we have been feeding on for sometime past, 
to those who have an ear to hear; and the word is received gladly 
by those who intimate, by their manner or express themselves in 
words, as desirous of receiving more instruction in these good 
things "God hath revealed... unto us by his Spirit;. ..yea, the deep 
things of God" (1 Cor. 2:10)-The eyes of our understanding 
being enlightened ...(we) know what is the hope of our calling. 
(Eph 1:18.) And I "lay aside every weight"... and "run with 
patience the race set before me;" and I seek not the praise of 
men like myself, but I do earnestly desire the approval of the 
incorruptible God, and I know that I have passed from death (in 
Adam) unto life, (in Christ), because I love the brethren" with an 
unfeigned love: Beholding my Lord in his Word, I am being 
"changed into the same image; " "I shall be satisfied when I 
awake in his likeness;" when I shall have received the end of my 
faith, the salvation of my soul (being). Unto him that hath 
washed me be the glory and the honor and dominion forever. 

S. O. BLUNDIN. 



R458 : page 6 

THE INSPIRATION OF THE BIBLE. 

Extracts from a Lecture by H. L. Hastings, before the 
Massachusetts Annual Convention of Y.M.C. Associations. 

The question as to the inspiration of the Bible is not a question 
raised by me. It is a question that is already up for discussion 
through the length and breadth of this land. What are we to do 
with this book? How are we to regard it? Is it the best book in 
the world, or the worst? Is it a true book, or is it a false one? Is it 
God's book, or is it man's book? 

Over and over again this Book says, "Hear ye the word of the 
Lord. " Now, the message is the word of the Lord, or it is a lie. It 
is the word of the Lord, as it professes to be, or else it is a cheat, 
a swindle, a humbug, a fraud. 

R459 : page 6 

To illustrate: A man tells me that Jesus of Nazareth was a good 
man; but then, there were other men just as good. 

But while you say, "He was simply one of many remarkable 
men," He says, "I came forth from the Father, and am come into 
the world;" and again, "I leave the world, and go to the Father." 
He says, "O Father, glorify thou me with thine own self, with 
the glory which I had with thee before the world was." Now, do 



you say he was a good man and yet he told lies? What is your 
idea of a good man? I do not believe that a good man lies; and I 
do not believe that a man who lies is a good man. Perhaps you 
do, and if so, you were brought up in a different way from that 
in which my father brought me up. So I do not believe that a 
book packed with lies from one end to the other, is a good book; 
and I do not want any one to come and tell me that Jesus Christ 
was a good man, and the Bible is a good book, but neither of 
them tell the truth. I join issue there. This book is what it 
professes to be, or it is a swindle; Jesus of Nazareth was what he 
professed to be, or he was an impostor. 

Suppose a man comes to town and represents himself as the son 
of a British nobleman. He is well-dressed and has plenty of 
money; but after a while they find out that he is the son of a 
blacksmith, down in the next town. Now I do not want you to 
tell me how well he behaves, what fine broadcloth he wears, or 
what a perfect gentleman he is in all his deportment. The fact is 
that he is a liar, a fraud, and a scamp. He has come under false 
colors, and palmed himself off on the community under false 
pretenses; and the more good things you may say about him the 
less I think of him; because if he is such a well-educated 
gentleman, he knows better than to be going around as a fraud, 
and deceiving the people. So we must accept Jesus of Nazareth 
and his claims entirely, or else we must reject the whole gospel 
as an imposture, and as the grandest, most stupendous fraud the 
world has ever known. 

Now, do not be fooled by this talk about the Bible being "a good 
book," and yet just like many other good books. There is not 
another like it in the world. Let us look at some of its 
peculiarities :— 

Here is one: The Bible is a book which has been refuted, 
demolished, overthrown, and exploded more times than any 
other book you ever heard of. Every little while somebody starts 
up and upsets this book; and it is like upsetting a solid cube of 
granite. It is just as big one way as the other; and when you 
overturn it again, it is right side up still. They overthrew the 
Bible a century ago, in Voltaire's time —entirely demolished the 
whole thing. "In less than a hundred years," said Voltaire, 
"Christianity will be swept from existence, and have passed into 
history. " Infidelity ran riot through France, red-handed and 
impious. A 

R459 : page 7 

century has passed away. Voltaire's old printing-press, it is said, 
has since been used to print the word of God; and the very house 
where he lived has been packed with Bibles from garret to 
cellar, as a depot for the Bible Society. Up to the year 1800, 
from four to six million copies of the Scriptures, in some thirty 
different languages, comprised all that had been produced since 



the world began. Eighty years later, in 1880, the statistics of 
eighty different Bible societies which are now in existence with 
their unnumbered agencies and auxiliaries, report more than 
165,000,000 Bibles, Testaments, and portions of Scripture, with 
two hundred and six new translations, distributed by Bible 
societies alone since 1804; to say nothing of the unknown 
millions of Bibles and Testaments which have been issued and 
circulated by private publishers throughout the world. For a 
book that has been exploded so many times, this book yet shows 
signs of considerable life. 

I hear of a man traveling around the country exploding this 
Book and showing up "The Mistakes of Moses," at about two 
hundred dollars a night. It would be worth something after 
hearing the infidel on "The Mistakes of Moses," to hear Moses 
on the mistakes of the infidel. When Moses could talk back, he 
was rather a difficult man to deal with. Pharaoh tried it, and sank 
like lead beneath the waves. Jannes and Jambres withstood 
Moses, and it is said were buried in the Red sea. Korah, Dathan, 
and Abiram tried it, and went down so deep that they have not 
yet got back. But now Moses is dead, and it is easy to abuse 
him. It does not take a very brave beast to kick a dead lion. * 

But, after all, this book seems to stand abuse, and thrive upon 
refutation. A few months ago some learned men, after working 
for a number of years on the revision of the New Testament, 
finished their work. Having inserted a few modern words 
instead of others which had become obsolete, made some slight 
corrections of errors in translation, and rectified from ancient 
manuscripts some little errors which had been made by copyists 
in transcribing the book, at last the book was announced as 
ready to be issued on a certain day. What was the result? Why, 
men offered five hundred dollars to get a copy of that Book a 
little in advance of its publication; and the morning it was 
published the streets of New York were blockaded with express 
wagons backed up and waiting for copies of that Book which 
had been refuted, exploded, and dead and buried for so many 
years. Millions of copies of that Book were sold as fast as they 
could be delivered. They telegraphed the whole of that Book 
from New York to Chicago, for the sake of getting it there to 
print in a newspaper twenty four hours in advance of the mail. 

A dead book, is it? They would not pay for telegraphing the 
greatest infidel speech ever delivered in this country. This old 
book seems to show some signs of life yet. 

It outlives its foes. If you could gather all the books written 
against it, you could build a pyramid higher than Bunker Hill 
Monument. Now and then a man goes to work to refute the 
Bible; and every time it is done, it has to be done over again the 
next day or the next year. And then after its enemies have done 
their worst, some of its professed friends torture and twist and 
misrepresent it. It lives through all that. Infidels have been at 



work for nearly eighteen hundred years, firing away at it, and 
making about as much impression upon it as you would 
shooting boiled peas at Gibraltar. 

The fact is, this book has come into the world, and it seems to 
have come to stay. It is in the world, and I do not know how you 
are to get it out. One hundred years ago you might have found 
that book in twenty or thirty translations; but now you can find it 
in from between two and three hundred different versions, most 
of which have been made in this last progressive, intellectual, 
nineteenth century. All over the globe it goes; touch any shore 
and you will find the Book there before you. 

Every one knows that where this Book has influence it makes 
things safe. Why is this? If it were a bad book, we should expect 
to find it in the hands of the worst men. If it were a bad book, 
you would expect a man to have a revolver in one pocket and a 
New Testament tucked away in another. 

What makes the book so different from all other books? Whose 
book is it? Who made it? Infidels have the strangest ideas of that 
subject. I recollect in Marlboro, Mass., I read in a paper an 
article written by an infidel, which stated that the Council of 
Nice in the year 325, compiled the New Testament. They had a 
lot of Gospels and Epistles, genuine and spurious, and no one 
could distinguish between the two; so they put them all on the 
floor, and prayed that the good ones might get up on the 
communion table and the bad ones stay on the floor; and that 
was the way the present New Testament was compiled. 

And that very statement can be found in infidel books now 
published in Boston. This writer said that this account rested on 
the authority of Papias, an early Christian Bishop. I replied in a 
lecture, that there was one difficulty about that story-that Papias 
was dead and buried a hundred and fifty years before the 
Council of Nice was held. The man rose to explain, and said that 
this was not the right Papias, but that it was another Papias, an 
obscure Christian Bishop of the fourth century. I told him I 
thought he was obscure, so obscure that no one ever heard of 
him before or since. On investigation it was learned that a 
German dominie, named John Pappus, preacher in Strausburg, 
and a professor at Munster, who died in 1610, discovered this 
story in an old Greek manuscript entitled "Synodikon," which 
was written by some one down in the dark ages, about the year 
900; for it relates things which occurred as late as 869, or five 
hundred years after the Council of Nice was dead and buried. 
And this story, written nobody knows when, where, or by 
whom, has been swallowed, believed, and published by infidels 
far and near, as an account of the origin of the New Testament. 

I have on one of my library shelves, between twenty and thirty 
volumes, containing about twelve thousand pages of the writings 
of different Christian authors who wrote before A.D. 325, when 



the Council of Nice was held. These books are full of Scripture. 
Those writers had the same books which we have; they quoted 
the same passages which we quote; they quoted from the same 
books from which we quote. 

Origen, who wrote a hundred years before the Council of Nice, 
quotes five thousand seven hundred and forty-five passages 
from all the books in the New Testament; Tertullian, A.D. 200, 



*It would be interesting to hear a military leader and legislator, 
like "Moses the man of God, " who, after he was eighty years 
old, commanded for forty years an army of six hundred 
thousand men, emancipating, organizing, and giving laws to a 
nation which has maintained its existence for more than thirty 
stormy centuries, give his candid opinion concerning "the 
mistakes" of a "Colonel" of cavalry, whose military career is 
said to have included one single engagement. 

R460 : page 7 

makes more than three thousand quotations from the New 
Testament books; Clement, A.D. 194, quotes three hundred and 
eighty passages; Irenaeus, A.D. 178, quotes seven hundred and 
sixty-seven passages; Polycarp, who was martyred A.D. 165, 
after having served Christ eighty six years, in a single epistle 
quoted thirty-six passages; Justin Martyr, A.D. 140, also quotes 
from the New Testament; to say nothing of heathen and infidel 
writers like Celsus, A.D. 150, and Porphyry, A.D. 304, who 
referred to and quoted multitudes of the very passages now 
found in the Scriptures which we have. Indeed, Lord Hailes, of 
Scotland, having searched the writings of the Christian Fathers 
to the end of the third century actually found the whole of the 
New Testament, with the exception of less than a dozen verses, 
scattered through their writings which are still extant; so that, if 
at the time of the Council of Nice every copy of the New 
Testament had been annihilated, the book could have been 
reproduced from the writings of the early Christian Fathers, who 
quoted the book as we quote it, and who believed it. And now 
infidels talk about the Council of Nice getting up the New 
Testament. You might as well talk about a town-meeting getting 
up the Revised Statutes of the State of Massachusetts, because 
they happened to say they accepted or received them. The 
Council of Nice did nothing of the kind. The books of the New 
Testament were received from the Apostles who wrote them, 
and were carefully preserved, and publicly read in the churches 
of Christ long before the Council of Nice was held. 

Says Tertullian, A.D. 200, "If you are willing to exercise your 
curiosity profitably in the business of your salvation, visit the 
apostolic churches, in which the very chairs of the apostles still 
preside in their places; in which their very authentic letters are 
recited, sounding forth the voice and representing the 



countenance of every one of them. Is Achaia near you? You 
have Corinth. If you are not far from Macedonia you have 
Phillippi and Thessalonica; if you can go to Asia you have 
Ephesus, but if you are near to Italy we have Rome. " 

These apostolic churches received the Gospel at the hands of 
men who wrote them; and the epistles were given and signed by 
men whom they well knew. Paul wrote, "The salutation of me, 
Paul, by mine own hand, which is the token in every epistle, so I 
write." 

Now, what did these writers testify? They testified things which 
they knew. The Apostle John did not say, "That which we have 
dreamed, imagined, or guessed at, that thing do we declare unto 
you;" but "that which was from the beginning, which we have 
heard, which we have seen with our eyes, which we have looked 
upon, and our hands have handled, of the word of Life." (1 John 
1:1.) This was their testimony. They testified that they saw 
Christ in his life and in his death; that they saw him after his 
resurrection, and they knew these things and testified of them. 
They preached Christ, who had died and risen again. These 
Apostles suffered the loss of all things, and imperilled their very 
lives in proclaiming truth; and they left their testimony on 
record in this Book. Then, the apostles quote from the prophets, 
and the prophets quote from the Psalms, and refer to the law 
which was given on Mount Sinai; and so we go back from book 
to book, until we reach the book of Genesis, and that does not 
quote from anybody or anything. You have then reached the 
fountain head. 

"But," says one, "I think the Bible may be a true history." So 
you think it an easy matter to tell the truth, do you? I wish you 
could make other people think so. Suppose you go and read a 
file of the newspapers published just before the last election, and 
see if you do not think it requires divine inspiration to tell the 
truth, or even to find it out after it is told. Truth is mighty hard to 
get at, as you can see by perusing the daily papers on the eve of 
an election. 

There are certain things in the Bible which, to my mind, bear the 
impress of divinity. A skeptic will tell you what a race of sinners 
we read about in the Bible! Do you suppose that if the Bible had 
been revised by a committee of eminent divines, and published 
by some great religious society, we should ever have heard of 
Noah's drunkenness, of Jacob's cheating, or of Peter's lying, 
cursing, or dissembling? Not at all. The good men, when they 
came to such an incident, would have said, "There is no use in 
saying anything about that. It is all past and gone; it will not 
help anything, and it will only hurt the cause. " If a committee of 
such eminent divines had prepared the Bible, you would have 
got a biography of men whose characters were patterns of piety 
and propriety. Sometimes a man writes his own diary, and 
happens to leave it for some one to print after he is dead; but he 



leaves out all the mean tricks he ever did, and puts in all the 
good acts he can ever think of; and you read the pages, filled 
with astonishment, and think, "What a wonderfully good man he 
was!" But when the Almighty writes a man's life he tells the 
truth about him; and there are not many who would want their 
lives printed if the Almighty wrote them. 

When the Lord undertakes to tell his story of a sinful man he 
does not select a poor, miserable beggar, and show him up; he 
does not give even the name of the guilty woman who bathed 
the Savior's feet with her tears; but he takes King David from 
the throne and sets him down in sackcloth and ashes, and wrings 
from his heart the cry, "Have mercy upon me, O God, according 
to thy loving-kindness; according to the multitude of thy tender 
mercies blot out all my transgressions." And then when he is 
pardoned, forgiven, cleansed, and made whiter than snow, the 
pen of inspiration writes down the dark, damning record of his 
crimes, and the king on his throne has not power nor wealth or 
influence enough to blot the page; and it goes into history for 
infidels to scoff at for three thousand years. Who wrote that? 

You find a man who will tell the truth about kings, warriors, 
princes and presidents to-day, and you may be quite sure that he 
has within him the power of the Holy Spirit. And a book which 
tells the faults of those who wrote it, and which tells you that 
"there is none righteous, no, not one," bears in it the marks of a 
true book; for we all know that men have faults and failings and 
sins, and among all the men described in that Book, every man 
whose life is recorded has some defect, some blot, save one, and 
that is "the man Christ Jesus." 

Men say there are difficulties and absurdities and errors and 
contradictions in the Bible. After speaking once in the city of 
Boston, an infidel came to me and told me that the Bible was not 
true, for there was that story which Moses told about the quails. 
Israel lusted after flesh, and the Lord sent them quails to eat, and 
they fell by the camp a day's journey on each side, or over a 
territory forty miles across, and they were two cubits deep on 
the ground, and the Israelites ate them for about a month. I have 
in my possession an infidel paper which was published in 
Boston, in which there is about a column of arguments and 
figures on this "quail story;" giving an estimate of the number of 
bushels of quails that were piled up over the country, and 
showing that when they were divided among the six million 
Israelites, each Jew would have 2,888,643 bushels of quails, 
which they were to eat during the month, giving each poor 
Israelite 69,620 bushels of quail to eat at each meal during the 
month; and therefore the Bible was not true! I answered that the 
Bible did not say any such thing. He insisted that it did. "Well," 
said I, "find it!" He could not find the place; so I turned over to 
the eleventh chapter of Numbers, and there read that instead of 
the birds being packed like cordwood on the ground, three feet 



deep, the account says that the Lord brought the quails from the 
sea, and let them fall by the camp, as it were "two cubits high," 
or about three feet high upon or above the face of the earth. That 
is, instead of flying overhead and out of reach, they were 
brought in about three feet high, where any one could take as 
many of them as he chose. And this skeptical friend had got the 
birds packed solid, three feet deep, over a territory forty miles 
across. As if some one should say that a flock of geese flew as 
high as Bunker Hill Monument, and we should insist that they 
were packed solid from the ground up, two hundred and twenty- 
one feet high! This is a sample of the arguments to prove that 
the Bible is not true! 

The book, to my mind, bears the marks of inspiration in the 
foresight which it exhibits. This Book foretells things. You 
cannot do that. You cannot tell what will be next year, or next 
week. "The spirits" cannot tell who will be the next President. 
They may tell a great many things that are past. They may tell 
you who your grandmother was, and may copy the inscriptions 
on your grandfather's grave-stone, and may tell things which 
were written in the family record. They may reveal many things 
in the past-for the devil knows about the past-but they cannot 
foretell the future. 

The revelations of prophecy are facts 

R460 : page 8 

which exhibit the divine omniscience. So long as Babylon is in 
heaps, so long as Nineveh lies empty, void, and waste; so long 
as Egypt is the basest of kingdoms; so long as Tyre is a place for 
the spreading of nets in the midst of the sea; so long as Israel is 
scattered among all nations; so long as Jerusalem is trodden 
under foot of the Gentiles; so long as the great empires of the 
world march on in their predicted course— so long we have proof 
that one omniscient mind dictated that Book, and "prophecy 
came not in old time by the will of man. " 

We call this Bible a book, but here are sixty different books, 
written by 

R461 : page 8 

thirty or forty different men. A man may say, "I do not believe 
in the book of Esther. " Well, what of that? We have sixty-five 
others left. What will you do with them? A man says, "I find 
fault with this chapter or with that. " Suppose you do? If you 
were on trial for murder and had sixty-six witnesses against you, 
suppose you impeach one of them, there are sixty-five left; 
impeach another, and you still have sixty- four left; impeach 
another, and you have sixty-three— enough to hang you up if you 
are guilty. Do you not see that you cannot impeach this Book 
unless you do it in detail? Each book bears its own witness, and 
stands by itself on its own merits; and yet each book is linked 



with all the rest. Blot out one, if you can. I am inclined to think 
it would be difficult to do this. This book is built to stay 
together; it is inspired by one Spirit. 

The authorship of this Book is wonderful. Here are words 
written by kings, by emperors, by princes, by poets, by sages, by 
philosophers, by fishermen, by statesmen; by men learned in the 
wisdom of Egypt, educated in the schools of Babylon, trained up 
at the feet of rabbis in Jerusalem. It was written by men in exile, 
in the desert, and in shepherd's tents, in "green pastures" and 
beside "still waters." Among its authors we find the fishermen, 
the tax-gatherer, the herdsman, the gatherer of sycamore fruit; 
we find poor men, rich men, statesmen, preachers, exiles, 
captains, legislators, judges— men of every grade and class. The 
authorship of this Book is wonderful beyond all other books. 

And what a book it is— filled with law, ethics, prophecy, poetry, 
history, genealogy, sanitary science, political economy. It 
contains all kinds of writing; but what a jumble it would be if 
sixty-six books were written in this way by ordinary men. 
Suppose, for instance, that we get sixty-six medical books 
written by thirty or forty different doctors of various schools, 
believers in allopathy, homeopathy, hydropathy, and all the 
other opathies, bind them all together, and then undertake to 
doctor a man according to that book! What man would be fool 
enough to risk the results of practicing such a system of 
medicine? Or, suppose you get thirty-five editors at work 
writing treatises on politics, and then see if you can find any 
leather strong enough to hold the books together when they have 
got through. 

But again, it took fifteen hundred years to write this Book, and 
the man who wrote the closing pages of it had no 
communication with the man who commenced it. How did these 
men, writing independently, produce such a book? Other books 
get out of date when they are ten or twenty years old: but this 
book lives on through the ages, and keeps abreast of the 
mightiest thought and intellect of every age. 

Suppose that thirty or forty men should walk in through that 
door. One man comes from Maine, another from New 
Hampshire another from Massachusetts, and so on from each 
state, each bearing a block of marble of peculiar shape. Suppose 
I pile up these blocks in order until I have the figure of a man, 
perfectly symmetrical and beautifully chiseled, and I say, "How 
did these men, who had never seen each other, chisel out that 
beautiful statue?" You say, "That is easily explained. One man 
planned that whole statue, made the patterns, gave the 
directions, distributed them around; and so, each man working 
by the pattern, the work fits accurately when completed. " Very 
well. Here is a book coming from all quarters, written by men of 
all classes, scattered through a period of fifteen hundred years; 
and yet this book is fitted together as a wondrous and 



harmonious whole. How was it done? "Holy men of God spake 
as they were moved by the Holy Ghost. " One mind inspires the 
whole Book, one voice speaks in it all, and it is the voice of 
God. 

Again, I conclude that this book has in it the very breath of God, 
from the effect that it produces upon men. There are men who 
study philosophy, astronomy, geology, geography, and 
mathematics, but did you ever hear a man say, "I was an out- 
cast, a wretched inebriate, a disgrace to my race, and a nuisance 
in the world, until I began to study mathematics, and learned the 
multiplication table, and then turned my attention to geology, 
got me a little hammer, and knocked off the corners of the rocks 
and studied the formation of the earth; but since that time I have 
been as happy as the day is long; I feel like singing all the time, 
my soul is full of triumph and peace; and health and blessing 
have come to my desolate home once more. " Did you ever hear 
a man ascribe his redemption and salvation from intemperance 
and sin and vice to the multiplication table, or the science of 
mathematics or geology? But I can bring you, not one man, or 
two, or ten, but men by the thousand who will tell you, "I was 
wretched; I was lost; I broke my poor old mother's heart; I 
beggared my family; my wife was broken hearted and dejected; 
my children fled from the sound of their father's footstep; I was 
ruined, reckless, helpless, homeless, hopeless until I heard the 
words of that Book!" And since that word entered his heart he 
will tell you that hope has dawned upon his vision; that joy has 
inspired his heart; and that his mouth is filled with grateful song. 
He will tell you that the blush of health has come back to his 
poor wife's faded cheek; that the old hats have vanished from 
the windows of his desolate home; that his rags have been 
exchanged for good clothes; that his children run to meet him 
when he comes; that there is bread on his table, fire on his 
hearth, and comfort in his dwelling. He will tell you all that, and 
he will tell you that the Book has done the work. Now, this 
Book is working just such miracles, and is doing it every day. If 
you have any other book that will do such work as this, bring it 
along. The work needs to be done; if you have the book that will 
do it, bring it out. But for the present, while we are waiting for 
you, as we know this Book will do the work, we propose to use 
it until we can get something better. 

Christians sometimes try to defend the word of God, but it is its 
own best witness and defender. The best thing for us to do is to 
bring out the word of God, and let "the word of the Spirit" prove 
its own power, as it pierces "even to the dividing asunder of soul 
and spirit. " 

The Book is its own witness. It bears its own fruits and tells its 
own story. It is a sorrowful fact that you can hardly go into a 
prayer-meeting but you are likely to hear a quotation from 
Scripture that is not in the Bible and never was. You may hear, 



"In the midst of life we are in death," from the Prayer-book; "He 
tempers the wind to the shorn lamb," from an old romance; 
"God unchangeably ordains whatsoever comes to pass," from 
the Catechism; accompanied by passages misquoted, 
misunderstood, and misapplied, which show that the people do 
not study their Bibles and do not understand them. We need to 
read the Bible, to search it, study it, believe it, and obey it, and 
we shall find that it is the word of salvation to the perishing, and 
that it is filled with sanctifying power. 

But, says one, "I do not understand the Bible. I read it, but I 
cannot make anything of it." "How do you read your Bible?" 
"Oh, I read a chapter now and then; I read it here and there." 
Suppose your boy comes home from school and says, "I can't 
make anything of this arithmetic; it is all dark to me." You say 
to him, "How did you study it?" "Oh, I read a little at the 
beginning, and then I turned to the middle and read a little here 
and there, and skipped backward and forward. But I don't 
understand it; I can't see into it. " 

You say to him, "My son, that is not the way to understand 
arithmetic. You must begin with the simplest elements, and 
master every principle, learn every rule, solve every problem, 
and thus the whole book will open to you as you go on. " 

Take the Bible, and read it from beginning to end, and see how 
it comes out? You will find it the grandest and most thrilling 
story the world has ever known. Begin at the beginning, and 
read until you find out who is the hero of the story. You will 
find that the presence of one person pervades the whole book. If 
you go into the British navy- yard, or on board a British vessel, 
and pick up a piece of rope, you will find that there is one little 
colored thread which runs through the whole of it- through 
every foot of cordage which belongs to the British government— 
so, if a piece of rope is stolen, it may be cut into inch pieces, but 
every piece has the mark which tells where it belongs. It is so 
with the Bible. You may separate it into a thousand parts, and 
yet you will find one thought-one great fact running through the 
whole of it. You will find it constantly pointing and referring to 
one great Personage— "the seed of the woman" that shall crush 
the serpent's head; the seed of Abraham, in whom all the nations 
of the earth shall be blessed; the seed of David, who shall sit on 
David's throne, and reign forever; the despised and rejected 
sufferer, the "man of sorrows," "the Christ of God," born in 
Bethlehem, crucified on Calvary, rising triumphant from 
Joseph's tomb, ascending to sit at God's right hand, and coming 
again to judge the world and reign as King and Lord of all 
forever. Around this one mighty Personage this whole book 
revolves. "To him give all the prophets witness;" and this Book, 
which predicts his coming in its earliest pages, which 
foreshadows his person and his ministry through all its 
observances, types, and sacred prophecies, reveals in its closing 



lines the eternal splendors which shall crown and consummate 
his mighty work. 

God's Word declares the end from the beginning. It is not only 
the chart which guides every weary wanderer to his own eternal 
rest, but it is the record of the great plan and purpose of the 
Almighty. It unfolds God's everlasting purpose, as manifested in 
Jesus Christ; and if one will read three chapters at 

R462 : page 8 

the first of the Bible and three at the end, he will be struck with 
the correspondence which there exists. 

At the beginning of the Bible we find a new world: "In the 
beginning God created the heavens and the earth. " At the end of 
the Bible we find a new world: "I saw a new heaven and a new 
earth; for the first heaven and the first earth were passed away. " 
At the beginning, we find Satan entering to deceive and destroy; 
at the end we find Satan cast out, "that he should deceive the 
nations no more. " At the beginning, sin and pain and sorrow and 
sighing and death find entrance to the world; at the end, there 
shall be no more pain nor sorrow, no sighing, and no more 
death. At the beginning, the earth, for man's transgression, is 
cursed with thorns and thistles; at the end, "there shall be no 
more curse, but the throne of God and of the Lamb shall be in 
it. " At the beginning, we find the tree of life in paradise, from 
which the sinner is shut away by a flaming sword, lest he eat 
and live forever; at the end, we find the tree of life again "in the 
midst of the paradise of God," and the blessed and the blood- 
washed ones have a right to the tree of life, and "enter in through 
the gates into the city. " At the beginning, man was beneath the 
dominion of death and the grave; at the end, "the dead, small 
and great, stand before God," the sea gives up its dead, and 
death and hell are destroyed in the lake of fire. At the beginning, 
the first Adam lost his dominion over earth, and was driven out 
of the garden of Eden in shame and sorrow; at the end, we find 
the second Adam, victorious over sin and death, enthroned as 
King and Lord of all, and reigning in triumph and glory forever. 

Now, when you get the plan of this Book, you find that it is 
something more than a book of detached sentences, good 
maxims, and comforting words. It is a Book which unfolds the 
divine purpose, and reveals not only the way of salvation, but it 
marks the pathway of the people of God through this wilderness, 
and reveals the destiny of the world and the church. 

When we look at these facts we see that this is no man-made 
book. When Columbus discovered the river Orinoco, some one 
said he had found an island. He replied: "No such river as that 
flows from an island. That mighty torrent must drain the waters 
of a continent." So this Book comes, not from the empty hearts 
of impostors, liars and deceivers; it springs from the eternal 
depths of divine wisdom, love and grace. It is the transcript of 



the Divine Mind, the unfolding of the divine purpose, the 
revelation of the divine will. God help us to receive it, to believe 
it, and be saved through Christ our Lord! 



page 8 

BIBLE STUDENTS' HELPS. 

For a time we were unable to fill orders for the EMPHATIC 
DIAGLOTT at the reduced rate, but we can now do so. 
Remember— but slightly damaged on inside of cover— $1.50. 

YOUNG'S CONCORDANCE: We wish that all our readers had 
this very valuable work while we can furnish them at the 
reduced rate, (i.e., half the usual price; $1.75 by express, or 51c 
extra for postage, if sent by mail-the latter is cheapest for those 
at a distance from Pittsburgh). The price at which we furnish 
them is less than wholesale price. This is the latest revised and 
most complete edition pub lished-the "Students' Edition." This 
work is at once a Greek and Hebrew Lexicon, giving the 
meaning of the original terms in English, and also a 
Concordance giving each word of Scripture and the words 
which they translate. The value of such a work is becoming 
more apparent daily, as theorisers attempt to palm off a private 
interpretation under guise of "a better definition of the original. " 

In this superb volume every word is arranged under its own 
Hebrew and Greek original, exhibiting 31 1,000 references and 
30,000 various readings. Its size is large quarto, 1094 pages. 

A similar work, "Englishman's Greek and Hebrew 
Concordance," (3 vols.) sold at $22, in cloth binding, only seven 
years ago, and usually reached only the hands of scholars; but 
the present work, by one of the ripest scholars of the age, (Prof. 
Young, of Edinburgh, Scotland) has been printed in immense 
quantities, and at a price bringing it within the reach of all 
students. Indeed, it seems providential that it should be provided 
so cheaply at a time when it can be of so great service to truth 
seekers. At the price at which we furnish it, even our English 
and Scotch readers can save considerable by ordering them at 
this office. No Bible student can afford to be without a copy. It 
is of more value than two years' study of the Greek and Hebrew 
languages. 



page 8 



"FOOD" AND 
"TABERNACLE TEACHINGS." 

We still have some of these pamphlets for those who have not 
yet read them. We desire, however, to keep them for those 
whose appetite has been sharpened by first reading the October 
number of Z. W.T. Let such order them, but for loaning or giving 
to uninterested ones the October paper is best. We can send you 
as many of the latter as you can use. 

FOOD FOR THINKING CHRISTIANS is a pamphlet of 162 
pages. "THE TABERNACLE AND ITS TEACHINGS" 
contains 96 pages. Both are published from the Tract Fund and 
are FREE. 



R462 : page 1 

VOL. IV. 

PITTSBURGH, PA., APRIL, 1883. 

NO. 9. 



page 1 

ZION'S 

Watch Tower 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S 
PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED MONTHLY AT 101 Fifth Avenue, Pittsburgh, 

Pa. 



C. T. RUSSELL, Editor and Publisher. 



The Editor recognizes a responsibility to the Master, relative to 
what shall appear in these columns, which he cannot and does 
not cast aside; yet he should not be understood as endorsing 
every expression of correspondents, or of articles selected from 
other periodicals. 

TERMS OF SUBSCRIPTION. 

TERMS : —Fifty cents a year, postage prepaid. You may send 
paper money to the amount of two dollars, by mail, at our risk. 
Larger amounts may be sent by Drafts, P.O. Money Order, or 
Registered Letter, payable to C. T. RUSSELL. 

FOREIGN TERMS. 

Foreign Postage being higher, our terms to foreign subscribers 
will be 65 cents a year. Please send us no foreign money or 
postage stamps, as we can make no use of them. Remittances 
may be made by Foreign Postal Money Orders. 

TAKE NOTICE. 

This paper will be sent free to any of the Lord's poor who will 
send a card yearly requesting it. Freely we have received and 
freely we would give the truth. "Ho, every one that thirsteth, 
come ye to the waters; and he that hath no money, come ye, buy 
and eat— yea, come, buy wine and milk without money and 



without price. " And you that have it- "Wherefore do ye spend 
money for that which is not bread? and your labor for that which 
satisfieth not? Hearken diligently-and eat ye that which is good, 
and let your soul delight itself in fatness."- ISAIAH 55:1,2. 



page 1 

NO 3-CENT STAMPS-paper money preferred. We cannot pay 
for Diaglotts, or Concordances, or Printer's bills with stamps, 
and are at much inconvenience and loss of time in trying to 
exchange stamps for money. 



TISCHENDORF TESTAMENTS. -The orders for this work 
have been in excess of the present supply. We expect more in a 
few days, when the orders will be promptly filled. 



GATHERINGS FOR PASSOVER. 

The Church at Newark, N.J., send word that they will meet at 
Room No. 1 , Library Hall. 

At Philadelphia, Pa., at the residence of Bro. R. H. McMunn, 
corner Third and W. Norris streets. 

The church at Pittsburgh, Pa., at Hall over "Third National 
Bank" No. 101 Federal Street, Allegheny (second floor). 

All consecrated Christians, trusting in the value of the "blood 
shed for the remission of sins," are cordially invited to meet with 
us. 

Meetings will of course, be held in many places of which no 
announcement is publicly made. 

The hour of meeting will be 7:30 P.M., Saturday, April 21st. 



R462 : page 1 



VIEW FROM THE TOWER. 

The Lord is granting us much to encourage us lately, and no 
doubt his all- wise eye saw the time encouragements were most 
needed. 

Nothing encourages us more than the excellent letters which 
daily come to hand in great numbers. It is pleasant to hear from 
those freshly interested in the truth, as a newly-found treasure 
long hid, even though we realize that some may be "stony- 
ground" hearers, who have not much root, and when persecution 
or distress ariseth, because of the Word, by and by may be 
offended and wither away as rapidly as they sprung up. 



It is specially encouraging to hear of those who are growing 
both in grace and knowledge, enduring hardness, trials, 
persecutions; as good soldiers, fighting the good fight of faith, 
and laying hold on eternal life. 

There could be no better evidence of progress and searching for 
truth than the many orders constantly coming in for the helps to 
study— a desire to take advantage of the various helps which 
seem to be providentially provided now. 



R462 : page 1 



THE SON OF GOD. 



The character of our Lord Jesus Christ has not only been the 
admiration of all his true disciples and followers since he passed 
that wonderful life narrated by the evangelists, but it has often 
been the theme of wonder and approbation on the part of many 
who were never ranked among his devoted adherents. It is only 
our purpose in this brief article to quote some of these 
expressions of admiration and praise as they have been drawn 
from different ones in contemplating the divine nature and 
character of the Son of God. 

The oft-quoted and well-known eulogy of Rousseau, shows how 
he esteemed that perfect personage who is the subject of gospel 
narrative, as well as what impressions those extraordinary 
narratives made upon his mind. He says: 

"How petty are the books of the philosophers, with all their 
pomp, compared with the Gospels! Can it be that writings at 
once so sublime and so simple are the work of men? Can he 
whose life they tell be himself no more than a man? Is there 
anything in his character of the enthusiast or the ambitious 
sectary? What sweetness, what purity in his ways, what touching 
grace in his teachings! What a loftiness in his maxims; what 
profound wisdom in his words ! What presence of mind, what 
delicacy and aptness in his replies ! What an empire over his 
passions ! Where is the man, where is the sage, who knows how 
to act, to suffer, and to die without weakness, and without 
display? My friends, men do not invent like this; and the facts 
respecting Socrates, which no one doubts, are not so well 
attested as those about Jesus Christ. These Jews could never 
have struck this tone, or thought of this morality, and the Gospel 
has characteristics of truthfulness so grand, so striking, so 
perfectly inimitable, that their inventors would be even more 
wonderful than he whom they portray." 

On one occasion Napoleon said: "From first to last Jesus is the 
same; always the same— majestic and simple, infinitely severe 
and infinitely gentle. Throughout a life passed under the public 
eye he never gives occasion to find fault. The prudence of his 



conduct compels our admiration by its union of force and 
gentleness. Alike in speech and action, he is enlightened, 
consistent, and calm. Sublimity is said to be an attribute of 
divinity: what name then, shall we give him in whose character 
was united every element of the sublime? I know men, and I tell 
you Jesus was not a man. Everything in him amazes me. 
Comparison is impossible between him and any other being in 
the world. He is truly a being by himself. His ideas and his 
sentiments, the truth that he announces, his manner of 
convincing, are all beyond humanity and the natural order of 
things. His birth, and the story of his life; the profoundness of 
his doctrine, which overturns all difficulties, and is their most 
complete solution; his Gospel, the singularity of his mysterious 
being, his appearance, his empire, his progress through all 
centuries and kingdoms— all this is to me a prodigy, an 
unfathomable mystery. I see nothing here of man. Near as I may 
approach, closely as I may examine, all remains above 
comprehension— great with greatness that crushes me. It is in 
vain that I reflect— all remains unaccountable! I defy you to cite 
another life like that of Christ. "-The Restitution. 



Humanity seems bent on extreme views; like a pendulum, they 
are on one extreme or the other till they stop. Men rush to one or 
the other extreme according to their temperament, till they stop 
making a way or plan of their own, and accept of God's way- 
God's plan -then they reach the center of truth. 

So on this subject of the Son of God; one class will affirm that 
he was an imperfect man, born under the curse like all other 
men, while another class will go to the other extreme, and claim 
that he was JEHOVAH himself. Both pass the center of truth 
while reaching the opposite extremes of error. 

On the contrary, how guarded are the Scriptures on both these 
points— guarding us against both extremes and setting forth the 
truth, both beautiful and harmonious. On the one hand it assures 
us that there is the one supreme being— Jehovah: "Hear, O Israel, 
Jehovah our God is one Jehovah" (Deut. 6:4 -Young). To this 
testimony Jesus and the apostles give assent. Jesus declares, "I 
came... not to do mine own will, but the will of him that sent 
me"-"My Father is greater than I"- at the same time assuring us 
that he and the Father were one in harmony and interest. The 
Apostle declares the same thing, saying, "There is but one God, 
the Father, of whom are all things, and we in him; and one Lord 
Jesus Christ, by whom are all things, and we by him." (1 Cor. 
8:6.) 

And, again, the head of the woman is the man, the head of every 
man is Christ, and "the head of Christ is God" -the Father (1 
Cor. 11:3 and 15:24). 



On the other hand it assures us that he was without spot or 
blemish— undefiled, separate from the race of sinners -in him 
was no sin; he was holy 

R463 : page 1 

from his birth; that he lost not the right to live as do we, through 
Adam's sin, but that "in him was life, " and no cause of death was 
found in him; and hence his death was a voluntary offering, as a 
payment of the penalty of our sins. 

Yes, it is the plain teaching of the Word that he who had a 
higher form became a MAN-not an imperfect man, but a MAN- 
-a full, perfect representative of the highest order of earthly 
beings. "Thou madest him a little lower than the angels; thou 
crownedst him with glory and honor" (Heb. 2:7,9). Compare, 
also, Phil. 2:6-11. Dia. When this perfect man consecrated 
himself at baptism, he was begotten to a new nature, higher than 
human, higher than angelic, higher than the nature he had laid 
aside to become a man— the Divine nature —"so much better than 
angels." 

But this divine nature in Jesus was not attained until the 
consecrated human nature was fully dead— only an earnest of the 
coming nature could the man Jesus receive. 

When Jesus was among men, the natural superiority of a perfect 
man, the natural crown of "glory and honor"- attaching to an 
unblemished Lord of earth— caused him to shine among men, so 
that his enemies said, "Never man spake like this man, " and the 
multitudes hung on his words, and, if he had not hindered, 
would have taken him by force and made him a king. Even as a 
lad he was able to confound the most learned of his nation. So 
much, at least, may be said of Jesus as a perfect man. Added to 
these natural powers were the special gifts of miracles which 
were given him as attesting that he was owned of God. Yet, it 
should be remembered, that it was not the miracles which 
specially marked him as above other men; for miracles, and 
even raising of the dead, had been done by Prophets centuries 
before. That which impressed the above writers, and all thinking 
people, when studying the record of Jesus, is the grand 
perfection of his being-of his acts and his teachings. 

Nor, should we so much wonder at this, if it were but borne in 
mind that the perfect man was an earthly IMAGE (in qualities 
and powers) of the Creator. 

While, then, truth-a right appreciation of our Lord Jesus-is 
desirable at any cost, we can see more reasonable excuse for that 
extreme error which would denominate him Jehovah, than for 
that other extreme which would class him among the sin-cursed, 
imperfect and depraved race from which Scripture declares he 
was separate. 



Lest some should forget previous expressions on the subject, let 
us state that we hold that when the sacrifice of the perfect 
human nature was ended, the Father highly exalted Jesus to the 
perfection of the Divine nature, far above angels and every other 
order of creation -next to the Father. 



R463 : page 1 

WE ANSWER FOR THEM. 

It will be remembered, that in discussing the erroneous 
teachings of two contemporaries -"Zion's Day Star" and "The 
World's Hope"-we called attention to the fact that they used the 
scriptural terms "Ransom," "Redeem," "Bought with a Price," 
etc., dishonestly. We proposed to test them before their readers 
by putting a few straight forward questions, which, in 
answering, we had hoped their true position would have been 
manifested. 

Both Journals have had abundant opportunity, and neither has 
attempted an answer. We, therefore, propose to answer them for 
them-no, not for them, but for their reader's benefit. This we 
could have done before, but preferred to give them first an 
opportunity to state themselves, lest some should think we 
misjudged or misunderstood them. It must now be manifest to 
all, that, as we claimed, they have been practicing a deception 
upon their readers-putting their own private interpretation upon 
the words and ideas referred to, when they quoted them. Is not 
this deception? and is not a religious deception the worst species 
of fraud? 

To bring the question before you, we quote from our February 
issue as follows: 

"If this contemporary plainly stated itself as numbers of others 
do, we should have no special need to single it out among others 
for criticism. But it does not. It covertly attempts to steal the 
hearts of God's children and engraft this "damnable heresy" (2 
Pet. 2:1) upon their minds, by quoting freely enough of the 
passages which contain 

R463 : page 2 

the words "bought with a price," "redeemed," "ransom," etc., 
disclaiming, without attempting to disprove their meaning, or 
deny their genuineness. 

It insinuates and argues in such a way as to rob these words of 
their correct import in the mind of those who possess no English 
Dictionary, or are too careless to use it; or who presume that the 
English words may have a different significance from the Greek 
ones which the Apostles used, but which they do not understand. 



We have heretofore shown that the Greek words rendered 
"bought," "ransom," "redeem," etc., in referring to the work of 
Jesus for men, are no less pointed, but, if possible, more so than 
their English equivalents. So far, then, from being an exponent 
of the world's hope, or the church's either, our contemporary is 
being used by the adversary in a covert, and therefore all the 
more dangerous way, to undermine the only hope held out for 
the world in Scripture-the ransom. 

To put this matter fairly before its readers, (to most of whom we 
send a copy of this issue) we shall propose to it the same 
questions which in our last we propounded to the Day Star, and 
which it has not answered-probably because it did not wish so 
plainly to show its real belief. We are well aware that neither of 
these contemporaries will relish these questions. 

We have tried to so state them that any attempt to dodge the real 
issue will, we hope, be so apparent as to attract the attention of 
any who might be inclined to think our criticisms too severe. 

The questions are as follows:— 

(1) Why did Jesus die? 

(2) How does it effect our sins? 

(3) How did he put away sin by the sacrifice of himself? 

(4) In what way did he give "himself a ransom (Greek, 
antilutron— an equivalent price) for all?" 

(5) In what way was he a "propitiation (satisfaction) for our 
sins?" 

(6) In what sense were we "bought with a price?" 

Now, fair warning; if our contemporaries do not answer these 
queries fully and squarely, it can only be construed as moral 
cowardice, and certainly will substantiate our claim that they are 
dealing underhandedly with their readers, and "handling the 
Word of God deceitfully" (2 Cor. 4:2). The questions at issue 
are not trivial-not such as brethren might honestly differ on; for 
they are the very foundation of Christianity, without which the 
whole doctrinal structure, reared by the Apostles, falls. 

But, let it be remembered, that we have nothing but kindly 
personal feelings toward the Editors of these two papers; with 
both of whom we are on intimate and friendly terms. It is error 
and falsity which we oppose, not men. This is true of Mr. 
Ingersoll also. Personally, we esteem him a polished gentleman, 
while we cannot but gainsay his infidel teachings. We take the 
side of inspired record as against every phase of infidelity; but 
we cannot but admire most, those opponents who honestly 
differ, and honestly state their differences, instead of using a 
Scriptural form of words and denying the power and meaning 
thereof. 



To answer these queries, let us take them in order. We state the 
import of the teachings of these papers which are in harmony on 
this question, whatever difference there may be between them 
on other less vital points. 

(1) Why did Jesus die? 

Their answer: Because he was an imperfect man, and hence as 
liable to death as any other member of the Adamic race, and 
"death passed upon all." (See Rom. 5:12.) 

We object and answer, "that no cause of death was in him"— "in 
him was life" and not death. In him was no sin, hence on him the 
punishment of sin— death— could have no power. His death was 
a free-will sacrifice as our redemption price. He could have 
sustained life as a perfect and sinless man forever, but he "gave 
his life a ransom for many. " 

Paul substantiates our position, saying: "Christ died for our sins 
according to the Scriptures" (1 Cor. 15:3.) 

(2) How does Jesus' death affect our sins? 

Their answer: It has no direct effect upon our sins. We die for 
our own sins and thus pay our own penalty. Jesus died for 
himself and thus paid for his imperfection (which they do not 
care to openly call sin). The indirect effect of his death was, that 
he furnished us an example, or illustration of fortitude and 
endurance, etc., and thus his death was valuable to us only as an 
example of how we should suffer and die for truth and right. 

We object and answer, that while it is true that Jesus' life and 
death were valuable examples, yet they were more —much more 
than this, or else scores of Scriptures are meaningless and false. 
The prophets, who, because of their witness for and loyalty to 
truth, were sawn asunder, stoned to death, etc., and the Apostles, 
who were crucified and beheaded, etc., these all were valiant for 
truth, and full of faith, and are all good examples, and are so 
recognized in Scripture (Phil. 3:17). But where is it claimed that 
by their examples they 

R464 : page 2 

redeemed or ransomed or bought us with their blood? 

The penalty of our sin was death, and we could never have been 
freed from that great prison-house— we could never have had a 
resurrection to life had not some one done more than set us an 
example. The question would still be, "Oh, wretched man that I 
am, who shall deliver me from the body of this death?" And the 
answer points out only the one able to deliver from the 
condemnation of death. "Thanks be to God who giveth us the 
victory through our Lord Jesus Christ. " "For to this end Christ 
both died, rose, and revived that he might be Lord [Master-or 
have authority over] the living and the dead" (1 Cor. 15:57 and 



Rom. 14:9). We answer this question then: "He bore our sins in 
his own body on the tree" (1 Pet. 2:24). 

(3) How did Jesus put away sin by the sacrifice of himself? 

Their answer:— By his example and teaching he taught men to 
put away sin for themselves, and thus, in a sense, it might be 
said that he put the sin away. 

We object, that Moses and the prophets had taught men to 
abstain from sin; hence, if Jesus put away sin only by precept 
and example, he did no more than others. And, if it is true, that 
"In him was no sin," how could he be an example of how to put 
away what he did not have? But note, the question is a quotation 
from Paul (Heb. 9:26), and it reads that he put away sin, not by 
precept and example of his life, but "by the sacrifice of himself. " 
Read the connections, and try to view the matter from the 
Apostle's inspired standpoint, and unless you think, as one of 
these contemporaries does, that Paul often made mistakes and 
misquotations, you should be convinced of his meaning when 
penning these words. 

Remember, too, that when Moses, as a type of Jesus, taught men 
to abstain from sin, he, too, did more— he typically made a sin 
offering-a sacrifice for sin. And the antitype not only taught 
purity, but did more— made himself a sacrifice for sin— the true 
sacrifice. "The Lamb of God which taketh away the sin of the 
world." 

(4) In what way did he give "himself a ransom (Gr. antilutron— 
an equivalent or corresponding price) for all?" 

To this question they can give no answer except by denying the 
meaning of the word, which any one may see by reference to 
Young's Concordance. The significance of the original is very 
pointed. Jesus not only gave a price for the ransom of the 
Adamic race, but Paul says he gave an equivalent price. A 
perfect man had sinned and forfeited all right to life: Jesus, 
another perfect man, bought back those forfeited rights by 
giving his unforfeited human existence a ransom— an equivalent 
price. Read now Paul's argument (Rom. 5:18,19): "Therefore, as 
by the offence of one, judgment came upon all men to 
condemnation; even so, by the righteousness of one, the free gift 
came upon all men unto justification of life. For as by one man's 
disobedience many were made sinners, so by the obedience of 
one shall many be made righteous." 

(5) In what way was he "a propitiation (satisfaction) for our 
sins?" 

This is another question which they cannot answer. They would 
like to declare that he was not a satisfaction in this sense, or not 
a satisfaction in that sense, or not a satisfaction in some other 
sense; but the question, In what sense was he a "satisfaction for 
our sins?" they cannot answer. 



We answer, that this text is in perfect harmony with all 
Scripture. The Law of life (obedience) was broken by Adam, 
and both he and his posterity were condemned as unfit for life. 
Jesus became our ransom by paying our death penalty, and thus 
justifying us to life, which in due time comes to all, to be again 
either accepted or rejected. Yes, we are glad that the claims of 
the Law upon our race were fully satisfied by our Redeemer. 

(6) In what sense were we "bought with a price?" 

Their answer: Bought is not a good word; it conveys too much 
of the "commercial idea"; they would say, rather, ye were taken, 
etc. 

We object; by such false reasonings the Word of God would be 
robbed of all its meaning. Words are useless unless they carry 
some idea. What other meaning is there in the word "bought" 
than the "commercial idea"? It has no other meaning or idea to 
it. But Paul was a lawyer, and his teachings, more than any other 
Apostles', are hard to twist; and in this instance he guards well 
his statement, by saying, not only that we were "bought," but he 
says it was with "a price;" and then, lest some one should claim 
that the price was the ministry and teachings of Jesus, Peter is 
caused to guard it by adding- "With the precious blood of 
Christ, as of a Lamb without blemish and without spot." (1 Cor. 
6:20; 1 Pet. 1:19). 

In conclusion, let us say in a few words, what they do think of 
the value and preciousness of the death of Christ. They believe 
and have privately expressed, and it is the covered import of 
their public teachings, which they do not yet wish to state 
boldly— not until they get false premises and conclusions 
engrafted first, as a basis on which to place it, —that Jesus' death 
no more paid your ransom price than did Paul's or than my death 
would; nay, put it stronger, that his death was of no value in 
redeeming us. 

As before pointed out, this denial of the ransom we believe to be 
the great rock upon which the nominal Church is even to-day 
being dashed. 

The doctrine of the substitution of Jesus, in settlement of the 
sinner's guilt and punishment, is being scoffed at among the 
"great preachers"; and the doctrine, so plainly taught by the 
apostles, that the death of Jesus was the price of our release from 
death, is falling into discredit and disrepute among the "worldly 
great," and hence also among some who would like to be of that 
class. 

The reason of this is evident: it is the story of the two extremes 
over again. Satan had engrafted on the Church the doctrine of 
eternal torment, and, to be consistent, led on to the thought that 
Jesus bore eternal torment for every man. This involved eternity 
of suffering by Jesus. This evidently was untrue; so it was 



explained, that when in Gethsemane and at Calvary, Jesus 
suffered as much agony in a few hours as all humanity would 
have suffered in an eternity of torture. Now, it does not take a 
very smart man to see that something is surely wrong in such a 
view of Jesus' substitution. It seems to be Satan's policy now to 
lead to the opposite extreme and deny substitution entirely. 
Instead of casting away Satan's libel on our Heavenly Father's 
government— the doctrine of eternal torment— most men seem to 
hold on to it and roll it as a sweet morsel under their tongues, 
and discard the teachings of the Apostles relative to Jesus' death 
being our ransom price-the price or substitute for our forfeited 
lives. 

Would that all might see the beauties and harmonies of God's 
Word. Man condemned to death-extinction; Jesus, man's 
substitute or ransom, died for our sins and thus redeemed or 
bought us back to life, which redemption will be accomplished 
by a resurrection to life. Jesus, as a man, is dead eternally; his 
humanity stayed in death as our ransom, and he arose a new 
creature-a spiritual instead of a human being— put to death in 
the flesh, but quickened (made alive) in spirit. "Though we have 
known Christ after the flesh, yet now henceforth know we him 
(so) no more. " 

Beloved, let us stand firm on the foundation of all hope-the 
ransom— and now, when the enemy comes in like a flood, be not 
afraid to act and speak for truth boldly if you would be 
recognized by him who lifts up a standard for the people (Isa. 
59:19). 



R465 : page 2 



SEVEN STAGES. 

A BIBLE READING. 



Perfection. 



Man formed by God. -Gen. 1:27. 

In God's likeness. -Gen. 1:26. 

With all wants supplied. -Gen. 1:29. 

With dominion over all earthly things. -Gen. 1:28. 

Pronounced very good. -Gen. 1:31. 

Made upright.-Eccles. 7:29. 

Under law. -Gen. 2:17. 



Disobedience. 



Hearkened to another rather than God. -Gen. 3:17. 
Brake God's command by eating. -Gen. 3:6. 
Transgression of law is sin.-l John 3:4. 
Sin by Adam entered the world. -Rom. 5:12. 
Adam's posterity in his likeness. -Gen. 5:3. 



Many dead by the offence of one.— Rom. 5:15. 
Scripture concludes all under sin. -Gal. 3:22. 



Imprisonment. 



Hope. 



The wages of sin is death— Rom. 6:23. 

Adam driven from the tree of life.— Gen. 3:24. 

Completed his death in 930 years. -Gen. 5:5. 

All die in Adam.- 1 Cor. 15:22. 

Death as a jailer.— 1 Pet. 3:19. 

Death an enemy.— Jer. 31:16. 

Death controlled by Satan. -Heb. 2:14. 



Help from the Lord.-Isa. 41:14. 
God will come to save.— Isa. 35:4. 
Redeemer shall come.— Isa. 59:20. 
He shall redeem Israel. -Ps. 130:8. 
Graves to be opened. -Ezek. 37:12. 
Grave to be destroyed.— Hosea 13:14. 
Death to be swallowed up.— Isa. 25:8. 



Deliverance. 



Brought by God's own arm. -Isa. 63:5. 

A Savior. Glad tidings to all. -Luke 2:10, 11. 

Christ redeems from the curse. —Gal. 3:13. 

Christ's blood cleanseth from all sin.-l John 1:7. 

A free gift to all men.— Rom. 5:18. 

Christ lighteth every man. -John 1:9. 

God in Christ reconciling the world.-2 Cor. 5:19. 



Consecration. 



Of body. -Rom. 12:1. 
Of mind. -Rom. 8:9. 
Of influence. -Phil. 3:7. 
Of reputation. -Luke 6:22. 
Oftime.-l Peter 4:2. 
Of talents.-Rom. 12:6. 
Of substance. — 1 Cor. 16:2. 



Exaltation. 



Inname.-Acts 15:14. 
Inpower.-2 Tim. 2:12. 
In position. -Rev. 3:21. 
In influence. -Rev. 3:12. 
In privilege. -Rev. 2:7. 
In honor.-2 Thess. 2:14. 
In condition.-! John 3:2. 



J. F. SMITH. 



[It will be noticed that the first five of these stages belong to 
both the Church and the world. The last two apply only to the 
Church, the world being restored or brought back to the first 
condition eventually. -ED.] 



R465 : page 2 

BIBLE STUDENTS' HELPS. 

We have discontinued the sale of "Cruden's Concordance" in 
consequence of being able to furnish "Young's Analytical 
Concordance" at so low a price. There is no comparison in 
values. To the discerning student, who wishes to know the 
original word and its English meaning (by one of the ablest 
living scholars), there is no other such work published. 

page 2 

In answer to numerous questions, we would say: The one we 
furnished recently is not the "Book Exchange" edition, which 
contains many inaccuracies and is on poorer paper, but is the 
"students' edition"-the latest revision and most complete edition 
of the work. Our price is $1.75 by express, or 51 cts. extra, for 
postage, if by mail. 

We still have some copies of "The Emphatic Diaglott," as 
previously announced. 

We have no more of the $1.30 "Oxford Bibles." 

We procured a few copies of the "Variorum Bible," at a special 
sale, much below the regular price. We can send them by 
express at $4.25. The regular price of this work is $7.50. (By 
mail, 25c extra for postage.) This is the latest "Teachers' Bible" 
published— by Eyre & Spottiswoode. Its special peculiarity over 
others is, that it gives the various readings of the ancient Greek 
and Hebrew MSS., including the valuable Sinaitic of both Old 
and New Testaments. 

We cannot take postage stamps in pay, as we must pay cash. 
R464 : page 3 

THE POTTER'S HAND. 

To the Potter's house I went down one day, 

And watched him while moulding the vessels of clay, 

And many a wonderful lesson I drew, 

As I noted the process the clay went thro'. 



Trampled and broken, down trodden and rolled, 
To render more plastic and fit for the mould. 
How like to clay that is human, I thought, 
When in Heavenly hands to perfection brought; 

For Self must be cast as the dust at His feet, 
Before it is ready for service made meet. 
And Pride must be broken, and self-will lost- 
All laid on the altar, whatever the cost; 

But lo ! by and by, a delicate vase 

Of wonderful beauty and exquisite grace. 

Was it once the vile clay? Ah, yes; yet how strange, 

The Potter has wrought so marvellous a change! 

Not a trace of the earth, nor mark of the clay, 
The fires of the furnace have burned them away. 
Wondrous skill of the Potter-the praise is his due, 
In whose hands to perfection and beauty it grew. 

Thus with souls lying still, content in God's hand, 
That do not His power of working withstand. 
They are moulded and fitted, a treasure to hold, 
Vile clay now transformed into purest of gold. 

-M. F. Clarkson. 



R465 : page 3 



THE PASSOVER. 



This was and yet is among Israelites one of the most important 
of their religious observances. It was the first feature of "the 
Law" given them as a typical people. 

The ceremony, as originally instituted, is described in Exod. 12. 
A lamb without blemish was slain, its blood was sprinkled on 
the doorposts and lintels of the house, while the family within 
ate the flesh of the lamb with unleavened bread and bitter herbs. 
On that night (the fourteenth of the first month, Jewish time), 
because of the sprinkled blood and the eaten lamb the first-born 
children of Israel were passed over, or spared from the plague of 
death which visited the first-born of the Egyptians. On this 
account, and because on the next day Israel marched out from 
Egyptian bondage— free— therefore, by God's command (Exod. 
12:14), they commemorated it every year on its anniversary. 

The Israelite saw only the letter of this ceremony, and not its 
typical significance. So, too, might we have been in similar 
darkness had not the Holy Spirit of God given us the key to its 
meaning by inspiring the Apostle to write the words ( 1 
Corinthians 5:7): "CHRIST OUR PASSOVER IS SACRIFICED 
FOR US; THEREFORE LET US KEEP THE FEAST." 



Our attention being thus called to the matter by the Spirit, we 
find other Scriptures which clearly show that Jesus, "the Lamb 
of God," was the antitype of the Passover lamb, and that his 
death was as essential to the deliverance of "the Church of the 
first-borns" from death, as was the death of the typical lamb to 
the first-borns of Israel. Thus, led of the Spirit, we come to the 
words and acts of Jesus at the last Passover which he ate with 
his disciples. 

God is very exact, and the slaying of the typical lamb, on the 
fourteenth day of the first month, foreshadowed or typified the 
fact that in God's plan Jesus was to die at that time. And, it is 
remarkable, that God so arranged the reckoning of time among 
the Jews that it was possible for Jesus to commemorate the 
Passover with the disciples, and himself be slain as the real 
"Lamb" on the same day. [The Jewish day, instead of reckoning 
from midnight to midnight as usually reckoned now, 
commenced at six o'clock in the evening and ended at six the 
next evening.] Thus Jesus and the disciples, by eating the 
Passover, probably about eight o'clock, ate it "the same night in 
which he was betrayed," and the same day in which he died- 
thus every jot and tittle should be and was fulfilled. 

Just five days before his crucifixion Jesus presented himself 
before them, to be received or rejected— when he rode to the city 
on the ass, fulfilling the prophecy, "Behold, thy king cometh 
unto thee" (Matt. 21:5), and fulfilling, at the same time, that 
feature of the Passover type which provides that the lamb must 
be received into the houses five days before the time of its 
killing (Exod. 12:2). Thus Jesus made his last presentation to 
Israel as a nation, or house, five days before the Passover, as we 
read: "Then Jesus, six days before the Passover, came to 
Bethany.... On the next day [five days before] much people that 
were come to the feast, when they heard Jesus was coming to 
Jerusalem,. ..went forth to meet him (John 12:1,12,13). Then it 
was that their king came unto them-sitting upon an ass's colt. " 
Then it was that he wept over them and declared, "Your house is 
left unto you desolate. " "Ye shall not see me henceforth till ye 
shall say, Blessed is he that cometh in the name of the Lord" 
(Matt. 23:38,39). 

Jesus knew the import of the Passover, but the disciples knew 
not. He was alone; none could sympathize, none could 
encourage him. Even had he explained to the disciples, they 
could not have understood, or appreciated his explanation, 
because they were not yet begotten of the Spirit. Nor could they 
be thus begotten until justified from Adamic sin-passed over, or 
reckoned free from sin by virtue of the slain Lamb, whose shed 
blood ransomed them from the power of the destroyer— death. 

Thus alone-treading the narrow way which none before had 
trod, and in which he is our Fore-runner and Leader -what 
wonder that His heart at times was exceeding sorrowful even 



unto death. When the time had come they sat down to eat the 
Passover, and Jesus said unto the disciples: "With desire I have 
desired to eat this Passover with you before I suffer. I say unto 
you, I will not any more eat thereof until it be fulfilled in the 
kingdom of God" (Luke 22:15,16). Doubtless he longed to have 
them understand how it would BEGIN to be fulfilled, a little 
later on in that very day, by the slaying of the real Lamb. 

Probably one reason he specially desired to eat this Passover 
with them was, that he there designed breaking the truth of its 
significance to them to the extent they could receive it; for, "As 
they did eat, Jesus took bread, and blessed, and brake it, and 
gave to them, and said, Take (eat), this is my body" (Mark 
14:22). "This is my body, which is given for you: THIS DO in 
remembrance of ME." "And he took the cup and gave thanks 
and said, Take this and divide it among yourselves. 

R466 : page 3 

...This cup is the new covenant, in my blood, which is shed for 
you" (Luke 22:17-20). 

We cannot doubt that the design of the Master was to call their 
minds from the typical lamb to himself, the antitype, and to 
show them that it would be no longer proper to observe a feature 
of the Law which he was about to fulfill. And the bread and 
wine were to be to them thereafter the elements which, as 
remembrancers of him, would take the place of the lamb. Thus 
considered, there is force in his words, "This do in remembrance 
of ME"— no longer kill a literal lamb in remembrance of a 
typical deliverance; but, instead, use the bread and wine, 
representatives of my flesh and life— the basis of the real 
deliverance —the real passing over. "Hence, let as many as 
receive me and my words henceforth do THIS in remembrance 
of me." 

Thus our Lord instituted his Supper as the remembrancer of his 
death, and as a substitute for the Passover as observed by the 
Jews. Is it asked why Jesus ate of the typical lamb first? We 
answer that he was born under the dominion of the Law, and 
must observe its every requirement. Since he made an end of the 
Law, nailing it to his cross, we are free from Law, as relates to 
either the Passover or the Lord's Supper-its substitute— but we 
are of those who esteem it a privilege to celebrate each year the 
anniversary of our Lord's death; to DO THIS in remembrance of 
him- "for even Christ our Passover is slain, therefore LET US 
keep the feast. " 

It would be difficult to determine just when or why this 
impressive season for the commemoration of our Lord's death 
was ignored, but it was, doubtless, as an "expediency." 
Doubtless zealous teachers thought that the great Teacher had 
made a mistake, and that it was "expedient" to have it oftener 
than once a year; and all seem to have understood Paul to teach 



that it made no difference how often it was observed when he 
said: "As often as ye eat this bread and drink this cup, ye do 
show the Lord's death till he come" (1 Cor. 11:26). But a careful 
study of all Paul said on the subject should convince all that this 
was not the case. In the context he tells them (verse 23) that he 
delivered to them that which he also received of the Lord: "That 
the Lord Jesus, the same night in which he was betrayed, took 
bread," etc. Here notice not only that the time selected by Jesus 
seemed the most appropriate, but that it was so appropriate that 
Paul was informed, by a special revelation from the Lord, that 
this was instituted the night he was betrayed. 

How often could the Church break that bread and drink that cup 
as a proper memorial of the Lord's death? Surely only on its 
anniversary. In the same way, when American independence is 
celebrated, it is on its anniversary -the Fourth of July. It would 
be considered peculiar, at least, if some should neglect July 
fourth and celebrate it at sundry inappropriate times. And if 
speaking of the fourth of July, we should say, as often as ye thus 
celebrate ye do show forth the nation's birth, who would 
understand us to mean several times a year? Likewise, also, the 
Lord's Supper is only properly a celebration on its anniversary. 

Some think that they find records in Scripture which indicate 
that the early Church ate the Lord's Supper every First-day. To 
this we answer, that if this were true we should have no more to 
say on the subject; but where is the record? We are referred to 
Acts 20:7: "Upon the first day of the week, when the disciples 
came together to break bread, Paul preached unto them," etc. 
But is there any evidence that the bread was broken as a 
remembrancer of the Lord's death? If so, why was it never called 
the Lord's Supper, and why was the wine omitted? Was the cup 
not as important an emblem as the bread? Because it is written 
that Jesus was known to the two disciples at Emmaus (Luke 
24:30) in the "breaking of bread," who will claim that that was 
more than an ordinary meal? Who will claim that they were 
eating the Lord's Supper? No one. 

So far from being an appropriate time for the commemoration of 
our Lord's death, the first day of the week, or Lord's day, would 
be most inappropriate. Instead of being set apart or used by the 
early Church to commemorate Jesus' death and the sorrowful 
scenes of the Lord's Supper, Gethsemane and Calvary, it was to 
them a glad day— a day of rejoicing and hosanna's, saying, "THE 
LORD IS RISEN INDEED." Hence its name and general 
observance by the Church as a day of wor+ship and praise. 

The seeming custom of breaking bread every Lord's day, 
perhaps had its rise in the fact that disciples were few and came 
sometimes long distances to meet together on the Lord's day, 
and socially ate a meal together. Perhaps, too, a blessed 
association of thought and interest lingered round the breaking 
of bread on the first day, when they remembered how repeatedly 



Jesus manifested himself to them on that day— after his 
resurrection— and how it was while they were eating that he 
made himself known (Luke 24:35). 

Even the faint traces of this once established custom in the 
Church-of celebrating the anniversary of the Lord's death and 
resurrection- which the Roman and Episcopal Churches still 
observe, after an accommodated fashion, on "Good Friday," has 
been almost lost sight of by the other sects. 

It has been the custom of many of the WATCH TOWER readers 
to DO THIS in remembrance of our Lord's death on its 
anniversary. Believing that it properly takes the place of the 
type— the Passover— we reckon it according to Jewish, or lunar 
time, and hence frequently on a different date from "Good 
Friday," which is reckoned on solar time. The Passover this year 
comes on Lord's day, April 22d, at six P.M.; hence the time 
answering to the hour of Jesus' death would be three o'clock, 
P.M., of that day, and the time for the eating of the Lord's 
Supper would be about seven to eight o'clock of the Saturday 
evening preceding April 21st. It should be remembered that the 
Lamb was slain the day before the Feast of Passover 
commenced. It will be celebrated as usual. We should, as 
heretofore, seek to follow the example of the first Communion 
service— using unleavened bread* and wine— whilst we talk 
together of their significance and value. 

THE IMPORT OF THE EMBLEMS. 

It might be profitable to some to point out the significance of 
the broken loaf and the cup. 

Of the bread, Jesus said: "It is my flesh"— i.e., it represents his 
flesh— his humanity which was broken or sacrificed for us. 
Unless he had sacrificed himself— his humanity for us— we could 
never have had a resurrection from death— could never have had 
a future life; as he said, "Except ye eat the flesh of the Son of 
Man.. .ye have no life in you" (John 6:53). 

Not only was the breaking of Jesus' body thus the providing of a 
bread of life, of which if a man eat he shall never die, but it was 
also the opening of the narrow way to life and the breaking, or 
unsealing, of truth, as a means of aid to walk the narrow way 
which leads to life. And thus we see that it was the breaking of 
him who said, "I am the way, the TRUTH and the LIFE; no man 
cometh unto the Father but by ME" (John 14:6). 

Hence, when we eat of the broken loaf, we should realize that 
had he not died-been broken for us-we should never have been 
able to come to the Father, but would have remained forever 
under the curse of Adamic sin and death, and should never have 
been made acquainted with the way, the truth, the life, or the 
Father. 



Another thought: the bread was un-leavened -without leaven. 
[Leaven is corruption, an element of decay or decomposition.] 
Leaven is a type of sin and the decomposition, decay and death 
which sin works in mankind; so, then, this type declares that 
Jesus was free from sin— a lamb without spot or blemish— "holy, 
harmless, undefiled." Had Jesus been of Adamic stock, had he 
received the life principle in the usual way from an earthly 
father, he, too, would have been leavened, as are all other men, 
by Adamic sin; but his life came direct from God-hence he is 
called the bread from heaven. (See John 6:41). Let us, then, 
appreciate the bread as pure, unleavened, and so let us eat of 
him; eating and digesting truth, and especially this truth; 
appropriating by faith his righteousness to ourselves by which 
we realize him as the way and the life. 

The Apostle, by divine revelation, communicates to us a further 
meaning of the bread, and shows that not only did the loaf 
represent Jesus, individually, as our head, etc., but that, after we 
have partaken thus of him, we may, by consecration, be 
associated with him as parts of one loaf (one body) to be broken 
for, and become food for, the world. (1 Cor. 10:16). This same 
thought of our privilege as justified believers, sharing now in the 
sufferings and death of Christ, and thus becoming joint-heirs 
with him of future glories, and associates in the work of blessing 
and giving life to all the families of the earth, is expressed by the 
Apostle repeatedly and under various figures; but when he 
compares the Church to the loaf now being broken as a whole, 
as Jesus was individually, it furnishes a striking and forcible 
illustration of our union and fellowship with our Head. 

He says, "Because there is one loaf we, the many [persons] are 
one body; for we all partake of the one loaf. " "The loaf which 
we break, is it not a participation of the body of the Anointed 
one?" (1 Cor. 10:16,17-Diaglott). 

The wine represents the life given— the sacrifice-the death. 
"This is my blood (symbol of LIFE given up in death) of the 
new covenant, shed for 

R467 : page 3 

many FOR THE REMISSION of sin;" "Drink ye all of it" (Matt. 
26:27,28). 



*Unleavened bread may be procured through any Hebrew 
family. 



It is by the giving up of his life as a ransom for the life of the 
Adamic race, 

R467 : page 4 



which sin had forfeited, that a right to LIFE comes to men. (See 
Rom. 5:18,19). Jesus' shed blood was the "ransom for all," but 
his act of handing the cup to the disciples, and asking them to 
drink of it, was an invitation to them to become partakers of his 
sufferings, or, as Paul expresses it, to "fill up that which is 
behind of the afflictions of Christ." (Col. 1:24.) "The cup of 
blessing, for which we bless God, is it not a participation of the 
blood [shed blood-death] of the Anointed one?" (1 Cor. 10:16— 
Diaglott). Would that all could realize the value of the cup, and 
could bless God for an opportunity of suffering with Christ that 
we may be also glorified together." (Rom. 8:17.) 

Jesus attaches this significance to the cup elsewhere, indicating 
that it is the cup of sacrifice, the death of our humanity. For 
instance, when asked by two disciples a promise of future glory 
in his throne, He answered them: "Ye know not what ye ask; are 
ye able to drink of the cup that I shall drink of?" Wine is also a 
symbol of joy and invigoration: so we will share Jesus' glories, 
honors and immortality— when we drink it new with him in the 
kingdom. 

Let us then, dearly beloved, as we surround the table to 
commemorate our Lord's death, call to mind the meaning of 
what we do, and see to it that we feed on Him; and, when 
strengthened by the living bread, let us drink with him into his 
death. "For if we be dead with him we shall live with him; if we 
suffer we shall also reign with him. " (2 Tim. 2:11,12). 

WHO MA Y COMMUNE? 

Every member of Christ-even one alone with the Master may 
commemorate —but, so far as possible, all members of the one 
loaf should meet together. Ceremonious formality would be out 
of place-but, "Let all things be done decently and in order. " 

Another thought: while it is proper that we should thus 
commemorate "Our Passover," or its anniversary, yet it should 
not be forgotten, that in a sense we eat and drink, and have this 
sacred fellowship with our Lord every day and every hour. The 
night in which Israel ate of their Passover lamb, with "bitter 
herbs," typified the entire Gospel Age; and their deliverance 
from Egypt followed in the morning. So with us, we eat of our 
Lamb with the bitter trials and afflictions of evil in the present 
age— but joy cometh in the morning— our deliverance from earth 
and the dominion and oppression of evil. The morning already is 
dawning, let us hasten the more to "fill up that which is behind 
of the afflictions of Christ." 

The Apostle Paul seems to enforce the ideas we have just 
presented relative to the meaning of this ordinance, and shows 
the necessity of a proper appreciation of its meaning. He warns 
(1 Cor. ll:27-30-Diaglott), that "whoever may eat the bread 
and drink the cup of the Lord unworthily will be an offender 



against the body and blood of the Lord. But let a man examine 
himself, and thus [with an understanding and appreciation of its 
significance] let him eat of the bread and let him drink of the 
cup; for he eats and drinks judgment [condemnation] to himself 
who eats and drinks not discriminating [appreciating] the Lord's 
body. Through this [lack of a proper appreciation of the true 
import-that it signifies our sharing in the sufferings and death 
of Christ— for this reason] many are weak and sickly among you, 
and many sleep. " 

The truth of Paul's remarks we can each bear witness to. Many 
in the Church, not only of the nominal Church, but many 
members of the true Church, "whose names are written in 
heaven," are weak and sickly, and many have gone asleep 
entirely, become dead to spiritual things, and, as dead branches, 
are cut off from the vine-the overcoming Church (John 15:2). 

If, then, we would become strong and full of spiritual vigor, and 
"not sleep as do others," when we annually ratify our covenant, 
let us examine ourselves, and thus let us partake of the 
sufferings and the emblems, that in due time we may partake of 
His glory also. 



R467 : page 4 

WHAT THINK YE OF CHRIST?-- 
WHOSE SON IS HE? 

The editor of a contemporary answers the above question in a 
very unsatisfactory manner. Rejecting, with undisguised 
contempt, the doctrine of the "immaculate conception," and 
laboring to prove unworthy of credence the simple story of the 
fulfillment of Isaiah's prophecy relative to it, found in Matthew 
and Luke, boldly assumes the position that Christ is the natural 
son of Joseph. But will he accept the legitimate consequences of 
this position? We shall see. 

That Christ is the son of David the Jews, blind as they were, 
understood perfectly; but, having no faith in his immaculate 
conception, they were utterly unable to answer the final 
question: "If David then call him Lord, how is he his son?" Can 
our contemporary do better than they from the same stand- 
point? 

But Israel's Messiah, the Christ of the Bible, is not only the son 
of David, but he is the divinely-appointed heir to David's throne. 
The purpose for which I write is to show from the Scriptures 
that if Jesus of Nazareth is the natural son of Joseph, he can 
never sit on David's throne, and, consequently, is not the true 
Messiah. 



If we can believe the Record (and, if not, we know nothing 
about the matter), Joseph must trace his descent from David, 
back through that long line of kings beginning with Solomon. 
This question, then, demands an authoritative answer. Can the 
real heir to David's throne come in that line? The careful Bible 
student will learn two things: 

1 . If Solomon had obeyed God as did David his father, the 
throne of David would have been established in his line forever; 
consequently, the deathless heir to that throne would have come 
of his seed just as certainly as of David's. Proof: "The Lord hath 
sworn in truth unto David, he will not turn from it, of the fruit of 
thy body will I set upon thy throne. If thy children will keep my 
covenant and my testimony that I shall teach them, their children 
shall also sit upon thy throne forevermore" (Psa. 132:11,12). But 
in what line? "And of all my sons (for God hath given me many 
sons), he hath chosen Solomon my son to sit upon the throne of 
the kingdom of the Lord over Israel.... Moreover [beyond all 
this], I will establish his kingdom forever if he will be constant 
to do my statutes and my judgments as at this day" (1 Chron. 
28:5-7). 

2. Had they been thus obedient, the throne of David would not 
have been overturned, nor his crown profaned "by casting it 
down to the ground," but there would have been an unbroken 
line of kings from David to Christ. Proof: "If thy children take 
heed to their way, to walk before me in truth with all their heart 
and with all their soul, there shall not fail thee [be cut off from 
thee, from the throne-margin] (said he) a man on the throne of 
Israel" (1 Kings 2:4). 

It is a principle, the correctness of which few will question, that 
whatever is clearly promised on condition of obedience is 
forfeited if that obedience is not rendered. On this ground alone 
we must conclude that David's throne and kingdom cannot be 
established forever in Solomon's line. If we are right in this 
conclusion, the Scriptures will sustain the position. "To the 
law," then, "and to the testimony": "And thou Solomon, my son, 
know thou the God of thy father, and serve him with a perfect 
heart.. ..If thou seek him he will be found of thee, but if thou 
forsake him he will cast thee off forever." (1 Chron. 28:9). 
Again, "And the Lord was angry with Solomon, because his 
heart was turned from the Lord God of Israel.... Wherefore the 
Lord said unto Solomon, Forasmuch as this is done of thee... I 
will surely rend the kingdom from thee.... Notwithstanding, in 
thy days I will not do it-for David thy father's sake; but I will 
rend it out of the hand of thy son. Howbeit, I will not rend away 
all the kingdom, but will give one tribe to thy son, for David my 
servant's sake and for Jerusalem's sake, which I have chosen" (1 
Kings 1 1 :9-13). Thus, ten out of twelve parts of "the kingdom of 
the Lord over Israel" was rent away from Solomon's line 



immediately after his death, and the remaining portion was 
retained, not for his sake, but for David's and Jerusalem's sake. 

Let us now listen while God declares his purpose concerning the 
two last kings in Solomon's line: "Thus saith the Lord of 
Jehoiakim, king of Judah, He shall have none to sit upon the 
throne of David" (Jer. 36:30). Of Jeshoniah, or Coniah as he is 
sometimes called, we read: "As I live, saith the Lord, though 
Coniah the son of Jehoiakim, king of Judah, were the signet 
upon my right hand, yet would I pluck thee thence.... Is this man 
Coniah a despised, broken idol? Is he a vessel wherein is no 
pleasure? Wherefore are they cast out, he and his seed, and are 
cast into a land which they know not? O earth, earth, earth, hear 
the word of the Lord: Thus saith the Lord, Write ye this man 
childless, a man that shall not prosper in his days: for no man of 
his seed shall prosper, sitting on the throne of David, and ruling 
any more in Judah" (Jer. 22:24-30). 

R468 : page 4 

Two things seem very certain: 1. If Christ is the son of Joseph, 
he came in Solomon's line; and if the kingdom is restored to that 
line, it was just as really rent away from David, who obeyed 
God, as from Solomon, who disobeyed him— all his promises 
and threatenings to the contrary notwithstanding. 2. If he is 
Joseph's son he not only came in Solomon's line, but he is "this 
maris" seed; and yet the whole earth is called to hear the solemn 
declaration, "NO MAN OF HIS SEED SHALL PROSPER, 
SITTING ON THE THRONE OF DAVID, AND RULING 
ANY MORE IN JUDAH" (Jer. 22:30). 

I think I have fully sustained the position taken at first, that if 
Jesus of Nazareth is the natural son of Joseph, he can never sit 
on the throne of his father David, and, consequently, is not the 
true Messiah. But he is not the son of Joseph; and I am not 
disposed to leave this subject until I have shown, not only that 
he did not come in that line, but that it was predicted that he 
should not so come. But, first, let me quote a prophecy which is 
very suggestive, coming as it does immediately after the last one 
named above: "Behold the days come, saith the Lord, that I will 
raise unto David a righteous Branch, and a King shall reign and 
prosper.. ..In his days Judah shall be saved, and Israel shall dwell 
safely; and this is the name whereby he shall be called (by), 
JEHOVAH-OUR RIGHTEOUSNESS." [See Young's 
translation.] (Jer. 23:6.) Compare these two prophecies and draw 
your own conclusions. But I wish to make a point here. The 
editor, before referred to, thinks Matthew's application of 
Isaiah's prophecy is extremely absurd. "And the fact that Isaiah 
names the child Immanuel, while the angel names Mary's child 
Jesus, is proof that the two are entirely different, and bear no 
relation to each other whatever. " Will he also claim that this 
Branch, raised up unto David, bears no relation to Mary's child, 



because the latter was named at his birth Jesus, and not "OUR 
RIGHTEOUSNESS"? 

Even the long-suffering of God has a limit, and Solomon's line 
of kings reached it at last. This is the record of it: "And thou 
profane, wicked prince of Israel, whose day is come, when 
iniquity shall have an end. Thus saith the Lord, Remove the 
diadem and take off the crown: this shall not be the same [how 
shall it be then?]; exalt him that is low and abase him that is 
high. " Every one must admit that Solomon's royal line is the 
high branch of the Davidic house. This, then, must be abased, 
and a low branch exalted, when, after the predicted overturning, 
the throne, the kingdom and the crown shall be given to him 
"whose right it is." Mary seemed to catch the inspiration of this 
truth when she exclaimed: "He hath regarded the low estate of 
his handmaiden; for, from henceforth, all generations shall call 
me blessed. He hath put down the mighty from their seats and 
exalted them of low degree. " If you will turn to Luke 3:23 and 
onward, you will find that, while Joseph came of the royal line, 
as Matthew testifies, Mary came of that obscure one beginning 
with Nathan. 

In conclusion, let me say, that whatever others may do in regard 
to this question, it is my purpose to "Let God be true," if it 
makes all men liars. 

MRS. L. R. K. BISHOP. 



R468 : page 4 



SPEAK TO INDIVIDUALS SINGLY. 

It will be well for us to learn to speak to individuals singly. "A 
congregation of one" may be large enough to call forth all our 
powers in proclaiming the great news of salvation. Often we 
may save sinners one by one. If you had a bushel of bottles, and 
wanted to fill them with water, you would not think the quickest 
way would be to get a fire engine and hose and play over the 
heap, especially if the corks were all in, but you would be likely 
to take a single bottle by the neck, extract the cork, and then, by 
means of a funnel, turn in a little water at a time until it was 
filled; and then take another and repeat the process. You would 
get more bottles filled that way than with a hose and fire engine 
playing upon them. So you may be able to accomplish more by 
working single-handed than in crowds. You may preach the 
word by the wayside or by the fireside, for people need the same 
Gospel indoors as out. 

We need to have the peace of God in our own hearts before we 
can do much good to other people's hearts; and unless we can 
rule our own spirits we shall not accomplish much in molding 
the spirits of others. We notice a blacksmith uses a cold hammer 



to bend a hot iron; and after working with his tools a little while 
he plunges them into cold water. So, if you are to influence 
others, you must keep cool yourself; if you get your hammer hot 
you will not be able to bend the iron. It is useless to undertake to 
fight the devil with fire.... You know the story of the old French 
general, who, when he had besought the king to spare the 
Christians from persecution, and had been refused, said: "Sire, 
God's Church is an anvil that has worn out a great many 
hammers." Now, if you are filled with the Holy Spirit, you can 
stand a great deal of hammering, and the world will mock and 
sneer at you in vain. If you keep near the Lord you will ever 
triumph in His grace. 

H. L. HASTINGS. 



R468 : page 4 

BE TRUE TO GOD. 

"They loved the praise of men more than the praise of God. " 

The want of moral honesty is the principal impediment to the 
progress of religious truth now, as in the days of the Nazarene. 
Many who heard him speak and beheld his prodigies, were 
convinced of the truth of his claims as a teacher "sent from 
God"; but his doctrines so conflicted with the popular customs 
they could not be accepted, only at the cost of social position. 
The integrity of his hearers was put to the test; and the honest 
among them made the requisite sacrifice, and publicly accepted 
his teaching; but those who loved the praise of men more than 
the approbation of God, suppressed their convictions, and 
hypocritically adhered to the popular multitude. It is just so now 
in regard to all attempts to reform the absurd and conflicting 
creedal systems of our age. A large majority of modern 
preachers, and of the intelligent lay members of the churches, 
are as fully convinced of the fallacy of modern theology, and the 
impotency of modern pulpits in reforming the world, as the 
writer; but their love of popularity and ease, and lack of trust in 
God, cause them to remain through life in a false and 
hypocritical position— their life a continuous lie. 

Christ said to his disciples, "Ye are the salt of the earth; but if 
the salt has lost its savor, it is fit for nothing, but to be cast out 
and trodden under foot. " Here we have the estimate Jesus placed 
upon those Christians who suppress their convictions for the 
sake of popularity. He compares them to a man who lights a 
candle and puts it under a cover to conceal its light. He says, 
"Woe unto you when all men shall speak well of you; so did 
their fathers to the false prophets." "Ye are they who justify 

R468 : page 5 



yourselves before men; but God knoweth your hearts; for that 
which is highly esteemed among men is abomination in the sight 
of God" (Luke 16:15). But to those who are ostracised for 
defending the truth he says, "Blessed are ye when men shall hate 
and revile you, and separate you from their company, and cast 
out your name as evil for the Son of Man's sake. Rejoice, for 
great is your reward in heaven. " 

D. WINDER. 



R468 : page 5 

"LORD, TEACH US TO PRAY." 

In Luke 11:1,2 we are told that as lesus "was praying in a 
certain place, when he ceased, one of his disciples said unto 
him, Lord, teach us to pray as lohn also taught his disciples. 
And he said unto them, When ye pray, say, Our Father who art 
in heaven. " 

Before we ever saw the plan of God in the orders of salvation (1 
Cor. 15:23), we often found ourselves confused in our manner 
of addressing the Deity; and, since we saw the plan, it was a 
long time before we were able to get the subject clear in our 
mind as to the proper form of address. 

We have noticed that others, apparently, have the same 
difficulty, for we have heard them address the Father and the 
Son, indiscriminately, in the same prayer. While we recognize 
the fact that "God hath made this same lesus... both LORD and 
Christ" (Acts 2:36), we see the importance of discriminating 
between the FATHER and the SON, and of addressing a throne 
of grace, not only in the spirit, but with the understanding also. 

Some may think it unimportant, but, if this were so, lesus would 
evidently have told the disciples so when they made the request 
quoted above; but, 

R469 : page 5 

instead of making such a statement, he answered the question in 
the manner referred to. We have earnestly desired that God 
would be pleased to teach us how to address him, for we did not 
wish to dishonor the Father nor the Son, nor to grieve the Holy 
Spirit in our addresses at the throne. We hardly think we should 
have arrived at the conclusion which we have, had it not been 
for the understanding of the plan. Jesus says, "No man cometh 
unto the Father but by me" (John 14:6). There is a significance 
in the words, so often sung, which perhaps are not as often 
understood: "Come to Jesus." "Come, ye sinners, poor and 
needy." God (the Father) heareth not sinners (John 9:31), but 
Jesus does. He says, "Come unto me, all ye that labor and are 
heavy laden [with sin], and I will give you rest" (Matt. 1 1:28). 



Then, before justification, while getting a sight of our sin and 
corruption, we cry unto Jesus— he is our way unto God. The faith 
of the repentant soul hears him say, "Neither do I condemn thee; 
go and sin no more. " After being justified, but before 
sanctification (consecration of the justified nature), we are 
reckoned sons of God on the earthly plane, but candidates for 
heirship with Christ. Now we are reckoned perfect human 
beings, like Adam before he sinned, and like Jesus before 
baptism. 

We understand that Jesus was a perfect human being from his 
birth, having a body "prepared" for him (Heb. 10:5); while we, 
from the moment of forgiveness, are reckoned so in honor of our 
faith in the sacrifice which he made, which sacrifice was for the 
purpose of redeeming the lost race; of placing in the prison 
house a "representative"-a "substitute"-that the represented 
might go free, the forfeit being paid, the penalty met in the 
person of Christ, and the demands of God's holy law vindicated. 

Because we have repented of our sins and believed on the Lord 
Jesus Christ, who "taketh away the sin of the world" (John 
1:29), on him who is "the propitiation for our sins" (1 John 2:2), 
and, as our desire is to be perfect, we are so reckoned on his 
account, i.e., "for Jesus' sake;" and the beseeching invitation 
comes to us who are now "brethren" (of Jesus, before his 
consecration to death) to present our "bodies (plural) a living 
sacrifice, holy, acceptable to God" (Rom. 12:1). We are told that 
if we do this, and "suffer with him, we shall also reign with 
him," we shall be made possessors of immortality, shall be made 
like unto Christ's glorious body, be made partakers of the divine 
nature. And when we make this covenant of death with Jesus, 
we are reckoned as partaking of the divine nature- "begotten 
again" (not again spiritually, i.e., twice spiritually, as some have 
said that we say). We had been begotten of the flesh, now we are 
begotten again, but this time of the Spirit, adopted into the 
divine family, legally becoming divine sons, having an "elder 
brother." He was the "first begotten," and of course at that time 
the only begotten (God gave his only begotten Son to die for 
us); but the seed has multiplied, many have believed into him, 
and with him sacrificed the human, "for which cause he is not 
ashamed to call them brethren (Heb. 2:11), but would hardly 
have called them brethren before, or for any other reason. 

We now belong to the royal household, and are permitted to 
approach God by the ordinary name, "Our Father," "Abba 
Father," i.e., Father, Father, having been legally justified in the 
flesh, and, after consecrating it, "received up into glory. " 
Coming by this "new and living way" into the holy place, 
opened up for us by Jesus, we approach with humble boldness 
"unto a throne of grace" (Heb. 4:16; 10:20). 



From these considerations we conclude that the man of the 
world, when first getting a view of his lost condition, should 
"come to Jesus." 

After his justification he comes to the Father in Jesus' name. A 
reckoned son on the plane of the restored Adam, he antedates 
"the restoration" of the race to the Adamic condition. 

If he accepts of the invitation to the higher life, and consecrates 
himself to death with Christ, he is still a reckoned son (though 
begotten of the Spirit) on the divine plane. 

While a reckoned son on either plane, we understand that it is 
proper to address the Father in Jesus' name; "and in that day 
(when he sees us again [John 16:22] and we see him and are like 
him) ye shall ask me nothing." "Verily, verily, I say unto you, 
whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my name, he will give it 
you" (John 16:23.) 

Now, the betrothed asks in the name of him to whom she is 
betrothed; "in that day" she will ask in the same name, but, lo ! it 
will be her name. 

Precious name, O how sweet! 
Hope of earth and joy of heaven. 

Perhaps some one is ready to ask, "But is that promise (John 
16:23) to be fulfilled before the resurrection"? 

We think not in its fullness, but is so far as we "ask anything 
according to his will" (1 John 5:14); but, it is evidently 
impossible, "seeing through a glass darkly" (1 Cor. 13:12); to 
always "ask according to his will;" but then, being "like him," 
there will be no mistake. "Whatsoever ye shall ask" will be 
granted. "Hitherto ye have asked nothing in my name; ask, and 
ye shall receive, that your joy may be full" (John 16:24). It is 
evident that our imperfect prayers now have to be revised by our 
Advocate (1 John 2:1), and the revised prayer might not always 
contain all the things asked for, but would contain all that is 
good for us; but this need not be any cause for discouragement, 
but rather for encouragement. God help us to pray more, praying 
"with the Spirit and with the understanding also." (1 Cor. 14:15.) 

Were half the time that's vainly spent, 
To heaven in supplication sent; 
Our cheerful songs would oftener be, 
Hear what the Lord has done for me. 

J. C. SUNDERLIN. 



R469 : page 5 



PALESTINE. 

The houses of the common people of Greece and Rome were 
full of statues of deities; there was not one in a Jewish house in 
Palestine. That there is a God, that he is one God, that he is a 
righteous God, and that he rewards the righteous and punishes 
the wicked, these beliefs were more than a part of the Jewish 
creed; they were the part of the very fiber of the Jewish 
character. It is from the land thus educated, through the long 
discipline of centuries, that have gone forth the influences which 
have made all other lands theistic, which have successfully 
banished the idols from the churches and the homes, the 
licentious gods and goddesses from the imagination, and godless 
philosophy from the intellect. The Grecian has given the world 
art, the Roman law, the Anglo-Saxon commerce, the Jew 
religion. Greece is sacred to the artist, Rome to the statesman, 
England to the worker, Palestine to man. Its hills and valleys, its 
lakes and rivers and sea-coast, are indissolubly connected with 
the history which has exercised a more powerful influence on 
the destinies of the race than any other province of equal size. - 
Lyman Abbott. 



R469 : page 5 

A HARMONIOUS VIEW. 

Among Christian people there are three leading views relative 
to Christ's coming. We briefly state them: 

First, those called Second Adventists, look for Christ's coming, 
expecting that soon he will appear-a fleshly being- in the sky, 
when instantly the Church will be caught up into the air above 
the earth and there remain with him, while fire and brimstone 
are rained upon the earth, burning it to a cinder. During the time 
it is burning, and until it cools off (probably thousands of years), 
Christ and the Church will be waiting in the clouds. 

These will then take possession of the earth, which will become 
as the garden of Eden again. There they expect to "build houses 
and inhabit them, plant vineyards and eat the fruit of them, and 
long enjoy the work of their hands." There they expect to reign 
with Christ as kings and priests-over whom none can tell 
(unless it be over one another), since all the rest of mankind 
must have long since perished in the burning earth. 

Second, those terming themselves Pre-Millenarians, expect 
Christ to come unawares and gather the Church, and with them 
leave the world and go to heaven for a few years. During the 
absence of Christ and the Church, the world will be full of 
trouble, distress of nations, pouring out of the vials of wrath 
(more or less literal), etc. This trouble and distress will destroy 
or subdue unruly sinners, and then Christ Jesus and his church 



will return to earth and inhabit a new Jerusalem City which will 
(literally) descend from the sky. 

Christ and his saints-all glorious fleshly beings- [called 
SPIRITUAL as a compliment to Paul (1 Cor. 15:44-50), though 
held to be really fleshly] will then reign over the few of the 
nations 

R470 : page 5 

which have survived the trouble. This reign will last a thousand 
years. Then the dead, so unfortunate as not to live during the 
Millennial age, will be brought out of a "lake of fire" to earth, 
and arraigned for mock trial and condemnation before Christ 
Jesus and his Church. All will speedily be condemned and sent 
back to hell for never ending ages; then Christ and the Church 
will go to heaven and deliver up the kingdom to God, even the 
Father, and the world will be set on fire and melted-possibly to 
become, at some future time, again a stage for combat between 
new races of men and devils; or possibly to continue to roll 
through space a blackened cinder, a lasting memorial of the lost 
cause of man's dominion, and of God's lack of wisdom in 
undertaking to establish an earthly government of which man 
should be king. (Psa. 8:6.) 

Third, Post-Millenarians, by far the largest class, including 
nearly all so-called orthodox Christians, claim that the foregoing 
views are too gross and materialistic. They claim, and with good 
reason we think, that it would be very absurd to think of the 
glorious Christ and his Church (spiritual beings) either building 
houses and planting vineyards and enjoying the work of their 
hands, or reigning and living in a city in Palestine. They think 
this would be progress backward and not forward. During this 
age, say they, the church walks by faith and not by sight. To 
bring in a new age, in which it would walk by sight, would 
prove it to be a dispensation on a lower plane and not 
progression. 

They claim that the Millennium, or 1000 years' reign of truth 
and righteousness, will be marked by no visible manifestation of 
Christ to men's natural eyes, but that the Church, in her present 
condition, will stem the tide of evil and cause righteousness to 
prevail, and that thus God's kingdom— church-(which they 
claim is now reigning) will conquer the world, and bring about 
the foretold blessedness and happiness to fill the earth. All this 
is to be accomplished without Jesus' personal presence here, 
though they claim that the Church will have special spiritual 
help and power from him in the great work. When the point is 
reached where all evil and wrong is subjected to right, the plan 
ends (i.e., if so aimless a supposition can be called a plan at all), 
and then Jesus comes and the mock trial and condemnation of 
the ignorant and unfortunate billions, who lived before the 
Millennial light had fully blazed forth, are re-consigned to 



endless woe and the earth destroyed by fire, much as Pre- 
Millennialists believe. 

We cannot find words to express our thankfulness to our Father 
that we have been led into a much more harmonious and 
reasonable understanding of his plan than any of these views 
present. These are the human reasonings on the Word of God 
before the true light was due. Many still tenaciously hold these 
ideas of the past, but those who walk in the path, which shines 
more and more, are led into a more reasonable and harmonious 
view. We rejoice to be of those free from fetters of human 
creeds -free to search and believe God's Word -free to be 
taught of God. Hence, as the Millennial morn is breaking, we 
are prepared to see light in God's light. 

The truth seems to lie between— the last two views being the 
extremes— Second Adventism being, in our judgment, the 
grossest and farthest from truth, except on the one point of man's 
condition in death. 

Now, let us state briefly a fourth view of this subject, as seen 
from ZION'S WATCH TOWER, the scriptural proofs of which 
have frequently been presented in our columns and hence are 
now omitted. We ask a careful comparison of it, not only with 
the three above, but with God's Word as a whole. 

THE FOURTH VIEW. 

This view recognizes plan, system, purpose in all God's works, 
reading them in his statements and in his doings. 

Jehovah formed the earth- not to burn it, but "to be inhabited." 
"He created it not in vain; he formed it to be inhabited" (Isa. 
45:18). He created various orders of creatures adapted to the 
earthly home, of which man was the Chief-Lord-Ruler- King 
(1 Cor. 15:40; Psa. 8:6). 

This is Jehovah's plan, and must ultimately be accomplished, but 
its accomplishment requires the work of seven thousand years. 

Man, to be in any degree a likeness of God, must have a free 
will, and, in order to the proper use of his will, he must have 
knowledge. This, God could have given him without, but 
permitted him to gain by, experience. When he sinned by the 
exercise of his free will, God inflicted a righteous punishment 
and withdrew the life, and thus death reigned by sin, and man 
for 6000 years has been experiencing "the exceeding sinfulness 
of sin" and the bitterness of its fruit. 

During all this time Jehovah's plan did not change. Man knew 
not of it, nor angels, for "angels desired to look into these 
things," but were not permitted (1 Pet. 1:12). Meanwhile God 
gave laws, and caused types and shadows of his plan to be 
enacted in a nation which he chose for this purpose (Israel). 
These shadows showed the leprous character of sin and pointed 



to the slain Lamb of God— as the means and agency for its 
removal— and in the type, too, was presented the blessings to 
follow its removal. 

In due time Christ Jesus came and "gave himself a ransom 
(equivalent price) for all. " Did he come too soon, since sin must 
reign the full 6000 years? No, our Father had another part of his 

R470 : page 6 

plan hidden in this plan for earth! It was to select "a peculiar 
people," "a little flock," "the Bride," who should be lifted out of 
the human nature entirely and become new creatures— partakers 
of the Bridegroom's Divine nature. Thus the sacrifice of the 
Lamb of God, which taketh away the sin of the world, was not 
too soon, but in "due time. " All must be bought before any could 
be selected, and there was just sufficient time for the selection of 
the Bride before the due time should come for giving the human 
family a knowledge (experience) of good, and bringing in 
everlasting righteousness, and restoring to such as would have 
it—the lost dominion. 

We are now in the early dawn of the Millennial day. It is the day 
of all man's week (7,000 years) the best; the only one in which 
right will rule and wrong be fully subjected, and man will be 
restored by natural processes to the perfection once lost by the 
disobedience of one man, but the right to which has been 
redeemed by the obedience of the man Christ Jesus (Rom. 5:18). 

During this Millennial age Jesus and his Bride, spiritual beings- 
no longer men- will be personally present, directing and 
overruling the affairs of earth, but invisible to men, as angels 
have been in the past. As Satan and his angels (present- 
invisible— yet ruling among men) have used Rome as so willing 
an agent that it is scripturally called by his name— the devil and 
Satan-so this spiritual kingdom of God will operate through 
restored fleshly Israel, and find in it so willing an agency that it 
will be properly called also the kingdom of God, and will extend 
its borders righteously, as the Roman counterfeit has attempted 
to do unrighteously, until the kingdom shall fill the whole earth. 
Then shall be fulfilled the prayer of the Master, "Thy kingdom 
come: Thy will be done in earth as in heaven." And man 
restored shall plant and build and long enjoy the work of their 
hands, for "the earth abideth forever." God "made it not in vain; 
he made it to be inhabited. " 

When sin and Adamic death are wiped out, and all its traces 
removed, and the incorrigible destroyed in the second death, 
then man, being in the condition in which he was first created - 
an image of his Creator, and possessed of an experimental 
knowledge of both good and evil- will be in proper condition to 
receive and rightly use the first dominion. Then the dominion 
will be delivered up to God, even the Father, by the 
accountability of men being made thereafter directly to Jehovah, 



instead of to Jesus as during the Millennial age (John 5:22). 
During that age the Father judgeth no man, but hath committed 
all judgment unto the Son, his agent-man's purchaser - 
Redeemer. 

Thus we get a glimpse of God's plan for bringing many sons to 
glory— some to the glory of the human nature and some to the 
Divine nature. But the glory of the terrestrial (earthly) is one 
thing and the glory of the celestial (heavenly) is another thing 
entirely (1 Cor. 15:40). Surely we can say that it is a plan worthy 
of our God— full of Wisdom, Love and Power. "Oh, the depths 
of the riches both of the knowledge and wisdom of God!" 

We understand that now we are in the dawn of the glorious day- 
-it is not yet sunrise-(fhe shining forth of the Church, Matt. 
13:43), but the "Day Star" (Jesus) has arisen in our hearts- we 
know of his presence— and the sunshine will, ere long, dispel the 
darkness and storm with which this day opens. That this 
Millennial era commences with a time of trouble, and the 
pouring out of symbolic plagues and vials, we believe and teach; 
and we incline to the belief that the trouble and distress will be 
of a sort at first little appreciated by many. First, the nominal 
Churches— systems— having filled their mission are due to be 
destroyed. Secondly, earthly kingdoms, having served their 
purpose, are vessels of wrath fitted for destruction (Rom. 9:22); 
and mankind, long held in bonds of ignorance, under oppression 
and superstition, is to be released and prepared for their 
experience with good during Messiah's reign. 

As this Gospel age is the time for trial of those called to the 
heavenly nature-the Church— so the Millennial age is to be the 
time of judgment— trial of mankind— to determine who of them 
are worthy of human perfection and the dominion of earth. It 
will be the time of trial of earth's dead, as well as those living, 
when that age begins. 



R471 : page 6 

FORETOLD AND FULFILLED. 

It would not be difficult to form a tolerably complete 
dictionary, of the meaning of the Apocalyptic symbols, by 
placing over-against each, passages of Scripture in which the 
same symbol is employed in contexts which indicate its 
meaning; or in historical narratives, ceremonial observances, or 
legal enactments, which throw light upon it. To search the 
Scriptures, is to find the solution of many a difficulty in this 
book, for it is more closely related to the rest of the Bible than 
would by superficial readers be supposed. 

We proceed, however, briefly to examine two of the leading 
prophecies of the Revelation, a clear understanding of which is, 
of itself, sufficient to determine its whole scope and character. 



They are two of the most important symbolizations in the entire 
series, they occupy several whole chapters, and are alluded to in 
others; they are closely related to each other, and one of them is 
divinely interpreted. This is the vision of BABYLON THE 
GREAT, in the seventeenth chapter of the book, a prophecy 
which, by its synchronical connection with almost all the other 
predictions of the Apocalypse, furnishes a most valuable clue to 
the meaning and application of the whole series of visions. This 
prophecy has besides, a solemn practical importance, rendering 
it peculiarly needful that it should be rightly interpreted. 

Immediately prior to the fall of Babylon, described in the 18th 
chapter of Revelation, a voice from heaven cries, "Come out of 
her, my people, that ye be not partakers of her sins, that ye 
receive not of her plagues; for her sins have reached unto 
heaven, and God hath remembered her iniquities." Is it not all- 
important that Christian people should be very clear as to the 
system thus solemnly denounced by a voice from heaven? And 
similarly, immediately after the fall of Babylon, "a great voice, 
as of much people in heaven," is heard saying, with reference to 
it, "Alleluia; salvation, and glory, and honor, and power, unto 
the Lord our God; for true and righteous are his judgments: for 
he hath judged the great whore, which did corrupt the earth with 
her fornication, and hath avenged the blood of his servants at her 
hand. And again they said Alleluia. And her smoke rose up for 
ever and ever."... 

The depravity attributed to "Babylon the Great," the peculiarly 
solemn adjuration to God's people to come out of her, and the 
utter and awful destruction denounced against her, all combine 
to attach great practical importance to the inquiry, what system 
is intended by this symbol? 

A perusal of the 17th and 18th chapters of the Book of 
Revelation shows that "Babylon the Great" represents a system 
which should last long, exert a subtle and extensive influence, 
and be guilty of exceeding iniquity and cruelty. This system 
must still be in existence, seeing its destruction takes place 
simultaneously with "the marriage of the Lamb," an event which 
we know to be still future; and seeing also that up to the moment 
of its destruction, or very nearly so, children of God will be 
found more or less connected with it, so that a need will exist for 
the urgent call, "Come out of her, my people. " 

This system is prefigured as a cruelly persecuting one, as one 
that would "shed the blood of saints and martyrs of Jesus," one 
on whom the Lord God would "avenge the blood of his 
servants. " The Lord Jesus Christ, who loves his Church, 
foreseeing the existence and career of this terrible system, 
forewarned, and thus fore-armed her by this prophecy. He 
furnishes her with abundant marks whereby the foe may be 
recognized, and solemnly warns her against making any truce or 
compromise, while he stimulates and encourages her for the 



long and bitter conflict by a view of the final result. He would 
have his people in no perplexity or doubt on so momentous a 
question, so he has made this prediction peculiarly clear; has 
placed it in marked and intentional contrast with another 
prophecy, which makes its meaning still clearer; and he has 
added besides, an explanation which leaves no room for the 
candid student to err. 

Let the reader note the contrasted features of the two symbolic 
prefigurations: 



"THE WHORE THAT SITTETH 

UPON MANY WATERS" 

"BABYLON THE GREAT" 

"There came one of the seven angels 
which had the seven vials, and talked with 
me, saying, Come hither; I will show unto 
thee the judgment of THE GREAT 
WHORE that sitteth upon many waters. 

"So he carried me away in the spirit into 
the wilderness: and I saw a woman sit 
upon a scarlet colored beast, full of names 
of blasphemy, having seven heads and ten 
horns. 

"And the woman was arrayed in purple 
and scarlet color, decked with gold and 
precious stones and pearls, having a 
golden cup in her hand full of 
abominations and filthiness of her 
fornication. And upon her forehead was a 
name written, Mystery, BABYLON THE 
GREAT, the mother of harlots and 
abominations of the earth. 

"And I saw the woman drunken with the 
blood of the saints, and with the blood of 
the martyrs of Jesus." (Rev. 17:1-6). 



n 



"THE BRIDE, THE LAMB'S WIFE" 
"THE HOLY JERUSALEM" 

"There came unto me one of the seven 
angels which had the seven vials full of 
the seven last plagues, and talked with me, 
saying, Come hither, I will show thee THE 
BRIDE, the Lamb's wife. 

"And he carried me away in the spirit to a 
great and high mountain, and showed me" 
(the bride, the Lamb's wife, under another 
symbol). (Rev. 16) 

"To her was granted that she should be 
arrayed in fine linen, clean and white; for 
the fine linen is the righteousness of 
saints" (Rev. 19:8). 

"This Bride is described as 'THE HOLY 
JERUSALEM descending out of heaven 
from God, having the glory of God: and 
her light like unto a stone most precious" 
(Rev. 21). 

The dragon "persecuted the woman," and 
"the dragon was wroth with the woman, 
and went to make war with the remnant of 
her seed, which keep the commandments 
of God and have the testimony of Jesus 
Christ" (Rev. 12:13-17). 



R472 : page 6 

As to Babylon John adds, "when I saw her, I wondered with 
great admiration. And the angel said unto me, Wherefore didst 
thou marvel? I will tell thee the mystery of the woman. ...The 
seven heads are seven mountains, on which the woman sitteth. 
The waters are peoples, and multitudes, and nations, and 
tongues.... And the woman which thou sawest is that great city, 
which reigneth over the kings of the earth" (Rev. 17:7). 

These prophecies present two broadly contrasted women, 
identified with two broadly contrasted cities, one reality being in 
each case, doubly represented as a woman, and as a city. The 



harlot and Babylon are one; the Bride and the heavenly 
Jerusalem are one. 

It is evident that the true interpretation of either of these double 
prefigurations must afford a clue to the true interpretation of the 
other. 

The two women are contrasted in every particular that is 
mentioned about them; the one is as pure as purity itself, "made 
ready" and fit for heaven's unsullied holiness; the other, foul as 
corruption could make her, fit only for the fires of destruction. 

The one belongs to the Lamb, who loves her as the bridegroom 
loves the bride; the other is associated with a wild beast, and 
with the kings of the earth, who ultimately hate and destroy her. 

The one is clothed with fine linen- righteousness; the other is 
attired in scarlet and gold, in jewels and pearls, gorgeous indeed, 
but with earthly splendor only. 

The one is represented as a chaste virgin, espoused to Christ; the 
other is mother of harlots and abominations of the earth. 

The one is persecuted, pressed hard by the dragon, driven into 
the wilderness, and well-nigh overwhelmed; the other is drunken 
with martyr blood, seated on a beast which has received its 
power from the persecuting dragon. 

The one sojourns in solitude in the wilderness, the other "reigns 
in the wilderness" over peoples, and nations, and kindreds, and 
tongues. 

The one goes in with the Lamb to the marriage supper, amid the 
glad hallelujahs of heaven; the other is stripped, insulted, torn, 
and destroyed, by her guilty paramours. 

We lose sight of the Bride amid the effulgence of heavenly glory 
and joy, and of the harlot amid the gloom and darkness of the 
smoke that "rose up for ever and ever. " 

It is impossible to find in Scripture a contrast more marked; and 
the conclusion is irresistible, that whatever one may represent, 
the other must prefigure its opposite. They are not disconnected 
visions, but a pair-a pair associated, not by likeness, but by 
contrast. 

Now, Scripture leaves us in no doubt as to the signification of 
the emblematic bride, the Lamb's wife, the heavenly Jerusalem. 
We read, "Husbands, love your wives, even as Christ also loved 
the church, and gave himself for it; that he might sanctify and 
cleanse it with the washing of water by the word, that he might 
present it to himself a glorious church, not having spot, or 
wrinkle, or any such thing; but that it should be holy and without 
blemish. " "For we are members of his body, of his flesh, and of 
his bones." The purpose of Christ's love, as regards his blood- 
bought church is, that she should be with him, and be one with 
him forever; that she should behold and share his glory, being 



perfectly conformed to his image. Here, in prophetic vision, we 
see this blessed design accomplished, and the complete and 
perfectly sanctified church, clad in spotless robes of 
righteousness, brought to the marriage supper of the Lamb. We 
see her persecuted like her Lord, and like her Lord and with her 
Lord, glorified. Beyond all question, the New Jerusalem bride 
represents the true church of Christ. 

What then must the contrasted symbol, the Babylonian harlot, 
represent? Surely some false and apostate church, some church 
which, while professing to belong to Christ, is in reality given 
up to fellowship with the world, and linked in closest union with 
the kings of the earth; a worldly church, which has left her first 
love, forgotten her heavenly calling, sunk into carnality and sin, 
and proved shamelessly and glaringly faithless to her Lord. 

Be it observed, that these symbols, a woman and a city, 
prefigure definite systems, corporate bodies, not merely a 
multitude of similar but disconnected individuals. The tares of a 
wheat-field, the bad fish in the net, may represent such; but here 
we have neither true Christians nor worldly professors, as 
individuals, but two corporations, two definite bodies. The true 
church of Christ is a body; its members are united in the closest 
union to their Head and to each other; one life animates them: 
"Because I live, ye shall live also;" one spirit dwells in them; 
they are one habitation of God. The link that unites them is, 
however, a spiritual one; the body is consequently visible as 
such. A false church can have no such spiritual link. The bond 
that unites it must therefore be carnal, outward, visible; the 
church represented by Babylon must be a visible church, an 
earthly corporation, and as such capable of being discerned and 
recognized.... The woman and the city are one— if we can 
discover the name of the city, we shall be able to identify the 
church intended. 

The last words of the angel to John seem to leave no possibility 
of mistake as to the city. "The seven heads are seven mountains 
on which the woman sitteth....And the woman which thou 
sawest is that great city which reigneth over the kings of the 
earth. " What city was that? There was but one great city which, 
in John's day, reigned over the kings of the earth. It was ROME: 
and Rome is the only city that was great then, has been great-in 
one way or other ever since, and is so still. And Rome was 
seated on seven hills- "the seven mountains on which the 
woman sitteth. " Her common name with the classic writers of 
St. John's age, is "the seven hilled city; " an annual festival used 
to be held in honor of the "seven hilled city;" every Latin poet of 
note, during a period of five hundred years, alludes to Rome's 
seven hills. The medals and coins of the day represent Rome as 
a woman sitting on seven hills; and her titles show, with 
sufficient clearness, how thoroughly she reigned. She was styled 
"the royal Rome;" "the mistress of the world;" "the queen of 



R472 : page 7 

nations." Her sway was all but universal. She was the metropolis 
of that fourth great empire which Daniel had foretold would 
break in pieces and subdue all things, "dreadful and terrible and 
strong exceedingly;" and, at the time of the Apocalyptic visions, 
her power was at its height. Rome, and no other city, can be 
intended here; the woman is in some way identified with Rome. 
We previously saw that she must represent a church; now we 
know what church. The harlot is the Church of Rome; for simple 
minds there seems no escape from this conclusion. "The woman 
which thou sawest is that great city" "which reigneth over the 
kings of the earth. " 

The question, however, naturally suggests itself, If the woman 
be identified in some way with ROME, why is her brow 
emblazoned with the name of BABYLON? The answer is 
evident; the Apocalypse is a book of mysteries; things are 
represented by signs; realities are veiled; and it would have been 
altogether inconsistent with the whole style of this prophecy to 
have written ROME on the harlot's brow. The woman is a figure 
of the church, a corrupt, idolatrous church; that is, the symbol 
seen by John was suggestive of something widely different from 
itself; so the name with which the symbol was stamped, was 
also suggestive of something widely different from itself, though 
mysteriously similar. The harlot is "Mystery, Babylon the 
Great." 



The above extracts are from the pen of an English writer. We 
supplement them as follows: 

Names were formerly given as expressions of character or work; 
as, for instance, Mary was commanded to call her child's name 
Jesus, which means deliverer or Savior, because he should save 
his people from their sins. The name Babylon, applied by the 
Spirit to the Church of Rome, expresses her character for 
Babylon means mixture— confusion (see Lev. 18:23). This 
union of the woman (church) with the beast (empire) constitutes 
the spiritual harlotry of which she is guilty. 

But the same (Babylon) applies to her entire family; her 
daughters inherit both her nature and name, for she is a "mother 
of harlots," and her works they do. Some of her daughters have 
followed very closely in her footsteps, in mixing Church and 
State. Such are "The Church of England" and other State 
Churches. And such would other daughters be, also, if they 
could find empires willing to support them. 

The same spirit of confusion-the Church walking in unlawful 
union with the world— is seen on every hand. The Church 
(nominal) and the world walk hand in hand, unite their interests, 
and make merry together. It is the worldly element and its 



wealth that is sought by every sect to support and sustain the 
Church in the degree of luxury she wishes to enjoy. Alas, the 
name Babylon is emblazoned on the brow of every sectarian 
system the world over! Yet they all, like the mother system, hold 
forth "a golden cup (the Word of God) full of abomination for 
(Greek, kai.) the filthiness of their fornication," without a blush 
for their shame, and, in fact, ignorant of the fact that it 
condemns them. 

But the cup of Divine indignation is now full. The Lord will 
have pity and patience no longer, and though, until this harvest 
time, he permitted wheat and tares to grow together, the 
imperative command now is, "Come out of her, my people." The 
magnet of truth is gathering out the Jewels, and the reproaches 
of the world and the nominal Church are refining and fitting 
them for 

R473 : page 7 

the Master's use. 

He is thus seeking out the "little flock"-the true Church-whose 
names are written in heaven, who, during his absence, have 
waited for him, searched carefully every letter of his, which 
would inform them of his coming and glory, and of his will 
concerning them; those who have made and performed the 
sacrifice of earthly interests, to secure with him the higher and 
more enduring pleasures and honors than any which the world 
can offer. Yes, "They shall be mine, saith the Lord, in that day 
when I make up my jewels" (Mai. 3:16,17). 

Cyrus, who conquered the typical Babylon, and set free the 
typical Israel in bondage in her, is undoubtedly a type of Christ. 
In the overthrow of the type, not only was the capitol city 
(Babylon) overthrown, but the empire with all its provinces and 
cities. So, too, Babylon here is to fall, and it implies not merely 
the great city— the capitol and leading system of the apostate 
Church (the Roman Church)— but all under the rule of the world- 
-all of the mixture, all of the confusion— mother and daughters. 

It is Babylon that falls and is dashed in pieces in this day of the 
Lord, but the true and faithful virgin shall be gathered and made 
perfect, and, as the Bride and joint-heir, shall share Christ's 
glory. 

Dear is this Church to God, 
Her walls before him stand; 
Dear as the apple of his eye, 
And graven on his hand. 



R473 : page 7 



THE CONSUMMATION OF OUR HOPE. 

Some of the Lord's dear children, sorely pressed by the 
adversary and longing for the glorious consummation of our 
hope, anxiously inquire how long must we tarry here, and in 
what manner shall we go? For these, and for refreshing the 
memory of all, we briefly review what the Scriptures teach on 
this subject. 

It has been an old and cherished idea with Christian people, and 
ourselves among others, based on a misunderstanding of some 
scriptures, and an overlooking of others, that those who remain 
unto the coming of the Lord should not pass through the ordeal 
of physical death. We took more interest in this thought than 
other Christians, because we had learned that we were living in 
the day of the Lord's presence. We never claimed this as new 
truth, however; it was simply an old idea applied to the time in 
which we learned we were living, which idea we had not 
discovered to be erroneous until a little over a year ago. 

The scriptures upon which that idea has been based, when 
critically considered, do not (in our judgment) support the 
thought; and other scriptures seem to teach positively that all 
who will be members of the body— Christ- must like their head, 
example, forerunner, die physically. Carefully examine the 
subject in the light of the following remarks on texts usually 
regarded as the basis of the idea that some will be exempted 
from physical death: 

In 1 Thes. 4:15,17, we read: "That we which are alive and 
remain unto the coming (parousia-presence) of the Lord shall 
not prevent [precede] them which are asleep. For the Lord... 
shall descend... and the dead in Christ shall rise first: Then we 
which are alive and remain shall be caught up together [or also] 
with [or to] them, &c. " 

Now we do not claim that anything here mentioned indicates 
that the saints, as new creatures, who remain over to this time of 
the Lord's presence will die; but we do claim that nothing in this 
text teaches that their human bodies will not die. This scripture 
does not mention what change they will undergo before being 
joined to the Lord; in fact the change is not mentioned here at 
all. But the same apostle elsewhere informs us that a change 
must take place, because "flesh and blood" cannot inherit the 
kingdom of God- we must all be "changed" to spiritual bodies. 

Let us next look at 1 Cor. 15:51, for it mentions the change 
particularly, and let us notice carefully whether Paul says we 
shall be changed without dying, as we have always supposed he 
does. We read: "Behold I show you a mystery; we shall not all 
sleep, but we shall all be changed. In a moment, in the twinkling 
of an eye;. ..the dead shall be raised incorruptible, and we shall 
be changed. " We received the impression that our earthly body 
would not die, from the above statement regarding sleep, but the 



human body might be dissolved and we— the new creatures —be 
delivered from it so quickly, clothed upon with our spiritual 
body, that not a moment for sleep would intervene. If time 
should intervene between the dissolution of our earthly house 
(human nature) and the receiving of our spiritual body, we 
should be obliged to sleep, as the apostles and "all who sleep in 
Jesus." But that sleep has always been an undesirable thing; 
therefore with the Apostle we can say that we are anxious, not to 
be unclothed (asleep without either human or spiritual body), 
but we prefer, if the will of God be such, that we should be of 
the class alive when the Lord has come, so that, instead of being 
even for a moment in the unclothed (or sleep) condition, we 
might be clothed upon, or receive the spiritual at the same 
moment we part with the old human house. And this in 
substance Paul here states— all will not sleep, for to some the 
change will be in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye. 

One thing is sure, we must leave the flesh sometime, and 
whenever or however it may be, it will be the death or 
dissolution and end of the human to all who become full 
recipients of the divine nature. 

Now, notice the words of Jesus concerning John. John, we have 
long since seen to be a type or representative of the last part of 
the church— those who are alive and remain unto the presence of 
the Lord and who shall be changed. Jesus said of our 
representative, John: "If I will that he tarry till I come, what is 
that to thee, Peter? Then went that saying abroad among the 
disciples, that that disciple should not die; howbeit, Jesus said 
not that he should not die, but if I will that he tarry till I come, " 
&c. (John 21:22). Just so, dear brethren, it has been with the 
company typified by John; the saying has gone abroad and has 
been generally received that this part of the church will not die. 
Howbeit, when we examine the evidences, we find that neither 
Jesus nor the apostles said we should not die, but that we would 
tarry till the Master's presence and be changed in a moment and 
not sleep. 

Now, notice the positive teaching that all of "the body" will die, 
and then mark the necessity of death. It was no less an authority 
than Paul who said: If we be dead with him we shall also live 
with him; and if we have been planted in the likeness of his 
death, we shall be also in the likeness of his resurrection, 
therefore we are to be made conformable unto his death. 

Does some one object that these words are applicable to the 
daily life of Paul and of us and suggest that we are to be "living 
sacrifices?" Very true, but while our dying commences at our 
consecration, it does not end there. As in the case of our 
"Captain," it does not end until the human is dead. While we 
begin, as "living sacrifices," yet, when the sacrifice is finished, 
all that is human is dead. The thing that dies at once is the 
human will, and when this is accomplished we reckon ourselves 



dead; but the death actually is in progress day by day until the 
sacrifice is complete. We cannot receive the spiritual mind 
unless we surrender the human mind or will, so also we cannot 
receive our spiritual body unless the earthly body is surrendered. 
Remember that Jesus said to all the churches: "Be thou faithful 
unto death and I will give thee a crown of life. " 

It is in harmony with these thoughts that we understand the 
words of Jesus (John 11:26): "Whosoever liveth (at this time) 
and believeth in me [or is one of the faith- ful] shall never die. " 
The class referred to are reckoned dead to the human will, 
nature, hope, etc., and are alive toward God as new creatures. 
Such new creatures who are now living will not sleep— will not 
die— but immediately, in the twinkling of an eye, will be 
transferred to their new body like unto Christ's spiritual body. 
What matters it to us, if the earthly house of this building be 
dissolved in death, we shall not be unclothed but clothed upon 
with an heavenly one. 

Now, as we have seen, that in Jesus' case the human was 
surrendered to death forever, (He was "put to death in the flesh 
but quickened in spirit"), and that, had he taken back the human 
nature, it would have been taking back our ransom price, so we 
have seen that it is a privilege granted to us as his body, to fill 
up that which is behind of the afflictions of Christ-to share in 
the world's redemption, with him who loved us and bought us 
with his own precious blood-to suffer with him, being made 
conformable unto his death. In a word, if Jesus must needs be 
obedient even unto death, and if he says to us: "Be thou faithful 
unto death," then it is clear that the dissolution or death of the 
human being is necessary. 

But we find still more positive teaching on this point. Turning to 
Psa. 82:6, we read: "I-I (Jehovah) have said God's ye are, and 
sons of the Most High all of you; but as man ye die, and as one 
of the heads ye fall" (Young's Trans). 

Our high calling is so great, so much above the comprehension 
of men, that they think we are guilty of blasphemy 

R474 : page 7 

when we speak of being "new creatures" -"partakers of the 
divine nature. " When we claim, on the scriptural warrant, that 
we are begotten to a divine nature and that Jehovah is thus our 
father, it is claiming that we are divine beings-hence all such 
are Gods. True, we are only in the embryo condition, now 
spiritually minded, but by-and-by we shall be perfected. Thus 
there is a family of Gods, Jehovah being our father, and all his 
sons on the divine plane, being brethren and joint-heirs: Jesus 
being the chief or first-born. 

Nor should we wonder that so few discern this grand 
relationship, into the full membership of which we so soon hope 



to come. The apostle tells us that "the natural man receiveth not 
the things of the Spirit of God... neither can he know them, 
because they are spiritually discerned" (1 Cor. 2:14). Just so it 
was when our great Head and Lord was among men. Having 
consecrated the human at 30 years of age, he was begotten of the 
spirit, and became a part-taker of the divine nature. When Jesus 
said he was a son of God the Jews were about to stone him, 
reasoning thus, that if a son of God, he was making himself to 
be also a God, or of the God family. [Just what we claim: 
"Beloved, now are we the sons of God"- "The God and father of 
our Lord Jesus hath begotten us."] (1 John 3:2 and 1 Pet. 1:3.) 

Jesus does not deny that when he said he was a son, he implied 
that he was of the divine nature, but he quotes to them the above 
passage from the Psalms as being good authority, and it seems 
as though it satisfied them, for they did not stone him. Jesus 
said, "Is it not written in your law, I said ye are Gods?" Then he 
proceeds to show that the "Gods" there mentioned, are the ones 
who receive obediently his words and example, and concludes 
his argument by asking whether if God calls such ones as 
receive his (Jesus') teachings, Gods, whether they think that he, 
the teacher, whom the Father had specially set apart as the head 
of those Gods, could be properly said to blaspheme, when he 
claimed the same relationship as a son of God (John 10:35). 

These sons of God, like him from whom they heard the word of 
truth by which they are begotten, are yet in disguise; the world 
knoweth us not for the same reason that it knew him not. Our 
Father puts no outward badge or mark of our high relationship, 
but leaves each to walk by faith and not by sight all through the 
earthly pilgrimage -down into death. His favor and love and the 
glory and honor which belong to our station, we can now see by 
the eye of faith; but soon it will be realized in fact. Now we 
appear like men, and as men all die, even as others; but in the 
resurrection we will rise in our true character as Gods-partakers 
of the Divine nature (2 Peter 1 :4). 

It doth not yet appear 
How great we shall be made; 
But when we see him as he is, 
We shall be like our Head. 

How forcibly this is expressed by the prophet, and how sure it 
is, too ! Jesus says— it cannot be broken. 

Then the whole Christ-head and body— are addressed as one, as 
they 

R474 : page 8 

will be under Christ their head, saying: "Arise, O God, judge 
[rule, bless] the earth; for thou shalt inherit all nations." 

We, as new creatures, who are living in this favored time of the 
Lord's presence, expect to be translated, or changed to our own 



spiritual condition, but we expect the change to take place at the 
moment of the death of the "earthen vessel"— we will not be 
obliged to sleep as did the new creature Paul and others, but will 
be "changed in a moment." 

Of this favored time Jesus told us in words never understood 
until due, saying: "Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord 
from henceforth: Yea, saith the Spirit, that they may rest from 
their labors; but their works follow with them" (Rev. 14:13— 
E.D.). 

Uniformly throughout the Bible, except in this one instance, 
death is represented as a dreadful disaster, a terrible enemy, a 
devouring monster, and the grave as a great prison, permitted of 
our loving Heavenly Father, only because men had become 
sinners and must be destroyed. And the great hope held out 
before the world has been, that Christ, having given himself a 
ransom for the sinners -having "tasted death for every man -the 
just for the unjust— will soon commence the great work of 
destroying death by restoring all mankind to life. Thus will he 
"swallow up death in victory." (1 Cor. 15:54). 

When he has exalted his church to the glory of kingdom 
(symbol, mountain,) power, then he will spread before all people 
a great feast, and, through this kingdom, (mountain) he will 
destroy the vail of ignorance and the covering of death-i.e., "He 
will swallow up death in victory" (Isa. 25:6-8). Then he will 
break open and abolish the great prison-house of death and set at 
liberty all the captives. Of this deliverance to the captives and 
opening of the prison doors to them that are bound, Jesus 
preached, saying, The day is coming in the which all that are in 
their graves shall hear the voice of the Son of man and come 
forth (John 5:28). 

Paul recognizes death as the greatest of all enemies, and, 
speaking of Christ's Millennial reign, he says: "He must reign 
till he hath put all enemies under his feet: The last enemy that 
shall be destroyed is death (1 Cor. 15:25,26). It is the same 
Apostle who, speaking of the object of Jesus' coming into the 
world and dying for our sins, says that he took the human 
nature, that "through death he might destroy him that had the 
power of death, that is, the devil" (Heb. 2:14). It is also affirmed 
that he will open the prison doors of them that are bound 
(captives of death) and proclaim liberty to the captives (Isa. 
61:1). 

In view of the general expression of enmity to death in the 
Scriptures, the above solitary text, speaking of it as a blessing, is 
rather peculiar, until we notice, that the application is limited by 
the word "henceforth." Not always, but henceforth, death may 
be a blessing. But, notice another limitation. It will not 
henceforth be a blessing to all mankind, but only to those "in the 
Lord"-members in particular of the body of Christ, the little 



flock, to whom it is the Father's good pleasure to give the 
kingdom-to all others death will continue to be an enemy until 
its final destruction in the Millennial reign (Hos. 13:14). 

Again, it is unusual to speak of those already dead as dying; but 
the Spirit uses this seemingly incongruous expression, evidently 
desiring to limit the application of the death blessing to a certain 
class: "Blessed are the dead [those dead to the world— crucified 
with Christ -"Ye are dead and your life is hid with Christ in 
God,"] henceforth who die in the Lord." 

Now, we are full of interest to know when, from what time 
forward, will it be blessed, for the special class mentioned, to 
die. These words were written for our edification, and we should 
be able to know when they apply, especially if we are in the 
Lord and dead to the world; for it was part of our Master's 
promise that the Spirit should guide us into an understanding of 
the truth, and show us things to come (John 16:13). If, as we 
believe, the last members of the body of Christ are now living - 
"The feet of him"— it is time that we had an understanding of this 
passage, which clearly refers to the feet. 

We look backward at the context to ascertain if possible when 
this blessing is due. The seven preceding verses give, we think, 
very clear testimony on the subject. They mention three specific 
messages which must be proclaimed in the church (symbol, 
heaven) which, we believe, have been in process during the first 
seven years of harvest just ended, from 1874 to 1881. The first 
message embodies not only the agelasting good news (Gospel) 
but also the time element. "The HOUR of his judgment is 
come. " This is precisely what was preached by quite a goodly 
number of us, viz.: that the glad tidings of great joy should yet 
be unto all people, and that the "harvest," or time of trial, 
(judgment) commenced with 1 874, and would last for forty 
years— the first seven years being specially devoted to the church 
for the harvesting of the first-fruits. 

You will recall that up to 1878, though Restitution was the key 
note, and entire consecration was always urged, yet the time 
element was one of the most prominent features always. Since 
1878, however, though the same time element is recognized in 
all our preaching and teaching, and is repeatedly referred to as a 
proof of our position, yet the direct teaching of time has almost 
stopped among all the preaching brethren-and this, too, without 
any preconcerted arrangement, and without any other reason 
than that other elements of truth came into greater prominence. 

It was in the spring of 1 879 that, seeing clearly the parallelism 
between the nominal Jewish church and the nominal Gospel 
church, we were enabled to know just where the latter was 
finally rejected of the Lord and spued out of his mouth (Rev. 
3:10), no longer to be his mouthpiece. We saw that this was due 
in 1878, as the parallel of the rejection of the Jewish church, 



when Jesus, just prior to his crucifixion, wept over them and 
said: "Your house is left unto you desolate. " The Jewish church 
was there likewise cast off, or spued from his mouth. 

We were led to see very clearly that the nominal church of the 
Gospel Age is Babylon, (the confused, mixed condition of 
worldly-mindedness and lukewarm Christianity), described in 
Rev. 18:2-4. 

This spuing out, or casting off, of the nominal church as an 
organization 

R475 : page 8 

in 1878, we then understood, and still proclaim, to be the date of 
the commencement of Babylon's fall, as recorded there. And 
since then we feel ourselves led of the Spirit, through the 
unfolding of this portion of the word of truth, to say, in the name 
of the Lord, to all God's true children in Babylon: "Come out of 
her, my people, that ye be not partakers of her sins and receive 
not of her plagues" (verse 4). This seems to accord wonderfully 
with the second message, "Babylon is fallen" (Rev. 14:8). 

The third message (14:9-11), was that concerning the worshipers 
of the Beast and his Image-showing the nominal church in the 
colors in which the Word of God paints it, pointing out how all 
who remain in her, either in spirit or name, in opposition to the 
Word of God, saying, "Come out of her," will be subject to 
torment and vexation so long as they are worshiping creeds and 
doctrines and organizations of men, the remembrance of which 
distress (smoke of torment) will never be forgotten. 

As with the preceding two, so with this third message-it could 
not have been more accurately fulfilled than it was. [And here 
we would remark, that the resemblance of the teachings of our 
company, to the messages here given, was only noticed after 
they had been proclaimed]. All three of these messages yet 
continue, and will doubtless continue to be repeated by others so 
long as they contain truth due to the Lord's children; but, as 
special messages in the sense referred to in the prediction of the 
Revelator, they had all been given before the fall of 1881, and 
this was the time which corresponded with the end of the 
seventieth week of Daniel's prophecy. Since then we are in the 
time of patient waiting for our "change" described in verse 12. 
And here it was in the fall of 1881 that, for the first time, we 
were able to read understandingly the words, "Blessed are the 
dead who die in the Lord from henceforth. " Evidently the 
blessing is to the members of the Christ now living. 

But, we inquire, in what respect will death be a blessing to us 
now? We answer, that now we shall not sleep, but we will be 
instantly invested with our heavenly (spiritual) bodies, being 
changed in a moment, dropping all that is human and earthly, 
and being clothed upon with our heavenly condition. In the case 



of Jesus, there were nearly three days of sleep— the unclothed, 
unconscious, dead condition between the times when the earthly 
body was resigned and the heavenly body was received. Paul 
and others have been nearly two thousand years waiting 
"unclothed," or "asleep in Jesus," and this is one of the principal 
reasons why death was undesirable even to Christians. We don't 
wish to be unclothed, even for a moment, but we do desire to be 
clothed upon, or to have the change an instantaneous one (1 Cor. 
15:52). 

Herein consists the blessing to those of the body now taken. 
Death to the human will be instantaneous with the perfecting of 
the divine nature, hence it will be a blessed "change." "Yea, 
saith the Spirit, that they may rest from their labors; but their 
works follow with them. " 

To the class thus "blessed," there will be no interruption of 
work. Already dead to the world and alive toward God, their 
work is in harmony with the kingdom work now going on, and 
they merely step to their higher plane of "divine" perfection and 
power, and there continue the same work. It is only the labor 
(toil,) incident to the mortal body-the frail "earthen vessel" 
which ceases. Not so highly favored in this regard was the lot of 
any of the members of "the body" which preceded us. Quite a 
period elapsed in Paul's case between sufferings and glory. 
When he had fought a good fight and finished his course he 
looked forward, not to a change in a moment, but to a sleep from 
which he would be awakened to receive his reward in the 
kingdom. So he expresses his hope. "Henceforth there is laid up 
for me a crown of life which the Lord, the Righteous Judge, 
shall give me at that day" (2 Tim. 4:8). 

"How beautiful are the feet of Him, " how many favors and 
blessings are for us. Truly, "Blessed are the dead who die in the 
Lord from henceforth: Yea, saith the Spirit, that they may rest 
from their labors and their works follow with them. " Rejoice 
and be exceeding glad —but 

Ne'er think the victory won, 
Nor once at ease sit down; 
Thine arduous task will not be done, 
Till thou hast gained thy crown. 

The human must be entirely sacrificed before the divine is 
perfected- "Be thou faithful unto death and I will give thee a 
crown of life, " are the words of our Lord and Forerunner in 
whose footsteps on the narrow way, we must follow, to gain the 
prize of our high calling- "Glory, Honor and Immortality." 



R471 : page 8 



STRING OF PEARLS. 

Now abideth faith, hope, and charity.- 1 Cor. 13:13. 

Behold this string of pearls, the coronet of diamonds. Each 
pearl sparkles with the luster of its own individuality. Of the 
three it is written, "Now abideth faith, hope, love. " Of love it is 
declared, "But the greatest of these is charity. " Love the most 
brilliant of the group; more exalted than her companions: yet 
Faith, Hope, Love, all essential to vital godliness. There can be 
no religious experience without these. One cannot be substituted 
for the other. Like a railroad permit, or passport, they are not 
transferable. These three graces have their places in the 
experience of every child of God. 

Notice the order. Faith is foundational. Hope and Love resultant. 
This is the Divine arrangement, this God's order. A man is 
according to his Faith. It is the root of this tree of experience; 
the vehicle God uses to reveal himself by his Spirit to man's 
interior nature. "According to your Faith be it unto you." 
"Without Faith it is impossible to please him: for he that cometh 
to God must believe that he is, and that he is a rewarder of them 
that diligently seek him. " 

Simple as Faith is in the abstract, yet God has been pleased to 
honor it with results which are glorious. A little girl was asked 
once the question, "What is Faith?" to which she replied, 
"Trusting God and asking no questions." That simple, brief 
answer gives a correct idea of the simplicity of Faith, and, when 
exercised, brings results. A Scripture or two: "Therefore, being 
justified by Faith, we have peace with God through our Lord 
Jesus Christ; by whom, also, we have access by Faith unto this 
grace wherein we stand, and rejoice in hope of the glory of God. 
And not only so, but we glory in tribulations also, knowing that 
tribulation worketh patience: and patience experience, and 
experience hope, and hope maketh not ashamed because the 
love of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy Ghost 
which is given unto us." (Rom. 5:1,5). The apostle Paul prayed 
for a certain church that their faith fail not. He knew if their 
Faith was gone, all would be gone. The apostle Peter regarded 
Faith as the basis of character, and the unit in spiritual addition, 
and besides this, giving all diligence, "add to your faith virtue, 
and to virtue (courage) knowledge, and to knowledge 
temperance, and to temperance patience, and to patience 
godliness, and to godliness brotherly kindness, and to brotherly 
kindness charity. For if these things be in you and abound, they 
make you that ye shall neither be barren nor unfruitful in the 
knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ" (2 Peter 1:5-8). How 
needed the injunction of holy writ, "Have faith in God. " Hope 
springs from faith, and waits for the accomplishment of faith's 
object. "Faith cometh by hearing, and hearing by the word of 
God. " Hope comes by experience. A man without hope is like a 
world without the sun. Hope flings a bow upon the stormiest 



cloud, kindles a fire in the coldest bosom, and blooms in every 
soil. While I breathe I hope-is the motto of the race. To expect, 
when circumstances are at their worst, that they will become 
better-aye, and better at their best-is as natural as to breathe. 
The object of the hope referred to in this wonderful group is the 
appearing of Christ to receive his bride, and transform them into 
his likeness. "Looking for that blessed hope and the glorious 
appearing of the great God and our Savior Jesus Christ, who 
gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all iniquity, 
and purify unto himself a peculiar people, zealous of good 
works." (Titus 2:13-14). 

O what a blessed hope is ours, 

While here on earth we stay, 

We more than taste the heavenly powers, 

And ante-date that day, 

We feel the resurrection near, 
Our life in Christ concealed, 
And with his glorious presence here, 
Our earthen vessels filled. 

-Words of Faith. 



page 8 

"WHEN a false theory for salvation has been endorsed for some 
time is it not best to part with it and make way for the truth, 
even if the separation hurts or even kills the old carnal nature?" 



"There is no fear in love; but perfect love casteth out fear: 
because fear hath torment. He that feareth is not made perfect in 
love." 



R475 : page 1 

VOL. IV. 

PITTSBURGH, PA., MAY, 1883. 

NO. 10. 



page 1 

ZION'S 

Watch Tower 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S 
PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED MONTHLY AT 

101 Fifth Avenue, Pittsburgh, Pa. 



C. T. RUSSELL, Editor and Publisher. 



The Editor recognizes a responsibility to the Master, relative to 
what shall appear in these columns, which he cannot and does 
not cast aside; yet he should not be understood as endorsing 
every expression of correspondents, or of articles selected from 
other periodicals. 

TERMS OF SUBSCRIPTION. 

TERMS : —Fifty cents a year, postage prepaid. You may send 
paper money to the amount of two dollars, by mail, at our risk. 
Larger amounts may be sent by Drafts, P.O. Money Order, or 
Registered Letter, payable to C. T. RUSSELL. 

FOREIGN TERMS. 

Foreign Postage being higher, our terms to foreign subscribers 
will be 65 cents a year. Please send us no foreign money or 
postage stamps, as we can make no use of them. Remittances 
may be made by Foreign Postal Money Orders. 

TAKE NOTICE. 

This paper will be sent free to any of the Lord's poor who will 
send a card yearly requesting it. Freely we have received and 
freely we would give the truth. "Ho, every one that thirsteth, 
come ye to the waters; and he that hath no money, come ye, buy 
and eat— yea, come, buy wine and milk without money and 



without price. " And you that have it- "Wherefore do ye spend 
money for that which is not bread? and your labor for that which 
satisfieth not? Hearken diligently-and eat ye that which is good, 
and let your soul delight itself in fatness."- ISAIAH 55:1,2. 



R475 : page 1 

VIEW FROM THE TOWER. 

It is written in the Word: "My people are destroyed for lack of 
knowledge." Students of science expect to study assiduously the 
scientific textbooks and to put their knowledge in practice. And 
thus it should be with those who come to the study of the 
greatest of all sciences— God's Revelation. Our text-book, the 
Bible, inspired by the Great Creator, should engage our 
profoundest thought and most diligent study. 

While the readers of the TOWER are, perhaps, more studious of 
the Scriptures than most Christian people, yet we cannot but feel 
that the special tests and trials of faith in this Day of the Lord, in 
which we are living, would be much more easily withstood if 
each saint would study both the Word and plan of God about 
four times as much. The trial of your faith is much more 
precious than that of gold, and if you are building with other 
than truth every such beam or support of error is a real weakness 
of your faith-structure, and will assist the enemy in his attack 
upon you. Every error held is weakness, every truth clearly and 
firmly held is a power-a part of the power of God unto your 
salvation. Hence when we pray for power and strength to 
overcome the world and its spirit, we should eat and thoroughly 
digest the spiritual food which God has provided for this 
purpose. Thus God answers our prayers. Just as in the natural 
things we receive strength from God by eating of natural food 
which he provides. 

We desire again to mention the helps to study-the pamphlets 
Food and Tabernacle— and suggest that if you have not read 
them within six months, you would, doubtless, be profited by re- 
reading them-especially chapters 6 and 8 of "Food. " We know 
this, from the many questions contained in your letters which are 
fully answered in those chapters. 

Oh, how needful the panoply provided by our Captain, but we 
must needs put it on and use it, or it will be useless to us. Bear in 
mind that "We wrestle not against flesh and blood, but against 
principalities, against powers, against the rulers of the darkness 
of this world, against spiritual wickedness in high places" (Eph. 
6:12); and that every effort to veil and obscure the truth, whether 
done by a willing, or deceived and unwitting agent, is the device 
of our unseen adversary to retard our progress in the narrow 
way. 



Our adversary not only makes the attack more fiercely in this 
Day of the Lord, but also increasingly surrounds us with "cares 
of this life," and presents deceitful views of earthly allurements, 
that thus he may engage our every moment and talent, and 
hinder our putting on the armor, and weaken us for the conflict 
with error. Realizing this, well shall it be with us if we profit by 
our knowledge. 

Truly the hour of his judgment is come-Who shall be able to 
stand?— He that hath clean hands and a pure heart. And how can 
this condition be reached except under the influences of the 
Word of God and its exceedingly great and precious promises. 
Hence the indispensableness of a true and well-founded faith to 
a saintly life. 

We almost tremble as we realize that, in this hour of trial, it 
begins with the house of God. (1 Pet. 4:17.) It has begun with 
us, and error after error is being promulgated, and our adversary 
seeks to appear as an angel of light— a messenger of truth. Who 
shall be able to stand? It shall deceive, if it were possible, the 
VERY ELECT. But, no; they shall stand, having their loins girt 
about with truth-having on the breast plate of Christ's 
righteousness- the helmet of his salvation— the shield of faith in 
his blood by which we have redemption, even the remission of 
sins. They are shod for this narrow path with the preparation 
which comes from a proper appreciation of the glad tidings. 
They are, also, armed with the Sword of the Spirit which is the 
Word of God. Yes, these shall stand-the elect through the 
foreknowledge of God, through sanctification of spirit (mind) 
and belief of the truth. (1 Pet. 1:2; 2 Thes. 2:13.) This implies 
that God foreknew and forearranged that those should be chosen 
to this high calling who, believing the truth, were sanctified by 
it. This implies the searching for truth as for hid treasures. Let so 
many of us as would be perfect, be thus minded, and stand 
complete in Him. 

R476 : page 1 

Hold fast that thou hast: let no man take thy crown. If you are 
one of the sanctified in Christ Jesus, there is a crown laid up for 
you until you may finish your course; but if any man draw back 
he shall lose his crown; for the Lord shall have no pleasure in 
him, neither delight thus to honor him— and the Lord can find 
another to wear his crown. 

We have been struck with this thought recently. There seems to 
be so many consecrated ones coming into greater knowledge of 
the truth, and prepared, seemingly, for crowns, we have 
wondered if any others were in danger of losing theirs through 
the wiles of our adversary. 

Letters are constantly coming to hand, from out of way places, 
telling how truth has been recognized and appreciated and is 
feeding the consecrated ones wherever they may be. We cannot 



doubt that every consecrated child will be brought in contact 
with the light now shining on the sacred page. During the past 
month we have heard from two deeply interested Indians, one of 
them a preacher; also, from a missionary in China. It is glad 
tidings of great joy to the ends of the earth, wherever God has 
children unfettered by traditions of men. 

There are many inquiries for preaching —many from out of way 
places where we could not send. All should remember that, the 
fact of a necessity for preaching, is a call to those who have 
truth, to freely give what they have freely received of God. It is 
a call to preach, of the genuine sort, and each child of God is a 
witness— a light bearer. Let your light so shine as to glorify your 
Heavenly Father. 

There are a number of ways of preaching. Among the most 
telling methods is private conversation, backed up with well 
chosen articles marked for their reading and study. One sister 
writes us from Virginia that she began to tell what she had 
recently been learning to a few neighbors privately, and so many 
came that presently a schoolhouse was needed to accommodate 
them, and it even was crowded. So, each one willing and 
anxious to labor in the vineyard, will find the master ready to 
use his service, and a door of some sort will open. Make use of 
small opportunities, and greater ones will come in due time. 
Only, be sure you do all in the love of the truth, and not in a 
spirit of combativeness. Then assuredly you will be blessed 
while blessing others. 

We append extracts from some letters which will interest you: 

page 1 

Gait, Ontario. 

DEAR BROTHER:-The copies of "Food for Thinking 
Christians," also copy of "The Tabernacle and its Teachings," 
duly reached me, and I am now endeavoring to feed the 
"Heavenly Food" to my hungry fellow-Christians. Two others 
and myself are meeting three or four times per week to make 
ourselves more thoroughly acquainted with these great truths, 
and to satisfy ourselves that these teachings are based on the 
Word of God. As soon as we get through this, we intend to 
begin a systematic course of teaching out of "Food for Thinking 
Christians" for all in this place whom we can interest and who 
are hungering and thirsting after the precious truth of God. 

Hoping I soon may be able to report good progress in our 
teaching, and praying that the Lord will greatly bless you in 
your glorious work. 

I am, very gratefully, your brother in Christ, 

R476 : page 1 



Chefoo, China. 

EDITOR OF ZION'S WATCH TOWER: DEAR SIR:-A few 

days ago a number of your paper was brought in to me as a 
curiosity. I am somewhat out of the orthodox ruts and fancy I 
may read your paper with profit and pleasure. If you will send 
me the paper I will try and get the subscription to you in some 
way— for, though a self-supporting missionary, I cannot quite 
call myself one of the "Lord's poor" to whom you offer the 
paper gratuitously, for Our Father has bountifully supplied all 
my needs, since I gave up my salary, three years ago. I think I 
can get a few subscribers among my friends in China, for I find 
not a few who are trying to reconcile the "mercy that endureth 
forever" with the final irrevocable doom of all who, since the 
fall, have died without a knowledge of the Redeemer of the 
world. We have no "Post-Office Order" arrangements here, else 
I would send the subscription at once. 



page 1 

Lisbon, Iowa. 

C. T. RUSSELL, EDrTOR-Dear Bro.: The papers I sent for 
came all right, for which you have my thanks. I have already 
distributed some of them, but am careful not to place them 
where they will not be appreciated. I am glad to tell you that I 
find among church members, when seriously conversing on the 
matter of the old theology, a growing sentiment of being tired of 
it, having out- lived it, and thought ahead of it. They boldly say a 
reformation must come, and soon, or the Church is dead. Several 
are carefully studying the TOWER, Tabernacle, and Food. I tell 
them all to test them by the Bible. As a beginning, we are about 
to start a Bible class, to study with your papers and books. None 
of us have as yet left the Churches of which we are members 
(Methodist and Baptist) but shall not hesitate as soon as we can 
properly master these views of God's plan for man's salvation. 
For thirty-three years I have been a member of the Methodist 
Church, and a worker, but for years have been restive. My heart 
is with you in the work. Yours in Christ, 

R476 : page 1 

Rome, Pa. 

BRETHREN OF ZION'S WATCH TOWER: I have been a 
Bible student for many years, and for more than a quarter of a 
century I have been trying to show my fellow-men the way to 
life in a public capacity. Many a time I have been at a loss to 
make one passage of Scripture agree with another. I am done 
with human creeds forever, for I consider them an unmitigated 
curse, a greater plague than any that fell upon the Egyptians; but 
the light begins to dawn. The other day I came across your little 



book, "Food for Thinking Christians." It is a rich treat and food 
indeed to my hungry soul. 

My only ambition for years has been to know what the Bible 
teaches— Now, brethren, if so I may call you, as you have set my 
soul athirst for solid, sober, study of the sacred Word. I look to 
you to supply the want. You say, "ask and ye shall receive." 

I can find a place and use for anything you send me that will 
illustrate and explain the Scriptures. I leave the matter with you 
as to what you send— anything you may think I need the most. 

Yours in the truth, 

Later from the same Brother: 

BROTHER RUSSELL:-Your letter of a recent date has been 
received. To say I thank you for the favors you have sent is 
poorly to express my feelings. I am learning at the age of sixty 
what I ought to have learned forty years ago. Well, never mind, 
the past can't be recalled, and I am thankful that your book fell 
into my hands even now. I have literally devoured both "Food" 
and "Tabernacle, " and while reading them, find myself 
exclaiming with wonder and astonishment, "strange," "strange" 
indeed that I could not have seen all this long ago. 

I have been a student of the Bible for more than forty years, can 
read the Hebrew, Greek and Latin Scriptures, yet the creeds of 
men blinded me for 

R476 : page 2 

many years. Well, I will rejoice and be thankful that light and 
comfort has come at last. 

I wish that others may see and feel what I have seen and felt— 
"The Truth" that makes us free indeed. 

Yours truly, 
R476 : page 2 

THE PASSOVER. 

By appointment in our last issue, the anniversary of the slaying 
of the Passover lamb, which typified the death of the Lamb of 
God which taketh away the sin of the world, was celebrated by 
saints in various places on Saturday evening, April 21st. We 
have heard from several meetings, and from others whose 
insolation prevented communion with other saints except in 
spirit. 

The Pittsburgh assembly numbered about one hundred. We had 
the pleasure of greeting two brethren from New York State, one 
from Illinois, and one from Missouri, besides seven from 
different sections of this State. We believe all felt it good to be 



there; and in our communion with the Master, the lonely and 
scattered ones— members of the same body and fellow-heirs of 
the same glorious promises— were all remembered. 

We broke and ate the unleavened bread thinking of its antitype- 
the true and living bread which came down from heaven to give 
life to the world— the pure and sinless (unleavened) Jesus. As we 
broke it we thought of his body as broken for us-How "Christ 
died for our sins according to the Scriptures. " In the cup of wine 
which we drank, we recognized the blood of Christ shed for 
many for the remission of sins— the blood of the New Covenant- 
-and we appreciated it as the blood of the covenant wherewith 
we were sanctified. It was to us no common thing, as we 
esteemed his death no ordinary death. It was viewed as the 
precious blood of Christ, as a lamb without spot or blemish, 
whose blood speaketh better things for us than the blood of bulls 
and goats —even the remission of sins for ever. 

And looking further, under direction of the Word, we saw that 
these emblems meant still more— the sharing of them represents 
how we as his church, after justification through his blood, are 
permitted to share his sufferings and his death. It is thus that we 
have fellowship and communion with him— "filling up that 
which is behind of the afflictions of Christ. " 

As we reflected on this symbolism as expressed in Paul's words 
(1 Cor. 10:16,17): "The cup of blessing which we bless, is it not 
the communion of the body of Christ? For we, being many, are 
one bread [loaf] and one body: for we are all partakers of that 
one bread. " We rejoiced that the plan of God was such as to 
enable us, after partaking of the sin-cleansing benefits of Jesus' 
death, to sacrifice our justified humanity with his, and thus 
become heirs of the divine nature— joint heirs with Jesus Christ 
our Lord. Thus we esteemed it our privilege to count the present 
trials and offense of the cross all joy, knowing that they shall 
work out for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of 
glory— if we are rightly exercised thereby. 

Brother Sunderlin, who was present, called to mind Jesus' words 
at the first supper-"Verily one of you which eateth shall betray 
me"— and remarked, there have been many such betrayers since. 
Then he asked, and doubtless all questioned, Lord, Is it I? and 
prayed, Forbid it, Lord. We remembered, too, that to the most 
earnest disciples that hour of trial was severe. All forsook the 
Lord, and some denied him. We prayed, "Lead us not into 
temptation," yet felt that we were really stronger in his power 
because of our recognized weakness in our own strength. 

Our communion was very sweet indeed, and long to be 
remembered. Then we sang a hymn and went out thinking of the 
scenes and circumstances attending and succeeding the first 
supper -the garden of Gethsemane, Pilate's judgment hall, 
Herod's soldiers, Calvary. 



It will not be out of place to remark that what we celebrate is not 
the feast of the Passover, which, with the Israelite, lasted seven 
days, but we celebrate the killing of the lamb which precedes the 
feast. The church feasts daily and 

page 2 

hourly during the Gospel dispensation on the blessings resulting 
from the death of Christ. Such feasting was not possible before 
the Lamb was slain: at Pentecost this antitypical feast began. 
Hence, too, it was that our celebration was on the evening 
preceding the Feast of Passover season as observed by the 
Hebrews. 



R477 : page 2 

"LET HIM BE UNJUST STILL." 

"He that is unjust, let him be unjust still: and he that is filthy, let 
him be filthy still: and he that is righteous, let him be righteous 
still: and he that is holy let him be holy still. " (Rev. 22: 1 1 .) 

To some minds the text here quoted is considered strong 
evidence against the position taken by the WATCH TOWER 
favoring a future probation for the world. 

Indeed, it seemed to us so, for a long time after we saw from 
other Scripture (1 Tim. 2:4; Ezek. 16:48 to the end of the chap; 
Matt. 11:24,25; 12:32; Eph 2:7; John 11:9; 1 John 3:8, and 
many others) that a future probation was a doctrine of the Bible. 

Although so many Scripture texts seemed plainly and 
unmistakably to establish the doctrine of a future probation, still 
this one seemed to be an unyielding argument against the 
position; and yet we did not feel satisfied, for the stronger 
reason that as an argument against future probation (or 
judgment, trial, for the world, John 1 :24-R.V.) it would be out 
of harmony with the teachings in the Scripture texts referred to. 
The thought that God would give permission to be unjust under 
any circumstances, is out of harmony with his past dealings with 
men, and out of harmony with his own character as well as his 
word. Ever since we saw clearly that God is "of purer eyes than 
to behold evil" (with allowance) we have been convinced that he 
will not forever permit the vile thing to pollute his universe. 

He will not "let" nor consent to endless transgression of his law. 
But what is meant, then, in the text we have called attention to? 
That we may understand it better, let us go back to the first 
verse, and find, if we can, what events are to transpire at the 
same time, which may help to an understanding of this. 

In connection with the scenes spoken of in the first and second 
verses, it is said (in the third verse) "there shall be no more 
curse" (the Adamic death having been destroyed); this, then, is 



at a time when, if a man dies, it will be for his own sin; now all 
die on account of Adam's sin. "By one man sin entered into the 
world and death by sin" (Rom. 5:12). "By one man's 
disobedience the many were made sinners" (19th verse), though 
a man may shorten his life by violating the laws of the physical 
nature. At the time spoken of here, too, the truth of God (1st 
verse), "clear as crystal," is flowing to the nations without 
obstruction directly from "the throne." It is, moreover, at a time 
when "the leaves of the tree (wood, or trees, plural- Young's 
trans.) are for the healing of the nations." As the nations are not 
yet healed, and will not have been healed when Christ takes the 
kingdom (Rev. 11:15,18,) it must be at the time spoken of here, 
which is after Christ comes to judge (give trial, probation to) the 
world. And notice that "the time ("for the healing of the 
nations," "and [when] there shall be no more curse") is at hand:" 
and just at this time "he that is unjust, let him be unjust still," 
etc. 

We ask would the popular construction put upon it, namely, that 
it signifies that the condition of the wicked when Christ comes, 
is to eternally remain the same, i.e., that as they were found in 
that condition at his coming, they are forever to remain in it with 
his decree of "let"; we say would that be in harmony with the 
preceding part of the chapter, saying nothing about the 
Scriptures referred to above? How very inconsistent it would 
seem in connection with the statement, "There shall be no more 
curse;" but with the generally received opinion regarding it, 
there would be an unspeakable, indescribably awful curse still 
resting upon the world of mankind. 

But perhaps some one is ready to say "that is a description of the 
city of the New Jerusalem, and it is in the city that there is to be 
no more curse." Well, let us read on a little; leaving the 1 1th 
verse we will begin with the 14th: "Blessed are they that do his 
commandments, that they may have right to the tree of life, and 
may enter in through the gates into the city"; the city (kingdom 
of our Lord) will finally absorb all except the "death and hell" 
element of the 15th verse, including whosoever loveth and 
maketh a lie, which dregs shall finally be disposed of in the 
"second death" (chap. 20:14). 16th verse: "I, Jesus, have sent 
mine angel to testify unto you (John) these things in the 
churches." 

Now, we submit this understanding of the 11th verse. During 
this Gospel age, the standard of judgment concerning our acts is 
God's revealed word; by it the saints (God's children, the elect) 
judge themselves, and when the righteous rule of the next age is 
inaugurated, and the curse removed, even with so great a change 
in some important respects, "still" the same law will continue in 
force, and will be the standard of judgment. 

He that is unjust by the standard of judgment in this age, will 
("let him") be unjust still. Justice being one of the attributes of 



God, there can be no other standard, and he who is unjust must, 
by his holy law, i.e., according to it, forever be declared unjust. 
Not that he must remain unjust; but that while he is unjust he 
will always be declared, or judged so, by this standard. And he 
that is judged holy by that law now will then (in the age or "ages 
to come") be holy still. Mark well now, that when the statement 
in 11th verse is in force, the 17th verse is also. "And the Spirit 
and the Bride say come (this must be after the marriage of the 
Lamb): And let him that heareth, say come. And let him that is 
athirst come. And whosoever will, let him take the water of life 
freely." 

-J. C. Sunderlin. 



R477 : page 2 

THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 

Brother G. N. H. Peters, of Springfield, Ohio, is an old 
acquaintance and friend. He is a believer in the redemptive work 
of Christ, and hence a Christian brother. He is a believer in the 
future reign of Christ and the saints, for which cause sake he has 
suffered the loss of some things— some of the esteem of the 
nominal church. We regret to have it to state, however, that he is 
not free from Babylon's shackles, being yet identified with the 
Lutheran sect— hence has been hindered from a fuller 
development in grace and knowledge of the word and plan of 
God than if he stood in the full liberty wherewith Christ hath 
made us free. 

Our brother has spent a large part of the past thirty years in 
preparing a very comprehensive work on Eschatology, entitled - 
-"THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM." It treats of the kingdom of 
God to be established, from the standpoint known as "Pre- 
millenarian. " It gives voluminous reports of the hundreds of 
views entertained on this subject— advocating in the main the so- 
called "Pre-millenarian" view. While the author does not ignore 
the teachings of the Apostles, he lays greater stress and value on 
the opinions of the "Fathers" (the Christian teachers of the first 
five centuries) than we could acknowledge as proper. 

The work will comprise three volumes of about 600 pages each. 
The publisher says that the price should be $5 per volume, but if 
sufficient orders— or promises at $3 per volume— are received in 
advance to justify, then that will be the price. 

While we cannot recommend it to you more than as above, to 
briefly state the facts and circumstances, yet if you should 
conclude to order it or a prospectus of it you should address our 
brother and friend as above. 



page 2 



THE VARIORUM TESTAMENT. 



As already announced, we made considerable effort and inquiry 
to procure for our readers the readings of the Sinai tic MS. of the 
New Testament as a basis of knowledge of what was originally 
the accepted Scriptures, and showing the few errors and 
interpolations which crept into the volume during Papal 
dominion. Its readings are most valuable because, 1st, it is 
complete, without a missing page; 2nd, because it is the very 
oldest MS., written about 325 A.D., before Papacy or any other 
sect had reached dominant influence, which would enable them 
to tamper with or alter the text. Thus its superior value is 
apparent. 

We procured and supplied some with an American edition, 
paper bound, but have at last found what we take pleasure in 
offering you- "THE VARIORUM TESTAMENT"-A New 
Testament with the ordinary "King James'" text, with marginal 
references, and containing as FOOT NOTES any variations in 
readings made by the five most authentic Manuscripts extant, 
chief among these being the Sinaitic. 

The Testament is printed from the plates of the Variorum Bible, 
which retails at $9.00 in best binding. It is cloth bound, and 
retails for $1.25. Such a work is little appreciated except by 
careful and earnest Bible students, such as are many of our 
readers; hence the work has not met with ready sale, and the 
Importers closed out all they had of them to us at much less than 
cost. We bought them for your benefit, and can furnish them for 
50 cts. each. (This pays for postage also.) They are now ready 
for mailing. 



R477 : page 2 



GOD KNOWS WHAT IS BEST. 

Things are not what they seem. God alone perceives their true 
value and lasting results. He is infinitely wise, and cannot err; 
infinitely strong and cannot fail; infinitely kind and cannot 
neglect. He will keep back nothing that is good, however we 
may depreciate it; nor give us what would injure, though we beg 
for it with outstretched arms. 

If the vine were sensitive and could speak it might utter a cry at 
the stroke of the pruning-knife; but, if it were wise and gloried 
in its fruitfulness, it would acknowledge that if the vine-dresser 
had cut it less, he would have withheld a good thing. If the 
cornfield were sensitive and could speak, it would not, if wise, 
ask to be spared the plunging plow and the torturing harrow. 



This is our culture time, in view of the great harvest. That is best 
which promotes the fruitfulness in which God delights, and 
which will be our true glory by his grace. Christians must not 
judge of things as men do whose possessions and hopes are 
limited by the present. We are pilgrims, and must estimate 
circumstances in view of their influence, not so much in making 
us comfortable on our way as in helping us home. Nobler aims 
involve severer toil, fiercer conflicts, costlier sacrifice. If we 
seek a nobler goal, let us not envy others their smoother path. If 
we would win a richer prize, we must fight a sterner battle. If we 
would attain a loftier height we must clamber up sharper crags. 

The easy path of the lowland hath little of grand or new; 

But a toilsome ascent leads on to a wide and glorious view. 

Peopled and warm is the valley, lonely and chill the height; 

But the peak that is nearer the storm cloud is nearer the stars of light. 

-Newman Hall. 



R478 : page 2 



WAS IT AN ERROR. 



In our February issue the argument of a contemporary, that Paul 
made mistakes and misquoted, we answered by quoting and 
properly punctuating the Psalm referred to. Our contemporary, 
in its last issue, effects to treat the argument lightly, and 
pretends to quote our argument. It appears to do so, but 
strangely enough omits the very pith of the quotation, upon 
which our argument rested. Was this a mistake— an accident— or 
did our contemporary think it would be more like a misquotation 
thus? Charity bids us hope it was a mistake. 



R478 : page 3 

THE DIVINE WORD. 

BY MRS. LIZZIE FENNER BAKER. 

"Heaven and earth shall pass away, but my words shall not pass 
away. " 

Dearer with every passing hour 
Is God's sweet word to me, 
To its blest truths as to a tower, 
In troubled times I flee! 

For while the heavens and earth shall last 
Its promises are sure- 
Yea! when they both are with the past 
Its glories shall endure. 



The word of Him who cannot lie, 
Who by His own will stand, 
When the swift whirlwind sweepeth by, 
And in the desert land, 

Who sendeth out his angel guard 
Above his loved ones' way, 
And turneth, by his rod of power, 
Their darkness into day. 

Whose blessings, promised to the meek, 
About their pathway rise, 
Like blossoms in a wintry-waste, 
Or stars in storm-tossed skies. 

O, I have proved each word of thine, 
My God, as gold is tried- 
Never to tear or prayer of mine 
Was thy strong help denied. 

I bless thee for each step I've trod 
By the dark waves of woe; 
With faith and peace my feet were shod 
Through the wild flood to go ! 

Hast thou not said, "But for a night 
The weeping shall endure— 
Joy cometh with the morning light" ! 
O, promise sweet and sure! 

Where is my joy?-to dwell apart 
From earth's poor bonds set free, 
Hidden within thy faithful heart, 
To find my all in Thee. 



-Guide to Holiness. 



R478 : page 3 

"THIS ONE THING I DO." 

Human experience, as well as the divine word, attest the 
importance of concentrating energy upon some one thing if we 
would achieve the best results. 

It was Jesus who said, "No man can serve two masters."— "Ye 
cannot serve God and Mammon. " It was James who said, "A 
double minded man is unstable in all his ways." 

To-day the keenest business men of the world are endorsing this 
teaching of Scripture by applying the principle in their business. 
In the various trades as now conducted, one man does a part of 
the work. In the making of shoes, watches, pianos; in fact in 
everything it is found expedient to subdivide the work, so that 
each man may do a certain part only and thus become more 



proficient. This one thing he does and thus becomes proficient in 
it. 

The same principle is becoming recognized in the higher walks 
of life. A successful business man not unfrequently fails utterly 
when he attempts to branch out into politics. Where two prizes 
are aimed at, neither will be fully achieved. The man who seeks 
the top-most round of both wealth and politics will fail of one 
and most likely of both. —No man can serve two masters. 
Recognizing this, we find the successful men pursuing some one 
object or aim in life. 

If this be true as regards earthly things, how much emphasis it 
places upon the words of Jesus and the Apostles as relating to 
spiritual things. And not only their words but their lives attest 
the principle. The words of Paul- "This one thing I do, 
forgetting those things which are behind, and reaching forth 
unto those things which are before, I press toward the mark for 
the prize of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus" (Phil. 
3:13,14)-has only an empty sound until we thoughtfully 
consider what things he had left behind, and what was now the 
aim or prize for which he was running. And since we are 
exhorted to follow his example in the race, it may be well for 
each to examine himself to see how like, or unlike, his course is 
to that of Paul (Phil. 3:17). 

Looking back we find that Paul had superior advantages and 
prospects as a man. He had "much learning," having been 
educated under one of the best teachers of that day, "Gamaliel. " 
Education was more rare then than now and more costly. 
Consequently the opportunities and influence of educated men 
were proportionately greater. 

Paul was a Doctor of Divinity, or, as they were then called, 
"Doctor of the Law" -a member of the Sanhedrin. Being thus a 
"Master in Israel," all may see that he occupied a place of great 
influence and dignity among his fellow countrymen. Add to 
these honors the fact that by birth, he inherited "Roman 
citizenship," and we find a man with brighter prospects than one 
in ten thousand of his countrymen for gaining a place of pre- 
eminent distinction either in the State government or in the 
nominal Jewish Church. 

Whether or not Paul also inherited wealth we are not informed, 
but it is reasonable to suppose so. At all events his "Roman 
citizenship" was worth "a great sum" (Acts 22:28). 

But, summing up all these possessions, the ambitions which they 
stimulated and the prizes which they pointed out, Paul turned his 
back on them all when his eye caught sight of the heavenly prize 
of the high calling in Christ Jesus. He counted them all but as 
dross when compared to the true jewel. It is when reviewing this 
course of action that he uses the words of our text. 



Whatever things were gain to me, these I have, on account of the 
Anointed One, esteemed as a loss. But then, indeed, I esteem all 
things to be a loss on account of the excellency of the 
knowledge of the Anointed Jesus my Lord; on whose account I 
suffered the loss of all things and consider them to be vile 
refuse, so that I may gain Christ, and may be found in him:. ..to 
know him and the power of his resurrection, and the fellowship 
[sharing] of his sufferings, being conformed to his death. 

Not that I have already received it, or have been already 
perfected, but I pursue, if, indeed, I may lay hold on that for 
which I was laid hold on by Christ. Brethren, I do not reckon 
myself to have attained it, but one thing I do-even forgetting the 
things BEHIND and stretching forth towards the things 
BEFORE, I press along the line towards the PRIZE OF THE 
HIGH CALLING of God by Christ Jesus. 

"As many, therefore, as are perfect should be of this mind; and if 
in any [other] thing you think differently, God will also reveal 
this to you" (Phil. 3:7-15 -Diaglott). 

Though Paul had sacrificed so much, there is no evidence that 
he ever regretted it, or desired to have those things back. On the 
contrary, his ambition seems to have been such that he could 
have wished that his possessions and hopes had been yet larger 
in order that his sacrifice might thus have been the greater. In his 
case there was no "looking back" like Lot's wife, but a forgetting 
of those things which he had sacrificed. He thus avoided a 
temptation common to many to-day, who, though they have left 
very little, comparatively, continually look back at it and recount 
to themselves how much they have suffered and lost, thus 
hindering a completion of the sacrifice and race begun. Let us 
take a lesson from this, and forget, too, the things behind— 
forget our old hopes and earthly aims and ambitions, and fill our 
minds only with those aims and hopes which are before— laid up, 
in reservation for us. But what was the one thing which Paul 
did? We are apt to forget that Paul and the other Apostles were 
men much like ourselves. And though the common affairs of life 
are scarcely mentioned, but only the more public ministrations, 
nevertheless all of these entered into their life experiences much 
as with us. Remembering this will enable us the better to 
appreciate their examples. Hence we answer that the one thing 
which Paul was doing was not preaching, 

R479 : page 3 

nor writing, nor singing hymns, nor traveling, but the one thing 
he did was, as Jesus expressed it— doing the will of God. It was 
in harmony with this will of God that Paul traveled, preached, 
made tents, was persecuted, imprisoned, etc.; and it was 
necessary, as Paul knew, to lay aside and forget all the aims and 
masters in order to render acceptable service to him who 
declared, "No man can serve two masters." 



Looked at thus, beloved, if we would be acceptable to our 
Master and win the prize of our high-calling, we must determine 
also- "This one thing I do." Did you once have an ambition for 
wealth and luxury? You must forget that, as one of the things 
that were, but are not. Were you ambitious for fame, worldly 
honor, or office? Let these all fade away in the light of the 
greater honor and glories now before you in prospect, for which 
you are now running and striving- "A far more exceeding and 
eternal weight of glory. " This is the one thing to be sought now, 
and all our doings must be with reference to it if we would win 
it. To divide our attention would be to lose it. 

But, does some brother or sister say, Alas ! then I can never win 
this great prize? I cannot give all my attention to doing this one 
thing; I must spend time and strength daily, laboring for the 
meat that perisheth. Ah, brother, I am glad you mention it. I can 
encourage you on this point I hope. Let me remind you that Paul 
made tents for a living- "labored, working with his hands." 
Now, I ask you, was he not as truly in the service of God while 
making tents as while preaching? Was he not as really doing the 
one thing? The fact that you have less time, and doubtless less 
talent to spend in declaring the unsearchable riches of Christ, 
does not change the matter. God knows your circumstances and 
necessities, and he declares it to be his will that you care for 
those whom his providence has placed under your care. Hence, 
in thus caring for them, you are doing his will who declares, 
That "if any provide not for his own, and especially for those of 
his own household, he hath denied the faith and is worse than an 
infidel" (1 Tim. 5:8). 

But, on the other hand, let us see that our attention to earthly 
things is limited by necessity. There is danger that our 
necessities be too liberally considered, thus tending to cultivate 
pride and desire, and to hold us back and hinder our race. There 
is always danger lest the needful affairs of this life develop into 
matters of aim and object which would interfere and conflict 
with the one aim before us. 

In a word, then, whether we eat or drink, or whatsoever we do, 
let us do all to the glory of God. If we find certain food to 
incapacitate us and interfere with— this one thing we do-then we 
should deny ourselves of it. Can we glorify our Father more by 
great plainness of dress, or great plainness of speech? Then that 
alone and not our convenience or will, but His will be done. 
This is doing the same one thing and seeking the same prize in 
the same way exactly as did Paul. This, too, is what Jesus meant 
when he said, "Seek ye first (chiefly) the kingdom of God." All 
other seeking must be subordinate to this if we would win this 
prize. 

It will be noticed in Paul's argument, as above quoted (Phil. 
3:15), that he concludes that as many as are standing complete 
in Christ, should have "this mind" to seek the one thing-the 



prize before and to forget those behind. And when he adds, 
"And if in any [other] thing you think differently, God will also 
reveal this unto you," it seems that he meant to have us 
understand, that wherever this entire consecration to the will of 
God exists, based on the ransom as expressed in verse 9, such 
consecrated ones are in the right way; and though they might, 
perhaps, hold minor errors, it was only a question of time when 
they would come to appreciate the truth. Beloved, let us who 
claim to stand complete and perfect in Christ Jesus, be thus 
minded, and thus, in all we do, press along the line, keeping in 
view only the one aim and prize of our high calling. 



R479 : page 3 

CONFIRMATIONS OF THE 
TRUTH OF THE BIBLE. 

In Deut. 27:1 1-13, and Josh. 8:32-35 we are told of the 
blessings pronounced on the children of Israel from Mount 
Gerizim, and the curses from Mount Ebal; the full record of 
which may be found in the 28th chapter of Deuteronomy. It has 
doubtless seemed strange to many how these utterances could be 
heard from one mountain to the other; but here we have an 
explanation of it. 

"Dr. Faunce said that he stood on Gerizim and his travelling 
companion, G. W. Gardner, now of Iowa, stood on Ebal, and 
alternately read these blessings and cursings, while others stood 
in the valley and responded 'amen'; and that all could hear every 
word distinctly, although the readers were a mile apart. " 

These mountains or peaks are eight hundred feet high, and are 
separated by a green, well- watered valley of five hundred yards 
wide. What a grand auditorium this valley was; and how 
admirably arranged by nature's great Architect, that "blessings" 
and "cursings" could be heard from cliff to cliff and from the 
valley below. How impressive the scene must have been!— 
Selected. 



R479 : page 3 



"THE INVISIBLE THINGS OF HIM." 

While it is true that the child of God must walk by faith and not 
by sight, it is blessed to find that the wisdom and love of our 
Father has provided crutches for us to lean upon when faith is 
weak or lame; for, "Like as a father pitieth his children, so the 
Lord pitieth them that fear him," even though they may be weak 
and lame, as we all are, more or less, owing to the hereditary 



taint of sin. We need help according to the exigencies of the 
hour and the times in which we live. 

Under the Jewish dispensation men had to contend against flesh 
and blood; and though that is still true to a certain extent, yet our 
chief warfare now, during the Gospel age, is "not with blood and 
flesh," but "with the potentates of this darkness, with the 
spiritual things of wickedness in the heavenlies." (Eph 6:12. - 
Dia.) This began to be the case when Paul made this statement, 
and it is growing more emphatic every hour. 

The time was when the foe of man was visible, and, though 
some forms of evil are still visible, yet, as we said, the great 
conflict of the Christian is with an invisible power. The foe is 
growing more subtle and more intangible, but not the less real, 
for he knows "he has a short season" (Rev. 12:12); therefore, 
those who conquer must do so "through the BLOOD of the 
LAMB and through the word of their testimony" and "love not 
their life to death" (11th verse). Anciently, when God 
communicated with man he made use of some visible means, 
and when he sent the Redeemer into the world he took the form 
of man, having "a body prepared" for him. But now, though 
some of his agencies are still visible, yet the mighty powers are 
invisible, and the visible agencies have but little power, 
comparatively, and would have none, were it not communicated 
by the invisible. 

Some men have no faith in the invisible, and can look only at 
the things which are seen. They have but little faith in an 
invisible, intelligent, Almighty personality called God, and none 
in an invisible, intelligent, mighty personality called Satan; and 
yet the invisible things of both are "clearly seen, being perceived 
by the things which are made. " 

Some who have a little faith in the invisible occasionally look 
away to the unseen, and feebly believe in them, while their 
principal interest and faith centers in the seen, the material, the 
temporal. 

Man has always had some helps for his faith in the invisible, but 
our Father has graciously provided more of such helps as the 
time approaches for us to enter the unseen "house not made with 
hands." 

We are already beginning to live, to a goodly extent, in the 
invisible. We do not now refer to our thoughts of God and 
invisible things in the sense in which it is said by the Apostle- 
"Our conversation is in heaven"-nor to supposed intercourse 
with spirits, but to the fact that we are standing not only where 
the "ends of the world" (ages) meet and blend, but where two 
domains, the visible and the invisible, mingle. The door of the 
invisible stands ajar, and we peer into the domain of unseen 
things. Many of the affairs of this 



R479 : page 4 

life are now being conducted by means of invisible powers. 

It is but little more than a century since invisible forces came 
into practical use in the ordinary affairs of life, if we except the 
unseen power called life, which animates all living beings. But 
now these unseen powers have become such constant 
companions that we seem to be familiar with them, and they are 
so intimately associated with visible things that we almost forget 
that they are invisible, having never been seen by mortal eye, 
and probably never will be. 

R480 : page 4 

When we are rapidly drawn from place to place by the power of 
steam, we hardly realize that it is an invisible and silent power. 
We think we see and hear it; but when we see it, it is dead, and 
what we hear is its dying groan. Its effects may be seen and 
heard, but the power is silent and invisible. 

The mysterious power of electricity which is supposed to 
pervade space, and is thought by some to be the secret principle 
of life, has lately been our newsboy, is now our speaking- 
trumpet, by which we hold a pleasant conversation with our 
friends a thousand miles away, and the aged and infirm may, at 
home, listen to the church services in a distant city. This same 
power now gives us almost the light of day in our streets and 
dwellings, and proposes to be general house servant and 
detective. 

Who can step up to the telephone for the first time and converse 
with a friend a hundred miles away as easily and pleasantly as 
though he stood by his side, hearing all the modulations of his 
voice and his subdued laugh in such a manner that he recognizes 
that it is his friend, and not feel as though he stood in the open 
door- way leading to the "unknown land?" Though we cannot 
demonstrate the connection between these wonderful 
developments and the stately steppings of our God, yet there are 
so many things which so strongly indicate the connection that it 
is easier for us to believe it than to disbelieve it. 

There seems to be a striking coincidence between the words of 
Jesus in Matt. 24:27 and what has and is taking place at this 
time, when those who are looking for the fulfillment of his 
words discern that "the time is at hand. " "For, as the lightning 
cometh out of the East and shineth even unto the West, so shall 
also the coming of the Son of man be. " 

Father Miller, upon whom so much reproach has fallen (but who 
was a devoted Christian man of irreproachable Christian 
character), saw that there was an important, prophetic point in 
about 1 843, and supposed that Christ was to personally and 
visibly appear to the world at that time, and that it would be the 
closing up of earthly affairs; but, when disappointment came, 



unlike many of his followers, he was not despondent, but 
believed that the Lord would lead his people to a further 
understanding of his word and designs, and that in the fullness 
of time he would come. 

That awakening set many Christians to examining the Word 
with extreme care, the result of which is that many interesting 
parallels between the Jewish and Gospel ages have been 
discovered, and it is now convincingly known that the first step 
toward the second advent did take place at or about that time, 
but not in the manner that Father Miller had expected. If he had 
understood "the plan of the ages," he would have known better 
why Christ was to come again, and that God's first lesson to the 
world, that of making known the exceeding sinfulness of sin, 
had not yet been finished. 

That which was "finished" upon the cross being the reconciling 
of the world "to God by the death of his Son," after which, 
"being reconciled, we shall be saved by his life. " If he had 
understood that God was in Christ reconciling the world unto 
himself, and that from among the reconciled ones he was 
"taking out a people for his name," and that when taken out he 
would "come again and receive them unto himself," and that this 
had all been done for a purpose, which would be made known 
"in the ages to come, showing forth the exceeding riches of his 
grace; we say if he had known this (not then due, as we 
understand), he could have had a better understanding of the 
manner of his coming, and would not have expected him to 
come in a manner which would make it proper for men to say 
"lo, here is Christ or lo, there." (See "Food," pages 27 and 56: 
"Why will there be a second advent, " and "How will Christ 
come.") In connection with what has been said above, including 
the words of Jesus referred to (Matt. 24:27), let us see if any 
notable events mark the time of expectation. 

In 1 833 "Father Miller" began to lecture upon the second 
coming of Christ, and premised that it would take place in the 
fall of 1843. In 1832 the electro-magnetic telegraph was 
conceived by Morse while on a transatlantic voyage, and it was 
born in 1835, "when he put up a half mile of wire in coils 
around a room and exhibited a telegraph in operation. " 

"In the morning of March 4th, 1843, he was startled with the 
announcement that the desired aid of Congress had been 
obtained in the midnight hour of the expiring session, and thirty 
thousand dollars placed at his disposal for his experimental 
essay between Washington and Baltimore. In 1844 the work was 
completed and demonstrated to the world. 

In 1843, it is believed, occurs the first suggestion of the project 
of the Atlantic Telegraph (American Cyclopedia, Vol. II, page 
850), and a few years after was realized the fact (whatever 
bearing it may have upon the subject) that real lightning, 



conveying intelligence, shone from "the East" to "the West," and 
vice versa. 

While we would not be fanciful nor morbidly imaginative, we 
would not be too slow to mark the striking coincidence of events 
which seem to indicate the fulfillment of prophecy. Could any 
one who is most familiar with the railroads of the present day 
give, in so few words, so clear and vivid a description of 
locomotives and railroad carriages as is given in the second 
chapter of the prophecy of Nahum in these words? "The chariots 
shall be with flaming torches in the day of his preparation, and 
the fir-trees shall be terribly shaken. The chariots shall rage in 
the streets, they shall jostle one against another in the 
broadways: they shall seem like torches, they shall run like the 
lightnings." But, says one, that is a prophecy concerning 
Nineveh. Very true, but like most or all of the prophecies, it 
doubtless has a two-fold significance. 

Like the prophecy concerning Babylon, which is generally 
understood to refer to the apostate Church of Rome as well as to 
the ancient city of that name, so this prophecy is understood by 
some, and with good reason, we think, to refer to the world, and 
to conditions affecting both the church and the world, and has an 
application in this time. But whatever may be thought 
concerning it, one thing is evident, that no carriages or chariots 
in Nineveh, nor anywhere in the history of the world, would so 
well answer to the description here given. 

See how they "rage in the streets"; notice how, at their 
"couplings," they "jostle one against another in the broad ways"; 
and how, in the night time, they "seem like torches," and the 
very same forceful, though exaggerating term, is used by the 
prophet to convey an idea of their speed: "They shall run like the 
lightnings." So the modern term has been applied to a fast train, 
"the lightning train. " 

But, is some one saying, "How about the 'fir-trees,' are they not 
as symbolical as the rest?" Certainly. In Rev. 2:7 there is an 
evident reference to Jesus Christ as being "the tree of life, " 
harmonizing with the statement which he made in John 6:55 : 
"My flesh is meat indeed, and my blood is drink indeed." So 
these fir-trees, referred to by the prophet, we understand to be a 
class of people, and as the fir-tree is spoken of in scripture as a 
"goodly" tree and "choice," and is evergreen, and as the Lord's 
people are spoken of in Isaiah 14:8 as "fir-trees," we conclude 
that in this prophecy his people are represented by the fir-trees; 
and, we ask, are not these "fir-trees terribly shaken" just now? 

Ye "trees of righteousness," who are being bent and "terribly 
shaken" before the storm blast, begin the 61st chapter of Isaiah 
and dwell with loving gratitude and joy upon the 3d verse. In 
harmony with this, we find in Daniel 12:4 the statement that in 



"the time of the end many shall run to and fro and knowledge 
shall be increased." 

But, some say, that is only a general statement; men have always 
run to and fro, and knowledge has been increasing from the 
beginning. Very good, but do not events particularly emphasize 
that statement just now? You know very well that men never 
could run to and fro as they can now; in comparison, they had to 
crawl to and fro. 

No longer ago than when "Father Miller" and his 
contemporaries were boys it would have taken a man as long to 
travel from New York to Ohio and back as it does now to travel 
around the world; and only one decade ago, with all the helps 
for faith in unseen things which were in the world then, if any 
man had soberly stated that within ten years we could sit in our 
easy chair in New York City and talk, not by signs, but by word 
of mouth, to friends in Cleveland, Ohio, it would have been said 
that he was extravagant in thought, or deprived of reason. 

The telephone, substantially as it is now, was first practically 
introduced in the fall of 1877, and the following spring of 1878 
was the time when, we understand, favor to Israel was due to 
begin, and, according to the Berlin treaty, actually did begin. 

Three thoughts are (to "the watcher") noticeable here, whether 
significant or not. The Jewish year commences in October, and 
in the same year and at the time which marks the ending of the 
age, according to our understanding of the chronology, two 
noted events took place, whether they have any connection or 
not, they are historical events; the introduction of the Electric 
Telephone and the Berlin Treaty. Those at least who love his 
appearing are pleased to note in these things the fulfillment of at 

R481 : page 4 

least one prophecy: "Many shall run to and fro and knowledge 
shall be increased." ..."Many shall be purified and made white, 
and tried; but the wicked shall do wickedly, and none of the 
wicked shall understand, but the wise shall understand. " They 
see, also, that these things have been "closed up and sealed until 
the time of the end. " 

In conclusion, we would say with another (H. Grattan Guiness), 
that we "would strongly deprecate the false and foolish popular 
notion, that all study of prophecy is unpracticable-a notion too 
often propagated by passing, but mischievously influential 
allusions to the subject, from pulpit, platform and press, made 
by those who know little either of it or of its effects. 

It ought to be a sufficient rebuke to the levity that hazards such 
an assertion, or admits such an idea, to recall the facts, that one- 
third of the Bible consists of prophecy, and that our Lord and 
Master said, "Search the Scriptures"- not a portion of them 
only. 



The apostle Peter expressly tells us that we do well to take heed 
to the "More sure word of prophecy, as unto a light shining in a 
dark place, until the day dawn and the day star arise. " 

Is it unpractical to make use of a good lantern in a pitch-dark 
night in traversing a dangerous road? Or is it not rather 
unpractical and unreasonable to attempt to dispense with it? 
Noah was a student of unfulfilled prophecy, and Scripture 
presents no more practical preacher of righteousness than he 
was. All the prophets were students, too, of their own and of 
each other's predictions, and especially of their chronological 
predictions. 

"The prophets inquired and searched diligently, searching what, 
or what manner of time, the Spirit of Christ which was in them 
did signify" (1 Peter 1:10). Daniel was a student of unfulfilled 
prophecy, yet he was not only a practical statesman, but a man 
of singular holiness, classed with Noah and Job as one of the 
most righteous of men. There is everything in the nature of the 
study to make those who pursue it both practical and holy. It 
imbues the mind with the counsels and judgment of God about 
the affairs and the events of earth; it reveals what shall be, and 
thereby lessons the inordinate power of that which is now, 
bringing the spirit under the influence of things unseen and 
eternal, and thereby weakening that of things seen and temporal. 
It affords to hope much needed food, lacking which we must 
languish and grow feeble, and to faith and love peculiar stimulus 
and enjoyment. 

Without intelligent acquaintance with the teaching of the 
prophetic word, no man of God is or can be thoroughly 
furnished to all good works, for it is a part of the "all Scripture" 
given by inspiration, and is profitable for the purpose of 
rendering him so. 

Perhaps one reason for the prevailing neglect of prophetic 
exposition and preaching will be found, on reflection, to lie, not 
in the fact that it is unpractical, but rather in the fact that it is so 
peculiarly practical that few have the boldness and courage to 
face the ridicule, opposition and contempt it is sure to incur in 
the world. So far from the study and exposition of the prophetic 
word being profitless and vain, we believe it is impossible to 
estimate the loss sustained by the church, or the injury done to 
the world, by the very general and unjustifiable neglect of it. Is 
it not our duty to declare the whole counsel of God? Those who 
have carefully looked into this subject, solemnly and with good 
ground, believe that the word we are commanded to preach is 
full of evidence that the long predicted and long delayed 
judgments on all the powers of evil which are not only already 
begun, but are fast accomplishing before our eyes, are to issue, 
and that speedily, in such a burning of Babylon the Great as will 
light up all Christendom with the lurid glow, the accompaniment 
of the glorious advent of the King of kings; yet multitudes of 



Christian teachers, without even taking the trouble of examining 
into the subject, still preach the contrary, or imply it in their 
preaching, not from well-grounded convictions of its truth, but 
from educational prejudice or mere force of habit. 

Is this right? Ought not every minister of the Word to study for 
himself the teachings of Scripture until he is satisfied that he has 
attained the truth on this momentous theme? 

For, if we are right, if there be unequivocal evidence in the 
inspired volume, evidence that no previous generation of 
Christians was in a position to appreciate, as Christians can now, 
that the day of Christ is at hand— if we be right in believing that 
scarcely a single prophecy in the whole Bible, relating to events 
prior to the second advent of Christ, remains unfulfilled— if we 
be right, then surely every pulpit in the land should be ringing 
with timely testimony to these truths; surely these solemn and 
momentous facts ought not, in the preaching of any of God's 
faithful ministers throughout the world, to be passed by in 
silence. And who, that has not studied the subject, can be in a 
position to say that we are not right- that these things are not 
so? 

May such a spirit, as the Bereans of old had, be granted to the 
Christians of this generation, that they may diligently search the 
"more sure word of prophecy," and draw direct from that sacred 
fountain the truth as to the fast approaching future which God 
has graciously revealed. 

It seems hardly necessary for us to add that no faint and feeble 
efforts in the study of the Word will be sufficient to "thoroughly 
furnish" us, for many will and do seek it in that way, and no man 
who shall "strive to enter in at the straight gate," who does not 
take pains to understand his "Master's will" so as to "strive 
lawfully," can expect to be crowned (2 Tim. 2:5). 

J. C. SUNDERLIN. 



page 4 

"NOT every one that saith unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into 
the kingdom of heaven; but he that doeth the will of my Father 
which is in heaven." (Matt. 7:21.) 



R481 : page 5 



REPRESENTATION-SUBSTITUTION. 

The "World's Hope" is at hand, and complains that we 
misstated its teachings. It finds it easier to cry "unfair" than to 
answer a few pointed questions regarding the very fundamental 
principles of Christianity, which we presented as a test of its 



faith or unbelief in the death of Jesus as the ransom for our guilt 
and penalty. Our contemporary, if it still belongs to the 
household of faith, seems to have forgotten the exhortation of 
the Apostle to be able to give a reason for the hope that is in it, 
with meekness. Whether it has forgotten this injunction, or had 
no reasons to give, or was not able to give them, we are yet in 
doubt; for instead of offering even now an answer to the 
questions, which would have set at rest all "mis-representation," 
and what it terms "unfair" statement, it raises a dust of mixed 
and confusing statements, some of which we quote below: 

We are sincerely glad to note, however, that even though it be 
under great pressure, yet it seems to be getting nearer the truth 
on the subject of ransom, bought, etc., and seems reluctantly to 
admit now that Jesus was man's representative IN DEATH, 
which is just what we claim in the fullest sense. It says: "Let the 
full light of His representative relation to the race be seen, and it 
all becomes plain. If he STOOD FOR-or was reckoned to be 
the world of mankind- then the sin, all the sin of the world, 
must have been on Him. " And again, "That Christ was thus 
made the sin-bearer is shown by many scriptures; and, in order 
to bear the sins of the world, he had to become the world— the 
man." 

We are glad to note this approach toward a full confession of 
truth, and pray that it may go on. At the same time we must 
criticize a little, and say that the expression relative to Jesus 
becoming the world is certainly very ambiguous. We, and 
doubtless most of its readers, will understand this to mean that 
Jesus was a representative, substitute, or ransom for all the 
world. But if our contemporary meant this, why did it not state 
itself plainly? We wonder if it has anything to hide under this 
ambiguous expression, or, if it did not like to use words so 
nearly the expressions of the TOWER, which it seems to regard 
as an enemy, which it is not. Like Paul, when such momentous 
questions are in dispute, we must for the good and safety of each 
other, and all the flock, use great "plainness of speech. " Let us 
remember, that without a child-like and humble spirit we are not 
well pleasing to our Father, and that the spirit of truth is to 
acknowledge an error if we find that we had fallen into one. 

Again, it says: "A most clear prophecy of this sin-bearing 
relation of Christ to us, is given in Isa. 53. "Surely he hath borne 
our griefs and carried our sorrows:... He was wounded for our 
transgressions, He was bruised for our iniquities; the 
chastisement of our peace was upon him, and by His stripes we 
are healed. All we (sinners, 'every man,' Heb. 2:9) like sheep 
have gone astray: we have turned every one to his own way; and 
the Lord hath laid on Him the iniquity of us all. " This Scripture 
is surely in fullest harmony with the thought of Jesus being our 
ransom, substitute, or representative, in receiving for us the 
wages of our sins— death. 



But, stop! we read further: Some "may think because we believe 
he is the World's Sin-bearer, that we are virtually maintaining 
the doctrine of Substitution— the punishing of the innocent 
instead of the guilty. " Why, of course, we would— who could 
think otherwise? Does it fear that its readers will draw this 
legitimate conclusion? It seems so, for it continues: "But nothing 
is 

R482 : page 5 

further from our thought if we understand the meaning of words 
or have any idea of justice. We place Representation AGAINST 
Substitution." 

We must confess that we are puzzled. Our contemporary has 
evidently some private meaning for words, and when, in the 
above quotations, we hoped we were getting at agreement, 
supposing it used the word representative the way other people 
use it; but now we are entirely lost as to its meaning, for, by its 
Dictionary, representation and substitution are opposites-or 
against each other in meaning. 

If every writer should adopt a special meaning for his words, it 
would be useless to read at all, for the reader would never know 
what the writer meant. It is for this reason that people adopt 
some general standard by which to determine the meaning of 
words. We suggest Webster's Dictionary as a standard, and here 
give its definition of the words our contemporary understands to 
be opposites, or against each other in meaning, that all may see 
how very closely the words are related in meaning, and how far 
from being opposites. 

WEBSTER'S DICTIONARY. 

REPRESENTATIVE. -An agent, deputy or substitute, who 
supplies the place of another. 

SUBSTITUTE.-One who, or that which is substituted, or put in 
the place of another. 

SUBSTITUTION.-The act of substituting or putting one person 
or thing in the place of another; as the substitution of an agent, 
attorney, or representative. 

Now, we ask, what two words in the English language could 
more nearly mean the same thing? If our contemporary is so 
astray on this point, may it not be equally in error as to what 
constitutes a proper idea of Justice? Who can show that God was 
unjust in permitting Jesus to become man's substitute, ransom, 
or representative, or that, in laying upon Jesus-the willing 
Ransom— the iniquity of us all, there was anything cruel, unkind, 
or contrary to Justice or Love. 

Again, arguing against Substitution, it says: "If the premises 
were correct, Christ, being the substitute for man, should not 
have been raised at all. " We answer, that it is important to keep 



in mind the distinction between the man Christ Jesus who died, 
and the new creature Christ Jesus who was raised and ever lives. 
It was the man that was substituted for mankind, as Paul tells it: 
"Through a man (Adam) there is death, through a man also 
(Jesus) there is a resurrection of the dead." (1 Cor. 15:21— 
Diaglott). 

Again, our contemporary says: "We admit that Jesus was not 
raised in the same, but in a much higher condition than that in 
which he lived before; but, to say that he was a substitute for 
man because he laid down a condition, and was then raised to a 
higher, is to make the condition and not Christ himself the 
substitute for man. " We reply that this is just exactly the 
Scripture teaching and our claim, viz: That the pre-existent one 
who was in a spiritual— mighty— form, took upon him the form 
or CONDITION of a man— became a man-that he, by the grace 
of God, should taste death for every man- (Phil. 2:7,8). In due 
time he gave that human condition (with all its rights) a 
RANSOM for all-as the price for all- and thus a right to 
perfect human conditions, was bought for every man. Now, did 
he in the resurrection take back again the human condition- 
human nature? We answer, no. He was "put to death in the 
flesh— quickened in Spirit" (1 Pet. 3:18). "Sown an animal body, 
raised a spiritual body." (1 Cor. 15:44- Diaglott.) Hence our 
contemporary admits our position exactly, if the expression last 
quoted conveys its real meaning. We do not claim, and never 
have claimed, that Christ Jesus the new creature, the Spiritual 
being, was our substitute, but the reverse; it was the man Christ 
Jesus who gave himself a ransom for all, and who, because of 
this work, was highly exalted by the Father to his present divine 
nature and excellent glory (Phil. 2:8,9-Diaglott). 

Does any one suggest that our last position, being true, proves 
that the leaving of the spiritual condition for the human 
condition was a death or a sacrifice also? We answer that Paul 
shows that the leaving of the previous condition and becoming a 
man was a part of the "humbling" connected with the sacrifice. 
But recall, that life was not given up or lost there, or "laid down" 
even for a moment, but was transferred to the Babe of 
Bethlehem; hence, that was not the sacrifice or death, but only 
an incidental preparation for death as a man. On the contrary, 
when he died— at Calvary— life was given up, lost, laid down 
completely, for he was dead three days— all existence was at an 
end-He gave "all that he had" (Matt. 13:44). After three days he 
received life as a new creature, as a "gift of God," as a reward of 
obedience; but he took not again the human nature or 
CONDITION, and never can do so. For if he were to take that 
back, it would be taking back the price, with which he bought 
us. 

From some of the foregoing quotations it will be seen that our 
contemporary is either really, or seemingly, again approaching 



the truth on this very important doctrine, and we would not in 
the slightest hinder the work of reformation, but rather bid it 
God-speed, and welcome back again to the sure foundation him 
who, in times past, was a true "yoke-fellow. " But, true 
reformation should be accompanied by repentance and a very 
plain, correct restatement of things misstated. 

Lest some should think that we were, as it claims, unfair and 
misstated its teachings, on the subject of the ransom, in our last 
issue, we will below give some quotations showing that we were 
not. 

It will be seen by the following quotations from our 
contemporary's January issue, page 59, that, referring to the 
sacrifice which atones for our sins and reconciles to God, it 
teaches that by the destruction of sin by each individual in 
himself, each thus RECONCILES himself to God by the 
destruction of the enmity [sin, or curse] in himself. Each sinner 
thus reaching a condition of at-one-ment with God, instead of as 
Paul states it: We were reconciled to God by the death of His 
Son— while we were yet sinners (Rom. 5:10). We quote: 

"The shedding of the blood of the beast represented the killing 
of the life principle of the lower nature-the enmity, the carnal 
mind, the will of the flesh-and was required, because nothing 
but the complete RECONCILIATION, which the destruction of 
the enmity involves, could satisfy law or justice and yet save the 
man." Again: "As the carnal mind cannot be subject to God's 
law (Rom. 8:7), ITS destruction is a necessity to man's 
salvation, so this killing sacrifice is the RECONCILING ACT." 
If this does not directly deny, it does entirely ignore the 
reconciling act mentioned in Scripture, viz: "While we were 
sinners, we were reconciled to God by the DEATH OF HIS 
SON." Again, it says: "What the Law could not do,-set man 
right-the GOSPEL of Christ accomplishes." 

Here is just the point. It claims that man's salvation is a moral 
reformation, hence, whatever leads men to reform, saves. We 
claim, on the contrary, that before reformation could be of any 
value to men, they must be redeemed, ransomed, bought. The 
Adamic sin must be canceled, and the condemnation too, and 
death must be lifted by the sacrifice of man's ransom, substitute, 
or representative —the man Christ Jesus. Then comes the gospel- 
-the good news— that man is ransomed, and it is the love of God 
thus manifested in our redemption which leadeth men to 
repentance and reformation. Yes, the gospel is that which Paul 
preached, saying: "I delivered unto you first of all that which I 
also received [first of all], how that Christ died for our sins 
according to the Scriptures" (1 Cor. 15:3). 

In our contemporary's issue of Dec. last it says, speaking of the 
death of Christ: "The real death which he died, and which gave 
him such power to draw men to himself, was that of which the 



physical death on the cross was but a shadow. " "He died out of 
the old dispensation of law into the dispensation of grace. Being 
the first, He established that dispensation. He died out of the 
Adamic LIFE (?) and rose into the perfect life of the second 
Adam."... "He will, therefore, draw men out of law into grace; 
out of the life (?) of the first Adam into that of the second 
Adam." Again, page 42: "Christ died to the old relation which 
he had COME INTO by Adam's sin." And again, "The blood 
which must be shed, without which there is no remission of sins, 
IS that which is the evidence of the death of the ENMITY 
WITHIN US -death to sin." 

These quotations, we think, can be construed only as we did 
construe them in our last issue-"WE ANSWER FOR THEM." 
However, we will say this: If our contemporary does attach a 
proper weight to the death of Jesus as our ransom, it is not well 
expressed in the above quotations from its columns; and we 
further suggest, that it can set at rest the entire question by clear 
and straightforward answers to the six questions on the subject, 
proposed in our February issue, which we answered in our last. 
Let the truth be known. 

As in contrast with the utterances of our contemporary, we wish 
to present to its readers and ours, an article from the pen of its 
Editor when he was a "true yoke-fellow," a valued 
correspondent of the TOWER, and defender of the value of the 
ransom as the price of man's release from death. 

The article is on this very topic, and it should be noticed that it is 
a clear, straight- forward statement of the scriptural views as still 
held and presented by the WATCH TOWER. It does not abound 
with ambiguities and non-understandable expressions, as present 
theories of this writer seem to make necessary— such as "He 
became the world," etc. The article below is a reprint from 
"ZION'S WATCH TOWER," October, 1879. Would to God that 
he might return to this foundation. For this we most earnestly 
seek and pray. 



R483 : page 5 



ATONEMENT-RESURRECTION. 

"For if, when we were enemies, we were reconciled to God by 
the death of his Son much more, being reconciled, we shall be 
saved by his life. "-ROM. 5:10. 

One of the prominent features of God's plan, by which his love 
is manifested, is Christ's death. 

Perhaps no other feature has been opposed so much as the idea 
that the death of Christ should have anything to do with man's 
salvation; and much effort has been made by some to explain it 



away, or so modify the teachings of the Bible on this subject as 
to make it palatable to the natural mind. 

The bold and reckless spirit that declares, by word or action, that 
we will believe nothing unless it accords with our reason, may 
be characteristic of the age in which we live, but it does not 
savor of the meek and quiet spirit that trembles at the word of 
the Lord. We do not oppose the searching and comparing of the 
Scriptures to ascertain what they teach. That is really the 
disciple's work. And it is right also to bring all theories to the 
test of God's word-to "prove all things [by that standard] and 
hold fast that which is good. " And in all this we shall find room 
for the exercise of the faculty of reason; but if in our searching 
we find a fact stated, the philosophy of which we cannot see, it 
is hardly becoming in a Christian, to ignore or belittle the fact. 

We may fail of seeing for two reasons —either because God has 
withheld his reason, or because we are still ignorant of some 
other revealed fact which in due time will be made plain. Better, 
if need be, to say, "I do not understand," than to deny the facts. 

No careful student can fail to be impressed with the stress that is 
laid on the death of Christ. That some have overlooked other 
truths, and so laid too much stress on the death, we will not 
deny; but that is no excuse for our belittling the death by 
overexalting other features. A morbid desire for something new 
and peculiar, should be checked by a careful reading of the 
context before using a verse, or a small part of it, in proof of a 
new theory. 

"When we were yet without strength, in due time Christ died for 
the ungodly. Scarcely for a righteous man will one die; yet, 
peradventure, for a good man some would even dare to die. But 
God commendeth his love toward us, in that, while we were yet 
sinners, Christ died 

R483 : page 6 

for us" (Rom. 5:6-8). How can Christ's death show or commend 
God's love to us unless that death meets a necessity in the 
sinner's case? 

To do for us what we could or must do for ourselves would not 
be an expression of benevolence. To say that he died to meet our 
necessity would be a strange thing indeed, if it were only his life 
that could help us. But verse 10 shows us the value of both the 
death and the life, and should forever prevent us from 
confounding the two or ignoring either one. "Reconciled 
[atoned] to God by the death of his Son,... saved by his life. " 

That there is an atonement by the death of Christ the above 
passage clearly teaches, and is so translated in verse 11. And 
even if the salvation by his life is elsewhere called 
reconciliation, or if there should be discovered a dozen other 
reconciliations, still it remains true that we are "reconciled to 



God by the death of his Son," and it is an expression of God's 
great love for the world of sinners. 

That this atonement, by the death of Christ, has no reference to 
the breaking down of the middle wall between the Jew and 
Gentile, is clear, because the apostle goes on to explain, and 
shows as plain as words could make it, that the atonement 
secures to mankind what was lost through Adam. 

"Wherefore," in the 12th verse, relates back to the atonement of 
verse 1 1 , and it is stated that as by one man all men were 
condemned to death, so by the atonement all men are justified to 
life. To overlook this is to ignore the "wherefore" and 
"therefore" of the apostle, verses 12-18. We do not overlook the 
fact or value of Christ's obedience any more than we overlook 
Adam's sin. Sin brought death, and righteousness brings life. But 
that the death of Christ, the righteous one, was a necessity, is the 
idea for which we here plead. 

Now, if any one can read carefully the whole passage and not 
see that Christ's death secures to man recovery from DEATH, it 
will prove that the human mind is greatly biased by its own 
determinations. 

It is not an isolated text, however, that teaches the recovery from 
death by the death of Christ. 

ATONEMENT IS THE BASIS OF RESURRECTION. 

The apostle has shown us that Christ's death is the atoning act. 
We shall, therefore, expect to find the death of Christ associated 
with man's recovery from death. 

We are not forgetting the resurrection of Christ, nor overlooking 
its value as the entrance of the Head into endless life, and, 
therefore, as the key of immortality for mankind; but we are 
seeking to give his death its place as the PRICE of redemption 
or recovery. 

Certainly man's recovery from death is one thing, and the gift of 
immortality is another, and they should be so considered, though 
they are intimately related to each other. The former is the basis 
of the latter, and the latter is the object for which the former is 
accomplished; hence it is said, "Reconciled by his death, saved 
by his life." 

"He died for our sins." It is not said that he rose for our sins. He 
is the Lamb that taketh away the sin of the world. The world's 
sin is Adam's sin. "In whom all have sinned" (Rom. 5:12— 
marg). "He bore our sins in his own body on the tree." He 
became a curse for us." "Wounded for our transgressions." "By 
his stripes we are healed. " "Christ sent me not to baptize, but to 
preach the gospel— not with the wisdom of words, lest the cross 
of Christ should be made of none effect" (1 Cor. 1:17). If 
Christ's death in itself does nothing, then it is of no effect. The 



cross must refer to the death and not to the after life. "The 
preaching of the cross is to them that perish foolishness, but to 
us that are saved it is the power of God" (verse 18). 

"The Jews require a sign, and the Greeks seek after wisdom, but 
we preach Christ crucified" (verses 22,23). "I determined to 
know nothing among you save Jesus Christ and him crucified" 
(Chapter 2:2). From what he said in the first chapter, we know 
Paul made a specialty of the death in his preaching. 

The cross is the basis of all the glory. He laid down his life for 
the sheep. "No man taketh it from me. I lay it down of myself. " 
To Pilate he said, "Ye could have no power at all were it not 
given you from above. " 

After the hour for the Passover (he being the antitype, and it 
must be fulfilled on time) he no longer sought to protect himself, 
nor allowed others to protect him, but gave himself into their 
hands. His hour had come; then and not till then "they killed the 
Prince of life." "He gave his life a ransom for many"- "A 
ransom for all, to be testified in due time. " Hence, being 
redeemed— "bought with a price"-we are not our own. 

That Christ died in the same sense in which men die, and in 
which men are counted dead before they die, must be true, or 
there would be no relation between his death and theirs. Here, 
again, the love of Christ constraineth us, because we thus judge 
that if one died for all, then were all dead (not all actually dead, 
but counted dead)- "death (sentence) passed on all." His death 
was of the same kind, MET THE CLAIM AS A RANSOM, so 
that all are his, and counted alive, for the object as stated, "that 
he died for all, that they who live should no longer live unto 
themselves, but unto him who died for them and rose again." 
The idea is here suggested that he gained the right to control all 
for whom he died.... 

This work of redeeming by death, is not to be confounded with 
the work of the second Adam, which is to impart spiritual life. 

CHRIST DID NOT BECOME THE SECOND ADAM 
UNTIL HE WAS MADE A QUICKENING SPIRIT. 

That our Lord Jesus is the antitype of Adam, as Head of a new 
race, is true, but he is more than that. Adam, besides being head 
of a race, was lord of all [the earthly] creation. So, too, Jesus 
died and rose again that he might be Lord both of the dead and 
the living (Rom. 14:9). So, too, the uttermost parts of the earth 
are to be his possession (Psalm 2). That this is not a baseless 
assumption is shown in Heb. 2. There we learn that the very 
purpose for which Christ took our nature was, that "by the grace 
of God he might taste death for every man. "-"That through 
death he might destroy him that had the power over death, i.e., 
the devil, and deliver them who, through fear of death, were all 
their lifetime subject to bondage." He binds the strong man, the 



prison-keeper, and delivers the captives. He delivers them from 
the death of which they were afraid during their lifetime. They 
never had a spiritual lifetime, and never dreaded a spiritual 
death. Christ took the natural that he might redeem the natural, 
and possesses the spiritual that he may impart the spiritual, is the 
evident teaching of the Bible. The same thought of his having 
power over the dead is brought to view in Rev. 1:18. "I am he 
that liveth and was dead: and behold I am alive forevermore; 
Amen; and have the keys of Hades and of death."... 

This is in keeping with all the rest. Christ died that we might 
live, and lives that we might live forever. This view of the 
subject does not shut God out of the work and plan, for it is his 
plan to work in and by the Lord Jesus. That the terms death and 
life are used figuratively, sometimes, we freely admit, and the 
context will determine it; but when speaking of the penalty of 
sin and resurrection from it, the death of Christ must serve as the 
key. Thus, as well as 

page 6 

otherwise, we can glory in the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ. 

Brethren, let us beware of anything that belittles or sets aside the 
death of Christ as the offering and PROPITIATION FOR SIN, 
not ours only, but also for the sins of the whole world. The 
simplicity, nature, object and extent of this RANSOM will be 
testified— made known in due time. 

J. H P. 



R484 : page 6 

THE COUNCIL OF NICE AND 
THE CANON OF SCRIPTURE. 

BY H. L. HASTINGS. 

A portion of the skeptical class of the community are intelligent 
and somewhat candid, but unfortunately are not familiar with 
the subjects about which they talk, and hence are led into most 
egregious errors. 

There is, perhaps, no statement more current among infidels at 
large, whether of high or low degree, than that the canon of New 
Testament Scripture was defined and settled by a vote of the 
bishops assembled at the Council of Nice, in the year A.D. 325. 
Over and over has this assertion been made and reiterated. And 
many infidels have settled it as one of the articles of their faith, 
and upon this basis proceed to deride Christians for their folly 
and superstition. 

I recollect meeting this story in Marlboro', Mass., where it had 
been written out by a leading infidel, and printed in a 



newspaper. The writer declared that this account of the origin of 
the New Testament rested upon the authority of Papias, an early 
Christian bishop. I replied that there was one little difficulty 
about that story, namely, that Papias had been dead and buried 
150 years or more before the Council of Nice was ever heard of; 
but suggested that, as they might have obtained their 
information from "the spirits," the fact of his death was no 
insuperable difficulty in the way of their theory. The skeptic 
arose to explain, and said the person alluded to was not the right 
Papias, but that the one he referred to was an "obscure Christian 
bishop of the fourth century. " The writer replied that he was no 
doubt very "obscure," so obscure that no one had ever heard of 
him before or since. 

It seemed desirable, however, that this statement about Papias 
should be looked up, and so, turning to a well-known infidel 
book written by an English author, and published at the office of 
what has long been the leading infidel paper of America, these 
words were found: 

"The following fact, mentioned by Pappius in his 'Synodicum of 
the Council of Nice,' is however, worth all the preceding, 
valuable and curious though they be. Pappius informs us of the 
manner in which the true Gospels were selected from the false at 
that memorable council: 'This was done,' says he, 'by placing all 
the books under a communion table, and upon the prayers of the 
council, the inspired books jumped upon the table! while the 
false ones remained under!' What a test of truth! What a proof of 
inspiration! It is quite a stirring argument. Who, after this, will 
venture to doubt the authenticity of the Scriptures?.... And if 
these councils are not to be depended upon, we have no means 
of ascertaining which of the immense numbers of Gospels, Acts, 
Epistles, and Revelations, are really genuine, or if any are so. 
All is confusion, doubt, and uncertainty. A curious state of 
things when a book is said to be of divine origin. " 

Similar statements are found in numerous infidel publications, 
and are received with unquestioning confidence by infidels who 
taunt Christians with their credulity in believing the Bible. This 
story, as quoted above, was referred to as "an historical record 
translated from the Greek, " in an article published in a Boston 
infidel paper. 

Briefly stated, the Council of Nice did nothing of the kind 
during its sessions, as this question did not come up for 
consideration there. This foolish story occurs in a book entitled 
"Synodikon," which was printed from an old Greek manuscript, 
first discovered by John Pappus, a German theologian, but 
written no one knows when, where, or by whom; but as it refers 
to events which occurred in the year A.D. 869, we know it must 
have been written at least 544 years after the Council of Nice 
was held. Pappus probably discovered this romancing old 
document in some library, and printed it as a curiosity; and 



infidels have swallowed it whole, as if it were the authentic 
history of an eye-witness. 

We propose now to show briefly, the absurdity and falsity of the 
assertion that the New Testament was concocted by a pack of 
priests, or an ecclesiastical council. 

Robert Phillip's "Life, Times, and Missionary Enterprises of 
John Campbell," the African Missionary traveler, contains (pp. 
215-216) the following anecdote by Mr. Campbell: 

I remember distinctly an interesting anecdote referring to the 
late Sir David Dalrymple, better known to literary men abroad 
by his title of Lord Hailes, a Scottish judge. I had it from the late 
Rev. W. Buchanan, one of the ministers of Edinburgh. I took 
such interest in it that, though it must be about fifty years ago 
since he told it, I think I can almost relate it in Mr. Buchanan's 
words: 

"I was dining sometime ago with a literary party at old Mr. 
Abercrombie's, father of General Abercrombie who was slain in 
Egypt at the head of the British army, and spending the evening 
together. A gentleman present put a question which puzzled the 
whole company. It was this: 'Supposing all the New Testaments 
in the world had been destroyed at the end of the third century, 
could their contents have been recovered from the writings of 
the first three centuries?' 

"The question was novel to all, and no one even hazarded a 
guess in answer to the inquiry. About two months after this 
meeting, I received a note from Lord Hailes, inviting me to 
breakfast with him next morning. He had been one of the party. 
During breakfast he asked me if I recollected the curious 
question about the possibility of recovering the contents of the 
New Testament from the writings of the first three centuries. 

'"I remember it well,' said I, 'and have thought of it often, 
without being able to form any opinion of conjecture on the 
subject.' 

"'Well,' said Lord Hailes, 'that question quite accorded with the 
turn or taste of my antiquarian mind. On returning home, as I 
knew I had all the writings of those centuries, I began 
immediately to collect them, that I might set to work on the 
arduous task as soon as possible.' Pointing to a table covered 
with papers, he said, 'There have I been busy for these two 
months, searching for chapters, half-chapters, and sentences of 
the New Testament, and have marked down what I have found, 
and where I found it, so that any person may examine and see 
for himself. I have actually discovered the whole New 
Testament from those writings, except seven (or eleven) verses, 
(I forgot which,) which satisfied me that I could discover them 
also. 'Now,' said he, 'here was a way in which God concealed or 
hid the treasure of his Word, that Julian, the apostate emperor, 



and other enemies of Christ who tried to extirpate the gospel 
from the world, never would have thought of; and though they 
had, they never could have effected their destruction.' 

"The labor of effecting this feat must have been immense; for 
the gospels and epistles would not be divided into chapters and 
verses as they are now. Much must have been effected by help 
of a concordance. And having been judge for many years, a 
habit of minute investigation must have been formed in his 
mind." 

The Ante-Nicene Library, published by T. & T. Clark, of 
Edinburgh, comprises some twenty-four octavo volumes, 
averaging about five hundred pages each. In these 12,000 octavo 
pages of printed matter, which stand on a shelf by my side as I 
write, are comprised nearly all the extant writings of some 
fifteen or twenty of the most eminent Christian authors who 
lived before the year A.D. 325, when the Council of Nice was 
convened. One of these volumes also contains such remains of 
those spurious, uncanonical and fictitious Gospels, Acts, etc., as 
have come down to us from early ages. In these twelve thousand 
pages, all of which are accessible to skeptics in the English 
translations, and which can be compared with the originals by 
those who are 

R484 : page 7 

competent to do so, will be found an avalanche of evidence 
upon the question of the origin of the New Testament Scriptures. 

These men, some of whom were contemporary with the 
Apostles, and others who, as their immediate successors, were 
well acquainted with their associates and contemporaries, give 
in these writings the most positive and unmistakable evidence as 
to the New Testament books which they received, and as to the 
estimation in which those books were held. They quote passage 
after passage and page after page of the same Scriptures that are 
quoted to-day and read in every Christian assembly. They 
quoted the books which we quote; they quoted them as we quote 
them; they received them as we receive them, and this, long 
before the Council of Nice or any other council had anything to 
say about the canon of the Scriptures. 

Polycarp, who was martyred A.D. 155 or 156, after having 
served Christ eighty-six years, and who was, during some thirty 
years of his long Christian life, contemporary with the Apostle 
John, whose disciple he was, quotes in his epistle to the 
Philippians, nearly forty passages from our New Testament; 
Justin Martyr, who wrote about A.D. 140, or some forty years 
after the decease of the Apostle John, quotes again and again the 
very words which we now read in the New Testament; and in 
the writings of Irenaeus, A.D. 178; Clement A.D. 194; 
Tertullian, A.D. 200; and Origen, AD. 230, are to be found 



8,728 quotations from the New Testament, including every book 
which we accept as canonical. * 



*TERTULLIAN, in the thirty-sixth chapter of his work, 
"Against Heretics," written about A.D. 200, when the parchment 
writings of the apostles, being less than one hundred and fifty 
years old, should, with ordinary care, have been in perfect 
preservation, thus speaks concerning the authentic writings of 
the apostles, then read in the churches: "Come, now, you who 
would indulge a better curiosity, if you would apply it to the 
business of your salvation, run over the apostolic churches, in 
which the very chairs of the apostles are still pre-eminent in 
their places, in which their own authentic writings are read, 
uttering the voice and representing the face of each of them 
severally. Achaia is very near you, in which you find Corinth. 
Since you are not far from Macedonia, you have Philippi, you 
have the Thessalonians. Since you are able to cross to Asia, you 
get Ephesus. Since, moreover, you are close upon Italy, you 
have Rome, from whence comes, even into our hands, the very 
authority" [of the apostles]. 

R485 : page 7 

Dr. Alexander Keith, in the sixth chapter of his "Demonstration 
of the Truth of the Christian Religion," records the number of 
quotations from the New Testament which can be found in 
works which are still extant, by the writer whom we have 
named. He reports seven hundred and sixty-seven (767) 
passages quoted by Irenaeus, from every book in the New 
Testament except the third epistle of John and the epistle of 
Jude; three hundred and eighty-nine (389) passages quoted by 
Clement from every book except the epistle of James and the 
second and third epistles of John, and the epistle of Jude; 
eighteen hundred and two (1802) passages, or, if repetitions are 
included, more than three thousand passages, quoted by 
Tertullian, from every book in the New Testament except the 
epistle to James, the third of John, the second of Peter, and the 
epistle of Jude; while the works of Origen yet extant, contain 
five thousand seven hundred and sixty-five (5,765) quotations 
from the New Testament, including every book contained 
therein, and excluding all of the so-called apocryphal books, 
about which infidels sometimes talk so freely. Many works of 
Origen and other authors of those times have perished, but it is 
probable that if Origen's entire writings had been preserved, if 
the New Testament had been lost, it could have been 
reconstructed from them alone. 

These authors which we have named comprise but a portion of 
the authors who wrote before the Council of Nice; but these are 
sufficient to settle forever this question of the authenticity of the 
New Testament Scriptures. 



The fact that councils, at a later date, published to the world lists 
of books which they received as of divine authority, may be 
important to the council, but is of no importance to the books 
themselves. A town meeting or a village caucus might publish to 
the world the volumes they receive as the statutes of the state or 
the general laws of the nation, but their publication of the fact 
has no possible connection with the authority of those laws. If 
they receive them as authoritative, well and good; if they do not 
receive them, other people do; and the government is abundantly 
able to enforce them. So this talk about councils and priests 
concocting the New Testament out of a jumbled-up lot of 
doubtful and questionable books, is an evidence of that skeptical 
credulity which is so abundant among infidels as a class.— The 
Armory. 



R485 : page 7 

QUESTIONS ON SUBSTITUTION. 

Ques. If Jesus was man's substitute in death, why should men 
continue to die since his substitution of his life for ours? Is it not 
an argument against his view that men continue to die? For, if 
God be just, he could not hold both the sinner and his substitute 
for the same Adamic sin. 

Ans. It is not only a scriptural statement that Jesus "died for our 
sins" as our representative or substitute, but also that "He bought 
us;" and, to appreciate the matter fully, we must give this its 
weight also. 

Jesus was man's substitute in the sense that he met in his own 
person the penalty which God's broken law had charged against 
us. Consequently, God no longer CONDEMNS, because Christ 
died (See Rom. 8:34). This much, then, is settled— the 
condemnation. But now comes the question, if the Law is 
satisfied why is not the executioner, who has the power of death 
(the devil-Heb. 2:14), stopped at once? To solve this question, 
we must remember that while all the work and will of Christ is 
that of the Father, yet, in the legal aspect of the case now being 
considered, we see that men are not now amenable to the Father, 
but to His Son who bought them. The fact, then, that the enemy 
is not interrupted in his work is in no way chargeable to injustice 
of Jehovah; and as to the purchaser, Jesus, while he has 
announced his intention to exercise his authority and release all 
in his own due time, yet, who shall find fault with Him who 
bought for us a right to life, if he does not bestow it 
immediately. Surely we may know that he has some good reason 
for the delay, even if we cannot know the reason; for we 
remember that he loved and pitied us; for "greater love hath no 
man than this, that a man lay down his life for his friend. " 



But while we could trust his wisdom and love in ignorance of 
the wherefore, as thousands of our brethren in past ages have 
done, yet, we thank God that we are living in the time when it is 
pleasing him to reveal to us more of his plans, and to show us 
why death is permitted still to reign, even after Jesus has legally 
conquered it, and has "the keys (power to open) of death and 
hades" (Rev. 1:18). 

It is because God has purposed, not only the restitution of 
mankind to the perfection of their nature as it existed before 
marred by death and its cause— sin— but also the selecting out 
from among men of a "little flock," who, by a change of nature 
from human to divine, should be "new creatures," like unto 
Christ Jesus the Lord in his exaltation, and sharers of his work 
and glory- especially in that of restoring mankind. 

Now, all can see that this little flock -the Bride, who shall share 
his throne and work-must be selected FIRST, before "the times 
of restitution" begin, else she could not share. And if Jesus, 
immediately on having redeemed men, had begun to restore 
them-as soon as he had (the keys) "all power given unto him," 
(Matt. 28:18)-then it would have precluded the selection of the 
chaste virgin to be his Bride and helpmeet in the work. 

We are glad, very glad, that it was in the plan of God that Jesus 
should delay using his great power, trusting that, by the grace of 
God, when he shall take to himself his great power and reign, 
we too shall be glorified together with him and share in the 
exercise of his power as he has promised, saying, "Greater 
things than these shall ye do," referring to his miracles which 
were mere shadows of the coming restitution of all things. 

It might be asked, Why did Jesus not delay his first coming until 
the Bride had been selected and the restitution work had become 
due? As it is closely connected with our previous question under 
discussion, we here answer it: 

Not only was it needful that we should sacrifice with Jesus the 
human nature, in order to share with him the divine nature and 
glory, but our human nature, being imperfect and already 
condemned through Adam, it was necessary that it should be 
redeemed, or bought from the condition of condemnation, 
before it could be an acceptable sacrifice for Jehovah's altar— 
upon which must come no blemished offering. It will be seen, 
then, at a glance, that the sacrifice of Jesus, as our ransom from 
sin, was necessary BEFORE the call could come to the Church 
to share his sacrifice and glory. 

Notice further, that it was not only needful that time should 
elapse between the ransom and restitution, in which time the 
little flock may share in his sacrifice, but it was necessary that, 
during this time, EVIL should rule. Consider for a moment, that 
if our Prince were ruling now, and right-doing were rewarded 
and evil-doing punished, etc., it would be impossible for the 



little flock to be tried and tempted by evil, hence impossible for 
them to sacrifice themselves for truth and right. So, too, with 
Jesus' sacrifice; had it not been for the reign of evil, his 
witnessing for truth would have needed and brought no 
reproach, rejection, thorns, or cross, or death. 

In the Millennial age, under the reign of Christ, it will be no 
longer possible to "overcome evil with good," for the dominion 
of evil will be ended and the reign of righteousness begun. 

Those who regard the putting away of sins as the sacrifice (the 
discontinuance of evil practices, drunkenness, profanity, etc.,) 
will not appreciate our position. But those who see sacrifice to 
be something far beyond-the surrender and sacrifice of human 
rights, privileges, comforts and welfare-will appreciate the 
statement that such sacrifice can only be accomplished while 
there are evil conditions making them possible. 

It is thus that the Gospel age is termed "The acceptable year of 
the Lord. " It is the time during which God will accept of all 
sacrifices properly presented. No such opportunity was offered 
before this age except in type. It was not possible, because the 
ransom was not yet given; all were yet legally under 
condemnation of death as sinners. True, some believing God's 
plan of favor, looked forward, discerning the better sacrifices for 
sins, and in faith accepted the results. But that God did not treat 
sin as actually cancelled until Jesus had finished his sacrifice for 
sins, and presented it as the ransom price of our sins, is evident 
from the fact, that even the disciples of Jesus were not accepted 
by Jehovah as sacrifices until then-until Pentecost. 

Jesus was an acceptable sacrifice, because in him was no sin. 
Those during this age, who accept of his ransom, share now in 
the benefits of his sacrifice, and are reckoned free from sin and 
its condemnation. Such, being made free from sin, may also 
become acceptable sacrifices— acceptable through the beloved— 
so long as the "Acceptable year of the Lord" lasts. When the 
"little flock"— the Bride, the Lamb's wife— has been selected 
according to this law of purifying and sacrificing (or 
justification and sanctification), then the special call to change 
nature by sacrifice, termed our high-calling, heavenly-calling, 
etc.— will cease. 

The conditions of trial during the next age will be much easier 
than now, and the crown, though gloriously grand, will be less 
so than the one for which 

R486 : page 7 

we are running. Their aim, the perfection of the human nature; 
ours, the perfection of the divine— one a heavenly, and the other 
a glorious, earthly image of it. For the glory of the heavenly is 
one thing, and the glory of the earthly is another thing. The 
glory and dominion given to the first man (and his Bride), which 



is to be restored, placing him again but a little lower than the 
angels (Psa. 8:5), will but feebly illustrate the superior glory of 
our Lord— the second Adam (and his Bride)— made so much 
superior to angels, that to him every knee shall bow and every 
tongue confess. (Compare Psa. 8:5; Phil. 2:9,10; Heb. 1:4 and 1 
Cor. 6:3.) 



R486 : page 7 

FOREKNOWLEDGE AND 
PREDESTINATION. 

These two words have been the cause of a great deal of 
controversy among various classes of religionists, and many 
strange positions have been taken in regard to their Biblical 
meaning. Generally speaking foreknowledge is made to mean 
that unlimited wisdom of God which he possessed before the 
world was. We do not question but what God knew all things 
from eternity, but does the word foreknowledge, as used in the 
Scripture, refer to that unbounded intelligence which 
characterizes the infinite, or does it refer to that system which is 
revealed to us in the prophets? To us it appears plain that the 
two words foreknowledge and predestination, have no reference 
to the infinity of God's wisdom, but have specific reference to 
the plan of redemption made known in the promise, in type and 
in prophecy. In other words, the things written in the prophets. 
Foreknowledge refers to the things foretold. In order to make 
this point plain, we will refer to the Bible proofs: 

Take for example Peter's words on the day of Pentecost. "Him 
being delivered by the determinate counsel and foreknowledge 
of God, ye have taken, and by wicked hands have crucified and 
slain." (Acts 2:23.) The above text seems to be well explained in 
the next chapter. "But those things which God before had 
showed by the mouth of all his holy prophets, that Christ should 
suffer, he hath so fulfilled. " In strict harmony with the above, 
see Luke 24:44. "And he said unto them, these are the words 
which I spake unto you, that all things must be fulfilled which 
were written in the law of Moses, and in the Prophets and in the 
Psalms concerning me. " 

The reader will notice that Jesus does not refer to any pre- 
arranged plan beyond that mentioned in the Holy Writings. 
Indeed, all that is said upon the subject of foreknowledge of God 
seems to refer to that which was written. It is a matter of relief to 
feel that the things revealed in the promises, types and 
prophecies of the Scriptures are referred to by the word 
foreknowledge. Now, as knowledge precedes plans or actions, it 
therefore follows that predestination and election merely refer to 
that pre-arranged system or plan by which God will save all who 
conform to the image of his Son through the gospel. We do not 



offer the above in a dogmatic spirit, but as suggestive of a 
possible solution of a much abused and misunderstood subject. 
Our Rest. 



R486 : page 7 

WHAT DOES IT MEAN? 

We clip the following item from a daily paper of recent date: 

"The Pope will attend the coronation of the Czar. The coming 
together of these two heads of the different wings of the 
Catholic church, one of which recognizes the Pope as the 
supreme authority, and the other the Czar, is one of the most 
important religious events in the history of this century. It 
indicates a radical change in the prejudices of these two great 
religious bodies, the Roman and the Greek Church, that has 
been accomplished in the Protestant Church by the Evangelical 
Alliance." 

What does it mean? Is it possible that this is to be the first open 
step toward a re-union of the Greek and Catholic churches? Is 
the breach of such long standing about to be closed? Originally, 
as is well known, the Church was one, with Constantinople as 
the residence of the Emperor, and the recognized 

R486 : page 8 

center of religious power. Afterward, a breach occurred, the 
Church became divided, the Bishops of Constantinople and 
Rome antagonized each other, and all attempts to heal the 
wounds and close the breach were fruitless. From that day to 
this the two have been apart. Rome maintained its supremacy, 
while Constantinople was wrested from its Greek professors, 
and has been held by the Mohammedans to this day. It is 
confidently expected, however, that it will ere long pass into the 
hands of Russia, and again become the recognized center of the 
religion of the Greek Church, of which the Czar is at present the 
recognized head. 

In view of the marvelous changes through which the Roman 
Church has passed during the last twenty-five years, and the 
recent experiences of the Czar in his own dominions, may we 
not expect that the differences of the past will be buried, 
concessions made, and a reunion of the two Churches effected 
so as to give united strength to the work of restoring order, and 
checking, if possible, the dreaded opposition so rapidly coming 
to the front in all parts of Europe. That some change must take 
place, and that right early, is manifest.- Our Rest. [Ans. See Isa. 
8:12-16.-ED.] 



R486 : page 8 



ETERNAL TORMENT. 

Many Christians there are, both in and out of the Churches, who 
cannot endorse the doctrine of eternal torment. They reason, if 
God, as the Scriptures teach, is the source or fountain of love; if 
love is his chief characteristic, he little shows it by consigning 
thousands to endless pain, and thus exercising his unlimited 
power over helpless humanity. The doctrine, too, though 
formerly, and even yet by many, considered fundamental, is 
quite neglected in the pulpit, there being comparatively few who 
now defend it. Nevertheless, there are some apparently direct 
assertions of the Word of God which somewhat stagger earnest 
seekers after truth. A few of these passages will engage our 
attention at this time. 

Among the most prominent, cited in support of this doctrine, is 
Mark 9:43-50. We think our Lord had in mind, while speaking 
these words, the literal Hell or Gehenna, which was located in 
one of the valleys near Jerusalem. Into this were cast all kinds of 
refuse and unburied bodies of animals and criminals. This mass 
was consumed by fires which were kept burning continually. It 
does not require a very vivid imagination to picture the place as 
one to be shunned. The ignominious end of the wicked is 
likened to this place of destruction. The language here used is 
figurative. A literal eye, or hand, or foot could not cause one to 
stumble in such a way as to affect his eternal welfare. Christ was 
addressing his disciples, not the world, and when they 
covenanted to follow him they were to have an eye to his glory, 
to the coming of his kingdom. There are eyes of the 
understanding as well as natural eyes. Eye is used as a 
representative of design or purpose— "Is thine eye evil because I 
am good?"— "If, therefore, thine eye be single, thy whole body 
shall be full of light; but if thine eye be evil, thy whole body 
shall be full of darkness." 

The eye is the director of the hand and foot, and whatever these 
latter represent, is under the control of the former. It is not an 
uncommon thing for many who have professed to have an eye 
for the glory of God, to have a much larger eye for business, for 
literature, for fame, etc. This larger eye is causing many to 
stumble, and the consequence will be, loss of the prize, the God- 
life. Better, indeed, would it be for such were they to pluck this 
eye out entirely, that they might have a single eye to the glory. 
Christ sought to teach his disciples that things most highly 
esteemed, those thought by mankind to be necessary, should be 
given up if they in the least hindered our progress. Paul echoed 
the same spirit when he said, "I count all things but loss," etc. 
"Let us lay aside every weight— and run. " 

Another scripture, misunderstood by many, is Matt. 25:46. A 
proper understanding of this is dependent, we think, upon the 
context. When the event occurs is all important. In verse 31 we 
are told, it is "When the Son of man shall come in his glory. " 



This is at the coming of Christ, after the exaltation of the 
Church, when the glory reign has begun. During that reign those 
who have suffered with him in this age are to sit with him in his 
throne, while the sheep and the goats represent the world-the 
nations- whose trial will then be due. With us in this age the 
test is faith, but with them the test will be works. "Inasmuch as 
ye have done, " or "have not done. " The separation of men into 
the two classes, symbolized by sheep and goats, will be the work 
of that age, and, by its close, all shall have come to a knowledge 
of truth, and had opportunity to come to favor, or right hand 
position, as sheep. Those wilfully wicked, represented by the 
goats, will go down into destruction, symbolized by fire. All 
should see that fire is as 

R487 : page 8 

much a figure as sheep and goats. The interest centres in verse 
46. "These shall go away into everlasting punishment, but the 
righteous into life eternal. " The words everlasting and eternal 
here are the same in the original, and are used to express the 
continuousness of both reward and punishment. The reward is 
life, and will continue forever; the punishment is what-torment? 
No, it does not mention here what the punishment is, except in 
the symbol fire, which represents destruction. Other scriptures 
inform us that "the wages of sin is death. " "The soul that sinneth 
it shall die. " This is everlasting destruction, or a destruction or 
death from which there shall be no resurrection. Thus, we see, 
the reward and punishment are opposites-life or death, and the 
trial being over, these conditions are endless or everlasting. 

Again, Rev. 14:10,1 1 is a cause of stumbling. In the study of 
Revelation we should always bear in mind that it is a book of 
symbols. The "things which were shortly to come to pass" were 
signified unto John. A red light on a railroad is not in its self 
dangerous, but it is the signal of danger, and so of the signals in 
Revelation. The smoke and noise, the fire and water, etc., are 
not dangers but indicators. In the passage under consideration 
fire and brimstone signify destruction. It is no secret that the 
fumes of brimstone are destructive to life. It is frequently used 
as a disinfectant. The mention of it here, in connection with fire, 
is positive proof of utter destruction. 

But "the smoke of their torment ascendeth forever. " Anything 
annoying is tormenting. Individuals, with a desire to cling to the 
"traditions of the elders," are to-day annoyed by unfolding truth, 
and the same is true of all systems of religion. The confusion 
already existing in and among these systems and individuals, 
because of their departure from truth, is well symbolized by 
smoke which will become more and more dense. All those who 
are finally brought out of these systems will forever remember 
how they (the systems— "Beast," etc.) were tormented. 



The parable of the rich man and Lazarus, recorded in Luke 15, 
may be thought by some to have a bearing upon this subject. 
Our Lord spake in parables, "that seeing they might not see, and 
hearing they might not understand. " Had they understood them 
his design would have been frustrated. If a literal interpretation 
were allowed it would not have been difficult for those who 
heard to understand, and Christ would have had no occasion to 
explain even the few that he did. 

The general view of this parable breathes so much of the spirit 
of his satanic majesty that we would marvel at its almost 
universal acceptation, were it not for the fact that he who was a 
liar from the beginning remains so to this day, and seeks above 
all things to deceive the very elect. We think the proper view of 
this parable is that found in "Food," page 154, to which we refer 
any who may desire information. The above selections are 
probably the strongest cited in defense of this doctrine of eternal 
torment. Others there are, of similar import, to which the 
foregoing can be applied. 

J. F. SMrfH. 



page 8 



THE MOSLEM UPRISING. 



A telegram from London says: "The report of the capture of El 
Obeid excites uneasiness here. The fall of that post will probably 
be followed by an attack on Khartoum, and as the Egyptian 
government has neither money nor men for carrying hostilities 
on a large scale in the Soudan, it is feared that England may find 
herself drawn into an expedition to save Southern Egypt from 
being overrun. " 

The Editor of the Boston Herald, in commenting upon the news, 
says: "There is good reason for apprehension. If El Obeid has 
really fallen, the false prophet is master of the province of 
Kordofan. Only a few days back the capture of Bara by his 
forces was reported. The surrender of Bara and El Obeid is a 
heavy blow to Egypt, for the garrisons of the two posts 
numbered 5,000 men. Nor is that the worst of the situation. 
There is another Egyptian force, some 4,000 strong, in Darfur, 
to the west of Kordofan and, as the victorious army of the false 
prophet commands the communications between Darfur and 
Khartoum, it appears probable that this body will also be 
compelled to surrender. In that event the Egyptians may count 
upon having to fight, not for the reconquest of Kordofan, but for 
the maintenance of the Soudan. " 

Why does this news produce a sensation in London? Because 
the English government has undertaken to support the feeble and 
bankrupt government of Egypt; and if the Egyptian forces in 



Upper Egypt are not able to stop the onward march of the false 
prophet in Soudan, it is perfectly evident that he intends to 
march his army into Lower Egypt, where it is known that a large 
majority of the people are Moslems and would be ready under 
favorable circumstances to join the prophet's forces and fight the 
English as infidel invaders of their country. But this is not the 
most alarming feature of the subject to England. She 
understands that, if her army is brought into collision with the 
army of the false prophet, all the Moslem world will be excited 
to mortal revenge; for it would be considered a direct war 
between the Mohammedans and Christians. 

Such a conflict coming at this particular time, when all the 
Moslem nations, according to their accredited prophecy, are 
looking for just such a war, could not, we think, fail to produce 
more religious antagonism than any which has been experienced 
for a thousand years. It would doubtless produce a formidable 
uprising in India, and would so involve Turkey as to cause the 
Christian nations of Europe to strike for a partition and final 
settlement of the "sick man's" estates. 

The present position of all the Great Powers is certainly very 
ominous, and indicative of a rapid progress towards a final 
collapse, when Christ will appear on the scene to grind into 
powder human kingdoms and establish his glorious eternal 
kingdom under the whole heaven. This is heart-cheering news to 
all the followers of the adorable Jesus. Our heart cries out Come, 
blessed Savior! Come and stop this cruel strife! Come and 
gather thy lambs to thy bosom, and let thy Bride stand at thy 
side in thy heavenly palace! 

The entire Roman Catholic world has been taught that the 
present period is the time especially designed by God for that 
Church to crush all obstacles to its triumph and full restitution of 
the Papal prerogatives. The Russian nation and entire Greek 
Church also have been in high expectation since the predictions 
of Peter the Great, that about the present time the Russian sword 
will drive the Grand Turk from St. Sophia, and give the Greek 
High Priest once more the opportunity to celebrate mass at the 
ancient Christian altar. 

It is no secret that the Republicans of all nations believe that the 
present period is the fore-ordained time for monarchical 
governments to give place to universal republics. Communists 
declare that the set time has come for all governments, civil and 
religious, to fall before the imperious demands of Communism. 

The Protestant pulpit and press publishes the tidings that the 
prophetic time has come for the evangelization of the nations 
and the commencement of a "golden age. " The Atheistical world 
adds its testimony to the universal proclamation that this is a 
specific transition period, during which the Bible and religion 



must cease to be, and the godship of nature and man must 
henceforth rule the universe. 

Amidst these varied expectations of coming change the Hebrew 
proclaims the present time as the period for the appearing of his 
Messiah. 

Among the loud voices of this jargon surpassing Babel, a shrill 
voice is heard from the Arabian deserts and African wilds, from 
the Turk's dominions and the vast fields of India, sounding a 
fearfully prophetic note, commanding the millions of Islam to 
rally to the standard of their coming prophet, who, according to 
their faith, will appear at the head of a conquering army the 
present calendar year. This announcement is produced by an 
interpretation of a prediction of the Koran, and contains no 
divine authority, and is unimportant only as it is believed by a 
hundred and seventy- five millions of Mohammedans. This faith 
is certainly likely, and has already commenced to produce a 
formidable movement, which certainly is very threatening to the 
peace of the world. -Prophetic Times. 

The latest news from Mehdi is that he has been defeated in 
battle and is a prisoner. 



R487 : page 8 



THE BATTLE HOT. 



The warfare between good and evil waxes intense. Right and 
wrong are struggling for the mastery. Every individual child of 
God is beset with countless snares and dangers. Temptations and 
lusts surround them on every side, and— 

The meanest foe of all the train 

Has thousands and ten thousands slain. 

And yet we need not despair. The Captain of our salvation is 
able to deliver us, for he himself has met and vanquished every 
foe. In him we are safe, under him we shall be victorious. He 
maketh us always to triumph in him. He subdueth our enemies 
under us. "Thanks be to God who giveth us the victory, through 
our Lord Jesus Christ. " Without him we shall surely die, but 
trusting him we shall never perish, and no one can pluck us out 
of our Father's hand. 

Fear not, brethren, joyful stand 
On the borders of your land. 
Jesus Christ, our Father's Son, 
Bids us undismayed go on. 

-The Observer. 



R487 : page 1 

VOL. IV. 

PITTSBURGH, PA., JUNE, 1883. 

NO. 11. 



page 1 

ZION'S 

Watch Tower 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S 
PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED MONTHLY AT 

101 Fifth Avenue, Pittsburgh, Pa. 



C. T. RUSSELL, Editor and Publisher. 



The Editor recognizes a responsibility to the Master, relative to 
what shall appear in these columns, which he cannot and does 
not cast aside; yet he should not be understood as endorsing 
every expression of correspondents, or of articles selected from 
other periodicals. 

TERMS OF SUBSCRIPTION. 

TERMS : —Fifty cents a year, postage prepaid. You may send 
paper money to the amount of two dollars, by mail, at our risk. 
Larger amounts may be sent by Drafts, P.O. Money Order, or 
Registered Letter, payable to C. T. RUSSELL. 

FOREIGN TERMS. 

Foreign Postage being higher, our terms to foreign subscribers 
will be 65 cents a year. Please send us no foreign money or 
postage stamps, as we can make no use of them. Remittances 
may be made by Foreign Postal Money Orders. 

TAKE NOTICE. 

This paper will be sent free to any of the Lord's poor who will 
send a card yearly requesting it. Freely we have received and 
freely we would give the truth. "Ho, every one that thirsteth, 
come ye to the waters; and he that hath no money, come ye, buy 
and eat— yea, come, buy wine and milk without money and 



without price. " And you that have it- "Wherefore do ye spend 
money for that which is not bread? and your labor for that which 
satisfieth not? Hearken diligently-and eat ye that which is good, 
and let your soul delight itself in fatness."- ISAIAH 55:1,2. 



R487 : page 1 

VIEW FROM THE TOWER. 

Looking out in every direction, we note like a grand panorama, 
the changing affairs of Church and State fulfilling the "sure 
word of prophecy." Every development in the affairs of the 
nations or the nominal Church systems, or the true saints seems 
to confirm the teachings of Scripture, that we are living in the 
Day of the Lord. The saints seem to be having a more thorough 
sifting and testing, which eventually shall separate every tare 
and garner every grain of wheat. The nominal systems are in 
distress at the spread of intelligence and thought among their 
supporters; and the nations in uneasiness are endeavoring not 
only to form alliances of power, but to protect each other's 
dominion from revolutionists. 

Wonderful things are spoken concerning this dark day-mis 
"Day of the Lord" in which we are living. The student who will 
take his concordance and reference Bible and search out what is 
said of "that day" will be astonished. Note the following as an 
example and see if you can find the application, and whether 
you think the description begins to fit the facts in passing events: 

"As I live saith the Lord God, surely because my flock became a 
prey and my flock became meat to every beast of the field, 
because there was no shepherd, neither did my shepherds search 
for my flock, but the shepherds fed themselves and fed not my 
flock; therefore, O, ye shepherds, hear the word of the Lord: 
Thus saith the Lord God; behold I am against the shepherds, and 
I will require my flock at their hand, and cause them to CEASE 
from feeding the flock. Neither shall the shepherds feed 
themselves any more, for I will deliver MY flock from their 
mouth, that they may not be meat for them. 

"For thus saith the Lord God, Behold I, even I, will both search 
my sheep and seek them out. As a shepherd seeketh out his flock 
in THE DAY that he is [present] among his sheep that are 
scattered: so will I seek out my sheep and will deliver them out 
of all places where they have been scattered in the cloudy and 
dark day" (Ezek. 34:8-12). 

This is having a fulfillment in the gathering of the sheep of both 
folds- the natural and the spiritual Israelites- out of their 
respective bondages and dispersions, and how pointed and 
applicable are some of the references to shepherds-they shall 



feed the Lord's sheep no more— they cannot. This is due too at 
that day— into which we have already entered some nine years. 

The report from Bro. Seagrin, who for some six months has 
been travelling among his fellow countrymen, the Swedes, 
preaching the "Glad tidings," will be of great interest to you all. 
Our brother has only seen these beauties and harmonies of the 
Word about a year, but the seed seems to have found good 
ground-prepared-in which it is bringing forth much fruit, as 
already he has been instrumental in helping about two hundred 
out of darkness into this marvellous light, wherein we stand and 
rejoice in hope of the glory of God. Of course this means two 
hundred preachers of "this way" among that nationality. 

All this goes to demonstrate the necessity of some tract issues in 
the Scandinavian tongue and the German, but especially the 
former, who are a more religiously inclined people. We know 
that it will surprise many of our readers to learn that there are in 
this land nearly two millions of people (Swedes, Norwegians, 
etc.), who speak the Scandinavian language, and of these there 
are very few indeed who can read or understand English. We 
shall not give up the hope of issuing the tract papers for these as 
proposed some time since, but must wait until the Lord provides 
the means. Our regular Tract Fund is still behind, and the special 
SWEDISH TRACT FUND, started some time since, has not 
flourished thus far and contains less than thirty dollars. It would 
require about three hundred dollars to issue a proper edition. Our 
Master is rich- he owns the cattle upon a thousand hills, as well 
as the hills themselves, and all the gold and silver are His. If he 
deems the work necessary he will make the necessary provision. 
The German Fund has made even less progress, but as the 
interest in that direction is less we shall for the present be most 
interested in the Swedes. We deem it proper to thus inform the 
household of faith and especially the contributors to the Tract 
Fund. 

We here give you extracts from a few of the many good letters 
which continue to come to our office. May they 

R488 : page 1 

strengthen and encourage each of you as they do us, is our 
prayer. 



Fayetteville, N.C. 

DEAR BROTHER IN CHRIST:-For sometime I have been 
thinking of writing to you. I found in the March number of 
Zion's Watch Tower, for 1883, a communication under the 
caption, What is Duty? which answered my inquiry 
satisfactorily-perfectly. I have been a searcher after truth from 
youth up. Joined the Baptist Church at the age of 22 years, am 
now 49. 1 have been preaching over 20 years, but everything 



seems new to me since I have read your books. Why is it that 
such light has not been revealed by some of the so-called wise 
and great before this? I suppose the time for it had not come. I 
have not language sufficient to express my gratitude. May the 
Lord increase you in strength physically and mentally to go on 
in this great work until thousands like myself shall be able to see 
the light and beauty of the Bible. 

I am determined to heed the words of Paul not to confer with 
flesh and blood, but to go out of Babylon lest I be partaker of 
her sins. Last Sabbath I preached from John 6:68, "Lord to 
whom shall we go?" I expect to preach my last sermon for them 
as their elder, from Numbers 22:18, as my course is beginning to 
be talked of among my friends. I don't know what they will say 
more, but they will not say worse of me than they did of our 
Savior. They said He had a devil. I rejoice that I am accounted 
worthy to be reproached, and to bear stripes for his (Jesus') sake. 

Yours in the love of Christ, 

page 1 

Boston, Mass. 

DEAR BRETHREN:-The "Z.W.T." is a great blessing, there is 
spirit and life in it; it is not like the dead theology that abounds; 
it helps and strengthens me wonderfully. But it would make my 
heart leap to meet a brother in this hope, for I am all alone, and 
what is precious wisdom to me is foolishness to all my brethren 
here, yes, an unknown tongue to them. How wonderful it seems 
to come out into the sunlight, to feel the mind and heart expand 
under God's love and truth, and to realize that we have an 
unassailable position, not dependent upon the wisdom of man 
for its defence. Truly that which can bring heart and mind into 
perfect unison, so that they shall work together as one, instead of 
antagonizing one another, must be the wisdom and the power of 
God. How we ought to thank God that he has so led us out of the 
mists and fogs of Babylonian theology. It is a great privilege to 
preach these things, and I count that man thrice blessed who can 
do it, but we can't all be preachers in a large way; and not every 
man's lips are "touched with fire." But as God wills, if the Spirit 
shall lead me to leave my work here— a quiet and humble one— 
and go elsewhere, to any large work I trust he will give me the 
necessary strength. 

May your work be to the praise and glory of God. 

Your brother in the hope, 



P.S. If the work needs money I shall count it a privilege to help 
in that way so far as God shall bless me from day to day. I have 
nothing laid by for myself. 



Seguin, Texas. 

DEAR FRIENDS:. ..From seventeen to the present time, sixty- 
seven years old, as I look back my spiritual experiences, all the 
varied relations in life, locations and interests, seem to have 
opened my spiritual vision, aspirations and longings, for the 
coming of our dear Lord, our Beloved. 

Though a member of the Presbyterian Church in New York 
City, carefully taught in its doctrines by a most faithful elder in 
one of the oldest churches, I never could acknowledge the 
interpretations of divine truth, as just to God's great character 
and purposes, as truth demanded. So with all the formulas of our 
orthodox churches, but the cornerstone was there, and I thought 
the wood, hay, and stuble would be replaced by the living light 
coming from the same Divine source as the corner-stone, on 
which the church was built. Patiently I have been watching, and 
of late I have been filled with joy and ardent expectation, and 
have wanted to proclaim the blessed news, though I am a 
retiring woman. I recognize our Lord by the description His 
herald gives us. His name is called the Word of God, and out of 
his mouth goeth a sharp sword, that with it He should smite the 
nations. That is our Beloved: that sword is the one the dear 
searchers of the Word are aided by. Soon the truth will replace 
the wood, hay and stuble of creeds. This continual searching is 
to bring forth golden nuggets never dreamed of. Heretofore this 
searching has been committed to ministers, and too frequently 
men paid them for doing the searching, while they bowed to the 
shrine of mammon and unquestioningly assented to whatever 
conclusions their ministers suggested. Now all must for 
themselves search for the truth. I have studied for years the 
Bible by reference, always for fear the pure truth would be 
watchful, diluted by human reasoning. Now I seem so filled 
with its light and truth, I long and pray the Holy Spirit with 
mighty power to open all eyes to the glorious light of God's 
word. 

With loving sympathy, your sister in Christ, 



R488 : page 1 



BROTHER SEAGRIN'S LETTER. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I became acquainted with you 
through reading Zion's Watch Tower publications, some time 
since, but as I have never given you a very particular account of 
myself, and endeavors to spread the glad tidings among my 
fellow countrymen, I do so now, believing that you will be 
encouraged thereby. 

Some time ago finding my Bible teaching one thing and 
sectarianism quite another, I determined to go out as a lay 



Evangelist to preach the truth as nearly as I could understand it, 
among my own countrymen, the Swedes, and in my own 
language. While traveling and laboring in this way I met a friend 
in Iowa who had a copy of "Food for Thinking Christians." As 
he did not fully understand part of its teachings, he brought it to 
me to know my opinion of it. 

In answer to his questions I spent a whole evening trying to 
explain away its teachings, and afterwards retired to spend much 
of the night in thinking over the subject. The next morning I got 
the "Food" and my Bible, and began in earnest to compare the 
two to see if these things were really true— after careful study of 
the Bible I came gradually to see the beauty of this real glad 
tidings. 

I began in my preaching to introduce the teachings; yet to avoid 
reproach and secure the favor of men, I was tempted to limit or 
explain away these glorious Bible truths. Once on a text 
involving Restitution I had begun to explain it in the old 
manner, but the Spirit cut me off; I then thought to avoid saying 
anything to the point, but God did not forsake his Jonah-like 
servant. I saw at once the evil of so doing, and conquering the 
tempter, I did plainly preach "the restitution of all things spoken 
by the mouth of all the holy Prophets since the world began. " I 
have never since compromised with error. 

I find many who will listen for hours 

R488 : page 2 

with close attention. Some reject the truth, but many hear with 
joy. Some that I thought slow to receive it were only trying the 
foundations thoroughly, and some of these are becoming its 
most firm and able defenders, many of these humble teachers 
with their Bibles in hand, are able to overthrow the wise and 
learned preachers of traditions. 

For nearly a year I have preached this truth with more or less 
fullness as I gradually came to a knowledge of it. I have suffered 
much reproach and some trials and persecution for the truth's 
sake, but never since the time mentioned have I faltered or 
mixed truth with error to make it palatable to formal Christians. 
I find some infidels who, hearing the truth, are beginning to 
think the Bible is true, and some have accepted the truth and are 
telling the good news to others, showing that the Bible is 
reasonable when understood. 

During the time that I have preached this truth some two 
hundred Swedes have received it and are rejoicing in it and 
telling it to others. 

As an incident of the work, I mention the fact that in my 
congregation at one place were two noted infidels, who 
doubtless came from curiosity, but they listened and evidently 
had an ear to hear, for the next morning they came to see me 



very early. I asked them, Well, now do you want to have 
anything to do with Jesus? They said, Yes, since we have heard 
of these glad tidings of God's love we do want to have some 
interest in Jesus. We prayed together, and since I have received 
a letter from one stating how he had gone to the infidel club 
room and told them of the new Jesus he has found. 

Some places, the preachers coming after the people have heard 
these glad tidings, find it hard work to interest them again in the 
terrible and unscriptural doctrines which bound us and 
blindfolded the eyes of our understanding for so long. In one 
place a brother got up after the service and advancing to the 
desk said, You did not tell us the truth, your sermon was 
unscriptural; hereafter when you preach we want you to give us 
God's Word and quote it from the Bible. 

The established ministers, called orthodox, sometimes oppose 
me and would hinder me from preaching if they could, but the 
Lord opens up some place, and the truth hungry are fed and 
rejoiced. Leaving one such place recently, several brethren bade 
me good-bye, and with tears in their eyes said, Bro. Seagrin, 
whatever happens let nothing hinder you from boldly 
proclaiming this glad tidings, that others may be blessed as we 
have been. 

Many of our nation seem to have an ear to hear, and "He that 
hath an ear to hear let him hear." I urge my Swedish brethren 
who have been favored with truth, that has brought such joy and 
strength to them, to try to explain to others that they may rejoice 
and be strong also; searching out those saints who can discern 
truth and comforting and stimulating them to run well for the 
rich prize before us. 

Pray for me, dear brother, while I try to labor among our 
Swedish brethren, and if it shall please our Lord to send the 
Swedes the October number of the Tower in our own language, 
as you proposed some time ago, I shall be so glad. If we could 
have Food in Swedish also it would be of great good under the 
Lord's blessing. 

Brother, pray for me that I may be able to do my part of the 
work acceptably to our Father. 

Yours in Christ, CHAS. SEAGRIN. 



page 2 



VARIORUM BIBLES. 



We have obtained more of this special lot of Teacher's Bibles; 
called Variorum, because in addition to the matter in other 
Bibles of the sort— concordance, maps, index, etc.— it has foot- 
notes giving the readings of the old MSS. where they differ from 



the ordinary text, also the opinions of various scholars, on the 
translation, where it differs from the usual rendering. 

We can furnish these to our readers at about half the usual 
prices, viz., plain French Morocco, $3.25, and best Turkey 
Morocco-Divinity circuit, $5.50 (Retail rate, $9.00). These are 
published by Eyre & Spottiswoode, London. Postage 25 cents 
extra-registered 10 cents additional. 

We still have the Variorum Testaments mentioned particularly 
in our last, cloth bound, 50 cents, post paid. Those who cannot 
afford the Bible, should avail themselves of the opportunity to 
get these Testaments at this price. 



R488 : page 2 



THE SERVANT HEIR. 



"Now I say, that the heir, as long as he is a child, differeth 
nothing from a servant, though he be lord of all."— Gal. 4:1. 

We have heard these words frequently quoted to support the 
theory that Jesus was in no essential respect different from other 
men. 

That he belonged to the fallen race; that he redeemed himself as 
well as the rest of mankind; that he was in "all things" (not 
excepting his moral nature) just like other fallen men. Another 
text which is used to support the same idea is that "in all things 
it behooved him to be made like unto his brethren" (Heb. 2:17). 

We regard these texts as strong as any we know of to support the 
doctrine, referred to, but that, we reckon, is no support at all, 
when carefully examined. In the first place the passage under 
consideration, including the second verse, is a general statement, 
and by itself alone has no reference to Jesus Christ as an 
individual, but to the Church of Christ; and in the third verse the 
Apostle makes an application, saying, "Even so WE, when we 
were children, [speaking of the Church while under the shadows 
of the Jewish age] were in bondage under the elements of the 
world. But when the fullness of the time was come, God sent 
forth his SON, made of a woman, made under law." Now, how 
did it happen that he was under the law? Was he there in the 
same way that all Adam's race were? No. All the descendents of 
the first Adam were under law on account of sin; they were 
there because they could not help it, they were there by descent, 
their father was a bondman, and their lives were all forfeited; the 
law was to teach them that, and their need of a Redeemer and 
Savior. 

Jesus Christ was "made under law" for a purpose, not of 
necessity, but of grace, viz., that he might redeem ("buy off"; 
see Diaglott, interlineary trans.) those that were under the law, 



that we being then (afterward) called might, receive the adoption 
of sons. 

The Apostle's argument as he advances to the 9th verse is to 
show that 

R489 : page 2 

the law is but the rudimentary part of God's redeeming scheme, 
and that up to the time of the close of the Jewish economy, the 
plan of God, and all those embraced in it AS SUBJECTS OF 
REDEMPTION, was immature. He is not speaking of 
individuals, but of a system (in which individuals are included), 
which was yet in its childhood, and he uses the text to illustrate 
the subject. 

That the Apostle is referring to the immaturity of the joint- 
heirship and plan in its unfoldings during the age of shadows, is 
apparent from the connection between the last clause of the 3d 
and 9th verses; wherein he speaks of the time when they "were 
in bondage under the elements (rudiments) of the world," and of 
their tendency now to "turn again to the weak and beggarly 
elements." 

It is very evident that this statement of the Apostle has no 
reference to Jesus, for the reason that as an individual he 
differed in many essential respects from those whom he came to 
redeem; because he bought them with himself: gave himself; 
whereas if he had been in all respects, sin included, like them, he 
too would have been a debtor to the law; and COULD NOT 
redeem them. 

Though a servant, he was not an "unprofitable servant," which 
he told the disciples to say they were when they had "done all 
which was their duty to do." Luke 17:10. 

But a "righteous servant" who could redeem the rest, would be a 
very profitable servant, according to our way of thinking. 

But it may be asked, how does that harmonize with the 
sentiment that he was "made in all things like unto his 
brethren?" 

We answer that we think it harmonizes well, when we consider 
his own statement regarding who his brethren are. "He that 
doeth the will of my Father which is in heaven, the same is my 
brother," &c. (Matt. 12:50.) "For both he that sanctifieth, and 
they [notice] who are sanctified, [set apart, consecrated] are all 
of one, for which cause he is not ashamed to call THEM 
brethren" (Heb. 2:11). 

It is such "as are perfect," i.e., whose will is in perfect accord 
with the will of "our Father in heaven," who are reckoned sons 
of God and "brethren" of Jesus. We are reckoned, what he 
ACTUALLY WAS. 



He "did no sin" (1 Peter 2:22), and to the reckoned sons, Jesus' 
brethren, no sin is imputed. Herein is the blessedness of "the 
man to whom the Lord will not impute sin" (Rom. 4:8). 

In view of the gradual development of the "joint-heirs" during 
their minority, but who are to become one by virtue of their 
union with "the heir," how appropriate the illustration made use 
of by the Apostle in the text quoted. 

J. C. SUNDERLIN. 



R489 : page 2 



SECRET PRAYER. 



Secret prayer has the sanction of lofty examples. Isaac went out 
into the fields to meditate at eventide. In his chamber, Daniel 
knelt upon his knees three times a day, and prayed and gave 
thanks before the Lord his God. Jesus saw the devotion of 
Nathaniel under the figtree. Peter was at prayer on the housetop 
when he received his commission to preach the gospel to the 
Gentiles. Jesus withdrew from the multitude and from the 
presence of the disciples, and retired to the mountains, or to the 
desert to pray. Sometimes He spent the whole night in prayer. 
How often did Olivet witness the devotions of the Man of 
Sorrows the last rays of the setting sun, as they fell upon the 
mountain, revealed Jesus on its summit, kneeling and when the 
morning dawned He was still there, his locks wet with the dews 
of the night. 

Secret prayer is a test of sincerity. Public worship may be 
attended from various motives, good or bad. But private 
devotion, secret prayer— what can induce it but the motives pure 
and lofty, the desire heaven-inspired and heaven aspiring, the 
thirst after righteousness, the love of God! Who that loves not 
God or desires not to love Him, can have any business with Him 
in private or will seek a private interview? The hypocrite may 
pray in public, and he may pray in his family. Here others see 
him. But he will not pray in secret. If he attempt it, he will soon 
abandon it, for he expects from it neither profit nor pleasure. 
There is hope for a man as long as he is mindful of his secret 
devotions. He may have left his love, and the things which 
remain may be ready to die. But the fact that he still feels after 
God in secret places, if happily he may find Him, is evidence, 
first of his own sincerity; secondly, that the Spirit of divine 
grace is with him, and drawing him to the fountain of life. 

The closet removes all the external restraints to devotion. The 
sentiments of the public service are suited to the general 
sympathy; and this measure of emotion is not transcended, 
except in cases of overwhelming power and overflowing feeling, 
when the impetuous tide breaks through all restraints. But there 



are no restraints whatever in the closet. There, no feeling need 
be suppressed. The tear may flow. The passion of penitence may 
be indulged. The agony of prayer may be exercised. There are 
none to be annoyed, none to pass the harsh judgment, none to 
ascribe your feeling to weakness or hypocrisy. In that lone place 
there is no ear but God's to hear. And are there not confessions 
to be made which no ear but his should hear? In that lone place 
there is no eye but God's to see. And who but God can 
understand and sympathize with your secret sorrows? He is thy 
father—thy father in heaven. "Cast all your care upon him, for he 
careth for you." And this is the promise of Jesus: "Him that 
cometh unto me I will in no wise cast out. " A father loves his 
sick and sorrowful child most. So Jesus has an especial love and 
sympathy for him that has no helper. "As one whom his mother 
comforteth, so will I comfort you, and ye shall be comforted. " 

The closet is favorable to devotion. It not only removes 
hindrances, but it furnishes helps. It shuts out things visible. We 
leave the dusty and crowded thoroughfare of the world, and turn 
aside to rest a little in the sweet shade of the tree of life-to drink 
of the spring that gushes from the rock to commune with God 
and think of heaven. The world is not there, pride is not there, 
passion is not there. Eternity is there, God is there, Jesus is 
there, the Holy Spirit is there, angels are there. We feel as Jacob 
felt as he lay down to sleep on the rocky knoll, and awoke in the 
midst of hovering angels. "And he said, surely the Lord is in this 
place, and I knew it not. This is none other but the house of God, 
and this is the gate of heaven." 

Secret prayer prepares for all public services. The Christian 
comes forth from his closet refreshed with grace, filled with the 
Spirit, his graces shining, like the face of Moses when he came 
down from the mount of communion; active to labor, patient to 
suffer, ready to serve his generation, and prepared to finish his 
course with joy. 

"The Father which seeth in secret shall reward thee openly. " His 
blessing shall rest manifestly upon you. It will appear in your 
experience, and in the daily walks of life. It will be manifest to 
yourself, and visible to others. The Spirit of Jesus shall be with 
you and in you. It will appear in your voice, in your very looks, 
and in all your conversation. God will give you the necks of 
your enemies-the world, the flesh, and the devil. You shall run 
and not weary, walk and not faint, and mount up with wings like 
an eagle.— Selected. 



R489 : page 2 

THE HANDWRITING ON THE WALL. 

The Catholic Mirror caustically remarks: 



"When Protestantism began, it was to create a new era in the 
religion of the world. 'Rome' was to go down with all sorts of 
crashes, the 'superstitious dogmas' of the Middle Ages were laid 
aside forever, and a rational creed was to rule the future. Loud 
and fierce rang the triumphant war shouts of the champions of 
the new order of things. But soon— wonderful spectacle!— 
protests began to be entered against Protestantism. At first, 
feeble and lost in the blatant roars of the blind giants who were 
hurling things to pieces, they gradually grew louder, as the 
triumphant cries grew weaker. Time went on, bringing its silent 
revenges. 'Rome,' so far from being down had recovered her 
ground in Europe and extended her spiritual empire in other 
parts of the world. And, meanwhile, Protestantism was splitting 
into an infinite variety of sects, each powerful in respect of 
wealth, considering members, but powerless on account of the 
want of cohesion. 

"So the matter stands now. Decidedly, something is the matter. 
Our beautiful concern is decaying. Protestantism is sick. So, call 
in all the wise doctors; let's have consultations, conferences, 
evangelical alliances, and what not. But the end, friends, so far 
as we can see, is an abundant flow of gabber and endless waste 
of ink in all sorts of 'symposiums' (vide the North American 
Review), and nothing else. And, indeed, it needs no great insight 
to pronounce upon the disease's issue, since even James 
Anthony Froude, its special champion in the past, writes: 
'Protestantism is dead.' There is the epitaph in three words. It is 
dead as a moral force that counts in the world, and slowly the 
little disintegrated forms are withering around the spirit that 
gave them life, but now lies mute. " 



R490 : page 3 



THE TEMPTED AND TRIED. 

Tempted and tried, Oh! the terrible tide 
May be raging and deep, may be wrathful and wide; 
Yet its fury is vain, for the Lord will sustain, 
And forever and ever Jehovah shall reign. 

Tempted and tried, yet the Lord at thy side, 

Will guide thee, and keep thee, tho' tempted and tried. 

Tempted and tried, there is one at thy side, 

And never in vain shall his children confide; 

He will save and defend, for he loves to the end, 
Adorable master, and glorious friend. 
Tempted and tried, whatever betide, 
In his secret pavilion his children shall hide, 

'Neath the shadowing wing, of eternity's King, 
His children may trust, and his children may sing. 



Tempted and tried, yet the Lord will abide, 
Thy faithful redeemer, and keeper and guide, 

Thy shield and thy sword, thine exceeding reward, 
Then enough for the servant that he be as his Lord. 
Tempted and tried, the Savior who died, 
Hath called thee to suffer and reign by his side. 

If his cross thou wilt bear, his crown thou shalt wear, 
And forever and ever, his glory shall share. 

—Selected. 



R490 : page 3 



THE ARCH-ANGEL 



This term signifies chief-messenger, and occurs but twice, Jude 
9; 1 Thes. 4:16. It is never used in the plural, and altogether 
seems to teach that there is but the one chief-messenger of 
Jehovah. 

While we are not directly told who is Jehovah's chief- 
messenger, except that his name was called Michael, the thought 
suggests itself, Can it be that he who was called Michael- 
Jehovah's chief-messenger- was none other than our Lord in his 
pre-human condition? He who "did not meditate a usurpation to 
be like God, but divested himself, taking a bondman's form, 
having been made in likeness of men" (Phil. 2:6,7 -Diaglott), 
and whom Jehovah in consequence highly exalted and gave "a 
name above every name; that at the name of Jesus every knee 
should bow and every tongue confess to the glory of God the 
Father"? (Phil. 2:10,11.) 

We call to mind that Jesus was called "the messenger of the 
covenant" (Mai. 3:1), and from what we learn of his pre-human 
glory (see Dec. issue, "Consider Him"), we conclude that HE 
must have been "chief messenger." Surely we may well reason 
that Jehovah's first-born, the beginning of the creation of God, 
would be the chief. And the thought gathers force as we 
remember that he was the "only begotten of the Father"-the 
only being whom Jehovah directly created, and in this sense the 
Alpha and Omega, the beginning and ending of Jehovah's 
creation, who "was before all things, and by whom [as Jehovah's 
agent] all things consist" (Col. 1:16,17), "Without him was not 
any thing made that was made" (John 1:3). 

Surely chief-messenger would be a fitting title for this being. 
And we inquire, If he was not the chief- messenger, who was his 
superior? 

In the above quotation (Phil. 2:6), Paul seems to suggest an 
inference not directly stated; that he is contrasting the course of 
the pre-existent Jesus with that of Satan-the rebel-angel— the 



chief of "those messengers which kept not their first estate. " In 
Isa. 14:12-15 we seem to have an account of how Satan did 
meditate a usurpation of Jehovah's honor and power, saying in 
his heart, "I will ascend into heaven, I will exalt my throne 
above the stars of God. ...I will ascend above the heights of the 
clouds; I will be like the Most High." 

In his pre-human condition, Jesus, as the first-born and chief- 
messenger, must have outranked Satan, whose rebellion must 
have been directed against His, as well as against Jehovah's 
authority. Thus Paul's language inferentially shows that the very 
exaltation which Satan sought by pride and rebellion, and failed 
to reach, is in substance obtained by the chief-messenger who 
humbled himself and has now been exalted to the Divine nature. 

One expression in Scripture may at first sight seem to conflict 
with this thought that Jesus and the arch-angel are identical. It is 
Heb. 1:13: "But to which of the angels said he at any time, Sit 
on my right hand until I make thine enemies thy footstool?" 
Unto none of the angels, we answer, but to Him who was 
superior, a chief over angels-the only begotten of the Father. 
Thus seen, this Scripture not only does not oppose but supports 
this view. 

Examining the various connections in which the word is found 
should teach us something. We find Jude using it (vs. 9) with 
profound respect, as of one in superior control. In Daniel 10:13- 
21; 12:1, Michael is again mentioned in great respect, and as the 
superior of Gabriel, who himself was one of the most honored 
angels (Luke 1:19). Further it is significant, that in the 
announcement of the conception of Jesus, Gabriel was sent 
(Luke 1 :26), a fact which can scarcely be accounted for 
otherwise than as we now do, by supposing that it was the chief- 
messenger whose existence was transferred from being in a form 
of God (a spiritual being), to the babe of Bethlehem, to become 
a man. Doubtless the chiefest messenger remaining in the courts 
of glory was sent on that most marked and notable occasion. 

In Dan. 12:1, the prophecy touches the Day of the Lord and its 
events— the very time in which we are living— the time of 
resurrection, etc., and instead of saying, Then shall Messiah set 
up his kingdom, etc., it says, "At that time shall Michael stand 
up [begin to exercise his power and dominion]-the GREAT 
PRINCE, etc." We reason that this Great Prince-Michael- 
Jehovah's chief-messenger, is none other than the Lord of glory, 
whose presence we are now proclaiming. 

But the key to the whole matter seems to be in our hands when 
we learn that the name Michael means: "Who as God," or "Who 
is like God." 

Who is like God but him whom God hath highly exalted and 
given a name above every name; who is partaker of the divine 
nature, and "the express image of the Father's person, " of whom 



it is written, that "All men should honor the Son even as they 
honor the Father," also- "And let all the angels of God worship 
him"? With the meaning of the word Michael in this last text 
how significantly it reads: At that time shall he who is like God 
stand up- come into power-the Great Prince. Yes, he shall take 
to himself his great power and reign. (Compare Dan. 12:1,2; 
Rev. 11:17,18.) 

Paul's mention of the Arch-angel is in harmony. "The Lord 
himself shall descend from heaven with a shout, with the voice 
of the chief-messenger and the trump of God, and the dead in 
Christ shall rise," etc. 

Yes, beloved, we believe that the great chief-messenger is 
present, and is even now standing up or assuming control and 
organizing his kingdom; hence the unrest among the kingdoms 
of earth, which are tottering to their fall—the voice (of 
command) from the chief messenger is now distinctly heard by 
those who have an ear to hear, hence the dissolution of present 
systems. "He uttered his voice, the earth melted"— symbolically. 
(Psa. 46:6). 



R490 : page 3 

THE SEVEN CHURCHES. 



We began some months ago a series of articles on The Seven 
Messages to the Churches, of Rev. 1 to 3. 

Absence from home and other reasons have hindered their 
continuance. We have already examined the first four, but it is 
suggested that we partially review these before proceeding. 

We hold that the book of Revelation is a book of symbols. We 
are told that our Lord "sent and signified [made signs] by his 
angel unto his servant John" (Rev. 1:1). 

We know that the book abounds in symbols or signs, and we are 
satisfied that these are the rule, and the literal- when 
unavoidable— is the exception. 

To be in harmony, then, with the rest of the book, "the seven 
churches which are in Asia" must be symbolic: and as the book 
is chiefly "history written beforehand," they must also 
symbolize seven successive stages in the history of the Christian 
Church; covering the period between the first and second advent 
of Christ. The fulfillment, we think, proves the correctness of 
this position. 

In the first chapter we have a description of "one like unto the 
Son of man," 

R491 : page 3 



as seen in a vision by John. Some one or more of the features of 
this description are peculiarly appropriate to each of these 
successive stages of the Church; and in each case he who sends 
the message is thus described. 

The names of the churches are also characteristic, as we shall 
see when we come to look at them. 

The last part of each message, or the promise to the 
"overcomers," is also peculiarly adapted to the different periods. 

To give a sort of birdseye view of the arrangement, we would 
notice their chronological position. Ephesus covers the period 
during the lives of the Apostles; Smyrna during the time of the 
Pagan persecution, reaching to about A.D. 323, when 
Constantine became sole Emperor of Rome, and declared in 
favor of Christianity. Pergamos embraces the transition period in 
which the Papal Church had its rise; Thyatira the space during 
which the true Church was in the wilderness, and the mother of 
Harlots sat as a queen, cohabiting with the kings of the earth. 
Sardis takes in a short interval just before the Reformation. 
Philadelphia, from the Reformation until recent times; and 
Laodicea, the nominal Church of to-day. 

Ephesus means, first, desirable. In this period our Lord "holdeth 
the seven stars in his right hand," etc. (compare chap. 1:20). The 
messengers of the Churches (Paul, Peter, John, etc.) during that 
period were so powerfully led and kept in the grasp of the Lord 
Jesus that we accept their teachings as we accept his, believing 
that their words were really his. This Church is commended for 
its faithful, patient labor, and its discernment of truth and 
teachers (Acts 20:28-30, 1 Cor. 11:19). It was a characteristic of 
that period that "they forsook all and followed him"; they took 
joyfully the spoiling of their goods; they sold what they had, and 
gave to those in want. Though often deprived of the bread of this 
life, they not only had the living bread, but the promise of "the 
tree of life which is in the midst of the Paradise of God. " 

Smyrna means bitter, [Myrrh and Marah (Ex. 15:23) are kindred 
words.] It was the period of most bitter persecution, under the 
Roman Emperors from Nero to Diocletian. "The devil [Pagan 
Rome] shall cast some of you into prison that ye may be tried, 
and ye shall have tribulation ten days" (last and most severe 
persecution, A.D. 303 to A.D. 313). 

Those who have read the history of this period can understand 
the depth of the words, "that ye may be tried. " Some of the most 
sublime pictures of Christian endurance that the world has ever 
seen were enacted during the Smyrna period. 

The call was for faithfulness "unto death"; the promise was "a 
crown of life. " Also "he that overcometh shall not be hurt of the 
second death. " 



Pergamos means an earthly elevation. The speaker is he who has 
"the sharp two-edged [Greek, two-mouthed] sword" -the Word 
of God. During this period, while the nominal Church was 
growing popular, the true Christians were tested by the 
introduction and development of Pagan and Papal ideas. The 
Pagan priests, unwilling to lose their positions of honor and 
influence among the people, sought to bend their theories to fit 
the new religion; and while nominally professing Christianity 
they brought many of their ideas with them; which were 
eventually engrafted upon the true stock. Thus the Church was 
led into error, evil practices, and away from God. This is what is 
alluded to in the reference to Balaam and Balak. Balak tempted 
Israel to sin, and thus brought about what he could not 
accomplish by his own powers (Num. 31:16). So these priests 
taught the Church to indulge in spiritual fornication, and thus 
brought upon her the withering blight of God's wrath. 

The doctrine of the Nicolaitanes seems to be the theory of 
lordship or headship in the Church. Nicholas means a lord. The 
strife as to who should be greatest existed among many of the 
Patriarchs (fathers) of the prominent churches. At their councils 
there was a bitter fight for supremacy. The tendency was toward 
an earthly head, and of course many wanted the honor. The 
patriarchs of Jerusalem, Antioch, Constantinople and Rome, 
were most prominent. The first two dropped out, but the strife 
continued several hundred years between Constantinople and 
Rome, and was only settled by a division of the Church: the 
Eastern, or Greek Church accepting the Patriarch of 
Constantinople for its head, and the Western, or Papal Church 
acknowledging the Bishop or Pope (Father) of Rome. 

Many of the true in the churches denounced this attempt to 
disobey the direct command of Jesus, "Call no man Father" 
(Matt. 23:9), and of course received the persecution promised (2 
Tim. 1:12). This class in Pergamos our Lord commends under 
the symbol of "Anti-pas my faithful martyr." In the Greek, anti 
means against, and Papas, father; so in the usual formation of 
words Antipas would mean an Anti-papist, one who protests 
against the Pope or Father. 

In this age also those who sought to be popular received the 
emoluments of the Church, but the promise to the overcomers is 
of pleasure and honor that shall be eternal. 

Thyatira seems to mean "The sweet perfume of a sacrifice." It 
was the period of the Papal persecution. The Antichrist had 
seated himself in the temple of God, announcing himself 
through his minions as "Our Lord God the Pope," ruling the 
nations and the churches with a rod of iron; dashing in pieces 
like a potter's vessel those who would not acknowledge his 
authority. The virgin church was enduring the hardships of the 
wilderness, while the harlot, reveling in her lewdness, sat on the 
throne of her royal paramours. 



The message is sent by one who has "eyes like a flame of fire" 
to watch over his faithful ones as they wandered through the 
dark valleys, or hid in the darker caves of earth; and "feet of 
hard brass" to walk by their side as they scale the rugged 
mountains, or wander footsore and weary seeking a place to 
plant the seeds of truth. An allusion is made to a faithful old 
prophet who had to flee for his life into the wilderness from the 
idolatrous wife of a king. The picture is from the history of 
Elijah, Jezebel and Ahab. Jezebel was the protector of the priests 
of Baal. Her husband was king, and she wielded his power for 
her own ends. The drouth of three and a half years was evidently 
a type of the "time, times and a half '—1260 years-of the 
spiritual famine, "not of bread nor of water, but of hearing the 
words of the Lord" (Amos 8:11). "And I gave her space 
[chronos, time] to repent.... And she repented not. Behold I will 
cast her into a bed [sleep, stupor], and them that commit 
adultery with her into [the] great tribulation." A symbolic "time" 
is 360 years, as the three and a half above. Her time for 
repentance has been, of course, since the light of the 
Reformation dawned upon her. On Oct. 31st, 1517, Luther 
nailed his ninety-five propositions on the church door in 
Wittemberg. The news and light spread rapidly. Dating the 
beginning of this "time" from the spring of 1518, allowing the 
intervening months for the light to spread, 360 years bring us to 
the spring of 1878; when, according to the parallels, the 
announcement was made, "Your house is left unto you 
desolate"; and the fall of Babylon was due to begin. The "world" 
who supported her are also already entering the "time of 
trouble." "And I will kill her children [daughters] with death." 
Spiritual death is what ails the Churches of to-day. The 
Physician has given them up and the spiritual gangrene is surely 
doing its work. [See article Seven Last Plagues, by ED., 1st 
Plague, in this issue]. 

The characteristic of this Thyatira 

R491 : page 4 

period was the reign of the false church, therefore the promise to 
the overcomers is, "To him will I give power over the nations, 
and he shall rule them with a rod of iron; as the vessels of a 
potter shall they be broken to shivers: even as I received of my 
Father." 

The false Church claimed infallibility, that she alone could 
interpret the Scriptures; but to the faithful is here promised not 
only light before the day, but the same proof of the time of night 
and of the dawning- "I will give him the morning star." 

W. I. M. 



R491 : page 4 



THE SEVEN CHURCHES. 



SARDIS, REV. 3:1-6. 

"To the messenger of the congregation in Sardis write." Sardis 
is said to mean— that which remains; as if it were perhaps a 
useless remnant; or something out of which the life or virtue had 
gone. "I know thy works, that thou hast a name that thou livest, 
and art dead. " They had the appearance of being what they were 
not, having the form of godliness without the power. 
Hypocritical, perhaps, without knowing it. A kind of carnelian, 
Sardian stone, is found near Sardis, from which it received its 
name. It is of a blood-color, sometimes covered with a thin layer 
of white. Thus it may look like purity, but a close examination 
will reveal the deep red or flesh-color below the surface. To 
outward appearance and by profession spiritual, but in heart 
animal, fleshly, carnal. Sardis was the remains of the true 
Church which had been driven into the wilderness; but when 
persecution began to abate, her zeal also subsided. Persecution 
has always developed the life and vigor of the Church: ease 
brings languor. Thyatira was specially commended for her 
works (Rev. 2:19). Sardis for the 

R492 : page 4 

opposite- "I have found no works of thine fulfilled before my 
God" (REV. VER.) 

Their love and understanding of the Scriptures had evidently 
decreased. They were warned to "Remember how thou hast 
received and heard, and hold fast and repent. " God's Word is 
spiritual food. He who continually feasts upon it will grow 
vigorous, healthy and powerful. He who neglects to eat, or fails 
to digest this living bread must be weak and sickly; remaining at 
best only a spiritual dwarf, powerless to discern "the signs of the 
times," ignorant of what the Lord is doing, or what his plans are. 

Many having the Sardis characteristics are living to-day; to such 
there is a fatal warning in the declaration: "If perchance, then, 
thou may est not watch, I WILL HAVE COME as a thief, and in 
nowise mayest thou get to know during what kind of hour I 
SHALL HAVE COME upon thee." (Rotherham's trans.) 

They do not expect him to come "as a thief," stealthily, silently. 
Seven times his coming is so described. To those only who are 
watching is the thief s approach known. Those who are in bed 
know nothing of his whereabouts until after he has entered the 
house. Those asleep will only be awaked after he has taken full 
possession. As he progresses in his work of destruction they 
gradually wake up. They wonder what that noise means. They 
rouse themselves, but it is too late; they have been "overtaken." 
Thus he will be present-invisible and unknown (except to the 
watchers) for some time (years) after his arrival, and will only 



be recognized by the sleepers as the noise gradually increases, 
and they slowly realize what it is. The reason many cannot 
comprehend his presence now is that they are looking for, first, a 
fleshly Christ, visible to the fleshly eye, and with an imposing 
demonstration, which they cannot mistake; secondly, they 
suppose that from the moment of his coming there will be 
commotion in nature and among men. Thus they are unable to 
understand "the signs of the times." Failing to recognize the fact 
that spiritual bodies cannot be seen (without a miracle) by 
human eyes, they cannot understand HIS PRESENCE while all 
things continue as they were since the beginning of creation. 

"But thou hast a few names in Sardis which did not defile their 
garments: and they shall walk with me in white, for they are 
worthy. " Here are a little flock who are pure all the way 
through; these are entitled to wear a covering of spotless white: 
they are what they appear to be. "He that overcometh shall thus 
be arrayed in white garments; and I will in nowise blot his name 
out of the book of life, and I will confess his name before my 
Father, and before his angels." Having been once cleansed and 
having our name written in the book of life is no guarantee that 
we shall always retain this position. We may become so defiled 
that our Lord will be ashamed of us, and drop our names from 
the record. "Blessed is he that watcheth, and keepeth his 
garments, lest he walk naked, and they see his shame." 

When the Lord would revive his work and bring to an end "the 
dark ages" by giving increasing light and knowledge in spiritual 
things, he did not give it to Sardis. She was "dead." He went into 
the stronghold of idolatry, and called one out who, like 
Abraham, cared not whither he went so long as he knew he was 
led of God. Luther came out of Rome. 

It was easier to start a new tree from fresh and vigorous seed, 
even in a "Romish dunghill, " as he called it, than to cause to 
sprout a decayed and lifeless stump. Even so it is now. The 
nominal Church has become too proud to represent the Meek 
and Lowly One, who humbled himself and preached the gospel 
to the poor. The Lord is calling out those who will speak his 
truth and do his bidding without consulting Babylon. 

W. I. M. 



R492 : page 4 



TWO REIGNS CONTRASTED. 

It may help some, to grasp the scriptural teaching relative to the 
coming reign of Christ and the present reign of Satan-the prince 
of this world— to contrast them as below. 



God placed man in dominion of earth; Satan beguiled him and 
made him his willing slave, and thus become ruler of earth— "the 
prince of this world" (John 12:31). His power and dominion is to 
cease in due time, and though so long as it continues he seeks to 
oppose the will and law of God on earth, yet, under the guidance 
of our all-wise God, even the rule of evil is made to work out an 
ultimate blessing. 

SATAN'S REIGN. 

EFFECTS ON SINNERS. 

"And now we call the proud happy— yea, they that work 
wickedness are set up; yea, they that tempt God are even 
delivered." (Mai. 3:15.) 

"And judgment is turned away backward, and justice standeth 
afar off, for truth is fallen in the street and equity cannot enter. " 
(Isaiah 59:12.) 

"I have seen the wicked in great power and spreading himself 
like a green bay tree." (Psa. 37:35.) 

"But as for me, my feet were almost gone, my steps had well 
nigh slipped: For I was envious at the foolish when I saw the 
prosperity of the wicked. 

"They are not in trouble as other men; neither are they plagued 
like other men. Their eyes stand out with fatness; they have 
more than heart could wish. 

"Behold, these are the ungodly who prosper in the world; they 
increase in riches." (Psa. 73:2,3,5,7,12.) 

EFFECTS ON SAINTS. 

"Men shall say all manner of evil against you falsely for my 
sake; rejoice and be exceeding glad, for great is your reward in 
heaven; for so persecuted they the prophets which were before 
you." (Matt. 5:11,12.) 

"He that departeth from evil maketh himself a prey. " (Isa. 
59:15.) 

"Yea, and all that will live godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer 
persecution." (2 Tim. 3:12.) 

"The disciple is not above his Master." (Matt. 10:24.) 

"In the world ye shall have tribulation." (John 16:33.) 

"If the world hate you, ye know that it hated me before it hated 
you.... If they have persecuted me they will persecute you." (John 
15:18-20.) 

"If we suffer with him, we may also be glorified together. " 
(Rom. 8:17.) 



"We fill up that which is behind of the afflictions of Christ. " 
(Col. 1:24.) 

"If in this life only we have hope in Christ, we are of all men 
most miserable." (1 Cor. 15:19.) 

Would that all of God's children appreciated the teaching of His 
Word relative to what constitutes marks of his friendship and 
favor-during this present age. They might then realize that 
earthly prosperity and wealth are not marks of divine approval 
and favor -that whom the Lord loveth he chasteneth often, and 
that the wealth of the saints in this age consists of our abundance 
of grace and knowledge of God. 

But now contrast this treatment of the righteous with their favor 
and exaltation under the incoming reign of the Prince of Peace 
who will make wars to cease unto the ends of the earth. (Psa. 
46:9.) 

THE REIGN OF CHRIST. 

EFFECT ON EVILDOERS. 

"In those days they shall say no more, The fathers have eaten a 
sour grape and the children's teeth are set on edge. [The Adamic 
sin and curse being cancelled by the Redeemer, men will be 
freed from that condemnation.] But every one [who dies— the 
second death] shall die for his own iniquity: every man that 
eateth the sour grape, his teeth shall be set on edge. " (Jer. 
31:29,30; Ezek. 18:2-9.) 

"The workers of iniquity ...shall soon be cut down like the grass 
and wither as the green herb;. ..for evil doers [those who 
persistently sin against the high and helpful influences of the 
Millennial Day] shall be cut off." (Psa. 37:1,2,7,9.) 

"For yet a little while, and the wicked shall not be." (Psa. 37:10.) 

EFFECT ON RIGHT DOERS. 

"Then shall ye return [turn around— everything will be turned 
around] and [ye shall then] discern between the righteous and 
the wicked, between him that serveth God and him that serveth 
him not." (Mai. 3:18.) 

"To you that fear my name shall the Sun of righteousness arise 
with healing in his wings." (Mai. 4:2.) 

"In his days shall the righteous flourish. " 

"The righteous shall flourish like the palm tree; he shall grow 
like a cedar in Lebanon." (Psa. 72:7; 92:12.) 

"Those that wait upon the Lord shall inherit the earth. " (Psa. 
37:11.) 



"The meek shall inherit the earth, and shall delight themselves in 
the abundance of peace." (Psa. 37:11.) 

Amen. Thy kingdom come thy will be done on earth, as in 
heaven. The whole earth shall be filled with thy glory-and all 
nations which thou hast made shall come and worship thee— 
when the kingdom is the Lord's and He is the governor among 
the nations. (Matt. 6:10; Psa. 72:19 and 22:27,28; Rev. 15:4.) 



R492 : page 4 



"FOOLS HATE KNOWLEDGE." 

"When the wise is instructed he receiveth knowledge. "-Prov. 
21:11. 

In this age of advancement investigation and proofs, truth and 
falsehood, light and darkness are engaged in a hand to hand 
struggle for supremacy; old theories, old creeds, and refuse of 
the dark ages, are being weighed and found wanting. Truth also 
is being assailed, twisted and distorted by the enemy of all truth 
and those whom he has only too well succeeded in blinding; 
therefore, "Prove all things, hold fast that which is good." The 
struggle is a vital one; none should be indifferent; and especially 
those who claim to be soldiers of Christ should not be unarmed, 
for we war not against flesh and blood, but against spiritual 
wickedness in high places, therefore take the whole armor of 
God- "The sword of the Spirit," "the shield of faith," "having 
your loins girt about with truth," by which only can we "fight 
the good fight of faith," "Till we all attain to the unity of the 
faith and of the knowledge of the Son of God.... So that being 
truthful 

R493 : page 4 

in love we may grow up in all things into him who is the Head, 
the Anointed One" (Eph 4:13,15). While fools- those who act 
foolishly, wickedly— love not the truth, hate knowledge, the wise 
love the truth and seek it diligently. And none of the wicked 
shall understand, but the wise shall understand. 

To know God we must gain knowledge of him, and knowledge 
is assured belief, enlightenment, acquaintance with or 
understanding of God, his plans and purposes as revealed in 
Christ, for it hath pleased the Father that in him all fulness 
should dwell, therefore he could say, "I am the way [to the 
Father] and the truth [relating to him] and the life" [from him], 
"the light of men. " John 1 :4. "No man cometh unto the Father 
but by me; if ye had known [understood] me ye would have 
known [understood] my Father also." John 14:6,7. "Ye are my 
friends if ye do whatsoever I command you.... I have called you 
friends; for all things that I have heard of my Father I have made 



known unto you." John 15:14,15. If he is not making known his 
plans to us we cannot be his friends, "for the servant knoweth 
not what his Lord doeth." "But God hath revealed them to us by 
his Spirit, for the Spirit searcheth all things, yea the deep things 
of God." 1 Cor. 2:10. And "if any man have not the spirit of 
Christ he is none of his." "And his sheep hear his voice [obey 
his word] and follow him, for they know his voice. A stranger 
will they not follow... they know not the voice [word] of 
strangers." Many who profess to follow him are being led by the 
"voice of strangers," words of men, and abide in darkness, but 
"the path of the just is as the shining light, which shineth [with 
knowledge of God] more and more unto the perfect day. " These 
take heed unto the sure word of prophecy, as a light that shineth 
in a dark place until the day dawn. 2 Pet. 1:19. 

Christ is become unto us who have received him, all things— 
"Wisdom and righteousness and sanctification and redemption. " 
1 Cor. 1:30. Wisdom is the right use of knowledge, however 
small, and the putting forth of determined effort to find more, 
and the maintaining of the teachable spirit that will receive 
instruction in God's way; for, "If thou criest after knowledge and 
liftest up thy voice for understanding, if thou seekest her as 
silver and searchest for her as hid treasure, then shalt thou 
understand the fear of the Lord and find the knowledge of God. " 
Prov. 2:3-5. Many who lift up their voice-pray for knowledge- 
do not seek it as "hid treasure," therefore they do not find it. 

To know God we must know his Son. He is the word, the 
mouth-piece or declaration of the Father. "He hath declared 
him," manifested his name, his power and character. He that 
receiveth him, receiveth him that sent him, and "this is life 
eternal." John 17:3. And as Christ reveals the Father, the written 
word reveals him, and we, "beholding as in a glass the glory of 
the Lord, are changed into the same image" or likeness to his 
character; and when born of the Spirit-born from the dead- 
likeness to his person, for "we shall be like him. " 

But "though I understand all mysteries and all knowledge,... and 
have not love, I am nothing:" (1 Cor. 13:2), "for he that loveth 
not, knoweth not God, for God is love." 1 John 14:8. We cannot 
know God without loving him and those who bear his likeness, 
for we "are taught of God to love one another." "He that saith he 
abideth in him ought himself also to walk as He walked." (1 
John 2:4,6). And verily he pleased not himself, but delighted in 
doing the Father's will. Knowing that it was the Father's will that 
he should give his humanity a "ransom for all. " "He was 
obedient unto death, the death of the cross." Phil. 2:8. For 
"without shedding of blood is no remission." ..."So Christ was 
once offered to bear the sins of many." (Heb. 9:22-28). And 
because of this willing obedience to the Father's will he could 
say, "Therefore doth my Father love me, because I lay down my 
life that I might take it again [in resurrection he took it on a 



higher plane-a spiritual].... I have power to lay it down and I 
have power to take it again. This commandment (or authority to 
say this) have I received of my Father." (John 10:17,18). 

Since we are to be co-heirs and partakers with him, members of 
the body of the anointed when we shall be united to him (for no 
virgin, 2 Cor. 1 1 :2, is a member of the body of her espoused 
husband until united to him in marriage -then the twain become 
one flesh) we should also be sharers in his sufferings, and show 
the same willing obedience that he did, for "he is the author of 
eternal salvation to all them that obey him"— continue in his 
word— in his teachings-in the truth. "And the truth shall make 
you free" from deceptions of men, who are deceiving and being 
deceived; and from the snares of the world, "For the fruit of the 
Spirit is in ALL, goodness and righteousness and truth" (Eph. 
5:9). Truth is the mirror in which we behold— recognize - 
understand God, and we are sanctified through it. "Sanctify 
them through thy truth, thy word is truth. " 

R493 : page 5 

(John 17:17). But if we take one-sided views we do not behold 
the image of the glorious God; but are suffering ourselves to "be 
turned out of the way. " 

"God our Savior will have all men to be saved [from the Adamic 
fall] and to come unto the knowledge of the truth." (1 Tim. 2:4). 
In no other way but by the reception of the truth when testified 
to them can the world be saved. Conscience cannot save them, 
for Paul was chief of sinners "in all good conscience, " nor can 
the deeds of the law, for "By the deeds of the law shall no flesh 
be justified in his sight. " But when the living and the dead will 
be brought to a knowledge of God "the Lord alone shall be 
exalted in that day," (the millennial day) and the prophecy will 
be fulfilled, "The Lord reigneth, let the earth rejoice, let the 
multitude of the isles be glad.... His lightnings [truth] enlighten 
the world... the heavens [heavenly rulers-the saints] declare his 
righteousness and all the people see his glory" (Psa. 97:1-4). 

S. O. BLUNDEN. 



R493 : page 5 



"THE EARNEST OF OUR INHERITANCE." 

The inheritance of the saints is the crowning theme of all the 
messages to the Church since the day of Pentecost. Before that 
time no mention of it was made. In all his teachings Jesus never 
referred to it, but it was one of the many things he had to tell his 
disciples, which they were not then able to bear, because the 
Spirit had not yet come. (John 16:12.) 



To the readers of the Tower, it is not necessary here to point out, 
the grandeur of the prize for which we are striving; it has been 
our central theme from the first up to the present time. The 
Tower has endeavored to continually hold it before the Church 
as the goal of their aspirations, and to point out with precision 
and care the "narrow way" which leads to it, and the dangerous 
snares of the adversary to arrest their progress. 

Some with anxious solicitude now inquire, Is it possible for me 
yet to attain the High Calling, since the acceptable year of the 
Lord ended in the fall of 1881, as we have learned that any 
consecrating since that time, though acceptable to the Lord, are 
not acceptable as sacrifices, as candidates for the High Calling- 
the reign with Christ? Of all such inquirers we would ask, Have 
you "the earnest," or pledge of the inheritance, which is the Holy 
Spirit? If so, then you must have received it "after that you 
believed" (Eph. 1:13)— after you were justified and when you 
consecrated yourself entirely to God, as has been frequently 
explained, whether you can recall the time of your consecration 
or not. If, then, you have the earnest, or pledge, in due time you 
may have the inheritance also. 

Addressing the consecrated ones Paul says, "Having [first] 
believed, ye were sealed with that holy spirit of the promise" 
(Eph. 1:13). The natural man, we are told, receiveth not the 
things of the Spirit of God, for they are foolishness unto him, 
neither can he know them, because they are spiritually discerned 
(1 Cor. 2:14). Now, if we are able to appreciate the High Calling 
to such an extent that we find our hearts filled with an intense 
desire to obtain it, and a disposition to drop all the weights of 
earthly treasure and run with patience the narrow, difficult way, 
then we may be sure that this desire receives its impulse, not 
from the natural man, but from the new creature begotten of the 
Spirit. The old things-old aims, old ambitions and desires-you 
find have passed away, and you are reaching out after the things 
unseen and hitherto unknown. 

Your ambition now is to share with Christ, not only in his glory, 
but also in his sacrifice and humiliation. Now, Paul says those 
who have thus received the spirit (intent or meaning) of the 
promise have in that fact a pledge of its fulfillment. By the Spirit 
which we have received, and which enables us thus to 
comprehend the magnitude of the promise, he says we are 
sealed— marked off-stamped as sons of God, adapted to the 
spiritual plane. If we find others who cannot understand or 
rightly value the High Calling, it is because they are natural 
men, and we should not upbraid them for not running for that 
which they cannot see or value. And as few can appreciate our 
hopes, we must expect to be a peculiar people and to be 
misunderstood by others. 

In the light of these scriptures, any may readily know if they are 
sealed with the Spirit or not; and each time they contemplate the 



grandeur of the prize, they should gather courage and strength 
from the thought that this is an earnest or pledge of their 
inheritance. 

R494 : page 5 

Praise God for such an anchor to our faith! 

But one inquires as he discerns this blessed assurance, Is it now 
settled beyond all peradventure that I shall obtain the 
inheritance? Well, let us see how Brother Paul regarded it. He 
certainly understood and rightly valued the High Calling, when, 
as he said, for it he "suffered the loss of all things," if "by any 
means" he might attain it. Yet, though he had this pledge of the 
inheritance, he says, "Brethren, I do not reckon myself to have 
attained it; but one thing I do, even forgetting the things behind, 
and stretching forth towards the things before, I press along the 
line towards the prize of the High Calling of God by Christ 
Jesus." (Phil. 3:8-14 -Diaglott.) 

To illustrate-a son becomes heir to his father's inheritance, and 
as a pledge or earnest of that inheritance he receives from his 
father a deed signed and sealed; yet he may lose that pledge by 
carelessness, or in an unguarded moment, having his senses 
stupefied by intoxication, he may barter it away, and so never 
come into possession of the inheritance to which he once was 
lawful heir. 

In the same way, it is possible that though we realize that we are 
sealed, stamped, marked out as heirs of our Father's inheritance, 
we may nevertheless, through lack of care, lose it, or becoming 
intoxicated with the spirit of the world, and our spiritual senses 
becoming stupefied, we may barter it away for a trifling 
gratification of the old nature. Let us, like Paul, watch and 
continue to press "along the line" marked out-the line of 
sacrifice, even unto death. 

R. W. 



R494 : page 5 

CONVERTING A SINNER. 

"He which converteth the sinner from the error of his way shall 
save a soul from death, and shall hide a multitude of sins."— Jas. 

5:20. 

Some have supposed that this scripture conflicts with the 
teaching that there will be a restitution of all. They reason that if 
the converted ones are saved from death, then death must be the 
unalterable doom of all not converted. This seems a logical 
conclusion; but let us view the statement as it stands related to 
the context, and we will see that, instead of applying it to the 
world, James applies it to backsliders from the truth. This will 



be seen by reference to the preceding verse. It is more clearly 
expressed in the Emphatic Diaglott; therefore we quote from it: 
"My brethren, if any one among you wander from the TRUTH, 
and some one turn him back; know you that he who turns back a 
sinner from his path of error will save his soul from death and 
will cover a multitude of sins." 

From this we may see that the converting, or turning back, is of 
one who has once been enlightened and tasted the good word of 
God-the truth-but who had wandered into error. If men had 
penned this they probably would have said, wander from 
morality, or wander into vice. Few would think of laying so 
great stress upon what some would term "merely getting the 
head wrong on some doctrinal matter. " 

It is far from our aim to speak lightly of vice, or to declare "that 
it matters not what a man may do if he has a correct theology"; 
but we do say that the two, faith and character, are very 
intimately related, and we caution all against the too prevalent 
view that "it matters not what you believe [truth or error] if you 
live morally. " This is a device and snare of the devil, by which 
he hinders many from searching for the truth, and thereby 
hinders the complete sanctification which is impossible without 
a knowledge of the truth. 

Jesus attested that knowledge of truth was indispensable to 
entire sanctification; when he prayed the Father for his disciples, 
"Sanctify them through thy truth; thy Word is truth." And our 
text implies that to lose the truth, to wander into error, will result 
in the loss of the sanctifying power— hence a loss or cessation of 
their sanctification, which, if it continue-if they be not turned 
back from error-must result in death. 

This does not apply at all to "the world of sinners." To turn such 
from a life of sin to one of morality and virtue would not "save a 
soul from death." No, none can thus save himself by a moral 
reform, for if so Jesus would not have died for our sins. It does 
apply to those who, having been justified freely from the 
Adamic sin and reckoned free from Adamic death (the first 
death), have become candidates for the divine nature and are 
reckoned as having begun life again as "new creatures." Yes, it 
is these, our "brethren," and it is the more impressive when we 
remember that it is the new life which might be forfeited, or the 
second death incurred, by turning aside from the truth. 

Looked at thus, with what carefulness should we hold fast the 
truth ourselves, and with what earnest solicitude should we 
endeavor to help the brethren who have "wandered from the 
truth," and to shield the flock of Christ from the snares of error! 

The word "wander" well expresses how all errors gradually 
grow and stealthily intrude upon the sanctified. Seldom or never 
does our Adversary commence with open error or direct 
infidelity; but the danger lies in the fact that Satan seeks to 



clothe himself with a mixture of truth, so that as "an angel of 
light" he may cause the unguarded to wander. (See 2 Cor. 
11:14.) 

While many are seeking to turn the world to God, few are 
claiming the promise of our text by seeking the wanderers of the 
flock. 

While watchfulness against the encroachments of the enemy has 
been very necessary all through the age, it is specially so now. 
As a "roaring lion" he has gone about in times past terrifying 
and persecuting the Church, but they fought the enemy in the 
open field, and many sealed their testimony with their blood. 
But in these last times our enemy, still the same, pursues a 
different policy. Assuming the garb of an angel of light, a 
messenger of truth, he seeks to poison the food of the hungry 
household of faith. The slow and cautious steps by which error 
has been introduced indicates the subtlety of our foe, and should 
put all on guard and lead them to note with care all the warnings 
of the Word. 

Those who are drawn into the "snare of the fowler," and who 
unwittingly become his agents in disseminating error, are 
doubtless honest in a way, being first deceived themselves 
("deceiving and being deceived"). And since error fast subdues 
the new nature and brings into prominence the proclivities of the 
old, it will not be strange if the endeavor to pluck them from the 
net of the enemy and to expose the danger to others, will, at least 
for a time, be misunderstood and bring the wrath of the 
Adversary upon the faithful servants of God. But if in the face of 
the foe a soul may be saved from death (the second death) that 
should be sufficient reward. 

We cannot better express our feelings here than in the language 
of Paul: "We would that ye knew what great conflict we have 
for you [whom we address through the Tower] and for them at 
Laodicea [the Lord's children still in the 'spewed out' nominal 
Church], and for as many as have not seen our face in the flesh; 
that their hearts might be comforted, being knit together in love, 
and unto all riches of the full assurance of understanding to the 
acknowledgment of the mystery of God. ...And this we say, lest 
any man should beguile you with enticing words: ...As ye 
HAVE RECEIVED Christ Jesus the Lord, so walk ye in him: 
rooted and built up in him and established in the faith.... Beware 
lest any man spoil you through philosophy and vain deceit, after 
the tradition of men, after the rudiments of the world and not 
after Christ" (Col. 2:1-8). 

We can readily afford to let the work for the world wait God's 
due time while we spend all our little talent in ministering to the 
pressing necessities of the household of faith (Gal. 6:10), in 
view of the fact that this age is about ended and that the testing 
and proving for the new nature will soon be over, and the 



opportunity for gaining the divine nature forever ended-in view 
also of the fact that the "overcomers" will soon be invested with 
power, and cause the knowledge of the Lord to fill the earth: 
thereby accomplishing the turning of all men unto God. In view 
of both these facts it is pre-eminently our privilege and work to 
use our utmost endeavor to turn back the wanderers to the truth, 
and thereby to the sanctification upon which the new life 
depends. While thus employed, we rejoice to know that some 
benevolent human hearts sympathize, and some loving hands 
minister, to the temporal necessities of the suffering world; now 
"groaning and travailing in pain waiting for the manifestation of 
the sons of God." (Rom. 8:19-22.) 

In conclusion, we remark that there are many truths. There are 
philosophic, and historic, and scientific truths, but from all these 
we may wander without loss of life. These are all good and 
valuable, and furnish excellent employment for the natural 
mind, and both in this and in the coming age will tend to bless 
and elevate. But these are not the truths commended to the 
sanctified in Christ Jesus. No, it is divine truth. "Sanctify them 
through THY TRUTH. Thy word is truth." We question whether 
it be possible to be proficient in more than one line of truth. 
Hence the propriety of following the examples set us, and giving 
all diligence to make our calling and election sure, receiving 
truth, which working in us, will sanctify us to the service of him 
who is "The Truth." 



R495 : page 5 

OUR CONTEMPORARIES. 

We mean those with whom we have had recent discussions on 
the nature of our Redeemer and of the redemption which he has 
effected. These contemporaries seem to be puzzled by the six 
simple questions recently propounded to them in these columns, 
and doubtless feel annoyed because of the weakness of their 
theories, which will not permit an answer to them without 
showing to all their readers their untenable position, and in fact 
that their theories make void the plain statements of Scripture 
relative to our ransom and purchase with the precious blood of 
Christ -which scriptures they quote frequently and thus prevent 
the lameness of their theories from appearing too prominent. 

These theories, however different in some respects, are alike in 
that they ignore the ransom, which we have already noted as 
being the coming and fast-growing form of infidelity among 
Christians, which Satan seems to be stirring up in these last 
days. Another paper has recently been started in defence of this 
no-ransom theory, called The Millenarian. This is the third paper 
in advocacy of this error started within a year and a half. Our 
Adversary seems able to supply both talent and money for the 



promulgation of such blasting and blighting heresies. But his 
power shall continue only for a little season- "He knoweth that 
he hath but a short time, " for 

"He who was slain on Calvary's mountain, 

Soon shall reign a thousand years." 

Now, since they cannot answer our questions in a 
straightforward manner without showing their theories in their 
true light, they endeavor to turn the attention of the flock away 
from the real issue-the importance of the truth in question-by 
seeking to enlist sympathy, as though they were being 
personally abused. And one throws out the inference that it is a 
martyr, and 

R495 : page 6 

that it is more difficult to hold its peace than to reply, but says it 
will answer the question, on which they have already been 
deliberating for months— in time. 

We answer, that if a man be suspicioned of any crime and be 
questioned regarding it, if he is innocent, it is his duty to state 
the facts, to answer the questions, that thereby he might clear 
himself. And what would be thought of such a one if, instead of 
answering, he should claim that he could answer, but thought it 
more noble and martyr-like to stand accused, merely claiming 
that the accusation was untrue, but refusing to give the evidence 
and so clear himself by plain answers? We answer, that to the 
mind of every right-thinking person he would stand justly 
condemned as guilty. Who would crown such a one with a 
martyr's laurels? But if such a course be condemned in an 
individual matter, what shall we say of a periodical which 
attempts to be a religious teacher, a feeder of the flock of Christ, 
who is accused of mixing poison with the children's meat? 

Regarding personal attack, we would say that we have been no 
more personal than were our Lord and the Apostles, and that it 
would be impossible to so point out the error and danger that all 
the flock may be able to recognize it, without plainly mentioning 
the periodicals containing those errors. The names of the editors 
have never been mentioned, though if it were necessary for the 
truth's sake, we should not for a moment hesitate. Our personal 
solicitude for these is as great as for any of the flock, though we 
greatly fear the baneful tendency of their present course and 
error on themselves. It is a fearful thing to deceive others, but it 
generally begins in self-deception and then progresses in 
blindness. We believe that all these errors originate with the 
great Adversary; therefore we claim that "We wrestle not 
against flesh and blood, but against principalities, against 
powers, against the rulers of the darkness of this world, against 
spiritual wickedness in high places "-places of influence. 



We have mentioned pointedly your Adversary (the devil) and 
those whom we believed to be forwarding his cause by publicly 
spreading error. His servants ye are to whom ye render service. 
(Rom. 6:16). Among others we have mentioned Mr. Ingersoll, 
the out-spoken denier of the RANSOM, and Mr. Henry Ward 
Beecher, The Day Star, and The World's Hope, and The 
Millenarian, as those who quoted scriptural phrases and arrayed 
themselves thus in a "garment of light," while they really made 
void the doctrine of the Ransom by their unscriptural theorizing. 
These are all public teachers, and the flock of Christ could in no 
way be guarded against their wily twisting of Scripture, without 
mentioning them so as to be unmistakably understood. The 
truth, and especially this truth, the Ransom, never needed more 
to have the sword of the Spirit unsheathed in its behalf by every 
true soldier of the cross than now, and by the grace of God we 
hope to fight a good fight until called higher. 

And now, relative to their claim that they will answer these six 
troublesome, yet simple questions, in time, we feel that it will be 
in the interest of truth for us to tell their readers how we 
interpret this: It means that when they think their readers have 
forgotten the points of the questions and their relationship to 
each other, then they will take them up one at a time, and devote 
a whole article to each little question, weaving the web of 
sophistry (false reasoning) around them, so that when they have 
read it none will be quite sure just what is meant. Their 
expressions will be so carefully guarded that none could find a 
single quotation which would show their true position. We thus 
judge from the past. 

We protest. This is not the right way to deal with any subject, 
much less a religious one. A child, a babe in Christ, who had 
nothing to cover or conceal, nor any theory to sustain, should be 
able to answer those questions in one column or less. That the 
fundamental character and simplicity of these questions may be 
remembered, we repeat them here, at the same time declaring 
that by the grace of God we will agree to answer any six 
questions which they will propound on the fundamental 
doctrines of Christianity. And on any more advanced subject we 
are willing to give A REASON for the hope that is in us with 
meekness, in our OWN WORDS. 

The questions were as follows: 

(1.) Why did Jesus die? 

(2.) How does it affect our sins? 

(3.) How did he put away sin by the sacrifice of himself? 

(4.) In what way did he give "himself a ransom [Greek, 
antilutron— an equivalent price] for all"? 

(5.) In what way was he a "propitiation [satisfaction] for our 
sins"? 



(6.) In what sense were we "bought with a price"? 

The answer to these six simple questions would promptly decide 
the matter of our contemporary's faith or lack of faith in the 
ransom. It must not forget that it is on trial before its readers, 
and it must have little confidence in the intelligence of its 
readers to suppose that they will not discern the weakness of its 
policy. In the light of facts we can call its dealing nothing but 
policy— such as is indeed common among secular papers on 
political subjects, but which should not be once named among 
you as becometh saints. 

The few changing expressions of our contemporary in its recent 
issues we cannot regard as an indication of reform on this 
subject. We could have no confidence in a reform 
unaccompanied by an acknowledgment of past errors. The 
retraction should be as public as the original statements. This 
appears to be God's unalterable law. Until it shall make a full, 
clear, unequivocal statement of its position, such as the answer 
to the questions propounded would involve, we must question 
whether the recently changed expressions mean anything more 
than that it is more guarded as to its phraseology since our 
criticism. 

We quoted from its teachings in our last, and now we give some 
extracts from its very first issue (October, 1882) as proof that its 
teachings did deny that the Lord bought them; did deny that we 
were bought with a price, even the precious blood of Christ. 
Under the heading ATONEMENT it sneers at the doctrine of 
substitution, claiming that it places our Father "in the 
UNGRACIOUS attitude of demanding the full payment of the 
sinner's debt before he will forgive. " Is this an attempt of our 
contemporary to appear more gracious than Jehovah, who says 
he "will by no means clear the GUILTY," and who for this very 
reason "sent his only begotten Son that he should BE A 
PROPITIATION [satisfaction] for our sins," and who "by the 
grace [favor] of God tasted death for every man"? 

Our contemporary continues to sneer at what it terms "the gross 
injustice of transferring the consequences of sin from the guilty 
to the innocent, allowing the innocent to suffer instead of the 
guilty. " We answer that we are thankful that Satan has led us 
into no theory which would incline us thus to contradict the 
word of His testimony who bought us, who redeemed us, who 
"died the just FOR the unjust." My soul, come not thou into 
their secret who call good evil, and who find it needful to 
traduce the Almighty's character for justice in order to prove 
their theory, that we were not bought with a PRICE; which they 
claim has too much of a "commercial idea" to suit their aesthetic 
tastes and theories, and who deny and make light of those 
precious words: 



Jesus died and paid it all, 
All the debt I owe. 

Now, hear its own statement of its faith. Our contemporary 
continues: "Repentance-complete change of heart and life-and 
forgiveness are the Lord's cure for the difficulty [sin]; and when 
this is accomplished 'the enmity' [see Eph. 2:16] is surely 
destroyed and the man RECONCILED TO GOD." No one can 
mistake this statement; and what is it? It is another and a 
different gospel from what the Apostles delivered. (See Gal. 
1:8.) THIS gospel has no need of the death of Jesus as our 
ransom from 

R496 : page 6 

the wages of sin. It has no place for Rom. 5:18,19: "Therefore, 
as by the offence of one, judgment came upon all men to 
condemnation; even so, by the righteousness of one the free gift 
came upon all men unto justification of life. For as by one man's 
disobedience many were made sinners, so by the obedience of 
one shall many be made righteous." It claims that repentance is 
the thing which saves men— that if they repent God will 
FORGIVE, and it calls this the Lord's CURE. We call this a 
man's remedy and theory, and in the name of Jehovah declare 
that 

These for sin could not atone; 
Christ must ransom, he alone. 

This was the "Apostles' doctrine," viz.; that Jehovah laid upon 
Him (Jesus) the iniquity of us all-and "by His stripes we are 
healed. 

Notice again that in the above statement of its faith, our 
contemporary says that repentance and forgiveness destroy the 
enmity, but note how contrary this is to the teaching of Paul, 
who says that the enmity was destroyed by the cross. It declares 
further that man is reconciled to God by repentance and 
forgiveness, but Paul says: "When we were enemies we were 
RECONCILED TO GOD by the death of His Son" (Rom. 5:10.) 

Truly the justice, rather than the love of God is manifested by 
His rewarding sin with death-but the LOVE, the great love 
wherewith he loved us, even while we were yet sinners and 
under proper condemnation of his just laws, is manifested by the 
death of his Son to release us from that just condemnation — 
opening up a way by which God could still be just yet the 
justifier of sinners who believe in Jesus as their ransom. "In this 
was manifested the love of God toward us, because that God 
sent his only begotten Son into the world, that we might live 
through him" (1 John 4:9). 

The child of God who can feel an indifference on this most vital 
point of all the Gospel, this attempt to ignore, deny, and remove 
the very foundation upon which the entire temple of God fitly 



framed, is builded, shows either that he does not appreciate the 
importance of the question, or else that he possesses so little of 
the spirit of Christ as not to have the zeal for the Lord's house 
and work and Word swallowing up all other considerations and 
interests. An appreciation of the value of the death of Christ is 
all important as a basis of entire consecration; hence the 
prominence given it in the Word. It is very important as a part of 
the truth without which we cannot be sanctified. 

We commend to all a careful study of chapters VI and Vin, in 
"Food for Thinking Christians" as a help on this subject. 

In conclusion— we have done our duty by those of our readers 
who are also readers of our contemporaries. "He that hath an 
ear, let him hear"; and we feel convinced that only such will 
hear with proper force and power the Word of the Lord on this 
topic. We have dealt with this subject at the greater length 
because we believe that this, which now assails those of "this 
way," is but a ripple of the mighty wave of unbelief in the cross 
of Christ which is even now beginning to sweep over the entire 
nominal Church. It is clearly described by the Apostles as the 
form of error which would be prevalent in the last days of this 
age. Our hope has been and is, that by clear, forcible and plain 
statement, we might help some to forearm themselves for the 
conflict-putting on Christ as their helmet, breastplate and 
shield. 



R496 : page 6 

WORSHIPING ANGELS. 

"Let no man beguile you of your reward in a voluntary humility 
and worshiping of angels, intruding into those things which he 
hath not seen, vainly puffed up by his fleshly mind. And not 
holding the Head from which all the body by joints and bands 
having nourishment ministered, and knit together, increaseth 
with the increase of God. " Col. 2:18,19. 

The word angel signifies messenger. All of God's children 
become messengers of truth when they tell the glad tidings to 
others. All the members of the Church of Christ are taught to 
help one another. No member of the body of Christ is so 
insignificant as to be of no service to the others. If any lay away 
their one or two talents, neglecting to use them, they soon 
become paralyzed members of the body— dead branches of the 
vine, and must be cut off. If one member of the body has more 
talents than another, in carrying out his consecration he will 
faithfully bring them all into active service. 

Just here our warped human nature is apt to run to either one of 
two extremes, against both of which we are faithfully warned. 
Some who have many talents are tempted to become puffed up, 



and to think of themselves more highly than they ought to think; 
and that weed, Pride, if not promptly dealt with, may soon gain 
full control and sink its possessor in ruin and death. Others are 
naturally timid, and neglecting to use their one talent or two, 
they rely solely upon other members. The latter class is by far 
the most numerous. 

The danger to this class must be very apparent when we call to 
mind the words of Paul (Acts 20:30): "Of your ownselves shall 
men arise, speaking perverse things to draw away disciples after 
them." And in the above text he says they will "vainly intrude 
themselves into those things which they have not seen" — 
attempting to wrest scriptures which they do not understand and 
apply them to their own theories, in their desire "to draw away 
disciples after them," being "vainly puffed up by their fleshly 
mind." Such, ministering to their own exaltation as teachers, 
would lead the flock into dangerous paths. 

How strange that it should be so ! but the flock of Christ is not 
left without warning, and a way of escape, narrow though it be, 
is open to every faithful follower of the Lord. How natural is the 
disposition to worship, to give undue honor to the messengers of 
truth. While we should honor and love all of God's messengers, 
we should ever bear in mind that all truth comes from Him, and 
that no human skill ever discovered the hidden treasures of 
infinite wisdom, until, in God's due time, He has chosen to 
reveal it. All honor and praise to him; and we may love for their 
work's sake the humblest instrument he may chose to make his 
messenger. 

John, the Revelator, who typified the living Church in the last 
days, when he had received in symbol the truths now made plain 
to the saints, made the same mistake that many now are prone to 
make. He fell at the feet of the messenger to worship him. But 
the faithful messenger said: "See thou do it not; I am thy fellow 
servant, and of thy brethren that have the testimony of Jesus; for 
the testimony of [concerning] Jesus is the spirit [import] of 
prophecy -worship God." (Rev. 19:10.) 

Yes, we are all servants one of another and messengers of the 
glad tidings as fast as we receive them; and we are all brethren 
who have received the testimony of the Scriptures concerning 
Jesus. Our worship must not be one of another, but of the great 
giver and author of the wondrous plan. Who can tell which 
brother messenger will prove faithful to the end, neither 
becoming puffed up, discouraged, overcome or weary in well 
doing? Indeed we are told some will run well for a time and then 
fall away, becoming the enemies of the cross of Christ; if 
worshiping or leaning on such messengers how insecure would 
be our standing. 

Many think it is a mark of humility to discard reason and blindly 
follow others. It is against such "voluntary humility" and 



worshiping of messengers that Paul warns the church, saying 
that in so doing there is danger of losing the reward-the High 
Calling. 

To the Master we look for example and direction, though not 
ignoring each other, for all help that comes through our brethren 
and fellow servants comes from him. But while we esteem them 
very highly in love for their work's sake, rejoicing in the talents 
through them given to the whole body, the little flocks should 
ever remember to hold our Head, our Bridegroom in highest 
esteem as our redeemer and guide. 

MRS. C. T. RUSSELL. 



R497 : page 7 

THE SEVEN LAST PLAGUES. 



"And I saw another sign in heaven, great and wonderful, seven 
angels having the seven last plagues: [last] because by them the 
wrath of God was to be completed. "-Rev. 15:1. DIAGLOTT. 

Among the weird pictures of this wonderful book of symbols, 
this one of the pouring out of the "seven vials of wrath" stands 
out in marked prominence. As its name indicates, it is 
understood to be the closing act in the drama of this age. An 
important difference exists between our view and that of many 
others however, in that they suppose the end of the age to be 
accompanied by the destruction of the people, and of the earth 
itself; while we understand that it is the ending of the present 
reign of evil, and a necessary preparation of mankind for the 
reign of righteousness. The connections in which we find the 
vials mentioned in the record are in harmony with this latter; it 
is followed by the symbolic pictures of the new age— new 
heaven and earth, binding of Satan, and reign of Christ. 

The great source of error in understanding these, as all of 
Revelation's symbols, is a too literal interpretation. It is read as 
though it were a statement of facts, instead of a statement of 
symbols. Before proceeding to the account of the plagues, the 
inspired penman records another symbol-the "sea of glass." 
This indicates that it stands related to the plagues; hence we will 
consider it first. From the connections, we understand that that 
which this symbolizes immediately precedes the plagues. 

"And I saw as it were a glassy sea, mingled with fire, and the 
conquerors of the Beast, and of his Image, and the number of his 
name, standing on the glassy sea, having harps of God. " 

Who these conquerors are is shown by what they overcome- 
viz., the Beast, Image and Number. Here we see the importance 
of an understanding of the symbols of chapter thirteen; for 



unless we understood what those symbols meant, we could not 
understand who is overcoming their influence. In this way God 
has made his Word self-interpreting. The understanding of one 
part or symbol is the key to an understanding of another. In 
harmony, then, with Rev. 13, we understand the overcomers 
here referred to, to be those Christians who are free from 
Papacy— the Beast— and from organized sectarian Protestantism- 
-the Image— and from all who bear the characteristics of their 
Number-that is, free, to the extent that these have no influence 
over their actions, professions, or thoughts -free indeed. 

This serves too, to show about when the plagues are due, and 
when this sea of glass condition may be reached; for if, as seems 
clear, the Image was formed by the organization of the 
"Evangelical Alliance," in 1846, then it is equally clear, that the 
overcomers of the "Image" could not occupy this position of 
favor and exaltation prior to that date. This furnishes a general 
reason for believing that the plagues must commence this side of 
the date mentioned, since it is during the pouring out of the 
plagues that the overcomers occupy this condition upon the "sea 
of glass." 

Having, then, ascertained who these overcomers are, and about 
when they thus stand, we pass on to consider the "Sea of glass 
mingled with fire," on which they stand. Sea, as heretofore 
explained, we understand to symbolize the masses of the people, 
and fire, the judgments, or trouble. We therefore interpret this to 
mean— The people in trouble, under the judgments of God. 
Above the troubled people are the overcomers —calm, serene, 
untroubled. Their position shows that their standing is by faith. 
(Matt. 14:29.) To the eye of faith all is transparent as glass. 

These overcomers sing a song. A song symbolizes a beautiful 
and harmonious expression. It is the song of Moses and the 
Lamb. That is, the song or preaching of these overcomers is in 
perfect accord with the Law and the Gospel. It is the same which 
Jesus (the "Lamb") taught, and which Moses taught in the Law 
and types. Not only does the description of the overcomers 
indicate that they are but a little fragment of the nominal 
Church, but the words of this song teach us the same— that the 
class who proclaim these things are few. 

The words of the song are given, or the leading points of the 
preaching which will be done by the overcomers— "Saying, 
Great and wonderful are thy works, O Lord God, the 
omnipotent. Alas ! how few are sufficiently acquainted with 
God's plans to recognize the fact that they are great and 
wonderful. Very few can sing this first note of the song, and 
fewer yet can sing it to its close. The second note is, "Righteous 
and true are thy ways, O King of the nations." (Diaglott.) Look 
at this; we can sing of the righteousness and justice of God's 
dealing with the nations, since we have come to see how he has 
permitted evil and death to come upon all, as a lesson, to teach 



us to appreciate life and righteousness. We can see 
righteousness, justice, mercy, and love in God's dealing, since 
we see in his Word that there is to be a restitution of all things 
which God hath spoken by the mouth of all his holy Prophets 
since the world began." (Acts 3:21.) Who, but those who see the 
restitution to be accomplished in the next age, could sing this 
part of the song? Not one; Christendom in general fears to think 
of God's justice in dealing with the nations in general, the great 
majority of whom have gone down into death without any 
knowledge of the only name whereby we must be saved. The 
righteousness, and justice, and love of God's dealing, can only 
be seen by looking at the work of the next, as well as at that of 
present and past ages. Yes indeed we rejoice to proclaim to all 
who have an "ear to hear"-Just and true are Jehovah's ways in 
ruling the nations. 

The next note is in perfect harmony with the last- "Who shall 
not fear, O Lord, and glorify thy name? since thou alone art 
bountiful. " Our great Creator's every dealing is an act of favor- 
even the evil which man was permitted to bring upon himself is 
to be overruled for good; and we ask ourselves the question, 
Who shall not fear and glorify God when, in the coming age, his 
wonderful goodness is manifested, and when the knowledge of 
the Lord shall fill the whole earth? We would be inclined to 
believe that every one should praise his love everlastingly, were 
it not that Scripture clearly discloses a second death, which tells 
of some who will be accounted worthy of it. 

"For all the nations shall come and worship in thy presence, 
because thy righteous acts are manifested. " This is the last note 
of the song, and is full of force and meaning. How few are 
proclaiming, either publicly or privately, this part of the song. 
Some believe that many of the nations now dead are in a place 
of mental or physical torture, there to remain to all eternity. 
Others claim that they are dead, and will never again have life; 
others that those who are dead, will be raised from death to pass 
a mock trial, and be destroyed. But how few can sing this song 
of restitution, declaring that all nations shall yet come from 
death, and shall worship their Lord and Redeemer, when 
brought to a knowledge of the truth. (1 Tim. 2:4.) Even Sodom, 
a nation long since destroyed, shall come and worship. (Ezek. 
16:48-63.) 

Another symbol is the "Harps of God. " The song is sung in tune 
and harmony with the harps. The harp of God we believe to be 
the Bible, its many strings or chords are the Law, Prophets, 
Psalms, Gospels, etc. Many Christians have the "harp," but few 
have it so strung and tuned that they can bring forth harmony 
enough to accompany "the song of Moses and the Lamb." The 
overcomers have the harp well in hand— in fact, without it and 
the inspiration of its music, they never could have been 
overcomers. They have them tuned, too. How forcible this 



picture! Truly, it would have been incomplete without the harp 
of God. 

Another thought is suggested— The overcomers not only have 
the harp, and know how to sing this song of restitution, but they 
do sing it. There are some of God's children who have their harp 
considerably in tune, and who know the song, but who do not 
proclaim the glad tidings of coming restitution; they fear to face 
the opposition which this course would bring-the unpopularity 
which would attach to anything outside the religious rut of so- 
called orthodoxy. These are not among the overcomers; they 
have not yet gotten a victory over the influence of the Beast and 
Image; they are yet in some bondage. All of the overcomers sing 
the song. Each of us should inquire of our own hearts whether 
we are tuning our harps and singing this song. Now is the time. 

Many of the Lord's dear children in mystic Babylon's captivity, 
have sat down beside her rivers so defiled by the mire of 
worldliness and error and wept when they remembered God's 
favor to Zion in times past. They laid aside the harps of God, 
hanging them on the willows that weep over the grave of truth in 
Babylon. They that carried them away captive (the Babylon 
system) require of them a song and mirth, saying, "Sing us one 
of the songs of Zion." Yes, Babylon would like to see Zion's 
captives happy beside her muddy streams; and in the midst of 
her worldliness, would like to hear an occasional song of Zion, 
that she might boast of the Lord's favor. But "how shall the 
captive daughters of Zion sing the Lord's song in a strange 
land?" (Psa. 137:1-6.) To all such we cry: Take down your harps 
from the willows; flee out of Babylon into full liberty of thought 
and expression; tune your harps and sing the song of Moses and 
the Lamb. Sing of God's mighty love and the "restitution of all 
things which God hath spoken by the mouth of all his holy 
prophets." 

The next thing shown to John is the coming of the seven 
messengers out of 

R498 : page 7 

the temple to pour out the plagues. Since it is the saints who are 
"to execute the judgments written" (Psa. 149:9) we interpret 
these "seven angels" to mean the saints-the living saints, they 
being the representatives or active agents of the entire anointed 
company-as "the feet of Him. " It is the feet, or last part, who 
sing the restitution song of Moses and the Lamb, above the sea 
mingled with fire. "How beautiful are the feet of Him that 
bringeth good tidings, that publisheth peace, that saith unto 
Zion, Thy God reigneth" (Isa. 52:7). These same feet as 
representatives on earth of the entire body, are to pour out the 
seven vials, or be associated more or less directly with the 
judgments coming. These are clothed with white linen; these 
have kept their wedding garments; they are robed in the 



righteousness of Christ- "justified by his blood." They are the 
servants of God; the girdle representing a servant, and the gold 
of it representing divinity. They, as the servants of God, have a 
divine service to accomplish. 

When they had all gone forth from the temple it was filled with 
smoke, so that none could enter it. The temple symbolizes the 
nominal church. The coming of the messengers out of the 
temple, symbolizes the coming of the overcomers out of the 
nominal church. When all such have come out, the temple 
(church) will be so full of smoke (confusion), that no man would 
care to go into it. It was "filled with smoke from the glory of 
God and from his power": that is, the glorious harmony and 
beauty of truth as presented by the overcoming class, shows the 
deformity and confusion of man-made creeds. As the truth 
though rejected, shines out with increasing glory, the whole 
nominal temple is seen to be full of smoke— confusion and 
darkness; and all who remain in it become so blinded by it, that 
they cannot see the glory of God either as displayed in his Word 
or its fulfillment in passing events. 

The messengers are now nearly all out, and already the smoke, 
or confusion in the church, is considerable. Few care to enter 
even now, and recent reports of various sects show that the 
increase has been very slight for the past year. When we 
remember that the large proportion of new members received is 
from the Sunday-School, we can realize how, even now, very 
few men (persons of mature thought) enter the nominal temple. 
The nominal church will be in this confusion until the seven 
plagues are poured out; during that time the Babylon, or 
confusion element, will be destroyed, and the cleansed temple of 
truth be again opened to receive justified believers— then as heirs 
of the earthly promises. 

"And I heard a great voice out of the temple saying to the seven 
angels, GO YOUR WAYS and pour out your vials of the wrath 
of God upon the earth"- Rev. 16:1. 

The nominal systems are anxious to retain every member, for 
each one counts, and their boast is in numbers and wealth; but 
when they find any who count all earthly considerations but loss 
and dross, and who will not be fettered and bound by man-made 
creeds they thrust such out, saying, Go, then, do your worst, 
"GO YOUR WAYS." 

The unfettered, the overcoming class, have nearly all gone forth, 
we believe, now. These do not require the plagues since the truth 
has made them free. This little flock by no means constitutes the 
whole house of God. No, the house of God— the household of 
faith— is a large class, the majority of whom are still in the 
nominal Church, fettered by its creeds and dwarfed by its 
worldly conformity. For their sake-that they may be brought 
into the liberty of the sons of God, even through great tribulation 



(Rev. 7:14)— we are told that "judgment must begin at the house 
of God. " They must be liberated first, and the overcoming class 
shall be the instruments in striking off the shackles of error. The 
plagues are really blessings in disguise, just as an amputation is 
a blessing though a trying ordeal of suffering to those who 
require it. 



R498 : page 7 



THE FIRST PLAGUE. 



"And the first went forth and poured out his bowl on the 
LAND; and there came an evil and malignant ULCER on those 
men having the mark of the BEAST, and on those 
WORSHIPING HIS IMAGE." -(Chap. 16:2. Diaglott.) 

These evils, called plagues or bowls of wrath, are designed to 
rid the world of every form of evil and wrong. The class 
symbolized by the land or earth, we understand to mean all 
people under religious restraint, of whatever name or order. 
Land or earth as a symbol represents settled, organized religious 
society, as sea represents the restless irreligious, unsettled 
masses of humanity. Those having the mark (characteristics) of 
the Beast (Papacy) and those worshiping his Image 
(Protestantism), as hitherto shown, are the great mass of non- 
overcoming and nominal Christians. 

It is upon this class that the trouble first comes. While Roman 
Catholics constitute an important proportion of this earth class, 
yet the trouble does not affect them at first, as shown from the 
fact that the ulcer is not upon those worshiping the BEAST, but 
on those worshiping the IMAGE and having the marks or 
characteristics of the Beast (Papacy), which indicates clearly the 
various shades and degrees of Protestantism. 

Their trouble is compared to an ulcer -"an evil and malignant 
ulcer. " To appreciate the symbol let us consider the literal: An 
ulcer is a running sore; it is an evidence of constitutional 
disorder, and very painful. A CANCER in its worst stages, 
becomes a malignant ulcer. An ulcer is a cankerous sore, that is, 
one which eats, corrupts and destroys. Now carry the thought- 
what an ulcer or bad cancer is to a man will illustrate the 
character of the consuming, life-draining trouble coming upon 
the systems constituting Protestantism, so called, which 
ultimately will destroy it. It arises from within itself; it is a 
constitutional disorder, caused by the errors inherited and 
retained from the "Mother of harlots and abominations." There 
is no cure for this evil -the blood is poisoned, it has permeated 

R498 : page 8 

the entire body, and death must ensue. 



There was a time— in the days of Luther and reformation— when 
the daughters might have been radically healed, but her false 
ministers "healed the hurt of the daughter of my people slightly, 
saying peace, peace, when there is no peace." (Jer. 8:11.) Now 
there is no balm in Gilead, there is no physician there-therefore 
she is not healed. Her King is not in her, she is spewed out of his 
mouth. (Jer. 8:22, Young's Trans. See also Rev. 3:16 and 18:23.) 
There is no remedy, these systems must die. The disorder comes 
from within. Already these disorders have broken out, and 
though the canker is carefully concealed, the bad odor and 
distress are noticeable. 



R498 : page 8 

THE SECOND PLAGUE. 

"And the second poured out his bowl into the SEA; and it 
became blood, as of one dead, and every living soul died — 
THOSE IN THE SEA. "-Vs. 2. 

Bear in mind that the sea symbolizes the irreligious masses of 
mankind- those not under religious restraint. 

To appreciate the trouble upon this class we must study the 
symbol. Blood in a living creature is full of vitality, but the 
blood of a dead person is the very reverse. After death, the blood 
rapidly begins to separate into two parts-a watery liquid called 
serum and a more solid substance termed clot. As soon as this 
separation has been accomplished the CLOT begins to 
PUTREFY or corrupt. Applying this, we understand it to teach 
that a great and thorough disintegration will occur in this large 
class of humanity, after which, one element will rapidly corrupt 
and putrefy. Among the irreligious masses have been numbered 
such noble specimens of humanity as Stephen Girard, Geo. 
Peabody, and Peter Cooper, besides many less notable, honestly 
skeptical souls. The result of the commingling of such with the 
masses imparted a life principle and vitality. But reading this 
plague, we realize that a separation of these two elements is due, 
the result of which will be decay and death to every principle of 
morality and virtue in this class— when every living thing (active 
element of virtue and benevolence) in this sea class will perish. 
In other words, remove the element which advises prudence, 
morality, and right-doing, from the counsels of the restless 
masses— from the Labor Leagues and other associations, and let 
the lower element control itself, and the result would quickly be 
the destruction of life, property, laws, and peace— a grand reign 
of anarchy in the name of communism. 

From other Scriptures we are taught to expect just such an 
uprising— which eventually shall overthrow the kingdoms of 
earth. But the beginning of this is all we must look for now-the 



separation of the serum from the clot— of the vital from the 
corrupting element. This seems to be now in progress. Men of 
noble minds who realized the oppression of the masses by 
money and governments and desired to assist in their 
amelioration, are forced to withdraw because of the spirit of 
recklessness which pervades the mass, leading to assassinations, 
etc., in other countries and threats of the same in this land. In 
England Mr. Gladstone, Mr. Parnell and others, have attempted 
to provide some relief for Irish oppression, but must disown all 
fellowship and sympathy with the dynamite and assassination 
policy of hot-headed leaders among the masses. 

But we should remember that the full results of this evil or 
plague will not be felt for many years; it has its beginning only, 
now. It is well also to remember that one plague or evil goes on 
increasingly, after a second and a third, etc., are added, until in 
the end the entire 

R499 : page 8 

seven forms of evil will be operating simultaneously. 



R499 : page 8 



THE THIRD PLAGUE. 



"And the third poured out his bowl into the RIVERS and into 
the FOUNTAINS of waters and they became BLOOD. And I 
heard the angel [messenger] of the waters saying— Righteous art 
thou, the one who is and who was, the bountiful one, because 
thou hast judged these. Because they poured out the blood of 
Saints and Prophets thou gavest them also blood to drink; they 
deserve it. "—vs. 4-6. 

This third element of trouble results from the turning of the 
rivers and fountains of water into blood. Running waters 
symbolize truth. The river channels through which water (truth) 
has flowed, symbolize the various sects or denominations. The 
fountains symbolize the founders and schools of these various 
systems— the places or men in whom these channels had their 
start or beginning. 

For a long time, water— truly very muddy in some, but 
nevertheless a mixture of water has flowed in these various 
systems, of which many have partaken and have been refreshed. 
But a change comes, and that which once refreshed, will 
(gradually) become loathsome as blood. [Blood has been 
advised as a medical remedy, but in such cases it is taken 
immediately on being drawn from the animal, else it would be 
poisonous for its change is rapid-hence a river of blood could 
symbolize only loathsomeness and death.] 



This we understand to be a picture of a change rapidly taking 
place in religious channels -their creeds, though containing as 
much truth and error as ever, they are coming to regard 
differently. General enlightenment is greater, and what was once 
received without question, is now becoming loathsome and 
death-like. As in a similar plague (literally) upon Egypt, the 
people digged wells for water because they could no longer 
drink of the bloody rivers, so here-independent thinkers are 
digging for themselves, for purer waters than the regular 
channels afford. Truly this turning of the waters of their 
channels into blood, is among the causes of anxiety and great 
annoyance to the sectarian, but only the few yet realize this 
trouble. 

The angel of the waters-or the messenger of the REAL truth-is 
able to see in this a righteous judgment of God against those 
systems, as expressed in vs. 5 and 6. The direct cause of this 
trouble is mentioned-they had poured out the blood of the saints 
and prophets. 

Is it inquired in what sense this was done? We answer that blood 
in a person is life and to pour it out is to waste it. The life of the 
saints is truth-God's word-as it is written: "The words that I 
speak unto you, they are spirit and they are life," and "The 
testimony of Jesus is the spirit [vitality, life] of prophecy." 
Hence to have wasted the life-principle of saints and prophets, 
would be to have wasted the words and testimony of Jesus. This 
they did by neglecting his word, and receiving instead the 
traditions of men, which errors have corrupted and defiled the 
truths they possess to such an extent that the thinking ones are 
fast coming to that condition where they cannot drink from 
those channels. 

In these very channels, or systems, where the teaching of Satan 
has been preserved, viz. : that man has an existence which can 
never cease, and hence must continue forever (Gen. 3:4), nine- 
tenths of them in misery, in these same channels, the teachings 
of the Prophets, that the wages of sin is death, but that God has 
provided for "times of restitution of all things, spoken by the 
mouth of all his holy prophets since the world began" (Acts 
3:21) is neglected, cast aside, WASTED. And hence it is that 
they will get blood to drink shortly. The creeds of these systems 
being so mixed with error by the retaining of Satan's lie and the 
rejection of the Lord's testimony, both through the words and 
example of prophets and saints, they will soon come to 
recognize them as too obnoxious and nauseating to be palatable 
to either themselves or the world. 

"And I heard the ALTAR saying, Yes, O Lord God, the 
omnipotent, true and righteous are thy JUDGMENTS," verse 7. 

The altar represents the class of prophets and saints whose 
testimonies for truth were sealed with their lives, the testimony 



of whose lives had been wasted. These speak not audibly, but in 
that figurative way in which Abel's blood is said to have cried 
out. The testimony of these condemn the present systems as 
worthy of having this trouble or plague; because of their 
previous disregard of truth. While nominal Church systems have 
become great and popular in worldly favor, both in the days of 
the prophets and ever since, in the days of the saints, yet now as 
ever, this success and popularity has been the result of an 
alliance with the world and a participation of its spirit. Since, as 
well as in the days of the prophets, to live separate from the 
world and to boldly advocate the truth in opposition to the 
worldly mixture of error, has cost persecution and either literal 
or symbolic beheading— or cutting off. The testimony of every 
sacrifice for truth acceptable to God is here represented as 
condemning the course of these systems and justifying the 
retribution represented in this third plague- "FOR THEY ARE 
WORTHY." 



R499 : page 8 

THE FOURTH PLAGUE. 

"And the fourth poured out his bowl on the SUN, and to him 
[it-ROTHERHAM'S TRANSLATION] it was given to burn 
men with fire. And men were burned with great heat, and they 
blasphemed the name of that God who has authority over these 
plagues, and they reformed not to give him glory."— vs. 8,9. 

Here the misery of some is caused by an increase of sunlight. 
As the moon symbolized "THE LAW," so the sun symbolizes 
the GOSPEL LIGHT. The former was but a shadow or 
reflection of the latter, and the relationship of the two to the 
Church (the woman) is beautifully symbolized in Rev. 12:1. The 
increase of the sunlight means an increased brilliancy of Gospel 
light and knowledge. 

This increase of light is to affect all classes, as is indicated by its 
not being limited to a certain class as are the other plagues are 
limited; to "sea," "land," "rivers," etc. It comes upon men- 
mankind in general and upon representative leaders of men, in 
particular. It is the increase of light-knowledge— which is 
causing independence of thought and action among all classes of 
society. It causes differences between kings and subjects, 
between capital and labor, between clergy and laity; the 
increasing light is doing it all. It is Gospel light too; for no 
matter how Infidels may scoff at the Bible and affect to have 
superior liberty to that which it teaches, it nevertheless remains a 
fact, that the grandest liberty is that where Christ makes free; 
and the essence of Gospel light is in the Master's words, "Ye 
shall know the TRUTH and the truth shall make you free." It is 
truth that is spreading-truth on every subject: truth relative to 



the rights and authority of kings; truth relative to the rights both 
of capital and labor; truth relative to the claimed superiority and 
lordship of a self-elevated class termed the clergy. 

The conflict is between truth and superstition -light and 
darkness; it will be a severe struggle, but TRUTH is mighty and 
shall prevail; debasing the proud and exalting the humble. Those 
whose deeds are evil— who are in the wrong,— hate the light, is 
the Master's testimony. It would curtail their power and lower 
their position to elevate all others to equality. These are 
scorched or troubled by the increase of light, and none more so 
than religious lords, for it is the increase of light which 
doubtless helps to turn the waters of their cherished channels 
into blood— corruption -making their doctrines and creeds, 
which emanated from fountains of the sixteenth century, 
distasteful and obnoxious. 

After preaching for years doctrines which called God just and 
loving, but proved him to be worse than the gods of the heathen- 
-after having defended for years their sectarian isms, some of 
which teach that God has foreordained the salvation of a "little 
flock" and their children, but has also foreordained eternal 
misery as the lot of the great mass of humanity and their 
offspring— thus teaching, that "there are infants in hell not a 
span long," etc. -no wonder that such who worship and honor 
their sect and such teachings, more than they do God and His 
Word, would feel scorched and annoyed with the great light and 
heat of truth, as it is now beginning to shine out and reach them. 

"And they blasphemed the name of that God." Blasphemy, as 
the word is used in Scripture, does not signify profane swearing, 
but rather a misstatement of character. For instance Jesus was 
accused of "blasphemy" because he said he was the Son of God 
(John 10:33). These zealous sectarians become so angry against 
present unfoldings of truth which prove the Love and Mercy of 
God as well as his Justice, that they go to the very extreme of 
opposition and grossly misstate God's character and often wrest 
his Word from its true import to sustain their theories. 

This, which is a plague to others, is a wondrous boon to those 
who are out of Babylon and humbly enjoying the leading of 
God's Spirit from the one fountain direct-the Word of God. 
This increase of Gospel light, and consequent increased light 
thrown upon the Law shadows— showing the true teachings of 
the Tabernacle and its services and sacrifices, are pointedly 
foretold in symbol by the prophet (Isaiah 30:26) who says: "The 
light of the Moon shall be as the light of the Sun, and the light of 
the Sun shall be sevenfold, as the light of seven days, in the day 
that the Lord bindeth up the breach of His people, and healeth 
the stroke of their wound. " It is the same day (period) in which 
He assembles the outcasts, and makes up His Jewels. 



R496 : page 8 

We hail thy bright beams, 

O morn of Zion's glory; 

Thy blessed light breaks on our sight 

O hail, happy day! 

The day that brings a sweet release, 
That crowns our Jesus Prince of Peace, 
And bids our sorrows cease! 
O hail, happy day!" 



R496 : page 8 

THE lily is my symbol of fortitude, white and pure and royal, 
even as I have seen some dear children of God triumphant 
though in darkened chambers, and on beds of pain. The 
mignonette, most unobtrusive, yet most tenderly subtle, of all 
things in the floral world, is my emblem of patience. Its perfume 
pervades its neighborhood.- M. E. Sangster. 



R500 : page 1 

VOL. IV. PITTSBURGH, PA., JULY, 1883. NO. 12. 



page 1 

ZIONS 

Watch Tower 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRISTS PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED MONTHLY AT 

101 Fifth Avenue, Pittsburgh, Pa. 



C. T. RUSSELL, Editor and Publisher. 



The Editor recognizes a responsibility to the Master, 
relative to what shall appear in these columns, 
which he cannot and does not cast aside; yet he 
should not be understood as endorsing every expression 
of correspondents, or of articles selected 
from other periodicals. 

TERMS OF SUBSCRIPTION. 

TERMS :- -Fifty cents a year, postage prepaid. 
You may send paper money to the amount of two 
dollars, by mail, at our risk. Larger amounts may 
be sent by Drafts, P.O. Money Order, or Registered 
Letter, payable to C. T. RUSSELL. 

FOREIGN TERMS. 

Foreign Postage being higher, our terms to foreign 
subscribers will be 65 cents a year. Please 



send us no foreign money or postage stamps, as we 
can make no use of them. Remittances may be 
made by Foreign Postal Money Orders. 

TAKE NOTICE. 

This paper will be sent free to any of the Lords 
poor who will send a card yearly requesting it. 
Freely we have received and freely we would give 
the truth. "Ho, every one that thirsteth, come ye 
to the waters; and he that hath no money, come ye, 
buy and eat-yea, come, buy wine and milk without 
money and without price." And you that have it— 
"Wherefore do ye spend money for that which is 
not bread? and your labor for that which satisfieth 
not? Hearken diligently-and eat ye that which is 
good, and let your soul delight itself in fatness. "- 
ISAIAH 55 :1,2\ 



R500 : page 1 

VIEW FROM THE TOWER. 

There is nothing special to report. 
The outlook is much the same as at 
last writing, hence we shall give the 
more space to extracts from letters, as 
they furnish news from various pickets 
of the Lords camp, of the welfare of the 
"little flock." 

In the TOWER office every spare hour 
is being devoted to the promised "Millennial 
Day Dawn"; but such a work, 
to be comprehensive and clear, must 
not be too much hurried. We know 
your need for it, and many inquires show 
your desire for it; and we are doing all, 
that the necessities of other features of 
the work will permit, to hasten it. 

The following extracts from correspondents 
will cheer and encourage you, 
we trust: 

page 1 



Macon Depot, N.C. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-The 
three numbers of "ZIONS WATCH 
TOWER" have long since been received, 
and several times read with much interest, 
for which I thank you heartily. I 
also received the "FOOD." This I have 
studied carefully, I think for about four 
months. Its doctrines and teachings I 
fully endorse. With the aid obtained from 
it, the study of the Scriptures is more 
interesting, its teachings plainer, and its 
truths perfectly harmonious. In its 
doctrines, however, I meet with opposition 
from ministers and nominal 
Church lights; but they, in every instance, 
fail- while maintaining their 
creeds-to harmonize the Scriptures. 

I have been trying to preach the 
Gospel for some time, but have not been 
able to preach this year except by the 
fireside, but I hope, God willing, to 
commence soon to preach the doctrine 
and views taught in the Scriptures as 
shown in the "TOWER" and "FOOD." 

Yours in the work, with brotherly 
affection, . 

R500 : page 1 

Kerville, Texas. 
DEAR BROTHER:-Through a good 
brother, I have been reading "ZIONS 
WATCH TOWER" for nearly a year. I 
am so much edified that I cannot think 
of doing without it. I am nearly 
seventy-eight years old, and have been 
in the service of the Lord for fifty years; 
and, through misfortunes, I am one of 
the Lords poor, but I rejoice that you 
have made me welcome to light and 
truth through the WATCH TOWER. If 
you will send as many copies for distribution 
as you can see proper, I will do 
what I can in this way. 



Yours in Christ, 



Sterling, Fla., June 4, 1883. 

C. T. RUSSELL:-Dear Sir and Bro: 
I am a Baptist minister, young, comparatively, 
"in the cause;" have been 
preaching about three years. Yesterday, 
at meeting, a friend handed me a 
couple of copies of "ZIONS WATCH 
TOWER." I brought them home and 
have been reading them. I am amazed! 
I am delighted! Can such, indeed, be 
true? Yet you have Scripture to sustain 
you. 

Please send me right away "FOOD 
FOR THINKING CHRISTIANS," and any 
other reading matter. I want to investigate. 
I am not satisfied with so-called 
orthodoxy. I pray constantly for light, 
and it seems to me my prayer is about 
to be answered. I am astonished to 
find some things in your paper which I 
have been preaching, it seemed to me, 
alone by myself, with none to sustain 
me but Gods Word. I am poor, very 
poor, but I must have your valuable 
paper. If you can, you can send it now, 
and in a short time 111 send you the 
money. Surely, surely, you must be 
right. 

Yours in love, . 

page 1 

DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:-I send you 
another list of names for the TOWER. 
In my work last week I was called 
upon to explain the teachings of Z.W.T. 
publicly. After doing so, a lady remarked 
that the plan was so very plain 
that she feared to accept it, thinking 
that Gods plan must be more obscure 
than the "Chart of the Ages" in "Food" 
teaches. 

I explained to them, that there are 
two reasons why many of Gods children 



are not able to accept the truth. 

First, early training; and second, denominational 

pride and fear. Had 

their parents been Roman Catholics, 

and taught them in that faith, in 

nine cases out of ten they would have 

been Roman Catholics. For the same 

reason, many cling to the Baptist and 

Methodist sects and the thousand isms 

of to-day. When we come to any of 

these sects and present a truth from 

God, the first thing they do is to inquire 

if it is the teaching of their church. 

When they are satisfied that it is not, 

as a general thing they at once stop 

their ears and determine not to heed it. 

In a meeting, just a short time ago, 
after I was through preaching, one of 
the leaders of the people exclaimed, 
"Id rather go to hell than not be a 
Methodist." Surely he was very zealous 
--For the Bible, or the truth of its 
teachings? No; he was zealous for 
Methodism. See what denominational 
pride and fear is driving people to do 
in these days. They only know each 
other by their colors, not by the spirit 
of the Master displayed in each other. 

Jesus Christ only established one 
Church-one body. The Church of 
1800 years ago was not known as Baptist, 
Methodist, Presbyterian, etc. Our 
Lord gave us our creed and discipline 
-the Bible-which is profitable for 
doctrine, for correction, for reproof, etc. 
But it is in these closing days of the 
Gospel Age, as it was in the last days 
of the Jewish Age, the mass of the 
nominal Church reject the commandments 
of God that they may keep their 
own traditions. Now, when we read from 
the Bible that the worlds resurrection will 
take place when our Lord Jesus comes, 
as foretold by all the holy prophets, and, 
by turning to the prophet Ezekiel, 
we read that he will bring Sodom and 



her daughters to their former estate, 
whom God took away as he saw good; 
if, in view of these plain statements, we 
stop our ears to the fact, we are not 
worthy of so great salvation. 

Thank God some were convinced 
and persuaded to walk in the Lords 
footsteps and not with a worldly church. 

Bro. Russell, if the dear Lord has 
only used your pen to bring me into 
light, it is worth ten thousand worlds 
to me. You are dear to me. I am 
running for the prize. It is hard work 
for me. Pray for me that I might 
crucify myself and keep humble. 

Your brother in Christ, 
G. A. ROSE. 

R500 : page 1 

DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:-By a kind 
Providence a number of the "WATCH 
TOWER" fell into my hands, and it met 
my views so well that I sent for it for 
one year. Then you sent me "FOOD 
FOR THINKING CHRISTIANS," and it 
was very rich food indeed. I have 
read it through three or four times, and 
it seems richer every time. I cannot 
express the thankfulness I feel. I am 
now sixty-three years of age. For 
some time I was a minister of the Protestant 
Methodist Church, but the study 
of the Scriptures led me farther from 
their creed. I finally withdrew, and for 
the last eighteen years I have stood 
outside of the nominal Churches. They 
have desired me to unite again, but I 
could not join with any sectarian organization. 

1 felt and still feel called 

upon to come out from among them 
and be separate. 

I cant think of parting with the 
WATCH TOWER. There are a number 
here who are waking up to the truth. 
If I had sample copies to distribute 



among them, I think it would do good. 
My heart is filled with strong desire to 
spread the good news. 

Yours in patient waiting for the full 
development of Christs kingdom and 
glory, . 



R500 : page 1 

A LETTER AND ITS ANSWER. 

DEAR SIR:-It seems to be the work 
of kind providence which has put into 
my hands both of your pamphlets, 
"Food" and "Tabernacle," and two 
numbers of the TOWER, from all of 
which I obtained some of the most 
beautiful explanations of Scripture that 
I ever met with. The system of Gods 
plans as therein presented is grand and 
sublime indeed; yet in some respects I 
think it to disagree with my Bible. 

I respectfully invite your attention to 
some points of seeming disagreement, 
with an humble desire that you may be 
able to harmonize them. They are:— 

First. Your system of interpretation 
appears destitute of reasons for sinners 
to "flee from the wrath to come."... 
We find in the Bible a beautiful equilibrium 
and balancing, of Gods love and 
mercy on the one hand, and His 
holiness and justice on the other. "Felix 
trembled"-God "will in no wise 
clear the guilty," etc. These statements 
your system of interpretation seems to 
ignore and render impracticable. 

Second. The Bible positively declares 
a second apostasy, or falling away fRev. 20:7-9 v ), 
after the Millennium; this 
your system of interpretation ignores 
and would render impossible. 

Third. Scripture positively places the 
general resurrection, not only after the 



Millennium, but even after the second 
apostasy, while the harmony of your 
teachings demands it during the Millennial 
age. 

If in those three points (so far as I 
have now noticed) your system could be 
shown to be in harmony with the Bible, 
I should joyfully embrace your teachings 
as a grand advance in theology, 
and, according to my opportunity and 
ability, I should preach it, the balance of 
my days. 

Hoping soon to see the requisite explanation 
of these matters from your 
pen, either by letter or through the 
TOWER, I remain, 

Yours respectfully, . 

Stones Prairie, 111. 



OUR REPLY. 

It gives us pleasure to answer the 
queries of those whose letters savor so 
much of the Spirit of Christ, and believing 
that this communication may be 
of interest to others, we answer through 
the TOWER. To save space we will 
not repeat the questions. Please keep 
them well in mind. 

In reply to your first proposition, we 
assure you that we do preach a "wrath 
to come," and more than that, we 
preach that the "Day of vengeance of 
our God" has already come. We refer 
you to "Food for Thinking Christians," 
Part IV.; also pages 51-53, 72-74 and 
120-124. We very much question if 
this subject of wrath and trouble, coming 
upon the nominal Church and the 
world, is referred to half as often in 
any other publications. But you mean, 
Why do we not teach, as the mass 
of Christians do, an eternity of pain 
and agony to all except the saints? 



We answer, because Gods Word does 

not teach it. We teach "a just recompense 

of reward"; but the difficulty is, 

that under the heathenish doctrines 

which, during the dark ages, became 

engrafted upon Christianity, a just punishment 

for sin has been lost sight of, 

and the Church has coined out of the 

symbols and figures of Revelation and 

some of the parables and dark sayings 

of Jesus, such a fiendish doctrine on 

this subject, and have so constantly 

held this libel on the character of God 

and his Word before the mind, that it 

takes some time for a thoroughly indoctrinated 

person to be able to come 

back, to a proper appreciation of justice 

and to scriptural ideas concerning the 

nature of the wrath to come. 

It is exactly our teaching that God 
"will in no wise clear the guilty." In 
harmony with his condemnation, "DEATH 
passed upon all men" [but not eternal 
LIFE in torment]. In this was manifested 
the justice of God, and that holiness 
which could not permit an imperfect 
thing to exist. His love for his creature 
was there, also, but was not yet manifested. 
Four thousand years later-in 
the fullness of time-the love of God 
was manifest in the gift of his Son, who 
paid our penalty (DEATH), and all men 
are thereby justified to live again, and 
he tells us that in his due time "all they 
that are in their graves suffering the 
penalty pronounced-DEATH-[but not 
torment] shall hear his voice and come 
forth, some to life [perfect life, having 

R500 : page 2 

been justified by faith and passed their 
trial or judgment in this present life] 
and some to judgment [krisis-TRIAL] . 

"Felix trembled," but not from any 
recorded words of Paul relative to 



eternal torment. No, we claim that 
Paul taught, as we are teaching, that the 
time is coming in which every wicked 
act and every good act will receive a 
JUST recompense of reward. Felix 
knew, doubtless, of crimes and injustice 
of which he had been guilty, and he 
therefore trembled. 

But another thing should be borne 
in mind when judging of our teachings: 
It is that we are living in a 
peculiar time, when some of the special 
features of the gospel are properly 
made more prominent than others, 
by all the faithful and wise servants 
whom our Lord has appointed to 
give to His household "Meat in due 
season" CMatt. 24:45 v ). We stand 
where the severity of God has been 
made too much of, and His goodness 
and love almost overlooked; hence it 
is that our teachings have seemed to 
some at first sight, to show only the 
love of God. A reference to the present 
issue of the TOWER and previous 
ones under the head of "The Plagues," 
etc., will show that we give evidence 

R501 : page 2 

also of the severity of God. But a correct 
understanding of the just severity 
of God gives no indication of the fiendish 
character ascribed to him by the 
current theology of the various sects. 
We find in his word, and therefore 
teach, that Gods punishments are designed 
as corrective, and that only the 
finally incorrigible will be destroyed 
with the Second Death. 

Again, from our standpoint we see 
that the special work of separating from 
the world and from mere believers a 
"peculiar people" to follow in the footsteps 
of Jesus, and thus to become 
joint-sacrifices and joint- heirs with Him, 



is ended; and it only remains to encourage 
and assist the living members 
of this peculiar people, to persevere in 
the fulfilment of their consecration vows: 
and to testify to the world, to all that 
will hear, the breadth and scope of this 
great salvation for ALL mankind; that 
the Kingdom of Heaven is indeed at 
hand, not in its incipient stage, as was 
the case in the beginning of this age, but 
in its actual completeness and glory, it is 
even now coming into power. This 
special work now, finds its parallel in 
the special work of Jesus at the close of 
the Jewish age. His ministry did not 
aim to present the penalties of the Law, 
since he was about to bear that for 
them, but to introduce and prepare his 
followers to receive the blessings and 
favors of the Gospel age. 

Your Second proposition is, we think, 
an unintentional misstatement of our 
position. We do believe, in what you 
term the apostasy of v Rev. 20:7-9\ 
though quite likely we do not teach it 
as you have been inclined to look at it, 
owing to the bias you have received 
from current theology. We now refer 
you to "Food," page 124, lines three to 
eight from top. We give that Scripture 
the less mention because we believe 
that none whom we address will be there. 

Your Third point is a very general 
error, we think, and arises from a misunderstanding 
of the symbols and general 
arrangement of the Book of Revelation. 
Commencing with v chapter 20: 1\ 
and continuing to "chapter 22:5\ we 
believe to be six different views or presentations 
of the same period of time- 
the Millennial age. All these views are 
valuable, as they present different sides 
or phases of the same glorious kingdom 
of God. The first shows the restraining 
of evil for a thousand years, and its 
little season of permitted triumph at its 



close ("Rev. 20:1-3 V ). The second view 
("Rev. 20:4-10") shows the exaltation of 
the saints, their reign of a thousand 
years, and the destruction of the incorrigible 
at its close. 

The third view fRev. 20:11-15*) is a 
representation of the trial of the world 
before the white or pure judgment seat. 
It is at the establishment of justice and 
right in the earth that the present 
(symbolic) heavens and earth flee away, 
giving place to new heavens (governments) 
and new earth (society). Then 
the books (Scriptures) will be opened, 
made plain, so that a "wayfaring man, 
though a fool, need not err therein"; 
and the knowledge of the Lord shall fill 
the whole earth as the waters cover the 
sea; then the world will have its trial- 
being "judged according to their works" 
instead of by the standard of the 
Churchs trial, now in progress- "according 
to your faith." Here another 
"Book of Life" is opened-the one now 
being filled- with the names of the 
heirs of GLORY, HONOR and IMMORTALITY; 
and the new Book of Life is the 
record of those of the world, who, 
during their trial, will be accounted 
worthy of perfect human existence 
everlastingly, all others being cut off in 
the second death, symbolically termed 
the lake of fire. 

The fourth view fRev. 21:1-8") represents 
the blessedness of the Millennial 
age when the New Jerusalem (the 
glorified Church-the Bride) will be 
among men as their government and 
Gods representative: to remove their 
sorrows, pains and troubles by making 
all things new, resulting in the giving of 
the water of life to the obedient, and 
second death to the disobedient, as in 
the preceding views. 

The fifth view fRev. 21:9-27") shows 
this glorified church more especially; 



and the fact that the light (truth) which 
shines from it will be the guide of the 
nations fv. 24"), the sequel to this view 
being that those improving the opportunity 
will come into, or become associated, 
in the Kingdom of God-the 
earthly phase of it-while workers of 
iniquity are destroyed, as in the other 
views-their second death. 

The sixth view ("Rev. 22:1-5") shows, 
under the symbol river, that the blessing 
of the Lord is to be through the 
spread of truth to mankind during that 
Millennial age. It will proceed from the 
City of God-the glorified Church-and 
results in the complete blotting out of 
the curse and the restoring of mankind 
to communion with God. 

In conclusion, we would refer you to 
"Prov. 2:4,5\ "If thou seekest truth 
as silver, and searchest for her as for 
hid treasures, then shalt thou... find 
the knowledge of God." 

The Lord will bless every real truth-seeker 
-every Israelite indeed-for such 
alone truth was written, and to such 
alone it will be revealed. May you 
know the truth-be filled with its spirit, 
and be made free by it; then, indeed, 
you will be a minister of it, both now 
and in the ages to come. 



R501 : page 2 

THE DISPUTED CLAUSE. 

"Rev. 20:5", first clause, which reads, 
"But the rest of the dead lived not again 
until the thousand years were finished," 
is the subject of dispute. We showed 
conclusively that the above text has no 
support from any authority older than 
"the middle of the fifth century." It is 
not found in any of the older MSS.-it 



is not in the Syriac-and the confessedly 
oldest, most complete and best of all 
Greek MSS. of the New Testament- 
the Sinaitic-does not contain those 
words. It is wanting, too, in several of 
the more recent MSS., among which is 
the Vatican, No. 1 160, a MS. of special 
clearness and harmony with the most 
ancient ones. 

An exchange calls attention to the 
fact that Prof. Tischendorf, the finder of 
the Sinaitic MS., while admitting that 
the clause is not found in it, says that he 
thinks its omission accidental, "a mere 
error" of the scribe in copying. Our 
exchange thinks this all- sufficient- -we 
should accept of that clause because 
Prof. T. thinks-guesses-that its omission 
was a mistake. 

But we must inform our friends that 
we cannot accept of Prof. T.s guess on 
such a matter; he may guess for himself, 
but, in our opinion, the finder of a 
MS. written nearly sixteen hundred 
years ago has no better opportunity of 
judging what it should contain than anybody 
else. The favor which Prof. T. 
has conferred on Bible students consists 
in the finding and publishing of this 
wonderfully correct MS., and not in 
guessing something into it. The wonderful 
and uniform correctness of this 
MS. of itself casts great discredit on 
Prof. T.s guess, which would imply 
great negligence in the copying. 

Let us have the very oldest manuscripts 
of the Bible, and if they throw 
out and omit manifest errors, let us not 
hold on to those errors and guess that 
they should be in, and that their omission 
was a mere error. To do so would 
be to make the finding of such ancient 
MSS. useless; each party in whose 
favor an error had been made in copying, 
either by accident or intention, 
would be at liberty to claim that the 



omission of such clauses was "a mere 
error." It is Gods Word that we want, 
and we thank Him for the valuable 
Sinaitic MS. furnished through Prof. T. 
But we will not permit the esteemed 
Professor to doctor it for us. We cannot 
admit his authority to "add to the 
words of the prophecy of this book." 

We regret to have it to note that the 
justly celebrated Variorum Bible and 
Testaments (with which we have supplied 
many of our readers), when attempting 
to give the readings of the 
Sinaitic MS., has in the case of this 
clause taken the word of a fallible man 
as being infallible-It fails to show that 
the Sinaitic MS. does not contain the 
clause in question. 

In view, however, of the full meaning 
of the word anastasis (resurrection) set 
forth in our issue of June, 1882, this 
clause, EVEN IF GENUINE, would be in 
harmony with our general teaching- 
that all men will come forth from the 
tomb and have a trial (judgment) during 
the thousand years (millennium) 
mentioned in "verses 3,4,6,7 V of this 
same chapter fRev. 20"). We there 
showed that to come out of the tomb, 
as in Lazarus case, is not resurrection 
(anastasis)-not a raising up to perfect 
life. The condition of life enjoyed by 
Adam before sin, none of his posterity 
have ever possessed. We have all been 
in death- "in the valley of the shadow 
of death"-and to enjoy an anastasis, or 
lifting up to life, as Adam had it, includes 
not only the coming forth from 
the tomb, but all that process of restitution 
which will be in operation during 
that reign of Christ. And since perfection 
-the full attainment, of the full 
measure of life-will not be reached by 
the world until the end of the millennium, 
it would be in harmony to say: 
The rest of the dead lived not again 



[did not fully return to perfect life] until 
the thousand years were finished. 

But we stand by the record, and claim 
that this clause fits the truth rather by 
accident than inspiration, as shown by 
the foregoing evidence. This interpolation, 
doubtless, occurred by some scribe 
of the fifth century making a marginal 
note on his MSS. of his thought on the 
subject. 



R502 : page 2 

INTERNATIONAL S.S. LESSONS. 

"Thank God for the great improvement in 
Bible study which has followed the introduction 
of the uniform lesson system! Seven millions of 
youth of North America looking into the same 
passage of scripture each week! What a volume 
of study! How majestically strong is Gods truth, 
to stand such investigation and not disappoint, 
not fail, a single soul." 

The above is from an exchange. We 
wish it were true. But, alas! like many 
other of Satans delusions by which he 
deceives, it is false-a gilded bubble- 
outwardly bright and good, but really 
a form full of emptiness. The spread 
of intelligence and thought has led to 
the necessity of presenting more than 
sectarian creeds; some authority higher 
than mans words must be offered. 
There is nothing to offer but the Bible, 
and neither Papacy, Protestantism, nor 
Satan could expect to hold control of 
man without recognizing to some extent 
this demand. 

To meet this demand, yet to keep 
people from independent study of the 
Scriptures, seems to be the object of all 
parties. They well know that their 
systems would soon fall to pieces if the 



people would study the Bible independently. 

To meet this popular demand 

for authority on religious subjects, each 

prominent sect prints "Lessons Leaves" 

with questions and answers to suit its 

own creed, and at the same time, by 

mutual agreement, the same verses constitute 

the lesson among all denominations, 

thus giving the impression to 

many, and especially to the children, 

that Christian union is very strong and 

that all denominations are agreed as to 

the import of the lesson taught. 

The writer has served in the capacity 
both of teacher and superintendent in 
the Sunday-school and long since 
became convinced that all the good 
there is to this system is on the 
surface. Who that has ever been 
connected with the Sunday-school in 
recent years, does not know that it is a 
grand system of exercises and not of 
Bible study? Singing, calling the roll, 
giving reward tickets, returning and 
selecting library books and Sunday-school 
papers, taking up collections 
and talking about the Christmas treat; 
or the next picnic, or a summer vacation, 
takes up almost all the session 
until the bell rings for closing exercises 
and putting on wraps. Now, what a 
fraud to call this "a great improvement 
in Bible study!" What a delusion for 
that unconverted young woman who 
has taught (entertained) such a class, 
to suppose that she has been serving 
Christ and teaching his religion by 
such exercise! I tell you, nay; she is 
hardening her own heart by the deception, 
and convincing herself and her 
pupils that religion is an empty sham. 
Instead of seven millions of youth in 
North America being Bible students, 
they are-e specially the boys-taking 
first lessons in religious shams, which 
beget in them doubts concerning the 



Bible as well as of Christianity. This is 
the great evil; and our experience leads 
us to believe that fully one-half the boys 
in the Sunday-schools are young infidels, 
largely made so by the shams of 
sectarianism and its false representation 
of the Bible; while to the girls, the 
Sunday-school has become the nursery 
of pride, love of display in dress, and an 
increasing desire for amusement. 

But this system of uniform lessons 
serves Satan and the sects still better in 
another way. There was a time when 
thoughtful Bible class teachers met their 
adult classes every Lords day to study 
the Bible and to learn of its teachings. 
The teacher and class selected the subjects 
of interest for study, and even 
though bound by denominational yokes 
and prejudices, there was some opportunity 
for the Word of God to be heard, 
and for truth to shine forth: and sometimes 
considerable truth was thus fed to 
a thinking class. But this would never 
do, it would soon break up the Babylon 
systems if such Bible study were permitted; 
those who studied would soon 
be far beyond those who relied on 
creeds of the fifteenth century, and 
would leap the sectarian fences for the 
green pastures of Gods Word and the 
liberty wherewith Christ had made them 
free. Hence the necessity you see of 
uniform lessons, to hold back such 
classes and teachers, giving them such 
questions about the geography of Palestine, 
the manners, customs, dress, etc., 
of the people, mixed with a few simple 
questions on morality, such as could 
open up no general discussion, could 
lead to no appreciation of truth or error, 
but merely keep in the beaten path of 
the traditions of the elders, especially of 
the elders of their church. 

What a delusion and a snare is 
thrown about these adult classes, which 



leads them to believe that the twenty 
minutes thus spent each Lords day is a 
compliance with the Great Teachers 
Word: "Search the Scriptures." They 
are able to make thee wise, but the 
traditions of men will blind thee. "Come 
out of her, my people," partake not of 
her sins and receive not of her plagues. 



R502 : page 2 

LET us guard against the negative 
form of evil-speaking, generally the most 
thoughtless. Absalom was an example 
of this. Who could quote any actual 
evil- speaking against his royal father? 
Who could charge him with speaking 
evil of dignities? And yet by insinuations, 
by his way of putting things, by 
his very manner, he wrought a thousand-fold 
more cruel harm than any amount 
of evil-speaking out could have possibly 
done. Oh to be watchful as to such 
omissions to speak well, as amount to 
speaking evil? Watchful as to the eloquence 
of even a hesitation, watchful as to 
the forcible language of feature and eye. 



R502 : page 3 

A WORD TO CHRISTIANS. 

"That they may all be one. "-"John 17:21\ 

In vain ye say, "Let sects and systems fall, 
And Jesus precious name be all in all"; 
In vain ye say, "By His blest name alone 
His members should, while here on earth, be 

known"; 
Yet cling to what that gracious Jesus pains- 
Sectarian union and sectarian names. 



And can it be that "Baptist" sweeter sounds 
Than the dear name which each believer owns? 
Does "Independent" tell of Jesus love, 
Or efficacious in conversions prove? 
Is "Bible Christian" Gods appointed term 
By which Hed have mankind His own discern? 
Or does the spirit in "the Word" insist 
Their being known by "Friend" or 

"Methodist"? 
That word is silent-not one single name 
Of all the multitudes which now obtain, 
Is sanctioned there, but His, whose precious 

blood. 
Has sanctified the family of God. 

Say not, "How otherwise shall we be known?" 
Did Paul or Peter such distinctions own? 
Say not, "Names nothing mean"; alas! we see 
How oft they move the heart to jealousy. 
Say not "theyre harmless," for too well we 

know 
How under them what fierce contentions grow. 
They gather to their standard-not the Lord: 
Enforce their own enactments- -not "the Word." 

Just think of heaven, where happy oneness reigns, 
A gathering place for parties, sects and names! 
Ah, no! twould dim the glory of that place, 
Twould throw a cloud oer every saved ones 

face. 
One name ALONE the heavenly hosts adore; 
Nor is there space or room in heaven for more. 
Jesus is there,-His name alone is sung, 
His blessed names the theme of every tongue, 
Jesus is there-no other name they know; 
Why should we hear of other names below? 

Survey the vast profession of the day; 
How many men-how few the Lord obey! 
Mens systems, rules, and principles abound, 
While cleaving to "the Word" how few are 

found. 
"Our cause" now takes the place of Jesuss fold, 
"Our church" the place of church of God of old, 
"Our pastor" now is bound by space and time, 
And paid accordingly-is that divine? 



Oft fills his place in priestly robes arrayed, 

Spurning alike the vulgar dress and trade, 

Before his name the prefix "Reverend" stands, 

Which God, in Scripture, for himself demands; 

Usurping thus the title due alone 

To him who sits on the eternal throne! 

(O how unlike the noble few of old, 

Whose labors were for souls, and not for gold; 

Distinguished by their spirit, not their dress, 

Patterns of godlike, holy loveliness!) 

For these majestic edifices rise 
Of every character, and shape, and size; 
Gorgeous in their structure, costly in their plan, 
Majestic mentoes of the pride of man! 

These buildings reared are called "the saints 

abode," 
The "sanctuary" and the "house of God"; 
The "place of worship," and the "temple" too. 
Names so applied, the Apostles never knew. 
Alas! tis earthly worship that they teach, 
And hinder souls that would beyond it reach; 
Keeping at distance those love bids draw near, 
To worship in their priestly character, 
Within the temple pitched by heavenly hands, 
Where Christ, our Great High Priest, our surety 

stands. 

There is the only proper "saints abode"; 

The purchased Church, the only "house of God"; 

Where Jesus is, our joy it is to know, 

Our "place of worship" is, and not below. 

No grand conception of the builders mind- 
No taste or elegance, howeer refined 
No lofty eloquence, that charmeth so— 
No sounds harmonious that from organs flow- 
No "dim religious light"-no high degrees, 
Nor gorgeous vestments-can the Father please, 
Ah, no! man looketh to the outward part, 
But God surveys the secret of the heart; 
And that, by man esteemed perfections height 
Is but abomination in His sight. 
No mans invention can adorn the cross; 
Tis all abomination in His sight. 



Christian, go search the Word of God, and see, 
How far the statements here with them agree, 
Let not these things unheeded be, I pray, 
I speak as to the wise, judge what I say. 
R. COSSAR. 



R503 : page 3 

DESTROYING THE ENMITY. 

For He is our peace who made both one and 
the middle wall of the enclosure broke down; 
the enmity, in his flesh [even] the law of the 
commandments in decrees bringing to 
nought; that the two he might create in him 
into one man of new mould, making peace; and 
might fully reconcile them both in one body 
unto God, through the cross-slaying the enmity 
thereby.- v EPH. 2:14-16\ (Rotherhams 
translation.) 

The Apostle is addressing Christians 
-converts from heathen nations-Gentiles, 
and is showing that the difference, 
in Gods estimation, between Jew and 
Gentile, has now ceased. The Jew once 
had special favor, brought about by the 
typical sin offerings, though it was only 
typical of the real favor with God, 
which the gospel church enjoys- 
brought about by the better sacrifice 
(which needeth not to be repeated year 
by year) and the better covenant than 
the law. This contrast of their former 
condition as Gentiles, from the former 
condition of Jews, is referred to in v vs. 1 1-13". 
But now, in Christ Jesus, ye 
who at one time were afar off [from 
Gods favor] are made nigh by the 
blood of Christ. 

This shows how the Gentiles were 
brought into favor and communion with 
God- "by the blood of Christ." Now, 



the Apostle proceeds to show how the 
Jew got a blessing through the same 
"blood" of Christ-they who had been 
favored by the Law ordained to life. 
[The favor under the Law covenant 
was, that if any Jew could keep the 
Law he should have a right to life, and 
should never die. v Rom. 10:5\ v Gal. 3:12\] 
But that Law which seemed a 
promise or covenant by which they 
could have life-hence regarded a blessing 
--was found to be of no advantage, 
but rather a curse, because it did not 
give life to a single one of them. This 
was not because of faultiness of the Law, 
for the Law was holy and just and good. 
fRom. 7:12\) The fault was in the 
Jew who, because of sinful propensities 
and imperfect organism, inherited 
through the fall of Adam, could not 
keep the Law, and hence could not 
claim the life promised under that Law 
covenant. Thus, it will be seen, that 
the Law which was to bless them was 
found to curse or condemn the Jew, and 
was for this reason reckoned his enemy 
-called "the enmity," or OPPOSITION, 
or CONDEMNATION. 

What advantage had the Jew, then, 
do you ask? He had the first opportunity 
of the Gospel high calling, and 
will have the first call under the restitution. 
Then, too, some out of that people 
were developed into fitness for the 
spiritual kingdom, and some for the 
earthly kingdom. 

The Apostle having shown, as already 
explained, that those who had been 
Gentiles, without the Law, received 
their adoption and favor through the 
blood of Christ, now shows that the Jew 
had received an equally great blessing 
from the same one sacrifice, saying, 
"He is OUR peace." He settled the 
curse or condemnation of the Law 
which was upon us Jews. Not only 



did he settle fully the original claims of 

the Law violated by Adam, which condemned 

both Jew and Gentile, but he 

did even more for us Jews; he removed 

from us the galling yoke of the Law 

covenant under which we could never 

have attained life, and has offered us 

life as a gift or favor. Thus both the 

original curse or enmity between God 

and us Jews, as well as the secondary 

enmity or curse of our Law, which, as a 

partition, formerly separated us from 

you Gentiles; this was all taken away, 

so that both you and we may now have 

access to God through him who, by his 

blood-by his cross-destroyed all 

curse or enmity. 

The design is, that ultimately there 
shall be not Jew and heathen, but that 
all men shall be made new-re-created 
of a new mould. The old Adamic 
mould was spoiled by sin in the very 
outstart, but through Christ mankind is 
to be perfectly restored-re-moulded. 

Let it be noticed that the enmity or 
opposition was of God and toward men; 
men did not condemn God; but God 
did condemn men on account of sin. 
It was not Adam who became angry 
and offended with Jehovah and left the 
Garden of Eden. It was God who said, 
Cursed is the ground for thy sake, and 
who condemned (cursed) both man and 
woman to labor, sorrow, pain and ultimate 
death. Hence the enmity or 
curse which Jesus destroyed by tasting 
death for every man, was the enmity or 
curse which was the penalty of the 
broken law. When, therefore, we are 
justified to freedom from that condemnation 
or curse of death, by our ransom, 
it follows that we are justified to life, 
happiness, etc., such as was possessed 
before the curse came. And as surely 
as Jesus bought all, so surely will he in 
due time provide a deliverance for all 



by a resurrection. 

In this connection, it is well that all 
should remember that the Bible presents 
God to us in various characters. He is 
the FATHER that pittieth his children, 
and also the JUDGE of all the earth who 
will do right, and by no means clear the 
guilty. It is in the aspect of a Judge 
that God is represented in the matter of 
sin and its penalty. 

Now, a righteous judge must decide 
a case according to the law; and, 
where law is violated, he must condemn 
the violator according to the penalty 
mentioned in the law, no matter who 
the culprit may be, whether a near 
relative or the judge himself. [In 
Pennsylvania this really happened last 
month. A judge unwittingly violated 
a State law, condemned and fined himself 
according to the prescribed penalty.] 
Thus with Jehovah, when 
his loved child and creature Adam 
violated law, he must condemn him. 
Since the law was, "In the day that 
thou eatest thereof dying, thou shalt 
DIE," the Judge must execute the penalty, 
and sent the cherubim, drove the 
condemned ones from the garden of 
life-sustaining trees into the barren 
land outside, (where they would be unable 
to sustain life and must die), the 
sterile and unprepared earth; left in that 
cursed or barren condition because God 
foreknew its necessity as the prison or 
work-house in which man should exhaust 
his condemned life and realize the 
bitterness and evil of violating Gods 
law. 

The prisoner who is guilty, and who 
hears his sentence uttered by the judge, 
may often think of the judge as his 
pitiless ENEMY and may seldom know 
of the sympathy and love of the man 
existing behind the stern look of the 
magistrate who represents THE LAW. 



So, too, some who appreciate not the 
love element in the character of the 
Judge of all the earth, and see not the 
wise provision of the Law which cuts 
off from life the disobedient, and will 
not permit them to live forever in sin, 
such think of God only as the unbending 
and severe Judge. It is only those 
who have caught a glimpse of Gods 
plan for the liberating of the guilty 
prisoner whom He himself had justly 
condemned-only these can realize the 
great love wherewith the Judge loved 
us while we were yet sinners, while he 
was condemning us, and while he was 
permitting our deliverance into the 
great prison-house of death. 

The Judge did not show much of His 
love for quite a while, but merely thundered 
forth the disapproval of Law 
against sin and its penalty, against sinners, 
sternly declaring that the Law 
cursed all such- was at enmity or 
opposition to them. Thus did the Judge 
convince all of the exceeding sinfulness 
of sin, and then in due time He showed 
His love for the prisoners by himself 
providing the ransom. In this was 
manifested the love of God toward us, 

R504 : page 3 

because that God sent his only begotten 
Son into the world, that we might live 
through him fl John 4:9 V ). Now, all 
may see that this causes the character 
of the Judge to shine out the brighter. 
His great love and pity is seen the 
more clearly as we mount it upon the 
background of unbending justice, which 
could in "no wise clear the guilty," 
even though pitied and loved. 

This furnishes the key to an appreciation 
of the statement: "If when we were 
enemies [convicts before the Judge] we 
were reconciled to God [our penalty 



paid] by the death of His Son; much 
more being reconciled [guiltless-acquitted 
by the Judge who once condemned 
us] we shall be saved by His 
life" ("Rom. 5:10"). He who paid our 
ransom for us will bring us out of the 
prison-house of death, and the Judge 
will not object, but approve of our 
liberty. 

Again, speaking of his confidence, 
that his condemnation had given place 
to approval and justification, Paul introduces 
this same judgment scene, and 
shows that there need be, can be, no 
mistake about it. He asks: "What 
shall we then say to these things?" 
[He has been arguing justification as a 
basis or step to glory and heirship] 
"If God be for us, who can be against 
us?" [If the Judge who once condemned 
us says our ransom price has 
fully met the demands of the Law 
against us, why should we be in doubt 
about it? There could be no better 
evidence.] "He that spared not his 
own Son, but delivered him up for us 
all, how shall he not with him also 
freely give us all things? "Who shall 
lay anything to the charge of Gods 
elect? It is GOD that justifieth." 
[There could be no higher court to 
which to appeal, and the Judge pronounces 
us justified-freed from the 
condemnation of all inherited weakness 
and sin.] "Who is he that condemneth?" 
[Dare anyone claim that I am 
still guilty? If so, he must be ignorant 
of the ransom paid, ignorant that our 
substitute tasted death for every man. 
It should be a sufficient answer to such 
a one to tell him that] "It is Christ 
that died; yea, rather, that is risen 
again, who is even at the right hand 
of God, who also maketh intercession 
for us" CRom. 8:31-34"). 

This same subject-the sinfulness of 



all, God their condemning Judge, Himself 

also their deliverer by providing a 

ransom, and the CONSEQUENT righteousness 

of God in cancelling the sin-is 

forcibly set forth in v Rom. 3:22-26 v : 

"For there is no difference [between 

Jew and Gentile], for all have sinned 

and come short of the glory of God. 

Being justified [cleared of guilt] freely 

by His grace [favor] through the redemption 

that is in Christ Jesus: Whom 

God [the Judge] hath set forth to be a 

propitiation [satisfaction-for Adamic 

sin] through faith in his blood. To 

declare His [the Judges] righteousness 

for [in] the remission of sins that are 

passed through the forbearance of 

God." [i.e., the Judge sent his Son 

and paid the claim against the condemned 

race, in order that he might set 

them at liberty without violating his 

own laws] . "To declare, I say, at this 

time His righteousness: that he might 

be JUST and [also] the justifier of [sinners] 

him which believeth in Jesus" 

CRom. 3:22-26 v ). So then, that which 

was "enmity," which once hindered 

approach to God, which once condemned, 

was removed by virtue of the 

blood of the cross, and now all may 

come unto God realizing that our ransom 

settled the claims of justice once and 

forever. Indeed, since Jesus became 

the propitiation for our sins, instead of 

refusing to receive or commune with 

the condemned, the Judge and Father 

is sending out messengers during this 

gospel age, and will continue the same 

during the next— to inform them of his 

reconciliation, as we read: "Now, then, 

we are ambassadors for Christ, as 

though God did beseech you by us; 

we pray you, in Christs stead, be ye 

reconciled to God" f2 Cor. 5:2(T). 



R504 : page 3 

THE SEVEN CHURCHES. 



PHILADELPHIA.- V REV. 3:7-13\ 

"To the messenger of the congregation 
in Philadelphia write." The meaning 
of this name is well known-"Love 
of a brother." This stage in the 
churchs history evidently began at the 
great Reformation; and there are many 
still living who possess the characteristics 
described. 

We may understand the message better 
if we recall the condition of Rome 
when the Reformation began. She claimed 
to be the only holy and true. She 
claimed to have the sure mercies of 
David, the throne of the kingdom of 
the Lord; with power to bind or loose; 
to open or shut the gates of heaven; to 
be the only true synagogue; the only 
true recipient of the favor and love of 
God; to be the city of God; the only 
one having a right to bear his name. 

"These things saith he that is holy, he 
that is true, he that hath the key of 
David, he that openeth, and no man 
shall shut; and shutteth, and no man 
shall open." 

He who speaks has not given his prerogatives 
to fallible men. He lent the 
keys to Peter to open the doors to both 
Jew and Gentile. Peter preached the 
opening sermon to the Jew on Pentecost, 
and to the Gentiles in Ceasarea 
probably three and a half years after. 
CActs 2:10\) But Peter fell asleep and 

R504 : page 4 

the Master holds the keys. He it is 



who shall unlock the gates of hades 
and of death and shall free the long 
bound captives. No "successor of St. 
Peter" ever has or even can. If they 
had the power they would have tried it 
long ago. 

"I know thy works." It is a brief 
mention but emphatic, and carries with 
it this encouragement: "Behold, I have 
set before thee an open door, which no 
man can shut." There is considerable 
similarity between the work begun on 
the day of Pentecost and the work of 
Luther and his friends. The Reformation 
was, in a sense, the beginning of a 
new era; a dawning of light where all 
had been darkness; the separation of 
the true from the false and a new start 
in the way of truth and life. It was the 
beginning of a mighty work. No doubt 
all the powers of Satan and his human 
allies were exerted to close that door- 
we know they tried hard; but "He that 
is true" had said-- "which no man can 
shut." The "little flock" of reformers 
had but "a little strength" compared 
with the mighty hosts of their enemies; 
but they knew they had the truth, and 
fully trusted the Giver. Thus the Master 
could say, thou "hast kept my word, 
and hast not denied my name." Luthers 
declaration at the Diet at Worms, as he 
stood alone before the princes of Germany 
and the stern emperor Charles V., 
are worthy of a Paul, and illustrative of the 
text. "Unless," said he, "I shall be convinced 
by Scriptures, (for I can put no 
faith in popes and councils, as it is evident 
that they have frequently erred, 
and even contradicted each other); unless 
my conscience shall be convinced 
by the Word of God, I neither will, or 
can recant, since it is unworthy of an 
honest man to act contrary to his own 
conviction. Here I stand; it is impossible 
for me to act otherwise- so help 



me God." 

We do not understand that this symbolic 
period is restricted to those early 
days. That was the beginning. The conflict 
is not over. The proud and boastful 
churches of to-day are persecuting 
and would fain "wipe out" those still 
living of the Philadelphian band. The 
work is the Lords, he will take care of 
it, and man cannot hinder it. 

"Behold, I will make them of the 
synagogue of Satan, who say they are 
Jews, and are not, but do lie; behold, I 
will make them to come and worship before 
thy feet, and to know that I have 
loved thee." 

This is very plain language regarding 
the opposers of the truth, who claim to 
be the church of God. They would say 
we were calling them dreadful hard 
names if we were to use language half 
as expressive. When "the hour of trial, 
that which is to come upon the whole 
world, to try them that dwell upon 
the earth," has humbled their pride, 
they will learn who were the chosen, 
and come and render obeisance at their 
feet. The faithful ones will be kept 
from the power of this great trial; and 
the reason is given, "Because thou didst 
keep the word of my endurance." 
(Rotherham.) 

Those who have been disciplined, and 
have been wholly consecrated, and are 
in a crucified condition when this trial 
comes, will be far above its power. "A 
thousand shall fall at thy side, and ten 
thousand at thy right hand; but it shall not 
come nigh thee. Only with thine eyes 
shalt thou behold and see the reward of 
the wicked" fPs. 9V; v Luke 21:34-36^). 

"I come quickly; hold fast that which 
thou hast, that no one take thy crown." 

Numbers have believed for many years 
that we have been living in the "quickly" 
time; but failing to recognize the manner 



of his coming and the condition of 
his presence, they still look for him, and 
congratulate themselves on their patient 
waiting and watching for his return. 
They say, "When he comes, we expect 
to know it." When asked how, they 
triumphantly quote: "This same Jesus"- 
failing to appreciate the fact that the 
same Jesus was not recognized after 
his resurrection by those who had seen 
him daily for years. Mary and his disciples 
might talk to him and mistake 
him for a stranger, but these will recognize 
him instantly-miles away. 

Since he ascended he has been glorified. 
He allowed Saul of Tarsus to 
catch a glimpse of him in his new condition. 
It took him three days to get 
over it, and even then his sight was only 
restored by a miracle. Not until we 
are like him shall we be able to see him 
as he is fl John 3:2 V ). 

R505 : page 4 

Let those who thus cling to the fleshly, 
lest, fear while still looking for him in 
an earthly condition, he may come as 
the thief cometh, silently, and in a spiritual 
--therefore unseen-body, and, in his 
distribution of rewards, give the crown 
to another Over. IT). 

"Him that overcometh will I make a 
pillar in the temple of my God, and he 
shall go no more out; and I will write 
upon him the name of my God, and the 
name of the city of my God, the New 
Jerusalem, which cometh down out of 
heaven from my God; and my own new 
name." 

In the Philadelphia period, especially 
during the first and last phases of it, the 
faithful have either been obliged to come 
out of the nominal temple to find liberty, 
or they have been "cast out" for their 
straight testimony. 



The reward is that they will be, not 
simply an unimportant piece, but a 
vital part-a pillar in the true and 
eternal temple-a part that cannot be 
taken away or cast out while the structure 
exists. During their trial, their 
names were cast out as evil; they were 
branded as infidels and heretics; they 
were not recognized as children of God, 
as citizens of the heavenly country, as 
Christians. All this is to be reversed. 
The Lord knoweth them that are his, 
and in due time will fully and eternally 
acknowledge them. W. I. M. 



R505 : page 4 

THE SEVEN CHURCHES. 



LAODICEA.- v REV. 3:14-22\ 

"Unto the messenger of the congregation 
in Laodicea write." Laodicea is interpreted 
as "a tried, or judged people." 
The description shows us that 
they were tried and found wanting. 
"These things saith the Amen." This 
is the word so often translated "verily" 
in the gospels, and used by our Lord 
as a kind of affirmation or solemn prefix 
to some important announcement. 

From the peculiar use Jesus made of 
it, we should at once recognize the 
speaker and perceive that he is about to 
send a message of more than ordinary 
interest and solemnity. 

"The beginning of the creation of 
God." If we understand Christs meaning 
here this message is sent particularly 
to those who profess his name but deny 
the truth he here himself presents. Let 
those who do so, read with special care 



this special message. 

"What think ye of the Christ? Whose 
Son is he?" fMatt. 22:42 v ) is a question 
that has had many answers. More 
Bible and less hymn-book theology 
would have made the subject clearer to 
all. The doctrine of the trinity is totally 
opposed to Scripture, and has not a 
single reasonable text to support it 
when the well-known interpretation of 
v l John 5:7 V is discarded and "John 1:T is 
understood. We suggest that any one 
who does not see this subject clearly 
should read carefully and prayerfully 
\Tohnl7\ 

Another class-Unitarians, etc. -take 
away from the dignity and honor of our 
Lord, beside contradicting much Scripture, 
by denying that he had an existence 
before his conception in Mary. 
We ask such, to compare the following 
texts: "Matt. 22:45"; "John 1:14-15^; 
"3:13"; "8:58"; "2 Cor. 8:9" -"Col. 1:15-17^; 
"Phil. 2:6-7\ 

"I know thy works, that thou art 
neither cold nor hot. I would thou wert 
cold or hot. So then, because thou art 
lukewarm, and neither cold nor hot, I 
will spue thee out of my mouth." 

Here is a picture of the nominal 
Church of to-day as our Lord sees her. 
They are not cold in one sense; they 
have a good deal of zeal; but it is not 
according to knowledge. They have, 
with much labor on the part of some, 
organized their armies, developed their 
machinery, and multiplied their stores; 
but yet the enemy does not fall before 
them. They claim that their principal 
object and aim is to convert sinners; to 
(spiritually) beget children. The prophet 
puts these words in their mouth when 
they awake to a knowledge of the 
situation: "Like as a woman with 
child, that draweth near the time of her 
delivery, is in pain, and crieth out in 



her pangs; so have we been in thy 
PRESENCE, O Lord. We have been 
with child, we have been in pain, we 
have, as it were, brought forth wind; 
we have not wrought any deliverance 
in the earth; neither have the inhabitants 
of the earth come to (spiritual) 
life." This is said after they have 
realized the presence of the Lord. 

Neither hot nor cold, they incite disgust 
and are cast out as a hateful thing 
from being the mouthpiece of the Lord. 

To be a minister or priest in the 
nominal Church of to-day, one must 
bring with him a plentiful store of that 
which Paul despised and left behind, 
namely, human wisdom ("1 Cor. 1:17"; 
"2:16"). There is a wisdom learned by 
the mature, "even the hidden," "which 
the Spirit teacheth." This is not taught 
"in the schools," neither can it be learned 
there, but it is "freely given to us of 
God." Ministers are no more called of 
God with them. They are made as 
newspapers are made. Blank paper 
(sometimes very blank) is put into a 
machine, impressions are made on it, 
and it comes out finished. It is wrapped 
and stamped and is ready to be sent 
away. We may search the Scriptures 
in vain for an instance of Gods sending 
through such a channel. 

He hath raised up a new mouthpiece. 
He sheds increasing light to a little 
flock who are willing to receive it, and 
spread it abroad without fear. To 
those who humbly and prayerfully 
search for the truth; having but one 
aim, the glory of God; one desire, to 
do his will; one hope, to share that 
glory-according to his promises. 

We should not look for light where 
little remains but the fading reflections 
of a former glory. That sickly hue 
which now appears is but the smoke 
illuminated by the piercing rays from 



the part of a hand which, high on 
the wall, is writing, MENE, TEKEL, 
UPHARSIN. 

"Because thou sayest I am rich, and 
have gotten riches, and have need of 
nothing; and knowest not that thou art 
the wretched one, and miserable, and 
poor, and blind, and naked." 

"I am rich." I have all the spiritual 
light that exists in the world. I have 
gotten riches; have still more enriched 
myself; have much goods laid up for 
many years. All others are too poor to 
add to my store. I have all that is 
worth having, and need no more. "I 
sit a queen, and am no widow, and shall 
in nowise see mourning." Of course 
she cannot recognize her own picture, 
she is "blind." "And knowest not that 
thou art the wretched one," etc. Just as 
the Jewish house fell, because they 
knew not the time of their visitation 
("Luke 19:44") so, must their counterpart 
of this dispensation. The visitation 
(presence) of the Lord is as a 
stone of stumbling and rock of offence 
to both the houses of Israel ("Isa. 8:14" 
and "Heb. 3:5-6"). The fleshly house 
failed to recognize his presence in the 
flesh; the spiritual house refuse to acknowledge 
his presence in a spiritual 
body. Just as he could be seen by the eye 
of flesh in his first visitation, so he must 
be recognized in this only by the eyes 
of our understanding-the only spiritual 
eyesight we now possess. When we 
are made like him, bye and bye we 
shall see him as he is. 

If she is so blind that she cannot recognize 
her own condition and location, 
how can it be expected that she should 
see his. When she has learned his, she 
will realize her own, and it will be 
"pitiable, and poor, and naked." 

"I counsel thee to buy of me gold, tried 
in the fire, that thou mayest be rich; 



and white raiment, that thou mayest 
be clothed, and that the shame of thy 
nakedness do not appear; and anoint 
thine eyes with eye-salve, that thou 
mayest see." 

Some may say, How can this 
be a description of the Church of 
God? Is it not founded upon the 
Rock, Christ? We answer, the majority 
of those who compose the Churches 
of to-day know nothing about that 
Rock. Moreover, those who are founded 
upon Christ, if they refuse to do his 
bidding, must suffer the consequences. 
His call is, "Come out of her, my people, 
that ye be not partakers of her sins, 
that ye receive not of her plagues." 

Even though we are built on Christ, 
yet, if instead of building with gold, 
silver and precious stones, we daub together 
wood, hay and stubble, we shall 
suffer loss; for the fire (of his jealousy- 
"Zeph. 1:18") shall try every mans work; 
and such "shall be saved, yet so as by 
fire" CI Cor. 3:11-15*). 

The gold that is needed is the wisdom 
that cometh from above; the 
white raiment, the righteousness of 
Christ; the eye-salve, the Spirits help 
in the understanding of the Word. 

These will stand the fires, and enable 
those who have them to stand before 
the Son of man. 

"As many as I love, I rebuke and 
chasten: be zealous, therefore, and 
repent." 

The words translated rebuke and 
chasten, are in the Greek much more 
forcible than here appears. The first 
means reproach, disgrace; put to shame, 
dishonor. The latter, to train or educate 
like a child or youth. What a call! 
No wonder that the proud and conceited 
teachers of popular churches 
cannot hear the call. No wonder that 
some who have seen and heard refuse, 



to follow "the path their leader trod." 
"As many as I love, I disgrace and 
train: be zealous, therefore, and repent. 

"What poor despised company 

Of travelers are these, 

Who walk in yonder narrow way 

Along the rugged maze? 

Ah, these are of a royal line, 

All children of a King! 

Heirs of immortal crowns divine, 

And lo! for joy they sing." 
"Behold, I stand at the door and 
knock: if any man hear my voice, and 
open the door, I will come in to him, and 
will sup with him, and he with me." 

R506 : page 4 

Unknown to the Laodicean Church, 
the Lord has returned. He stands at 
the door. He could not do this if he 
were not present. He has not been always 
there as some think. To Sardis 
he said, "I will come"; to Philadelphia, 
"I come quickly"; to Laodicea, it is 
rap, rap, rap. Awake; let me come in. 
Do they hear? v Solomons Song 5:3\ 
gives the answer. 

Why has this little company had such 
a continuous feast of truth? Why does 
the light and glory stream down upon 
us in ever increasing brightness? It is 
because the Master has come in, and 
has girded himself, and made us sit 
down, and has himself served us. It is 
because the Sun of Righteousness has 
arisen, and those on the mountain and 
on the house-tops are already bathed 
in its glorious beams, for 
"The glory of the sunlight 

Of the bright Millennial day, 
Scatters all the powers of darkness; 
Lights the gloom with healing ray." 

"If any man hear my voice." There 
is nothing here said about being deaf. 
If they had been awake they would 



surely have heard. Jesus clearly foretold 
that he would come as a thief, but did 
not tell them the hour. His orders 
were simply, "Watch." They failed, 
and fell. "If the master of the house 
had known in what watch the thief was 
coming, he would have watched, and 
would not have suffered his house to be 
broken through." He slept on guard. 

While the nominal Church is still 
seemingly in power, while the old glory 
still hangs about her, while it is still 
respectable and honorable to be a 
church member (it will not be so long, 
in the eyes of many), the little flock of 
truth-seekers are despised and rejected. 
They are covered with reproach 
because they dare to point out the 
faults of a worldly church. They are 
looked down upon by her who sits as a 
proud queen, lifted up that she may 
have the greater fall. 

The decree has gone forth; the fall 
has begun; while "to him that overcometh 
will I grant to sit with me in my 
throne, even as I also overcome, and am 
set down with my Father in his throne." 

The nominal Church has a vague 

R506 : page 5 

idea of a kind of throne (composed 
principally of white cloud) somewhere, 
beyond the bounds of time and space, 
in the third heaven (counting upwards) 
where they shall sit forever; principally 
engaged in making music, and reigning 
(?) over their own passions (their 
passions being buried out of sight with 
their bodies). Strange work for eternity. 
Gods agents, as far as we can see, 
are always in activity. 

Christ does not always sit on the 
Fathers throne; he has one of his own. 
He will occupy it. And those who 
have followed him, by the way of the 



cross, shall share it with him. "He that 
hath an ear, let him hear what the Spirit 
saith unto the Churches." W. I. M. 



R506 : page 5 

THE THIEF. 

"He said to Jesus, Remember me when thou 
comest in thy kingdom. And he [Jesus] said to 
him, Indeed I say to thee this day, thou shalt be 
with me in Paradise."- V LUKE 23:42,43V- 
Diaglott. 

Those who consider salvation to be 
an escape from everlasting torture to a 
paradise of pleasure, and dependent 
only on accidental circumstances of 
favor, see in this narrative the doctrine 
of election exemplified-- Jesus, being 
pleased by the consoling words of the 
one thief, elected him to heaven, and 
equally elected that the other should 
roast to all eternity, unpitied, unrelieved. 
Truly if God has made salvation 
such a lottery, such a chance thing, 
those who believe it to be such, should 
have little to say against church lotteries, 
and less against worldly ones. 

But this is not the case. This scripture 
has evidently been much misunderstood. 
To get its true import, let us 
take in the surroundings and 
connections. 

Jesus had just been condemned, and 
was now being executed on the charge 
of treason to Caesars government, in 
saying that He was a king; though he 
had told them that his kingdom was 
"not of this world." There upon the 
cross above his head was the inscription 
of his charged crime, written in 
three languages: "THIS IS THE KING 
OF THE JEWS." All knew of his claims 



and derided him, except one of the 
thieves crucified with him. Doubtless 
he had heard of Jesus and of his wonderful 
character, and said in his heart: 
This is truly a strange and wonderful 
man; who can know that there is no 
foundation to his claims? He certainly 
lives close to God; I will speak to him 
in sympathy; it can do no harm. Then 
he rebuked his companion, mentioning 
the innocence of Jesus, and, turning to 
Jesus, the conversation noted above 
took place. 

We cannot suppose that this thief had 
any correct or definite idea of Jesus- 
nothing more than a mere feeling that 
he was about to die, and a straw of hope 
was better than nothing. To give him 
credit for more would be to place him 
in faith ahead of all Apostles and followers 
of Jesus, who at this time had 
left him and fled, and who three days 
after said: "We [had] trusted that it 
had been he which should have redeemed 
Israel." 

We can have no doubt as to the import 
of his petition; he meant that 
whenever Jesus reached his kingdom 
power he desired favor. Now, note 
Jesus answer. He does not say that 
he has no kingdom, but, on the contrary, 
by his response he indicates that 
the thiefs request was proper. The 
word translated "verily," or "indeed," is 
the Greek word "amen," and signifies 
"so be it," as you have asked: "I say 
to thee this day [this dark day, when it 
seems as though I am an impostor and 
about to die as a felon], thou shalt be 
with me in Paradise." 

Now, the substance of this is, that 
when the Lord has established his kingdom, 
the thief will be remembered and 
be in Paradise. Notice that we have 
changed the comma from before to 
after to-day. This makes it perfectly 



clear and reasonable. Jesus might have 
told the thief more if he had chosen. 
He might have told him that the reason 
he should be privileged to come to 
Paradise was because he was paying his 
ransom then and there-dying for his 
sins. He might have told him further, 
that he was dying for and ransoming 
also the other thief, as well as the whole 
gaping and deriding multitude before 
him; as well as the millions yet unborn 
and millions then entombed. We know 
this, because we know that "Jesus 
Christ, by the grace of God, tasted death 
for every man," and that as in Adam, or 
on his account, all die, even so in Christ, 
or on his account, shall all be made 
alive and be privileged to come back to 
that Edenic condition forfeited by the 
first mans sin, redeemed for men by 
Christs righteous sacrifice. 

As already shown, the garden of 
Eden was but an illustration of the perfect 
and beautiful earth when fully released 
from the curse. The word Paradise 
is of Arabic origin, not Greek- it 
signifies a garden. The Septuagint 
renders v Gen. 2:8 V thus: "God planted 
a paradise in Eden." When Jesus has 
established his kingdom, bound evil, 
etc., this earth will become a paradise, 
and the two thieves and all that are in 
their graves shall come into it. And 
by becoming obedient to its laws they 
may live forever in it. We doubt not, 
however, that the kind words spoken in 
that dark hour to the Lord of glory, 
will no more lose a suitable reward than 
the gift of a cup of cold water, or other 
small kindnesses done to those whom 
this King is "not ashamed to call his 
brethren." 

But have we the right to change the 
comma? Certainly, the punctuation of 
the Bible is not inspired. The writers 
of the Bible used no punctuation. It was 



invented about four hundred years ago. 
It is merely a modern convenience, and 
should be so used as to bring out sense 
and harmony with all other Scriptures. 
This harmony and sense is obtained 
only by the punctuation we have given 
above. To read it as usually punctuated, 
it would teach that Jesus and 
the thief went away somewhere that 
day, which is contrary to the following 
scriptures, which read carefully: "Luke 24:46 v 
\Tohn 20:17V John 3: 13\ In 
the latter text note that the words, 
"which is in heaven," are an interpolation 
as shown by the oldest MSS. 



R506 : page 5 

ENRICHED BY MANHOOD. 

In the columns of an exchange we 
read this explanation of why Jesus became 
a man: 

"One, whom we may call brother, has 
brought the language down to us, and 
knowing our language, is able to teach 
it to us. How short his earthly life! 
How infinite its results! The everliving, 
irrepressible Word, worked out a 
fitter abode and re-ascended to God 
ENRICHED BY THE POSSESSION OF 
MANHOOD." 

This statement is almost too absurd 
to criticize. If it were true, why should 
not angels be thus enriched? Nay, if 
it so enriched the Son of God, why 
should not the Father also thus enrich 
himself? Truly our exchange has a 
higher estimate of manhood, and a lower 
estimate of spiritual nature, than we can 
find taught in Scripture. We read that 
a perfect manhood, as illustrated in 
Adam and again in Jesus (See v Psa. 8:5\ 
and v Heb. 2:9 V ), is a little lower than 



the nature of angels, though they are 
the lowest order on the spiritual plane. 

But again, notice the reason given for 
Jesus becoming a man-that he might 
become acquainted with our language 
and teach us of heavenly things. Now, 
it is true, that Jesus did teach some 

R507 : page 5 

heavenly things, though very little, as 
he said: "If I have told you earthly 
things and ye believe not, how shall ye 
believe IF I tell you of heavenly 
things?" fJohn 3:12 v ). The fact is that 
the revelation of heavenly or spiritual 
things dates from Pentecost, after he 
was gone, as it is written: "It is expedient 
for you that I go away, for if I go 
not away, the Comforter will not come 
unto you.... I have yet many things 
to say unto you, but ye cannot bear 
them now; howbeit when he, the Spirit 
of truth, is come he will guide you into 
alltruth." CJohnl6:7,12,13 v ). 

It follows, then, that the writer of the 
above is not only in error about Jesus 
being enriched with manhood, but is in 
error also as to why he became a man. 
He could and did teach us heavenly 
things while he was in heaven; hence 
the object of his becoming a man must 
be something else. 

Let us inquire of Paul on this matter, 
and let us remember that a little 
Scripture is better than a great deal of 
theory, whether it be the old musty 
theories expressed in the fifteenth century 
creeds or in modern theorizings 
such as the above. The Apostle says 
that Jesus humbled himself in becoming 
a man, and that the object of so doing 
was to redeem men, to give himself a 
ransom for all, to taste death for every 
man. This being accomplished he was 
exalted again to the spiritual plane, yea 



to the highest grade on that plane of 
being-He has been made a partaker of 
the Divine nature, fl Tim. l:15 v ; v Matt. 20:28 v 
v l Tim. 2:6 V Acts 20:28^). 

He was "put to death in the flesh, 
but quickened in spirit." And "Though 
we have known Christ after the flesh, 
yet now henceforth know we him [so] 
no more." fl Pet. 3:18 v ; v 2 Cor. 5:16^). 
His humanity was all dropped, and so 
must ours be, for "Flesh" and blood 
cannot inherit the kingdom of God." 
flCor. 15:50\) Therefore we must be 
changed to his likeness, which is not human, 
but "The express image of the 
Fathers person." Let us keep natures 
separate, and remember that apples, 
potatoes and peas cannot be blended: 
nor can horses, dogs and fish; because 
they are of different natures. So the 
human and the divine natures cannot be 
blended because they are different natures. 
See Pauls definition of the distinctness 
of natures- "There is one 
kind of flesh of men, another flesh of 
beasts, another of fishes, and another of 
birds." v l Cor. 15:38-41,48\ 

But in this same exchange the editor 
asks, "Why will any contemporary hold 
the editor responsible for expressions of 
correspondents?" Now we should say 
that the above expression is not editorial 
matter, but what of it? We do not 
criticize the editors writings only, but 
the statements of the PAPER. It is the 
paper which goes forth as a Teacher. 
Unless said editor endorses the above 
expression of nonsense he has no right 
to publish it. Is there no responsibility 
to either the Church or the head 
of the Church connected with his position 
of editor? 

What should we say of the cook, who 
would serve up to the table a dish prepared 
by a subordinate, knowing it to 
contain deleterious and poisonous food? 



R507 : page 5 

THE DIVINE RIGHT OF KINGS. 

During the Jewish age Jehovah was 
Israels king, the Most Holy apartment 
of the Tabernacle, and afterward of the 
Temple, representing his throne, from 
which he delivered his rulings through 
the priesthood. This arrangement was, 
doubtless, typical of the arrangement 
for the coming age of restitution. 

But we read that the people murmured, 
and desired a king like the 
heathen nations about them; and God 
complied with their wish, giving Saul, 
David, etc. But while appointing these, 
God merely allowed them to represent 
him, as we read: "Solomon sat on the 
throne of Jehovah as king instead of 
David his father." fl Chron. 29:23\) 
Because of sin, God removed his throne 
from them fEzek. 21:26"), but promised 
that Messiah should come as the true 
King for Jehovahs kingdom, not only 
over Israel, but over the whole world. 
When he came to his own they, as a 
nation, received him not, as foretold. 
He then gave them up and turned from 
them to take out a cabinet of official 
assistants for the kingdom from among 
the other nations of earth whom they 
called Gentiles. 

These who are called out of the Gentiles 
are to be the Bride, the Lambs 
wife, and joint- heir in His kingdom, but 
are told that now they cannot reign, but, 
instead, must suffer and be cast out and 
despised for their Lords sake, and be 
subject to, or under the power of, the 
earthly authorities; UNTIL the "time 
comes for the saints to take the kingdom," 
when "the kingdom under the 



whole heaven shall be given to the people 
of the saints of the Most High." 
fDan. 7:27\) But this may not be, until 
the Lord takes to himself his great 
power and reigns. His kingdom shall 
break in pieces and consume all these 
present evil governments. As the vessels 
of a potter shall they be broken to 
shivers. (See "Dan. 2:44"; "Rev. 2:27"; 
"Psa. 2:1-9-12".) 

For awhile these governments persecuted 
the church-the saints-as Jesus 
had foretold should be the case, saying, 
"Whosoever will live godly [as God directs] 
shall suffer persecution." But 
some thought to improve on Gods 
plan, and, instead of suffering, got the 
church into a reigning position; so, by 
a combination with earthly empires, they 
succeeded, and as a result Papacy was 
exalted and became the "MISTRESS and 
Queen of nations" ("Rev. 17:5' and "18:8"). 

Results show, how much wiser was 
Gods plan than mans. Everything 
was changed; instead of suffering came 
honor; instead of humility came pride; 
instead of truth came error; instead of 
being persecuted she became the persecutor 
of all who condemned her new 
and illegal honors. Soon she began to 
invent sophistries and theories to justify 
her course, first deceiving herself, and 
then the nations, into the belief that the 
promised Millennial reign of Christ had 
come, and that her Popes were His 
representatives. 

It was but another step to declare the 
Church infallible, and but another step 
to claim that the Pope, as the head of 
the Church, Christs vice-gerent, must 
be infallible also. Thus, for centuries, 
she continued to add to her claims and 
to invent theories of tortures, purgatories, 
etc., to add to her influence and 
to give support to her authority, until 
"She made all nations drunk" with her 



erroneous doctrines. fRev. 17:2\) She 
succeeded in convincing, for the time, 
the whole world of the truthfulness of 
her false claims. Then the kings of 
earth could not accept of a crown without 
her permission, unless her ministers 
performed the ceremony, and thus gave 
it her sanction. Thus she crowned the 
kings of Europe, and her head, the 
Pope, blasphemously claimed the proud 
title of "King of kings and Lord of 
lords"-the infallible. 

When Protestantism sprang up it 
protested against many of her vices, 
and spurned her indulgences, disregarded 
her anathemas, but the right to 
rule over and appoint kings, and thus 
reign, was too sweet a pleasure to be cast 
aside. It proved a snare which hindered 
the Reformers from seeing that it was 
one of Papacys boastful assumptions, 
hence they clung to this among other 
marks of the Beast. Protestantism 
soon began to sanction and appoint 
earthly potentates in the name of God, 
thus continuing and countenancing this 
invention and assumption of Papacy. 
Following the example of the mothers 
unlawful union with the world, the 
Protestant sects were also termed harlots. 
CRev. 17:5\) 

The recent crowning of the Czar of 
Russia by the authority, and as the 
head of the Greek Catholic Church, is 
an illustration of this principle. Every 
crowned head in Europe reigns by 
sanction of some religious system. 
Indeed, since none object to the principle, 
it follows that present rulers and 
their claims are sanctioned by every 
prominent sect. 

What are their claims? Blasphemies! 
They claim that they reign "by 
the grace of God"-that Gods favor to 
the nation is shown by His appointment 
of these to rule their respective 



States. In the name of God wicked men 
are often raised to power; in His name 
they both make and break covenants; 
in His name they declare war against 
each other, slaughter thousands, and 
fill thousands of homes with misery. In 
Gods name they attempt to overthrow 
each other, whom they admit were appointed 
of God as much as themselves. 

We complain not at their appointment, 
we interfere not in their exercise 
of their power, remembering that now 
we are commanded to be subject to the 
powers that be, which God has permitted. 
But say not "By the grace of God,"- 
countenance not in the name of Christianity 
those whose appointment comes 
direct from the prince of this world- 
SATAN-and whose interests they advance. 
CJohn 14:30\) 

R507 : page 6 

This grand fraud, practiced in the 
name of Christianity, goes almost unquestioned 
among Christians, and puts 
their interests and sympathies on the 
side of oppression, rather than on the 
side of human freedom. But the question 
cannot long lie dormant; the irreligious 
will soon begin to use their 
reasoning powers on this question and 
others, and will act out their convictions 
so much the more as they realize 
the imposition practiced by religionists 
in the name of the Prince of Peace and 
God of Justice. 

As an evidence of the development 
of thought on this subject, we quote the 
following from the N.Y. Post of recent 
date. It says: "Among all the strange 
beliefs of the race, there is none stranger 
than that which made God Almighty 
select with care some of the most ordinary 
members of the species, often 
sickly, stupid and vicious, to reign over 



great communities under his special 

R508 : page 6 

protection-as His representatives on 
earth." 

To see this evil, or other evils, and 
not to expose them, is to be partaker in 
the evil deeds, for silence is CONSENT. 
We well know that some would counsel 
prudence, for FEAR of evil results from 
any change. Yes, fear is a great snare. 
True, it is the beginning of wisdom to 
fear the Lord, but even this soon gives 
way when we come into harmony with 
Him; for "perfect love casteth out fear." 
As for prudence, as generally exercised 
by the world, it has greatly hindered 
the truth always. It is better termed 
policy; we want none of it; for we read 
that God hides His wisdom from the 
wise and prudent, and reveals it unto 
those who will utter it unreservedly. 
CLuke 10:21\) 

As for a change, that must come, for 
the mouth of the Lord hath spoken it. 
We could not prevent it if we would, 
and those who really appreciate the 
blessedness of the change, from the 
dominion of the prince of darkness to 
that of the Sun of Righteousness, can 
only desire it. 



R508 : page 6 

IS YOUR SACRIFICE SALTED? 

"For every one shall be salted with fire, and 
every sacrifice shall be salted with salt."— 
V MARK9:49\ 

There are few, if any, words in the 
Bible that have a wider range of symbolism 
than the word salt. It is used as 



a symbol for fidelity, friendship, incorruption, 
barrenness, perpetual desolation, 
preservation, etc. 

Most every one knows that salt will 
quickly penetrate vegetable and animal 
matter; it has the remarkable quality of 
diffusing itself through the mass, and 
prevents animal matter from becoming 
putrid and offensive to the smell. 

If we were obliged to consider the 
above Scripture from an orthodox standpoint, 
we should rather let it alone than 
to have anything to say about it; but 
considered in connection and in harmony 
with the rules of the "high calling of 
God in Christ Jesus," as seen by the 
light of the rising sun, we see that which 
is intensely interesting, and which should 
engage our careful thought and earnest 
attention, and which should incite us to 
the greatest diligence to make our 
calling and election sure. 

In order to get the connection of the 
subject complete we must go back to 
the v 43d verse\ We there find that 
Jesus had been teaching the disciples the 
necessity of separating themselves from 
everything which should hinder them 
from meeting the requirements of the 
law of life, no matter how dear or 
valuable that object might be. We 
need only refer to these verses for the 
connection, as Bro. Smith in the May 
TOWER, under the head "Eternal Torment," 
very interestingly treats these 
verses, to which we refer the readers of 
this article. 

Jesus is not now speaking to the 
multitude, but to the little company, to 
those whom he had chosen, for he says, 
"He that is not against us is on our 
part, for whosoever shall give you a cup 
of cold water to drink in my name," etc. 
Now, these are the same persons referred 
to by the words "thy hand, thy 
foot," etc., verses 43,45 and 4T). It is 



better to cut off half of the offending 
powers which these organs symbolize, 
than to retain twice the number to make 
your destruction complete (for we understand 
Gehenna, translated hell here, 
to symbolize complete destruction); "for 
every one shall be salted with fire, and 
every sacrifice shall be salted with salt." 

We must not fail to notice the intimate 
connection between the v 49th verse" 
and the former verses by the little word 
"for," which shows the relation of the 
statements to each other. 

Take the first clause of v verses 43,45 v 
and v 47\ and connect them with the first 
clause of the v 49th verse\ reading, for 
illustration, as though that between the 
clauses were in parenthesis. 

We then read thus: "And if thy 
hand offend thee, cut it off": "For every 
one shall be salted with fire, and every 
sacrifice shall be salted with salt." As 
God will not accept of a divided heart, 
nor of divided service, if a part of your 
powers, symbolized by "hand," "foot," 
etc., cause you to offend (see margin 
and R.V.), it would be much better for 
you to cut it off and to have a single 
one (for they must be one as to harmony) 
to enter into life with, than to have two 
working in opposition, and resulting in 
utter destruction. "For every one shall 
be salted with fire." 

That this expression is used to describe 
the condition of the one who 
should obey the injunction here, to cut 
off and separate from all offending 
things, is evident, not only from the 
connection of the passage to what precedes 
it, but from a kindred passage in 
v Luke 14:34\ In this passage several 
of the oldest and best manuscripts 
(among which are the Sinaitic and Vatican) 
insert after the word salt, the word 
then. With this thought in mind, let 
us read the 34th and 35th verses of the 



v 14th chapter of Luke" . "So, likewise, 
whosoever he be of you that forsaketh 
not all that he hath, he cannot be my 
disciple. Salt, then, is good; but if the 
salt have lost its savor, wherewith shall 
it be seasoned?" 

This "forsaking all," in order to be a 
disciple of Christ, we understand to be 
the salt of fiery trial and separation 
with which "every one," especially those 
who will be disciples of Christ, who 
will follow him fully, "shall be salted"; 
but it "is good," if the salt have not lost 
its savor, its strength. 

If you are clinging to the world, and 
worldly ways, and worldly thoughts, 
and worldly associations, or to a worldly 
church organization, or to anything 
that is foreign to the word and spirit of 
Christ, if such things are at all pleasing 
to you so that you feel an affinity for 
them, feel as though you would like to 
abide there, that you feel more at home 
there, then the salt is losing, if it has not 
already lost, its savor. 

"Whosoever he be of you, that forsaketh 
not all that he hath (will not submit 
to be salted with fire), he cannot 
be my disciple." 

The Master was so salted, and "it is 
enough that the disciple be as his Master." 
It is as though he had said, every 
one who will follow me, must go through 
the fiery trial of amputation, must have 
the dross of base desire consumed, must 
allow the separating work of the Word 
to have its course with him, even though 
it "pierce to the dividing asunder of 
the soul and spirit (separating worldly 
life from divine life), of the joints and 
marrow." If you lose your worldly 
and sectarian life, if they are bound up 
together, you have lost that which is 
gain, for "he who will save his life, shall 
lose it." 

If there is a single ligament or nerve 



through which affinity with the world, 
with falsities or evil of any sort, is kept 
up, let "the sword of the Spirit, which 
is the Word of God," divide asunder; 
and while this painful work is going on, 
"Beloved, think it not strange concerning 
the fiery trial which is to try you, as 
though some strange thing had happened 
unto you, but rejoice, inasmuch 
as (in so far as) ye are partakers of 
Christs sufferings." 

You are not undergoing these as a 
means of your reconciliation to God, for 
you were reconciled, to God by the 
death of his Son" (not sons); but after 
"being reconciled, you are saved by his 
life," which lives and thrives in you 
after the offending part has been (legally) 
cut off. 

Now, after this obnoxious and corrupting 
part has been separated and 
taken away, let us observe the Apostles 
exhortation, and "present our bodies 
(now reckoned, perfect human) a living 
sacrifice"; but when presenting them, 
let us remember that in the type, SALT 
was required to be offered with the 
sacrifice. "With all thine offerings thou 
shalt offer salt" fLev. 2:13 v ). Here 
it is, doubtless, used as a type of, and in 
the text under consideration, as the 
symbol of fidelity, loyalty and 
incorruption. 

When we present our bodies as a 
sacrifice, though it be a living sacrifice, 
it is understood that it is consecrated 
to death; it is thenceforth 
counted ("reckoned") dead indeed unto 
the world. Let, then, the salt of fidelity 
and loyalty be sprinkled well over 
it and diffused well through it; let that 
fidelity keep watch over it; that no unclean 
birds of prey may swoop down 
upon it, nor wild beasts of passion carry 
it off. Let it lay there before God, so well 
salted that it shall not become corrupt 



before him and a stench in his nostrils. 

While it is so kept, it is a "holy" sacrifice. 

It is not a lame lamb, nor a blind 

one, that we are offering by faith unto 

him, but it is one that meets the requirements 

of his holy law, and is holy 

and acceptable unto God. 

Christ Jesus gave himself for us "an 
offering and a sacrifice to God for a 
sweet- smelling savor." It was sweet- smelling, 
because it was well salted with 
fidelity, he being "faithful to him that 
appointed him." Let us also be faithful 
to him that appointed us. 

But if we become careless and neglect 
the salt, the sacrifice, which otherwise 
would have been acceptable, will become 
offensive unto him on account of corruption 
(unfaithfulness), then, instead of 
receiving a blessing, we should receive a 
curse OMal. 1:14^). 

Let us be glad that we are permitted 
to see the radiant symbolism of Gods 
Word; and may we not only submit to, 
but volunteer to be "salted with fire," 
then we shall be prepared to offer an 
acceptable sacrifice that shall be "salted 
with salt." 

Thus saith the Lord, "I will bring 
the third part (not necessarily one-third) 
through the fire, and will refine them as 
silver is refined, and will try them as 
gold is tried; they shall call on my 
name, and I will hear them: I will say, 
it is my people; and they shall say, the 
Lord is my God fZech. 13:9"). 
J. C. SUNDERLIN. 



R509 : page 6 

THE BREAD AND THE WINE. 

EDITOR WATCH TOWER:-I read 
your article in the April number upon 



"The Passover," and am well pleased 
with it. I believe the Lords Supper is 
the Christians substitute for the Jewish 
Passover, and should be observed annually; 
but upon one point you did not 
speak out. I refer to the kind of wine 
to be used in this Supper. You suggested 
that "unleavened bread" be used, 
which I think is perfectly correct, but I 
ask, What kind of wine should be 
used? You teach correctly, I think, 
that leaven is the type of sin, etc., and 
therefore not a fit type of Christs purity. 
I think the same of fermented, or leavened 
wine. It is not pure, and therefore 
not a fit emblem of Christs blood! But 
you did not teach us that we ought to 
use fresh, pure wine instead of the kind 
that "biteth like a serpent and stingeth 
like an adder." 

Can any substance be a proper emblem 
of Christs pure and precious blood 
after that substance has fermented and 
becomes poisonous? I conclude that 
good wine is just as important to a proper 
celebration of the Lords Supper as 
unleavened bread. Hoping you will 
think and speak of these things, I am 
yours truly. P. D. LANE. 



OUR RESPONSE. 

In our desire to do nothing to hinder 
the cause of Total Abstinence, with 
which we sympathize, we have heretofore 
refrained from commenting specially 
on the subject mentioned above, but 
a number of inquiries, recently, show that 
the subject is active and needs a reply. 

We remark first, that there are many 
things about our climate and the restless, 
excited methods of our day, which 
almost inevitably lead men to excessive 
use of intoxicating liquors when once 



its use is commenced. Not only so, 

but it seems evident that most of the 

intoxicating liquors, manufactured at 

the present time, are drugged and adulterated 

in a manner that greatly increases 

the dangers and evils resulting 

from their use. 

For these reasons we give the Prohibitionists 
our sympathy, either in the 
enforcement of the present laws against 
those who adulterate liquors, or we 
should rejoice if they be able (which we 
doubt) to procure the enactment of new 
laws which would entirely stop its manufacture 
and sale. But this, we think, 
will not be accomplished until the 
prince of this world- Satan-is bound. 

But notwithstanding our sympathy 
-notwithstanding also our knowledge 
of the fact that the sympathies and 
prejudices, too, of a majority of our 
readers is on the side of Total Abstinence 
-yet, if we speak, it must be what 
we consider truth-truth, no matter 
whose idol is broken or whose theories 
suffer; and here it is: 

The claim is often repeated by zealous 
temperance advocates, that the 
Bible never countenances the use of 
intoxicating wine. They say that the 
wine Jesus made and drank was simply 
grape juice and not wine, and that a 
different Greek word is used when referring 
to these different liquors. We 
answer that this is a mistake. The 
Greek word gleukos, which means grape 
juice or "new wine," occurs but once in 
the New Testament ("Acts 2:13"), and 
its use there indicates that, if used to 
excess, it would confuse the mind. The 
word from which wine is translated, in 
every other instance in the New Testament, 
is oinos, and signifies grape wine 
of the usual sort, which always intoxicates 
when used to excess. 

As to whether oinos will intoxicate 



please note the following texts: "Be 
not drunk with wine, oinos, wherein is 
excess." v Eph. 5:18\ See also ^1 Pet. 4:3 V ; 
v Lukel:15 v ancT7:33,34\ 

But, it is suggested, that if wine contains 
the elements of leaven it would 
prove that it was not what Jesus used 
in instituting "the Supper." We will 
admit, that if this were so, it would prove 
what is claimed; but it is not so. Temperance 
orators may and do, make this 
statement, doubtless often ignorantly, 
but scientific men recognize quite a 
difference between alcoholic or vinous 
fermentation and putrefactive fermentation. 
The result of the former process 
is to cast out impurities and produce a 
sweet and pleasant liquid as in wine, 
while the other process produces sourness 
and ultimately rottenness. This 
last process is employed in leavening 
bread, the decay or fungus growth 
being arrested in its very early development 
by baking. 

So far as the Jewish custom is concerned, 
it disproves instead of proves the 
claim that wine contains the leaven 
quality, for the Jews use wine at the 
Passover and put away leaven. They 
use the REAL wine. The claim that 
unfermented grape-juice was what the 
Lord used, we can see to be incorrect 
in another way: The vintage season 
in Palestine was September and October, 
and the Passover was about six 
months later. The wine made in October 
would of necessity be fermented 
before April. 

The testimony of Jesus is that old 
wine is better than new fLuke 5:39"; 
"John 2:10"); and the fact that the wine 
they used did ferment, is shown by 
the parable concerning the putting of 
new wine (in which alcoholic fermentation 
was not finished) into old bottles 
[skins] which had been used before, 



and, having lost their elasticity, would 
burst under the expansion of gasses 
caused by the ferment. 

But, as before remarked, the circumstances, 
climate, etc., here, as well as 
the purity of the liquors, differ much 
from those of Jesus and the Apostles; 
and if any one should feel himself endangered 
by tasting wine at the remembrance 
of our Lords death, we would 

R509 : page 7 

recommend that such a one should use 
raisin-juice instead, which, though not 
wine, is certainly a "fruit of the vine." 
We provide the raisin-juice every year, 
but it was used by only one person at 
our last celebration of the Supper. 



R509 : page 7 

The Seven Last Plagues. 

CONCLUDED. 



THE FIFTH PLAGUE. 

And the fifth poured out his bowl on 
the THRONE of the BEAST and his KINGDOM 
was DARKENED, and they bit their 
tongues because of the pain, and blasphemed 
the God of heaven on account of 
their pains ["and their ulcers" is omitted 
by Sinaitic MS.] and they reformed 
not ["from their works" is omitted by 
Sinaitic MS.KRev. 6: 10,1 V. 

This pictures to us trouble coming 
upon Papacy (the Beast); not so much 
upon the masses of Romanists as upon 
those in authority, its rulers-the throne 



power-their clergy. Papacys walls 

are higher, its claims are stronger, and 

its claims to divine authority and infallibility 

of longer standing than those 

of the Protestant system-her daughters; 

therefore she the longer escapes 

the increasing light of this "Day of the 

Lord," and hence the longer escapes 

the trouble consequent to her errors. 

But she shall not escape the trouble. 
It comes on the throne or ruling class, 
and their kingdom is filled with darkness 
--uncertainty-absence of former 
unity and harmony, and in their trouble 
the pain will be increased by tongue-biting. 
The tongues of Papacy are its 
decrees and utterances, past and future. 
To bite, then, in pain, implies contradiction 
and denial of former utterances. 
Whether this signifies a contradiction 
and reversal of previous utterances of 
the Papal hierarchy, or whether it 
means controversy and differences between 
the living rulers of the Church, 
we may not decide, but it will probably 
include both of these difficulties, and in 
their attempt to justify their contradictory 
teachings, Gods character will be 
further dishonored, misrepresented, or 
blasphemed. 

As an illustration of this symbol, "biting 
their tongues," we note Papacys 
present humiliating concessions and 
contradiction of her former teachings, in 
her present recognition of the Protestant 
governments of Europe, which 
Papacy not only did not create, but 
actually cursed, and encouraged her 
faithful to use every means to destroy. 
This biting is occasioned by the pain 
and humbled condition in which Papacy 
finds herself. She has lost all temporal 
power, and to maintain long her spiritual 
influence, feels that she must not 
antagonize the governments which she 
can no longer claim the right to 



control. 

When we remember that it was this 
same Papal system which in its prosperity 
had "a mouth speaking great things" 
ODan. 7:8-25 v ; v Rev. 13:5 V ), making 
boastful claims, it should not surprise us 
that God should ordain as part of its 
reward that it should eat its own words. 



R509 : page 7 

THE SIXTH PLAGUE. 

"And the sixth poured out his bowl 
on the GREAT RIVER-the Euphrates; 
and its water was dried up, so that the 
way of those kings who are from the 
sun-rising might be prepared." fv. 12 v ). 

Literal Babylon was built upon the 
river Euphrates. Its wealth, supplies 
and sustenance came largely from this 
source. It had immense walls and strong 
gates over the river. Within the city, 
in bondage, were Israelites, Gods covenant 
people, and to overthrow Babylon 
and deliver these God appointed Cyrus 
the Median General, flsa. 45:1-5 V ; 
v Dan. 5:30,3 r.) He, coming to this 
strong city, did not attack it directly, 
but, by digging another channel for the 
waters of the river, he dried up the old 

R510:page7 

channel, through which he marched his 
army under the gates and captured the 
city. 

That this historic fact is used as the 
basis of a symbol in Revelation, none 
can question. Babylon and her fall are 
frequently mentioned, and here the drying 
up of the Euphrates adds to the 
correspondence. While "Babylon" is 



used as a general name for the entire 
nominal Church, it is used and is specially 
applicable to that portion of it 
called "the mother of HARLOTS." This 
sixth plague, or form of evil, is upon 
Babylon, the mother, and while other 
systems have channels, or rivers, her 
system is built upon the "GREAT 
RIVER." "And in her forehead was 
the name written BABYLON THE GREAT, 
the mother of harlots and abominations 
of the earth." fRev. 17:5\) Following 
the literal, and applying it to the 
symbol, we reason that the waters of 
this great river represent the people 
who, by their influence and money, 
support Papacy-from which Babylon 
the great draws her revenues. And to 
this agrees the explanation by the angel: 
"The waters which thou sawest where 
the harlot sitteth are peoples and multitudes 
and nations and tongues." fRev. 17:15".) 
The millions of Papacys subjects 
are of every tongue and clime, and 
this symbol shows that a disaffection is 
to spring up between the subjects and 
the church authorities which will turn 
aside her support and "dry up" her 
revenues, and thus speedily lead to 
Babylons complete destruction. "The 
drying up" will probably require years 
for its accomplishment. 

The direct cause of the drying will be 
the relationship existing between Papacy 
and the kingdoms of earth. Papacy, 
under the claim that it was Christs 
vice-gerent-His representative-in the 
days of her prosperity claimed the 
right to appoint the kings of earth, and 
did so; and subjects had a right TO 
REBEL against any government or king 
not thus recognized by Papacy. Since 
she has lost her power over the kingdoms 
of earth, she does not press this 
old claim, but would rather conciliate 
all the kingdoms; both those which she 



appointed and those appointed and 
sanctioned by other daughter churches. 
In this she is arraying herself directly 
on the side of these kingdoms, and in 
opposition to the increasing desire and 
effort of the people for liberty. Therefore, 
when present tendencies have produced 
a closer affiliation of religion 
and State than has existed for some 
time, it will result in leading the masses 
to throw off the yoke of the Church as 
well as the State, since both will be 
leagued against their cherished ideas of 
liberty and equality. The support of 
the people-the waters of the Euphrates 
--being thus withdrawn, the Babylon 
Church organization will become weak 
and helpless, by reason of the drying up 
of the waters from its channel. 

A hint in this direction is furnished 
in the history of the past month. 
Though the ruler ship of Great Britain 
is not of Papacys appointment, and in 
fact was created in violation of her laws 
and claims, yet the Pope has issued a 
"bull" or edict to its faithful in Ireland 
commanding both priests and people to 
desist from hostility toward the laws 
and government of England. Not to 
speak of the merits of the question, 
this action is certainly contrary to the 
previous claims and theories of this 
Church; and from their words it is evident 
that some of the Irish people are 
not slow to see this. At a public meeting 
held to consider the Popes edict, a 
famous orator among them (Charles 
OBrien) said, "The Irish people will 
neither be ruled by Rome nor Westminster." 
[The Protestant Irish are 
mostly Presbyterian, ruled by the principles 
of the "Westminster Confession 
of Faith."] And among the masses it 
was freely proposed to "Boycott the 
Pope" by refusing to pay "Peters 
pence" (a regular collection among 



Romanists, the world over, for the support 
of the Pope). Does not this look 
like a beginning of the turning away or 
drying up of one of the tributaries of 
that "great river"? As surely as God 
has given the symbol, so surely will it 
be fulfilled, and even now it hasteth 
greatly. 

The "drying up" is "to prepare the 
way of the kings from the Sun-rising." 
These kings we understand to be the 
saints-those who, with Christ, will be 
"kings and priests" to reign over the 
earth. fRev. 10:5\) They come, not 
to the Sun-rising, but from the Sun-rising. 
They come bringing light with 
them. This is a beautiful symbol of 
how "the righteous shall shine forth as 
the Sun in the kingdom of their Father." 
They bring with them light, liberty and 
joy to the groaning creation, for "The 
Sun of Righteousness shall arise with 
healing in his wings." The object of 
all these changes is to prepare mankind 
for the rule of righteousness-the kingdom 
really of Gods appointment which 
is to take the place of these which 
Anti-christ has attempted to authorize. 

"And I saw out of the MOUTH of the 
DRAGON, and out of the MOUTH of the 
BEAST, and out of the MOUTH of the 
FALSE PROPHET, three impure spirits 
like frogs" (Verse 13 v ). The DRAGON, 
as before explained, symbolizes civil 
government (especially that which once 
constituted civil Rome). The BEAST 
still and always, means Papacy. The 
FALSE PROPHET is a new symbol, and 
takes the place of both the "two-horned 
beast" and "the image of the beast," 
and, we believe, is a still more comprehensive 
symbol, representing all systems 
teaching error-those called "orthodox" 
as well as many considered 
heterodox. These three classes will all 
give forth one kind of teaching, called 



symbolically unclean spirits (impure, 
erroneous teaching), like frogs. 

This harmonious teaching in which 
these can all unite, we believe to be the 
dogmas of "the divine right of kings," 
the "authority of the clergy," and the 
claim that mankind is bound to submit 
to these and be controlled by them. 
Many of these-kings and clergy-and 
many of those who will recognize their 
claims, will doubtless be honest, but will 
be thus in opposition to God, because 
they know not that they are in the hour 
of his judgment, and that the time for 
the displacement of these Anti-christs, 
and the governments of their appointing, 
has come. It is a blessed fact that 
these beastly governments will eventually 
give place to the kingdom of 
God; that the times of the Gentiles 
will END by being FULL-filled; and 
while this is now due to be understood 
and appreciated by the saints- -those 
entirely consecrated to Gods word and 
will-yet "none of the wicked shall 
understand": hence they will be found 
fighting against God and his 
arrangements. 

Frogs have a very wise look, large 
mouths, are much puffed up, and utter 
only croakings. These doctrines, called 
spirits in symbol, which are to be common 
to these three classes, frog-like- 
much puffed up-are proclaimed with 
great swelling words, with a show of 
superior wisdom-wise look-and with 
much croaking. 

In brief, this indicates that when these 
systems give forth these unclean spirits 
or doctrines of the divine rights of kings 
and clergy and submission of the people 
as to God, it will be with boastfulness, 
an attempt to overawe with dignity, 
superior wisdom and ability, and 
with continual allusion to the disasters 
which must attend any change of present 



arrangements. This croaking, already 
beginning, as this darkness of 
trouble draws on, will increase with it. 
It will be heard from every mouthpiece, 
large and small, religious and political, 
officers and press. In fear they will be 
uttering warnings and threats, and few 
will be the independents to plead the 
cause of right, or to show that the time 
for the reign of righteousness has come, 
and hence the conflict. 

These are the "spirits of demons, 
working signs," i.e., doctrines of devils 
--the devils theory relative to present 
evil governments, indirectly of Satans 
appointment, through his agencies. 
These doctrines show signs in proof of 
their authority. They will give evidences 
and seemingly plausible reasons 
for the rights of kings and clergy; chief 
among these will doubtless be Gods 
appointment of kings and priests over 
fleshly Israel-which, however, was typical 
of the church and not of worldly 
systems fl Peter 2:9 V ). 

These unclean spirits, erroneous doctrines, 
"go forth to the kings of the 
whole habitable earth, to gather them 
together for the war [conflict between 
right and wrong] of the great day of 
the omnipotent God." f verse 14\) The 
kings of the whole world may properly 
be supposed, in symbol, to include not 
only kings, but princes, generals, also 
those termed financial kings and merchant 
princes, and the GREAT ONES 
among religious teachers. These classes 
influence and encourage each other with 
this impure doctrine of Satan-hence 
they gather or unite them all together 
on the one side of the conflict already 
drawing nigh. Were it not for this 
harmony and unity inspired by this 
teaching, each of these classes of kings 
and rulers would have felt the weakness 
and erroneousness of their claims, and 



truth might have prevailed more easily 
against them; but in their union they 
find strength and hope for success in 
retaining their hold upon the people. 

"And THEY gathered them together 
into THAT PLACE which is called in 
Hebrew ARMAGEDDON" (Verse 16"). Armageddon 
means mount of DESTRUCTION; 
and this describes what will be 
the result of this doctrine. It will unite 
all these systems in one cause as against 
the masses of the people and their liberties, 
and the result will be the total destruction 
of all those erroneous systems 
of Church and State. They shall fall. 

The "fifteenth verse" is abruptly thrown 
in as a parenthesis. It reads literally 
thus: "Lo, I come AS A THIEF! Blessed 
the one WATCHING and keeping the garments 
of himself; so that not naked HE 
may walk, and they see the shame of 
HIM." This is very significant. It declares 
that at the time when this evil 
doctrine will be apparently uniting all 
upon the side of law and order-upon 
the side of kings and clergy-our Lord 
will then be PRESENT, but secretly and 
unknown except to the watching ones. 

R511 : page 7 

Only those who are truly his and watching 
in the light of his Word will not be 
deceived by this impure teaching, but 
will realize his presence and the necessity 
of the foretold fall of all these 
things, because the rightful king is present 
to remove these out of the way of 
his kingdom. 

The position of this declaration- 
thrown in disconnectedly-is significant. 
It teaches that our Lord will be present 
before the impure teaching begins to 
GATHER them to their destruction. 



R511 : page 7 

THE SEVENTH PLAGUE. 

"And the seventh poured out his bowl 
on the AIR; and there came forth a LOUD 
VOICE from the TEMPLE OF GOD [Sinaitic 
MSS.] saying, IT IS DONE." 

Seven is often used as the symbol of 
completeness; so this seventh plague 
completes the trouble coming, and will 
result in the complete unveiling of Satans 
deceptions and the binding or destruction 
of his power and influence. 
The result of this trouble brings conviction 
to some. This is shown by the 
great voice from the Temple, saying, 
"It HAS been done!" (Literal translation.) 
When last we saw the temple, 
or the nominal church, it was filling 
with smoke and casting out the faithful 
messengers of truth, saying, "Go 
your ways; pour out the plagues; do 
all you can" fRev. 15:8^; V 16:T). Boastfully 
relying on internal strength; but 
now, when the seventh has been poured 
out, we hear this nominal temple saying, 
"It has been done"; we are now convinced 
of the truths uttered by the 
faithful messengers whom, in our ignorance 
and pride, we cast out from us: 
Who told us that we were in darkness 
and great distress was coming upon us, 
and that our systems, which we so fondly 
cherished, were to crumble into dust. 
It has been done even as they declared; 
Babylon is utterly destroyed; as a great 
millstone cast into the sea, she shall rise 
no more. 

This temple class, which finally recognizes 
Gods dealings when these systems 
are entirely destroyed, is the same 
which we have found elsewhere mentioned 
in Scripture, and which we have 



designated the second company, who, 
though losing the prize promised to 
overcomers of the Beast, etc. fRev. 20:4 V ), 
are "saved so as by fire [these 
severe judgments] in the day of the 
Lord Jesus." This blessed result upon 
this second company gives us an intense 
interest in and longing for the destruction 
of the enslaving systems mentioned 

R511 : page 8 

in v succeeding verses' as the result of this 
seventh trouble. 

"And there were lightnings and thunders 
and voices." This describes the 
general effect on mankind; lightnings 
signifies diffusion of knowledge. "His 
lightnings enlightened the world" fPsa. 97:4 V ). 
Voices signify proclamations 
and general discussion of subjects by 
those being enlightened. Thunderings 
signify tumults accompanying the increased 
enlightenment. 

"And there was a great EARTHQUAKE; 
such as was not since a man 
was on the earth, such an earthquake- 
so great. And the GREAT CITY became 
three parts, and the city [Sinaitic reading] 
of the nations fell down" fv. 18 v ). 

An earthquake would symbolize a 
revolution, and here brings to our attention 
the greatest revolution which ever 
has or ever will take place on earth. 
This is the great revolution mentioned 
by the Prophet, in which every mountain 
and hill (the high ones) should be 
brought low, and the valleys (humble 
ones) be exalted, bringing all humanity 
to a common level as a preparation for 
the righteous reign of the Lords Anointed. 
Each of the previous plagues 
has tended toward this end, and this 
last results in the utter overthrow of the 
triple alliance or association between 
the Beast (Papacy), the False Prophet 



(other religious systems teaching error), 
and the Dragon (civil power), shown 
under the sixth plague. 

The Great City here evidently represents 
these united three elements which 
attempted in union to rule over or control 
the world. This union and power 
will continue for awhile, but, as here 
shown, they will again separate-be divided 
into three parts. Seeing that 
their alliance and mutual support has 
failed to control and keep subject the 
restless and turbulent masses, each will 
attempt to adopt an individual policy in 
their effort to adjust and settle society. 
But their efforts will be fruitless, and 
will only hasten the crisis of the hour. 
As a consequence, we read: "The city 
of the nations fell down." 

But, though the kingdoms shall fall, 
the religious element of the union shall 
not escape. Under the name Babylon 
they all seem to be included (as elsewhere), 
saying, "Babylon the great 
was remembered before God, to have 
given her the cup of the wine of the indignation 
of the wrath" (Verse 19 v ). 
This signifies that the fiercest of the 
trouble-the wine or extract of the 
wrath- will be upon the Babylon systems 
more than upon the political division. 

"And every ISLAND fled and no 
MOUNTAINS were found." (Verse 20\) 
[Islands seem to symbolize Republican 
governments-organizations of people 
slightly above the "sea" level.] This 
would be the natural result of the overthrow 
of monarchies or kingdoms, symbolically 
called mountains, as indicated 
in v Psa. 97:5\ "The hills (literal, mountains) 
melted and flowed down like wax 
at the PRESENCE OF THE LORD, at the 
presence of the Lord of the whole 
earth." This is a grandly expressive 
illustration of the passing away of earths 
dominion. In this day of the Lord- 



the day of His presence, the day of the 
establishment of his kingdom in the 
earth-some of the mountains [kingdoms] 
will melt, or gradually come down 
to the level of the people, by the fire and 
great heat, caused by increase of truth 
and knowledge, while others remaining 
firm will be overwhelmed-by the "sea" 
-in revolutions. This last form is described 
in "Psalm 46\ which seems to give 
a complete picture of this seventh 
plague. It reads thus: "God is our 
refuge and strength, a very present help 
in trouble; therefore will we not fear 
though the earth [society] be removed, 
and though the mountains [kingdoms] 
be carried into the midst of the sea 
[overthrown by the ungovernable masses] : 
Though the waters thereof roar 
and be troubled [in great commotion], 
though the mountains shake with the 
swellings thereof." Then follows a more 
literal statement of the same things. 
C verse 6\) "The heathen [lit. Gentiles] 
raged, the kingdoms were moved; he 
uttered his voice, the earth melted." 

While kingdoms [mountains] shall 
give place to republics, [islands] so the 
islands in due time shall also flee away, 
as we find it here recorded. fRev. 16:20\) 
That is, the spirit of liberty will 
overleap all bounds and order, and end 
in anarchy. But notice that when the 
republics are swept away, it will be after 
kingdoms have all been overturned, 
as indicated by the expression-"No 
mountains were found." 

It is in a similar manner that the Master 
speaks of the "sea and waves roaring" 
as the beginning of trouble and 
cause of fear. And Peter refers to this 
time of trouble, which shall burn as an 
oven, as the time when the earth and 
all earthly elements shall be consumed 
and give place to a new earth [society] 
and new heavens [government], then 



there shall be no more sea [people not 
religiously restrained]. 

"And a great HAIL, as if weighing a 
talent, comes down from heaven on men; 
and men blasphemed God on account 
of the plague of the hail, because the 
plague of it is exceedingly great." 
C Verse 21\) 

Hail is solidified water. If water or 
rain, causing fruitfulness and refreshing 
to earth, be a symbol of truth, refreshing 
and causing gracious fruits in humanity, 
then hail must signify truth delivered in 
such a way as to be dangerously destructive 
to things with which it comes 
in conflict. These will be heavy-a 
talent each-about the weight of a man 
--sufficient to break down everything 
before it. This recalls the symbolic use 
of this same word by Isaiah "And the 
hail shall sweep away the refuge of lies 
and the waters (truth) shall overflow the 
hiding place." flsa. 28:17^). Untruth 
-error-falsity, is the bane of the world, 
and the time of trouble would be incomplete, 
and the world still unprepared for 
the reign of righteousness, were it not 
for this hail. Recalling a similar plague 
which came literally upon Egypt, we 
find that it injured only those Egyptians 
who had not respect to the words of Jehovah 
(See^Exod. 9:19-21*); and we 
may safely reckon the same of this symbolic 
hail; it will smite down and 
subdue only those who are in opposition 
to it, and that for their good. 

We need not suppose that this hail 
comes last, for in giving an account 
something must be mentioned last if all 
occurred simultaneously. These various 
things described will occur, or be 
in process at once- voices, thunderings, 
hail and lightning among the people, 
causing the earthquake, fall of Babylon, 
and mountains, etc. This is more than 
hinted at, in the fact that these same 



events, mentioned under the seventh 
seal and seventh trumpet, are mentioned 
indiscriminately as one event. 

The hail, be it remembered, "comes 
down from heaven": heaven, as already 
defined, symbolizes spiritual powers, 
but not any longer corrupt and vitiated 
spiritual powers, for these have passed 
away. Babylon has been cast as a 
millstone into the "sea" to rise no more. 
This is the new "heavens" which shall 
gradually take the place of the old, which 
is to "pass away with a great noise" or 
tumult-voices, thunderings, &c. Yes, 
thank God, he that in Verse 15 v announces 
his presence as a thief will have not 
only broken down the kingdoms of the 
present, but will also have set up that 
kingdom for which our Lord taught us 
to pray: Thy kingdom come; thy will 
be done on earth as in heaven. "Sing 
unto the Lord, O ye saints of his, and 
give thanks at the remembrance of his 
holiness; for his anger endureth but a 
moment; in his favor is life: weeping 
may endure for a night, but joy cometh 
in the morning." fPsa. 30:4,5 V ). 

"Blessed be his glorious name forever; 
and let the whole earth be filled 
with his glory. Amen and Amen." 



R512:page8 

WHAT DOES THIS FOREBODE? 

During the session of the Ninety-Fifth 
General Assembly of the Presbyterian 
Church of the United States, held recently 
at Saratoga, Dr. Herrick Johnson, 
of Chicago, in his opening address, 
speaking of the peril within the Presbyterian 
body, said: 

"The Church is rapidly approaching 
calamity. It is threatened with a famine 



of preachers. Our Church numbers 
5,741 congregations, and by no possible 
figuring can ministers be made to match 
churches. Take in every stated supply 
and retired minister, and still 500 
churches are pastorless. When the 
taper burns at both ends look out for 
darkness. There are no grounds of 
hoped-for relief in the colleges and 
theological seminaries to supply the demand. 
The trend is continually the 
wrong way. Of the students in twelve 
colleges in the last decade, only nineteen 
per cent entered or proposed to enter 
the ministry. The loss has gone too 
far not to injure the Church. Unless it 
be retrieved, disaster follows." 

This is indeed, a gloomy outlook, and 
we do not wonder that the Moderator 
of the Assembly views it with alarm. 
This is the more reasonable when we 
consider that the Presbyterian body 
within the past few years has not grown 
to any extent numerically stronger. It 
indicates a growing apathy among its 
members to take an active interest in 
the teaching and propagation of the 
Presbyterian tenets. But this apathy, 
this lack of vocations to the ministry is 
not confined to the Presbyterian body; 
the same wail of grief comes from the 
other denominations in the Protestant 
fold. The young men who enter their 
course of studies ostensibly for the purpose 
of becoming the exponents of the 
particular tenets of their respective 
creeds, are drawn away by the attractions 
of the world and embrace other 
avocations. While this dearth in the 
ministry exists, medicine, law and other 
professions are overcrowded, and while 
the aspirants to worldly honors are 
nominally members of the Protestant 
congregations, they, as a rule, take no 
interest in church affairs beyond attending 
service when it suits them and contributing 



liberally to the support of their 
pastors and their Church institutions. 
Catholic Mirror. 



R512:page8 
PALESTINE A NATION. 

While men are absorbed in their little 
cares, alternately moved by hopes and 
fears, the grand and stately march of 
human events progress onward and irresistibly 
to completion in the fulfillment 
of an inevitable law which controls 
all human action. Men here and there 
raise their puny voices as if to stay this 
tide of advancement, arrest this fiat of 
the Eternal. As well might they attempt 
to stay the law which governs the 
universe. Races have as fixed a course 
to run as have the stars that dazzle in 
the blue vault above us, and the race of 
Israel is the bright fixed star amongst 
them. In all its wanderings it has been 
true to its course. Its mission has been 
foreseen and foretold and its final restoration 
to the Holy Land prophesied. 
That this prophecy is being fulfilled the 
signs of the times indicate. It is being 
accomplished so quietly and so gradually 
that only those who have given the 
subject attention realize the importance 
of the work done. Our readers are to-day 
presented with a comprehensive 
statement of acts, facts and opinions in 
regard to this historic enterprise 
which cannot fail to interest all thoughtful 
minds. The picture presented has 
in it the essence of romance. It is at 
once real and ideal. Aside from the prophetic 
features of the subject, the political 
importance is of the deepest 
significance. 

Palestine is a political necessity to the 



Jewish race. The founding of a nation 
in the Holy Land once more, means an 
exaltation of all Israel. It places her as 
a nation amongst the nations of the earth. 
It gives to the Jew that political power 
and sovereign right which means protection. 
It makes him a citizen of his 
country, and gives him a passport 
amongst the nations of the earth.... 
This may look impracticable to the 
man in the counting-room absorbed in 
his books, to the man in his store absorbed 
in figuring up his profits and 
losses, to the man steeped in the bliss 
of social pleasures, but it is as clear as 
the noondays sun to whoever makes a 
study of the political horoscope. 

The political autonomy realized, the 
Jews scattered throughout the world 
will not flock to Palestine in a body. 
There are 300,000 Jews in Asia, 400,000 
in Africa, and 5,000,000 live in Europe. 
It is from these that Palestine will draw 
its life of restoration. The American-born 
Jew will undoubtedly remain an 
American, and if he should ever visit 
the Holy Land it would be for pleasure 
and travel and to see a land so famous 
as the chief birthplace of his heroic race. 

It may be said that geographically 
speaking Palestine is too small to exert 
much influence as a political, intellectual 
or moral power among the nations of 
the earth. We reply that in ancient 
times Greece was a power, and that in 
modern times the little island of Britain 
is a power. Geographically speaking, 
what are they? It is intellect, moral 
force and pride of nationality that make 
nations great, and not extent of territory. 
It is intellect and moral power 
that will make Israel renowned among 
nations. -Jewish Messenger. 



R512:page8 

OUR BESETMENTS. 

This is a trying period for those to 
whom the light comes. Satan seems 
to use every art to hinder a thorough 
investigation of the truth. Some he 
crowds with business. To some he 
opens up what would seem like good 
chances to success. Others he crowds 
with household duties and cares. He 
draws many into small reforms, and 
urges them to give more and more of 
their time and energies to the seemingly 
noble work. He fills up the spare 
time of others with social enjoyments or 
little recreations or relaxations. Anything 
and everything to keep us from 
giving ourselves wholly to the most important 
work that any have ever had 
the privilege of doing. To keep up 
with advancing light will require much 
study. We need to test every call upon 
our time by the questions, Will it be 
more to the glory of God that I do this 
than to study his Word? If it is necessary, 
How can I best hasten it so as to 
leave more time to devote to his work? 
W. I. M. 



R512:page8 

A HIGH CHURCH Episcopal paper in 
Chicago contains the following advertisement: 

"A young man, unmarried, in Priests 
Orders, energetic worker, vigorous 
preacher, and who can say or sing and 
celebrate in a Catholic manner the 
Offices of the Church, wishes to become 
the Rector of a Parish, or an Assistant. 
Address," etc. 

You pay your money and you take 
your choice, whether you will have him 



"say" those Offices in a Protestant 
manner or "sing and celebrate them in 
a Catholic manner. "--Independent. 



R512:page 1 

VOL. V. PITTSBURGH, PA., AUGUST, 1883. NO. 1. 



page 1 

ZIONS 

Watch Tower 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRISTS PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED MONTHLY AT 

101 Fifth Avenue, Pittsburgh, Pa. 



C. T. RUSSELL, Editor and Publisher. 



The Editor recognizes a responsibility to the Master, 
relative to what shall appear in these columns, 
which he cannot and does not cast aside; yet he 
should not be understood as endorsing every expression 
of correspondents, or of articles selected 
from other periodicals. 

TERMS OF SUBSCRIPTION. 

TERMS : —Fifty cents a year, postage prepaid. 
You may send paper money to the amount of two 
dollars, by mail, at our risk. Larger amounts may 
be sent by Drafts, P.O. Money Order, or Registered 
Letter, payable to C. T. RUSSELL. 

FOREIGN TERMS. 

Foreign Postage being higher, our terms to foreign 
subscribers will be 65 cents a year. Please 



send us no foreign money or postage stamps, as we 
can make no use of them. Remittances may be 
made by Foreign Postal Money Orders. 

TAKE NOTICE. 

This paper will be sent free to any of the Lords 
poor who will send a card yearly requesting it. 
Freely we have received and freely we would give 
the truth. "Ho, every one that thirsteth, come ye 
to the waters; and he that hath no money, come ye, 
buy and eat-yea, come, buy wine and milk without 
money and without price." And you that have it- 
"Wherefore do ye spend money for that which is 
not bread? and your labor for that which satisfieth 
not? Hearken diligently- and eat ye that which is 
good, and let your soul delight itself in fatness. "- 
ISAIAH 55 :1,2\ 



R512:page 1 

VIEW FROM THE TOWER. 

This number commences Vol. V., and 
from the Tower we look backward over 
the last few years, and as we see the 
pathway shining more and more, we rejoice, 
thank God, and take courage. 

"Looking back, we praise the way 
God hath led us-led us, day by day." 

Each step on the shining path brings 
us nearer and nearer the perfect light of 
day-nearer to the perfect appreciation 
of truth in all its parts and relationships 
-the whole truth. 

Our confidence in our Leader is 
strengthened too, in that while we have 
endeavored to make no paths for ourselves, 
but to follow his leading implicitly, 
we can look back and see that he 
has led us in a straight and progressive 
course. We have not been blown about 
by every wind of doctrine, but have 
been piloted in a course direct toward 



the light, "as the needle to the pole." 

Let us glance backward a few years 
and trace again, our guided footsteps in 
this shining way; we all need the encouragement 
which such manifest leading 
of the Lord affords. 

"Then well see what God hath wrought: 
Let us PRAISE HIM-praise Him as we ought. 
So short a time ago as 1870 we saw, in 
addition to the first principles of the 
Gospel, only the two bare facts-the 
Lords second coming and the Restitution 
--and these but vaguely; for though 
we then saw restitution taught in Scripture, 
we were much in doubt as to its 
comprehensiveness, questioning often 
whether it would include all the billions 
of the dead whom the god of this world 
had in the present life blinded. And 

R513 : page 1 

concerning the Lords second coming, 

while we realized that he is no longer a 

man, but is now the new creature-the 

express image of the Fathers person- 

a quickening spirit, yet we failed somehow 

to make a proper application of 

this to his second coming, and unthinkingly 

and ignorantly, rather expected 

his coming to be as a glorified man, 

than as a spiritual being. It was not 

until about 1874 that these things became 

clearer, so that we realized that 

when Jesus should come, it would be as 

unobserved by human eyes as though 

an angel had come; and that it could 

be known only by some miracle, by 

some manifestation or demonstration. 

About the same time the completeness 
of the Restitution to be brought 
about, came clearly to our vision. It was 
in this way: we had seen the various 
Scriptures which spoke of the Sodomites 
return to a former estate (restitution), 
and Israels return at the same 



time, and how all the families of earth 
were to be blessed through Christ, when 
he should take his great power and 
reign, etc., etc. But all these failed to 
convince us of restitution for all, because 
we could see that God could in 
perfect justice, take away the lives which 
he had given- -could entirely blot men 
out of existence as easily as he could 
bring them into being. And we felt 
much inclined to believe that many 
of the dead billions would never be 
brought into existence again, until we 
came to see more fully the value of the 
Ransom Price given for our sins, "and 
not for ours only, but also for the sins 
of the whole world." 

When we came to scrutinize Gods 
dealings, we found that He showed no 
mercy on sin, but injustice condemned 
it and executed the penalty of death 
against all; that justice must be met and 
fully satisfied, before mankind could go 
free from that death penalty; and that 
Gods mercy was displayed, not in opposing 
and setting aside his justice, but 
in providing a Redeemer or ransom 
price which fully met all the claims of 
His own just laws against us. This 
convinced us that the various Scriptures 
which predicted the saving of all 
men from the curse-death-meant literally 
all they said: That when Paul 
said, "He gave himself a ransom [antilutron 
-equivalent price] for all" fl Tim. 2:6"), 
it involved the necessity of 
a release from death of all who were 
thus bought. It gave a depth and scope 
to many scriptures, such as "Rom. 5:18,19": 
By one mans sin came death 
upon all; and by our Lords righteousness 
and obedience unto death (our 
penalty) comes life to the same all; for 
as through or by Adam all die, even so 
by or through Christ shall all be made 
alive, fl Cor. 15:22\) Thus our faith 



in the ransom, that it was an equivalent 
price for ALL, was the rock into which 
entered as an anchor our hope for a 
"restitution of all things." 

Next our attention was drawn to the 
subject of the TIME of our Lords 
coming. Before this we had strenuously 
ignored time, partly because of 
its being made so much of by "Second 
Adventists," and because of the frequent 
failures of their expectations. 
Moreover, the fact that they claimed 
the destruction of the world to be the 
impending event, and used the periods 
of time mentioned in Scripture to mark 
the time of that destruction, was another 
reason why we were disposed to ignore 
the subject of time. Their erroneous 
theory of the destruction of the world 
cast discredit on the time which they 
associated with it. 

When, however, the manner of our 
Lords coming was seen in the light of 
what he is-a spiritual, and no longer a 
human being-then we saw that our 
Father had provided TIME in the Bible, 
that thus we might know, or see with 
the eye of our understanding, what we 
could not see with our natural eyes— 
viz., the Lords presence. A careful 
study of times and seasons taught in 
Scripture convinced us that the Lord 
was due to be present in 1874, and 
other time teachings of the Word 
showed that in the spring of 1875 the 
restitution of all things was due to 
commence. 

This conclusion was rather startling, 
and surprised us thoroughly. It would 
have seemed so much easier to believe 
had the prophecies pointed twenty years 
ahead and shown us that then Jesus 
would come-be present and do a separating 
work in the nominal Church, and 
during a time of trouble should so order 
the truth that it, as his word, would 



smite down evil and error of every 
form, including "the kingdoms of this 
world," under "the prince of this world." 
We re-examined every point carefully, 
and every part fitted to every other 
with a completeness that bore the stamp 
of truth, and with a strength which testified 
that the calculations came from 
and were the testimony of Gods 
chronometer. 

Very cautiously every expression of 
Jesus and the Apostles and Prophets 
was scanned, to see whether their testimony 
would correspond. Gradually we 
found them, one after another, to be in 
fullest accord; for instance, Jesus words 
CMatt. 24:37"), "As the days of Noah 
were, so shall also the coming of the 
Son of man be." Examining this passage 
we found that the word coming does 
not convey the proper meaning. The 
Greek word Parousia signifies PRESENCE 
--that the person has arrived, and is no 
longer in the act of coming. Another 
text we will mention fl Thes. 5:1-5"): 
"Of the times and seasons, brethren, ye 
have no need that I write unto you, for 
yourselves know that the Day of the 
Lord so cometh as a thief in the night 
[stealthily, quietly], and when they [the 
world] shall say peace and safety, then 
sudden destruction cometh upon them 
as travail upon a woman with child, and 
they shall not escape. But ye, brethren, 
are not in darkness that that day should 
overtake you as a thief; for ye are all 
children of the light." The children of 
light walk in the shining path enlightened 
by the Lamp-the sure word of 
prophecy, from which the light shines 
out, showing them that the time is fulfilled, 
that the harvest and its events 
are commenced, and that the Reaper is 
present in his day-the Day of the Lord. 

[The Millennial Day-Dawn will contain 
these various TIME PROOFS. It is 



being prepared as rapidly as other 
duties will permit.] 

Engaged in searching and teaching 
thus, time sped on till 1878 had come. 
While our previous leading into truth 
was blessed and sweet, yet since 1878, 
has come the richest feasting and most 
blessed growth in favor and knowledge 
--for it is since then, that the Lord has 
given us to see the deep things of God, 
at some of which we shall now glance 
briefly. All having been published, and 
being fresh in your memory, it is needless 
to now treat them in detail. 

(1). It was there, that our "Lamp" 
showed us that the nominal church was 
cast off from favor, spued out from 
being the Lords mouthpiece, and from 
that time the message has been freely 
given, "Babylon is fallen! Come out of 
her my people." And as we look at 
her present condition of decay and falling, 
looking back we see that she began 
to fall at the time indicated on the prophetic 
dial. 

(2). Next the rays of divine illumination 
fell on "Rev. 12" and "13", opening up 
before us, with marked clearness of 
detail, the history of Papacy-the Beast, 
and Protestantism its image-and the 
great control these would possess in the 
Church, ultimately causing the masses 
of the Church to mark or name themselves 
so as to indicate a support of 
their claims and systems; and prohibiting 
and forbidding the right of buying 
and selling-the free exchange of truth 
-by those who do not recognize these 
systems. This left no doubt as to the 
mind of the Spirit toward those systems 
here termed the "Leopard Beast," "the 
two horned beast," and the "Image of 
the Beast," and their ultimate destruction 
by the bright shining of truth from 
the present one. This in turn helped 
us to appreciate more clearly that an 



important part of the overcoming expected 
of us, is to get free from the 
binding and blinding influences of these 
systems-as shown in "Rev. 20:4\ 

(3). Following this, came light upon 
the short bed and narrow cover of "Isa. 28:20", 
which we saw was the uncomfortable 
and unsatisfactory creeds in 
which a babe in Christ might, but a developed 
man could not stretch himself 
or find any rest. All who are "weaned 
from the breasts" and are no longer 
babes in Christ ("verse 9"), to these God 
will teach his doctrines and then they 
will speedily get out of the short trundle-bed 
creeds, and, instead of vexation, 
find rest in the liberty wherewith Christ 
makes free. 

(4). Then the bed of "Luke 17:34" 
was seen to be the same as the short 
one mentioned by Isaiah, and the shining 
of the one cast light upon the other 
and its surroundings. Thus we saw 
that the one taken and the other left in 
the presence of the Son of man, referred 
not as we had once supposed, to a 
change from natural to spiritual bodies, 
but to a translation out of the domain 
or kingdom of darkness into the light 
and liberty of the kingdom of light: in 
short, to the gathering of some out of 
short creed-beds to follow the Lord, 
and the leaving of others in their uncomfortable 
position. 

The same ray of light, shining on the 
connected statements, showed those 
grinding at the mill to represent teachers 
seeking to prepare food for the 
household of faith- some of these will 
be taken, others left to grind on at the 
unsatisfying husks and chaff. The 
taken ones went-where, Lord? Jesus 
answered, "Wheresoever the body [carcass 
-food] is, thither will the eagles be 
gathered together." Thus we see that 
the class gathered in the presence of the 



Son of man-in the day when he is 
being revealed (Verse 30")— will be gathered 
to the real food-to a satisfying 
portion. And all the saints whom the 
truth has called out of the short bed 
and from grinding the husks of human 
tradition, to the heavenly food now 
provided for us, can truly say, it is "a 
feast of fat things." 

(5). While it is difficult at such a 
feast to decide which is the richest food, 
yet we believe that what we are now 
about to mention is of all the food the 
best, viz: The appreciation of the 

R514:page 1 

sacrifices of Leviticus-especially of the 
Day of Atonement for sins, as pictured 
in "Lev. 9" and "16". Nothing ever showed 
us so clearly the necessity and value of 
a sacrifice for our sins, and not for ours 
only, but also for the sins of the whole 
world. We feel confident that no one 

R514:page2 

who has a clear understanding of the 
details of these sacrifices for sin, can 
ever question the ransom. Here is 
clearly shown the sacrifice of Jesus as 
the bullock and the "little flock" who 
follow him, represented by the Lords 
goat. Nowhere else is our share with 
our Lord in the work of sacrifice "filling 
up that which is behind of the 
afflictions of Christ" ("Col. 1:24") so 
clearly shown. But we need not tarry 
with this topic-you have it in detail in 
the Tabernacle pamphlet, which we 
trust you have not only read, but studied 
in connection with the Scripture. 

(6). Shining through this appreciation 
of the sacrifices for sins, came greater 
light upon a number of subjects related 
to the fellowship of the "little flock" in 



Jesus sufferings. We saw now a 

greater depth in Baptism, and as the 

light from Leviticus shone upon v Rom. 6:3-5\ 

we saw that Baptism into 

Christ, by a baptism into His death, 

meant much more than an immersion 

or burial in water, though that is a 

beautiful figure and symbol; appropriate 

as an outward sign or symbol of our 

consecration to death as sacrifices with 

Christ. And looking through this open 

door we saw the meaning of being dead 

WITH Christ that we might also live 

WITH him— suffering with him that we 

might also be glorified together-having 

fellowship (or part) in His death 

that we might have fellowship also in 

His resurrection. 

(7). Following now in order, came 
light to discern the difference of natures 
-that animal or earthly beings, were 
distinct and separate every way from 
spiritual or heavenly beings; that while 
both were bodily conditions, yet as explained 
by Paul they are distinct and 
separate, one earthly, the other heavenly. 
"There is a natural [animal] 
body and there is a spiritual body." 
fl Cor. 15:44\) Thus we saw that as 
there are various orders or grades of 
earthly creatures-beasts, birds, fishes 
and the chief of all these man, yet 
each is a distinct nature. So also on 
the spiritual plane there are various 
orders or degrees, the chief of whom is 
Jehovah; yet those on the spiritual plane 
do not blend, hence the angelic nature 
never will develop into a divine 
nature, because they are distinct and 
separate natures, even as man and fish 
are separate natures. 

We were aided in seeing this by the 
light from v Lev. 16 v ; for in it we saw 
that those who sacrificed surrendered a 
human nature (represented by the 
bullock and goat) to partake of a new 



nature (represented in the Priest); this 
being in harmony with much of Pauls 
testimony concerning the same class of 
sacrifices, that as the natural man 
perished or was sacrificed, they were 
developing as "new creatures." The 
transformation at first being merely a 
mental one-from a natural or earthly 
mind to a heavenly or spiritual mind- 
will at the resurrection be complete, for 
then the new or spiritual mind will be 
joined with a new or spiritual body- 
thus completing the change now begun 
from animal to spiritual beings. But 
this change of nature we saw was not 
designed for all mankind-no, only for 
those who sacrificed the human nature 
with Jesus, that they may gain a promised 
share with HIM, in life as spiritual 
or heavenly beings-highly exalted, not 
only above the human nature, but also 
above angelic nature. For know ye not 
that when exalted we shall judge or 
govern angels, and be joined in heirship 
with him who has been made so 
much better than the angels? 

(8.) Then came-"The narrow way 
to Life," and we saw as never before 
the meaning of Life— Immortality— and 
the narrowness of the way which leads 
to it. It is narrow; there is no room 
to lug along worldly hopes and ambitions; 
it is steep and rugged, and every 
step is a denial and sacrifice of the 
rights and comforts of the human 
nature. The steps in this narrow way 
are not merely conflicts with sin. No, 
that may be done anywhere by the 
justified only, as well as by the sanctified, 
and all who enter this "narrow way" 
have already been justified from all sin 
in Gods sight by the ransom price 
given by Jesus. On the contrary, the 
steps are of sacrifice: sacrificing those 
things to which as men they have a 
right. 



As the steps are very difficult ones, 
which few would ever find, and fewer 
yet would care to walk in if they did 
find them, so it is but reasonable to 
infer that the prize at its further end is 
of wondrous value. The prize is Life 
--not merely existence, but Life in the 
superlative degree-i.e., independent 
of all conditions, as God has "life in 
himself," and not dependent on surrounding 
circumstances and elements. 
Life in this degree belongs not to 
angelic or human nature, but to the 
Divine nature only. And the fact that 
the narrow way which few find, leads to 
this Life, proves that on it is the class 
who seek for "glory, honor and immortality," 
and to whom are given 
"exceeding great and precious promises, 
that by these they might become 
partakers of the Divine nature." f2 Pet. 1:4\) 
With joy we saw too, that 
though few find this "narrow way," and 
few would gain that prize of life-immortality 
-yet these few were to be the 
instruments of God in the restitution of 
human existence to the WORLD, which, 
if used in harmony with Gods will, may 
be everlasting existence. 

(9.) With the light shining from a 
better appreciation of the distinctness 
and separateness of human and spiritual 
natures, we soon began to see clearly 
the two phases or parts of the kingdom 
of God-the spiritual phase composed 
of Jesus and His Church over all and 
above all, and the earthly phase composed 
at first of Israel after the flesh, 
restored to favor and ruling and teaching 
men as the earthly representatives 
of the spiritual kingdom, and gradually 
gathering into union and harmony with 
it all the families of the earth, except a 
few incorrigible ones who shall be 
destroyed. 

(10.) In turn, this discernment of the 



two parts or elements of the one kingdom, 
led to the appreciation of many 
Scriptures previously obscure, and enabled 
us to see how Abraham, Isaac 
and Jacob, and all the prophets, would 
be in the kingdom of God (human 
phase), though having lived and died 
before the Spirit-dispensation began- 
before the narrow way to LIFE was 
opened up by Jesus our Guide and 
Forerunner in it. 

(11). Next light flashed out upon the 
words of Jesus fRev. 2: 1 V). "He that 
overcometh shall not be hurt of the 
second death." Never before had we 
realized that we are called to go into 
the second death, but promised that it 
should not be a permanent injury or 
"hurt." Now we saw that what is 
termed the first death is the Adamic 
death, which would have been the utter 
end except for the ransom given, which 
bought all out of its grasp and control. 
The actual recovery of mankind out of 
death (i.e., restitution) awaits for its 
accomplishment the glorious reign of 
Him who "bought us with his precious 
blood." But now we are told to reckon 
ourselves, free from sin and pure, and 
to reckon ourselves freed from Adamic 
death, which is the penalty of sin. Thus 
one death is in the past to us, and this 
reckoned-restored life we present to 
God asking that our justified humanity 
be permitted to share death with 
Jesus spotless sacrifice. This would be 
our second death. First we were under 
and in Adamic death, but were lifted 
(by faith) out of that death that we 
might become dead with Christ. 

Hence though death came to Jesus but 
once and was his first death, to those 
who become dead with him it is the 
second death, because Jesus was not in 
the Adamic death while we were. 
But the overcomers shall not be hurt 



of the second death. Ah, no; they will 
be greatly blessed by it, for if they thus 
become dead with Him they shall also 
live and be glorified with Him fRom. 6:8 V 
and v 8:17 v ). 

But to all who enter the second death 
as a punishment for their own wilful 
sins, after being enlightened by the 
Spirit of truth and not as justified sacrificers 
with Jesus, it will be a great hurt, a 
severe loss, the loss of all hope, the extinction 
of all life, in which there is no 
hope of a resurrection; for Christ dieth 
no more; and for such there remains no 
further share in the sacrifice for Adamic 
sin, and which released from Adamic 
death fHeb. 10:26 v ). 

(12). Next we saw that the living 
members of Christ-those that are alive 
and remain in the presence of Christ- 
these have a special work to do, in introducing 
the present King. We had 
long since seen that among the many 
figures used to represent the union and 
fellowship which exist between Jesus 
and his Church, one of the most forcible 
is that which represents all as one person, 
Jesus the head, and the Church the 
joints and members of the body. In 
this figure the last members would be the 
feet; and while there has been a hand 
and foot class all along in every age of 
the Church, yet of the Church, as a 
whole, the last members are the feet. 
Hence if we have the right appreciation 
of the Word, the living members are 
the feet of the anointed body-the 
Christ. 

And just in harmony, we here found 
the Prophet testifying, "How beautiful 
are the FEET of Him that bringeth 
good tidings of good... that saith 
unto Zion thy God REIGNETH flsa. 52:T). 
We found not only that the living 
saints were the feet class, but that we 
were making this very proclamation to 



Zion as foretold by the Prophet, saying, 
"Thy God reigneth"-the Lord 
is present-the kingdom is being set up 
and is beginning, in its own quiet way, 
the breaking in pieces and consuming 
of every opposing thing. 

(13). About next in order came, "The 
blessed dying," mentioned in v Rev. 14:13", 
and we saw for the first time that 
the evidence is clear, that all who 
become sacrifices must die. The difference 
between those who remain unto 
the presence of the Lord and those who 
"fell asleep in Jesus" previously, being 

R515 : page 2 

that we shall not sleep. The overcomers 
in these days of his presence 
will not sleep, for in the very moment of 
death they "shall be changed" from 
human to spiritual beings. Hence, 
"Blessed are the dead who die in the 
Lord from HENCEFORTH; yea, saith 
the Spirit, they shall rest from their 
labors, but their works follow with 
them." 

This in turn led to the appreciation 
of v Psa. 82:6, 8 V : "I have said ye are 
GODS; all of you children of the Highest: 
but ye shall all die like MEN." This 
was very confirmatory of what we had 
seen of the distinctness of nature between 
men and the "new creatures," between 
human nature which we have 
from Adam, and the divine nature 
promised to those who follow the captain 
in sacrificing the human nature. 

Of the light shining during the past 
year-on Revelation, on the invisible 
things of God, the increasing evidence 
of the presence of Christ both in the condition 
of the Church, and the continued 
preparation of the world for a conflict, 
by uniting into societies, are fresh in 
your memory. Also the evidence presented 



of the credibility and authenticity 
of the New Testament Scriptures, 
called out by the claim of some that 
they were as competent, and better 
able to understand and express truth 
than the Apostles. Also the discussion 
in all its phases of that important question, 
"Whose Son is He?" We found 
no lack of evidence that he was the 
Anointed Son of the living God, and 
that his life was "from above," and 
came not through the sin and death-tainted 
line of Adam. We thus disproved 
the claims of some who asserted 
that he was the son of Joseph; and not only 
so, but proved that, if a son of Joseph, he 
would have been of the line of Solomon 
and hence not the heir to "Davids 
throne," since the promise to Solomon 
was on condition of loyalty to God, and 
he was cast off, that the true heir should 
come by another of Davids sons- 
Nathan-from whom Mary descended. 
And with many truths has the Lord fed 
us, making very clear, we trust, to all 
the little flock that the basis of all hope 
to the Church or the world is the favor 
of God exercised by and through a 
Redeemer and a ransom price. Lastly, 
we have seen that the "Arch-angel"- 
the chief messenger of Jehovah-is now 
our highly exalted Lord of all, the 
Redeemer of the world, the Head or 
Bridegroom of the Church. 

And now, commencing another year, 
we trust that it will refresh and strengthen 
you all, to look back at the way that 
God hath led us. 

"He leadeth us; oh, blessed thought" ! 

What better evidence could we have 
that we are on the shining way to perfect 
Day, than by glancing back. Ours 
has truly been a shining path-shining 
more and more. Each new ray of light 
has added to, instead of contradicting 
that previously received; and thus we 



may expect it to continue until the full 
blaze is reached-when we shall know 
as we are known-if we continue to 
follow humbly the Masters leading. 

Truly, this is not only an evidence of 
the Lords leading but His presence, 
for thus he told us it should be, when he 
would come and knock; blessed would 
be those servants who would be watching 
and open unto him immediately- - 
He would come in to them and cause 
them to sit down to meat (food-refreshing 
and strengthening truth) and come 
forth and serve them ("Luke 12:37" and 
"Rev. 3:20"). 

We would not presume on past leading 
as a proof of leading during another 
year now beginning, but would keep in 
mind that as the natural branches were 
broken off because of boastfulness and 
unbelief, so we should be in danger if 
we ceased to "hold the head" in proper 
reverence. But by the grace of God we 
start upon another year trusting the 
same promises, that "He that seeketh 
findeth, and to him that knocketh it 
shall be opened." We shall expect 
more meat in due season from the 
Master who is feeding us-yet doubtless 
there will be trials and testings of 
courage and faith, to see whether we 
have made proper use of the meat 
already given us. Beloved, let us give 
more earnest heed, lest at any time we 
should let those things slip; but, laying 
aside every hindrance and weight, let 
us, afresh with vigor, lay hold upon 
the great hopes set before us in the 
Gospel-glory, honor and immortality 
-the divine nature. 

Let us bear in mind that the Presence 
of Christ, and Whose son is he? 
were the tests at the first advent, and over 
that stone the fleshy house of Israel 
stumbled, as now in His presence a 
second time, the same questions are 



asked and discussed, and over the 

same stone now present in the path 

many are falling, for "He shall be for a 

stone of stumbling and for a rock of 

offence to both the houses of Israel" flsa. 8:14" 

and "1 Pet. 2:5-8"). 



R515 : page 2 

Below will be found some extracts from 
INTERESTING LETTERS. 

Birmingham, England. 

DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:-The Emphatic 
Diaglott received this morning, 
for which many thanks. I have now 
pleasure in forwarding my yearly subscription 
and a small contribution to the 
Tract Fund; should rejoice if it were 
more. 

For twenty years, and indeed until 
the advent of "Food" twelve months 
ago, the United States was of all places 
in the world the last that I should have 
thought of for receiving spiritual instruction 
and consolation from; and the 
smile of pity, or amazement, or incredulity 
with which the mention of these 
glad tidings, or the presentation of 
"Food," is received by the image worshipers 
here, appears to indicate that it 
is the last place they wish to receive it 
from. 

The good news appears to be most 
acceptable to "Dissenters," and still 
more so to those who are sectarians in 
name only, but to the "Orthodox" ones 
it is most objectionable.... A great 
stumbling block to many is the fact that 
we have no sectarian badge, and while 
seeing but little truth in many so 
fettered, they cannot realize any in 
those who are absolutely free. I thank 



my Lord that this great light has shone 
upon me, and I pray that I may be 
enabled steadfastly and faithfully to 
walk in the light until death. 

Your article in January WATCH 
TOWER, as to the solitariness and loneliness 

R515 : page 3 

of individual believers has, doubtless 
been felt by many besides myself, 
but though sometimes wishing for 
kindred companionship, I rejoice in the 
deliverance from the bondage of the 
multitude; and although I should be 
glad to meet with others for instruction 
and communion, I often think this severance 
is preferable, lest a sectarian 
spirit should spring up. 

how clear is the Word from the 
new teaching, and how harmonious; 
how vividly at times is the truth revealed, 
and what a comforting change 

from the doubts and misgivings, and 
the continual unrest and disquietude of 
former days ! I thank the Lord for all 
these mercies, and pray that he will 
bless and prosper and enlighten and 
keep steadfast in his truth those who 
are disseminating his Word. 

1 am, Dear Brother, 

Yours faithfully in the Lord, 



page 3 

Omaha, Neb. 

DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:-Many warm 
thanks for your publications, which besides 
the "Concordance," reached me in 
due time. I think they are inestimable 
in value, as they explain the blessed 
Word so that all that "have an ear to 
hear" ought to hear. 

I have thrown aside all literature except 
the Bible, and even that single 



book would now take more time to 
study than I really can get. While in 
the past I never studied so much as 
now, and while the reading of other 
books occupied most of my time, yet I 
thought to know the doctrine of the 
Bible by heart. Whenever I read a 
chapter, it seemed to me so old and 
indifferent that I never could delight 
myself in reading it. But now everything 
is new, all is full of life and 
fire, which warms my heart up to devotion 
and praise, so I can thank God 
now that I ever was born. Especially 
I adore Him that I have the privilege 
to live in this grand time, when knowledge 
is increased, and that I am found 
worthy to suffer with our Lord, that I 
also may be exalted with him. 

I have observed through your paper 
the sound position which you hold, and 
my constant prayer is, that the God of 
all grace might give you more wisdom, 
and build you up more and more. 
Surely you have a very difficult position, 
which requires constant watchfulness, 
and especially prayerfulness, in 
order to escape the snares of the 
adversary. 

I am enabled, by Gods grace, to say 
that I am leaning on Gods Word, feeding 
in the pleasant pasture of peace, 
drawing water out of the wells of salvation, 
and rejoicing in hope of glory. 
My faith is unwavering, my prayers 
fervent, and I have the assurance that 
God the Father accepts my sacrifice. 
Though only five years in this country, 
only 20 years of age, I have seen hard 
times, experienced many things, and 
have been led wondrously by the hand 
of my heavenly Father; and my will 
in the future is to live only for our 
Redeemers cause, come what will. 

I have a perfect knowledge of the 
German language, and I am meditating 



upon what I could do. When the German 
people are won, they are faithful. 
I am assured there will be a way opened 
to them by our divine Lord somehow. 
To Him be praise, honor and glory, 
both now and forever. 
Yours in Christ Jesus, . 

Covington, Pa. 

C. T. RUSSELL, DEAR SIR:-Last 
October I received a copy of "ZIONS 
WATCH TOWER." I do not know what 
I thought of it then, but recently I came 
across it in looking over old papers, 
and for two days I have been reading 
and re-reading it very attentively. 

There are many thoughts which strike 
me with a force that forbids their dismissal 
as bare speculations. 

I am a Presbyterian greatly interested 
in Bible study, but for years I 
have felt that I was barely clinging to 
the verge of the true light yet to be 
revealed. And yet, enough has been 
graciously vouchsafed to me by breaking 
away from denominational theories, 
and comparing scripture with scripture, 
to satisfy me that richer, greener pastures 
are within reach of every Christian 
than the great majority are ready or 
willing to feed in. With the slight advance 
I have made by striving to sink 
self-will in the Divine will, and trusting 
and believing in the Holy Spirits 
power to enlighten my mind in the 
study of the Word, I find many, in 
pulpit and pew, whom I know have 
little sympathy in what they deem departure 
from "old landmarks." But 
that is all nothing to me. I have exulted 
in the restfulness and joy that 
certain new unfolding s have brought to 
me, and from the remaining restlessness 
and discontent, I know I am not yet 
fully anchored upon the solid foundation, 
cleared of the "hay, wood and 



stubble" of human building, and am 
looking, fully expecting the clearer understanding 
of "things to come" which 
Christ has promised to his "friends." 
Will you please send me "Food for 
Thinking Christians." 
Yours very sincerely, . 

Newburg, N.Y. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-Last 
week I made two hundred calls here; 
and after exhorting each one to "test" 
the "WATCH TOWER" by Gods own 
word, and not by old sectarian ideas, I 
left them the Oct. number, with the 
understanding that should they become 
interested in the themes of that number, 
they should have more truth on the 
same line. I see that God has set me 
right in the very best channel for doing 
good. I find it to be very humiliating 
to the natural man to thus suffer as I do, 
but to the spiritual it is a holy highway 
in which I walk, carrying armfuls of 
"FOOD" to starving saints. I think if 
every city could have a true, suffering 
and competent saint to go from house 
to house with this "BREAD," that many 
of the enslaved ones would soon see deliverance 
coming, and thus be lifted out 
of the fearful snare of the devil, from 
which I have been picked and set at 
liberty. 

I have stood in the pulpits of different 
denominations, exhorting sinners to 
escape eternal torment, and I thus scared 
many into the church. Thus I went 
from town to town and city to city telling 
the people of the eternal pain and 
anguish they must surely expect except 
they took my advice. And all that time 
I did not know whether eternal torment, 
or heaven would be my everlasting 
abode. I used to say these very 
words to my hearers: "A moments 
space removes me to that heavenly place, 



or shuts me up in hell." But where are 
my scared hearers now? Their religion 
turned out to be a forced profession 
through fear of hell, and not LOVE to 
God. And nearly as soon (and sometime 
before), I left them they got back 
again as before. But now, how changed 
is all this! I have now spent nearly a 
year going from town to town scattering 
the real truth-this blessed Gospel. I 
now no longer wonder why Jesus came 
4,000 years too late. Thank God he 
has tasted death for all; and, as Peter 
said, in the TIME of restitution he will set 
the captive free. O how I long to see 
it come! Your brother in Christ, 



Alameda, Cal. 

DEAR FRIENDS:-Paper and Tabernacle 
Tract at hand, for which accept 
my thanks. O what joy thrills my 
heart at the receipt of anything from 
your office! I never had anything like 
it in all my life. When I read in TOWER 
about your celebration of the Lords 
Supper, I was overcome with an inexpressible 
joy that I couldnt read the 
article for tears for some time. When 
I reached the point where Bro. Sunderlin 
called to mind Jesus words, "Verily 
one of you which eateth shall betray 
me," I thought, O how often I had 
denied the dear Lord in the past through 
ignorance of the true teaching of His 
Word. O, what a Gospel feast now! 
"Wonderful things in the Bible I see." 

How He feeds me on the Bread of 
Life! His flesh is meat indeed, and 
His blood is drink indeed. 

The ground seems very hard and 
sterile here. I see so little fruits of my 
labors that sometimes I feel lonely and 
sad; but when the WATCH TOWER 
comes, I seem to be on an oasis for a 
while, and I dive afresh into the great 



mine of truth; and I know not how 
many times I say, "Glory to God," before 
I get through my feast; but I sow 
in great hope, for I know it is good 
seed and must take root somewhere. 

I expect to take a trip in the country 
next week, the Lord willing, and shall 
publish salvation as I go. Wife joins 
me in much love to you and all the 
brethren. 

Yours in the blessed Christ, 



P.S.-My health is poor now, but O, 
what peace is upon me! 

R515 : page 3 

Delhi, N.Y. 

DEAR BROTHER: -The time is come 
when a remittance is due. I enclose 
$15. Last year I took ten papers in 
the hope of interesting and doing good 
to some. I find some actually refuse 
them; others refused to be interested; 
and as I do not believe in forcing men, 
nor think it proper to cast pearls in 
an unseemly place, this year you 
may send me five copies. It would 
give me pleasure to increase rather than 
decrease the number, but when Jesus 
says, "Let them alone," I obey. Please 
send me a Variorum Bible, and, if you 
can, send me two more of "Food for 
Thinking Christians," and two more 
"Tabernacle Teachings," as a reserve 
for opportunity to do good. I know 
that the others I got have done good. 
What remains of the remittance place 
where you think best. I think the claim 
of the Swedes is good. 

Perhaps you would like to know who 
I am or what I am. I am over seventy 
years of age; what the world would call 
a poor man, a shoemaker, or rather a 
shoemender. But I bless God for his 
goodness to me. I was brought up a 
Presbyterian; came to this country forty-four 



years ago. From conviction I became 
a Baptist; afterwards in 1845 or 
46 George Storrs sermons were the 
means of a great theological revolution 
with me. The hand of fellowship was 
withdrawn from me, because I believed 
I had no immortality now, but rejoiced 
I had it as a PRIZE BEFORE ME, and 
also because I believed that Jesus Christ 
was the Son of God. The Bible then 
seemed to me like a new book, and I 
bless God it has been brighter and 
brighter all along. 

As proof texts for the restitution of the 
human race, although I have no remembrance 
of seeing them alluded to, I 
would quote "Ps. 90:3\ "Thou turnest 
man to destruction; and sayest, Return, 
ye children of men," I used to look upon 
the word return, as to return to dust, 
but I was forcibly impressed by noticing 
that word marked by a capital R 
as being an emphatic word-and the 
reason assigned in the "following verse\ 
"For a thousand years in thy sight are 
but as yesterday when it is past, and as 
a watch in the night." God is not limited 
by years nor ages for the accomplishment 
for his gracious purposes. 

Again, "Jeremiah 12:15-17": "And 
it shall come to pass, after that I have 
plucked them out I will return, and have 
compassion on them, and will bring 
them again every man to his heritage, 
and every man to his land. And it 
shall come to pass, if they will diligently 
learn the ways of, my people to swear by 
my name the Lord liveth; (as they taught 
my people to swear by Baal;) then shall 
they be built up in the midst of my people. 
But if they will not obey, I will utterly 
pluck up and destroy that nation, saith 
the Lord." By carefully reading the 
"preceding part of the chapter", I came to 
the conclusion these promises are yet in 
the future. "Oh, that men would praise 



the Lord for his goodness, and for his 
wonderful works to the children of 
men." Yours in love, 



page 3 

New Hampton, N.Y. 

DEAR BRETHREN:-I have read the 
"Food" in connection with the "Tower" 
and, owing to the clearer light obtained, 
find much pleasure therein. Thanks to 
Bro. G. A. Rose, who introduced them 
in this section. In response to the 
statement, that you have other reading 
matter for earnest inquirers, I write in 
the hope of obtaining. 

It seems as if the dense night that has 
enshrouded us is at last dissolving, and 
the glorious light of the Word is slowly 
but surely breaking upon our benighted 
minds. We open our eyes in a convulsion 
of fear, just as the horrid nightmare 
is about to crush us with eternal torment, 
and lo, we are surrounded with the full 
radiance of day! A sweet sense of relief 
fills us with unutterable joy. But 
millions more are still blindly agonizing 
with their dreams, fearing to open their 
eyes lest they should find the awful 
vision real. This view is sad enough, 
but the break of day is near. 

Surely God will prosper your undertaking. 
Continue your work; rouse the 
erring ones to their duty; bring them 
back to the fold. 

Yours sincerely, 



Hobart, Kansas. 
DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-... 

The Food and Tabernacle have been at 
work. We have been calling the attention 
of our neighbors and friends to 
read, but have only found one or two 
that want to learn. As for me and my 



house we are fully determined to follow 
after the truth, and lay aside our church 
creeds and rely on the Word of God. 
I am over sixty years of age; and have 
been very active in the cause of Christ 
for 40 years, but my light was dim until 
I got the WATCH TOWER and pamphlets. 
I held the office of deacon of 
the Baptist church here one year ago, 
but have come out of her, and, with one 
or two more, we stand alone. I have 
but very little of this worlds goods, but 
I feel truly rich to think that I have 
found the light and truth even in my old 
age. It is more pleasure to me now to 
read Gods Word than it was before. 
Your brother in the Lord, 



R516 : page 3 

THE INTEGRITY OF THE BIBLE. 

"We hear so much said of this suspected 
text, and that doubtful passage; 
of this probable interpolation from the 
margin, and of the long quarrel which 
scholars have waged over that Greek 
letter, mark, or accent, that we sometime 
forget that God, in his constitution 
of the Bible, has made it impossible 
to seriously pervert it. Of course there 
will be erroneous transcriptions. The 
hand of the scribe is not inspired. Of 
course there may be, here and there, 
insertions, or marginal note written into 
the text. Of course there may be a 
word dropped out, or a vowel omitted, 
in one passage or another. The eye of 
the scribe will sometimes fail to discern 
distinctly what it sees or what it omits; 
and there must be of necessity more or 
less liability to minute error in making 
of so many writings. But the great 



course of doctrine cannot be eliminated 
from the Scriptures, except as you tear 
the whole fabric into tatters. It is interwoven, 
each part with every other- 
story, law, precept, proverb, the biographies 
of Christ by the evangelist, 
and the argument of Christ by the 
Apostles, and the vision of Christ in 
Apocalypse; until, if you throw away 
one part, you must equally throw away 
many others. You may get rid of the 
story of Balaam; though, if you do, you 
will miss one of the most picturesque 
and impressive stories in all the Old 
Testament. But, what then will you do 
with the reference to him in Micah, in 
Peter, and in Revelation? You may 
get rid, perhaps, of the miracle of the 
passage of the Red Sea, and suppose a 
mere shift of the wind when Pharaohs 
army was divinely destroyed. But, 
what then are you to do with the Song 
of Moses and of Miriam? and what with 
the seventy- sixth Psalm, and the one 
hundred and fourteenth? and what with 
the Song of Moses and the Lamb, in 
the crowning book of the Apocalypse? 
They are inter-braided, like threads 
that have been woven so closely together 
that you cannot tear them apart 
without destroying the fabric. You 
cannot extract one and leave the rest, 
with any ingenuity or by any force. - 
H. L. Hastings. 



"LOVING words will cost but little, 

Journeying up the hill of life; 
But they make the weak and weary 

Stronger, braver for the strife. 
Do you count them only trifles? 

What to earth are sun and rain? 
Never was a kind word wasted, 

Never one was said in vain." 



R516 : page 4 

"WHO LOVED ME." 

"Who loved me, and gave himself for me."- 
v Gal.2:10\ 

Three little sunbeams, gilding all I see: 
Three little chords, each full of melody; 
Three little leaves, balm for my agony. 

WHO? 
HE loved me, the Fathers only Son; 
He gave himself, the precious spotless One; 
He shed his blood, and thus the work was done. 

LOVED! 
He LOVED, not merely pitied, here I rest; 
Sorrow may come-I to his heart am pressed; 
What should I fear while sheltered on his breast! 

ME! 
Wonder of wonders, Jesus loved ME! 
Wretched-lest-ruined-sunk in misery. 
He sought me-found me-raised me-set me 

free. 

My soul, the order of the words approves- 
Christ FIRST, me LAST, nothing between but 

LOVE! 
Lord, keep me always down, thyself above! 

Trusting in thee, not struggling restlessly, 
So shall I daily gain the victory. 
I- "yet not I"-but "Christ"-"WHO LOVED 
ME." -Selected. 



R516 : page 4 

"HAVE THEY NOT HEARD"? 

"But I say, Have they not heard? Yes, verily 
their sound went into all the earth and their 
words to the ends of the world." v Rom. 10:18". 



By many, this scripture is understood 
to mean, that in Pauls day the Gospel 
had been preached everywhere and 
heard by everyone. This is a mistake, 
as we shall see. To make such a statement, 
would not only contradict Pauls 
utterance in the "fourteenth verse" of this 
same chapter and elsewhere, but it 
would also contradict facts, for we know 
that the Gospel was not preached before 
Jesus came, and that, since then- 
during the few years after, when Paul 
wrote this epistle-it never reached in 
the remotest sense, one-tenth of all the 
world. It could not have reached the 
vast countries then undiscovered and 
unknown— America, Lower Africa, 
Further Asia, Australia, etc. 

The Apostles meaning will be clear 
when his discourse is considered as a 
whole. The ninth", "tenth" and "eleventh" 
chapters should be taken together, and 
studied as one subject. Then it will be 
seen that the apostle, by reasoning from 
the Old Testament Scriptures, is showing 
that the Gospel is to be preached to 
all the world, and not to Israel only, as 
some had imagined. To support his 
argument he repeatedly quotes from the 
Prophets. This is not clearly shown by 
the ordinary translation, in reading 
which it is difficult to discern which are 
Pauls words and which the statements 
of the Prophets. 

It should also be borne in mind that 
the Prophets seldom speak of things 
as future, but instead, they take a future 
standpoint and speak of things future as 
though they were accomplished in the 
past. Thus Isaiah, in referring to the 
birth of Jesus-a thing then future- 
spoke of it as though already accomplished, 
saying, "Unto us a child is 
born, unto us a son is given." ("Isa. 9:6".) 
Thus also "went," in the above 
text, should be understood; and the 



real meaning of the passage is seen to 

be "Verily their sound shall go into all 

the earth." In harmony with this custom 

of the Prophets, our translators 

should have rendered Pauls expression 

as future also. It would then read: 

"But I say, Shall they not hear? Yea, 

verily their sound shall go into all the 

earth." The same Greek word here 

translated heard (past tense) is in "Acts 3:22,23\ 

and elsewhere translated shall 

hear (future tense). 

To set our view of Pauls argument 
clearly before you, we will briefly paraphrase 
"Romans 9:30 to 11:36", placing 
Pauls quotations from the prophets in 
italics. 

["Rom. 9:30-33".] What must we 
conclude, then, concerning Gods dealings 
with Israel and the Gentiles? We 
conclude that though Israel has been 
seeking to be right and justified before 
God for over 1800 years, and the 
heathen nations were indifferent to and 
ignorant of it, yet now that it is offered, 
Israel will reject and the heathen accept 
the Gospel. Why? Israel, as a nation, 
is really hindered because they expect 
it by works, while the heathen will be 
better prepared to accept it by faith in 
Christs finished work. Israel, feeling 
so confident that she can approve herself 
to God by works of obedience, 
stumbles at the simplicity of the Gospel 
and cannot believe that 
"Jesus died and paid it all, 
All the debt we owe." 
Therefore, instead of accepting of 
Christs ransom, they stumbled over 
and rejected the only way to God. 
This was foreshown by the prophets 
words: "Behold I lay in Sion a stumbling 
stone, and rock of offence; and 
whosoever belie veth on him shall not be 
ashamed." 

["Chap. 10:1-4".] Though I speak 



thus plainly about Israel and their 
stumbling, do not understand me to rejoice 
in their fall, for I desire and pray 
that they might be saved. I do not accuse 
them of indifference and willful 
unbelief; nay, they have great zeal for 
God, but they have a plan and way of 
their own, and are thus blinded and 
cannot see Gods way and plan of justifying 
through a ransom. Hence they 
are striving to keep the Law in every 
particular, which in their degenerate 
condition is an impossibility, and are 
rejecting Christ, who before the tribunal 
of justice became the ransom, substitute, 
or representative of all who will 
accept of his service; and for all such 
he met and fulfilled the claims of the 
Law-DEATH. 

TVs. 5-10\] Moses explains fLev. 18:5^) 
that the man who does right according 
to the Law shall continue to 
live, and not die; but in all the time since 
Moses thus wrote, none have succeeded 
in meriting life-death claimed all. 
It is therefore useless to longer look to 
works. We are proclaiming that Christ 
is the end of the law for righteousness 
to every one that believeth. Jesus 
death settled the claims of the law upon 
all who accept his ransom, and this is 
the glad tidings which we now proclaim, 
that a right to life may be had by accepting 
of the redemption provided 
through Christs sacrifice for our sins. 

But, my brethren, as Moses also said 
fDeut. 30:11-14"), this thing is not hidden 
from them, neither is it far off, difficult 
to understand, and those who banish 
prejudice and exercise faith will not 
say, Who ascended into heaven to bring 
Christ down from above, or who descended 
into the grave to bring Christ 
back from the dead? But what will 
faith say? Faith will say just what 
Moses said fDeut. 30:14 v ). The word 



(that is, the truth which we preach), is 
nigh thee, even in thy mouth and in 
thy heart-it is reasonable and plain 
that you may understand. Faith accepts 
of the coming of Christ from 
above, his death, his resurrection and 
ascension, and finds abundant foundation 
in the words of Jesus, the Prophets 
and Apostles-unimpeachable witnesses. 
Unless you believe this, you of course 
cannot accept of his sacrifice as being 
the end of the law and the cancelling of 
its death-penalty against you as a violator 
of it. 

But if you would lay hold of this 
great salvation, you must publicly and 
openly confess that Jesus is Lord-your 
Master; that by his death he purchased 
you and thus became your owner; for 
"To this end Christ both died and revived, 
that he might be LORD [owner, 
master] both of the dead and living." 
fRom. 14:9 V ) And you must not only 
own and believe that he is your purchaser, 
Redeemer and LORD, but also 
that he is a living LORD-that God 
raised him from death and highly exalted 
him to a higher nature than that 
which he gave as our ransom. To believe 
and thus confess is acceptable with 
God, and to such believers it will be 
plain that Christ settled all the condemnation 
of the Law against them, 
and such may have joy and peace in 
thus believing. After all, it is with the 
heart that men believe. No matter how 
much their minds may be convinced of 
the truth, if their hearts are stubborn 
they will not believe. Brethren, get 
your hearts right, and then you will be 
able both to believe on and confess 
Jesus as your Lord. 

fVs. 11-13".] This general principle 
of faith and release from condemnation 
in Gods sight, is proved by the prophets 
words to apply not only to Israel 



but to all mankind, viz: "WHOSOEVER 
believeth on him shall not be ashamed." 
This shows that no matter how much 
preference was shown the Jew under 
the Law, there is to be no difference 
shown under the Gospel, for the same 
Lord over all is rich enough to settle 
the claims of all that come unto him 
and ask for a share in his ransom. We 
have proof of this in the prophecy 
which says: "WHOSOEVER shall call 
upon the name of the LORD shall be 
saved." 

f Vs. 14-17\] And this brings us to 
another question, namely: Is it not 
very proper to preach the glad tidings 
of ransom and salvation through Christ 
to the Gentiles or heathen, as well as to 
Israel? Certainly, the quotation last 
made implies this; for how could all 
call on Christ as Lord without believing? 
and how could they believe on 
him except they should hear? and how 
could they hear without a preacher? 
and how can preachers go forth truly 
unless commissioned and sent of God. 
Hence it is evident that God meant this 
glad tidings to be preached to the Gentiles 
and to every creature. Not only 
can we reason it out logically thus, but 
we find a positive statement that the 
glad tidings will be preached, which 
implies that the Law will be at an end 
to every one who heareth and believeth. 
The prophets Isaiah and Nahum testify 
of this preaching, saying: "How 
beautiful the feet of them that preach 
the gospel of peace [reconciliation 
through his blood-the remission of 
sins] and bring good tidings of good 
things," which come as a result. 

But we must not hastily suppose that 
when preached all will receive the glad 
tidings; for the Prophet, speaking of 
things future as though they were past, 
again testifies of the result of the preaching, 



saying: "Lord, who hath believed 
our report?" Which implies that the 
real believers and confessors would be 
few, at least for awhile. But this proves 
that faith is to be the result of hearing 
--hearing Gods truth. 

fVs. 18-21\] Now we inquire, Will 
the fact that few will believe prove that 
the testimony will reach all, in proof of 
which I again quote from the Prophet. 
He says: "Their sound went [shall 
go] into all the earth, and their words 
to the ends of the world." This proves 
that the Gentiles shall yet have this 
Gospel preached to them. Now how 
about Israel? Shall not they as a people 
come to know-understand and appreciate 
-the glad tidings? Yes, but 
not for a long time; they are yet a 
stiff-necked and stubborn people. As 
Moses said, God will (have to) provoke 
you to jealousy by them that are no people, 
and by a foolish nation will anger 
you. 

But Isaiah speaks yet more pointedly 
of Israels rejection of the message and 
the acceptance of it by the heathen, 
saying: "I was found of them that 
sought me not, I was made manifest 
unto them that asked not after me." 
And speaking of Israel he says, "All 
day long I have stretched out my hands 
to a disobedient and gainsaying [or self-willed] 
people." 

fChap. 11:1-5".] In view of these 
declarations of the Prophets showing 
that Israel will have to be thus 
dealt with and disciplined, I ask: 
Hath God utterly cast away his people 
Israel? God forbid; for I also am an 
Israelite, of the seed of Abraham, of 
the tribe of Benjamin. God hath not 
utterly cast away his people whom he 
formerly recognized and favored. Call 
to mind Elijahs prayer against Israel, 
saying: "Lord, they have killed thy 



prophets and digged down thine altars, 
and I am left alone, and they seek my 
life." But what was Gods answer? 
"I have reserved to myself seven thousand 
men who have not bowed the knee 
to Baal." Even so at this present time 
there is a remnant who through Gods 
favor will accept the glad tidings and 
will not stumble. I, Paul, rejoice that 
I am of that favored remnant. 

P"Vs. 6-8\] But now another point; 
this remnant is not saved by the works 
of the Law, nor because they almost 
kept it, but by accepting of Gods favor 
through Christ. While Israel as a nation 
fails to receive the blessing sought 
by works of the Law, the chosen ones, 
the remnant of Israel and those of the 
heathen who receive the glad tidings- 
these get the blessing. These being 
justified, not by works, but by faith in 
Christ as their Redeemer (substitute), 
thereby gain the privilege of becoming 
sons of God in the divine plan and 
joint heirs with Jesus Christ in the 
coming kingdom. The rest, both of 
Israel and the nations, will be blinded 
to the Gospel glories. The God of this 
world will blind them all except those 
who by faithfulness make their selection 
sure-a "little flock." 

fVs. 9,10\] David also foretold 
Israels stumbling, saying: "Let their 
table be made a snare and a trap and a 
stumbling-block and a recompense unto 
them" [i.e., their downfall shall be over 
the very blessings which God gave 
them; over their blessings they shall 
stumble. God had given them food 
such as he gave to no other people-to 
them God had committed the oracles 
of truth, the prophecies and the types 
which shadowed forth the sacrifice for 
sin, and the blessings following that 
atoning sacrifice; yet becoming proud 
and vain of the honors conferred; they 



thereby stumbled over the very graciousness 

of Gods plan shown to them 

in types.] Thus their eyes were darkened, 

and they were bowed down to 

see only the earthly promises. 

fVs. 11-14".] But now we come to 
another question-admitting that Israel 
will and is stumbling as foretold-I ask: 
Have they stumbled to fall irrevocably 
-will they ever again come into 
fellowship with God? God forbid that 
they should forever remain cast off; 
the significance of their fall is rather to 
be a blessing to the Gentiles than a permanent 
injury to Israel. And we may 
reason that if their fall from favor results 
in riches to the world-the Gentiles 
-then their restoration to favor, 
which Gods promises guarantee, will 
imply an abundance of divine favor 
both to Jew and Gentile. I speak to 
you Gentiles thus, because being the 
apostle to the Gentiles I desire to show 
the importance of the Gentiles in Gods 
plan, and to stimulate my countrymen 
to emulation, and thus recover some of 
them from blindness. 

f Vs. 15-21\] Thus is seen the breadth 
of Gods plans. We know that there 
are certain promises made to Israel 
which must yet be fulfilled; and if they 
be temporarily postponed and a blessing 
unexpectedly given to the Gentiles, 
it argues that Gods plans, as we now 
see them, are broader than we had at 
first supposed, and include Gentiles as 
well as Jews; for if the casting away of 
them opens a door of favor to the Gentiles, 
what shall the receiving of them 
be but life from the dead. That is to 
say, Gods promises to Israel are such 
as imply their resurrection from death 
-their restitution-and now that we 
learn that the World in general is reconciled 
to God and their sin atoned for 
by the ransom, we may reasonably conclude 



that "life from the dead"-restitution 
--will come to all the heathen as 
well as to Israel. We see Israel to be 
merely a first-fruit of the world, the 
first favored; and if God has a blessing 
for them as promised, it follows that he 
has the same blessing for other nations, 
for if the first-fruit, or sample, be holy 
-acceptable and blessed of God-so 
also the mass which it represents. 

If the root or original promise of God 
made to Abraham and Israel retain its 
life, it must bring forth the promised 
fruit-the blessing of all the families of 
the earth. The root of these promises 
is Abrahamic and Israelitish, and though 
some of the natural branches or offspring 
were broken off, and wild heathen 
branches grafted in instead, with them 
to partake of the life from the root-yea, 
the very fatness of the promise-yet 
they should not be puffed up against 
the broken off branches, but humbly 
and thankfully remember that they are 
occupying the place originally belonging 
to the natural descendants. Walk 
humbly, for if because of pride and unbelief 
they failed and were cast off, God 
would be as likely to cut off the wild 

R516 : page 5 

branches under similar circumstances.* 

["Vs. 22-24\] Here we find two prominent 
characteristics of our Heavenly 
Father illustrated-his love and his justice 
-his goodness and severity. He 
is abundant in mercy and goodness, but 
will by no means clear the guilty. His 
goodness is manifest by the promise 
and the blessings it contains and his 
severity or justice in the cutting off 
from those favors of all the unfaithful. 
But even in cutting Israel off, God is 
merciful and kind; and even though cut 
off they may be re-engrafted, if they 



exercise the needful faith. 
THE MYSTERY. 

["Vs. 25-2T.] Here is a point not 
generally known; it is a secret as yet- 
a mystery-and will show you that 
Gods plan is more comprehensive than 
you have yet appreciated; and by showing 
you that you have not all wisdom, 
it will enable you to keep humble and 
to search for the further unfolding s of 
Gods plans. The mystery is this: 
The blindness and breaking off of 
Israel will not continue forever, it will 
only last until the choicest, fittest 
branches from the Gentiles have been 
properly engrafted on the root-the 
Abrahamic promise. Then the broken 
off branches shall be reunited to the 
root. The fact is, the root or promise 
contains a double set of branches first: 
the select branches (natural and engrafted) 
the spiritual seed of Abraham 
--the Christ which is to bless all nations; 
and secondly, a lower order of 
re-engrafted branches (Israel restored) 
-the natural seed of Abraham through 
which the spiritual seed will principally 
operate in blessing all nations. 

Thus seen, all Israel will be saved 
FROM THEIR BLINDNESS in due time, 
and shall yet share in the very blessings 
they expected when they were 
broken off, viz.: the natural or earthly 
part of the blessings-the better or 
spiritual part of the Abrahamic blessing 
being conferred upon the elect, the 
chosen, who through much tribulation 
and crucifixion of the flesh and following 
of the Master are counted worthy 
of the chief honor-the spiritual blessings. 
In proof of what I state as to the 
recovery of Israel from her cast-off condition, 
I quote Jehovahs words by the 
prophet: "There shall come out of 



Zion the Deliverer, and shall turn away 
ungodliness from Jacob: For this is my 
covenant unto them when I shall take 
away their sins." 

['Vs. 28-30\] This prophetic statement 
shows us, beloved Gentile grafts, 
that though the natural branches are 
treated as enemies for the present, and 
for your exaltation, yet really they are 
still beloved of God, and he has blessings 
yet in store for them, as promised 
to their fathers; for any free gift and 
promise which God makes is sure of 
fulfilment. He knew all about this temporary 
lopping off, before he made his 
promises concerning them, and knowing 
the end from the beginning makes 
it unnecessary for him ever to repent of 
a promise made to any. 

Let us now analyze this prophecy 
and see that it implies what we have 
before suggested to be Gods plan, viz., 
to bring the natural branches again into 
Gods favor. Jacob clearly means fleshly 
Israel, and from these ungodliness is 
to be turned away- -but not until God 
himself shall "take away," or "put 
away," or "blot out" their sins. As 
elsewhere shown, the sins of the world 
are not put away, until the close of the 
Gospel age, until the sufferings of the 
body of Christ are ended. During this 
age, only the sins of those who now believe 
are cancelled or put out of sight 
by God. But he who now justifies believers 
will then justify them, as believers 
in the ransom, and he will thus take 
away their sin through the ransom 
which he gave for sin-even his Son. 

In turning away ungodliness a Deliverer 
is made use of. This is none 
other than Christ, the great Deliverer 
whom Moses promised. He shall deliver 
from all evil, from death, from pain 
and sickness, from ignorance and blindness, 
from every oppression of the 



Devil. He shall bind Satan and set 
free his captives, for he is Jehovahs 
Deliverer. This deliverer is the complete 
Christ, the members of the body 
with the Head united, complete-no 
more twain, but one. This deliverer 
comes out of Zion; it is the first-born 
of Zions offspring-the overcomer and 
heir of all things. Hence, before the 
promised blessings come to Jacob 
(fleshly Israel) the heir of the spiritual 
blessings must first be developed. 

Nor should we suppose that the 
blessings and deliverances will stop 
with Jacob, for, as already shown, they 
are but a first-fruits of restored mankind, 
and when they are turned to God, 
they shall become a channel through 
which the Deliverer will bless and release 
"all the families of the earth." 

f Ver. 31\] Lift up your eyes and 
take now a comprehensive view of 
Gods dealings with Israel-both spiritual 
Israel and "Israel after the flesh"- 
and see how grand and large is the 
plan of God which as yet is only budding. 
As for a long while you (Gentiles) 
were strangers and aliens from 
God, and seemingly unloved and uncared 
for, yet now have obtained mercy 
and favor, while fleshly Israel is cut off, 
even so these of the fleshly house are 
now unbelievers and cut off, that by and 
by they may obtain mercy and find 
favor through you: that is to say, God 
is blessing them at the very time he is 
cutting them off, for in blessing you 
and preparing the spiritual seed and 
Deliverer, he is making ready to bless 
them through you, when you as the 
body of Christ are complete. fGal. 3:29\) 
Thus through the mercy which 
God now shows you, he is also providing 
mercy for them, to be manifested in 
his due time. 

fVer. 32\] God treated Israel as a 



nation of unbelievers, and cast them 
aside nationally in order that he might 
have mercy upon them, and bring them 
as a people to inherit the earthly promises 
made to them. 

Looking at the deep workings of 
Gods plan thus, in the light of what he 
tells us is future, as well as past, we can 
but exclaim: Oh, the rich depths of 
Gods wisdom and knowledge! how 
useless for us to try to discover his 
dealings except as he is pleased to 
reveal his plans to us. His doings are 
all mysteries to us except as enlightened 
by his Spirit. Who knew this gracious 
plan, so much beyond human conception? 
Who helped the Lord to arrange 
such a plan, think you? This is not 
human wisdom and supposition. God 
only could be its author. A Jew never 
would have planned to graft in Gentiles 
to share the chief blessings of the 
promise! A Gentile never would have 
arranged the original stock and branches 
Jewish and himself a favored graft. No, 
the plan is clearly of God, and illustrates 
well both his goodness and just 
severity. Of him is all the plan, through 
his power it is all brought to pass, and 
to him be all the glory forever. 

When the Spirit of Pauls argument is 
caught, it can be clearly seen that he 
quotes from Isaiah the words "Their 
sound went into all the earth and their 
words to the end of the world," not to 
prove that the Gospel had been universally 
published, but that it would be 
in due time. 



*How we see this fulfilled in the breaking off 
of the Gentile branches-the nominal Church- 
now blinded and cast out and only the elect few 
branches, "the little flock," remaining. They 
are no more respected than were the natural 



branches, and are broken off for the same cause. 
- v Rev. 3:15-17\ 



R516 : page 5 

PREACHED FOR A WITNESS. 

'And this Gospel of the Kingdom shall be 
preached in all the world for a witness [testimony] 
unto all nations, and then shall the end come."— 
v Matt. 24:14\ 

We have seen from many evidences 
heretofore pointed out that we are now 
living in the time of the end of the 
Gospel Age, and that the special work 
of the present hour is the reaping of its 
harvest of ripened wheat under the 
direction and leading of the Lord of the 
harvest now present. Realizing this 
fact, not only from the testimony of the 
Word, but also from the actual work of 
harvest progressing before our eyes, 
and by the clearer light now shining, 
discerning as never before the blessed 
import of the glorious Gospel, we inquire, 
Has this Gospel been preached 
in all the world? We find that darkness 
still covers the earth and gross 
darkness the people; and the great 
nominal Church, the professed light-bearers 
and heralds of the Gospel of 
the Kingdom are also in darkness, and 
few either preach or realize fully this 
message of the kingdom. But if we 
consider for a moment what constitutes 
the Gospel of the Kingdom we will be 
assisted in realizing that this Gospel has 
been preached to every nation. 

The work to be accomplished under 
the Kingdom or reign of Christ, is the 
restoration of all mankind to perfection 
of being and consequent eternal life, 
and this reign and work will be possible, 



because all have been redeemed from 
the curse of death by our Ransom or 
Substitute-because all were bought with 
a price, even the precious blood of 
Christ. 

Though the Gospel or good news of 
the kingdom embraces all that can be 
known of Christs dominion over evil, 
and subjection of it, and while but a 
few have seen the deeper and more 
secret parts of Gods plan, and who 
therefore have appreciated the "good 
tidings" more fully than others, yet the 
central element of the "good news" has 
been published throughout the world to 
every nation. Though much beclouded 
and dimmed by the traditions of men 
and the deceptions of Satan, and so 
transformed as to rob it of much of its 
goodness, yet, we repeat, the central and 
vital point of the good news of the 
kingdom has been preached in all the 
world. That central point is, that 
"Christ died for our sins"; that by 
him "we have redemption through his 
blood, even the remission of sins"; that 
by the death of the Just One, many 
are justified freely from all things; 
that as we were condemned and delivered 
to the destroyer, now we are 
bought back with a price, even the 
precious blood of Christ, and are in His 
hands who promises to deliver the 
groaning creation into the liberty of 
sons of God; and that all accepting of 
Christ are to be blessed in his kingdom. 
This central element and first principle 
of glad tidings has certainly been 
preached in all the world, and is a fulfilment 
of this prediction of our Lord. 

Whatever of error the nominal 
Church has held, this kernel of truth- 
redemption through the precious blood 
of Christ-has so far been maintained 
and widely heralded, though its mixture 
with error has greatly hindered its 



proper reception. Not only has the living 
teacher gone forth as a herald to every 
nation, but the Word of God, printed 
in every language, has been scattered 
like autumn leaves. 

But though the good news that 
Messiah has come and paid our ransom 
price, has been so widely published, 
the world still shows no signs of being 
converted to God, and many who 
looked for this result are greatly disappointed. 
Such have entirely misapprehended 
the object of this dispensation 
in supposing it to be the conversion of 
the world to God, and therefore, notwithstanding 
the marked and foretold 
signs of the end, they cannot believe 
that we are really in its closing days. 

The general object, of the preaching 
of the Gospel during this age, as expressed 
in the above text, is "for a witness 
unto all nations." Our Lord knew 
beforehand, that under the present reign 
of evil-under the blinding influences 
of the "god of this world"-the message 
would not convert the world, as many of 
his disciples have erroneously supposed; 
hence, instead of saying that the Gospel 
would be preached in all the world for 
its conversion, he said it would be "for 
a witness." [As heretofore shown, there 
is also in addition to this a special object 
for the preaching of the Gospel, elsewhere, 
but not here expressed, viz: the 
selecting of a little flock of consecrated 
believers, to be joint- heirs of the Kingdom 
with Jesus.] 

But while a witness or testimony has 
been offered to the nations, it has not 
been received except by a few. "Who 
hath believed our report? and to whom 
is the arm of the Lord [Jehovah] revealed?" 
flsa. 53: V) (Jesus is Jehovahs 
arm stretched down to ransom 
and restore men.) If the Gospel is to 
be a witness to any, they must be able 



to see or accept of the testimony, or 
witness; and we see that though it has 
been preached to the nations FOR a 
witness, they were so blinded that they 

R517 : page 5 

could not receive it. But when their 
blindness is taken away, as we are told it 
shall be, then the present testimony will 
serve its purpose as a part in Gods 
plan; for in due time the good news is 
to be testified to every individual, and 
the due time for opening the blind 
eyes, etc., so that the witness or testimony 
can be received, is in the Millennial 
Age, as we have seen. 

Next let us see how the preaching of 
this Gospel during this age will serve 
as a witness in the coming age: When 
earths dead millions are again restored 
to life, this same Gospel-good news- 
will be testified to all, viz: that their 
restoration has been brought about as 
the direct result of Jesus death. Thus 
we read fl Tim. 2:4-6 v ); "God our 
Saviour will have all men to be saved, 
and to come to the knowledge of the 
truth. For there is one God, and one 
mediator between God and men, the 
man Christ Jesus who gave himself a 
ransom for all, to be testified in due 
time." 

All the restored nations having heard 
of this ransom will recognize the fact. 
Israel will remember how with wicked 
hands they slew the Lord. They shall 
remember and be ashamed; they shall 
look upon him whom they have pierced, 
and mourn over it as over the only one. 
CZech. 12:Kr-Young; v Ezek. 16:61\) 
Those who lived in that day will testify 
that Jesus did come in the fulness of time 
as foretold by the Prophets, and that 
he was as a lamb without spot, that he 
was led as a lamb to the slaughter, and 



that as a sheep before her shearers is 
dumb, so he opened not his mouth. 
They will also remember his claim of a 
coming kingdom and great power. 

Others down the centuries of the 
Gospel Age will say, Yes, we heard of 
that event. Zealous disciples of the 
Lord went everywhere telling it; it was 
an unmistakable fact of history; but we 
heard it so often and yet saw no results 
from it, that it seemed like an idle tale, 
and we paid no attention to it. 

Still others, all along the centuries 
preceding the advent and sacrifice, will 
say: We remember how we were required 
to offer bloody sacrifices to God 
for our sins; and that we could not 
approach him in any other way. We 
often wondered what it all meant, but as 
Paul since our day has explained, we 
now see, that they were all intended as 
types of the only acceptable sacrifice 
which should actually "take away the 
sin of the world," which the blood of 
bulls and goats typified, but never accomplished. 
Now we see that our sins 
have really been cancelled by his sacrifice, 
for as a result we are actually released 
from sins penalty-death. 

That marked event will thus stand 
out in bold prominence before all peoples 
and nations, and the proclamation 
now made will thus serve its purpose. 
Thus all the redeemed millions of earth, 
as they again step upon the stage of 
action, will become witnesses to the fact 
that the precious blood of Christ has 
accomplished their redemption. Thus 
will the Gospel-the good news that 
Christ gave himself a ransom for all- 
be testified to all and by all, in due time. 
Thus "the knowledge of the Lord shall 
fill the whole earth." Thus "he shall 
turn unto the people a pure language, 
that they may call upon the name of the 
Lord to serve him with one consent." 



OZeph. 3:9\) 

Heretofore the word preached has 
generally fallen upon deaf ears, and the 
sacred page has been opened before 
blind eyes, but soon, ignorance and 
prejudice being removed, the blind eyes 
shall be opened and the deaf ears shall 
be unstopped, flsa. 35:5\) 

Men will then recognize that the risen 
and glorified Christ is again present to 
restore and bless all the families of the 
earth, and that he is the great Prophet 
(teacher) whom Jehovah hath raised 
up, and they will be ready to hear and 
obey, as saith the Prophet Isaiah: "And 
many people shall go and say, Come ye 

R517 : page 6 

and let us go up to the mountain of the 
Lord [i.e., let us submit ourselves to the 
authority of his kingdom], to the house 
of the God of Jacob; and he will teach 
us of his ways, and we will walk in his 
paths,... and all nations shall flow 
unto it." Ochap. 2:2,3\) 

How comparatively weak and ineffectual 
upon the world are the efforts 
now put forth, and how few can discern 
the blessed hope in the joyful message 
we carry! But when the great Prophet, 
Priest and King shall fully take to himself 
his great power and dominion, not 
only shall the prince of darkness be restrained, 
but all his works of darkness 
shall be destroyed by the bright shining 
of the Sun of Righteousness. 

Nevertheless we see that it was necessary 
and expedient that the message 
should go unto all nations, though they 
did not receive it. The few who did 
receive it thereby received "power to 
become sons of God"-"partakers of 
the divine nature" and joint heirs of the 
kingdom fJohn 1:12"; "2 Peter 1:4"; 
"Rom. 8:17"), while it also served as a 



witness to the nations. MRS. C. T. R. 

R517 : page 6 

THE PRESENT JUDGMENT. 

"Now is the judgment of this world; now 
shall the prince of this world be cast out."- 
70HN 12:31\ 

The meaning of this text and a class 
of parallel texts, has been, like much 
other Scripture, comparatively obscure 
until of late. As the seals one after another 
have been opened, each has cast 
light upon the others. 

We think it is fair to infer that the 
prophets understood less about what 
they were writing than the apostles did, 
because they were inspired more to 
write than to understand, and had to 
study their own prophecies after they 
had written them, in order to understand 
them, and they were inspired to 
write them more specially for the benefit 
of those who live now, than for their 
own benefit, fl Peter 1:10,11, 12\) [This 
the regular readers of the WATCH 
TOWER know, but we repeat it for the 
possible benefit of those who are not 
regular readers.] We use the word 
"now" in the preceding sentence to 
cover a period of time embracing the 
entire Gospel age. 

The Apostle Peter uses the word 
us, in the passages referred to, in a 
similar sense to embrace the Christian 
body living not only at that time, but at 
any time during the Gospel age. 

We conclude, also, that as the prophets 
understood less of their own writings 
than the apostles did of those same 
writings, so the apostles understood less 
of what they heard Christ say prophetically 



than the members of Christ who 
read them now at the close of the age. 
This we say of the present living phase 
of the body and not of any individual. 

Not that the members living now are 
more inspired, nor more consecrated, 
nor anything of that kind, but they 
have passed more mile-posts along the 
way, have seen the fulfillment of much 
that was foretold by Christ and the 
apostles, as one after another of their 
sayings have been verified from that 
day to this. We (all consecrated 
Christians, members of the body of 
Christ) have had the benefit of most of 
the things which the revelator saw in 
vision. 

We have seen most of the things 
spoken of by our Lord in 'Mart. 24 v th 
chapter fulfilled. We have seen those 
magnificent buildings thrown down, and 
"not one stone left upon another." 

We have seen the "falling away" and 
the man of sin revealed, the son of perdition 
spoken of by Paul f2 Thes. 2:3 V ) 
in his waxing and waning power. We 
have seen Israel scattered among all 
nations without favor, under the withering, 
blighting curse of God, a distinct 
people but not a nation. We have seen 
"Jerusalem trodden down of the Gentiles," 
and remember that the condition 
was to continue "until the times of the 
Gentiles be fulfilled" fLuke 21:24 v ). We 
have seen the beginning of their gathering 
"out of all countries" to their 
own land. We have seen the gospel 
"preached in all the world for a witness 
unto all nations." We have seen the 
parallels of the ages, and looked with 
wondering gratitude into the plan of 
God, and now recognize the dawning 
of the day of the Lord, the presence 
of the Master. 

Having been permitted to see these 
things (some of which probably Paul 



saw but was not permitted to utter 
plainly then, as it was not then due to 
the world, neither is yet, our principal 
work being to "build each other up") 
we are enabled by the light thrown upon 
them, to see other things, among 
which is the statement of our Lord 
quoted at the beginning of this article. 

It will be noticed by the thoughtful 
reader, that this statement is not in harmony 
with the popular theology, which 
places the judgment of all men in the 
future. For that reason it is a troublesome 
text to all those who would have 
all Gods purposes regarding the probation 
of mankind accomplished in this 
world, age or dispensation. 

What can such say to a statement 
like this, "Now is the judgment of this 
world," or, as most authorities have it, 
"Now is a judgment of this world"? 
But what could our Lord mean by saying 
that? What kind of judgment is 
it, who are judged now, and what is 
meant by the term "now"? How 
strange and yet how comforting it is, to 
find many of these passages which 
have so long been so troublesome, now 
as the temple approaches completion, 
are the very stones needed to complete 
the work. 

To appreciate the sentence, let us 
take a look back and see what had been 
done for the world, in the way of redemption, 
at the time these words were 
spoken. We find upon examination 
that absolutely nothing had been done 
except to promise. That was enough, to 
be sure, to base a hope upon, for Gods 
promises are "yea and amen," but actually 
there had not been anything 
done to redeem the race from death, 
and those who were the chosen people 
of God, chosen for a purpose, supposed 

R518:page6 



that they were the only people 
that the Lord cared anything about. 
The Lord had said so much to them 
about being his chosen people that they 
got the idea that he could never choose 
any other people. 

He has said, "Ye are the children of 
the Lord your God;" "Thou art a holy 
people unto the Lord thy God, and the 
Lord hath chosen thee to be a peculiar 
people unto himself above all the nations 
that are upon the earth" fDeut. 14:1,2"), 
and very many times he expressed 
himself in a similar manner; 
but if they had known that they were 
not chosen so much for their own sakes 
as for Gods "holy name sake" fEzek. 36:22 v ), 
which means for the sake of 
love to all men, they would not have 
arrogated so much to themselves. But 
with all their perverseness they were a 
very fit instrument for the purpose for 
which they were chosen, else they 
would not have been chosen by infinite 
wisdom, of course. 

"Unto them was committed the oracles 
of God," and they kept them very 
well, the same as a son would keep the 
"last will and testament" of his father 
written in a language which he did not 
understand, but which he supposed conveyed 
the whole estate to himself. 

At the time the words were spoken, 
to which our attention is now directed, 
they had accomplished about all that 
was required of them at that time, and 
the further purposes of God were of 
such a nature that they were unfit instruments 
to be used for the accomplishment 
of them, and as God would 
not use instruments unadapted to his 
purpose, of course they had to be set 
aside. But why were they unfit? Because 
they had purposes of their own to 
accomplish which were not in harmony 



with the further purposes of him who 

had chosen them to be his people. 

They had agreed to be his obedient 

people, and that he should be their 

God fJosh. 2A-2T), but they had 

broken their agreement, they had made 

another choice, they had elected in 

their hearts that they would not follow 

the lead of any except he be a mighty 

one of earth, a chief among men, one 

who would lift them up to a condition 

of grandeur upon the earthly plane; it 

was earthly glory and honor that they 

wanted, and as the "prince of life" 

considered all such things of secondary 

importance, and made humility and 

self-denial requirements of the first importance, 

they chose to be under the 

leadership of the "prince of this world," 

who had offered to bestow the kingdoms 

of this world upon Christ if he 

would fall down and worship him. 

True, the prince of this world was a 
usurper, but he was nevertheless ruling 
this world, and for the time being had 
control. He had usurped the rulership 
of the world for four thousand years, a 
long reign, and it would seem claimed 
it by possession, but the lawful "heir" 
had come, and was preparing to take 
it, but until he actually did take it, he 
would not be its ruler or prince, and 
he never so styled himself, nor is he so 
called by the Apostles, but on the contrary 
he expressly says to Pilate, "My 
kingdom is not of this world" (Kosmo, 
arrangement); it was to be quite a different 
arrangement. So, if his kingdom 
was not of this world, he could not be 
the "prince of this world," then his language 
could have no reference to himself 
as some suppose, thinking perhaps 
that there is ground for that opinion in 
v Matt. 21:33-45 v ; but though that parable 
had regard to his lawful heirship, 
there is no intimation that he was the 



prince or ruler, and, as we have said, 

his words to Pilate are in direct contradiction 

to any such thought. 

Then we must seek for the meaning 
of these words somewhere else. We said 
there had nothing been done, actually 
toward redeeming the race. There had 
been sin-offerings, so-called, and various 
kinds of sacrifices, but none of them 
could redeem the race from death, none 
could make atonement for sin; they 
were all "shadows of good things to 
come." All that the house of Israel 
had and did was typical, and was to be 
superseded by others. Their sacrifices 
pointed to "better sacrifices," their 
promises to "better promises," their 
covenant to a "better covenant," their 
hope to a "better hope," and their testament 
to a better testament." fHeb. 7:19-22 v ; 
V 8:6 V ; v 9:23\) But when would 
these better things be? When the 
prince of this world should be cast out. 
But Jesus said "now shall the prince of 
this world be cast out," and we do not 
see things very much better yet. 

Then we had better examine that 
little word "now," and perhaps now is 
as good a time for it as any. Let us 
first look at some passages of Scripture 
where the word is used in a similar 
sense, which will perhaps give us a 
clue to it, making the sense more 
readily recognizable. 

Paul says fl Cor. 13:12 v ), "Now we 
see through a glass darkly." "Now I 
know in part." That was true then and 
is still true, though, as it is a little lighter, 
this much farther along we can see 
better. Yet we still see through the 
same glass somewhat darkly; it is still 
"Now." In v Matt. 3:1(T we read: 
"Now also the axe is laid [applied] unto 
the root of the tree," etc. The same axe 
of Gospel requirement, reckoning the 
intention for the act (see v Matt. 5:22-28 v ), 



still lies at the root of the trees. This 
is the real circumcision, and cuts off the 
"old man," whose place is supplied by 
the new creature. The old requirement 
(or axe) lopped off some of the 
branches; but "now," throughout the 
Gospel age, it is applied at the root. 
There must be an utter destruction of 
the flesh; there must be a "new lump." 
The past experience with the old has 
shown to the world that there must be 
a "new man," a new house, and that 
house is now being built up "a spiritual 
house." 

That "now" is not yet quite complete. 
In ^Rom. 3:20,21\ we read: "By the 
law is the knowledge of sin; but "now" 
the righteousness of God without the 
law is manifested, being witnessed by 
the law and the prophets." The same 
is still true with regard to the same 
things; it is still the same "now." 

Again, in v Rom. 8:22\ we read: "For 
we know that the whole creation groaneth 
and travaileth in pain together 
until now, and not only they, but ourselves 
also, which have the first fruit of 
the spirit, even we ourselves groan 
within ourselves, waiting for the adoption, 
to wit, the redemption of our 
body" (the church, which is his body), 
not bodies. We are still groaning, we 
are still waiting, the same "now" is not 
expired. 

We understand that our Lord uses 
the word now in the same sense that it 
is used in these passages; that is, it 
applies to the whole time from Christs 
first to his second coming at least, and 
covers the Gospel age up to the time 
that Christ with his saints takes the 
kingdom. 

As though he had said, the time 
to begin the work of salvation has come. 
There is now no further use for "bleeding 
birds, and bleeding beasts," the 



reality which these typified is now to 

take place, the "better sacrifices" now 

begin to be offered as the head laid 

next to the body is placed upon the 

altar. fLev. 1:12,13\) "Now" the 

real work commences, and in it is included 

a judgment of this world, and 

the overthrow, casting out of its prince. 

"The royal majesty of the heavens 
has approached," "The kingdom of 
heaven is at hand," "The hour is at 
hand," "My time is at hand." 

The result of that which is now beginning, 
is that the ruler of this world 
shall be cast out, and it will be at the 
desire of his own subjects. And even 
though he may seem to triumph because 
I am "lifted up from the earth," 
yet by that very means I will draw all 
unto me. "Now is the judgment 
(krisis-accusation, condemnation) of 
this world; and "judgment (krima, 
which includes law) must begin at the 
house of God." What do we see? The 
old house of God, the house of Israel, 
was condemned and "left desolate"; 
and even that was a type, for that which 
has happened to the second house is the 
same, and it is from the remnant of both 
houses that the new house is formed. 
Compare v Isa. llillVRom. 9:27V 11:5"; 
"Eph. 2:15\ See, also, "Isa. 8:14\ "The 
remnant [of both houses] of Israel shall 
not do iniquity, nor speak lies; neither 
shall a deceitful tongue be found in 
their mouth." fZeph. 3:13\) 

This remnant of "both houses of 
Israel" (how significant is the meaning 
of Israel: RULING WITH GOD; see 
Youngs Con.) judge themselves; and 
"when we are [thus] judged we are 
chastened of the Lord, that we should 
not be condemned with the world." 
fl Cor. 11:31,32".) He who is among 
this class "cometh not into [future] 
judgment, but has passed [legally] out 



of death into life." fJohn 5:24\ R.V.) 
"There is therefore now no condemnation 
[consequently no future judgment] 
to them that are in Christ Jesus. For 
the law of the Spirit of life in Christ 
Jesus made me free from the law of sin 
and death." fRom. 8:1,2% R.V.) 

While thus judging themselves they 
judge (condemn) the world the same as 
Noah did fHeb. 11:T), and their 
"judgment is just" because they seek 
not their own will, but the will of their 
Heavenly Father. 

Another sense in which we should 
consider the words, "Now is the, or a 
judgment of this world," though a secondary 
sense, is yet an important one, 
and though it is not a legal judgment, 
because rendered by those who are 
themselves legally dead (under sentence), 
yet it is a fact that such a judgment 
is being passed-i.e., this world 
is now passing judgment upon its rulership 
and condemning it, and the result 
will be in harmony with the judgment 
of the other class. The world (by acclamation) 
will cast out the prince of 
this world, and the universal desire will 
be for a different ruler. There are yet 
but a few comparatively who desire a 
righteous ruler, but the oppression of 
the present power will become so great 
that the universal desire will be for a 
king to rule in righteousness. Then 
the "Desire of all nations shall come," 
and the glory of this latter house (rulership) 
shall be greater than the former." 
fHag. 2:7-9\) Who, especially among 
those who are watching, cannot see the 
discontent prevailing with regard to the 
rulership of this world? Communism, 
Nihilism, and all that element, is the result 
of this judgment of the world, who 
suppose that they can bring this prince 
to terms. But, ah! they can neither 



R519:page7 

bring him to terms nor cast him out, 
because they operate upon the same 
principles that he does. They can express 
their judgment and dissatisfaction, 
but that is all they can do; they cannot 
even bind him. But the "Prince of 
life" is getting things ready, and when 
all is complete Satan will fall from his 
present position as ruler "like lightning." 
This Jesus saw in vision ("Luke 10:18"). 
But oh, the terrible events connected 
with his overthrow! What tongue 
or pen can portray them? 

Probably no more vivid description 
could be given than is given in the 
Book of "Zephaniah". You should read 
it all carefully; and let those who are 
not familiar with these things, and yet 
desire to have truth and righteousness 
prevail in the earth, dwell upon the 
"third verse of the second chapter"; and 
let all those who have sacrificed with 
Christ rejoice in what is said in the 
"third chapter, from the 16th to the 20th" 
verses, inclusive. 

There are some (they are "a solemn 
assembly") who see many of these 
things, but they follow afar off, for "the 
reproach is a burden" to them; but 
when the tribulation gets heavy enough 
they will be separated and gathered; 
this is reason for our comfort concerning 
them ("18th verse"). 

Another argument which we would 
present against the thought that the 
words "prince of this world" might refer 
to Christ himself and "the judgment 
of this world" refer to his trial before 
the Sanhedrim and Pilate, is this: Paul 
says ("1 Cor. 2:7,8"): "The hidden wisdom 
which God ordained before the 
world unto our glory, none of the princes 
of this world knew, for had they known 
it, they would not have crucified the 



Lord of glory." 

This would preclude his being either 
the, or a prince of this world. Jesus 
made the announcement, "The kingdom 
of heaven is at hand," and authorized 
his disciples to proclaim the 
same, but soon after said to Pilate, "My 
kingdom is not of this world." 

This is a dark and disorderly arrangement; 
it has been a night of sin all 
through the reign, but "the night is 
far spent, the day is at hand"-the 
kingdom of heaven is at hand." 

These terms are all of similar import 
and were true then; indeed, that work 
of Jesus and his disciples was the beginning 
of the end, it was the first part 
of the period embraced in the word 
"now," and we are in the last part 
of the same period. 

Some persons who are not Christians, 
and some who are, now think that because 
Christ said, and the disciples proclaimed, 
the kingdom of heaven at hand, the 
disciples thought it was to be set up 
during their life-time. There might be 
such a seeming to one not familiar with 
the Scriptures bearing upon this point, 
but to the careful Bible student, who 
compares scripture with scripture, there 
would be no trouble, for Paul says: f2 Thes. 2:1,2") 
"Now we beseech you, 
brethren, touching the coming of our 
Lord Jesus Christ, and our gathering 
together unto him, to the end ye be 
not quickly shaken from your mind, 
nor yet be troubled, either by spirit or 
by word, or by epistle as from us, as 
that the day of the Lord is just at 
hand ("has set in"; Rotherhams trans.) 
Let no man beguile you in anywise, for 
it will not be, except the falling away 
come first, and the man of sin be revealed, 
the son of perdition." (R.V.) 

Peter understood what our true guide 
about this was, when he said, "We would 



do well to take heed to the more sure 
word of prophecy, as unto a light that 
shineth in a dark place, until the day 
dawn" f2 Peter l:19 v ). So we see the 
day had not dawned then, although it 
was at hand, but not "just at hand," 
that is, not as near as the dawning. The 
night is far spent when we have past 
midnight, but the dawning is the beginning 
of day. 

We understand that we are in the 
last part of the period embraced in the 
word "now," in the text. The "more 
sure word of prophecy" assures us that 
this period is nearly filled up. We understand 
that the servants of God are 
being "sealed in their foreheads"; the 
last thing before the "four angels" "hurt 
the earth and the sea" fRev. 7:2, 3 V ); 
that we are just about entering the 
time of trouble, of which the destruction 
of Jerusalem was but a type. 

Many are being "purified and made 
white and tried." A judgment is in 
progress now, and there is still another 
to come, and the associate judges for 
that tribunal are being prepared fl Cor. 6:2,3'); 
and when the prince of this 
world is cast out, they will enter upon 
their further work of judging the world. 
One thought more. How much this 
class need to study and become familiar 
with "the books," according to which 
the judgment both now and then is to 
be given fRev. 20:12 v ). Yea, and how 
much we need to have the testimony of 
Jesus, for the testimony of Jesus is the 
spirit of prophecy." 

J. C. SUNDERLIN. 



R519:page7 

MR. OLIPHANTS VIEW. 



Mr. Oliphant, the great advocate and 
mover in favor of the restoration of persecuted 
Jews to Palestine, says: 

"That one of the first countries which 
must be affected by an independent 
Egypt, is Palestine, which lies on its 
borders, is certain; that it must of necessity 
become the first upon which the 
destinies of the adjoining countries must 
turn is no less self-evident. As our 
(Englands) policy in Egypt develops- 
as, under the pressure of circumstances 
it is inevitably bound to develop, the 
assurances of the government notwithstanding 
--with the virtual administration 
of the country by England, the national 
susceptibilities of France, Russia, 
and Italy, already strained almost beyond 
bearing, will find active expression. 
Compensations will be demanded, 
which must infallibly be the prelude to 
conferences, or wars, or both, when the 
Europeans will have to consider French 
claims in regard to Syria, Italian claims 
to Tripoli, Russian claims to Armenia, 
and the problem of Palestine and the 
holy places will present itself as the first 
for solution. We shall not, therefore, 
have long to wait before the fate of 
Palestine will become a burning 
question." 



R519:page7 

MOSES MONTEFIORE AND THE JEWS. 

On October 24th, 1884, Sir Moses 
will, if he should live, have reached the 
hundredth year of his age. The comparatively 
near approach of an epoch so 
interesting to all friends and co-religionists 
of the still hale and hearty philanthropist 
has attracted attention abroad 
as well as at home. A movement is on 



foot among the Hebrews of New York 
to prepare a suitable testimonial to Sir 
Moses Montefiore on the expected centennial 
of his birthday. An ardent advocate 
of the old faith, he did not let 
the toils of money-getting blind him to 
the unjust political disabilities under 
which the British Jews labored in his 
early days nor to the benighted and 
unfortunate condition of his brethren 
abroad, particularly in Palestine. In 
1827 he made the first of a series of trips 
to Palestine with a view to personally 
investigate the cause of the abject state 
of his brethren in that land. The result 
of the first visit was the founding of the 
Palestine fund, of which he has since 
constantly been the administrator. In 
1862 his beloved wife and helpmeet 
died. Her death marked an epoch of 
princely charities and donations by Sir 
Moses. Though grief burdened his 
soul and physical debility bowed his 
whitened head, it did not prevent him 
from immediately proceeding to Morocco 
in the following year, 1863, to 
plead the cause of the prosecuted Jews 
of Port Saafi, who were being massacred 
and tortured by the Spanish on a 
trumped-up pretext that the Spanish 
council had been murdered by the really 
inoffensive and innocent Jews. The 
venerable man succeeded once more in 
throwing oil on the troubled waters and 
restoring peace and happiness to his 
persecuted brethren, and also securing 
valuable privileges for resident Christians 
there from the Grand Shereef of 
Morocco. In 1875 he made his seventh 
and last visit to the Holy Land, the 
land of his love. Upon his coat of arms 
is a flag staff, and therefrom flowing a 
banner, on which, inscribed in Hebrew 
characters of gold, is the word Jerusalem. 
To see Palestine the seat of a Jewish 
state, with Jerusalem as its capital, is and 



has been the fond ambition and dream 
of his life-never to be personally realized 
in his time, as he himself is fully 
aware. But to the consummation of 
this wished-for end he has bent the best 
efforts of a longer life than is usually allotted 
to man. -London Christian 
Herald. 



R520 : page 7 

A GREAT WORK PROPOSED. 

"The latest proposition is to build a 
maritime canal through Palestine, and 
an English company, with the Duke 
of Marlborough at its head, has been 
formed for the purpose of making investigations 
and preliminary surveys. 

So far as at present proposed, the work 
will include, in the first instance, a canal 
twenty-five miles in length, from 
Halifax, in the Bay of Acre, through the 
plain of Esdraelon to the valley of the 
river Jordan. The depth of the proposed 
canal is to be forty feet, and its 
width 200 feet. This work will bring 
the Mediterranean into the heart of 
Palestine, and go far toward making a 
seaport of Jerusalem. It is further 
proposed to construct a canal 100 
miles in length from the head of the 
Gulf of Akaboan to the Dead Sea, and 
thus unite the waters of the latter with 
the Red Sea. If these things were 
successfully performed it is expected 
that an inland sea about 300 miles 
long, varying in width from three to 
ten miles, and deep enough to float 
vessels of the largest size, would extend 
from the Mediterranean to the 
Red Sea. There are some matters besides 
engineering difficulties which may 
hinder the execution of this project. 



The consent of the porte is indispensable, 
and certain European Powers 
would undoubtedly oppose the granting 
of a firman conferring upon England 
the exclusive right of way by 
water through Palestine. The Holy 
Land also has sacred associations for 
Christians throughout the world, and 
a wide- spread sentiment among all 
churches and sects would doubtless be 
raised in opposition to the innovation." 
--London R.R. News. 



R520 : page 7 

THE BIBLES PLACE IN THE WORLD. 

Thinking men are coming to place a 
higher estimate upon the value of Scripture 
history than formerly. It was fashionable, 
a few years since, for the literati 
of Europe to talk of myths of the Bible, 
and to speculate largely as to their probable 
origin "on the hazy horizon of the 
morning of time." But these morning 
fog-banks of antiquity have been lifting, 
and to the astonishment of these philosophers, 
these fancied myths are fossil 
facts. The same research and marvelous 
developments in the East that have 
done so much for the credibility of 
Herodotus, have also riveted mans faith 
to the Bible. 

The uncovering of Nineveh alone has 
wrought wonders. Nineveh, that great 
city. Nineveh, buried so long ago 
that Herodotus, the Father of History, 
knew nothing of it, not even its name; 
so long ago that Xenophon led his immortal 
ten thousand over its very site, 
utterly unconscious of the fact that a 
vast city was smouldering beneath their 
tread; so long ago that Volair dissolved 
the name into a mere film of mythology 



--Nineveh suddenly looms up into the 
gaze of the world with its vast palaces, 
its massive mausoleums, its gorgeous 
galleries of art, and libraries whose rock 
volumes and historic scrolls are but 
the faithful duplicates of many of the 
Scripture annals. The Nineveh of the 
Bible is there, and from her tomb of 
Jonah, from her place of Sennacherib, 
from her very stone archives, there 
comes a thousand voices attesting the 
authenticity of Bible history. In the 
library of the royal palace, besides the 
numerous treatises on ancient science, 
and grammars of Assyrian dialects, 
there are the annals of the empire, giving 
minute details of extended conquests, 
and siege and capture of walled cities, 
the fate of captives, the levying of tribute, 
and, in fact, all the concomitants 
of successful war. 

Among other campaigns, those into 
Judea are given with a carefulness of 
detail that is surprising. The names of 
Jerusalem, Samaria, Libnah, Lachish, 
Gaza, Ascalon, and others-of Jehu, 
king of Israel, of Hazael, Menahem, 
Hezekiah, Rezin, Omri, Hiram, king of 
Tyre, Illulous of Sidon, were evidently 
as familiar to the students of Assyrian 
history as they have ever been to Jewish 
or Christian readers of any age. They 
are perpetually recurring in many of the 
inscriptions. In a lengthy document is 
given the Assyrian history of "The Battle 
of the Kings," recorded in "Genesis 14\ 
The names of most of the kings 
who took part in this first important 
raid are given, together with the names 
of many of the cities of the plain. 

Corresponding to the Bible account ("2 Kings 18"), 
is the siege and capture of 
Lachish, which is amply illustrated on 
the walls of the palaces, and full particulars 
given. Over the head of the king, 
in one of the illustrations, is the following 



inscription in the cuniform or wedge 
shaped characters: "Sennacherib, the 
mighty king, king of the country of 
Assyria, sitting on the throne of judgment, 
before the city of Lachish. I give 
permission for its slaughter." In immediate 
connection with this inscribed on 
a massive cylinder of stone, is a confirmation 
remarkable indeed. The inspired 
record says: "Sennacherib came 
up against all the fenced cities of Judea 
and took them," f2 Kings 18:13"), and 
that when Hezekiah desired to purchase 
a peace, the invader demanded of him 
thirty talents of gold and three hundred 
talents of silver. The Bible also informs 
us that Hezekiah gave all the silver that 
was found in the house of the Lord and 
of the royal treasury, and that he also 
cut off all the gold from the doors and 
pillars of the temple, and sent to the 
haughty monarch. But only emboldened 
by this submissive spirit of Hezekiah, 
the scripture says that after repeated 
insults, Sennacherib advanced 
for the destruction of Jerusalem, but was 
discomfitted by the angel of the Lord, 
who slew in one night 185,000 men, 
compelling the haughty Assyrian to return 
to Nineveh. 

The two histories discovered are paralleled 
in a remarkable degree. The inscription 
on the monuments make Sennacherib 
to say: "Because Hezekiah, 
king of Judah, did not submit to my 
yoke, forty six of his strong fenced cities 
and innumerable smaller ones which depended 
upon them, I took and plundered, 
but I left to him Jerusalem his 
capital." The scripture account is a 
sufficient explanation for this fact. 
02 Kings 19:32\) "And because Hezekiah 
still refused to do me homage I attacked 
and carried off the whole population, 
fixed and nomadic, which dwelt around 
Jerusalem with thirty talents of gold and 



eight hundred talents of silver-the 
accumulated wealth of Hezekiahs 
court, and of his daughters, with the officers 
of his palace. I returned to Nineveh 
and I accounted their spoil for the 
tribute which he refused to pay me." 

The only apparent discrepancy (for it 
is apparent, not real,) in the whole of 
both accounts is in regard to the number 
of the talents in silver. The Bible 
states the amount demanded-the rock-records 
the amount carried off. The 
Bible gives the amount demanded of 
Jerusalem alone-the Assyrian the 
amount obtained from the whole of 
Judea. 

A confirmation still more remarkable 
is given in reference to the humiliation 
of Nebuchadnezzar-his being driven 
forth to dwell with the beasts for a season 
--an event which least of all we 
should expect to find recorded in the 
annals of an Eastern satrap. On a tablet 
now in the East India House, in London, 
is an inscription which may be regarded 
as the official report of that 
amazing calamity. Breaking off abruptly 
in the midst of the narration of 
the kings achievements in the architectural 
decoration of Babylon and Borsipa, 
the historian suddenly denounces the 
Chaldeans and astrologers, and then 
goes on to say: "The kings heart was 
hardened against them. He would 
grant them no benefactions for religious 
purposes. He intermitted the worship 
of Merodach, and put an end to the 

R520 : page 8 

sacrifice of victims. He labored under 
the effects of enchantment." There is 
much more that is obscure in this episode, 
and yet at its close the architectural 
narration is as abruptly closed. 
What clearer account of that awful visitation 



could be expected from a nation 

pre-eminent for haughty pride and vain-glorious 

pomp. 

So deeply was one of the infidel editors 
of the Boston Investigator impressed 
with the evidence of Layard, that he 
said in his columns in 1859: "Hereafter, 
whatever we freethinkers may 
have to say of the divinity of the old 
Book, not one of us shall ever question 
the genuineness of its history. "-Extracts 
from Chautauqua Lectures. 



R520 : page 8 
QUESTION COLUMN. 

Ques. If our debt is paid, Why is it 
said in Scripture that we are forgiven 
our trespasses? 

Ans. It would be useless for a sinner 
to approach God asking to be forgiven, 
because he also forgives trespassers 
against him. This would be no ground 
for forgiveness and is never held out 
thus in Scripture. The prayer referred 
to-"Forgive us our trespasses as we 
forgive those who trespass against us" 
-is not for sinners. Jesus said, "After 
this manner pray YE. Ye who recognize 
in Jesus, "the Lamb of God which 
taketh away the sin of the world"-ye 
who were once aliens, but are now made 
nigh by the blood of Christ- Ye may 
say to Jehovah, "Our Father who art 
in heaven." And having made a covenant 
of self-sacrifice, if ye, through 
temptation, sometimes fail of perfectly 
keeping it, ye may pray to your Father 
forgive; and "whatsoever ye shall ask 
the Father in my name, he will give it 
you fJohn 16:23 v ). The world may not 
call God Father, but we "have received 
the spirit of adoption whereby we cry 



Abba, Father" fRom. 8:15\) "He that 
abideth in the doctrine of Christ hath 

R521 : page 8 

the Father" 02 John 9 V ). 

Ques. Can a man who has made full 
consecration to the Lord remain a member 
of a secret society? 

Ans. We cannot speak from personal 
experience, never having been a member 
of any such society. But if we 
should even take for granted that they 
are in no way opposed to the doctrines 
of Christ, and that they cultivate morality 
(which is at least questionable), 
still we should feel that we were out of 
place in them. We believe that neither 
consecrated time, money, nor influence 
could be thus devoted without interference 
with the saints consecration vow 
to use all their time, all their money, 
all their influence, not only not against 
the Lord but in his service. Since this 
Journal addresses specially the consecrated 
class, we feel it unnecessary to 
do more than point out this confliction 
with the consecration vow. The same 
argument holds true exactly against 
every sectarian society called churches. 
Consecrated time, money and influence, 
cannot be thus wasted without injury to 
the cause, and violence to the vow, in 
our opinion. The wide scope of our 
consecration should, to the thoughtful 
saint, settle all the minor details of its 
fulfilment. 

Ques. Again, can such consecrated 
ones consistently insure either life or 
property? 

Ans. It is certainly a teaching of 
Scripture that we should "do good 
unto all men," and that, if even an 
enemy hunger, we should feed him. 
Insurance of life or property, like poor-houses 
and hospitals, is merely the putting 



of the teachings of Christ into a 
business form. It is the creating of a 
general fund by a large number, for the 
assistance of any one of their company 
in an extremity. 

We see nothing in this out of harmony 
with the Masters teachings. Life 
Insurance is equivalent to the laying 
aside in a savings bank of a small sum, 
regularly, for the benefit of some dependent 
ones. We believe that such a 
provision by a father for a dependent 
family is not contrary to the spirit of 
Jesus words, when he said, "Lay not 
up for yourselves treasures upon earth." 
A treasure is that upon which the heart 
is set, and many people make treasures 
of things of less use and value than 
money quite frequently-reputation, 
dress, pleasure, relics, etc. 

To the truly consecrated no earthly 
thing should be treasured, all must be 
counted as dross in comparison with the 
heavenly things promised. All must 
be lightly esteemed, so that, at a moments 
notice, we shall be ready and 
willing to sacrifice them to the will of 
the Lord or, heavenly interests. Some 
statements by Paul should be understood 
to be in harmony with our Lords 
words. He exhorts the Church to lay 
up money every week for the Lords 
family-the Church fl Cor. 16:2"); and 
if right to lay up for this, would it be 
wrong to use reasonable precaution in 
laying aside whatever might be reasonably 
spared from the demands of the 
present for the future necessities or 
emergencies of an earthly family entrusted 
to your care by the same Lord? 

But while remembering the words, 
that "He who provideth not for his 
own household, hath denied the faith 
and is worse than an infidel" fl Tim. 5:8"), 
let us also beware of the much more 
common error, of grasping miserliness 



which hoards, denying the necessities 
of the present in their families, and robbing 
them of the privilege of sharing 
in the furtherance of the Lords work- 
one of the greatest privileges we can 
deprive ourselves of. 

Ques. If those who die in infancy are 
to be restored to perfection on the 
human plane, please explain Jesus 
words: "Of such is the kingdom of 
heaven"? 

Ans. The import of this text evidently 
is: Of such like is the kingdom. 
This will be better seen by reading the 
next verse ("Mark 10:15"): "Verily, I say 
unto you, whosoever shall not receive 
the kingdom of God AS a little child, 
HE shall not enter therein." See also 
Matthews account of this, "ch. 18:1-6". 

This shows that Jesus is representing 
the gentle, teachable, guileless, humble 
disciple by a little child. How beautiful 
the thought- "children of God!" 
"Howbeit, in malice be ye children, 
(having none) but in understanding be 
men." fl Cor. 14:20"). 

Ques. Please explain "Heb. 12:8"? 

Ans. The Diaglott renders this passage 
thus: "But if you are without discipline, 
of which all have become partakers, 
then truly you are spurious and 
not sons." The apostle shows that during 
the present time those who are called 
of God to the new nature, must anticipate 
trials and temptations and oppositions, 
such things being necessary to 
their preparation for the grand and glorious 
future work for which God designs 
them; the overcoming of evil being a 
proper test of all who are designed to 
be sharers of Gods kingdom power. 

Paul in the context shows, that to be a 
follower of Jesus, is not to be carried to 
glory on flowery beds of ease; not to 
reign, but to seek to win a right to the 
kingdom; not to put on the dress of a 



racer merely, but to so run as to obtain 

the prize, which implies weariness, difficulties 

and obstacles to be encountered. 

He points out that thus it was with the 

first runner of this course-Jesus, our 

leader, captain and forerunner- who 

opened up this "narrow way" to us by 

giving himself a ransom for us. Paul 

argues that we should look to Jesus as 

a pattern: if his was a race of trial, discouragement 

and conflicts with evil, we 

should expect the same, and not be surprised 

at fiery trials. Was his name 

cast out as evil- was he hated without 

cause-did his brethren disown him- 

was he cast out of the synagogue because 

he told the truth-and were all 

these things grievous rather than joyous 

-discipline rather than pleasure? 

If so it was with the example and pattern, 

so it will be with every true follower. 

Instead, then, of regarding such 

sufferings of the present time as evidences 

of disownment by the Lord, we 

should look for and receive them as 

evidences that we are accepted as sons, 

and in training for the promised royal 

honors. To be without such evidences 

would indicate that we had never been 

"begotten by the word of truth." 

James 1:18\) 

Though they might have been begotten 
to some other hope by the word of 
traditions of men, promising a kingdom, 
etc., on other conditions- such would 
be spurious and not real heirs of the 
kingdom. 

Ques. What will become of those 
who hear the Gospel and reject it? 

Ans. We would say first, that many 
are supposed to hear the Gospel who 
really never do hear it. Jesus said, 
"Him that hath an ear let him hear." 
But the God of this world (Satan) has 
stopped many ears and blinded many 
eyes, so that they cannot recognize the 



joyful message we bear. We have the 
promise, however, that in due time all 
these deaf ears shall be unstopped, and 
the blind eyes shall be opened, and then 
this Gospel in its fulness shall be "testified 
to all." 

If you do not refer to this class (which 
includes the great mass of the world), 
but to a class who have actually heard 
and received the fundamental truth of 
the Gospel, that Christ died for our sins 
according to the Scriptures, and who 
were actually justified by faith, but who 
never consecrated themselves as living 
sacrifices to God, and thus rejected the 
good news of high calling, we would 
say of these that they lose their privilege 
of joint-heir ship and reign with Christ. 

But if you refer to still another class, 
viz., those who having heard the Gospel, 
and having been justified by faith 
in it, have also covenanted to become 
living sacrifices, and who afterwards reject 
the Gospel and become the enemies 
of the cross of Christ, counting the blood 
of the covenant wherewith they were 
sanctified a common thing; for such the 
Scripture says there remaineth no more 
a sacrifice for sin. Such are, indeed, in 
a sad condition. In their justification, 
such had received by faith the benefits 
from Jesus death which the world in 
general will actually receive soon; then 
they gave up that justified human hope 
for a hope of sharing the divine nature. 
Now if they cast aside the only anchor, 
and "count the blood of the covenant 
wherewith they were sanctified, an unholy 
[common, ordinary] thing;" such 
having had the full benefits of the ransom, 
and having then cast it aside, for 
such there remaineth no more an interest 
in that sacrifice, and, since Christ 
dieth no more, they are without hope. 
For such, death will be the second death, 
i.e., not the one on account of Adams 



sin, but for their own. 
Q. Please explain v Matt. 23:33\ 
A. This expression was addressed to 
the Pharisees as a class, and to the scribes 
or theologians among them, who zealously 
promulgated the traditions of the 
elders. They were looking for a future 
life as a reward for keeping the Law- 
or rather the traditions of the elders. 
Jesus, denouncing their hypocrisy, points 
out their real character, and, expressing 
his just indignation, exclaims: "Ye 
serpents, ye generation of vipers, how 
can ye escape the damnation (judgment) 
of hell (Gehenna). That is, how 
can ye escape the judgment to destruction. 
Gehenna was a place, outside the 
city of Jerusalem, for the burning or 
destruction of offal and the bodies of 
criminals. Jesus here uses it as a 
symbol of destruction, to which they 
were justly condemned. 

Think not, however, that they were 
the poor degraded outcasts of society. 
I tell you, nay. They were the most 
strict religionists and the most popular 
and refined theologians of their day- 
having a form of godliness, but denying 
the power thereof. But, though they 
shall not have a resurrection to life as a 
reward, as they expected it, and though 
they were justly condemned to destruction, 
with all the rest of mankind, they 
shall have a resurrection, because he 
whom they rejected and slew bought 
them with his own precious blood. 



R522 : page 8 

ETERNAL TORTURE. 

A brother who was at one time pastor 
of the "Christian Church" in Boston, 
and whose attention had been directed 



to the doctrine of eternal torment, thus 
writes of the sympathetic view of that 
doctrine. We give you extracts: 

"In pursuing the subject [eternal 
torment] I found no relief from the 
arguments or considerations advanced 
by the advocates of eternal woe respecting 
the sympathies of the righteous. 
Take for example the sentiments uttered 
by Jonathan Edwards: 

"The woes of sinners in hell will not 
be a cause of grief to the saints in 
heaven-but of rejoicing. This rejoicing 
will be the fruit of an amiable disposition, 
and a perfect holiness, and 
a conformity to Christ. At the judgment 
you may be ready to fly to some 
godly friend, but you will see them unconcerned 
for you, with joy ascending to 
meet the Lord, and not less joyful for the 
horror in which they see you. When 
THEY HEAR YOU GROAN and SIGH and 
GNASH YOUR TEETH, these things will 
not MOVE them to pity you. After your 
godly parents shall have seen you lie in 
hell millions of years, or ages, in torment 
day and night, they will not begin to pity 
you then. They will praise God that 
his justice appears in the eternity of your 
misery. The torments in hell will be 
immeasurably greater than being in 
a GLOWING OVEN, A BRICK KILN, OR 
FIERY FURNACE." 

"My soul sickened at such sentiments. 
It seemed to me that none but 
a monomaniac upon the subject could 
so write or believe. Scholastic theology 
may calmly reason of eternal 
woe; but when we examine the subject 
in the light of the fact that we, our 
families, friends, and fellow-men, as 
beings of sensitive natures, keenly alive 
to mental and physical suffering, are exposed 
to such a peril as the dogma of 
eternal misery asserts, one may indeed 
attempt to receive, or imagine it as true; 



but as Bp. Newton has well said, 
"Seriously believe it you cannot!" It 
would be a perversion of human nature 
to do so, to say nothing of the spirit of 
Christianity. 

"Our Heavenly Father has taught us 
by both precept and example to be 
"kind to the unthankful and unholy" in 
this life, and our hearts are easily roused 
by the sufferings of our common humanity. 
But we are told, in the world 
to come we shall behold countless 
myriads of the lost in the torments of 
hell, as in an unfathomable sea of 
liquid fire, where the wicked must drink 
in everlasting torture, and not feel one 
sympathetic emotion, or our happiness 
be for a moment marred by the terrible 
scene!" 



R522 : page 1 

VOL. V. PITTSBURGH, PA., SEPTEMBER, 1883. NO. 2. 



page 1 

ZIONS 

Watch Tower 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRISTS PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED MONTHLY AT 

101 Fifth Avenue, Pittsburgh, Pa. 



C. T. RUSSELL, Editor and Publisher. 



The Editor recognizes a responsibility to the Master, 
relative to what shall appear in these columns, 
which he cannot and does not cast aside; yet he 
should not be understood as endorsing every expression 
of correspondents, or of articles selected 
from other periodicals. 

TERMS OF SUBSCRIPTION. 

TERMS :- -Fifty cents a year, postage prepaid. 
You may send paper money to the amount of two 
dollars, by mail, at our risk. Larger amounts may 
be sent by Drafts, P.O. Money Order, or Registered 
Letter, payable to C. T. RUSSELL. 

FOREIGN TERMS. 

Foreign Postage being higher, our terms to foreign 
subscribers will be 65 cents a year. Please 



send us no foreign money or postage stamps, as we 
can make no use of them. Remittances may be 
made by Foreign Postal Money Orders. 

TAKE NOTICE. 

This paper will be sent free to any of the Lords 
poor who will send a card yearly requesting it. 
Freely we have received and freely we would give 
the truth. "Ho, every one that thirsteth, come ye 
to the waters; and he that hath no money, come ye, 
buy and eat-yea, come, buy wine and milk without 
money and without price." And you that have it— 
"Wherefore do ye spend money for that which is 
not bread? and your labor for that which satisfieth 
not? Hearken diligently-and eat ye that which is 
good, and let your soul delight itself in fatness. "- 
ISAIAH 55 :1,2\ 



page 1 

SEND the names of any to whom you 
think sample copies of the TOWER 
would be a blessing; or we will send 
you samples for your neighbors-Free. 



POST OFFICE CHANGES. 

The post office authorities now refuse 
all papers not properly addressed. 
This will account for some not getting 
their paper lately. When the name of 
your village or town is different from 
the name of the post office be sure to 
send the latter. 

The safest way to send money is by 
"POSTAL MONEY ORDER." The rates 
have recently been reduced. 



THE EMPHATIC DIAGLOTT. 



We again have a full supply of this 
very valuable work. For the benefit of 
new readers we would state that it is a 
Greek Testament having under each 
Greek word the corresponding English 
word, and is thus the most literal translation 
of the New Testament. Besides 
this, it has in another column alongside 
a very clear and emphatic translation, 
showing the emphasis of the Greek 
which is generally lost to the English 
reader. 

As we have said before, we repeat 
now, we know of no more valuable help 
than this in the study of the Scriptures. 
If we could not get another, we would 
not take ten dollars for the copy we use. 

The regular price for the work in 
cloth is four dollars-which, everything 
considered is not too high; but by 
special arrangements we have been enabled 
to offer it at $1.50 per copy to 
our subscribers. 



R522 : page 1 

VIEW FROM THE TOWER. 

We see darkness lifting in certain 
directions and with certain classes. 
The dawning light of truth which soon 
shall flood the world and permeate the 
present recesses of error and sin, is even 
now growing a little more grey as the 
darker shadows flee. 

The interest in truth in general, upon 
all subjects, is spreading daily, and upon 
the most weighty and important subject 
of religion it is making rapid strides. 
Of course this does not apply so fully to 
the more advanced religious truths. But 
even of these advanced truths we may 
say, that they are making rapid strides 



among the truly consecrated, i.e., 
among those consecrated to God only, 
and not to a sect. 

The TOWER goes into over 10,000 families 
monthly, and though some in those 
families bitterly oppose it, it is steadily 
commending the truth to the consecrated, 
and hundreds of hearts and 
hands are daily contriving ways for 
spreading its message of the justice, 
wisdom, power, and love, of our God. 

The TOWER goes monthly to about 
800 ministers of various denominations, 
and though some take it in secret and 
send us the names of fellow ministers to 
whom to send sample copies, who would 
not be known as the sender; and some 
preach long and loud against the "glad 
tidings," yet the truth is spreading and 
is affecting, directly and indirectly to 
some extent, the utterances of probably 
one-third the pulpits of this land and 
many in England. There is no resisting 
it; for it is of God. The King is 
present and is leading his truth, long 
trampled in the dust, to certain victory. 

We mentioned in a recent issue that 
there are nearly two millions of Swedes 
in this country, among whom are many 
earnest Christians some of whom are 
becoming interested in "this way." We 
mentioned also the desire to furnish 
such, a tract similar in substance to our 
issue, No. 4, Vol. 4, of TOWER, and the 
establishment of a FUND for this special 
purpose. Some are now inquiring 
about it, and though we have to report 
but a small sum, yet it was mostly subscribed 
during August; and a few more 
months similar would enable us to 
publish at once. The fund now contains 
$153.08. We lay before you as 
usual extracts from a few 

INTERESTING LETTERS. 



Marion, Iowa. 

DEAR EDITOR:-- A gentleman called 
at my study a few days ago, and I received 
of him a little pamphlet entitled, 
"Food for Thinking Christians." I did 
not think the pamphlet of much importance 
at the time, but from curiosity more 
than anything else, I began to read it, 
and I soon found that the title was not 
a misnomer, but that it was indeed food 
for thinking Christians. I have not 
finished reading it yet. Some facts, I 
think, will bear re-reading. I find in it 
many new and valuable ideas, and, as I 
am bound by no man-made creed, I am 
at perfect liberty to receive them. 

Many of the positions are new to me, 
and as beautiful as they are new. Part 
VIII., on "The Narrow Way to Life," 
advances some new thoughts in regard 
to Christ that thoroughly revolutionize 
my former notions. 

Well, I simply thought I would drop 
you a line to say I am being greatly 
profited by this little pamphlet, and I 
wish you God- speed in the good work 
of teaching the living oracles. 

In the one Hope, , M.D. 

Pineville, Mo. 
MY DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:-By a 

fortuitous circumstance, which, however, 
I regard as providential, ZIONS 
WATCH TOWER was brought to my attention, 
and I was much astonished to 
think I had lived so long on the outskirts 
of civilization without knowing 
what was going on. I have been waiting 
and trusting, a little like the old 
prophet Elijah, almost thinking I was 
left alone, when to my astonishment I 
learn from the TOWER that a work is 
going on, and thousands are yet in existence 
who do not bow the knee to the 
image of Baal or Babylon. 
I have passed my three-score years 



and ten, and three over. I was indoctrinated 

into the faith of Christ and consecrated 

to the service of God in my 

twenty-third year. Having drank deeply 

at an early period of the sentiments 

that seem to pervade the TOWER, I 

turned away from the doctrines of men, 

and regarded myself measurably as 

standing alone. I have written much 

upon the heavenly theme, as well as 

spoken much, but, to all appearances, to 

no avail. I appeared to address an unappreciative 

people. But now, as two 

drops of water, if placed in close proximity, 

will flow together by the law of 

affinity, so is my joy enlarged, and my 

heart goes out to you, my brother. 

Having waded through many vicissitudes 
through a long life, and now 
standing on the verge of the grave, as 
it were, I cannot expect to reach the 
period which will usher in the reign of 
the Christ of God. But, be this as it 
may, I have a well-grounded hope that, 
whether living or dead, I shall stand in 
my lot at the end of the days; when all 
tears shall be wiped away, and when his 
suffering and waiting saints-the body, 
the bride of Christ- shall be received 
and installed into the everlasting kingdom 
of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ. 

Will you please send me the TOWER? 
Being decrepit with age, I am unable to 
work much, and can scarcely meet the 
demands of nature, food and raiment, 
and if you will so regard it, I am one of 
the Lords poor. From what I can 
learn, the circulation of the TOWER is 
great, and what astonishes me is to 
think that a work of such magnitude 
and of such a character has grown up 
without my knowledge. I wish to learn 
more of it, and would be exceeding 
glad if you could spare the time from 
your pressing duties to correspond with 
me, giving a full detail of matters. You 



speak of the flock as being small; this, 
however, is not strange to me, but how 
small or how large are matters of my 
present solicitude.... 
Your brother in Christ, . 

page 1 

Nottingham, England. 

MY DEAR SIR:-I am glad to say 
the work here is progressing amongst 
my own congregation, and also amongst 
outsiders. "The kingdom of God 
cometh not with observation," and so 
the work makes no great show at present, 
but it is advancing in many minds. 
I have little trouble with those people 
who have been accustomed to go straight 
to Gods Book and abide by that, and 
who are truly walking with God. To 
let go old prejudice is comparatively 
easy to a mind made receptive by the 
Spirit of God. I have endeavored to 
act wisely, and not to ride roughshod 
over old views, as that might have 
aroused opposition and have defeated 
my object, which is to "lead into the 
light." Acting upon this method, I 
think I am finding my reward in a more 
ready reception of the truth than one 
might have expected. 

Yours ever truly in our Lord Jesus, 



R522 : page 1 

Moes River. 

BRO. RUSSELL-Dear Sir: While 
visiting friends, not long since, I saw 
the WATCH TOWER for the first time. 
My friend gave me some numbers of the 
TOWER, also "Food for Thinking Christians." 
I am highly delighted with them. 

I am, and have been for twenty-five 
years, a minister of the Gospel, but have 
not dug after truth as much as I might. 



I want to know more of these things. 
O, what good, blessed gospel truths I 
find in "Food for Thinking Christians." 
Will you be so kind as to write me as 
soon as possible, and send me as many 
papers as you can, not only for myself, 
but for others, who are just now hungering 
and thirsting after righteousness? 
I am yours, &c., . 

page 1 

Brayfield, 111. 

DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:-I have been 
reading your publications about twelve 
months; have compared with Scripture 
and find nothing to conflict. I have 
been a Baptist for several years, and 
have been reading and searching for 
truth; and I confess that I have received 
much light, and been led through many 
dark places, through the WATCH TOWER. 
I can read and understand the 
Scriptures better than ever before. I 
endorse the teachings of the TOWER. 
God has laid wide the gap through your 
publications, and seeing it, I have walked 
out of sectarian bondage, believing it 
better to obey God than man. I am 
not preaching in a public way, but am 
doing all I can in other ways to get men 
to see and understand the truth, though 
I meet with some opposition. 

Yours truly, . 

Topeka, Kansas. 
DEAR BROTHER:-I feel as though 
I stood alone here in Topeka in regard 
to these teachings; but it has inspired 
in me a better hope and a more abiding 
peace and love for God and man and 
the holy Scriptures than I ever had 
before, and I would rather stand alone 
throughout this harvest time, than to 
stand with and be of those whose faith 
is in the teaching of the nominal church. 



I feel that it is a sore trial to be so 
bitterly opposed by those, even of my 
own household, and to be misjudged by 
them. 

I do rejoice in a bright hope that 
ere long, I may be gathered with all 
those that are entirely Christs, and be 
ever with him; and I do pray that the 
WATCH TOWER may be blessed to all 
those that are hungering and thirsting 
after righteousness. 

Yours truly, . 



R523 : page 1 
SHACKLES BREAKING. 

The following is the brief report of a 
sermon of a Presbyterian minister of this 
city, delivered to his congregation not 
long since and clipped by us from a 
Pittsburgh daily paper. It serves to 
show the drift of intelligent thought on 
certain subjects. Though this Brother 
shows in this sermon no evidence that 
he understands Gods plan or has any 
special insight to the teachings of Scripture 
on the subjects, yet it does show 
that he has a reasonable mind and is 
honest enough to express his convictions 
in a manner which, to say the least, 
must endanger his title, honors and 
salary in Babylon. 

We pray that the Lord may guide 
him into the truth more and more. As 
he gives evidence of some reason and 
candor, two indispensable qualities for 
growth in grace and knowledge, if he 
also be wholly consecrated to the Lord 
and not to a sect, or creed, so that he 
shall rejoice to sacrifice all for the truth, 
counting not his life dear unto him, 



R523 : page 2 



then doubtless he will be owned and 
esteemed of God proportionately as he 
becomes disowned and dishonored by a 
worldly system, called the Church, but 
which is now given up and "spued 
out." The extract is as follows: 

"Yesterday morning the Rev. E. R. 
Donehoo delivered a sermon which is 
at variance with the old and accepted 
idea of the future life. The following 
extracts give an idea of the Reverend 
gentlemans views: 

"For the work of a man shall he render 
unto him and cause every man to 
find according to his ways. Yea, surely 
God will not do wickedly, neither will 
the Almighty pervert judgment. "-- 
\Tob34:ll-12\ 

The old doctrine of the literal hell of 
fire and brimstone is not very strenuously 
urged even by the most rigidly orthodox 
in these days. Nor has the surrender 
of this idea been followed by a 
declining confidence in the authority of 
Scripture. It cannot be denied that in 
proportion as the harsh and cruel dogmas 
of Christian doctrine, which once 
were the constitutional elements of every 
pulpit discourse, are abandoned, the 
beauty and harmony of Divine truth 
begins to appear. There was a time 
not very far distant when the chief 
argument employed in persuading men 
to give up sin, was in so picturing the 
condition of the lost in hell as to inspire 
the impenitent with terror and 
thus drive them through sheer fright 
into the fold of believers. The idea of 
present reward, from the pursuit of that 
which is in itself good and true and 
virtuous was scarcely ever brought into 
view. Through the influence of such 
instruction, it became the settled conviction 
amongst a large class that one 
or the other fate awaits every one immediately 



at death: Hell with its unmitigated 
miseries or Heaven with its 
unmingled joys. To have failed of the 
heavenly standard, even in the slightest 
degree, is to plunge into the deepest and 
most hopeless abyss of hell eternally. 
To have spent a lifetime in open and 
defiant rebellion against God, and yet in 
the final hour to have repented and 
sued for mercy is to escape every torment 
of the damned and to attain to all 
the bliss in store for the righteous. 

Such are the teachings with which 
sinners have too often been terrorized 
and saints regaled. All this may be 
good theology, which I doubt, but of 
this I feel perfectly assured that it is out 
of all proportion to the ordinary views 
of justice and equity, and utterly out of 
accord with the dictates of enlightened 
reason. If human courts should undertake 
to administer the law on any such 
principle, the judges would be held up 
to public scorn and society would rise 
up with the one common impulse to 
protest against such a partial, unjust 
and inhuman method of procedure. 
The punishment must have some relation 
to the enormity of the offense before 
the community will quietly acquiesce 
in its infliction. 

The great error with too many religious 
teachers has been that they have 
constructed their theology, so far at 
least as heaven and hell are concerned, 
not from the word of God, the only reliable 
authority at hand, but from the 
distorted and ghastly visions of Dante, 
or the equally grotesque and wholly unreliable 
imaginings of Milton, or the 
monstrous conceits so characteristic of 
the revivalists of the last century. 

The rule laid down by Christ is the 
safe one and in harmony with every 
portion of revealed truth: "Unto whomsoever 
much is given, of him shall much 



be required." The application of this 

rale should set at rest forever the delusion 

so often entertained that God will 

dispense indiscriminate rewards to His 

friends and indiscriminate punishments 

to all who have broken his law. The 

doctrine taught by Christ is that the 

more light the greater will be the punishableness 

of sin. To the Pharisee of 

his time he said: "If ye were blind ye 

should have no sin, but now ye say we 

see, therefore your sin remaineth." 

And James bears like testimony: "To 

him that knoweth to do good and doeth 

it not, to him it is sin." Knowledge 

carries corresponding responsibility. "If 

I had not come and spoken unto them 

they had not had sin, but now they have 

no cloak for their sin." From this we 

learn that a knowledge of the gospel 

brings with it a responsibility to accept it. 

While increased knowledge brings 
with it increased responsibility it must 
not be therefore inferred that mere 
ignorance will of itself constitute an excuse. 
The ignorance may be self-incurred, 
it may be guilt, neglect of available 
opportunities to inform oneself, in 
which case no mitigation in the punishment 
may be expected. 

What is true of punishment is as true 
of rewards. The reward will be in proportion 
to the service done and work 
rendered and character sustained and 
duty discharged. Each man here and 
now is determining for himself what degree 
of misery or happiness shall be 
meted out to him in the eternal world. 
And however strictly the great Judge 
will punish every transgression, I have 
no fear that Satans dominions will bear 
any proportion to those of an omnipotent 
King. After sin has been thoroughly 
punished and every rebel consigned 
to his doom the redeemed shall be 
made up of all ages and climes, innumerable 



as the sands of the sea shore, 
not one excluded from heavens joys 
in the end, but those who deliberately 
invoked their awful doom." 



R523 : page 2 

FRUITS OF THE SPIRIT. 

"If these things be in you and abound, they 
make you that ye shall neither be barren nor unfruitful 
in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus 
Christ."- V 2 PET. 1:8\ 

Good works and knowledge are so 
closely related that it is useless to think 
of separating them; they are produced 
by the same Spirit. Believing this, the 
TOWER seeks to present the deep 
things of God not to a worldly class, 
but to the consecrated, in whom the 
fruits of the Spirit are being produced, 
realizing that the natural man 
[the unconsecrated] receiveth not the 
things of the Spirit of God, for they are 
foolishness unto him, neither can he 
know them, because they are spiritually 
discerned.-ClCor. 2:14\) 

Wherever, therefore, and in proportion 
as we find the fruits of the Spirit, 
we expect to find the Spirit which produced 
those fruits. And all possessing 
this Spirit and using it, will be able not 
only to grow in grace but in knowledge 
also, and shall be neither barren nor unfruitful 
in the KNOWLEDGE of our Lord. 

This statement of the inspired Apostle, 
that a man cannot be fruitful in the 
graces and barren in the knowledge of 
the Lord, may and should astound some 
who boast of their graces and freely admit 
their ignorance of the Lord and his 
plans. 

Many who seem to be religious have 



only a form of godliness, a form of faith, 
a form of patience, a form of charity, a 
form of brotherly kindness. May we 
not, on Peters authority, safely set it 
down that those graces are like clusters 
of grapes tied on to thorn bushes and 
not the real fruit of the vine, if we find 
not with them that essential favor of 
God-a "knowledge of the Lord Jesus 
Christ?" May we not conclude that 
such, if ever purged from sin by faith in 
the sin sacrifice, have been blinded by 
the God of this world, and "cannot see 
afar off'-cannot grasp or appreciate 
the things future in the unfolding of our 
Fathers plan. ("Verse 9" and "Jno. 16:13".) 

The Apostle continues, "verse 10": 
"Wherefore the rather, brethren, give 
diligence to make your calling and 
election sure." As though he said on 
this account you must criticise yourselves 
very closely to see that you are 
developing the real fruits of the Spirit, 
remembering the test I have given you, 
that the real fruits will have among 
them, prominently, an increasing knowledge 
of our Lord-a close, intimate acquaintance 
and communion with him— 
in which he will reveal himself to us by 
showing us "things to come." 

Nor can the knowledge fruit be obtained 
independent of the other fruits- 
[though a parrot-like form of knowledge 
might exist without the others, it 
should be thus recognized as only the 
form] -because these various fruits are 
results of the same spirit or sap. And 
if one of these fruits withers and dies, it 
indicates that the supply of sap is being 
cut off, that the spirit is being lost by 
that branch, and surely indicates that all 
the fruits are withering and dying. Let 
all these fruits be in you and abound; 
quench not the Spirit. "For if you 
do [bear all] these things ye shall never 
fall: for so an entrance shall be ministered 



unto you abundantly into the everlasting 
kingdom of our Lord and Saviour 
Jesus Christ." f Verses 10,1 T.) 

R524 : page 2 

But, does some one suggest, that thus 
making knowledge one of the necessary 
fruits of the Spirit would exclude from 
the spiritual class many ministers and 
others? We reply, that while knowledge 
is essential, it does not follow that 
the knowledge must be perfect. It has 
pleased our Father to permit a veil of 
error to be drawn across his plan- 

" Which veils and darkens His designs." 
And only as it becomes due time does 
he remove that veil gradually, finally 
completely finishing "the Mystery of 
God." Hence, knowledge as a fruit of 
the Spirit, could never heretofore reach 
the same size which it now may and 
should attain. God expects the size of 
this fruit to be proportionate with its 
opportunities and possibilities. As an 
illustration- we refer you to the words 
of Albert Barnes, quoted in another column. 
These prove that what he knew 
of Gods character, as revealed through 
nature and in our Lord Jesus, had won 
his heart, so that, in comparison, the 
errors of that man-made theology were 
irreconcilable. As the due time for 
these mists to be cleared away has come, 
we should expect all such to advance in 
the shining path. 



R524 : page 2 
ACCEPTABLE WITH GOD. 



"Let the words of my mouth, and the meditation 
of my heart, be acceptable in thy sight, O 
Lord, my strength and my Redeemer."- 



V PSA. 19:7-14\ 

In the midst of the trying scenes of 
this day of the Lord how necessary that 
all the little company of consecrated ones 
should continually breathe this prayer. 
Doubtless all feel the almost overwhelming 
force with which the tide of 
innumerable temptations are brought to 
bear against them. To some the 
world presents unusual attractions, to 
some business brings increasing cares, 
to some error presents its most plausible 
and deluding forms, and to others 
weariness in the conflict with temptations 
within and without calls for rest 
and inactivity; and because iniquity 
abounds the love of many waxes cold. 

The inspired Psalmist not only puts 
this prayer in our mouth, but he suggests 
the means by which we may be 
acceptable to God, recommending the 
Word of the Lord as able to bring 
about this desired result, saying: "The 
law (margin-doctrine) of the Lord is 
perfect, converting the soul "-bringing 
us back to a condition of harmony with 
God. Without a close study of the 
teaching of our Fathers Word it is impossible 
to do or think those things that 
are pleasing in his sight. "The testimony 
of the Lord is sure, making wise 
the simple." Those who come to the 
Word of the Lord in simplicity of heart, 
with no other desire than to know his will, 
shall surely obtain the heavenly wisdom. 

"The statutes (precepts-teachings) 
of the Lord are right, rejoicing the heart 
-imparting the necessary stimulus to 
enable us to stem the tide of opposition. 
"The commandment of the Lord is pure, 
enlightening the eyes"-giving us the 
right ideas of justice, love, etc. "The 
fear of the Lord is clean, enduring forever." 
Filial fear of the Lord, which 
dreads to do anything to break the existing 



harmony, is a right and proper 
fear, not a slavish fear; and this loving 
fear will endure forever between those 
whose hearts are thus in harmony with 
God. 

"The judgments of the Lord are 
true and righteous altogether." His 
judgments as to right and wrong in any 
matter are always correct. If we cannot 
trust our own warped and erring judgment, 
we may always find a clear and 
unmistakable expression of our Fathers 
unerring judgments in his precious Word. 

"More to be desired are they than 
gold, yea, than much fine gold: sweeter 
also than honey and the honeycomb." 
We should thus appreciate and search 
for our Fathers judgments, our Fathers 
expressions of justice and right and 
truth. "Moreover, by them is thy servant 
warned, and in keeping of them 
there is great reward." We are warned 
against the danger and errors into which 
our own warped and erring judgment 
would lead us; for "Who can understand 
his (own) errors?" Let our prayer 
ever be, "Cleanse thou me from secret 
faults. Keep back thy servant also 
from presumptuous sins." If we presume 
to set up our judgment against the 
Lords judgment in any matter, as expressed 
in his Word, we fall at once into 
the snare of the adversary. 

In view of these things, let us humble 
ourselves under the mighty hand of 
God, meditating much upon the precepts 
and teachings of his Word, that 
through them we may be imbued with 
their spirit. And thus the words of our 
mouth and the meditations of our heart 
shall be acceptable in the sight of the 
Lord, our strength and our Redeemer. 
MRS. C. T. R. 



R524 : page 2 
NOAHS ARK. 

The following item is clipped from 
the Chicago Tribune of August 13th: 

"London, August 9th. A paper at 
Constantinople announces the discovery 
of Noahs ark. It appears that some 
Turkish Commissioners appointed to 
investigate the question of avalanches 
on Mount Ararat suddenly came upon 
a gigantic structure of very dark wood 
protruding from a glacier. They made 
inquiries of the inhabitants. These had 
seen it for six years, but had been 
afraid to approach it because a spirit of 
fierce aspect had been seen looking out 
of the upper window. The Turkish 
Commissioners, however, are bold men, 
not deterred by such trifles, and they 
determined to reach it. Situated as it 
was among the fastnesses of one of the 
glens of Mount Ararat, it was a work 
of enormous difficulty, and it was only 
after incredible hardships that they succeeded. 
The ark was in a good state 
of preservation, although the angles- 
observe, not the bow or stern-had 
been a good deal broken in its descent. 
They recognized it at once. There was 
an Englishman among them who had 
presumably read his Bible, and he saw 
it was made of the ancient gopher wood 
of Scripture, which, as every one 
knows, grows only on the plains of the 
Euphrates. Effecting an entrance into 
the structure, which was painted brown, 
they found that the admiralty requirements 
for the conveyance of horses had 
been carried out, and the interior was 
divided into partitions fifteen feet high. 
Into three of these only could they get, 
the others being full of ice, and how far 
the ark extended into the glacier they 
could not tell. If, however, on being 



uncovered it turns out to be 300 cubits 

R525 : page 2 

long it will go hard with disbelievers in 
the book of Genesis." 



The gopher wood of which the Ark 
was built, is generally supposed to be 
the cypress, famous among the ancients, 
and frequently mentioned in Scripture. 
It is remarkable for durability. Instances 
are related of doors and posts made of 
this wood which had lasted 1,100 years. 

Remembering, also, that Mt. Ararat 
is covered with perpetual snow and ice 
for more than 3,000 feet below its summit, 
and that an earthquake which shook 
it in the beginning of the present year 
(1883) broke loose tremendous quantities 
of this ice, burying under the avalanches 
whole villages, we cannot but 
think that the foregoing article is not 
so unreasonable as might at first appear. 
The same wise God who placed the 
Great Pyramid "in the midst and in 
the border of Egypt," for a sign, 
now but commencing to speak to men 
of science, may have hidden away 
Noahs Ark, burying and preserving 
it in ice, ready to be another witness to 
the most illiterate. We can only say, it 
would be "just like God," and in perfect 
harmony with our teachings, that 
the outward evidences of the truth of 
the Bible, for the instruction of the 
natural man, should begin to increase; 
and we expect that these will multiply 
during the coming thirty years. 



R524 : page 3 



PRAISE OUR GOD. 

"All nations whom thou hast made shall come 
and worship before thee, O Jehovah, and shall 
glorify thy name."- v Ps. 86:9 V ; v Rev. 15:4\ 

Arise all down-cast souls, arise, 
No longer sit in mournful gloom; 
Go forth to meet your risen King, 
Who comes victorious to the throne. 

Rejoice, rejoice, glad songs of praise 

To Gods eternal glory raise. 

Lo! Satan vanquished from Him flies, 
The "powers of darkness" dread the light; 
The grave is opened by His power, 
The bruised Serpent yields the fight. 

Rejoice, rejoice, glad songs of praise 

To Gods eternal glory raise. 

Alone he fought the glorious fight, 
Alone he conquers every foe; 
Then unto him let anthems rise, 
And songs of love forever flow. 

Rejoice, rejoice, glad songs of praise 

To Christs eternal glory raise. 

Earth then as Eden-man restored- 
All bright and happy here below; 
Saints glorified and with their Lord, 
Who shall not praise thee then, O God! 

Rejoice, rejoice, glad songs of praise 

To Gods eternal glory raise. 

From "Zions Watch Tower" now we see 

So near, that grand and glorious day; 

The thousand years of jubilee, 

When love once more mankind shall sway. 
Rejoice, rejoice, glad songs of praise 
To Gods eternal glory raise. R. C. 



R525 : page 3 

OUR GOSPEL HID TO SOME. 



"Therefore having this ministry, even 
as we received mercy we faint not; but 
have repudiated the secret things of 
shame; not walking in craftiness, nor 
falsifying the Word of God; but by the 
exhibition of THE TRUTH approving 
ourselves to every mans conscience in 
the sight of God. 

But if, indeed, our Glad Tidings be 
veiled, they have been veiled to those 
who are perishing [lost], to those unbelievers 
whose minds the God of this 
age blinded, in order that they might 
not [or, so that they cannot] see clearly 
the effulgence of the Glad Tidings of 
the Glory of the Anointed One who is 
the likeness of God." f2 Cor. 4:1-4 V ). 

The above rendering in the Diaglott 
brings to the surface of this passage a 
beauty and meaning, more difficult to 
grasp from the common translation. 
How true and forcible this expression, 
and how applicable to the Glad Tidings 
as now seen shining out in fullness and 
beauty, declaring our Father perfect, not 
only in Wisdom and Power, but also in 
Justice and Love. 

Very much of what is preached today 
as Gospel, is far from being glad 
tidings. Instead of revealing the glory 
of Gods character, a vast amount of 
what is taught, like rubbish, almost 
conceals the truth held, and dims and 
tarnishes Gods justice and his love by 
misrepresentation; and though instilled 
into men from childhood, it does not 
commend itself to the conscience of even 
its advocates. In proof of this, we 
quote the following from the pen of that 
good man, Albert Barnes, who, alas, was 
much blinded by the deceptions which 
the Prince of this Age had engrafted on 
theology before his day. Were he living 
now and brought in contact with 
the glad tidings now shining, probably 



he would rejoice in the light from the 
Word of God." 

Mr. Barnes says: 

"I see not one ray to disclose to me 
the reason why sin came into the world, 
why the earth is strewn with the dying 
and dead, and why man must suffer to 
all eternity. I have never seen a particle 
of light thrown upon these subjects 
that has given a moments ease to my 
tortured mind, nor have I an explanation 
to offer or a thought to suggest 
that would be a relief to you. 

"I trust other men, as they profess to 
do, understand this better than I do, 
and that they have not the anguish of 
spirit that I have; but I confess, when 
I look on a world of sinners and sufferers, 
upon death-beds and grave-yards, upon 
the world of woe, filled with hearts to 
suffer forever; when I see my friends, 
my parents, my family, my people, my 
fellow citizens;- when I look upon a 
whole race, all involved in this sin and 
danger; when I see the great mass 
of them wholly unconcerned; and when 
I feel that God only can save them, and 
yet he does not do it, I am struck 
dumb. It is all dark, dark to my 
soul, and I cannot disguise it. "-Albert 
Barnes Practical Sermons, p. 124. 

Of the Glad Tidings which we proclaim 
-some publicly, some privately-it 
is true that we repudiate the darkness 
and traditions of men brought from the 
"dark ages"-"not walking in craftiness 
[substituting traditions for Gods Word], 
nor falsifying the Word of God- [wresting, 
twisting and ignoring Scripture] 
but by the EXHIBITION of the TRUTH 
approving ourselves to every mans 
conscience. Not that all will acknowledge 
the force, grandeur and harmony 
of our teachings, but we may be sure 
that "in the sight of God" all who hear 
and carefully weigh these Glad Tidings 



will in their hearts approve it as reasonable 
and beautiful; unless, as the Apostle 
here remarks, the God of this age [Satan 
-" John 14:30"] has blinded their 
eyes. If our glad tidings be hid- 
veiled, obscured-it is not the fault of 
the glad tidings, for to all who can see, 
it is glorious, harmonious and bright. 
Where it comes and cannot be seen, 
the fault is not in the light but in the eye. 

As originally created, man was in his 
Creators mental likeness: Justice, Mercy, 
Love, etc., in man were the same in 
kind as in God: so much so that they 
could and did, even since the fall, reason 
together on these subjects ("Isa. 1:18"). 
But from the very outstart Satans 
policy seems to have been to blind men. 
He blinds and obscures and obliterates, 
as far as possible, these God-like qualities 
in them; and in addition seeks to 
misrepresent Gods character, and thus 
hinder their recognition of these qualities 
in Jehovah. 

Looking about us to-day we see people 
thus blinded everywhere, and from 
various causes. Some worship the work 
of their hands. In them the moral 
qualities-justice, love, etc., are almost 
extinguished. These retain scarcely 
any of the image of God, in which man 
was created. They are almost totally 
blind: yet in their blindness they are 
"feeling after God, if happily they 
might find him," as Paul expresses it 
("Acts 17:27"). Another class he blinds 
in an opposite way- with pride and 
liberty of earthly wisdom, science falsely 
so called. Vainly puffed up by their 
own wisdom, this class often become 
fools, who say in their hearts "There is 
noGod"("Psa. 14:1"). 

Another class who escaped his arts 
as applied to the two classes just mentioned, 
Satan seeks to blind in yet another 
way: this class has caught some 



glimpses of Gods character; they see 

a little of his power, but to his justice, 

wisdom and love, they are blinded by 

Satan who, by mixture of dishonoring 

falsehoods with their little truth, conceals 

the grandest elements of the divine 

nature. Those thus blinded cannot appreciate 

the glad tidings. This is no 

less true of many called Christians today, 

than of religionists in past 

centuries. 

When Jesus wanted to point out the 
blind in his day he did not mention the 
heathen, but the favored people of 
Israel, and especially the Pharisaic Doctors 
of the Law. It was to these he 
said that they were "blind leaders of the 
blind" CMatt. 15:14"). Satans method 
by which he blinded the Pharisees, was 
the same which he now uses with such 
effect on a similar class. Jesus mentions 
their cause of blindness-"Ye have 
made the commandment of God of none 
effect through your traditions" ("Matt. 15:6"). 
Satan could not get Israel to 
forsake the law and become idolaters, 
therefore he took the opposite course, 
and by multiplying the forms and ceremonies 
of religion, he satisfied their consciences, 
while he blinded them to the 
spirit, or true meaning of the Law. 
So now, with the spread of general intelligence, 
Satan keeps changing his 
tactics to hinder the light of the glad 
tidings from being appreciated. 

For a time, through Papacy in the 
dark ages, Satan had succeeded not 
only in blinding men by religious forms, 
but in almost extinguishing the glorious 
light; for he had almost destroyed the 
Lamp itself--"Thy Word is a lamp." 
Bibles were destroyed until it was supposed 
that none remained. But God, 
though permitting the prince of this 
world to reign, did not leave men in 
total darkness, and soon the fires of the 



reformation began to light up the world 
and scattered much of the darkness. 

But our wily foe, unable to restrain 
the light (the truth) transformed himself 
into a seeming angel of light (messenger 
of truth). He led the reformation 
into success, pride, and worldly 
honor, and introduced a worldly spirit 
so as to blind them in an opposite direction. 
As Israel had the Law, these 
have the Bible; but they glory more in 
printing Bibles, owning Bibles, and 
reading Bibles, than in studying and 
understanding them. Bibles are bought 
and worshiped and occasionally read; 
but the creeds of past ages and traditions 
of the Fathers are studied and practiced. 
Satan now, unable to hinder the publishing 
of Bibles, endeavors to have them 
read through creed-tinted spectacles. 
These will blind them so that the light of 
the glorious glad tidings can scarcely be 
discerned. 

Many who have been led to see some 
light, are blinded by fear; they fear to 
let their light shine; they fear to let 
any one know that though once blind, 
now they begin to see. These wear 
their goggles when others are in sight, 
and take them off a few moments when 
alone. They have the spirit of bondage 
and fear which bringeth a snare and 
blindness upon them again. Such are 
not worthy to be of the Bride, the Lambs 

R526 : page 3 

wife, as Jesus said: "Whosoever is 
ashamed of me and of my words... 
of him also shall the Son of Man be 
ashamed when he cometh in the glory 
of his Father with the holy angels" 
OMark 8:38 v ). 

Let the dear saints who by the truth 
have been translated out of darkness 
into this glorious light wherein we 



stand and rejoice, give special heed to 
another blinding influence. We have 
known some who had clean escaped 
from all those snares and blindings, and 
who had seen much of the glory of the 
glad tidings, who were still pursued by 
the adversary, and again brought into 
bondage and darkness, being led into 
spiritual pride and ambition; and such 
the adversary harnesses into the service 
and blinds to the truth, by engaging 
them in manufacturing and spreading 
fancied new light which has foundation 
and support neither in hoary tradition 
nor in Scripture, and whose only passport 
is that it is new. 

Of such are some of the modern 
theorizing s on the Atonement, which 
strike at the very foundation of the 
Christians hope, and are blinding and 
overturning the faith of some. 

Some others are blinded by prosperity: 
Satan throws them handfulls of 
gold, and their eyes become so fastened 
on it, that soon the glories of the glad 
tidings begin to fade from view, and 
they, too, are in outer darkness. Others 
are blinded by the cares of this life. 
They are made to appear necessities, so 
that all the energies of life may be absorbed 
in the things which perish; and 
that the heavenly things, being neglected, 
may fade from view. Let us beware of 
every blinding influence and keep the one 
thing constantly before us, saying as 
did Paul: "This one thing I do, forgetting 
the things which are behind and 
reaching forth unto those things which 
are before, I press toward the mark for 
the prize of the high calling of God in 
Christ Jesus" fPhil. 3:13- 14 v ). 

THE PERISHING BLINDED ONES. 

Thus seen, the blinded ones, not only 
embraced nearly all of Jesus day, but 



nearly all of every age since; and the 
Apostle says they are the perishing 
--the lost. What does he mean? Some 
tell us he means that all these billions 
of blinded ones are going to a place 
and condition of eternal torture because 
blinded by Satan. We answer, no; they 
and we were ALL lost-perishing in death 
because of Adams sin-and the difference 
between those who SEE by faith 
the glorious promises of God, as though 
already fulfilled, and those who are 
blinded by Satan so that they cannot 
see, is, that those not blinded have joy 
and peace through believing, and are 
reckoned SAVED both by God and 
themselves, while the blind are still in 
the lost condition- still under condemnation, 
even though Christ died for them. 
The benefit of Christs death becomes 
applicable to each, as he by faith grasps 
Christs sacrifice as the "propitiation for 
our sins." The blinded ones are unable 
to realize the ransom, hence are still 
among the lost or condemned. 

But we inquire, Shall it be thus forever? 
Will Jehovah forever permit the 
god of this world to blind men, so that, 
though the sacrifice for sin has been 
given, the blinded cannot see and take 
the benefit of it, by accepting their share 
in it? 

Oh, no; there comes an end to 
the reign of "the god of this world." 
He who redeemed men is commissioned 
to "put down all rule and all authority 
and power" other than that of Jehovah 
fl Cor. 15:24,25^). The great clock of 
the Ages has just tolled the close of 
Satans 6,000 years reign: the appointed 
"heir of all things," Christ- Jehovahs 
vice-gerent-is present, and the binding 
of the great blinder-the prince of this 
world, the prince of darkness-is commenced. 
When he is bound and shut 
up for a thousand years that he may 



not deceive and blind the nations during 
the reign of Christ, think you will the 
mass of the world be blinded still? If 
it required his continued arts to prevent 
the true light of the gospel from being 
seen, what will be the result of his 
binding? Surely it will be, sight to the 
blind. 

To this agree the words of the 
prophet: "Strengthen ye the weak 
hands and confirm the feeble knees. 
Say to them that are of a fearful heart 
be strong, fear not: Behold your God 
shall come with vengeance, even God 
with a recompense; he will come and save 
you." "THEN the eyes of the blind shall 
be opened, and the ears of the deaf shall 
be unstopped." 

The RANSOM for sin will then be 
clearly seen, "and the ransomed of the 
Lord (all who will accept of Christ as 
the propitiation or satisfaction for sin), 
shall return (from the lost and perishing 
condition) to Zion (Gods fortress) 
with songs and everlasting joy upon 
their heads; THEY shall obtain joy and 
gladness, and sorrow and sighing shall 
flee away." flsa. 35\) 

Does some one inquire why the god 
of this world was so long permitted to 
blind mankind to the glories of Gods 
character and plans? We reply that it 
was not long in Gods estimation. A 
thousand years are to him but as one 
day-as a watch in the night. Then, 
too, he had an object in permitting 
Satans reign. It furnished bitterness 
and distress to men in their experience 
under sin, which prepares them to appreciate 
the true light and reign of 
righteousness when due. And the blinding 
of the many served to develop and 
select the choice first-fruits unto God 
and the Lamb, the "little flock," who are 
to be joint-heirs with Jesus Christ their 
Lord, who shall share with Christ the 



glories to follow. They are to share in 
the bruising of Satan fRom. 16:2(T) and 
in blessing and restoring of sight to the 
blind. 

It was referring to this future healing 
of the deaf and opening of blinded eyes 
of the understanding, that Jesus said to 
the disciples: "Greater works than these 
shall ye do." Thus far Jesus disciples 
have never done greater works than his 
for the blind and lame and sick but in 
the dawning Millennial Day, they with 
him shall do the greater works- -they 
shall not only heal the bodies but the 
minds of men. 

In fact Jesus miracles were also 
types of spiritual blessings yet future, 
as we read: "These things did Jesus, 
and manifested forth (showed beforehand) 
his glory" f John 2: IT). The 
glory of Jesus is still future and will be 
shown "when he shall come to be 
GLORIFIED IN HIS SAINTS, and to be admired 
in all them that BELIEVE IN THAT 
DAY."f2Thes. 1:1(T). That coming 
glory was foreshadowed by his miracles. 
When it is remembered that very 
many of his miracles, in fact most of 
the notable ones, were done on the 
seventh or Sabbath day, it will be 
seen that this also was typical, and 
foreshadowed the fact that the great 
healing time would be the seventh 
thousand years-the Millennium-the 

R526 : page 4 

great Sabbath of rest in Christ, in 
which the world will be reinvigorated 
and perfected for the eternal ages of 
sinlessness to follow. 



R526 : page 4 



"JUDGMENT TO COME." 

It is a common thing to hear people 
talk of "the judgment day," as though 
there were but one judgment day, and 
that was in "the world to come;" or, if 
we were to state it according to the 
popular theology, we should say the 
world to which we go, meaning by the 
word we, all mankind. We understand 
this misconception to come from not 
"rightly dividing the Word of truth." 

There is no doubt that there is another 
world, or state or being, to which Jesus 
our blessed Redeemer and Lord has 
gone "to prepare a place" for us, and, 
when so prepared, "will come again" 
and receive us unto himself. fJohn 14:23\) 
But the word us does not apply to 
the world in the sense of embracing the 
whole human race, as is clear from a 
following Chapter (16:2(T): "Verily I 
say unto you, that ye shall weep and 
lament (at his absence), but the world 
shall rejoice; and ye shall be sorrowful, 
but your sorrow shall be turned into 
joy." Again, in the v 15th chap., 18 and 19 v 
vers., Jesus says: "If the world hate 
you, ye know that it hated me before it 
hated you. If ye were of the world, the 
world would love his own, but because 
ye are not of the world, but I have 
chosen you out of the world, therefore 
the world hateth you." 

We think no one can fail to see a 
clear distinction made here between 
"the world" and a class for whom 
Jesus was about to go and "prepare a 
place." He was to prepare the place, 
and they were to be prepared for the 
place through the teaching of the Holy 
Spirit, "the Spirit of truth, whom the 
world cannot receive, because it seeth 
him not, neither knoweth him." 

They (the disciples) were to become 
acquainted with the Spirit of truth, not 



the letter only, but the very nature of 
truth, the truth itself, should be their 
guide fJohn 14:17,26^ and v 15:26 v ), 
enabling them to judge themselves according 
to the "law of sin and death," 
and according to "the law of the Spirit 
of life in Christ Jesus." They see that, 
according to the law of sin and death, 
they are condemned to death because 
the account of sin stands against them 
in "the books," and it is a just account, 
and they acquiesce in it; but the Spirit 
of truth reveals to them the glorious 
fact that, by the law of the Spirit of life 
in (through or by) Christ Jesus," they 
are redeemed (liberated) from the law 
of sin and death; that the race is to live 
again in a coming age on account of 
this ransom; but that now (during the 
gospel age) those who hear and believe 
this may stand clear of the account, 
"made free from the law of sin and 
death," (because if they believe it, they 
will love the Redeemer, and condemn 
sin) and be reckoned NOW, what the 
world shall realize in fact, alive in (by, 
on account of Christ, fl Cor. 15:22\ 
-Diaglott.) 

But here a seeming difficulty arises; 
it is asked, how it is that they are made 

R527 : page 4 

free from the law of sin and death and 

yet have to die? But, it must be remembered, 

that they are already dead 

under the law of sin (i.e., legally), but 

they are to be saved from (out of) 

death, not from dying. This is to be a 

fact with the world in the coming age, 

and, to him who believes it now, it is 

now reckoned, i.e., he is reckoned as 

having suffered the penalty of the law 

of sin, and as having been restored to 

life by "the law of the Spirit of life in 

Christ Jesus." His faith causes him to 



walk according to "the Spirit of life." 
"There is, therefore, NOW no condemnation" 
to such an one. 

Such have ears to hear the gospel 
invitation to the higher life, the "high 
calling," which involves the consecration 
of that redeemed and restored nature, to 
death, with Christ. This call to the 
higher life, to be made a "partaker of 
the divine nature," is not a command, 
but is a "holy invitation," a glorious 
privilege, to suffer and die with Christ 
that we may be also glorified together. 

This, then, is a part of the present 
judgment (trial) of this world, the judgment 
which is now in progress among 
"the elect," and this judgment will exempt 
them from any further judgment 
("condemnation"). fJohn 5:24\) 

But there is another order of judgment 
going on now (to which we referred 
in the last number) in which the 
rulership of this world is being judged, 
and is about to be cast out, and then 
will follow the judgment to come. 
OActs 24:25\) 

But, does some one ask, if the human 
race are judged twice? We answer, 
most certainly they are. A little 
thought will convince any one who is 
familiar with the Scriptures that this is 
the case, for all men have been judged 
once already; for "it is appointed unto 
men once to die;" that is, one judgment; 
for man would not have been condemned 
to death unless judged to be 
transgressors of some law, and "after 
this (still another) judgment." Not for 
the same transgression surely. What 
was the first judgment and sentence of 
the race for? For the sins of the 
fathers. The "fathers ate the sour 
grapes and the childrens teeth are set on 
edge." fJer. 31:29 v ; ^Deut. 5:9\) For 
the whole human race suffer now for the 
fathers sins, or because they sinned? 



Yes, in a certain sense, (i.e., in Adam) 
yet not altogether for their individual 
sins, but the nature of the fathers, being 
polluted by sin, is transmitted to the 
children who come under the sentence 
of death for having the nature (disposition) 
to do just as the fathers did; as 
rebels in heart, they are under sentence 
of death. Then it is not for actual 
transgression that men die? Not for 
that only, but it is for the disposition to 
transgress. ("Matt. 5:28\) The inherited 
taint renders them unfit to live, 
because with such a nature they cannot 
keep Gods law. ("Rom. 8:7".) Then, 
will the judgment to come consign them 
to eternal death, or eternal suffering, because 
they did not keep Gods law in 
this age or life? Surely not; for it 
was their inability to keep it that caused 
their death, and called forth the mercy 
and love of God the Father and Son, 
who found a ransom for them, and 
brought them from death again, and restored 
to them what they lost in Adam. 
But will all that was lost in Adam be 
restored? Certainly; there will be a 
restitution of all things which God hath 
spoken by the mouth of all his holy 
prophets." ("Acts 3:21"; "Ezek. 16:44-63"; 
"Jer. 31:16", &c.) But if all that was 
lost in Adam is to be restored to all 
men, does some one ask what is the 
incentive to a holy life now? The incentive 
is exceedingly great; it is even 
an opportunity and the only one- -we 
see no "second chance"-to attain unto 
the divine nature-IMMORTALITY. 
During the gospel age is the accepted 
time for that ("Luke 4:19"; "2 Cor. 6:2"); 
and if any one receiving an invitation 
to that "high calling" fails to 
make his "election sure," it will be an 
eternal loss, one which can never, 
NEVER be retrieved, though it should 
be "sought carefully with tears." 



All men will be restored to what was 
lost in Adam, unconditionally, "for 
since through a man, there is death, 
through a man also there is a resurrection 
of the dead; for as by Adam all die, 
so by the anointed also, will all be restored 
to life" fl Cor. 15:21,22V- 
Diaglott.) But to this "high calling" 
there are "hard" conditions; it is a 
reaping where he "had not sown." 
The conditions are so hard that but few 
will accept them, for the conditions are 
even sufferings and death; not of the 
old nature, already under sentence of 
death, but of the perfect human, like 
what Jesus had, and with which the believer 
is credited. But those who accept 
these hard conditions do so "for the 
glory set before" them, and are passed 
from death (legally, out of) into life 
fMark 8:35 v ), and shall not come into 
condemnation" (process of judgment) 
again. fJohn 5:24\) But all the rest of 
mankind will come "after this" into 
judgment. 

That they will have a future trial, i.e., 
probation and judgment, is clear from 
several scriptures to which we have referred, 
and from the fact that man suffers 
the penalty of sin (death) before 
the "judgment to come;" hence the 
judgment to come must be after probation 
to come; for how can judgment 
(krima, an accusation charge) be 
brought concerning a transgression for 
which penalty has been suffered, and 
from which the subject has been redeemed? 
They were cast into prison 
(death, the penalty) till they should pay 
the "uttermost farthing." A redeemer 
paid it, and they are free. Who shall 
now condemn again for that? But now, 
with a knowledge gained from bitter experience, 
may come another probation 
which shall be a success. The first 
probation was in a representative, 



Adam, by whom all die; another, 
Christ, represented them, and by him 
all live again, (in a resurrection) and 
from that onward the probation is 
every man for himself. Herein we discern 
the thought of Paul when he said 
fl Tim. 5:24 v ): "Some mens sins 
are open beforehand, going before to 
judgment, and some they follow after." 

The works of the little flock composing 
the mystical body of Christ are 
manifest, and are judged beforehand 
(the first and second man, the man 
Adam and the perfect man in Christ 
Jesus, are both judged beforehand, i.e., 
before the "restitution" race are). 
"There is, therefore, now no condemnation 
of (judgment against) them 
which are in Christ Jesus," (the little 
flock) nor will there ever be, for the 
rule by which men will be judged in the 
coming judgment will be the same as 
that by which they are judged now, 
viz.: the law of God as embodied in the 
holy Scriptures, which will then be 
"opened" to the understanding of all 
and no longer sealed fRev. 20:12 v ); 
so that he who is unjust or unholy according 
to that law, will forever stand 
so judged by it, until he becomes 
changed or restored in his nature. 
And let no one vainly think that in the 
judgment to come there will be any 
other standard, for he who is unjust 
now, by the same standard, will "be 
unjust still." fRev. 22:1 T.) 

But there is one notable element that 
will necessarily be left out of the "judgment 
to come;" that is, the element of 
redemptive or propitiatory sacrifice, or 
representative suffering. Christ having 
offered one sacrifice (of this kind) for 
sins, forever sat down on the right hand 
of God, from henceforth expecting till 
his ENEMIES be made his footstool," 
fHeb. 10:12,13"), i.e., as we understand, 



instruments of service, not members 
of his body. So, we understand, 
there will be no more offerings of this 
kind, hence no more forgiveness of 
sins; every one who shall be subject to 
that judgment (trial) shall expiate his 
own sins. Stern justice will preside 
then. Christ having died to save that 
which was lost, namely, the ability to 
keep the law, that, being restored, man 
will be required to keep it or be beaten 
with many or few stripes according to 
the extent of his transgressions. These 
stripes will not be vindictive but reformatory. 
Verily "it is a fearful thing to 
fall into the hands of the living God;" 
yea, "Fear him, which, after he hath 
killed, (and brought again from death) 
hath power to cast into hell; yea, I say 
unto you, fear him." fLuke 12:5\) 
This is the "fiery indignation which 
shall devour the adversaries" ("eat up" 
opposition). fHeb. 10:4\) Who 
among us shall dwell with the devouring 
fire? 

The Christ of God "will not fail nor 
be discouraged till he have set judgment 
(right) in the earth flsa. 42:4 V ); 
and yet he will not break the bruised 
reed nor quench the smoking flax, but 
will bring forth judgment unto truth 
(right according to truth). None will 
suffer for the sins of their fathers then 
as is now the case. (See v Ex. 34:7 V ; 
v Deut. 5:9\ and human experience all 
around.) It will then no more be said, 
"The fathers have eaten sour grapes 
and the childrens teeth are set on edge," 
but "the soul that sinneth it shall die." 
"The son shall not bear the iniquity of 
the father, neither shall the father bear 
the iniquity of the son." fEzek. 18:20\) 
No one will die again on account of 
another; no one live again on account 
of another. 

But the inquiring mind naturally 



asks, Why was not this course pursued 
with man in the first place? We 
answer that God is just, and it would 
not have been according to his law of 
justice to imperil and hold man to such 
a strict account, without a possibility of 
redemption, UNTIL he had had experience 
with sin, and become acquainted 
with its awful results; but now, after 
having learned the exceeding sinfulness 
of sin, (which is the great lesson now 
being taught to the world,) and having 
(when brought again from the dead) 
ability given to keep the law, it is but 
justice to require it, and to attach a 
penalty, as at first, to the violation of it. 

In the beginning the judgment was, 
"In the day thou eatest thereof thou 
shalt surely die," and then and there 
a Saviour, Redeemer was provided, a 
city of refuge for him who had unwittingly 
forfeited his life. But we are not 
told of any such Saviour, city of refuge, 
in the age to come. True, "Saviours 
shall come up on mount Zion to judge 
the mount of Esau" fObad. 2V), but 
these saviours we understand to be 

R528 : page 4 

typified by those who judged Israel, 
and will be leaders and guides, kings 
and priests, but not Redeemers. 

So, a similar judgment is to be given 
in the coming age, that was given in 
the beginning, for violation of Gods 
law, viz.: death. This is the "second 
death," from which we are told of no 
resurrection; at least, if so, we are not 
aware of it. But he who in this present 
age having died with, or in Adam, is 
awakened of the Spirit and consecrates 
himself to death with Christ (this would 
be his second legal death), is not hurt of 
it, for he shall "find it" again in the 
first resurrection. fMark 8:35 v ; v Rev. 2:1 V; 



v 20:16\) 

O, blessed thought, that "Righteousness 
and judgment are the habitation 
(base) of his throne." 

"O, that men would praise the Lord 
for his goodness and for his wonderful 
works to the children of men." 
J. C. SUNDERLIN. 



R528 : page 4 

"AFTER DEATH THE JUDGMENT." 

We believe that to the great majority 
of mankind (to all except the Church), 
their judgment or trial will be after 
death-after the Adamic death-has 
been legally cancelled, and is being 
swallowed up of life, as is well expressed 
in the foregoing article by our 
brother; but the text at the head of this 
article so frequently used as it is by our 
brother, in the foregoing article, as the 
proof of that coming judgment, we object 
to, because it is used by the Apostle 
to teach a totally different thing, as may 
be seen from a careful examination of 
the entire argument in which these 
words were used. fHeb. 9:6-28\) 

Pauls argument is to those who were 
familiar with the typical service of the 
typical sanctuary. In their typical service, 
there was a remembrance made of 
sins each year; and each year on the 
Day of Atonement a typical sacrifice 
was offered which never actually put 
away sin, but which was merely typical 
of the real work to be done afterward 
by Christ. For the blood of bulls and 
goats could never put away sin, and 
they were merely figures or illustrations 
for the time of the real sacrifice, "The 
Lamb of God which taketh away the 
sin of the world"-who "put away sin 



by the sacrifice of himself." 

It was arranged of God, that the entire 
process of atonement for mans sin 
should be presented in types or patterns 
for our instruction, that the man of God 
should be thoroughly furnished. Accordingly, 
they had the Most Holy to 
represent the presence of Jehovah- 
heaven itself; and the death of Christ 
was illustrated by the priests every year 
-they using animals to represent themselves 
in death. When the bullock, 
which was "for," or represented the 
Priest, was killed, it represented the 
death of the priest, and thereafter the 
priest represented Christ as a "new 
creature," and took the blood-the evidence 
of his sacrifice of his former self 
-with him into the Most Holy, to present 
it as the ransom price for the 
peoples sins, and thereby to procure 
for the people Gods forgiveness of their 
sins and future favor. 

R528 : page 5 

But, as these men in this work were 
to typify Christ and his perfect work, 
that must be shown; hence the law, that 
if the priest failed to offer exactly the 
proper sacrifice, and in a proper manner, 
he would die at the second vail and 
not be permitted to enter the Most 
Holy, and hence would fail to make 
atonement for the peoples sins, and to 
come out to bless them. But, if every 
thing was perfectly done, the priest and 
his sacrifice were accepted of Jehovah, 
and the blotting out of sins and blessings 
of the people followed. It will be 
seen, then, that with these men who for 
years had typified Christ in the consecration 
or killing of the animals which 
represented them-after this representative 
death-came their judgment or 
trial. Was it perfectly done in all respects? 



If so, their judgment would 
be favorable, and they would come forth 
to typically absolve the sins of the 
people and bless them. 

As thus in type it is appointed for 
these men (priests) to die representatively, 
etc., SO ALSO Christ was once 
offered-died really-to bear the sins of 
many; and it was needful, as shown in 
the type, that he must go to have the 
sacrifice accepted in the Most Holy. 
We have evidence that he lives in that 
Most Holy, or perfect spiritual condition, 
which is proof to us that his was 
an acceptable sacrifice, and that in due 
time he will come forth with a blessing 
for all, for whose sins he paid the ransom 
price-his own life. 

The Apostles reason for making 
this argument is obvious. The Jews derided 
the idea of a Saviour dying without 
saving them, expecting that Messiah 
would reign in great earthly power 
and splendor. Paul shows them that 
Christ must needs first suffer to purchase 
--redeem-before he could save 
and bless, and that this had all been 
shown in the types of the Law. As it 
is appointed unto men (your priesthood) 
first to die and then to go into 
the Most Holy, etc., BEFORE the blessing 
could come, SO ALSO it is with 
Christ, of whom your men were but 
types or shadows. (See also "TABERNACLE" 
pamphlet, p. 61, and TOWER 
of October, 1880.) 



R528 : page 5 

THE UNMERCIFUL SERVANT. 

V MATT. 18:23-35\ 

This parable has been urged by some 



as in opposition to the necessity of 
Jesus death as our ransom, or substitute, 
in the settlement of the Adamic 
penalty. They argue that this parable 
teaches the contrary, that God FREELY 
FORGIVES all Adamic sin, and hence 
neither requires men to pay it, nor yet 
that Jesus should pay it for us, the just 
for the unjust. But this is a false presentation 
of the teaching of this parable, 
and results either from having a theory 
which they seek to prop with some 
seeming scriptural evidence, or from a 
too careless examination of the parable. 

The parable does not relate to dealings 
between God and the world of sinners; 
but between God and his covenanted 
children, called here, as elsewhere, 
"bond- servants." They are those 
who have already been justified from 
Adamic guilt by Christs ransom, and 
who have consecrated themselves to 
God to be his servants forever. These 
are acquainted with the will of their 
king and know how, through weakness 
of the flesh and temptation, they have 
failed to render to God all which their 
covenant calls for, and when they have 
gone to the Father and asked [as members 
of the body of Christ- in the name 
of their head] for mercy, they have always 
found him very merciful and he 
forgave them and said, Go in peace: as 
Jesus said, "Whatsoever ye shall ask of 
the Father in my name, He will do it." 

In return, it is expected that such 
shall be ready to exercise the same leniency 
toward their fellows. If they do 
not, they need not expect any leniency 
from their Father in the matter of their 
covenant keeping, but must be kept to 
the strict letter of it, and will be delivered 
over to trouble and distress in the present 
life sufficient to make them sympathize 
with the weak and erring. 

The same lesson is taught in the 



Lords prayer. Forgive our trespasses 
as we forgive those who trespass 
against us. It is the church which 
prays "Our Father"-the church already 
made free from Adamic guilt. 



R528 : page 5 

v REVELATION-CHAP. 4\ 

"After these things I saw, and behold a door 
opened in heaven, and the first voice which I 
heard, as of a trumpet, speaking with me, saying: 
Come up hither and I will show thee the things 
which must come to pass hereafter. Straightway 
I was in the Spirit." [Revised Ver.] 

When we listen to the description of 
a scene, as told by two or more observers, 
it is of much importance that we 
know both the time and the standpoint 
of the different witnesses. The chapter 
we are about to examine comes under 
this rule. 

In the Book of Revelation we believe 
that John, personally, always symbolizes 
the beloved disciples-the faithful 
in the Church- who are alive at the 
time required by the events described. 
We think the Master referred to this in 
7ohn 21:22^: "If I will that he tarry 
till I come, what is that to thee? follow 
thou me." "This saying, therefore, 
went forth among the brethren that 
that disciple should not die; yet Jesus 
said not unto him that he should not 
die, but if I will that he tarry till I come, 
what is it to thee?" If we observe the 
standpoint from which John sees each 
vision we will know that of the class he 
represents. 

Verse first tells us that the vision is 
of things "after" the events of the preceding 
chapter. The last period was 



while the Lord stood at the door knocking 
[being present, of course,] and when 
he is about to spue out of his mouth 
the present proud and worldly Church. 

R529 : page 5 

That process has begun, so that it is 
now due that the class symbolized by 
John should, in a symbolic sense, be 
caught up and enabled to see things 
from a purely spiritual standpoint. 

In Johns first vision, while he is 
given a glimpse of hidden things, he 
remains on the Isle of Patmos. Patmos 
means mortal. This symbolizes that 
the Church of Johns day could only 
see coming events from a mortal standpoint. 
Now he-rather we, whom he 
represents-are "caught up" in the 
spirit of our minds, and see spiritual 
things from an exalted position never 
attained to before. 

Johns vision, then, as described in 
this chapter, shows events as seen by 
us, or rather so many of us as have attained 
to this standpoint or spiritual 
position. This is in a sense the beginning 
of Johns visions. At the first 
revelation made to him he saw only our 
Lord and the lamp-stands; the messages 
were delivered to him in words. 
From this time forward he is allowed to 
see events and conditions in a series of 
vivid pictures-the clearest way of 
representation. 

He sees an open door in heaven. 
What heaven? When Paul was shown 
visions of things to come he was "caught 
up [better, snatched away] to the third 
heaven." f2 Cor. 12:2\) John also saw 
at last the third heavens and earth fully 
established. As most of our readers 
know, the progression of these so-called 
heavens is not upward, but onward. 
The first heavens and earth were before 



the flood; the second, this present evil 
world and its ruling powers (first and 
second are under Satan); the third, the 
new heavens and earth, wherein dwelleth 
righteousness. The third will be 
under the rule of Christ and his saints. 
It is during this latter that all the glorious 
promises of peace and prosperity 
will be fulfilled. "His rest shall be 
glorious." This dispensation of the 
kingdom of God is symbolically termed 
a new heavens (government) and new 
earth (subjects) in contradistinction 
from the heavens and earth which now 
are, "The present evil world," or order 
of things. It was to this Millennial 
kingdom that Paul was caught away in 
vision f2 Cor. 12:2 V ). 

As the powers of the third heaven 
take possession, the powers of the second 
are "shaken" until they are destroyed. 
OMatt. 24:29VHeb. 12:26\) 
The Lord tells us in "Matt. 24:3 V, that 
after he has come he "will send forth 
his angels with a great trumpet, and 
they shall gather together his elect 
from the four winds." (See also 
"lThess.4:16,17\) 

It is evident, then, that the open door 
which John saw was the entrance to the 
third heaven-the first step toward the 
place of power for those whom John 
represents. What brings them there? 
John says that the first voice which he 
heard was as of a trumpet, which said: 
"Come up hither." 

During the sounding of the seventh 
trumpet, under which we now are, the 
announcement was made: "The kingdoms 
of this world are become those 
of our Lord and of his Christ." fRev. 11:15".) 
The prophetic word has shown 
us that the Christ has come, that he has 
entered upon his reign. Believing this, 
and knowing what the result would be 
in the earth, business has been sacrificed 



and pleasure relinquished that we might 
know and spread the truth. Every new 
truth received and cherished has been a 
stepping-stone upward. The Lord has 
been our Guide, and we have been led 
into "green pastures." 

The first object to meet the gaze of 
John is that of a glorious King seated 
on his throne. This is the Father, the 
"Ancient of Days." He is "to look 
upon like a jasper and a sardine stone." 
The jasper is supposed to mean the 
diamond. It is described as "most 
precious" and "clear as crystal." Being 
the most brilliant of all the gems, it 
fittingly symbolizes the glory of God; 
the light (luminary, or source of light) 
of the New Jerusalem. fRev. 21:ll-23\) 
The sardine is a stone of a red 
color. We think it here symbolizes 
love, which is the underlying element 
in all Gods actions-tinging the glory 
through which it shines. 

The throne is encircled by a rainbow 
"like unto an emerald." A rainbow is 
the "token" of a covenant. fGen. 9:12-17\) 
The queen or emerald color 
probably symbolizes freshness and vigor; 
that Gods plans are, like nature in the 
spring-time, filled with life, and continually 
developing and unfolding- 
blossoming into luscious fruit for the 
sustenance and pleasure of His 
creatures. 

We are now introduced to 

THE TWENTY-FOUR ELDERS. 

Around the throne of God are seen 
twenty-four thrones, on which are seated 
twenty-four elders. Many opinions 
have been given in regard to who these 
symbolize. With present light we present 
the following: It is clear that, being 
symbolic, they cannot be individual 
saints. It cannot well be the Church 



of the first-born, as they appear under 
another symbol. It is unlikely that they 
represent angels. 

There have been, as we count, twenty-four 
prophets that have prophesied of 
"things pertaining to the kingdom of 
God." Their testimonies here seem to 
be personified, exalted and enthroned. 
The two witnesses of "Rev. 1 1:3-12" are 
evidently the Old and New Testaments 
thus personified, as we think we can 
clearly show when we come to them. 
They, too, were exalted to (symbolic) 
heaven-the place of honor and authority 
in the Church. 

These twenty-four witnesses for God, 
while now more or less despised and 
disbelieved, will yet be proved true and 
faithful, and will thus be similarly exalted 
in the sight of all men. (Comp. 
"Luke 10:15".) As yet, we only are enabled 
thus to see them. They are 
clothed in white, denoting purity. The 
crowns of gold symbolize their divine 
authority. 

At the present time the Church, in a 
great measure, ignores their witness- 
failing to understand it. In the future 
reign both the Church and the world 
must bow to their authority, as they 
will then have lost the privileges that 
were promised in the New Testament. 

"Out of the throne [of God] proceed 
lightnings and thundering s and 
voices." These refer to the mutterings 
of the tempest which is already gathering 
over the Church and the world. 
Others beside ourselves see the approaching 
storm, but they fail to recognize 
from whence it comes. 

Before the throne are seen seven lamps 
of fire burning, which are the seven spirits 
of God-the seven (perfect or complete 
number) channels through which 
God is about to manifest his power. If 
we compare carefully "Rev. 1:4,12,20"; 



"2:1"; "3:1"; "5:6", we find that they are the 
church of the first-born. These were 
called from the beginning "the light of 
the world," but from henceforth they 
are to "shine forth as the Sun in the 
kingdom of their Father." CMatt. 13:43\) 
These, too, are to be the honored 
instruments by which he will smite the 
nations, pour out his plagues, and shed 
light and truth upon mankind. "This 
honor hath all his saints." ("Ps. 149\) 

In full view of the throne is also seen 
"a sea of glass." This sea is soon to 
be mingled with fire ("Rev. 15:2"). From 
our standpoint it is transparent. The 
sea represents the unfettered, irreligious 
masses of the people. We are enabled 
to see clearly the internal forces that 
control them, what they are about to 
do, and why they do it. We can see 
that the fire is "already kindled." We 
see it smouldering in their breasts, ready 
to break out, a wild, unquenchable 
whirlwind of flame, when the due time 
comes. The whole matter is clear as 
crystal from the standpoint of those who 
are walking in the light. 

Around and in the midst of the 
throne are seen the four cherubim or 
living ones, here translated "beasts." 
Before we can understand what they 
represent here, we must take a glance 
at what is revealed in regard to them in 
earlier times. 

THE CHERUBIM. 

These strange creatures are first 
brought to view in "Gen. 3:24\ where 
they appear with flaming swords as the 
guardians of the way leading to the 
tree of life. They are next seen at each 
end of the mercy- seat on the ark in the 
wilderness ("Ex. 25:18"). In the most 
holy of the temple two new representatives 
of immense size were placed, between 



which the ark was set. fl Kings 6:23\) 
They were seen in vision by 
"Isaiah (6:2-6 v ) and by "Ezekiel (1:5-16"; 
v 10:l-2r). They are always connected 
with the immediate presence or 
with the throne of God. Evidently at 
the entrance to Eden they represented 
or accompanied the presence of God. 
(compare v Gen. 4:3, 16\) Isaiah and 
Ezekiel saw them as supporting or carrying 
the throne or chariot of Jehovah. 

Looking at the mercy- seat as representing 
this chariot or throne, the same 
idea is expressed in the relation of the 
cherubim to the ark-both in the tabernacle 
and temple. (See also v l Chron. 28:18\ 
v 2 Chron. 3\) Jehovah is frequently 
spoken of as dwelling between 
or above the cherubim. fEx. 25:22 v ; 
v Num. 7:89 v ; v l Sam. 4:4 V ; v Ps. 18:10"; 
"Isa. 37:16\ 

Some who have failed to recognize 
them as symbols, have supposed that 
they were a high class of angels, a kind 
of body-guard of the Most High. He 
has no need of such. He dwells amid 
admiring and adoring worshipers. 

What, then, do the cherubim symbolize? 
We think they personify the attributes 
of God. Scholars have suggested 
a number of attributes. We think that 
there are just four which are fundamental, 
namely: Power, Wisdom, Justice 
and Love. These four include all 
others. For instance: independence, 
omniscience, holiness and benevolence 
are dependent on or similar to the above 
mentioned in their absolute perfection 
as God has them. On these his throne 
is represented as being supported. 

When the way back to Eden was 
closed by "the cherubim," it was not 

R530 : page 5 

only the act of his power and justice; 



it was also done by wisdom and love. 
"Cursed is the ground for thy sake" was 
the utterance of love and wisdom. Idleness 
destroys; activity develops. The 
latter made the Greeks, even in a rugged 
country, a finely developed people; 
while idleness ruined Rome, with the 
treasures of the world at her feet. 

In the tabernacle two small cherubim 
appear. They are a part of the mercy-seat 
and seem to grow out of it. Before 
we can appreciate this picture we 
must remember that the tabernacle represented 
things as they exist during 
the Gospel age: the temple, as they will 

R530 : page 6 

be during the Millennial age. Again, 
the picture is not as seen from Gods 
standpoint, but from that of the church. 
The mercy- seat in a sense represents 
Christ. Many who cannot see the love 
and justice of God apart from Christ, 
believe that they are somehow bound 
up in him. These two attributes of God 
are very indistinct to them; they cannot 
see them; except that in some manner, 
too deep for their understanding, 
they are blended in Christ. Again, 
previous to the advent of Jesus, even 
the love is hidden; only the "stern" justice 
appears. The love was in Christ, 
but was not yet made manifest. Previous 
to the atoning sacrifice the picture 
appears like this. The mercy-seat is 
the place of justice-but man has been 
proved guilty. Until satisfaction has 
been made there is no hope. Power 
and wisdom-the two cherubim- stand 
at either end, their wings uplifted as if 
ready to fly to the rescue, but their feet 
are held by justice. They cannot move. 
They look expectant toward the mercy- seat, 
waiting, watching for the blood of 
atonement which shall set them free to 



do their willing work. But these cherubim 
are said to over-shadow the mercy-seat. 
This is also true, for if the blood 
of atonement is not forthcoming, they 
stand as the guardians of justice and the 
terror of the evil-doer. 

In the temple, which represents the 
church in the Millennial age, two new 
and very large cherubim were made. 
[Probably nearly twenty-one feet high.] 
They are represented as standing on 
each side of the ark, their outer wings 
touching either wall, and their inner 
wings touching each other, thus filling 
the whole expanse. f2 Chron. 3:10\) 

These two new cherubim would seem 
to represent the other two attributes that 
had been so obscure before, but are now 
made glorious by the additional light of 
the new dispensation. [There was one 
lamp stand in the tabernacle and ten in 
the temple.] The chief work of the 
Millennial age will apparently be to 
show that these two glorious attributes 
-love and justice-are not lame or impotent; 
they stand upon their own feet; 
they are independent, yet in perfect 
harmony, and that they are "of one 
measure and of one size." 
CI Kings 6:25\) 

We cannot in this follow minutely the 
description of the cherubim as seen by 
Isaiah and Ezekiel, neither have we 
sufficient light as yet, but we will notice 
a few points that are easily seen. These 
two prophets seem, like John, to represent 
the living saints. To them "the 
heavens were opened." fEz. 1:T; v Rev. 4:1\) 
They see "visions of God," and 
Jehovah sitting upon a throne." flsa. 6:1\) 
They see the cherubim around 
and under the throne. They hear them 
rest not from crying, "Holy, holy, holy," 
etc. That is, we now see that all of 
Gods attributes are in perfect harmony, 
and that in ceaseless chorus they are 



sounding forth his praise, and revealing 

the fact that "the whole earth is full of 

his glory,"-to those who have their 

eyes opened. We are sent to preach, 

as the Lords new mouth-piece, a message 

that is offensive to "a rebellious 

house," even to those who believe themselves 

to be the "Israel of God." It is a 

message of "lamentations, mourning and 

woe." fEz. 2:10\) We are given the 

book to eat. [What a blessed feast it 

is!] It is "like honey" in our mouths; 

but having been digested, it leads to 

self-denial, to crucifixion, to death. 

OEz. 3VRev. 10\) 

We realize our weakness, but when 
the hot coal from the altar touches our 
lips, we are ready to answer, "Here am 
I, send me." The message is, "Go and 
tell this people: Hear ye indeed, but 
understand not; and see ye indeed, but 
perceive not." "Declare fat the heart of 
this people, and its ears declare heavy, 
and its eyes declare dazzled," etc. 
[Youngs trans.] "Then, said I, Lord, 
how long? And he answered, Until the 
cities be wasted without inhabitant, and 
the houses without man, and the land 
be utterly desolate." flsa. 6:5-13\) 
At the voice of the cherubim the door 
posts of the temple move, and the house 
is filled with smoke flsa. 6:4 V ; v Ezek. 10:4 V ; 
v Rev. 15:8\) [For an illustration 
of this see "Seven Last Plagues," 
ZIONS WATCH TOWER, June, 1883. 
The four faces of the cherubim will be 
treated when examining v chap. 6\] 

In v Rev. 4:9-1 r, John hears the 
cherubim "give glory and honor and 
thanks to him that sitteth on the throne," 
and immediately the twenty-four elders 
fall down before him, saying, "Worthy 
art thou, our Lord and our God, to receive 
the glory and the honor and the 
power: for thou didst create all things, 
and because of thy will they are and 



were created" f Rev. 4: IT]. 

When we can hear the power, wisdom, 
justice, and love of God proclaiming 
in perfect harmony the glory and 
honor of our Father, then indeed his 
twenty-four witnesses ring out his praise 
as never before, and we realize that he 
created all things, both good and evil, 
and that they exist by his permission 
and shall ultimately work out his 
pleasure. W. I. M. 



R530 : page 6 
v REVELATION-CHAP. 5\ 



"And I saw in the right hand of Him that 
sat on the throne a book written within and on 
the back [or outside] close sealed with seven 
seals, and I saw a strong angel proclaiming with 
a great voice, Who is worthy to open the book 
and to loose the seals thereof? And no one in 
the heaven, or on the earth, was able to open the 
book or to look thereon." 

From Johns exalted stand-point he 
is enabled to look both backward and 
forward over the landscape; and that 
he may better understand Gods dealings 
he is shown the unfolding of the 
plan from the first. Hence the events 
of this chapter carry us back to the beginning 
of the Christian dispensation. 

When Ezekiel and John are said to 
have received the scroll, or book, it was 
openfRev. 10:2 V f Ezekiel 2: 1(T). At 
this date, but at the stand-point of this 
view, it had not yet been opened. The 
book signifies the plan and purpose of 
God as written in the law and the 
prophets. It was sealed perfectly (with 
seven seals) until Christ began to open 
it. 

When the disciples asked our Lord, 



after his resurrection, in regard to the 
plan, he answered: "It is not for you 
to know the times or the seasons which 
the Father hath put in his own power, 
[or grasp] but you shall receive power 
[to understand] after that the Holy 
Spirit is come upon you." ("Acts 1:7-8"). 
Life, immortality and sonship have only 
been seen since that time ("2 Tim. 1:10"; 
"John 1:12"). A mighty angel, with a 
great voice, cries: "Who is worthy to 
open the book, and to loose the seals 
thereof? And no one in heaven or on 
the earth [symbolic] was able to open 
the book or to look thereon." Probably 
this angel symbolizes the Law, which, 
from the time of its deliverance through 
Moses, had been proclaiming as unworthy 
all who sought to overcome by it. 

The faithful are represented as weeping 
because of the obscurity and want 
of knowledge in regard to the plan. 
"And one of the elders said unto me, 
Weep not, behold the Lion of the tribe of 
Judah, the Root of David, hath overcome, 
to open the book and the seven 
seals thereof." This elder proves to be 
the old patriarch Jacob, who made the 
prophecy on his death-bed when blessing 
his sons. ("Gen. 49:8-12"). 

John now sees "in the midst of the 
throne" and of the living ones and the 
elders "a Lamb standing, as though it 
had been slain." We recognize at once 
the One whom John the Baptist introduced 
to the Jews as "The Lamb of 
God who taketh away the sin of the 
world." He comes and receives the 
scroll out of the right hand of the One 
sitting on the throne. Not until he had 
passed the last test, had endured "to 
the end," had risen in victory a spiritual 
body, had been caught away in glory, 
did he receive the wonderful scroll 
which "the angels desired to look into." 

Ten days after our Lord ascended, 



the Holy Spirit was given, which at 
once began to unfold the truth to the 
church. When this took place John 
saw the four living ones and the twenty-four 
elders falling together before the 
Lamb, each having a harp, with which 
they sing a new song, saying, "Worthy 
art thou to take the book and to open the 
seals thereof; for thou wast slain, and 
didst purchase unto God with thy blood 
[men] of every tribe and tongue and 
people and nation, and madest them to 
be unto our God a kingdom and priests; 
and they [shall] reign upon the earth." 

When it was seen that these all acknowledged 
and testified of Jesus, it 
was indeed a new song and a glorious 
one; and when we listen to the beautiful 
harmony as the melodious chords ring 
out from all the golden harps, our 
prayers and thanksgiving go up in the 
sweet incense from the golden bowls 
they have brought us. It is glorious 
news to the called of the Gentiles. 
Many are striving hard to find a way to 
prove themselves Israelites after the 
flesh. How much more glorious to belong 

R531 : page 6 

to the spiritual family who shall 
inherit the divine nature and attain to 
the rank of the royal priesthood "after 
the order of Melchisedec" ! 

As the vision of the restitution of all 
under the dominion of Him who "shall 
be a priest upon his throne" CZech. 6:13"), 
rises before John, he seems to turn 
and look down the stream of time to 
the glorious consummation of the plan 
of salvation; and, lo, the messengers 
that are in the presence of the throne, 
even myriads of myriads and thousands 
of thousands, he heard saying with a 
great voice, "Worthy is the Lamb that 
hath been slain, to receive the power and 



riches and wisdom and might and 
honor and glory and blessing." And 
as the wave of thanksgiving and praise 
floats out over the world, the whole 
creation catches the strain and joins in 
the song: "And every created thing 
which is in heaven, and on the earth, 
and under the earth, and on the sea, and 
all things that are in them, heard I 
saying, Unto Him that sitteth on the 
throne, and unto the Lamb, be the blessing 
and the honor and the glory and the 
dominion for ever and ever. And the 
four living ones said, Amen. And the 
elders fell down and worshiped." 
W. I. M. 



R531 : page 6 

THE OBJECT OF OUR LORDS RETURN. 



DISCOURSE I. 

[At the request of some of the readers, we 
will publish reports of six discourses delivered 
by the editor in Allegheny City in 1878, published 
at that time in some of the public prints. 
The edition of "OUTLINES OF SERMONS" published 
some time ago is exhausted. To those 
whom we have been obliged to refuse we suggest, 
that this series may meet the approval of 
some of you and to some extent serve your purpose. 
Below is the first one of the series.] 

Why does the Lord return? We do 
not ask if he will return, for as every 
Christian student of the Bible well knows 
that is one of the central themes of the 
Apostles teaching-the coming of our 
Lord and our gathering together unto 
Him. It was repeatedly used by Jesus 
to comfort the disciples--"! will come 



again and receive you unto myself." 

But while all are agreed as to the fact 
--the manner and the object are subjects 
upon which there is great difference 
of view. As we are now dealing 
with the latter-the object-let us examine 
the various leading views on the 
subject, of which there are six. Four of 
these views make the coming of 
Christ "a coming" in name only- 
devoid of a personal advent. The other 
two views hold that the coming is a 
personal presence, but differ regarding 
its object, etc. 

First— Among the former, we find the 
chief to be, that death is the coming of 
Christ. The holders of this view scarcely 
know why they think so. Simply, 
they have that idea. This is the most 
unscriptural of all views, for while not a 
single text supports it, there are hundreds 
to contradict such a thought. The 
church is everywhere taught to look for 
and "love His appearing," while death 
is pronounced an enemy. "The last 
enemy which shall be destroyed is 
death." "For this purpose Christ was 
manifested that He might destroy 
death." Substitute the second coming 
of Christ for the word death in this 
passage, and what would you have? 
A second view is-That the power 
manifested on the day of Pentecost 
evinced Christs return as having taken 
place, and to be a coming in spiritual 
power and energy to His people. Such 
forget that Jesus characterized this 
as the coming of another, consequently 
not of himself, when he 
said, "I will pray the Father, and 
He shall send you another comforter, 
even the Spirit of Truth." There is a 
sense in which the Spirit represented 
Christ during his absence. For instance 
Jesus declared that he would be present 
with the twos and threes gathered in 



His name ("Matt. 18:20"). This He has 
done by the Spirit; comforting those 
who came seeking His blessing. In the 
same spiritual sense He has abode with 
His church all the way down; as he 
said, "Lo, I am with you always, even 
unto the end of the age." "Matt. 28:20\ 
Yet, personally, he was to be absent 
until the end of the age, as he taught. 

A third view is-That Christ came at 
the destruction of Jerusalem, because 
Jesus mentions His coming in the same 
conversation in which He refers to the 
destruction of Jerusalem. Overlooking 
the fact that three distinct questions are 
asked by the disciples, ("Matt. 24:3"), 
which received separate answers. Jesus 
gave them to understand that His coming 
was not imminent; there would be 
wars, etc., but the end is not yet. He 
said, "Nation shall rise against nation, 
and kingdom against kingdom," ("Matt. 24:7"). 
This was not fulfilled before the 
fall of Jerusalem, for until that time 
and for long after the Romans held the 
nations in the quiet and peace of servitude. 
Again, he says, "These good 
tidings of the kingdom shall be preached 
in the whole inhabited earth (NEW 
VERSION) for a testimony unto all the 
nations; and then shall the end come." 
This has only been fulfilled during the 
last few years. America, Australia and 
some other large portions of the world 
were probably unknown to the early 
church. Then He mentioned certain 
signs and said, "When YE see ALL 
these things then know that it is nigh, 
even at the door." This generation 
(the one seeing these signs) shall not 
pass away until all these things are fulfilled. 
The generation then living did 
not see all those signs. 

Further, John the Revelator, who 
wrote some 26 years after the destruction 
of Jerusalem, was ignorant of Christs 



having come, and Jesus himself also, 
for while one says, "Behold! I come 
quickly," the other answered, "Even so, 
come Lord Jesus." fRev. 22:20 v ). 

A fourth view is-That Christ comes 
in conversion of sinners; so continually 
coming, more and more. This cannot 
be what Jesus referred to when He said, 
"All the tribes of the earth shall mourn 
and wail because of him when they see 
him coming." Do they mourn and 
wail when a sinner is converted? The 
chief objection to the four views just 
mentioned is that the real personal coming 
is ignored. Of the two classes who 
hold to a personal coming of our Lord, 
one is called Pre-millenarian [before 
the Millennium], and the other Post-millenarian 
[after the Millennium]. 

Of the latter class are most of 
so-called orthodox Christians. They 
believe that he has been coming all the 
way down in the growth of the church 
and the advancement of science and 
civilization, but that he will also come 
personally to crown his triumphant 
church, when she shall have put down 
all opposing authority and power; and 
that he, through her efforts, will put all 
enemies under her feet. Others, who 
claim only a personal coming, believe, 
in about the same order of events; that 
through the missionary labors of the 
church the world will be converted and 
thus usher in the millennial age, at the 
close of which the Lord will come, wind 
up earthly affairs, reward believers 
and condemn sinners. They have much 
scripture which, if taken disconnectedly, 
seems to favor this view. But even these 
we believe, when Gods word and plan 
are looked at as a whole, will be found 
to favor the view we are advancing, viz: 
That Christ comes before the conversion 
of the world; that the church is 
now being tried, and that the reward 



promised the overcomers is: that they 

shall share in this reign:-- "To him that 

overcometh will I give to sit with me 

in my throne." ("Rev. 3:21\) "And 

they lived and reigned with Christ a 

thousand years." ("Rev. 20:4"). "Ye 

which have followed me," etc. CMatt. 19:28"). 

R531 : page 7 

"If we suffer with Him we 

shall also reign with him." ("2 Tim. 2:12"). 

There are two texts in particular used 
by our Post-millennial brethren to which 
we would refer. One is, "This gospel must 
first be preached in all the world for a witness. 
Then shall the end come." They 
claim this to mean that the gospel will 
convert the world before the end of the 
gospel age. We, Pre-millennial believers, 
claim that witnessing to the 
world does not mean converting the 
world, that the object of the present witnessing 
is principally "To take out a 
people for His name," the church, who at 
Christs coming are united to Him and 
receive His name. ("Rev. 3:12".) The 
"other text" is— "Sit thou on my right 
hand, until I make thine enemies thy 
footstool." The thought generally gathered 
from this Scripture is, that in 
heaven God has a throne on which He 
sits continually, and then when "Christ 
sat down on the right hand of the 
Majesty on High," He sat down also 
upon the same throne. This is a misconception. 
The throne of God as referred 
to is not an ivory or golden seat, 
but refers to His supreme authority 
and rulership, for "Heaven is my throne 
and earth is my footstool," and Paul 
says, "God hath highly exalted Him 
(Christ) and given Him a name above 
every name," etc. He has given Him 
authority above every other, next to 
the Father. If Christ sits upon a material 



throne until His enemies are made 
His footstool, (all subdued) then of 
course He could not come until the 
Millennial reign was fully inaugurated. 
But if it means the exalting to power, it 

R532 : page 7 

would not interfere with His coming 
and subduing all things unto Himself." 

"Right hand" signifies the chief place 
--position of excellence or favor. And 
the words of Jesus to Pilate agree with 
this thought: "Hereafter ye shall see 
the Son of Man sitting on the right 
hand of power, and coming in the 
clouds of heaven." fMark 14:62 v ). He 
will be on the right hand when coming 
and remain at the right hand during the 
millennial age. 

These two last named views demand 
a thorough examination. There are 
able arguments possible on both sides; 
yet both are not true. We propose, 
therefore, to take a glance at the plan 
of God for saving the world, believing 
that in so doing we shall find the relation 
and bearing of both the first and 
the second comings, and know where 
to locate the latter. 

First, then: Has God a plan? All 
must agree that He has; although, almost 
all are inclined to think and talk 
of His dealings as though He were 
dealing by a rule of chance, and governed 
entirely by circumstances. No; 
He that would condemn a man for 
building a tower without first counting 
the cost, shall He build and people a 
universe without matured plans and due 
forethought? No, brethren, "known unto 
the Lord are all His ways from the 
beginning." God has a plan or purpose, 
and we know that "all His purposes 
shall be accomplished." But how shall 
we find that plan? It is revealed to us 



in Gods Word. "Search the Scriptures," 
as Paul says. "Compare Scripture with 
Scripture," for 

"God is His own interpreter, 
And He will make it plain." 

We are too much inclined to ask 
What does my church say?, about any 
question, instead of "What saith the 
Scriptures? Too much theology is 
studied and the Bible not enough. With 
the thought, then, that "The Scriptures 
are able to make us wise," that the 
"Testimonies of the Lord are sure, making 
wise the simple" (teachable), and that 
"all Scripture given by inspiration of God 
is profitable, that the man of God may 
be thoroughly furnished," let us study. 

Notice first that the Scriptures divide 
human history into three great successive 
periods, called "The world that was," 
(the age ending with the flood), "The 
present evil world," (the age commencing 
at the flood and ending with the 
coming of Christ a second time), and 
lastly, "The world to come," (the age 
commencing with the second coming of 
Christ) the endless age, or "World 
without end." This arrangement is not 
mere fancy, but is strictly scriptural. A 
proper understanding of these ages enables 
us to "rightly divide the word of 
truth," and it seems impossible to understand 
his plan without first recognizing 
them. 

Peter mentions all of them. Q2 Pet. 3:6,7,12\) 
Paul speaks of "the present 
evil world, and of the world to come." 
Jesus also distinguished between them, 
and calls the devil the prince of this 
world, fJohn 14:30"), and promised reward 
to His faithful followers "in the 
world [or order of things] to come, etc. 

While Christ has all power in heaven 
and earth, for wise purposes, He has 
not heretofore made use of it, permitting 
evil to reign and measurably control 



the world, and the devil to be 
"prince of this world," or order of 
things. But the time is promised when 
"He shall take to Himself His great 
power and reign," exalting His church 
and giving her "power over the nations," 
so that instead of as now, being 
"subject to the powers that be," she 
shall "rule the nations." 

But when will He thus assume control? 
When the Gospel church, "His 
body"-Ecclesia-is complete, evil 
now being permitted, for the trial of 
faith, and the perfecting of the saints. 
This time is synchronous with the 
sounding of the "seventh trumpet." 
fRev. 11:15".) Here the mystery (church) 
of God is finished-and "the kingdoms 
of this world" become the kingdoms 
of our Lord and His anointed 
(church). Now, we inquire, is this 
transfer of authority from Satan to 
Christ caused by the conversion of the 
nations to Christ through preaching 
the Gospel? We answer, no; at this 
time the nations are not converted. See 
the "eighteenth verse": "And the nations 
were angry, and thy wrath is come." If 
converted, they would not thus be hostile, 
neither would Gods wrath come 
upon them. On the contrary, God 
teaches in many Scriptures that a great 
time of trouble will come upon the 
nations. "Come, behold the desolations 
which the Lord hath made in the 
earth; He maketh wars to cease unto 
the ends of the earth." fPsa. 46:8- 10"). 
This is the way God tells us He will 
make wars to cease. The next clause 
informs us that then He "Will be exalted 
among the heathen and in all the earth." 
This chastisement of nations is designed 
for their good, and is as necessary to 
them as chastisement to the children of 
God now, and it will have this effect; 
for "When the judgments of the Lord 



are abroad in the earth the inhabitants 
of the world will learn righteousness, 
flsa. 26:9"). It is in this new dispensation 
that, with Evil or Satan bound, the 
knowledge of the Lord shall fill the 
whole earth as the waters do the sea." 
The conversion of the world, instead of 
being due now, while the devil is 
"prince of this world," will, David 
says, be "When the kingdom is the 
Lords and He is the Governor among 
the nations, (then) all the ends of the 
world shall remember, and turn to the 
Lord, and the kingdoms of the nations 
shall come and worship before Him." 
CPs. 22:27-28"). 

"The present evil world" contains 
three separate ages; the Patriarchal age, 
lasting from the flood to the death of 
Jacob; the Jewish age, lasting from the 
death of Jacob until the death of Christ 
--when He gave them up, wept over 
them, and said: "Your house is left 
unto you desolate." CMatt. 23:38\) The 
Gospel age, lasting from Christs baptism 
and anointing until the full company of 
"the church of the first born" is complete, 
and He comes-the "sounding of 
the seventh trumpet, the resurrection 
and reward of saints and prophets." 
CRev. 11:16".) 

We know not how many ages may 
be in "The World to Come," but that 
there is more than one we are assured, 
for Paul speaks of "The ages to 
come." fEph. 2:7\) The first of these 
alone is dealt with in Scripture-the 
millennial age, during which the saints 
shall live and reign with Christ a thousand 
years. CRev. 20:4"). 

Having gotten an outline, let us look 
more particularly at Gods doings and 
sayings; and now, I will astonish you, 
doubtless, until you reflect, when I say 
that, according to His word, God is not 
now trying to convert the world, nor has 



He been during past ages. What has 
He been doing? "Taking out a people 
-Church— for His name." Dont think 
this wonderful, as it is only putting in a 
striking form what all Calvinists believe, 
among whom are Baptists, Presbyterians 
and others, viz: That God is 
now electing-or choosing His Church 
out of the world. Yes, and all our 
brethren who believe in free grace must 
admit that if "all His purposes shall 
be accomplished," and "Gods word 
shall prosper in the thing whereto it 
was sent"; if these Scriptures are true 
God did not purpose the conversion of 
the world during the past 6,000 years, 
else it would be accomplished. Neither 
did He send His Word to convert the 
world up to the present time, else it did 
not prosper in the thing whereto He 
sent it. These two views have been 
dividing points in the churches for centuries, 
viz: Election and Free Grace. 

We believe the Scripture to teach 
both, but that it requires the observance 
of "Heavens first law," order, to rightly 
divide the Word of truth on this 
subject. 

There is no scriptural account of Gods 
giving mankind any law, nor but very little 
light of revelation during the age preceding 
the deluge. One promise shines 
out: "The seed of the woman shall 
bruise the serpents head"; but even this 
required future revelation to be comprehended. 
God had, however, a few faithful 
servants, some of the patriarchs, who 
had light above the masses; these shone 
as lamps in a dark way. 

The Patriarchal age had increase of 
light. It was now revealed that this 
seed was not only to crush evil (the 
serpent) but to "bless all the families of 
earth." Still Gods church was represented 
by but one man at a time-Noah, 
Abraham, Isaac, etc. 



These Patriarchs were elected or 
chosen. "God called Abraham, and 
said," etc. Abraham and his kin was 
called. His parents were idolaters. He 
had many sons and daughters, but only 
one son was chosen. "In Isaac shall 
thy seed be called." "Of Isaacs two 
sons, only one was chosen, "as it is 
written (says Paul, v Rom. 8:11 and 12 v ), 
Jacob have I loved, but Esau have I 
hated" (loved less). God chose before 
they were born, "That the purpose of 
God according to election might stand." 
Now, remember, I do not say that God 
elected one to go to heaven and the 
other to hell. Far from it. We will 
talk of Esaus portion and the non-elect 
on a future occasion. 

At Jacobs death another advance 
step in Gods plan is taken, and typical 
or fleshly Israel is formed. From this 
time one man no longer represents God 
in the world; but a nation; all the sons 
of Jacob and their posterity. And now 
we have an elect nation or church, and 
God gives all His special blessings to 
it. Other and larger nations-Egypt, 
Chaldea, &c.-are passed by; left without 
light and without knowledge, while 
these are given to Israel. "What advantage 
then hath a Jew? Much every 
way, chiefly because to them was committed 
the oracles (laws and testimonies) 
of God." This is Pauls statement. 
fRom. 3:2 V ). God speaking to 
them says: "You only have I known of 
all the families of the earth." fAmos 3:2"). 
This people alone was recognized, 
and this continued until Christ came, 

R533 : page 7 

and after that-until for lack of faith 
they were given up and their house left 
desolate. 
During Christs ministry he preached 



to them and would not suffer His disciples 
to go to any others, saying as he sent 
them out, "Go not into the way of the 
Gentiles, and into any city of the Samaritans 
enter ye not." Why so, Lord? 
"I am not sent save to the lost sheep of 
the house of Israel." All His time was 
devoted to them until death, and here 
was his first and grandest gift, not for 
Israel only, but for all; for Jesus Christ, 
by the grace of God, tasted death for 
every man. fHeb. 2:9 V ). And now, also, 
in the Gospel age, a certain sort of 
election obtains. Some parts of the 
world are more favored than others 
with the Gospel (which is free to all 
who hear). Contrast yourself with your 
privileges and knowledge with yonder 
heathen man who never yet heard the 
call. 

When this called-out company (called 
to be the "sons of God," "heirs of 
God and joint heirs with Jesus Christ 
our Lord"-"our high calling") is 
complete, then the plan of God for the 
worlds salvation is only beginning. Not 
until then can THE SEED "bruise the 
serpents head" and bless all the families 
of the earth. For the seed is not 
Jesus, the head alone, but the church 
also, which is His body, as Paul informs 
us CGal. 3:29 v ), "Which seed is Christ; 
and if ye be Christs, then are ye Abrahams 
seed, and heirs according to the 
promise." The same company are to 
bruise the serpent. fRom. 16:20\) "The 
very God of Peace shall bruise Satan 
under your feet shortly." 

The Gospel age makes ready the 
chaste virgin (church) for the coming 
bridegroom. In due time the bridegroom 
comes and they that are ready are 
united. The second Adam and the 
second Eve become one, the new creation 
and the glorious work of elevating 
mankind in the world begins. The 



river of living waters will flow from the 
New Jerusalem-the symbol of the 
glorified church ("Rev. 22:1-3"). Then 
the conversion of the world will be due. 
The church, now the "espoused virgin," 
will then be "the Bride, the Lambs 
wife," and, with her Lord, she shall share 
in ruling, teaching and restoring mankind 
from the curse. Then shall the Spirit and 
the Bride say, come! and whosoever 
will, let him take of the water of life 
freely." ("Rev. 22:17"). What is now a 
"well of water in you," will then be a bountiful 
river-enough for all. Thus seen, 
the object of the Lords return is to exalt 
and glorify his Bride-the elect 
church- and with and through her to 
"bless all the families of the earth." 



R533 : page 7 

CHRISTIANITY VS. CHURCHIANITY. 

We are living in an age of shams and 
counterfeits. Satan seems to have 
abandoned the hope of crushing out the 
Christian Church by a process of undisguised 
hostility, and now seeks to 
destroy her efficiency by stealthily 
draining off her vitality, and robbing 
her of every supernatural element. He 
"transforms himself into an angel of 
light," and often assumes to be the 
special friend and guardian of the 
Church. Craftily he infuses his deadly 
virus and inculcates his plausible 
philosophy, until the moral perception 
is obscured, the conscience is distorted, 
and policy runs nearly the whole 
ecclesiastical machinery. Thus a popularized 
religion-which costs nothing 
and is worth nothing-is readily accepted, 
while the old religion of the 
cross is utterly discarded. The consequence 



is, that there is religion enough, 
and Churchianity enough, but a great 
famine for real Christianity. We meet 
with thousands all over the land who, if 
catechised in regard to their spiritual 
condition, reply with much self-assurance 
that they are members of such a 
Church. They assume that the Church 
is an ark of safety; and, once ensconced 
within her enclosures, all further anxiety 
ends. Let us try to unmask this dreadful 
delusion of the devil. 

There is a difference, we may premise, 
between the real and the nominal 
Church of Christ. The former is composed 
of all true Christians. Its boundaries 
are therefore invisible, as no man 
can tell exactly where to draw the lines. 
The latter is composed of those who 
assume the Christian name and practice 
the ordinances of Gods house. It is 
commonly called the visible Church, 
because its boundary lines are known. 
The epithet may apply to a single local 
society of a given denomination, or to 
the aggregate of local societies of all 
denominations. We use the term, in 
this paper, to designate the outward or 
visible Church. 

1 . Christ and the Church are not 
identical. There may be ten thousand 
Churches, but there is only one Christ. 
Nor can all those Churches supply the 
place of our one, blessed, all-sufficient 
Saviour. A man may be saved without 
the Church, but he cannot be saved 
without Christ. A man may be in the 
Church and not be saved; but he cannot 

R533 : page 8 

be in Christ without salvation. 

Sinners sometimes become members of 

the Church; but only saints are members 

of Christ. A person may live in 

the Church for years, with the old heart 



of carnality and selfishness; but "if 
any man be in Christ, he is a new 
creature." 

The requirements of the Church are 
often wrong and ruinous; but the claims of 
Christ are always reasonable and right. 
The Church may become a sink of pollution; 
but Christ is ever the perfection of 
purity. The Church may be rent with 
divisions; but Jesus Christ is not 
divided. The Church may become 
terribly entangled in mysticism and 
error; but Christ is always the embodiment 
of light and truth. The Church 
may change her name and her nature; 
but Christ is "the same yesterday, to-day, 
and forever." The Church may 
be a crutch to walk with, but she 
is a poor Christ to trust in for salvation 
and eternal life. 

2. Christian worship and Church 
worship are not identical. Vast multitudes 
cling to some Church establishment 
as a drowning man would cling to 
a life-boat. They bow obsequiously to 
her priestly and official mandates, and 
imagine that the blind servility which 
they tender to the Church will be accounted 
acceptable service offered to 
Christ. The simplicity of the Gospel is 
lost in the imposing forms and glittering 
accompaniments of modern churchism. 
Splendid church edifices attract 
the eye. Splendid music charms the 
ear. Splendid prayers are addressed 
to the CONGREGATION. Splendid sermons 
please the fancy, and leave deluded 
sinners to slumber on. Church 
rivalry has achieved a glorious success, 
if success consists in gorgeous temples, 
tall steeples, loud-sounding bells, thundering 
organs, ostentatious dressing, 
theatrical singing, pointless praying, 
rhetorical preaching, careless hearing, 
and unscriptural practicing! 

Much of the current worship is done 



by proxy. Lazy religionists surrender 
their sacred rights to others. They 
take it for granted that the preacher is 
on the right track, and readily swallow 
whatever may be doled out from the 
pulpit, without using their own brains 
in searching for the hidden treasures of 
truth. Thus religious ideas are transmitted 
from generation to generation, 
until tradition exerts a more powerful 
influence than the Bible in molding the 
sentiments of men. There comes to be 
a fashionable faith, as well as a fashionable 
dress. To embrace a certain 
stereotyped circle of doctrinal views entitles 
a man to the claim of "orthodoxy"; 
but let him not venture one 
step out of the beaten track, if he would 
not be denounced as a deluded heretic! 
But few have the moral courage to 
question the decisions of the Church, 
much less to discard what she has 
labeled as "orthodox." The verdict of 
a few leading denominations has thus 
grown up into a threatening tyranny; 
and the multitude cannot think of 
stemming the mighty tide. So they 
bow down in their narrow enslavement 
and worship this curiously-fashioned 
but pious-looking idol-the Church! 
Since all idolatry is an abomination to 
God, we have no more right to worship 
a church than we have to worship a 
golden calf! We rob the Lord of his 
rightful honor, and ourselves of the 
highest bliss of Christianity, by looking 
to the Church too much, and "looking 
unto Jesus" too little. What can be 
done to deal a staggering blow to this 
cruel church- worship of the day, and at 
the same time give us more exalted and 
ravishing views of Jesus Christ? There 
is a grand failure to carry out the ultimate 
design, when the appliances of the 
Gospel result only in the production of 
Churchianity. Our perception, our 



prayers, our faith, and our adoration 
must overleap the narrow precincts of 
the outward Church, and rise up to the 
eternal throne! "Worship God!" 

3. Christian fellowship and Church 
fellowship are not identical. The followers 
of Christ are called upon to 
"love one another with a pure heart 
fervently." Indeed, this is one of the 
Scriptural tests of discipleship. "We 
know that we have passed from death 
unto life because we love the brethren." 
All Christians constitute one family, 
and love is the golden tie designed to 
bind their hearts together around the 
common cross. But love is a tender 
plant that needs to be reared with a 
hand. Hence the many exhortations 
of Scripture to "consider one another" 
--to "be kindly affectioned one to 
another"-to esteem others better than 
ourselves-to "bear one anothers burdens" 
-to exercise a forgiving spirit- 
to "let brotherly love continue"-to 
"endeavor to keep the unity of the 
Spirit in the bonds of peace." All such 
injunctions point out the danger of 
alienated feelings and poisoned affections, 
and show the importance of making 
a special effort to promote Christian 
unity and love. How disastrous are 
the results of not regarding these Gospel 
precepts !— A. A. Phelps. 



R534 : page 8 

QUESTION COLUMN. 

Ques. A Brother writes to heartily 
endorse our expressions in last issue 
relative to the Inter. S.S. Lessons, etc., 
and asks, Can we not have a lesson leaf 
for children which would rightly present 
the Scripture teachings to them? 



Ans. In our opinion Sunday-schools 
and all kinds of schools are good and 
useful in proportion as they teach anything 
valuable or useful. Let children 
be taught morality of every sort, and instructed 
in the first principles of the 
Gospel, and all they can understand concerning 
Gods character, and of the harmony 
between Gods two revelations- 
the book of nature and the book of revelation. 
Thus they will be prepared for 
useful and honest lives as men and women 
--loyal and obedient to their Creator 
and Redeemer. 

But we who are in training for the 
high calling cannot turn aside from the 
special work of this age-the work of 
preparing "the Bride, the Lambs wife." 
The Bride is to make herself ready; 
and just at the present moment, when 
the last touches of adornment are being 
put on preparatory to the wedding, 
every members service is required in 
this all-important, present work. Soon 
our exalted position of heavenly power 
with the Lord, will enable us to render 
substantial aid to all work, for the blessing 
and elevating of humanity. The 
very work for which we are now in preparation 
is the restoring and blessing of 
all the families of the earth. 

To all saints who have a talent for 
teaching and explaining, and who see 
the truth clearly, we suggest that you 
"cast your net on the other side of the 
ship" and become fishers of men and 
women rather than of children; and 
fish for one class only, viz.: the consecrated 
in Christ Jesus, and to these do 
as did Aquilla and Priscilla to Apollos 
-show unto them "the way of God 
more perfectly." fActs 18:26-28\) It 
is the eleventh hour, but go ye also 
into the vineyard, and whatsoever is right 
shall be your reward. It is too late now to 
expect fruit for this vintage from new 



slips, but you may be of service to the 
older fruit-bearing branches by tearing 
off some of the old withered leaves, and 
thus letting in the sunlight of grace and 
truth with power to ripen their fruit. 

Ques. Is it possible for a parent to 
cast all care on Jesus and not be worried 
about the future condition of grown 
children, who, though members of the 
nominal church and free from gross sins, 
yet manifest much love for the world 
and have no appetite for spiritual 
things? 

Ans. We think that a proper appreciation 
of the Lords character and plans, 
while it would not lead to carelessness 
in using every opportunity to reach him 
that hath an ear to hear, yet would be 
free entirely from worry. Under all 
circumstances let us give thanks. 

In the first place, probably your sons 
and daughters, like thousands of others, 
are not new creatures in Christ-old 
things have not passed away and all 
things have not become new to them; 
hence they would not be heirs of spiritual, 
heavenly things. For this reason 
God does not reveal to them things 
which they cannot have. No such human 
eye hath seen, nor ear heard, 
neither hath it entered into the heart of 
man the things which God hath in reservation 
for those that love him [the 
consecrated "new creatures"]. But 
God hath revealed these things to the 
new creatures by his Spirit. 
ClCor.2:9-10\) 

Being of the earth earthy, they shall 
in due time be blessed by being restored 
to the perfection of the earthly condition, 
and to a perfect enjoyment of earthly 
blessings, because redeemed by the precious 
blood. In their resurrection (or 
perfecting) they shall come fully to the 
image of the first man, "very good"; 
but those who, through consecration, 



have changed their nature, will be no 
longer men, but "new creatures"- 
spiritual beings-and shall bear the image 
of the Head of the heavenly house 
when perfected. As was the earthly one, 
Adam, such like will they be also that 
are earthly: and as is the heavenly one, 
Jesus, such like will they be also that are 
heavenly. 

The difficulty is, that the church, having 
misconstrued the Gospels present 
mission to witness to the world, and to 
develop a "little flock," came to the conclusion 
that she must NOW convert the 
world, hence she has bent her energies 
in that direction, and almost ignored the 
deeper work upon the "little flock." 
The work of converting the world being 
slow, she naturally concluded that she 
must not be too particular as to whom 
she received, else she would seem to 
make no progress. Accordingly she 
lowered her standard. Therefore many 
persons have been told that they are 
Christians, and invited to join church, 
who never were converted, and know 
nothing about entire consecration. Such 
are not new creatures, and, consequently, 
cannot sympathize with the rules of self-sacrifice 
laid down in Scripture for the 
little flock. As such constitute, probably, 
three fourths of the membership of 
the nominal church, it is not surprising 
that spirituality and spiritual truths are 
at such a discount in it. 

Again, we say, rejoice- -rejoice that 
you may overcome and be of that spiritual 
seed which shall bless and restore 
the nations. Rejoice that your children 
are moral, and do all that you can to 
supply them a basis for morality in the 
expression and illustration of Gods 
character in your words and conduct. 
Rejoice as you think of the blessings to 
come upon them and all mankind when 
the kingdom is the Lords and he is the 



governor among the nations. Rejoice 
evermore, and in everything give thanks: 
"For he is good-His mercy endureth 
forever." "Blessed is the man that 
trusteth in him." 

Ques. Please let us know your opinion 
of the very distinct physical features 
of the present day, such as cyclones, sun 
spots, etc. I know your position concerning 
political and religious changes 
as fulfilling the scriptural statements of 
the shaking of the heavens, earthquakes, 
etc., but not concerning these 
physical phenomena? 

Ans. We understand that great physical 
as well as political and religious 
revolutions are now in progress. Just 
what these are, may not be very clearly 
seen, but these are as certain to bring a 
blessing to earth as the others, though, 
like them, the change may be attended 
with distress and temporary confusion. 

It seems certain that to make the 
earth into a paradise like Eden, such as 
the prophecies picture, and a fit place 
for the restored race, some great 
changes of climate, etc., must occur. 
Looking back, we find that some important 
changes of climate, etc., took 
place at the time of the Deluge; a 
change which at once affected the longevity 
of humanity, for before that life 
averaged 500 to 1,000 years, but immediately 
afterward it was shortened. (See 
v Gen. 6:3 V ; v 9:29 v ; v ll:32\) Furthermore, 
we learn that until the flood, there had 
been no rain on the earth, it being 
watered by a mist instead. fGen. 2:5,6\) 
These changes occurred at the end 
of the first world or dispensation-at 
the beginning of "The present evil 
world," or dispensation-and we think 
that a proper time to expect another 
change to a better condition would be 
at the close of the present evil dispensation, 
at the threshold of "The world 



[dispensation] to come," wherein dwelleth 
righteousness. That these changes 
will be sudden we do not believe, but 
think that the all- wise Director of the 
work has so planned that physical and 
higher changes run parallel and keep 
pace with each other. 

As we find the forty years, from 1874 
to 1914, A.D., prophetically marked 
out as the time for the change of earths 
administration, it would seem not unreasonable 
to suppose that the proper 
physical changes might occur during 
the same period. "Not that we expect 
all changes to be completed in the 
specified forty years, but that by that 
time the new systems and arrangements 
will be thoroughly introduced, which will 
be gradually improving, and will reach 
absolute perfection at the same time 
that mankind in general will reach absolute 
perfection by restitution. Thus 
the perfect earth and its perfect Lord 
(man) will both be prepared to enter 
upon the ceaseless ages of perfection 
into which shall never enter sin, death, 
pain or sorrow. 

So, then, to us let the physical contortions 
and quakings and tempests and 
angry waves, speak of the better condition 
coming, just as the social revolutions 
speak of a more blessed time 
coming to the groaning creation who 
shall be delivered into the liberty of 
sons of God. fRom. 8:2 1\) 

Whirlwinds or cyclones are disturbances 
occurring in the air or heavens- 
caused by disorders therein, and which 
exercise a baneful influence upon the 
earth. These physical disorders illustrate 
the origin of much of the worlds 
trouble; it will be caused by disorders 
in the symbolic heavens or church normal. 
Notice how this trouble and 
whirlwind are symbolically mentioned 
by v Jeremiah 25:29-36\ Notice how the 



chief distress is specified as coming 
upon the nations [governments] and 
upon the shepherds and principal of the 
flock-nominal. 

Ques. Why was the brazen serpent 
used as a type of Christ? 

Ans. Undoubtedly to teach and develop 
faith. But we presume you to 
mean, Why was the serpent used as a 
symbol of Jesus? We answer, that the 
serpent represents sin, evil-the curse 
and brass (copper) represents the human 
nature. (See Tabernacle Tract.) 
This was a fitting type of Jesus, because 
as a man he was made sin (i.e., reckoned 
and treated as the personification 
of all the evil and sin of the race, as 
their representative or substitute) for us 
(He) who knew no sin. 



R535 : page 1 

VOL. V. PITTSBURGH, PA., OCTOBER, 1883. NO. 3. 



page 1 

ZIONS 

Watch Tower 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRISTS PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED MONTHLY AT 

101 Fifth Avenue, Pittsburgh, Pa. 



C. T. RUSSELL, Editor and Publisher. 



The Editor recognizes a responsibility to the Master, 
relative to what shall appear in these columns, 
which he cannot and does not cast aside; yet he 
should not be understood as endorsing every expression 
of correspondents, or of articles selected 
from other periodicals. 

TERMS OF SUBSCRIPTION. 

TERMS :- -Fifty cents a year, postage prepaid. 
You may send by Draft, P.O. Money Order, or 
Registered Letter, payable to C. T. RUSSELL. 

FOREIGN TERMS. 

Foreign Postage being higher, our terms to foreign 
subscribers will be 65 cents a year. Please 
send us no foreign money or postage stamps, as we 



can make no use of them. Remittances may be 
made by Foreign Postal Money Orders. 

TAKE NOTICE. 

This paper will be sent free to any of the Lords 
poor who will send a card yearly requesting it. 
Freely we have received and freely we would give 
the truth. "Ho, every one that thirsteth, come ye 
to the waters; and he that hath no money, come ye, 
buy and eat-yea, come, buy wine and milk without 
money and without price." And you that have it— 
"Wherefore do ye spend money for that which is 
not bread? and your labor for that which satisfieth 
not? Hearken diligently-and eat ye that which is 
good, and let your soul delight itself in fatness. "- 
ISAIAH 55 :1,2\ 



page 1 

THE safest way to send money is by 
"POSTAL MONEY ORDER." The rates 
have recently been reduced. 



SEND us the addresses of all the moral 
and religious Swedes and Norwegians 
you can gather; for samples of the 
Swedish paper. 



SEND the names of any to whom you 
think sample copies of the TOWER 
would be a blessing; or we will send 
you samples for your neighbors-Free. 



"YOUNGS CONCORDANCE" cannot 
be sent by mail to foreign countries except 
Canada on account of excessive 
weight. Expressage to Europe is costly, 



hence foreign readers can probably purchase 
them there to best advantage. 



THE post office authorities now refuse 
all papers not properly addressed. This 
will account for some not getting their 
papers recently. When the name of 
your village or town is different from 
the name of the post office be sure to 
send the latter. 



R535 : page 1 

DARKNESS COVERS THE EARTH. 

"Behold the darkness shall cover the earth 
and gross darkness the people; but the Lord 
shall arise upon thee and His glory shall be seen 
upon thee. And the Gentiles (heathen) shall 
come to thy light. "- v Isa. 60:2\ 

The above diagram is powerfully 
suggestive of the statement of the 
prophet: "Darkness shall cover the 
earth." It was published here by the 
"WOMENS PRESBYTERIAN BOARD OF 
MISSIONS" and is termed "A Mute 
Appeal" on behalf of foreign missions, 
and was first issued by the "LONDON 
MISSIONARY SOCIETY." 

Each square of this diagram represents 
ten hundred thousand human beings. 
The lights, shades and blackness 
tell of the darkness and blindness 
which has overspread the earth, while 
sin and evil have ruled mankind, and 
cause us to look longingly for the 
bright Millennial Day when the Sun of 
Righteousness shall arise with healing 
in his wings, causing the knowledge of 
the Lord to fill the whole earth and to 
bless all mankind. 



The Watchman-the "Y.M.C.A." 
journal of Chicago-published this 
same diagram, and commenting on it, 
says: "The ideas of some are very 
misty and indefinite in regard to the 
worlds spiritual condition. We hear 
of glorious revival work at home and 
abroad, of fresh missionary efforts in 
various directions, of one country after 
another opening to the gospel, and of 
large sums being devoted to its spread; 
and we get the idea that adequate 
efforts are being made for the evangelization 
of the nations of the earth. 
It is estimated to-day that the worlds 
population is 1,424,000,000, and by 
studying the diagram we will see that 
considerably more than one-half-nearly 
two-thirds-are still total heathen, 
and the remainder are mostly either 
followers of Mohammed or members 
of those great apostate churches 
whose religion is practically a Christianized 
idolatry, and who can scarcely 
be said to hold or teach the gospel of 
Christ. Even as to the 116 millions of 
nominal Protestants, we must remember 
how large a proportion in Germany, 
England and this country have lapsed 
into infidelity-a darkness, if possible, 
deeper even than that of heathenism, 
and how many are blinded by superstition 
or buried in extreme ignorance. 
So that while eight millions of Jews 
still reject Jesus of Nazareth, and while 
more than 300 millions who hear His 
name have apostatized from His faith, 
170 millions more bow before Mahomet; 
and the vast remainder of mankind are 
to this day worshipers of stocks and 
stones, of their own ancestors, of dead 
heroes, or of the devil himself; all in 
one way or other worshiping and serving 
the creature instead of the Creator, 
who is God over all, blessed forever. 
Is there not enough here to sadden the 



heart of thoughtful Christians?" 

Some might suppose at first that the 
view is too dark and rather overdrawn, 
but we think the reverse of this. It 
shows nominal Christianity in the 
brightest colors possible. For instance, 
the 116,000,000 put down as Protestant 
is far in excess of the true number. 
Sixteen millions would be fully sufficient, 
we believe, to include every professing 
church member, and ONE MILLION 
would, we fear, be far too liberal 
an estimate for the "sanctified in Christ 
Jesus," who "walk not after the flesh 
but after the Spirit." 

It is, indeed, a sorrowful picture of 
ignorance and darkness and sin from 
any standpoint; but, viewed from the 
so-called "ORTHODOX" standpoint, it 
is truly 

AN AWFUL PICTURE. 

If we hold "Orthodoxy" to its own 
creeds, it believes that all of these 
billions of humanity, ignorant of the 
only name under heaven by which we 
must be saved, are on the straight road 
to everlasting torment. And not only 
so, but all of those 116,000,000 Protestants, 
except the very few saints, are 
sure of the same fate. No wonder, 
then, that those who believe such awful 
things of Jehovahs plans and purposes 
should be zealous in forwarding missionary 
enterprises-the wonder is that 
they are not frenzied by it. If we believed 
such things it would rob life of 
every pleasure and shroud in gloom 
every bright prospect of nature. 

That we have not misstated "Orthodoxy" 
on the subject of the fate of the 
heathen, we quote from their pamphlet 
--"A mute appeal on behalf of Foreign 
Missions"-in which the diagram 
was published. Its concluding sentence 



is: "Evangelize the mighty generations 
abroad-the ONE THOUSAND MILLION 
SOULS who are dying in CHRISTLESS 
DESPAIR at the rate of 100,000 a day." 

But another peculiar thing is, that the 
"Mute Appeal" on behalf of Foreign 
Missions is issued by the WOMENS 
PRESBYTERIAN BOARD OF MISSIONS." 
The peculiarity is that a denomination 
which in its creed declares its faith to 
be, that God did from all eternity predestinate 
some to knowledge and salvation, 
and all others to ignorance and 
damnation, should so disregard their 
"old landmarks" and prejudices as to 
attempt to change the arrangement 
which they declare was predestinated. 

But, really, we rejoice at this as an 
evidence that creeds of the darker centuries 
are losing their power over 
thinking people of every sect. We are 
glad, too, that their hearts are better 
than their creeds, and that they are 
superior to their estimate of God; for 
while they think that God looks calmly 
and unmoved upon this mass of humanity 
going down to hell at the rate of 
100,000 a day, and never exercising 
His power to give them the needed 
knowledge, they are superior in that 
they are moved to pity and to benevolent 
action by the sight. 

The great difficulty with "Orthodoxy" 
is, that they fail to recognize 
plan and method in Gods word and 
dealings. Such will, perhaps, gather 
from our foregoing criticism, that we 
have no care for, nor interest in the 
heathen; but we can most heartily assure 
them that this is not the case. The 
reason why they would thus judge us, 
would be the same if they applied their 
judgment to the actions and teachings 
of Jesus. He went not to the Gentiles 
(heathen), and commanded the disciples 
likewise. fMatt. 10:5\) He did 



not cry aloud nor "lift up his voice in 
the streets," shouting to and exhorting 
sinners or heathens to beware of eternal 
torture; neither did any of the apostles. 
In his preaching, Jesus said of some, 
"No man can come unto me except 
the Father, which hath sent me, draw 
him." fJohn 6:44\) The disciples he 

R536 : page 1 

taught specially, saying, "Unto you it 
is given to know the mystery of the 
kingdom of God, but, unto them that 
are without, all these things are done in 
parables, that seeing they may see and 
not perceive, and hearing they may hear 
and not understand, lest at any time 

R536 : page 2 

they should be converted." fMark 4:11, 12\) 
But when we 

RECOGNIZE THE PLAN AND ORDER 

revealed in Gods word all is clear, 
beautiful, reasonable and harmonious. 

We claim that, as Jesus said, the 
Gospel in this age is a WITNESS to the 
world and not designed to now convert 
all. All must agree with us that if God 
intended it to be a converting power to 
the world in this age, his plans have 
most signally failed, as the above diagram 
proves. But let us take Gods 
plan as he presents it, viz: to elect or 
select a church-a "little flock"-who 
shall be taught, tried, tested, polished 
and made ready for his service in an 
age to follow this; when through this 
spiritual seed of Abraham, all the families 
of the earth shall be blessed and 
enlightened. CGal. 3:29\) 

How strange it does seem that these 
dear Christian brethren and sisters who 



issue the "MUTE APPEAL," and others 
who seem so zealous and anxious for 
the salvation of men and the spread of 
the knowledge of the "only name" as 
a means to that end, should feel such 
an opposition to the teaching of the 
Apostles concerning the coming TIMES 
OF RESTITUTION of all things spoken 
by the mouth of all the holy prophets. 

Can they not see that Gods missionary 
enterprise is much grander and 
more comprehensive than theirs? Theirs, 
even if their prayers and desires were 
to be answered this very year, by the 
conversion of every living being on 
earth to the love and service of our 
Lord; this surely would not answer the 
cravings of sympathizing, loving hearts, 
and they would still pray: O, Lord, 
extend thy mercy and thy love to those 
in everlasting torment; and they would 
plead that those billions of the dead far 
outnumbered the millions of the living. 

How strange that they will not allow 
the Lord to tell them of HIS WAY of 
carrying on mission work, and how 
much comfort and peace they lose, and 
how many burdens they bear, because 
they have no ear to hear when He 
speaks through his word. 

Gods plan is to first select a "Royal 
Priesthood" during this age and have 
that priesthood teach and rule and bless 
the world in the next age. 

Now we are just at the threshold of 
the age of glory. The midnight 
shadows of the diagram are just beginning 
to flee before the "Sun of Righteousness," 
and the printing and scattering 
of millions of Bibles in the past 
87 years is one means toward the great 
work. In a word, then, these dear 
friends stand at our side in hope of the 
spread of truth, the great difference 
being that they expect to do it in their 
present weak, humble, mortal condition; 



and we expect to be glorified and 
clothed upon with heavenly form and 
power, as a means to the desired end. 

One of the great stumbling blocks 
which hinders " Orthodoxy s" reception 
of Gods grand missionary plan, of a 
special age in which the world (including 
those in their graves) will be taught 
and blessed by the knowledge and 
merit of the ransom, is their false idea 
of what constitutes DEATH. They have 
accepted Satans first lie, "Thou shalt 
not surely die," instead of Gods statement 
that men do die; hence they do all 
in their power to convince themselves 
that Satan was the truth-teller, and will 
not believe that when men die they lose 
life. They will not believe the Scriptural 
testimony. ("Rom. 6:23"; "Eccl. 9:10"; 
"Psa. 6:5"; "Job 14: specially vs. 1,10 and 21"; 
"2 Tim. 4:8".) Hence they 
are forced by their adherence to Satans 
theory, to claim that when men die 
they go to a place of woe or happiness 
and continue really to live, though they 
admit they seemed to die. 

If they would take Gods word simply 
and lay aside traditions, they would 
see that all men go to ("sheol," 
"hades") the condition of death, and 
that the power is with God to bring 
them to life again, to bring them up 
out of their GRAVES. ("Ezek. 37:12".) 
Then they would see the reasonableness 
of death as the penalty of sin and of 
the RANSOM from it, by the death of our 
Redeemer, who substituted his life for 
ours and died the just for the unjust. 
Thus he bought for all the right to a 
return to life (resurrection-restitution) 
when at the hands of the Royal Priesthood 
it shall be testified to every man 
that Christ died for ALL. (1 Tim. 2:6".) 

While God has foretold the gross 
darkness now covering the world, let 
none overlook the fact that he also 



foretells by the same prophet that when 
the government shall be upon the 
shoulders of Him called "Wonderful," 
the rod of the oppressor (Satan) shall 
be broken, and the people who walked 
in darkness shall see a GREAT LIGHT. 
CIsa. 9:2,4,6\) 

By the same prophet the Lord again 
says of Christ (head and body), "I will 
preserve thee and give thee for a covenant 
of the people, to establish (order, 
rule) the earth, to cause to inherit the 
desolate heritages; that thou mayest 
say to the prisoners (in death-in 
hades) Go forth; to them that are in 
darkness, show yourselves." (Come to 
the light-the truth.) flsa. 49:8,9\) 

Soon it shall be manifested that not 
in name only, but in deed and in truth, 
Jesus is "the true light which lighteth 
every man that cometh into the world." 
CJohn 1:9\) "And in that day shall 
the deaf hear the words of the Book, 
and the eyes of the blind shall see out 
of obscurity and out of darkness. The 
meek also shall increase their joy in the 
Lord." flsa. 29:18\) Surely we are 
now entering "that day," and for it 
thank God. 



R536 : page 2 

CHURCH GOVERNMENT. 

The article in a back issue of the 
TOWER (Vol. 4, No. 4), entitled "The 
Ecclesia," furnishes our understanding 
of what constitutes the Church of Christ 
and the spirit of love and truth which 
binds and unites the saints of all ages. 
But we have inquiries from a number of 
ministers and others who are coming 
back from sectarianism to the original 
and only true church which includes all 



SANCTIFIED believers in the ransom, 

asking whether we recognize local organizations 

such as the Apostles established 

in every city ("Titus 1:5"), having 

elders and deacons, etc.; and if we do 

not have such, Why? Is such organization 

not as proper now as in the 

Apostles days? And if there are no 

such organizations, how is the work of 

the ministry and teaching conducted 

successfully? 

We reply, that the circumstances now 
differ from those of the Apostles day 
in that their work was more to organize 
and lay the foundation for an age of 
work just beginning, while our work is 
the reverse almost of this; it is the ending 
or harvesting of this age; and the 
methods of then and now might be as 
different as are the methods of a farmer 
and the implements he uses in sowing 
seed and in reaping his harvest. 

The methods of Jesus, in harvesting 
the Jewish age, furnish a better guide to 
present work. It is with us much as it 
was with him: His mission was not to 
bring peace but a sword-division ("Matt. 10:34".) 
In some respects, dividing 
and tearing down are not as agreeable 
employment as building up; but if we 
are anxious to do the Masters will we 
have no other wish, and especially if he 
has shown us the necessity of the separation 
in order to the glorifying of the 
saints and the bringing in through them 
of an age of blessing to the world in 
general. Seeing this, harvesting becomes 
the most enjoyable work in the 
vineyard. 

For the same reasons that Jesus did 
not organize congregations while present 
with his disciples in the Jewish 
harvest, we do not consider expedient or 
necessary organizations even simple 
and unsectarian as those established by 
the Apostles. Our Lord is again present, 



not again in the "form of a servant," 
in the flesh, but a spiritual being; 
and he, being present, is in all things the 
guide and director of every laborer. 

But, though no earthly organization 
is attempted, yet we are as one-all 
united to the one head and following 
the leadings of his Word and Spirit. If 
we see any among us turn aside and 
"err from the truth," each other member 
will feel a loving duty to do what 
he can to restore such a one to the 
truth; yet we feel that the further responsibility 
of disciplining, etc., is with 
our present Lord, who also will do it. 
We labor to do his will and leave results 
to him. 

Our ministers, if assembled, would contrast 
nearly as strongly with those of 
the nominal "church" as did Jesus 
followers at the first advent contrast 
with the Scribes and Pharisees. 

The ministers of the nominal Church 
seek for and receive the popular approval; 
and for their labor they have 
their reward, being abundantly supported 
and honored. In fact, a young 
man of talent finds no easier or more 
direct road to the honors, ease and 
comforts of life than to enter the ministry 
of the Nominal Church. But far 
different is it with those who, for the 
love of the truth and the glory of God, 
go forth to declare the whole counsel of 
God whether men will hear or forbear. 
These are by no means salaried lords of 
Gods heritage, but, like their Master, 
they are despised and rejected of men; 
but they esteem it a privilege to receive 
the wages of persecution, hardship, 
and trial of the present time, 
while joyfully looking forward to the 
glory to be revealed. They use whatever 
talents they possess to the best advantage, 
whether they be many or few. 



R537 : page 2 

Some, through the columns of the 
"TOWER," are stirring up the gift that is 
in them; and some, who have the opportunity, 
travel from place to place preaching 
by word and printed matter, while 
others, whose field is not so wide, are 
thus engaged in their own immediate 
neighborhood. Few can give all their 
time directly in the Gospel work: 
the mass of them, in order to "provide 
things honest in the sight of all men," are 
obliged to "labor, working with their 
hands." 

The majority of these ministers [servants] 
of Christ do their work by 
searching out the "saints," for whom 
present truths are meat in due season, 
and by conversation on these subjects 
and the loaning of a paper containing 
some article which they have marked, 
they endeavor to build them up in the 
most holy faith, helping them to understand 
the word of God more perfectly, 
as did Aquilla and Priscilla with 
Apollos fActs 18:26"), and each doing 
with his might what his hand finds to 
do, using whatever talents he possesses, 
seeks thus to glorify God in body and 
spirit which are his. It is the mistake 
of very many Christians, however, and 
one which all should guard against, to 
suppose that they are serving the Lords 
cause when they are indiscriminately 
distributing anything which claims to 
be a religious tract or paper. The careful 
servant will be judicious and discriminating 
in this and in everything he 
undertakes. Such are the simple methods 
of the majority, and their work, under 
Gods direction, is mighty in the 
pulling down of strongholds. Here a 
little and there a little, Babylon and 
her wall of errors is crumbling before 
the truth. Another question in connection 



with this subject is: 

WHAT CONSTITUTES "A CALL TO THE 
MINISTRY?" 

All who consecrate are led of the 
Spirit (if they will follow) into more and 
more of an appreciation of Gods goodness 
and loving plans; and as they become 
filled with the spirit of love and 
see those about them needing the precious 
truth which they so freely received 
of God, and which so blessed 
and helped them, they realize that this 
very condition of things is a call from 
God to declare it to them, using their 
best talents in their heart- work, and 
letting their light so shine as to glorify 
their Father in heaven. 

Of every member of the anointed body 
it is true as of the Head-- "The Spirit 
of the Lord God is upon me because 
the Lord hath anointed me to 
preach good tidings unto THE MEEK." 
CIsa.61:l\) 

The Master is saying even now to 
every consecrated one: Go ye also 
into my vineyard-why stand ye idle? 
Reading matter for judicious use we 
will supply free. Sample copies of the 
TOWER will be sent free to those you 
think might be interested if you send 
us their addresses. We consider this 
one of the means in our hands for 
spreading the good news. 



R537 : page 2 

WHERE DID MOSES GET THAT LAW? 

An infidel, wishing to examine into 
the truth of the Christian religion, inquired 
of an elder of the Presbyterian 
church as follows: "What books, sir, 



would you advise me to read?" "The 

Bible," said the elder. "I believe you 

do not understand me," resumed the 

unbeliever, surprised in his turn; "I 

wish to investigate the truth of the 

Bible." "I would advise you, sir," repeated 

the elder, "to read the Bible; 

and," he continued, "I will give you 

my reasons: Most infidels are very ignorant 

of the Scriptures. Now, to reason 

on any subject with correctness, we 

must understand what it is, about which 

we reason. In the next place, I consider 

the internal evidence of the truth 

of the Scriptures stronger than the external." 

"And where shall I begin?" 

inquired the unbeliever, "at the New 

Testament?" "No," said the elder, 

"at the beginning-at Genesis." 

One evening the elder called and 
found the unbeliever at his house or 
office, walking the room, with a dejected 
look, his mind apparently absorbed 
in thought. He continued, not noticing 
that any one had come in, busily to 
trace and retrace his steps. The elder 
at length spoke: "You seem, sir," said 
he, "to be in a brown study; of what 
are you thinking?" "I have been 
reading," replied the infidel, "the moral 
law." "Well, what do you think of 
it?" asked the elder. "I will tell you 
what I used to think," answered the infidel. 
"I supposed that Moses was the 
leader of a horde of banditti; that, having 
a strong mind, he acquired great 
influence over a superstitious people; 
and that on Mount Sinai he played off 
some sort of fireworks, to the amazement 
of his ignorant followers, who imagined, 
in their mingled fear and superstition, 
that the exhibition was supernatural." 
"But what do you think 
now?" interposed the elder. "I have 
been looking," said the infidel, "into 
the nature of that law. I have been 



trying to see whether I can add anything 
to it, or take anything from it, so 
as to make it better. Sir, I cannot. It 
is perfect." 

"I have been thinking," he proceeded 
"where did Moses get that law? I 
have read history; the Egyptians and 
the adjacent nations were idolaters; so 
were the Greeks and Romans; and the 
wisest and best Greeks or Romans 
never gave a code of morals like this. 
Where did Moses get this law, which 
surpasses the wisdom and philosophy 
of the most enlightened ages? He 
lived at a period comparatively barbarous; 
but he has given a law in which 
the learning and sagacity of all subsequent 
time can detect no flaw. Where 
did he get it? He could not have 
soared so far above his age as to have 
devised it himself. I am satisfied where 
he obtained it. It came down from 
Heaven. I am convinced of the truth 
of the religion of the Bible. "--Selected. 



R537 : page 2 

IMMOVABLE FOR CHRIST. 

The old Lollards were called "Holdfasts," 
not only because of their firmness 
under persecution, but of their strong 
grasp of the truth. Coleridge said, 
with a practical aptness unusual with 
him: "What does not withstand has no 
standing-ground." "Hold fast, then, 
the form of sound words, in faith and 
love, which is in Christ Jesus." Be 
modest, unostentatious in all that is 
your own, willing to concede everything 
you have a right to yield, but be scrupulous 
and immovable about all that is 
Christs. -Selected. 



page 2 

SINCE three cent stamps are less useful 
than formerly, if you have more on 
hand than you know how to use otherwise, 
we will accept such during this 
month in payment of subscriptions. 



R537 : page 3 
HOW TO LIVE. 

He liveth long who liveth well! 

All other life is short and vain; 
He liveth longest, who can tell 

Of living most for heavenly gain. 

He liveth long who liveth well! 

All else is being thrown away; 
He liveth longest who can tell 

Of true things truly done each day. 

Waste not thy being; back to Him 
Who freely gave it, freely give; 

Else is that being but a dream: 
Tis but to be, and not to live. 

Be what thou seemest! live thy creed! 

Hold up to earth the torch divine; 
Be what thou prayest to be made, 

Let the great Masters steps be thine. 

Fill up each hour with what will last; 

Buy up the moments as they go; 
The life above, when this is past, 

Is the ripe food of life below. 

Sow truth, if thou the truth wouldst reap; 

Sow peace, and reap its harvest bright; 
Erect and sound thy conscience keep; 

From hollow words and deeds refrain. 



Sow love, and taste its fruitage pure; 

Sow peace, and reap its harvests bright; 
Sow sunbeams on the rock and moor, 

And reap a harvest home of light. 
-Horatius Bonar. 



R537 : page 3 
OUR SECT. 

Webster defines sect to mean "A 
part cut off," "Hence a body of persons 
who have separated from others 
by virtue of some special doctrine, or 
set of doctrines, which they hold in 
common." 

Since we hold to a set of doctrines 
delivered to the saints by Jesus and the 
Apostles, and since we separate and 
cut ourselves off from all other religious 
jurisdiction and control, therefore 
it follows that we are a SECT. We 
"separate from sinners" and "have no 

R538 : page 3 

fellowship with the unfruitful works of 
darkness." fEph. 5: IT; v 2 Cor. 6:\T). 
Because there is no concord between 
Christ and Satan, nor between a believer 
in Christ and an unbeliever in 
his ransom and Lordship, therefore we 
obey the Lords command, "Come out 
from among them and be ye separate, 
saith the Lord, and touch not the unclean, 
and I will receive you, and will 
be a Father unto you, and ye shall be 
my sons and daughters, saith the Lord 
Almighty." f2 Cor. 6:17,18*). 

In doctrine we hold firmly to the 
glad tidings preached by Jesus and explained 
by the Apostles, and will receive 
none other, even though it should 
be delivered by an angel from heaven. 



It is briefly stated by Paul thus: "I 
delivered unto you first of all, that 
which I also received [first of all], how 
that Christ died for OUR SINS according 
to the Scriptures." fl Cor. 15:3"). 
This is the basis; and built upon it, is 
our realization that we are justified and 
cleansed from all sin in Gods sight, by 
his offering or sin- sacrifice who "died 
the just for the unjust." Realizing this, 
"we have redemption through his blood, 
the forgiveness of sins." fEph. 1:T). 
All who accept of their share in this 
atoning sacrifice are properly termed 
Christians. 

This was the faith of the early 
church. True, they progressed beyond 
these first principles to the use of the 
"strong meat," and to a comprehension, 
with all saints, of the deep things of 
God; but the "babes in Christ," and 
those "who, by reason of use, had 
their senses exercised," were all one 
family-"all one in Christ Jesus." The 
more advanced in grace and doctrine 
bore the infirmities of the weak, each 
and all seeking to grow in grace and 
knowledge more and more. Where 
this apostolic rule was observed there 
could be no sect, no division in the 
body. It was only when error began 
to develop in the congregations that 
Paul wrote to some: I hear that there 
are divisions (sects) among you, and I 
partly believe it; for it is evident from 
what I learn of the worldliness and 
error coming in among you, that there 
would of necessity be divisions; for 
those true to the Lord could not have 
fellowship with such unfruitful works 
of darkness, but must rather reprove 
them, fl Cor. 11:18,19"). 

But while divisions were objected to 
in the true church, while all the apostles 
taught that there was one Lord, 
one faith, one baptism and one body-- 



church of Christ-yet this church was 
a sect itself-a split off from the Jewish 
church- which was cast off and left 
desolate, and it was also separated 
from the world. It was "the sect 
everywhere spoken against." fActs 28:22 v ). 
Thus, we see, that Christians are 
a sect or separated class- separate from 
the world- separate from sinners- separate 
from all others, in that they accept 
of Jesus, and salvation through his 
blood. But there should be no schism 
or division of this sect; all who are of 
it should be one. There is one fold 
and one Shepherd, fl Cor. 12:25^). 

It is not remarkable that Satan 
should seek to divide and separate the 
sheep and to put up fences, such as the 
denominational creeds prove to be, 
which would hinder some of the sheep 
from following the Shepherd into green 
pastures of fresh and living truth. This 
would be but wisdom on his part. But 
it is strange that he should be able to 
fetter the reason of so many, that they 
should think it a mark of spirituality 
to say, I am of Luther, a Lutheran; I 
of Calvin and Knox, a Presbyterian; I 
of Wesley, a Methodist, and so on; 
while Paul, on the contrary, to some of 
his day, who were in danger of this 
spirit of sectarianism, said: While one 
saith, I am of Paul, and I of Apollos, 
and I of Peter, are ye not carnal? Is it 
not in direct opposition to the spirit of 
Christ to think or act thus? "Is Christ 
divided?" Did Paul or Peter or Knox 
or Calvin or Wesley or anyone else 
than Christ die for your sins and redeem 
you? They, as servants of Christ 
and the church, should be esteemed 
very highly for their works sake, but 
to name the Bride after any other than 
the Bridegroom is manifestly improper. 

Oh, that all could see that in Gods 
sight there is but one church-whose 



names are written in heaven-and that 
God cannot and does not sympathize 
with or recognize any split in the real 
church. He does not recognize the 
narrow creeds in which so many of the 
sheep are confined and starving. As 
we have shown, he has placed but one 
fence around his fold. Inside of it there 
is plenty of room, both for the lambs 
and the fully matured sheep of Christ, 
to feed and grow continually. 

A PARABLE. 

Fix in your mind a picture of a fine 
large pasture surrounded by a strong 
and high fence- -the Law of God- 
which surrounds and keeps all the 
sheep within, but which recognizes no 
means of access to that fold-justified 
condition-except Christ, the door, 
faith in whose sacrifice for sin is the 
only way into the fold. All climbing 
into the fold by any other way are 
thieves and robbers. This is the pasture 
provided by the Good Shepherd 
for his sheep, for whom he once laid 
down his life. Into the true fold of 
Christ quite a flock of sheep have entered. 
They belong to the true Shepherd; 
but as we look before us at the 
grassy slopes, only a few sheep, a little 
flock indeed, seem to be enjoying the 
liberty of the fold-the liberty wherewith 
Christ hath made them free. 
Where are the others? We look and 
see inside the door, on either side of 
the pathway, small enclosures. Over 
each is written its peculiar name-Presbyterian, 
Methodist, Baptist, Second 
Adventist, Roman Catholic, Greek 
Catholic, Episcopalian, Lutheran, etc. 
Looking at these pens we find them to 
differ. Some are built like prisons with 
iron frames and bars and chains, others 
less strong, and some are merely marked 



out "dead lines" over which the 

sheep understand that they must not go. 

These pens are full of sheep, but they 
are weak, delicate and sickly for lack of 
proper exercise and fresh, nourishing 
food. They are regularly fed, but only 
upon husks, with occasionally a little 
milk, but they eat without relish and 
get no good from it. Many of them 
are leaner and poorer than when first 
they entered the fold, and some have 
become blind. Strange to say all 
seem to be perfectly satisfied, each with 
his own pen, and very seldom does one 
attempt to escape. 

Perplexed to know why these should 
thus submit to be penned, we watched 
to see how they were induced to enter 
the various enclosures. As the sheep 
entered by faith the fold of Christ 
through the only door, under-shepherds 
who had been appointed to help the 
sheep to find and appreciate the pastures 
of the entire fold, had conceived 
that they knew better than the Chief 
Shepherd how to manage the flock, and 
accordingly they had constructed these 
various pens. Each class stood at the 
door of his own, and as the new sheep 
came in, they tried to impress upon 
each, both by manner and voice, first of 
all the necessity of getting into some of 
the many pens; and secondly, each one 
tried to show the superiority of the one 
he represented. As a consequence, 
nearly all the sheep which entered got 
penned, and only a few passed on to 
enjoy all the liberty of the fold. The 
under-shepherds sought continually to 
impress upon their sheep that the free 
sheep were heretics and en route to 
destruction. 

We watched to see what would be 
the end of this matter, for we learned 
that the Chief Shepherd was expected 
by some, and we knew that his coming 



would soon demonstrate whether he 
approved of this dividing and imprisoning 
His flock. The under- shepherds 
mostly claimed that he would not come 
for a long time yet. 

Presently among the free sheep we 
heard great rejoicing. We looked and 
found that the Chief- shepherd had come 
quietly, unobservedly ("as a thief"), and 
was now recognized by some of the 
sheep, and hence the rejoicing. Some 
of those imprisoned heard the Shepherds 
voice; they looked and listened, 
yet could scarce believe. It was indeed, 
the voice of the shepherd as he 
tended and ordered his flock. All who 
were his true sheep seemed to hear his 
voice condemning the penning process 
and saying unto his sheep: "Come out, 
my people." 

Some leaped the fences and gained 
liberty and food from the Shepherds 
hand. But some were so weak and 
faint for lack of nourishment that they 
trembled with fear and dreaded the 
under- shepherds too much to come out. 
We noticed outside the fences that some 
of the free sheep brought food to the 
bars, and thus some of the weak ones 
were strengthened and then came out. 
The under-shepherds, meanwhile, were 
alert with redoubled vigilance, and by 
varying policies sought to keep the 
control of their (?) flocks. Some denounced 
and scoffed at those without, 
and threatened the sheep within; and 
others redoubled the customary exercises, 
the "forms of godliness." 

We waited to see the outcome, and saw 
the unfaithful under-shepherds bound 
and beaten with stripes, the prison pens 
all destroyed, and the fold used as designed 
-the flock one, its name one, and 
its head Christ Jesus. 



R538 : page 3 

"LEARN WHAT THIS MEANETH." 

"Go ye and learn what this meaneth, I desire 
mercy and not sacrifice. "— v Matt. 9:13 V -R.V. 

This injunction is just as pertinent 
now as it was when Jesus gave it, yet 
we cannot but think, according to our 
experience and observation, that if he 
were to make the same remark now to 
those who, "after the most straitest 
sect" of their religion, live Pharisees, it 
would be met by some such words as 
the following: "Why, Lord, do you 
ask us to learn the meaning of those 
old sayings of the prophets? They 
are expressed in language that is highly 
figurative and are so full of symbols 

R539 : page 3 

and metaphors that it is impossible for 
us to understand them; indeed we think 
we ought not to pry into such things." 

But this was an important lesson, 
and Jesus wished to call their attention 
to it. His friendship with publicans 
and sinners seemed to them to be out 
of order and so they were questioning 
the disciples, doubtfully, regarding it, 
and this called forth the statement of 
Jesus quoted above. 

It is doubtful if they ever learned 
that Gods work in Christ was not to 
sacrifice the world, but to save it, for, 
says Jesus, "The Son of man is not 
come to destroy mens lives but to save 
them." fLuke 9:56 v ). When Christ 
Jesus speaks we may see at the time 
but one phase of what is meant, while 
he causes the word spoken to span the 
everlasting relations of the subject. 

When Jesus, in v Matt. 12:7\ referred 



to these same words of the prophet 
Ho sea 6:6 V ), he did so in connection 
with the question of the observance of 
the Sabbath, saying, "If ye had known 
what this meaneth, I desire mercy and 
not sacrifice, ye would not have condemned 
the guiltless." This was equivalent 
to saying that they did not know 
its meaning. Then, rather peculiarly 
comes in the words, "For the Son of 
man is Lord of the Sabbath." 

In both these cases it was the lovingkindness 
of Jesus that disturbed their 
Pharisaical natures and called forth their 
opposition. It is the mercy of God in 
Christ toward the world that distressed 
the Pharisees of Jesus time, and distresses 
the same generation now; for 
"this generation" of vipers (this kind 
or class) has not yet passed away and 
will not have passed away until all the 
prophecy of the twenty-fourth chapter 
of Matthew is fulfilled. CMatt. 24:34 v ). 

Those who are not in spirit with 
Christ Jesus have ever been opposed to 
having mercy shown to the world in a 
limited way and time, professing to believe 
that Christ came to save the 
world, but yet that only a small proportion 
of them will be saved in any sense; 
that Jesus came to save men from the 
calamity which befel the race in Adam, 
but will only half, or not half, succeed. 

They think that when men die in 
Adam they pass a line beyond which 
mercy and the power of Christ to save, 
cannot go, thus limiting the wisdom 
and the power of God, "who will have 
all men to be saved and come to the 
KNOWLEDGE of the truth." fl Tim. 2:4 V ). 

It is "a thing incredible" with them 
that God should raise the dead, though 
they profess to believe in a "resurrection 
of the dead, both of the just and 
unjust," but still if one talks about the 
real resurrection of all men to actual 



life and hope again, "this generation," 
like their fathers who so beset Jesus, 
cry out in disgust, and act as though 
they thought of us as they did of Paul 
when he spoke of being sent "far 
hence unto the Gentiles," "away with 
such a fellow from the earth, for it is not 
fit that he should live." fActs 22:22\) 

How strange it seems to us, that the 
love of God so strikingly manifest in the 
gift of his Son, should be so buried up 
under papal rubbish as to make it seem 
to have no existence. 

That the restitution of all things, 
spoken of by the mouth of all the holy 
prophets," should be entirely dropped 
out of the teaching of the nominal 
church, and the destruction of most 
things substituted, shows the need of 
their "learning what this meaneth, I 
desire mercy and not sacrifice: for the 
Son of man is Lord of the Sabbath." 
But it also shows, as Jesus said, that 
these things are hid from the wise and 
prudent and revealed unto babes. In 
the Sabbath just now approaching, that 
mercy will shine forth in "the exceeding 
riches of his grace." But many do not 
wish to "learn what this meaneth." 
How full of meaning were Jesus 
words! J. C. S. 



R539 : page 3 

OLD LANDMARKS. 

Some whose attention is drawn to the 
clearer light now shining on the word 
of God, fear as they say, to leave old 
landmarks. This is a false veneration, 
bred of fear, and it requires only a moments 
reflection to show this. 

We asked such an objector, recently, 
how much he meant by old. Did he 



mean creeds formulated fifty years ago? 
Would he go further back to the Wesleyan 
movement? Even that is but recent. 
Perhaps he had better go further 
back to the "Presbyterian" movement, 
or to the "Lutheran" or "Episcopalian," 
to find old landmarks. Still there is the 
same difficulty. All of these are but 
comparatively recent landmarks, and if 
a really old creed is wanted, the Roman 
Catholic certainly should have the preference 
on the score of age. 
He saw, finally, his mistake and acknowledged 

R539 : page 4 

that he had been looking 
at matters from a false standpoint, and 
that the only OLD LANDMARKS worthy 
of confidence, are the inspired teachings 
of our Lord and the Apostles-the 
very ones to which we always appeal as 
the only True Standards of the Church 
whose names are written in heaven. 

In this connection we take occasion 
to make some extracts from a recent 
number of "The Scotsman" (published 
in Edinburgh, Scotland,) in which it reviews 
a lecture by Dr. A. F. Mitchell, 
Prof, of Ecclesiastical History. It serves 
well to show how the thinkers of even 
old, slow Scotland are awakening to the 
absurdity of some of the doctrines which 
have separated the children of God into 
sects and denominations, and have 
largely succeeded in substituting the 
creeds and traditions of men for the 
Word of God. The extracts are as 
follows: 

"THE WESTMINSTER ASSEMBLY; ITS 
HISTORY AND STANDARDS: BEING 
THE BAIRD LECTURES FOR 1882. 

Readers will find in Dr. Mitchells 
lectures an intelligent and exceedingly 



well informed account of the origin, purpose, 
history and results of the famous 
Westminster Assembly, by one who has 
made a special study of the subject. 

The intrinsic importance of the Westminster 
Confession, and its position as 
a test for our University Theological 
Chairs, cause us just now to turn with 
more interest and curiosity to its origin 
and authorship. In June, 1643, an ordinance 
was issued by Parliament calling 
that Assembly which met to settle a pure 
faith for England and framed those 
Standards which were adopted in Scotland. 
The principle on which representative 
divines were chosen was, that two 
should be elected from each English 
county, each University, and the Channel 
Islands, one for each county in 
Wales, and four for the city of London; 
while Scottish Commissioners were only 
invited to be present. In all, about 160 
divines and laymen were appointed, 
each member who attended receiving 
four shillings a day for expenses. Although 
in the list of those called we find 
a few names of reputation for learning 
and ability, it is impossible to say that 
they represented the best scholarship 
and most cultured views of the age. 
We miss in the roll several men, famous 
still for ripe learning, high theological 
attainments and grasp of intellect, who 
would have been fittest to join in this 
memorable Synod, though they would 
have opposed many of its decisions; 
while in the number are a host of estimable 
but utterly obscure men, whose 
support gives no weight and adds no 
value to one dogmatic conclusion of the 
meeting. 

It is evident that the orthodox see 
nothing absurd, nothing humorous in 
the opinions of these men being binding 
on after generations of clergy and all 
future theological Professors in our universities, 



centuries after these respectable 
gentlemen themselves, having quitted 
their fleshy tabernacles, have peradventure 
discovered, to their surprise, in 
another and better world, that they have 
been quite mistaken, and the General 
Assembly of the firstborn does not hold 
or enforce any Calvinistic creeds on its 
elect members. Even when they were 
deliberating on most weighty articles, 
the attendance was so small that the 
three committees were reduced to a 
quorum of six each; and we find in full 
Assembly only forty out of a hundred 
and fifty voting on a dogma, which has 
henceforth been imposed on the minds 
and consciences of millions of Presbyterians. 
Yet these worthy members confidently 
discover the hidden decrees of 
God and decide the fate of men, of angels, 
of devils and of infants: they interpret 
the most debatable parts of Scripture, 
and the most perplexing parts of 
Pauline dialects and simile; they formulate 
the most mysterious purposes of 
Providence. 

It is marvelous to think that these 
decisions by men whose opinions on the 
simplest points of politics, agriculture 
and physics, we would not listen to, 
should be binding on the nineteenth century, 
though the whole tide of thought 
has left them dry behind. Criticism has 
shown that it supports conclusions on 
corrupt texts, and on misinterpreted 
passages. Science has proved that it 
makes assertions which are profoundly 
erroneous. Advancing civilizations and 
higher cultivation have shown that its 
views of the purpose of God can be contrary 
to the true humanity on which we 
base our elementary ideas of the nature 
of the Deity. If the Assembly, whose 
views were discarded by the English 
Church a few years after, had been held 
a hundred years earlier, it would have 



been Roman Catholic; if it had been 
held fifty years later it would have been 
Arminian; what, then, gives perpetual 
authority in Scotland to this Calvinistic 
parenthesis in ecclesiastical history and 
doctrine? It is difficult to see why the 
theological views of the seventeenth 
century should be taught in our university 
chairs any more than the scientific 
opinions of that age. 

Suppose it had been laid down that 
every Professor of Medicine and Surgery 

R540 : page 4 

in future should conform to the 

standard of an association of doctors of 

1643, we should find them now teaching 

the most ghastly methods of therapeutics, 

insisting on drugs which ruin 

the carnal constitution, and practicing 

phlebotomy, which drains the human 

being of his blood, increasing insanity 

by the means taken to cure it, and denouncing 

the circulation of the blood as 

a flagrant heresy. If, in our Chairs of 

science, the opinions of the Royal Society, 

founded in 1660, were still binding 

we should find in natural philosophy, in 

geology, in chemistry, opinions taught, 

as in Roman Catholic institutions, as 

purest science and undoubted facts, 

which research has exploded and sent 

long ago into the limbo of extinct notions 

and curiosities of by-gone credulity 

and ignorance. Why, then, 

should the notions, on far more difficult, 

obsolete points, by this Assembly, 

be held as sacred and imperative, and 

entitled to hold the minds of posterity 

under the fatal law of intellectual 

mortmain? 

Still, must each Professor teach, under 
the yoke of their "dead hand," the inspiriting 
doctrine of total depravity, 
which holds that man is so corrupt that 



he can do no good thing, and yet that 
he will be damned if he does not do it; 
that he deserves eternal torments for 
sin; that millions are doomed for not 
accepting a gospel which they never 
heard; that it is the duty of the civil 
power to punish and extirpate heresy; 
that the world was made in six days, 
although the geological Professor in 
the same college will tell his students 
that the world was millions of years 
without a human being. That it is the 
"elect infants" only who are saved; 
that "God as a righteous judge doth 
blind and harden" the wicked. Such 
doctrines are denied by the vast majority 
of civilized people, and discarded 
by the highest, clearest minds and 
hearts in Christendom; yet still Professors 
of Theology are bound by these 
standards, are forced to shut their eyes 
and mouths to all that speculation, 
learning, science have taught for centuries, 
and are endowed by the State to 
teach the opinions of a few estimable 
but erroneous gentlemen, who, after 
much prayer and contention, agreed 
upon them more than two hundred 
years ago. 

Dr. Mitchell, whose views are interesting 
only as specimens of other admirers 
of the Confession of Faith, is 
not unconscious of some difficulties in 
maintaining some dogmas which are 
contrary to fact, science and humanity; 
and he has his "answers to objections," 
which he gives with an air of profound 
satisfaction and with complete unsuccess. 
The Confession says the creation 
of the world took place in six days, 
"which now almost all orthodox divines 
grant it did not." We therefore 
naturally conclude that these "orthodox 
divines," as regards the Confession, are 
heretics. Not at all, says Dr. Mitchell, 
who is in the same case; these words, 



he argues, are almost identical with 
those in Scripture, and therefore must 
be interpreted in the same non-literal, 
non-natural sense, as divines conveniently, 
but uncritically, put on those in 
Genesis. Now, can the lecturer deny 
that the Westminster Assembly meant 
them as six literal twenty-four hour 
days? Can the lecturer deny that 
these words are given as the statement 
of an historical fact, and are not a quotation 
which may be accepted as metaphorical 
or poetic, if we please? It is 
nothing to the point to show that some 
writers-Dean Colet or Philo-had 
previously regarded the "days" in a 
figurative sense; and it is ridiculous to 
say that the Assembly showed their intention 
not to exclude such a fanciful 
interpretation because they did not 
write "six natural or literal days." 

If we are allowed to treat the standards 
when we choose as metaphorical, on the 
ground that the Scripture passages 
they paraphrase are figurative, we shall 
be led into a delightful chaos, and have 
a most comprehensive Church. The 
phrase, "Son of God" is figurative; 
"redemption" is a Pauline metaphor 
from Greek law; "adoption" a metaphor 
from Roman law; "everlasting" and 
"eternal" punishment have been interpreted 
in various ways in Scripture; 
may we, therefore, explain them for 
ourselves with corresponding variety in 
the Confession? and if not, on Dr. 
Mitchells theory, why not? What is 
allowed to the Calvinist may be allowed 
to the Universalist and the Unitarian. 

But, in fact, the whole notion is 
absurd. The Standard is a formal, 
prosaic, legal document, to be interpreted 
by what it says. The lecturer, 
further, in argumentive despair maintains 
that when it is said, "elect infants 
dying in infancy are saved," it is not to 



be inferred from these words that there 

are any who are not elect! If so, we 

would have fancied these divines, so 

shrewd as not to say "literal days," 

would have been equally shrewd to 

omit "elect," in order to prevent a misconception, 

seeing that the opinion was 

so prevalent that there were infants 

non-elect, and therefore lost. Besides, 

this notion that all dying infants were 

humanely elected to life because they 

should die before they have power and 

time to sin, is contradictory of the article 

in the Confession, which says that 

when God elects to salvation it is without 

any foresight of good works,... 

or any other thing in the creature, 

as conditions or causes moving 

him thereto." We greatly fear that Dr. 

Mitchell should be looked after. If he 

had lived in the Puritan age, he would 

have been violently denounced as a 

heretic, denied Church privileges by 

the ministers he reveres so deeply, or 

put in jail by the civil magistrate whose 

authority he respects so highly, and reduced 

to be an "ambassador in bonds." 

How is it that with so many disputable 
and denied doctrines in a Standard 
containing about 16,000 propositions, 
that in successive generations ministers 
accept and sign it without any hesitation, 
though ordinary men cannot 
agree together on twelve questions? 
It is a curious problem which we can 
only explain by supposing that perfect 
belief is required only when we swear 
to one or two articles, but that a reduction 
is allowed, as by grocers, on taking 
a quantity. Dr. Mitchell has issued a 
useful work, proving the urgent necessity 
for the abolition of tests in our 
Universities if we desire to see freedom 
of thought, honesty of assertion, and 
progress of religious opinion and theological 
knowledge. 



R541 : page 4 
RESTITUTION. 

The restoration of the world to their 
"former estate" (life on earth) is a doctrine 
held by few Christians to-day 
through lack of seeing the glorious 
"plan" of salvation" God has revealed 
to us in his word. When once you 
get hold of restitution as a starting-point, 
you will soon find that God has a "plan", 
and diligent study of Scripture will open 
your eyes to see Gods love and wisdom, 
if you will only believe what God says, 
and not "human traditions." "Seek, and 
ye shall find; knock, and it shall be 
opened unto you." 

We read in "Acts 3:21" of the times 
(years) of restitution of all things which 
God hath spoken by the mouth of all 
his holy prophets since the world began. 
And in "Rom. 8:21", "The creature itself 
shall be delivered from the bondage of 
corruption into the glorious liberty of 
the children of God." Yes; the man 
Christ Jesus gave himself a ransom for 
all ("1 Tim. 2:6"). By the righteousness 
of one the free gift came upon all men 
unto justification of life" ("Rom. 5:18"). 
"For as in Adam all die, even so in 
Christ shall all be made alive" 
fl Cor. 15:22\) 

All praise be to God, Christ has 
bought the "world," and in due time 
will deliver them all from the prison-house 
of death, for he says, I have the 
keys of hades and of death ("Rev. 1:18".) 
But every man in his own 
order: Christ (the first-born from the 
dead,) the Head, then his body-the 
Church-after the Church has been 
glorified— the "world"— to their "former 



estate." For the earnest expectation of 
the creature waiteth for the manifestation 
of the sons of God fRom. 8:19^). 
Waiting and groaning (though ignorantly) 
for the Son of Righteousness to 
arise with healing in his wings. Then the 
promise to Abraham will be fulfilled: 
"In thee and in thy seed (The Christ) 
shall all the families of the earth be 
blessed." fGen. 28: 14\) 

Let us look at what the Prophets say 
about this glorious day (one thousand 
years.) Please read carefully the 
following: "Ps. 96:10-13"; "Isa. 11:1-10"; 
"61:4-11"; "65:17-25"; "Jer. 31:31-40"; 
"Ezek. 16:48 to end"; "28:25 and 26"; 
"34:24-31"; "Hos. 2:14-23"; 
"Rev. 21:3-5". After the world has 
been restored to their "former estate" 
under the righteous reign of "The 
Christ," it will be their "Judgment Day" 
(before the great "White Throne" of 
Truth), on trial for Eternal Life, having 
had a complete experience of good and 
evil in this present age, and then having 
full knowledge and power to obey. 
If they then willfully sin, they will die 
the second death-die for their own sin. 
CJer. 31:30"; "Acts 3:23"; "Rev. 21:8\) 

Truly we who see Gods plan can 
sing, Great and marvelous are thy 
works, Lord God Almighty; just and 
true are thy ways, thou King of nations. 
Who shall not fear thee, O Lord, and 
glorify thy name? for thou only art 
holy: For all nations shall come and 
worship before thee—for thy judgments 
are made manifest. Amen. Thy Kingdom 
come. ("Rev. 15:3 and 4\) 
R. COSSAR. 



R540 : page 4 

HIS WILL, OUR MEAT AND DRINK. 



The language of very many grateful 
hearts, who have realized their sins forgiven 
through the precious blood of 
Christ, has been, Lord, I will follow thee 
whithersoever thou goest. But very 
few, perhaps none at first, actually realized 
the full meaning of that covenant 
or promise; nevertheless the Master declares, 
"Him that cometh unto me I 
will in no wise cast out." fJohn 6:3T). 
But he would have us understand that 
it is no easy thing to follow him, for his 
was a thorny, difficult way, promising 
no gratification to the natural man. 

When on one occasion one came to 
Jesus, saying, "Lord, I will follow thee 
whithersoever thou goest," he replied: 
"Foxes have holes, and birds of the air 
have nests, but the Son of man hath 
not where to lay his head." fLuke 9:57,58\) 
That is to say, Are you willing, if 
need be, to be thus homeless and comfortless 
that thereby you may render 
greater service to our heavenly Father. 
It is my meat and drink to do his will. 
Shall it be yours also? It might be 
and sometimes is the case, that some 
can serve the Lord better by having a 
home and using its hospitality in the 
service. When, as was generally the 
case, the work in which Jesus was engaged 
called him about from place to 
place to preach in public, heal the sick, 
etc., he went, regardless of personal 
comfort. When near the homes of his 
disciples he often tarried with them; 
thus the home of Martha and Mary and 
Lazarus was often blessed with his 
presence; but most frequently after the 
toil of the day he sought repose for the 
night in the wilderness or on the mountains. 
Sometimes, however, when the 
interests of the work required it, he 
chose a regular dwelling place, for we 
read fJohn 1:38,39") that on one occasion 



two men were following Jesus, and 

R540 : page 5 

he, turning and seeing them follow him, 
said to them, "What seek ye?" And 
they said unto him, Master, "Where 
dwellest thou?" They wanted to have 
a personal interview with him, and 
therefore sought the retirement of his 
dwelling. Jesus said unto them, "Come 
and see. They went and saw where he 
dwelt and abode with him that day." 

We find the same principle governing 
the actions of the Apostles. As 
the work generally required them to be 
traveling, they not only gave up the 
comforts, but bravely endured the hardships, 
dangers and fierce persecutions 
that everywhere awaited them. At 
times now it might be expedient for the 
truths sake that the disciple have a 
home, as Paul found it expedient for 
the work, to abide in his own hired 
house for two years, where he received 
all that came unto him, preaching the 
kingdom of God, etc. Acts 28:3(T). 
It should likewise, be our meat and 
drink to do our Fathers will, as the 
necessities of the work may require it, 
homeless and friendless, to follow Jesus; 
or, if expedient to have a dwelling 
place, to use it in his service, having it 
entirely consecrated to his work. 

Another desiring to follow Jesus, even 
though, as he had just explained, it 
would be at the expense of great self-denial, 
said, "But suffer me first to go 
and bury my father." And "Jesus said 
unto him, Let the dead bury their dead, 
but go thou and preach the kingdom 
of God." Doubtless this young disciple 
dreaded to realize what was so generally 
the result with those who left all 
to follow Jesus, that their foes were they 
of their own household. He dreaded 



to incur his fathers displeasure and 

R541 : page 5 

thought to wait till his father was dead. 
Possibly his otherwise praiseworthy 
ambition was to add to the comfort and 
perhaps to the support and luxury of 
his declining years. 

Such an ambition would seem plausible 
and has proved a snare to many. 
They have permitted earthly ties to 
fetter and hinder them, saying, my 
family or my parents-those dear to me 
by human ties-shall have all the comfort, 
ease and luxury that my time and 
labor can supply. This has been my 
ambition in the past, and should I now 
withhold any part of that which they 
have come to expect at my hand, in 
order that I might follow the Master, 
my motive, my love would be 
misinterpreted. 

Under this pressure, many come to 
the conclusion that they will wait until 
these hindrances are removed, until 
such no longer need their care; but this 
is only a device of the adversary, who 
well knows that procrastination is not 
only the thief of time, but also of interest 
and inclination to heavenly 
things. Now, while our Lord would 
not have us ignore our natural responsibilities, 
and teaches that he who does 
not provide for those naturally dependent 
upon him is worse than an infidel, 
an unbeliever, he does teach that our 
consecration should be to God, and 
whatever of human responsibility devolves 
upon us should be discharged 
as unto him. 

Thus, in all we do, whether it be in 
"providing things honest in the sight 
of all men" for those of necessity depending 
upon us, and thus honoring 
our Master, and improving every available 



opportunity which, by economy of 

time and means, may be gained for 

spreading the good news-the Gospel 

of the Kingdom; or whether it be possible, 

by self-denial, to gain all our time, 

and utilize all our efforts in directly 

and widely proclaiming the Gospel, if 

we would follow our Lord it will be our 

meat and drink to do our Fathers will. 

"Let the dead bury their dead." All 

the world is reckoned of God as dead, 

being still under condemnation. Let 

them attend to their own affairs, work 

out their own ideas and think what 

they will of our peculiar ways. We 

must expect to be misunderstood, misrepresented, 

and to bear the reproach 

of Christ. But dont let that hinder 

us; it is our business to preach the 

gospel by every talent and opportunity 

we can command. 

"Another also said, Lord, I will 
follow thee, but let me first go and bid 
them farewell which are at home at my 
house. But Jesus said, No man having 
put his hand to the plough and 
looking back is fit for the kingdom of 
God." This one, though also desiring 
to follow Jesus, cast a lingering look 
behind to the things and friends once 
dearest. He thought he was willing to 
sacrifice earthly comforts and endure 
hardness as a good soldier; he did not 
desire to procrastinate and not begin to 
follow Jesus until his Father was dead, 
or the prejudices of his earthly friends 
were overcome. No; he only wanted 
to bid them farewell, to confer with 
them, and to gain their approval of his 
course. To follow Jesus was not yet 
the chief and all-absorbing thought. 

Jesus does not say it will be impossible 
for such a one to reach the kingdom, 
but that in that condition of mind 
he is unfit. And the strong probabilities 
are, that unless such a one takes a 



prompt, firm and decided stand, turning 
his back entirely to present allurements, 
and setting his face resolutely 
towards the prize of the high calling, he 
will soon become permanently unfit for 
the kingdom. 

May those who have consecrated all, 
and thus put their hand to the plough, 
be enabled to keep their eye on the 
heavenly prize, that its glory may keep 
them from looking back, and that the 
fascination of former human ties may 
not hold them in bondage. Like our 
Lord, may it be our meat and drink to 
do Jehovahs will. MRS. C. T. R. 



R541 : page 5 

"SALVATION UNTO THE END OF THE 
EARTH." 

Before leaving his disciples our Lord 
said, "I have yet many things to say 
unto you, but you cannot bear them 
now. Howbeit when he, the Spirit of 
truth, is come, he will guide you into 
all truth". ..and will show you 
things to come;. ..he shall receive 
of mine, and shall show it unto 
you." CJohn 16:12-14\) 

After his death and resurrection, when 
the waiting Church were baptized with 
the Spirit, at once the things which the 
prophets had written and which they 
had hitherto been unable to understand, 
began to be made plain to them. 

Peter did the opening work and 
called attention to the glad tidings as 
shown by the Prophets. He first 
quoted the prophecy of Joel fchap. 2:28,29 v ) 
concerning the promise of the 
outpouring of the Spirit upon Gods 
servants and handmaids and upon all 
flesh. His next reference was to 



Davids prophecy of our Lords exaltation. 
And the Spirit calling to mind 
the glowing language of the various 
Prophets, he boldly proclaimed the 
restitution of all things, declaring that 
it was "spoken by all the holy prophets 
since the world began" fActs 3:2T). 

This was the work of the Spirit as 
the comforter, bringing to their remembrance 
the statements of the prophets, 
and revealing the significance of those 
statements, thus instructing and comforting 
them by showing them things 
to come. We would naturally expect 
that joy would fill all hearts at the 
sound of such blessed tidings; but it 
was not so. The religious teachers of that 
day were grieved at this teaching and 
sought to silence them, but Peter and 
John, being filled with the Spirit, replied: 
"Whether it be right in the sight 
of God to hearken unto you more than 
unto God, judge ye: for we cannot but 
speak the things which we have seen 
and heard"-what we know of Gods 
plan. 

We find exactly the same condition 
of things to-day. While those who are 
filled with the Spirit rejoice with joy 
unspeakable and full of glory, the lukewarm 
professors turn a deaf ear to the 
truth and are grieved that the people 
are being taught these things. 

Since Peter has called our attention 
to all the prophets as heralds of the 
good news, we have been noticing particularly 
some of those uttered by 
Isaiah. Some will reluctantly admit 
that some time in the distant future 
there will be a restoration of Israel to 
their own land-that is, of all those living 
in that day; but for what purpose 
or advantage, either to themselves or 

R542 : page 5 



others, they seem to have no idea. But 

Isaiah makes it very plain that the 

great restitution refers to nothing so insignificant. 

In the v following texf Jehovah 

is addressing our Lord Jesus, 

saying, that to raise up or restore Israel 

is "a light thing," only a small part of 

the work. The restitution spoken by 

the mouth of all the prophets since the 

world began, means "salvation unto the 

end of the earth." "And now, said Jehovah, 

it hath been a light thing that 

thou art to me for a servant, to raise up 

the tribes of Jacob, and the preserved of 

Israel to bring back; and I have given 

thee for a light of nations, to be my salvation 

unto the end of the earth" flsa. 49:6'-- 

Young). 

This implies a resurrection-restitution 
-of all the living and dead ones as 
Peter preached. In the light of this 
declaration from the mouth of Jehovah 
himself-that Christ shall be for salvation 
to the end of the earth- we read in 
v Isa. 35" the glowing description of that 
time, now near at hand, when "The 
wilderness and the solitary place shall 
be glad for them." "They (earths redeemed 
millions) shall see the glory of 
the Lord and the excellency of our 
God," then made so manifest to all. 
In "chap. 26, verse 19\ God emphatically 
declares: "Thy dead men shall 
live... Awake and sing ye that 
dwell in dust.. .and the earth 
shall cast out the dead." And Jeremiah 
adds his testimony, saying: "They shall 
come again from the land of the enemy" 
-death fJer. 31:16"). Such tidings 
seem almost too good to believe, but 
the Lord reminds us that it is He who 
has declared this, saying: "For my 
thoughts are not your thoughts, neither 
are your ways my ways, saith the Lord. 
For as the heavens are higher than the 
earth, so are my ways higher than your 



ways, and my thoughts [plans] than 
your thoughts [plans].... For ye 
shall go out [of the prison of death] 
with joy, and be led forth with 
peace: the mountains and the hills 
shall break forth before you into singing, 
and all the trees of the field shall 
clap their hands" flsa. 55:8-12^). 

Those whose faith staggers not at the 
promises of God, are commissioned to 
encourage those of weaker faith flsa. 35:3,4"): 
"Strengthen ye the weak 
hands and confirm the feeble knees. 
Say to them that are of a fearful heart, 
Be strong, fear not: behold your God 
will come with vengeance (to bind the 
adversary- Satan- and destroy his 
works-" Rev. 20:2"; "1 John 3:8"), even 
God with a recompence; he will come 
and save you." "Verse 5": "Then the eyes 
of the blind shall be opened, and the 
ears of the deaf shall be unstopped," 
for "The knowledge of the Lord shall 
fill the whole earth as the waters cover 
the sea" flsa. 1 1:9"), and all will be able 
to see and hear the truth. Streams of 
water (truth) shall break forth in 
the desert, "And the parched ground 
shall become a pool, and the thirsty 
land springs of water. In the habitation 
of dragons where each lay, shall be 
grass with reeds and rushes." When, 
under the reign of Christ, truth shall 
thus refresh the earth, error and vice 
(symbolized by dragons) shall give 
place to the rapid and healthy growth 
of virtue. 

"Verses 8 to 10" show the particularly 
favorable circumstances under which 
the world, during the next age, will be 
disciplined and restored. The way by 
which they will be led back to human 
perfection, is here called a high way, not 
a narrow way, such as that in which the 
consecrated of this age walk to gain the 
prize of the high calling to immortality, 



the Divine nature. We who are running 
for this prize find ourselves hedged 
about continually and sorely pressed by 
the adversary who, during the next age, 
will be bound. The easy and gradual 
ascent of the high way will be clear and 
plain to all, so that "the wayfaring 
man, though a fool, shall not err therein," 
for all the stones-stumbling blocks- 
shall be gathered out ("Isa. 62:10"). 
Present temptations to evil will be 
removed when Satan is bound and 
men will be saying, Come, let us 
go up to the mountain of the Lord, and 
he will teach us of his ways, and we 
will walk in his paths flsa. 2:3"). 

The work of restitution will be a 
gradual work, the awakening from 
death being only the beginning of it; 
it will require the whole thousand years 
to fully complete it. Those years are 
therefore called "the times (years) of 
restitution" ("Acts 3:21"). Only those 
who flee from the defilements of sin 
shall go on this high way of everlasting 
continuance of life. "Verse 9": 
"No lion shall be there, nor any ravenous 
beast shall go up thereon; it shall 
not be found there." All obstacles to 
growth and development of perfect 
manhood shall be removed, but the redeemed 
-all mankind ransomed from 
death by the precious blood of Christ- 
shall walk up to perfection if willing to 
forsake their sins. 

"Verse 10": "And the ransomed of 
the Lord shall return, and come to 
Zion with songs and everlasting joy 
upon their heads: they shall obtain joy 
and gladness, and sorrow and sighing 
shall flee away." When we realize that 
this salvation extends to all the families 
of the earth, we see the force of Jehovahs 
statement: "It hath been a light 
thing that thou art to me for a servant, 
to raise up the tribes of Jacob, and the 



preserved of Israel to bring back." 

Not only shall that work be accomplished, 

but, in addition to that, Christ 

is also given for a light to all nations, 

and for "salvation to the end of the 

earth." R. W. 



R542 : page 5 

THE TEN COMMANDMENTS. 

A correspondent writes: I understand 
you teach obedience to the commandments 
of God. Do you wish us to understand 
the Ten Commandments written 
on stone, delivered to Moses at Horeb? 

We reply, No; we are not under the 
law of commandments written on 
stone, in the sense of hoping to justify 
ourselves before God in keeping them. 
Israels experience when they were put 
under that Law is sufficient to prove to 
us, as Paul expresses, that, "By the 
deeds of the Law shall no flesh be justified 
in Gods sight." fRom. 3:20\) 
Hence we are very glad that we are 
"not under the Law, but under Grace" 
-favor. fRom. 6:14V11:6 V ; 'Gal. 5:4 V ; 
v Rom. 3:19-26\) We are glad that the 
Gentiles were never put under that Law 
as the Israelites were, for in mans present 
imperfect condition it must and does 
condemn every one under it and justifies 
none. We are glad for Israel too, 
that when Christ Jesus died and thus 
fulfilled the claims of the Law against 
all under it, that he thus became "the 
end of the Law for righteousness (or 
rightly terminated its dominion) to 
every one that believeth." fRom. 10:4\ 
and v Gal. 3:23,24\) 

But lest some should claim that these 
scriptures quoted, refer to what some 
designate the "ceremonial" law, we 



will give Scripture proof that it included 
the laws written on tables of stone-the 
Ten Commandments. These were 
given at Horeb or Mt. Sinai. (See 
v Exod. 19:20 and 34 v ) and are termed 
the "covenant" of the Law. (See v Deut. 5\) 
Paul tells us that that covenant 
justified only Jesus, who, by his sacrifice, 
justified believers, bringing them 
under a new covenant, not of law, but 
of favor, by his blood, and, being thus 
justified, enables us [the Gospel Church] 
to inherit the first covenant-the one 
made to Abrahams seed- which Paul 
declares the Law (covenant), made four 
hundred and thirty years after (at 
Sinai), did not disannul, but merely 
hindered until removed and fulfilled by 
Jesus. (See v Gal. 3:17- 19\) 

"Romans 1:T proves that the Ten 
Commandments were part of the Law, 
which Paul in the v preceding verse" and 
the entire chapter shows that we are 
delivered from. There can be no question 
that THE LAW which said, "Thou 
shalt not covet," is that contained in 
the Ten Commandments, and this is 
the very law which Christ made Paul 
free from-by fulfilling its claims for 
him. (See v Rom. 8:l-4\) 

"Do we then make the Law of God 
of none effect [useless] through [the 
doctrine of] faith, [which we are now 
preaching]? Nay, "we establish the 
Law." fRom. 3:31\) First, we are 
proving that Gods law is nothing short 

R542 : page 6 

of perfection, and that none but a perfect 

person could keep it, and that it 

was given to prove to Israel their imperfection, 

and thus as pedagogue to lead 

them to Christ, from whom to receive 

as a gift, by faith in his blood, that life 

and perfection which they found they 



could not claim or obtain under the 
LAW. OGal. 3:24-29\) 

Secondly, our Head Christ Jesus who 
made us free from that Law under 
which Israel was placed, gave us 
another instead, saying, "A new commandment 
I give unto you that ye 
LOVE one another." fJohn 13:34\) 
This law of LOVE under which we are 
placed, contains the spirit of the Law to 
Israel-the Ten Commandments, and 
even more. This, the Apostle James 
terms the "royal law." fChap. 2:8\) 
And the same apostle who wrote that 
we are "delivered from the Law," 
CRom. 1:6"), and called it "Moses 
Law," OHeb. 10:28"), and that "Christ 
is the end of the Law for righteousness 
to every one that believeth," fRom. 10:4"), 
and that now "we are not under 
the Law," fRom. 6:15"), said also that 
he was not without law to God, BUT 
UNDER THE LAW to Christ, fl Cor. 9:21") 
[i.e., our responsibility is transferred 
from the Father to our Lord 
Jesus who bought us, hence we are no 
longer under Jehovahs Law given at 
Sinai, but under a new law or arrangement 
-"under Law TO CHRIST." Yet, 
since Christ is Jehovahs agent in 
making the new arrangement, and since 
his law is in harmony with and built on 
our Fathers law, as a temporary help 
for us, until we are restored to perfection; 
therefore, we may say with Paul, 
that we are not without law to God, 
even though "the Father judgeth no 
man but hath committed all judgment 
unto the Son."] 

R543 : page 6 

The Law under which we come 
through Christ differs from "Moses 
Law" in this-that the latter judges 
men by the deeds of the flesh, while the 



former (Christs Law) judges by the intents 
of the mind or will. Under 
Moses law, all men being imperfect 
through Adamic sin, none could DO 
perfectly, however much they might 
desire; hence, by deeds, no flesh was 
ever justified by that Law-all were 
condemned. fRom. 3 :20\) But now, 
under the new law of love, we walk by 
spirit or mind after this new law. We 
may not always succeed perfectly in 
doing all which we wish or will to do, 
but under this law the will is judged 
and not the deed. Hence all believers 
consecrated to God can fulfill this 
"Royal law," even though the new 
mind is in an imperfect "earthen 
vessel." 

And while thus excused from the letter 
of the law, all "believers "-united 
to and one with Jesus-have fulfilled it, 
i.e., so long as we in heart observe 
Jesus law, so long we may abide in 
him; and abiding in him, we have share 
in the actual fulfillment of the LETTER 
OF THE LAW as accomplished by him. 
Thus the righteousness of the Law is 
fulfilled in us, who walk not after the 
flesh, but after the spirit. 

It can readily be seen that two laws 
would be useless. And, since all in 
Christ are under the law of Love, they 
cannot also be under the Law of Moses. 
The law under which we are makes 
allowance for all the imperfections of 
each, whereas "Moses Law" required 
actual obedience and made no allowance; 
for it does not read, he that 
willeth and trieth to do, but "The man 
that doeth these things shall live," and 
"cursed is every one that continueth 
not in all things which are written in the 
book of the Law to DO them." 
CGal. 3:10,12\) 

Where LOVE is the law of the mind, it 
influences and, to a great extent, controls 



the imperfect and weak body. 
None thus actuated by love have any 
desire to violate the law of commandments. 
It is useless to say to such a 
one, "Thou shalt not steal"; "thou 
shalt not kill"; "thou shalt not bear 
false witness against thy neighbor." 
He has no desire to do those things, for 
love prompts to an opposite course. 
And if, through weakness of the flesh, 
such a one realizes that on some occasion 
he has failed to exemplify the law 
of love, no one is more grieved than 
himself. 

But some man will say: What is there 
in the "Ten Commandments" which any 
one cannot keep perfectly? That you so 
regard them proves that you, like the 
Pharisees, look not at the full measure or 
spirit of those commandments. If we 
will take the Masters teaching on the 
subject, we find that these Ten Commandments 
demand absolute perfection 
of thought and deed for their fulfillment. 
Jesus summarized their teaching, saying: 
Thou shalt love the Lord thy God 
with all thy heart, and with all thy 
soul, and with all thy mind. This is 
the first and great commandment, and 
the second is like unto it, Thou shalt 
love thy neighbor as thyself. On these 
two commandments hang all the Law. 
OMatt. 22:37-40\) Now let us see, is 
this a hard commandment? Yea, 
verily; none but perfect men could 
keep it. To love God thus is to subject 
every other thing and interest to his 
pleasure. To love a neighbor thus 
would insure that you would neither 
kill him, nor steal from him, nor covet 
his goods. Besides, look at Jesus definition 
of the sixth and seventh commandments. 
CMatt. 5:22,28\) 

Viewed from this standpoint, we see 
why none of the Jews ever could keep 
the Law and why we need to get into 



Christ, in order that the righteousness 
of the Law might be fulfilled in us. 

THE THIRD COMMANDMENT. 

Remember the Sabbath day to keep it holy. 
Six days shalt thou labor and do all thy work: 
but the Seventh Day is the Sabbath of the Lord 
thy God, in it thou shalt not do any work, etc. 
OExod. 20:8-1 1\) 

If this is a part of the Law whose 
control over us was removed by Jesus 
death, and which never was given 
to the gospel church, but whose righteousness 
(or right-meaning) is fulfilled 
in us, then all may see that, to any 
recognizing the liberty wherewith 
Christ hath made us free, there can be 
no bondage to the observance of any 
day. And in harmony with this 
thought is Pauls statement that "one 
man esteemeth one day above another; 
another esteemeth every day alike: 
Let every man be fully persuaded in his 
own mind." fRom. 14:5\) And if he 
shall make up his mind on this subject, 
from the foregoing statements of the 
Apostle relative to the Law, he will, 
doubtless, be persuaded with Paul and 
with us, that since Jesus has blotted out 
the handwriting of ordinances which 
was against us, which was contrary to 
us, and took it out of the way nailing it 
to his cross; therefore, henceforth, no 
man should judge us in meat, or in 
drink, or in respect of an holy day, or 
of the new moon, or of the Sabbath 
days, which are a shadow of things to 
come. Wherefore, if we are dead with 
Christ from the rudiments of the world, 
why, as though living in the world, are 
ye subject to ordinances? fCol. 2:14,16,17,20\) 
To those in Christ there is 
no law on the subject except that of 
LOVE. They may celebrate any or no 



day as their love to God and man, and 
their judgment of what would glorify 
God and bless men may direct. 

The fact that the Law compelled a 
rest every seven days, and that mankind 
seemed to require it, is an excellent 
reason why such a day should be 
observed. And love to God and a 
desire to worship him and to commune 
with his children is one of the best 
reasons for observing such a day. As 
to which of the seven days should be 
the best to observe, the church very 
early in its history decided that the first 
day of the week would be very appropriate, 
since on it Jesus arose from the 
dead and met with them and caused 
their hearts to burn as he expounded 
unto them the Scriptures. fLuke 24:27, 32\) 
Accordingly, we find that to 
meet on that day was very common 
among them, even before they came to 
appreciate fully their liberty, and while 
they still, to a great extent, observed 
the seventh day also. fActs 2:1\ 
Pentecost came on the first day of the 
week. v Acts 20:7 V and v l Cor. 16:2\) 
Paul was the Lords special agency in 
leading the other apostles and the 
Church in general into true liberty, and 
as he taught that every day was alike, 
so he practiced; and we find that sometimes 
he met with the Church on the 
first day, and sometimes went into the 
synagogues on the Sabbath, or seventh 
day. 

The question of Sabbath-keeping, 
like that of circumcision, is one that 
depends on the spirit or intent of the 
observer. As Paul testified to those 
who practiced circumcision in his day, 
so we testify to Sabbath (or seventh 
day) keepers now, viz.: If they keep the 
seventh day or any other day as under 
"Mosess Law," and in hope of keeping 
that Law and gaining its promised blessings, 



they are fallen from grace, and at 
present Christ is profiting them nothing, 
for the Jew did just so before Christ 
came. CGal. 5:2-4\) 

We cannot gain life by keeping the 
Law, for none can keep it perfectly, and 
to keep the third commandment and to 
fail in any other point, deprives of life 
and condemns to death under the Law 
covenant just as surely as though the 
whole law were violated, for "whosoever 
shall keep the whole law, and yet 
offend in one point, he is guilty of all." 
C James 2:10\) Hence that entire covenant 
was set aside on account of human 
imperfection, and the "new covenant," 
written and sealed with the blood of 
Christ, takes its place-the covenant 
which speaks of favor, life and peace 
through the righteousness of him who 
bought us with his own precious blood. 

Let us remember that under the Law 
the seventh day was commanded for 
rest only, and Paul gives us the key 
when he declares that "WE WHICH 
HAVE BELIEVED do enter into REST"; 
for he who trusts in Jesus as his justifier 
RESTS from attempting to do the 
work for himself and accepts it as a 
finished work-a gift of God through 
Jesus Christ our Lord. Those who 
thus rest in Jesus, do as God the 
Father did; for having created man, 
whose sin and fall he foresaw, Jehovah 
rested the entire matter in the hands of 
Christ to redeem men and destroy sin 
and death during the seventh day. 
(Seven thousand years from Adam till 
the end of the Millennium.) [See article 
"Creative Week" in back issue-of 
which we have no more on hand.] 
fHeb. 4:3- 10\) Whosoever thus believes 
in Jesus, as the propitiation for 
his sins, has "joy and peace (rest) in 
believing" fRom. 15:13 v )-a rest not 
transitory but permanent; not partial, 



but complete; not of one day, but of 
all, and which was well illustrated in 
the seventh day which typified it; for 
seven is the symbol of completeness. 
Since this REST is the gift of Gods 
love, and since we enter it when we 
come under the "royal law," is it not, 
therefore, fulfilled in love? for love is 
the fulfilling of the Law-to all in 
Christ Jesus who appreciate their standing 
and walk as becometh saints. 

page 6 

CRom. 8:1\) 



R544 : page 6 

THE OBJECT OF OUR LORDS RETURN. 



DISCOURSE NO. 2. 

We continue to-day our subject of 
last Sunday-"The object of our 
Lords return." To briefly review: 
We found that past ages and the present 
Gospel age have been but steps 
which God is taking toward the conversion 
of the world; that although He 
has not sought directly to bring all 
men to a knowledge of Himself (which 
is essential to salvation) but has confined 
that knowledge to a small proportion 
of His creatures who were thus 
elect, or chosen; as for instance the 
patriarchs of early ages, fleshly Israel 
of the last or law dispensation, and 
until the present century to but a small 
number of earths millions, even during 
this Gospel age. Yet, all of this was 
but a means toward the desired end- 
"The reconciling of the world unto 



Himself." 

We see that all Gods promises center 
in this Church, now being selected; 
that she is now as "the body of Christ" 
filling up the measure of His sufferings, 
and that when all the members have 
been selected from the world, and have 
been "made perfect through suffering," 
the Church will be joined to Christ 
Jesus, "whom God gave to be head over 
the Church, which is His body," or, as 
expressed in another simile, the "chaste 
virgin," will be united to the heavenly 
Bridegroom, and they twain become 
one, and this one-the Christ complete 
--is to be the heir of all things. 

This new creation (the Christ) we 
found to be the promised seed which is 
to "bruise the serpents head"-crush 
and destroy evil. So we read, "The 
very God of peace shall bruise Satan 
under your feet [under Jesus and his 
church] shortly. This same "seed of 
Abraham" (which seed is Christ) is the 
seed "in whom all the families of the 
earth shall be blessed." "And if ye be 
Christs, then are YE Abrahams seed 
and heirs." CGal. 3:29 v ). We found 
that the end of this age does not close 
the Churchs mission; that though now, 
while wheat and tares grow together 
until the harvest, the end of the world 
(age), her light shines but feebly, yet, 
when separated from the tares, and exalted 
with her Lord, then, with him she 
shall "shine forth as the Sun in the 
kingdom." This is the "Sun of Righteousness" 
which "shall arise with 
healing in his wings." 

We glanced at the glory of that 
Millennial day, wherein "there shall be 
no more curse," and "the knowledge of 
the Lord shall fill the whole earth," 
scattering the darkness of sin and ignorance 
and causing "wars to cease 
unto the ends of the earth." These are 



the "times of restitution," of which 
Peter speaks fActs 3:17,19"), which are 
due to begin when Christ comes. "For 
this, the whole creation groaneth and 
travaileth in pain together until now, 
waiting for the manifestation of the 
sons of God." fRom. 8:22,19") 

But let us leave this bright and 
pleasant picture of the coming day, of 
which, with the poet, we could say: 
"Haste thee along, ages of glory, 
Haste the glad time when Christ appears," 
and turning look at a dark picture. 
While it will be so favorable to those 
who may live in the "Millennial Age," 
what about those who have died before 
the plan of God has thus reached its 
fulness? During the 6,000 years since 
creation, there have lived on the earth 
about 143 billions of human beings. 
Of these the very broadest estimate 
that could be made with reason, would 
be that less than one billion were Saints 
of God. What of the 142 billions who 
died out of Christ- what is their 
condition? 

The Atheist answers: They are eternally 
dead. There is no hereafter; 
they will never live again. 

Calvinism answers: They were not 
elected to be saved. God foreordained 
and predestinated them to be lost, to 
go to hell, and they are there now, 
writhing in agony, where they will ever 
remain without hope. 

Arminianism answers: We believe 
that God excuses them on account of 
ignorance, and that if they did the best 
they knew how, they are as sure of 
being a part of the "church of the first 
born" as is Paul himself. 

To this last view the great majority 
of Christians of all denominations hold 
from a feeling that any other view 
would be irreconcilable with justice on 
Gods part. 



But, we inquire, What do the Scriptures 
teach on this last point?-that ignorance 
is a ground of salvation? No; 
the only condition known in Scripture 
is FAITH. "By grace are ye saved 
through FAITH." Justification by faith 
is the ground-rock of the whole system 
of Christianity. When, on the day of 
Pentecost, Peter was asked, "What 
must we do to be saved?" He answered: 
"Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, 
and be baptized, and thou shalt be 
saved." 

Again, he says ("Acts 4:12"): "There 
is none other name under heaven, given 
among men, whereby we must be 
saved," than the name of Jesus. 

Paul reasons that a man must hear 
the Gospel before he can believe: "How 
shall they believe on Him of whom 
they have not heard?" This, Gods 
plan-that men shall be saved on account 
of faith-Paul says was to the 
Jew a stumbling block (because they 
expected salvation as a reward of keeping 

R544 : page 7 

the law), and to the Greeks (the 

worldly wise) foolishness; but, nevertheless, 

it has "pleased God by the 

foolishness (in the eyes of men) of 

preaching to save them WHICH 

BELIEVE." 

We want to scripturally close you in 
to the thought, that all who have not 
heard could not believe, and not believing, 
could not be a part of the 
Bride of Christ. And this is not out of 
harmony with those first two chapters 
of Romans where Paul teaches that the 
heathen, having not the law, are a law 
unto themselves, etc. Many seem to 
misunderstand Paul, and represent him 
as teaching that the law which their 
conscience furnishes is sufficient in some 



cases to justify them. But this is a 
great mistake and far from Pauls 
meaning. Pauls argument everywhere 
is that "all the world is guilty before 
God," and that had he not known the 
law, he had not known sin. For by the 
law is the knowledge of sin." The law 
given to the Jew revealed his weakness, 
and was intended to show him that he 
was unable to justify himself before 
God. "For by the deeds of the law 
shall no flesh be justified in his (Gods) 
sight." As the written law thus condemned 
the Jews, so Paul says it is 
with the Gentiles also. Though ignorant 
of The Law they had light 
enough of conscience to condemn 
them-not to justify them-and 
so every mouth is stopped and all 
the world is proved guilty before God. 
("Romans 3:19"). And when this is realized, 
eternal life is seen to be "the 
gift of God, through Jesus Christ our 
Lord," to every one that believeth. 

Well, say some, the Bible to the contrary, 
I believe and insist that God 
wont damn the world for ignorance. 
Now, let us see. Do you practice what 
you declare? Why do you assist in 
sending missionaries to the heathen at 
a cost of thousands of valuable lives 
and millions of money? If they will 
all be saved, or even half of them, 
through ignorance, you do them a positive 
injury in sending a preacher to tell 
them of Christ when you know that 
only about one in a thousand believe 
when the missionary does go to them. 
If your idea be correct, it were far 
better that no missionaries should ever 
be sent. Before, as you believe, nearly 
all would have been saved on account 
of ignorance, but now because of 
knowledge nearly all will be lost. In 
the same way we might reason, that if 
God had left all in ignorance ALL 



would have been saved. Then, instead 
of the gospel being good news, it would 
be more properly named bad news. 

But when this theory is carried to its 
legitimate consequences, you do not 
believe it. No, my brethren, you do 
believe that there is no other name 
given whereby we must be saved. Your 
actions speak the loudest-and speak 
rightly. 

Now, suppose we look at things just 
as God tells us of them and leave the 
clearing of His character to Himself. 

WHAT HAS BECOME OF THE 142 
BILLIONS. 

First, we answer that you may be 
sure they are not now in hell suffering, 
because the Scriptures teach that full 
and complete reward is not given to 
any until Christ comes, and He shall 
reward every man, and the unjust are to 
receive their deserts then also. Whatever 
may be their present condition, it 
cannot be their full reward, for Peter 
says: "The Lord knoweth how to reserve 
the unjust unto the day of judgment 
to be punished," and He is doing 
so. But the thought of so many of our 
fellow creatures at any time, being lost, 
without having had the knowledge 
which is necessary to salvation, seems 
terrible indeed to all who have a spark 
of love or pity. Then, too, there are a 
number of Scriptures which seem hard 
to harmonize with all this. Let us see. 
In the light of his dealings, How shall 
we understand the statement, "God is 
Love," or "God so loved the world 
that he gave his only begotten Son, 
that whosoever belie veth in Him might 
not perish?" 

Ah, Lord, it seems to poor, frail 
humanity that if you loved the 
world so much, you might have made 



provision not only that unbelievers 
might be saved, but also that all might 
hear and thus have a chance to believe. 

Again, we read: "This is the true 
light, that lighteth every man that 
cometh into the world." fJohn 1:9 V ). 
Lord, all our reason seems to say, not 
so, we cannot see how Jesus lighted 
more than a few of earths billions. 
Yonder Hottentot gives no evidence of 
having been so enlightened, neither did 
the Sodomites and myriads of others. 

Once more we read that Jesus, by the 
grace of God, tasted death for every man. 
CHeb. 2:9 V ) How, Lord, we ask? If 
he tasted death for the one hundred 
and forty-three billions; and from other 
causes it becomes efficacious to only 
one billion, is not his death comparatively 
a failure? 

Again: "Behold I bring you good 
tidings of great joy which shall be to 
ALL people." fLuke 2:1(T). Surely it 
is to but few that it has been glad 
tidings and not to all people. 

Another is: "There is one God and 
one Mediator between God and men, 

R545 : page 7 

the man Christ Jesus, who gave himself 
a ransom for all." fl Tim. 2S). A 
ransom, then why should not all have 
some benefit from Christs death? 

Oh, how dark, how inconsistent do 
these statements appear, when we remember 
that the Gospel church is a 
"little flock." Oh, how we wish it 
would please God to open our eyes 
that we might understand the Scriptures, 
for we feel sure that did we but 
understand, it must all seem clear. It 
must all declare in thunder tone "God 
is Love." Oh, that we had the key! 
Do you want it?-are you sure you do? 
It is in the last text we quoted, "Who 



gave himself a ransom for all, to be testified 
in due time." fl Tim. 2:6 V ). Due 
time, ah, now we see; God has a due 
time for everything. He could have 
testified it to this 142 billions in their 
life time; then that would have been 
their due time; but as it was not so, 
their due time must be future. We 
know that now is your due time and 
mine, because it is testified to us now. 
Christ was a ransom for you before you 
were born, but it was not due time for 
you to hear it until years after; so with 
the Hottentot; Christ was his ransom 
at the same time that he was yours. 
He has not heard it yet and may not in 
this life; but in Gods due time he will. 

But does not death end probation? 
one inquires. We answer there is no 
Scripture which says so, and all the 
above and many more Scriptures would 
be meaningless or worse, if death ends 
all hope to the ignorant masses of the 
world. A Scripture often quoted to 
prove this generally entertained view, 
is: "Where the tree falleth, there it 
shall be." fEccl. 11:3 V ). If this has 
any relation to man and his future it indicates 
that in whatever condition of 
knowledge or ignorance he enters 
death, he remains the same, until he is 
raised up again. 

But, how can knowledge ever reach 
these billions in their graves? It never 
will, "for there is no work, nor device, 
nor knowledge, nor wisdom in the grave 
whither thou goest." fEccl. 9:10\) 
"For in death there is no remembrance 
of thee (God): in the grave who shall 
give thee thanks." fPsa. 6:5\) 
God has provided for the resurrection 
of them all. For "as in 
Adam all die, even so in Christ shall 
all be made alive." fl Cor. 15:22\) 
As death came by the first Adam, so 
life comes by the second Adam. Everything 



that mankind lost in the first 

Adam is to be restored in the second: 

hence the age following Christs second 

coming is spoken of as "The times of 

restitution." 

Life is one of the things lost, and is 
to be one of the things restored. Mark, 
I do not say eternal life is given them; 
no, Adam never had eternal life to lose. 
The continuance of his life was conditioned 
on his obedience. Life as a human 
being was lost and this will be restored 
by the second Adam, and with it 
the ability to render obedience. This 
is the general salvation that Christ accomplishes 
for all, but the "great salvation" 
which believers receive is entirely 
different. This enables us to use another 
text, which is little used except by Universalists, 
and although we are not Universalists, 
yet we claim the right to use 
all Scripture. It reads: "We trust in 
the living God, who is the Saviour of 
all men, especially of those that believe." 
fl Tim. 4:10\) All men are saved or 
rescued from the loss entailed on us 
through Adam, by having all those lost 
things, including natural life, restored to 
them. He is also the "especial Saviour 
of them that believe now-during this 
age-for they are privileged to become 
sons of God on a higher than human 
plane, even to be partakers of the divine 
nature. 

Now we see that "the testimony in 
due time" explains all of those hitherto 
troublesome texts. In due time it shall 
be "good tidings of great joy to all 
people." In due time that "True Light 
shall lighten every man that cometh 
into the world." And in no other way 
can these Scriptures be used without 
wresting; we take them to mean just 
what they say. Paul carries out the 
line of argument with emphasis in 
"Romans 5:18,19". He reasons that as 



all men were condemned to death and 
suffered it, because of Adams transgression, 
so also Christs righteousness 
justifies all to life again. All lost life, 
not of our own will or choice, in the 
first Adam, and all receive life at the 
hands of the second Adam equally 
without their will or choice, with the 
privilege of forever retaining it on 
specified conditions. 

When thus brought to life, and having 
the love of God testified to them, 
their probation, their first chance begins, 
for we do not preach a second chance 
for any. 

But Peter tells us that the restitution 
is spoken by the mouth of all the 
holy Prophets. They do all teach 
it. Ezekiel tells us of the valley of 
dry bones, "These bones are the 
whole house of Israel," and God says 
to them: "I will open your graves and 
cause you to come up out of your 
graves and bring you into the land of 
Israel," ("Ezek. 37:11,12".) This agrees 
with Pauls statement, "Rom. 11:25,26". 
"Blindness in part is happened to Israel 
until the fulness of the Gentiles, (the 
Gospel Church, the elect company 
"taken out of the Gentiles") be come 
in, and so all Israel shall be saved," or 
brought back from their cast-off condition. 
For "God hath not cast away 
His people which he foreknew." ("Rom. 1 1:2"). 
They were cut off from His 
favor while the bride of Christ was 
being selected, but will return to favor 
when that work is accomplished--" vs. 28 to 33". 
The prophets are full of 
statements of how God will plant them 
again, and they shall be no more 
plucked up. This does not refer to 
restorations from former captivities in 
Babylon, Syria, &c, for the Lord 
says: In those days they shall say no 
more, The fathers have eaten a sour 



grape and the childrens teeth are 
set on edge; but every man shall die 
for his own iniquity; every man that 
eateth the sour grape, his teeth shall be 
set on edge." fJer. 31:29,30\) This 
is not the case now. You do not die 
for your own sin but for Adams. "In 
Adam all die." He ate the sour grape 
and our fathers continued to eat them, 
entailing more sickness and misery 
upon us all. The day in which "every 
man shall die for his own iniquity," is 
this Millennial or Restitution day. But, 
when restored to the same conditions 
as Adam, will they not be as liable to 
sin and fall again as he was? No, they 
will have learned the lesson which God 
designed to teach to all during the first 
6,000 years, viz: "The exceeding sinfulness 
of sin." They will be prepared 
to appreciate the good and shun the 
evil; and the Gospel church then glorified 
will be "The kings (rulers) and 
priests" (teachers) of that new age, for 
"Unto the angels hath he not put in 
subjection the world to come; whereof 
we speak." fHeb. 2:5\) 

But are we sure that God intends 
these blessings for any but the "people 
whom he foreknew"-the Jews? Yes. 
He mentions other nations also by name 
and speaks of their restitution. Let 
me give you an illustration that will be 
forcible-the Sodomites. Surely, if I 
find their restitution mentioned you 
will be satisfied. But why should they 
not have an opportunity as well as you, 
or the Jew, to obtain eternal life? True, 
they were not righteous, but neither 
were you when God gave you your 
opportunity. Christs own words tell 
us that they are not as guilty in His 
sight as the Jews who had more knowledge: 
"Woe unto thee... Capernaum, 
for if the mighty works which 
have been done in thee, had been done 



in Sodom, it would have remained unto 

this day." fMatt. 11:21,23\) Thus 

Christs own words teach us that they 

had not had their full opportunity. 

Remember Christ says of the Sodomites 

that "it rained fire and brimstone from 

heaven and destroyed them all." fLuke 17:29\) 

So, if their restoration is spoken 

of, it implies their resurrection. Let us 

look at the prophecy of v Ezek. 16:48" 

to close. Read it carefully. God here 

speaks to Israel and compares her with 

her neighbor Samaria, and also with 

the Sodomites, whom he says, "I took 

away as I saw good." fEzek. 16:50\) 

Why did God see good to take away 

these people without giving them a 

chance of eternal life through the 

knowledge of "the only name"? Because 

it was not their due time; they 

will come to a knowledge of the truth 

when restored. He will save them from 

deaths bondage first, and then give 

them knowledge, as it is written: "God 

will have all men to be saved, and to 

come unto the knowledge of the truth." 

C 1 Tim. 2:4\) When brought to the 

knowledge, then, and not until then, are 

the preparations for Eternal life. With 

this thought, and with no other, I can 

understand the dealings of the God of 

love with those Amalekites and other 

nations, whom he not only permitted, 

but commanded Israel to destroy utterly, 

and leave neither man, woman or 

child, sparing not even the little ones. 

How often my heart has ached and 

yours too, as we sought to reconcile 

this seeming wantonness on Gods part, 

with the teachings of the new dispensation 

--"God is love," "Love your enemies," 

&c. Now we see that the entire 

Jewish age was a type of the higher 

Gospel age; Israels victories and conquests 

merely pictures of the Christians 

battles with sin, etc. These Amalekites 



and Sodomites and others might 
just as well die so, as of disease and 
plague, and it mattered little to them, as 
they were merely learning to know evil, 
that when on trial "in due time" they 
might learn good and be able to discriminate 
and choose good. 

But let us read the prophecy further. 
After comparing Israel with Sodom 
and Samaria, and pronouncing them 
worse, >. 53\ says, "When I bring again 
the captivity (In death all are captives; 
and Christ came to set at liberty the 
captives and to open the prison doors 
of the grave) of Sodom and Samaria, 
then will I bring thy captives in the 
midst of them." These will be raised 
together. In Verse 55 v this is called a 
"return to their former estate"-restitution. 
But some one, who cannot imagine 
that God really could be so good 
or just, suggests: God must be speaking 
ironically to Israel, and saying, He 
would just as soon bring back the 
Sodomites as them; but has no notion 
of either. Let us see; read v vs. 60-63": 
"Nevertheless I will remember my 
covenant with thee; I will establish it 

R546 : page 7 

to thee." Yes; says Paul, "This is 
Gods covenant unto them-they are 
beloved for the fathers sake. For the 
gifts and callings of God are without 
repentance." fRomans ll:27-29\) The 
v 63d verse" concludes the argument, 
showing that the promised restitution 
is not based on the merits of either 
Israel, the Samaritans, or the Sodomites 
--"That thou mayest remember and 
be confounded, and never open thy 
mouth any more because of thy shame, 
when I am pacified toward thee, for all 
that thou hast done, SAITH THE LORD 
GOD." When God signs his name to a 



statement in this way, I must believe it. 
And no wonder if they are confounded, 
when "In the ages to come He shows 
forth the exceeding riches of his grace." 
fEph. 2:7\) And many of Gods 
children will be confounded, and 
amazed also, when they see how "God 

R546 : page 8 

so loved THE WORLD." They will be 
ready to exclaim with brother Paul: 
"Oh the depth of the riches both of the 
wisdom and knowledge of God! How 
unsearchable are his judgments, and his 
ways past finding out!" 
f Romans 11:33".) 

But some will inquire, how comes it 
that this has not been seen long ago? 
We answer, God gives light and knowledge 
to his people just as it is due. 
The world was left in almost entire 
ignorance of Gods plan until the 
Gospel age, when Christ came, bringing 
life and immortality TO LIGHT 
through the Gospel. The Jews up to 
that time supposed that all the promises 
of God were to and for them alone, but 
in due time God showed favor to the 
Gentiles also. Christians, generally, 
have supposed that Gods blessings are 
to the church, but we begin to see that 
God is better than all our fears, and 
though he has given us the "exceeding 
great and precious promises," He has 
made some to the world also. 

"The path of the just is as a shining 
light that shineth more and more unto 
the perfect day," and the fact that it 
now shines so brightly; and that we are 
able to see more of the beauty and 
harmony of Gods word, is to me a 
strong presumptive evidence that we are 
nearing that glorious Millennial Day 
when we shall know even as we are 
known, fl Cor. 13:12\) 



But we promised to harmonize those 
doctrines of the Church generally supposed 
to be opposed to each other, 

viz: CALVINISM, or Election; and ARMINIANISM, 
or Free Grace. Perhaps 
you already see how they harmonize 
themselves, by simply recognizing the 
order of the ages, and applying each 
text to the place and time to which it 
belongs. Let me then point out to you 

THE INCONSISTENCY OF EITHER CALVINISM 
OR ARMINIANISM. 

when separated from each other. In 
doing so, I do not wish to reflect on 
those who hold these doctrines. I shall 
merely call your attention to features 
which their warmest advocates must confess 
to be their weak points. 

First-Calvinism says: God is all-wise; 
He knew the end from the beginning; 
and as "all his purposes shall be 
accomplished," He never could have intended 
to save any but a few-the true 
Church, the little flock. These He 
elected, and predestinated to be eternally 
saved; all others were equally predestined 
and elected to go to hell, for, 
"known unto the Lord are all His 
works from the foundation of the world." 

This has its good features; it shows, 
and properly, Gods Omniscience. This 
would be our idea of a GREAT God 
were it not that the three great essential 
qualities of greatness, viz., MERCY, 
LOVE and JUSTICE are lacking, for 
none of these qualities find place in 
bringing into the world 142 billions of 
creatures damned before they were born, 
and mocked by protestations of love. 
No, no; "God is Love," "God is Just," 
"God is Merciful." 

Second-Arminianism says: Yes, 
God is love, and in bringing humanity 
into the world He meant them no harm; 



only good. But Satan succeeded in 
tempting Adam; thus "Sin entered 
into the world and death by sin." And 
ever since, God has been doing all he 
can to deliver man from his enemy, 
even to the giving of His Son. And 
though now, six thousand years after, 
the gospel has only reached a very 
small portion of those creatures, yet, we 
do hope and trust, that within six thousand 
years more, through the energy 
and liberality of the Church, God will 
have so far remedied the evil introduced 
by Satan, that all may at least know of 
his love, and the knowledge of God be 
co-extensive with the knowledge of evil. 

The commendable feature of this view 
is, that it accepts the statement that 
"God is Love." But, while full of loving 
and benevolent designs for His 
creatures, He lacks ability and foreknowledge 
adequate to the accomplishment 
of those designs. 

While God was busy arranging and 
devising for the good of his newly 
created children, Satan slipped in, and 
by one stroke, upset all Gods plans, 
and in one moment brought sin and 
evil among men to such an extent that 
even by exhausting all his power, God 
must spend twelve thousand years to 
even reinstate righteousness to such a 
degree that man will have an opportunity 
to choose good as readily as 
evil; and the one hundred and forty-two 
billions of the past six thousand 
years, and as many more of the next, 
are lost to all eternity, in spite of Gods 
love for them, because Satan interfered 
with his plans as God had not foreseen. 
Thus Satan gets, in spite of God, one 
hundred into hell to one God gets to 
glory. This view must exalt mens 
ideas of Satan, and lower their estimation 
of Him who "spake and it was 
done; commanded and it stood fast." 



But how refreshing it is for us to turn 
from these fragments of truth, as separately 
considered, and see how harmonious 
and beautiful they are when 
united; how, during the present and 
past ages, God is electing, or gathering, 
by the preaching of His word the Gospel 
church; how he wisely permitted 
evil to come into the world in order 
that He might develop His church, 
which, thus being made perfect through 
suffering, might be prepared for her 
gracious work in the future; and how 
the mass of mankind, though not now 
on probation, are nevertheless getting a 
knowledge and experience, by contact 
with sin, which he foresaw they would 
be the better of. And, furthermore, 
how he took occasion, in connection 
with this, His plan, to show us His 
great love, by so arranging that the 
death of Christ was necessary to our recovery 
from sin, and then freely giving 
Him to be "the propitiation for our 
sins, and not for ours only, but also for 
the sins of the whole world," and then 
in the next dispensation-- "The new 
heavens and earth," fRev. 21:l-9-l(T 
and v 22:17\) "The spirit and the 
bride say come, and whosoever will 
may come and take of the water of life 
freely." Then "Free Grace" will be 
shown in the fullest measure. This is 
the teaching of Gods word. Men 
would not have thought of such a glorious 
plan of salvation. Truly God has 
said: "My thoughts are not your 
thoughts, neither are your ways my 
ways: For as the heavens are higher 
than the earth, so are my ways higher 
than your ways, and my thoughts than 
your thoughts." flsa. 55:8,9\) Hereafter 
when we address "Our Father," 
may it call to our mind that His love 
and compassion are far greater than the 
pity of earthly parents; and while we 



study His word more and more, and 
seek to "grow in grace and in the 
knowledge and love of God, let us ever 
remember that 

"Blind unbelief is sure to err, 

And scan His work in vain; 
God is His own interpreter 

And He will make it plain." 
Having seen how much of the great 
plan of God awaits the coming of Christ 
for its accomplishment, and having, we 
trust, found why Christ comes, we will 
next Sunday take up another branch of 
truth connected therewith, and inquire 
the teaching of Scripture as to the 
judgment of the Church, and of the 
World, the reward of Faith and that of 
Works. 



R543 : page 8 
OUR INFLUENCE. 

Why has Christian influence so little 
effect upon the unconverted? Can it be 
for want of knowledge of Christian duties, 
or why is it such a barren and fruitless 
thing to be a Christian? Truly we need 
not expect that the whole world will be 
converted because they see beauty in the 
confession of Christians, for Christ himself 
has said, "If they will not hear my 
words, they will not hear you." Yet 
the Spirit of God is fruitful, and will 
multiply when it has free access into the 
hearts of his Spirit-born people. 

There is, indeed, a great fault in Christian 
professors in our day. The motive 
is not pure. Either from love of 
the world, or from lack of true repentance, 
the heart is not wholly given to 
God, and for this reason God cannot use 
it for his purpose, namely, for his temple; 
therefore old things remain, and 



the creature is not renewed in spirit 

and mind, and knows not how to adorn 

his profession, and remains only a 

stumbling block in the eyes of the world, 

because he professes to have the spirit 

of God, and has it not, or walks not according 

to it. Oh, Christians! let us be 

careful how we profess Christ, lest not 

only the sin of hypocrisy be required at 

our hands, but also the blood of our fellow 

creatures, who turn away from Christians, 

and say there is no reality in religion. 

It is truly good to be a Christian, 

to enjoy the Spirit of God, the love 

of Christ, and the many blessings that 

are manifested through the Spirit as 

well as the promised glory and blessings. 

--Selected. 



R546 : page 8 
QUESTION COLUMN. 

Ques. Are there any other papers 
than the TOWER which teach as it does 
that Jesus is now present? 

Ans. We know of none other which 
teaches the personal presence of Christ 
Jesus. Most of those whose attention 
has been given to the subject of the 
second advent, fail to see the distinction 
between the human nature which Jesus 
laid down in death as our ransom, and 
the new nature given him by the Father 
as a reward for so doing. fPhil. 2:9\) 
Therefore, such generally expect that 
Jesus will be a human or fleshly being 
at his second coming. But though we 
have known Christ after the flesh, yet 
now, henceforth, know we him no more 
after the flesh but as a spiritual being- 
the express image of the Fathers person, 
and consequently as invisible to human 
eyes (without a miracle) as the angels, 



and as the Father "whom no man hath 
seen nor can see." f2 Cor. 5:16"; v Heb. 1:3 V ; 
v lTim. 6:16\) 

The fact is, that to be consistent with 
their theories, none could teach Christ 
Jesus presence who do not recognize 
the distinction and total difference between 
the perfect human and the divine 
natures. (Study very carefully the Chart 
and its explanation in "Food," p. 105.) 
If Jesus is now merely a glorified man, 
then when he comes he would be seen 
by the natural eye, and there would be 
no special necessity for taking heed to 
the sure word of prophecy; nor would 
those Scriptures be true, which represent 
his presence to be "as a thief," 
discernable only by those watching. If 
he is now merely a perfect, glorified 
man, then those who claim this, to be 
consistent, should also claim that at his 
first advent, before he was "highly exalted," 

R547 : page 8 

he was an imperfect man. But, 

on the contrary, Scripture teaches that 

at the first advent, Jesus was undefiled, 

sinless, perfect-a man FIT to be a ransom 

for other men-and at his resurrection 

perfected as a new creature and 

again a spiritual being. 

If change of nature is impossible, as 
some seem to claim, how did Jesus 
change from a form of God (a spiritual 
form) and become a form of flesh, or a 
human being? And if he changed thus 
to take our lower nature fPhil. 2:T), 
why should any deny that he could be 
given a nature, not only higher than 
men (the human), but higher than that 
he laid aside to become a man. If 
any have theories that would compel 
Jesus forever to be a man, we think 
such theories had better be sacrificed 
than the Scriptures which teach 



that human and spiritual beings are dissimilar, 
though on certain conditions 
some during this age are offered a 
change of nature. 

From the standpoint of those who 
recognize the distinction between human 
and spiritual beings, the invisible, 
personal presence of Christ is not unreasonable. 
Such realize that, "Though 
we have known Christ after the flesh, 
yet now henceforth know we him no 
more" after the flesh. The human 
being, restored, will be a glorious and 
perfect man; while the "new creature," 
perfected, will be entirely different-a 
perfect spiritual being-and it doth not 
yet appear what such shall be like. Of 
Jesus we read that he is now "the express 
image of the Fathers person, 
whom no MAN hath seen NOR CAN SEE. 
He was put to death in the flesh (as a 
man) and quickened in spirit (as a new 
creature). 

It is this Jesus, raised in glory and 
power, a spiritual body and not an animal 
or human body-perfect as a new 
creature-that we teach is present, and 
whose power and presence is now exercising 
so marked an effect upon the 
affairs of both the Church and the 
world. It is his glorious presence as a 
reaper ("Rev. 14:14") of his ripening 
harvest, whose sharp sickle of truth is 
now separating the true from the false, 
and the matured from the immature 
wheat. Yes, the Lord has come to 
make up his chosen and polished 
jewels. We are living even now in the 
presence of the invisible Lord, whose 
lightning flashes of truth are even now 
enlightening the world ("Matt. 24:27"; 
"Psa. 97:4"). The first flashes are bringing 
terror and dismay to the world, disclosing 
also the gigantic proportions of 
evil and oppression; but shortly the 
full glory, the bright shining of his presence, 



will be recognized by all (seen by 

the eye of their understanding) and will 

bring healing and blessing. 

The present, invisible, spiritual prince 
of this world (Satan--* John 14:30*) 
will then be fully cast out, when the 
new, invisible, spiritual Prince (Christ) 
shall fully take to himself his great 
power and dominion. 



R547 : page 8 

MAKING US WHITE. 

"What have I done that I must suffer 
so?" "Must I always bear such 
humiliation?" We answer that God 
puts a high estimate upon "the riches 
of the glory of his inheritance in the 
saints." A proprietor pulls down his 
old house and tears up the lilacs and 
cherry trees, and plows and seeds his 
ground anew, to make a fitting place 
for a better home. But how would the 
green grass sob, and the shrubbery 
shriek, could its story be heard. Suffering 
is not always a penalty. It is often 
corrective. It is educative. Purifying, 
training and glorifying, in its nature, it 
must go forward until the end. An old 
captain on an ocean steamer says, "A 
little head wind is good; it makes the 
furnace draw." Patience is beautiful 
and useful, but it means something to 
be patient about. It is like the night 
blooming cereus; it comes only to 
perfection in darkness, and when midnight 
is densest. At one end of yonder 
paper machine is a pile of beautiful 
white paper. How the rags would 
scream at their scouring, and grinding, 
and pressing, and crushing. But see 
the result! So, Christian, see what 
blessed things are intended to reward 



your trials. --American Wesleyan. 



R547 : page 1 

VOL. V. PITTSBURGH, PA., NOVEMBER, 1883. NO. 4. 



page 1 

ZIONS 

Watch Tower 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRISTS PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED MONTHLY AT 

101 Fifth Avenue, Pittsburgh, Pa. 



C. T. RUSSELL, Editor and Publisher. 



The Editor recognizes a responsibility to the Master, 
relative to what shall appear in these columns, 
which he cannot and does not cast aside; yet he 
should not be understood as endorsing every expression 
of correspondents, or of articles selected 
from other periodicals. 

TERMS OF SUBSCRIPTION. 

TERMS :- -Fifty cents a year, postage prepaid. 
You may send paper money to the amount of two 
dollars, by mail, at our risk. Larger amounts may 
be sent by Drafts, P.O. Money Order, or Registered 
Letter, payable to C. T. RUSSELL. 

FOREIGN TERMS. 

Foreign Postage being higher, our terms to foreign 
subscribers will be 65 cents a year. Please 



send us no foreign money or postage stamps, as we 
can make no use of them. Remittances may be 
made by Foreign Postal Money Orders. 

TAKE NOTICE. 

This paper will be sent free to any of the Lords 
poor who will send a card yearly requesting it. 
Freely we have received and freely we would give 
the truth. "Ho, every one that thirsteth, come ye 
to the waters; and he that hath no money, come ye, 
buy and eat-yea, come, buy wine and milk without 
money and without price." And you that have it— 
"Wherefore do ye spend money for that which is 
not bread? and your labor for that which satisfieth 
not? Hearken diligently-and eat ye that which is 
good, and let your soul delight itself in fatness. "- 
ISAIAH 55 :1,2\ 



page 1 

SEND us the addresses of all the moral 
and religious Swedes and Norwegians 
you can gather; for samples of the 
Swedish paper. 



THE safest way to send money is by 
"POSTAL MONEY ORDER." The rates 
have recently been reduced. "POSTAL 
NOTES" are no safer than money. 



R547 : page 1 

VIEW FROM THE TOWER. 

The Swedish tract fund reached such 
a sum as to justify the publishing of a 
sample copy of the TOWER in the Swedish 
language, to be used as a tract, 
among the Swedish and Norwegian 



Christians, here and in Sweden. The 
notice in our last issue, that we were 
ready for lists of addresses of religious 
Swedes and Norwegians, brought to us 
many responses, and we will be mailing 
sample copies to the same, about the 
time you receive this paper. Whether 
there will be in the future, a regular 
edition of the TOWER in Swedish, will 
depend upon the interest awakened 
amongst that people by these sample 
copies and upon the supply of needful 
means for the additional expense involved. 
It is in the Lords hands and 
we cannot doubt that He will overrule 
it to his own glory and the blessing of 
His Swedish Saints. 

It cannot fail to give pleasure to each 
one who has contributed even "two 
mites" to the fund which published 
these sample copies, that they have 
helped to preach the "glad tidings of 
great joy" among over 20,000 Swedish 
brethren and sisters. All who appreciate 
the "good tidings," seem to feel 
as did the early church, that it is a thing 
so precious, so good, that they cannot 
refrain from declaring it. 

Though our Father is rich and will 
not permit a single one of his saints to 
go hungry for the bread of life through 
the unfaithfulness of any of us, yet if we do 
not improve the privilege granted us, of 
ministering to the saints, the loss will 
be ours. While we rejoice to see that 
some of the consecrated are growing in 
grace by the exercise of this talent of 
distributing to the (spiritual or temporal) 
necessities of others, we fear that 
some are depriving themselves of this 
blessed privilege and means of growth 
in grace. We have no disposition, nor 
do we intend this as fault-finding. We 
mention it as an aid to self-examination. 
May the Lord help us all, to faithfully 
judge ourselves, regarding the fulfillment 



of our covenant. 

We shall not beg for Jehovah for he 
is rich; he says, "The silver is mine, 
and the gold is mine," "and the cattle 
upon a thousand hills." "Hag. 2:8 V ; 
v Psa. 50:10\ Yet while so rich, he has 
deposited a little here and there, more 
or less, with us; giving us the control of 
it. Then he leaves his own work, the 
very things in which he is interested 
most, measurably dependent on us, in 
order that we might have the privilege 
of using the means intrusted to us in 
ministering to the necessities of the 
saints and being thus co-workers with 
God. 

Are we not right in saying that this 
is a great privilege? Are we not right 
too, in supposing that few appreciate 
highly enough their stewardship? Do 
we always remember Jesus words? 
"He that receiveth you receiveth me, 
...and whosoever shall give to 
one of these a cup of cold water only, 
shall in no wise lose his reward. "Matt. 10:40-42\ 
Do we always remember 
that the Lord as represented by every 
saint who is a member of His body, is 
still to be found, still to be ministered 
to? Let us remember too, that the 
real members will seldom ask, except 
of the Father, because they possess the 
spirit of their head-the spirit of trust 
which looks to their heavenly Father 
for whatsoever he sees best, to send, 
and by whomsoever he sees fit to send 
it. But how great is the privilege of 
being fit and used in Jehovahs service. 

If it is a privilege to feed and clothe 
the "earthen vessel," how much more 
blessed is the privilege of feeding the 
spiritually hungry with "the bread of 
life," and clothing them with the "wedding 
garment" of Christs righteousness, 
by scattering the truth. God has 
so ordered matters-inventions, etc., 



that to-day the greatest influence and 
the most forcible preaching, is done 
through the medium of the printing 
press. Thus, for instance, each copy 
of the TOWER contains about eight 
sermons, and these are brought before 
an average of about 20,000 readers at 
each issue, the majority of whom have 
"an ear to hear," which is not the case 
with the ordinary congregations of nominal 
Christians. Thus the TOWER under 
the Lords blessing, is able to spread 
the truth more widely than 200 traveling 
preachers could do. 

We call your attention to this matter 
so that you may appreciate more fully, 
the lever of power within your own 
grasp, for the spread of truth. Some, are 
recognizing and improving these latter 
day advantages in one way and some in 
another. Some call together companies 
of their friends and neighbors and read 
them a discourse; others write to us for 
sample copies, which they loan to such 
as seem to have an "ear." Others, endeavor 
to introduce the TOWER among 
Christians, as a regular preacher. 

R548 : page 1 

The present issue of the Swedish 
paper, will we hope, help to open the 
Lords storehouse, to the hungry of that 
people. This is well, but let us not 
stop, while others are crying for 
"bread." Our German brethren and 
sisters are still in want, because of the 
famine fAmos 8: IT) and it is our 
happy privilege to be among Jehovahs 
agencies in answering their prayer- 
"Give us this day our daily bread." Let 
us give the "meat in due season." Freely 
we received, let us freely give to 
others the heavenly food-manna. 
"Blessed is that servant whom his Lord 
when he cometh shall find so doing." 



"Matt. 24:46\ 

To this end, we propose that while 
we shall still remember the regular Tract 
Fund and the Swedish Fund, we shall 
give some special attention to the German 
Fund. It will be remembered that 
this fund was started some time ago and 
then permitted to rest until the Swedish 
Tract-paper should be issued. Now we 
are ready, so far as in us lies to preach 
the glad tidings to our German brethren 
and sisters also. The German Fund 
contains about $25. When it grows to 
about $300. we shall begin to make a 
start, in this direction. 

Though it is right enough that those 
who preach the gospel should live by it 
--or be supported by it, fl Cor. 9:1 1-15",) 
we are glad, that the "Chief Shepherd" 
has so arranged for us that we 
are not thus supported. Rather, we 
labor working with our own hands, 
that we might not be chargeable to any, 
but might have the privilege of helping, 
together with all saints, in supplying the 
lack, both temporal and spiritual, of 
others, fl Cor. 4:12\) 

For this reason we may freely speak 
to you of this privilege, with the less 
danger of being misunderstood. And 
yet we realize that many of our readers 
will feel, if they do not express it, a wish 
that the TOWER would confine itself to 
teaching "The love of God," "Restitution," 
etc., and occasionally touch upon 
and condemn profanity, or intemperance 
and not talk so much, of entire consecration, 
sacrifice, and self-denial. To this 
we reply, that the mission of the TOWER 
is specially to the "little flock"-to aid 
those who are consecrated, to sacrifice. 
To those of its readers who are fully consecrated, 
its words of counsel, reproof, 
and exhortation are directed. Of those 
who are not consecrated, and who are 
therefore not running for the prize of 



the "high calling," we should not expect 
so much, though such, if they give 
even a cup of cold water, shall in no 
wise lose their reward, when the time 
for rewarding comes. ("Matt. 10:42\) 

With the Lord, it is not His poverty, 
but his desire to give us an opportunity 
of being co-workers with him, that is the 
cause of the seeming poverty of many 
of his saints and of his treasury. So, we 
can heartily say to you, that our interest 
in this question of your sacrifice, is a 
desire to see the truth spread and saints 
fed, but chiefly, for YOU WHO HAVE 
CONSECRATED; lest you should fail to 
perform your sacrifice. We even fear 
that a false modesty on our part, has 
been an injury to the flock over which 
our Lord hath made us to some extent 
"overseers." We have for some time, 
seen the necessity of sacrifice on the 
part of all who would win the great 
prize, and though we have repeatedly 
set forth the necessity of entire sanctification 
of mind and body; our time, reputation 
and money-all: That this death to 
earthly things as symbolized in our 
water baptism is absolutely essential to 
our becoming joint-heirs with Jesus 
Christ our Lord. ("Rom. 8:17\) Yet 
we have realized all along that selfishness 
-love of self, its ease, honors, etc., 
so powerfully counteracted the clear 
teachings of the Word, that it had but 
slight practical effect. 

We desire to do our duty and to 
warn the flock against selfishness, our 
most iminent danger-our greatest 
enemy. ("Ezek. 33:6,7".) Each one 
who is running the race for the great 
"prize of our high calling" should look the 
issue fairly in the face, and ask himself 
the question, What am I sacrificing? 
I have time, money and influence, some 
of each: am I so arranging my affairs 
that as large a proportion as possible of 



these, is used directly in the Masters 
service? How much of my influence 
have I sacrificed, in an attempt to honor 
and advance the truth? How much 
sacrifice-- self-denial, have I made, in 
ministering to the saints and others, 
either the earthly or the heavenly food 
and clothing? How much of my time 
has been sacrificed from self and spent 
for the good of others-doing good 
unto all men as I have opportunity, 
especially to the household of faith? 

We must not attempt to excuse ourselves, 
by saying that we know of none 
of the saints that are starving or naked, 
else we would help them; and if the 
Lords treasury should become bankrupt, 
we would then come forward, and contribute. 
This is an old excuse and evasion 
suggested by our adversary. Let 
us remember that if we wait for such opportunities 
we will never find them. 
God will never allow his treasury to be 
bankrupt; He will never allow his saints 
to starve. Our experience in this matter 
corroborates that of David fPsa. 37:25, 26\) 
"Yet have I never seen the righteous 
(saints) forsaken, nor his seed begging 
bread. He is ever merciful and 
lendeth; and his seed is blessed." The 
Lords children, and work will get along 
without us; but alas what a loss of opportunity 
and blessing, we should sustain. 
"Take heed that no man take thy 
crown." If we fail to use our privileges, 
some more worthy will enjoy them and 
receive the reward. 

To be a sacrifice at all, it must be a 
willing offering and not one forced from 
us by extraordinary circumstances. Let 
no man who thus gives time, money, or 
influence, consider that he offers a 
sacrifice. 

But some one who has considerable, 
willing to justify himself, may inquire, 
How much should I give, of my time, 



money and influence? Possibly you 
made a mistake-a common one however 
-for if you are running for the 
high calling, you should rather have 
asked, "How much may I use for myself?" 
If you gave yourself and all, to 
God, then none of the things you have 
are yours but Gods; and you are his 
agent or steward, to spend all as you 
understand to be His will, regardless 
of your own preferences for self. 

How much you ought to spend, on 
yourself and family, how much you 
should spend on the poorer, and how 
much you should spend in spreading the 
truth, are weighty and important questions, 
which we must leave each steward 
to decide for himself; merely suggesting 
Pauls advice, that in all these matters 
your aim should be to provide 
things "decent." You should attempt 
to do for the poor so as to have them 
"decent;" yourself and family should be 
"decent;" and the cause of truth should 
be supported on the plane of decency; 
but on none of these have you a right to 
waste the Lords goods, by 
extravagance. 

R548 : page 2 

The warp in our "earthen vessels" is 
such, that do the best we may, we shall 
probably find self, more and better provided 
for than our poorer brother, or 
the work of our Father. Knowing this 
to be our disposition, and seeing how it 
differs from that of our Father as displayed 
by our Elder Brother, who, 
though he was rich, yet for our sakes 
became poor, that we through his 
poverty might become rich f2 Cor. 8:9 V ), 
we should be constantly on our guard; 
and while beholding his image (his disposition) 
as in a mirror we should see 
to it that we are being changed, daily 



and hourly to the same image, from 
glory to glory-by the spirit of the 
Lord. ("2 Cor. 3:1 8".) 

But does another say, "I have nothing 
to give!" Alas my brother, then you 
are indeed in a bad condition. If you 
have nothing to give, then you cannot 
sacrifice anything. Then you may as 
well reckon yourself out of the present 
race for the great prize, for all who 
attain that goal are sacrificers, and have 
something to offer. OHeb. 13:15,16" 
and "1 Peter 2:5\) 

But are you sure- very sure, you 
have nothing? search carefully for none 
were "called" to this honor, to whom 
one talent or more, had not been given. 
If you have hidden yours, so that neither 
you nor others can see it, we urge you 
to dig it up quickly and make the more 
active use of it, lest the King should 
speedily finish his reckoning with the 
servants, and instead of saying "Well 
done, thou good and faithful servant" 
to thee, should say "wicked and slothful 
servant." 

No saint has so little, that he has 
nothing to spend, for the glory and 
honor of Him who did so much for us. 
And, in this connection it is well that 
we should remember, that the less 
we have, proportionately greater is the 
sacrifice when we give. Jesus showed 
his appreciation of amount and motive, 
for when the rich were casting into the 
Temple treasury, He saw a poor widow 
cast in two mites and said that she had 
sacrificed more, than all the others. 
("Luke 21:3".) The two mites principle 
applies to influence and time as well as 
to money. Be assured that if you have 
been led of the Lord to consecrate your 
all, you surely have a way before you 
to perform, for it is written: "It is God 
that worketh in you both to will and to 
do of His good pleasure." ("Phil. 2:13".) 



The true principle of sacrifice, seeks 
not the poorest and leanest part of our 
sacrifice to offer before the Lord, but 
the fat-the freshest hours, the choicest 
talents. Let us learn more and more 
to economize time and money, so that 
much of it may be directly used for His 
glory. 

Now, with an exhortation that you 
shall read carefully Pauls words to the 
saints at Corinth-" 2 Cor. 8" the chapter 
and especially the ninth chapter"; marking 
carefully Verses six to twelve"; we feel 
that we have discharged a duty toward 
you and shall leave the matter with you, 
praying that the Word of God which is 
sharper than any two-edged sword, may 

R549 : page 2 

in this as in all things, be toward you 
living and powerful; piercing even to 
the dividing asunder of the soul (the 
human nature) and the spirit (the new 
nature): Thus enabling you to separate 
and judge even the thoughts and intents 
of your own hearts. fHeb. 4:12,13\) 
And, the very God of peace 
shall work in you, both to will and to 
do, of his good pleasure, while you let 
the same mind be in you, which was 
also in Christ Jesus our Lord. 

For your joy and encouragement, we 
present below some— 

EXTRACTS FROM INTERESTING 
LETTERS: 

page 2 

Coon Rapids, Iowa. 
MR. RUSSELL:-Dear Bro.:-I enclose 
pay for the "Variorum Testament, 
the balance is for the Tract Fund. It is 
only a trifle, but I will have to be content 
with sending a little at a time, and 



hope that it may be more the next. But 
I can never hope to pay for what you 
have sent to me. It was through these 
publications that I was brought to know 
of the priceless prize, that it is even my 
privilege to run for. It found me a poor, 
overburdened, discouraged woman, although 
loving my Lord, still afraid to 
trust him. But I was looking and longing 
for His coming, and praying for 
light, and it came through your tract 
"Food for thinking Christians." God sent 
it. I always receive these papers as 
from him. I have tried to interest others 
in them, but have found none in sympathy 
with me, not even my husband 
and children; and I have so longed for 
them to enjoy these things with me. 
But still I find even here a great joy; 
my Master was alone; did he not long 
for those he loved to understand and 
sympathize with him? I pray for my 
loved ones as he did for his. I am trying 
to sacrifice my life and all I have to 
Him, but find it a daily struggle to overcome. 
THE TOWER always sends me to 
my Bible, and, O what wonders, what 
comfort, what joy I find. Idontget 
time to read anything else. Excuse me 
for writing so long a letter, but it tells so 
little. My love and prayers are with 
you. . 

Ellisville, Mo. 
DEAR FRIENDS:-As a humble servant 
I am still trying to distribute and 
promote the truth, and am oftentimes 
refreshed by meeting from a very unexpected 
direction those who seem fully 
prepared to receive the good news. I 
had the pleasure of meeting some such 
the other evening and we were so much 
interested in the glorious subject, that 
we were surprised to find it near midnight 
when we finished. But I more often 
meet those who seem both deaf and 



blind to such blessed truths; this, formerly 
was very discouraging, but with increasing 
light and a more correct understanding 
of Gods plan, I can but sympathize 
with and pity them, and am often 
reminded of our Saviours prayer on 
the cross, for with their minds thus darkened 
they know not what they reject, 
or in so doing what they are losing. I 
have been thinking of forming a Bible 
Class, for searching the Scriptures in 
connection with the WATCH TOWER, as a 
help to the few who are willing to receive 
the light. It is a cheering thought to 
me, that I am entering my spiritual work, 
at about the same mature age as did my 
Saviour, and may I ever prove a vigilant 
and faithful servant is the continuous 
prayer of my heart. 

Please send me anything you have on 
hand for distribution, as I think I see 
some new chances for doing good. You 
will find enclosed something for the 
Tract Fund-hope I can send more the 
next time. Yours in faith, 



R549 : page 2 

Chicago, Ills. 
DEAR SIR:-You will permit me, 
though a stranger, to say that I have received 
knowledge for both head and 
heart that years of searching had failed 
to accomplish, and so with the hope of 
seeing others freed from sectarian darkness, 
I, too, will be glad to be counted 
among those who are helping to distribute 
the meat in due season. I know 
whom I trust now, thanks be to God. 
The "Food", came just when I had lost 
hold, because there was nothing to hold 
me in the churches-for I searched Baptist, 
Methodist, Free Methodist, Congregational 
and Presbyterian denominations 
till I became satisfied that the Lord had 



something better for me to find: Then 
"Food" came-it seemed accidentally- - 
but now I see it was providentially. Let 
me heartily thank you-or rather thank 
God for giving you the ability to open 
the way to the light. Great is the surrounding 
darkness and we are desirous 
to have others see their way clearly. If 
you can send us some reading matter, we 
can drop it into good soil. A dear old 
child of God left our house in great sorrow 
and perplexity of mind last Sunday 
evening. He has been a deacon in the 
Baptist church for thirty years. Said he, 
"O, I have studied these matters until I 
just find, that the more I give my mind 
to these things the less I know; and now 
I just know nothing and have made up 
my mind to let it go, for God will bring 
it out all right; and what can I do but 
wait Gods own good time. When we 
get over there, we will see face to face." 
I endeavored to persuade him to expect 
the mystery to be explained. Said he: 
"O bring me anything. I want the best 
the Lord gives. I know God is love 
and I hate this "Hell doctrine!" The 
minister in a little church here, is in a 
quandary: he is a thinking man, only he 
is in the "iron bedstead." Please send 
reading matter, if possible,-these two 
at least feel their need. 
Yours in Christ, 

and wife. 

Hamilton, Scotland. 
DEAR BROTHER IN JESUS:-Since 
writing you on the 26th ult. I have received 
"Food for Thinking Christians," 
and I beg to say that I never in all my 
life read any book with the same relish. 
"Praise God from whom all blessings 
flow." I have got such a blessing from 
it that it is like a new conversion to me. 
I cannot tell you, how it has filled my 
soul with rapture and thanksgiving to 



God. I am sure it will bless all who 
read it. It contains much I have not 
been in the habit of hearing or seeing, 
before, and still the same was in the 
Scriptures before me for my searching 
out, as you have done. There is a great 
depth of truth through the whole book, 
and it is written in a way that even those 
who have not studied their Bible much 
will be able to grasp the most of its precious 
teaching, and also, I trust, make 
them, as it has done with me, fall down 
on their knees and thank God. I wish you 
to send me the TOWER regularly. I am 
only a poor man in this worlds wealth, 
but I have faith in God. I cannot in my 
present circumstances, say how much I 
will be able to give towards the Lords 
work during the year, but you shall receive 
according as he prospers me: 
However, I enclose my small mite for 
the present. Trusting you will be enabled 
to still carry on the good work 
you are in, by our Heavenly Father 
moving the hearts of those who have 
plenty, to give of their abundance, also 
those who have less, to give in proportion. 
I see from your paper, and the 
book I have referred to, that I will be 
more able in the future to preach the 
Gospel than I have done in the past; 
and also to correct some things wherein 
I can now see plainly from Scripture 
that I was wrong in. But I taught according 
to the light I had. 
Your brother in the Gospel, 



page 2 

Ozark, Ark. 
DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:-"Food for 
Thinking Christians" received and read; 
it is now going the rounds of the village 
as a great curiosity. Some denounce 
it as the work of the devil, as 



did the Jews the miracles of Christ; 
others say its dangerous doctrine, it 
antagonizes their Church creeds; others 
rejoice that the "glad tidings of great 
joy" can be made so plain. To me I 
believe it a great blessing, for I now 
read the Bible ten times more than ever 
before; partly to see if these things are 
true, partly to see what more can be 
found with this new light; and because 
the more I know of God and his Word, 
the more I love him. 

To say that I heartily thank you for 
this little book is but a feeble expression 
of my gratitude, and while I do 
not yet endorse all of your teachings, 
I am anxious to know what more you 
have to say in harmony with them, and 
take this opportunity to ask you to send 
me the "Tabernacle Pamphlet." 

May God assist you in reflecting the 
true light. Yours in the love and 
search of the truth, . 

Farland, Kans. 
DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:-Allow me to 
call you Bro. and thank you for your 
kindness in sending me a copy of "Food 
for Thinking Christians," and two copies 
of the WATCH TOWER. Your favor is 
greatly appreciated. The pamphlet I 
have studied, and read to others, and 
talked the subject over with still others, 
with varying results. Some, with myself, 
value it highly as supplying a want 
long felt. It treats on subjects which I 
have long thought about, and desired 
to understand. It is more valuable to 
me than its weight in gold. A dear old 
mother in Israel, a confirmed invalid 
and not far from the river, with her 
son who is an Elder in our church and 
his wife and mine (five persons), delight 
to meet together to read it and converse 
about it. Another Elder and his wife 
say I have got hold of a dangerous doctrine; 



yet they are good people, but the 
Food is too strong for them. Others 
cannot understand its teachings at all, 
but cling to hell-fire and brimstone. 

But oh, what a glorious subject it is to 
those who can appreciate it, and the 
more we study it the more interested 
we become. I have been talking with 
some of the brethren and I see that I 
can form a class of interested inquirers 
after the truth. 

I have started a spirit of inquiry. 
Please send another copy of Food for 
Thinking Christians for the dear old 
mother before mentioned, she has my 
copy and can hardly allow it to leave 
her. We should dearly love to hear 
preaching on the subject. We belong 
to the Christian or Campbellite church, 
but at present are without preaching, 
our pastor having left for more profitable 
pastures. 

Yours in Christ, . 



R549 : page 2 
BURDENS. 

In the last chapter of the Epistle to 
the v Galatians v are these two sentences: 
"Bear ye one anothers burdens, and 
so fulfill the law of Christ," and "Every 
man shall bear his own burden." 

It is a burdened world. Every shoulder 
has its load, the carrying of which 
often becomes exceedingly tiresome. 
This is so far true as to make the invitation 
of Jesus, "Come unto Me, all ye 
that are heavy-laden," a universal 
invitation. 

There are real loads, and there are 
fictitious burdens. There are some 
things which a man ought no more refuse 
to bear than a ship should refuse to 



carry its freight. He was made to 
carry just such burdens. It is unmanly 
to strive to shirk them. But, sometimes, 
people take on themselves that which 
there is no need for them to bear: and 
then they make great complaints against 
fate, or God, or whatsoever or whomsoever 
they suppose to be at the head of 
universal affairs. 

A little study of the two sentences 
we have quoted above, which occur very 
near one another in the same chapter, 
may be of assistance to us. 

Their contiguity exposes them to the 
suspicion of being contradictory. In 
one breath the Apostle teaches us to 
bear one another s burdens, and in the 
next breath tells us that every man 
shall bear his own burden. 

There are two things to be noticed 
here. One is, that whereas we have 
the same English word in both sentences, 
in the Greek there are two different 
words. In the first quotation the 
word translated "burden" means that 
which tires; in the second, it means 
that which loads. Whatever makes a 
man grow weaker and weaker is the 
first kind of burden. Whatever is needful 
to carry-- such as a soldiers kit, or 
a ships freight-it is the meaning of the 
second kind of burden. 

Moreover, we are to consider the occasion 
of the employment of these 
phrases. A Christian man is overtaken 
in a fault, through some infirmity of 
character or temperament. He is not 
to be thrown away, therefore, any more 
than a brave soldier who has not the 
strength to carry his heavy knapsack and 
gun must be thrown out of the ranks, 
simply because, for the reason, he is too 
weak to bear his burden. His comrades 
must come up and restore such a one, 
in the spirit of meekness; for that comrade, 
spiritual as he is, and strong now, 



may sometime hereafter become tired, 
by either an increase of what he was 
carrying, or a decrease of his strength. 
Now the stronger comrade must assist 
the infirmities of the weaker comrade, 
and so fulfill the law of Christ. 

Those who are spiritual ought to be 
considering their Christian brethren all 
around them, to see how they can help 
the weak; but every Christian man 
ought, as far as possible, to bear his 
own burdens and discharge his own 
duties so as to throw nothing on his 
brother. The burden ought to be 
sought by the stronger; it ought not to 
be shirked by the weaker. If there be 
burdens which I cannot bear, and have 
no neighbor to assist me, then I 
have a comfort which is afforded me in 
"Psalm 55:22\~Dr. C. F. Deems. 



R549 : page 3 

LET US GO FORTH. 

"HEB. 13:13". 

Silent, like men in solemn haste, 
Girded wayfarers of the waste, 
We pass out at the worlds wide gate, 
Turning our back on all its state; 
We press along the narrow road 
That leads to life, to bliss, to God. 

We cannot and we would not stay; 
We dread the snares that throng the way, 
We fling aside the weight and sin, 
Resolved the victory to win; 
We know the peril, but our eyes 
Rest on the splendor of the prize. 

No idling now, no wasteful sleep, 
From Christian toil our limbs to keep; 
No shrinking from the desperate fight, 



No thought of yielding or of flight; 
No love of present gain or ease, 
No seeking man or self to please. 

No sorrow for the loss of fame, 
No dread of scandal on our name; 
No terror for the worlds sharp scorn, 
No wish that taunting to return; 
No hatred can to hatred move, 
And enmity but kindles love. 

No sigh for laughter left behind, 
Or pleasures scattered to the wind; 
No looking back on Sodoms plains, 
No listening still to Babels strains; 
No tears for Egypts song and smile, 
No thirsting for its flowing Nile. 

What though with weariness oppressed? 
Tis but a little and we rest. 
This throbbing heart and burning brain 
Will soon be calm and cool again; 
Night is far spent and morn is near- 
Morn of the cloudless and the clear. 

Tis but a little and we come 
To our reward, our crown, our home! 
Another year, or more, or less, 
And we have crossed the wilderness; 
Finished the toil, the rest begun, 
The battle fought, the triumph won! 

We grudge not, then, the toil, the way; 
Its ending is the endless day! 
We shrink not from these tempests keen, 
With little of the calm between; 
We welcome each descending sun, 
Ere morn our joy may be begun! 
-Horatius Bonar. 



R549 : page 3 

FULL PROOF OF HIS MINISTRY. 



After our Lords resurrection and ascension, 
the little company of a hundred 
and twenty disciples, according to 
the Masters command, were together 
awaiting the descent of power from on 
high-the Holy Spirit. While waiting 
they very properly spent the time in 
prayer and in searching of the Scriptures, 
and while thus engaged ("Acts 1:13-26") 
Peter found that passage in 
Davids prophecy which mentions the 
appointment of another to the office of 
Judas the betrayer of our Lord; and 
calling the attention of the company to 
it he said: "Men and brethren, this 
Scripture must needs have been fulfilled 
...which David spoke concerning Judas 
who was guide to them that took Jesus, 
for he was numbered with us, and had 
obtained part of this ministry.... 
It is written in the book of Psalms, 
"Let his habitation be desolate and let 
no man dwell therein, and his bishopric 
let another take." 

R550 : page 3 

Commenting on this, Peter urged that 
it was their duty to select one of their 
number to be a successor to Judas, saying, 
"Wherefore of these men which 
have companied with us all the time 
that the Lord Jesus went in and out 
among us, beginning from the baptism 
of John unto that same day that he was 
taken up from us, must one be ordained 
to be a witness with us of his resurrection. 
Peters counsel seemed good to 
all the disciples, and accordingly they 
appointed two whom they esteemed the 
most proper persons, and asked the 
Lord to make a choice between them, 
agreeing to cast lots, and to accept the 
one on whom the lot should fall as the 
Lords choice of an apostle to fill the 
place of Judas. 



Now, though Peter and the rest of the 
disciples were very zealous and anxious 
to do the Lords will, they evidently 
made a great mistake. In the first place, 
all that they were told to do was to 
tarry, to wait at Jerusalem until they 
should be endued with power from on 
high. In the second place, their human 
judgment was unwittingly attempting to 
direct the Lord, even before they were 
baptized with the Spirit; and not only 
so, but to limit his choice to one of two 
disciples. It was just like impetuous 
though zealous Peter to make such a 
proposition, and the erring human judgment 
of the balance of the disciples to 
approve and accept it. But the Lord, 
knowing their hearts, simply ignored 
their error, and let time prove to them 
that he was abundantly able, without 
their assistance, to make his own choice 
and to direct his own work. 

Of Matthias, on whom the lot fell to 
be an Apostle, we never hear afterward. 
He was with them at Pentecost, and 
was one of the hundred and twenty who 
received the baptism of the Holy Spirit, 
but his record ends there. The special 
mission of the Apostles is clearly defined 
in "Acts 1:8" -our Lords last 
words before his ascension: "Ye shall 
receive power after that the Holy Spirit 
is come upon you, and ye shall be witnesses 
unto me both in Jerusalem and in 
Judea, and in Samaria, and unto the 
uttermost part of the earth." 

While this, in a general sense, applied 
to the whole company of those early 
disciples, and while in fact by their faith 
and example, as a company who had 
actually seen the Lord both before and 
after his resurrection, they have been 
witnesses to all the world; yet in the 
strictest sense, it applied to those specially 
chosen as public teachers and 
witnesses; and those same twelve Apostles 



still speak through their writings, 
and shall continue to do so until the 
knowledge of the Lord shall fill the 
whole earth. 

Since to be an Apostle was to be a 
witness of the Lords resurrection, none 
could be Apostles except those who had 
seen Jesus after his resurrection, hence 
the eleven felt confident that the one for 
Judas place should be chosen from the 
company present, but Jehovah had another 
plan and was preparing an instrument 
of his own choosing in the person 
of Saul of Tarsus. Saul of Tarsus? 
The disciples would never have thought 
of him. He was the most noted and 
dreaded persecutor of the church known 
to them, not only in Jerusalem, but pursuing 
them even unto strange cities; 
neither had he seen the Lord after his 
resurrection. Nevertheless Saul of Tarsus 
was a chosen vessel of the Lord, to 
bear his name before the Gentiles, and 
kings and the children of Israel; fActs 9:15") 
and his after course gave full 
proof of his Apostleship. Though Saul 
was not among those who saw our Lord 
as he appeared-in the flesh-after his 
resurrection, this was no barrier to 
Gods plan under which he was "chosen 
from his mothers womb" to be an Apostle. 
Hence we read, "Last of all he 
was seen of (by) me also." fl Cor. 15:8\) 
While the other Apostles saw Jesus 
as he appeared after his resurrection, in 
various human bodies, Saul saw him as 
he is-a glorious spiritual body shining 
above the brightness of the noon-day 
sun. The effect of the personal glory 
of the Lord as seen by Paul, was to 
strike him blind, and only by a miracle 
was his sight restored. 

As Paul saw Jesus-a glorious spiritual 
being- so all the little flock shall 
see him when born of the Spirit— in the 
resurrection. As at their conversion 



and consecration, they are begotten of 
the Spirit, in the resurrection they are 
born of the Spirit. When we see him 
"as he is," it will not have the effect on 
us that it had on Paul, for he saw him 
"as one born out of due time" (more 
properly before the time); but we (and 
Paul also at that time) shall see him as 
he IS, for we shall be changed and be 
spiritual and glorious beings like him, 
being fashioned like unto his glorious 
body. 

In view of the benefit to be derived 
from such an example as Paul, it would 
be well to note in what a marked way 
the Lord gave proof of his calling. 
Some at the present day, in looking 
back to the early church, appear to 
think that they, unlike the church of 
to-day, moved along very smoothly, 
and that because they had actually seen 
the Lord and heard from his own lips, 
there was little or no trial of faith, and 
no differences of opinion among them; 
that having the Apostles directly appointed 
of the Lord and present with 
them, their teachings were all received 
without doubt or questioning; and, in 
short, that all was harmony, save the 
trials that came from the outside world, 
from those who did not profess to love 
or follow the Lord Jesus. 

But this we find is far from the facts 
in the case. Immediately after the baptism 
of the Spirit at Pentecost, all were 
of one mind and full of hope and joy- 
"And the word of God increased, and 
the number of the disciples multiplied 
in Jerusalem greatly, and a great company 
of the priests were obedient to 
the faith." fActs 6:7\) And many 
gladly received the word and were baptized 
--as many as three thousand in 
one day. These were genuine conversions 
too, and not the result of excitement 
and impulse, for they continued 



steadfastly in the Apostles doctrine and 
fellowship, and gave evidence of a 
spirit of sacrifice. Such were added to 
the Church daily. fActs 2:41-47\) 

While rejoicing in the truth, the fierce 
persecutions from without, only served 
to more firmly unite them in love and 
sympathy, and in defense of the truth 
against a common foe. But soon difficulties 
arose among themselves. Some 
began to "depart from the faith once 
delivered to the saints," to be "corrupted 
from the simplicity that is in 
Christ," and their evil influence was 
great. 

It was in the very beginning of the 
outcropping s of error, that Pauls clear 
teachings and manifest leadings of the 
Spirit marked him as the very chief of 
the Apostles, a teacher of teachers, the 
special mouth-piece of the Lord. 

Immediately after his conversion, Paul 
began to preach the Gospel, traveling 
from city to city, principally among the 
Gentiles, preaching the remission of sins 
through the redemption that is in Christ 
Jesus, to all that believe on him both 
Jew and Gentile. As a result of his 
labors, little companies of believers 
were gathered in almost every place he 
visited. For a time he was encouraged 
by their faith and zeal, but the time of 
trial came to every one of them, testing 
every saints fidelity to his consecration. 
The trial came not only to the Church 
in general, but to the Apostles also, and 
here we see Pauls clear faith and bold 
self-sacrificing zeal defending the entire 
Church against the assaults of error. 

In his preaching, as was characteristic 
of him, without fear, neither soliciting 
the favor of men, he presented the truth 
in clear and unmistakable terms. It was 
clean cut and pointed so that all understood 
just what he meant. He taught 
that all, both Jew and Gentile, might be 



justified simply and only by faith in 
Christ; that the sacrifice of Christ as a 
substitute for us, fully met all the claims 
of the law of God against us, and that 
therefore we have life through him; that 
since Christ had thus made a full end of 
the claims of the law against us, there 
is now to believers no condemnation and 
no necessity for observing the ceremonies 
of the law heretofore enjoined 
upon Israel, and that in fact to longer 
observe those typical ceremonies by 
which Israelites had vainly thought to 
justify themselves, would now be wrong, 
and would indicate a lack of full faith 
in the ransom through Christ Jesus. 

The other Apostles at Jerusalem as 
yet did not seem to see this matter so 
clearly, for they and the church at Jerusalem 
still adhered to some of the law 
ceremonies-circumcision, etc. -and 
when the Gospel went to the Gentiles 
they at first thought that they should be 
circumcised. Neither did they for some 
time seem to realize the force of their 
commission that the Gospel should go 
"to the uttermost part of the earth"- 
to the Gentiles. They had grown in 
grace and knowledge less rapidly than 
had Paul, being more or less retarded 
by the force of their surroundings and 
of old ideas. 

After a time certain persons went out 
from Jerusalem to the various Gentile 
churches, teaching contrary to Paul, 
that they should be circumcised and 
obey the law of Moses, while Paul had 
taught them that they were justified by 
faith in Christ "without the works of 
the Law." To counteract Pauls teachings, 
these Judaizing teachers evidently 
sought to cast discredit on his authority 
as an Apostle, claiming that he was not 
really an Apostle, that the real Apostles 
who were appointed by the Lord were 
all up at Jerusalem. 



On account of this difference of opinion 
the churches were more or less unsettled 
in their faith. Some evidently 
began to say, We dont know after all 
whether this Paul is any authority; it 
seems that he was not one of the twelve 
of the Lords appointment, and we dont 
know that he has any right to teach differently 
from all the other Apostles at 
Jerusalem, that we ought not to obey 
the Law of Moses. 

As this error began to spread among 
the churches, Paul began to find it necessary 
for the truths sake to not only 

R551 : page 3 

oppose the error and re-affirm and 
prove the truth, but also to prove to 
the Church that he was as much an 
Apostle, chosen of the Lord, as were 
the others. 

To the church of Galatia he wrote: 
"I marvel that ye are so soon removed 
from him (Paul) that called you into 
the grace of Christ, unto another Gospel: 
which is not another; but there be 
some that trouble you and would pervert 
the Gospel of Christ." But now let me 
tell you; "Though we (Paul and his 
associates) or an angel from heaven 
preach any other Gospel unto you than 
that we have preached,. ..and 
ye have received, let him be accursed." 
CGal. l:6-9\) 

And let me say further, brethren, 
that the Gospel which was preached 
of me, is not after man, for I neither received 
it of man, neither was I taught 
it, but by the revelation of Jesus Christ. 
fvs. 11,12".) I Paul am an Apostle, not 
of men, neither by mans appointment, 
but by Jesus Christ, and God the Father 
who raised him from the dead. ("vs. 1\) 
You heard of me in times past how I 
persecuted the Church of God and how 



I wasted it and how zealous I was for 
the tradition of my fathers, ("vs. 13,14\) 
[And he verily thought he did Gods 
service. "Acts 26:9\] But when it 
pleased God who from my birth called 
me by his grace, to reveal his Son in 
me; immediately I conferred not with 
flesh and blood, but went forth at once 
to preach the faith which once I persecuted. 
Cvs. 15,16,23"). 

To prove to you that I received my 
commission and authority direct from 
the Lord and not from them which were 
Apostles before me, let me tell you that 
I did not go up to Jerusalem until three 
years after my conversion; and then I 
went to see Peter, and abode with him 
fifteen days; but other of the Apostles 
saw I none save James, the Lords 
brother, fvs. 17-19".) Then fourteen 
years after, I went up again to Jerusalem 
with Barnabas, and took Titus with 
me also. And I went up by revelation 
--the Lord sent me-not to learn of 
them, but to communicate unto them 
that Gospel which I preach among the 
Gentiles. ("Gal. 2:1-2".) The other Apostles, 
fettered in a measure by the Judaizing 
influences around them, and not 
making sufficient progress in the knowledge 
of the truth, Paul was sent by the 
Lord to strengthen and assist them. 
But to show that he did not go about it 
boastfully he says, I communicated 
"privately to them which were of reputation, 
lest by any means I should run 
in vain ("v. 2"), lest I should fail to 
have them see the depth and fulness of 
the Gospel revealed to me." 

When Paul went to Jerusalem he was 
cordially received of the Apostles and 
elders and the church at Jerusalem. 
Though they had one of their own 
choosing to fill the place of Judas, and 
though they did not seem to understand 
his selection and peculiar course 



in preaching to the Gentiles, yet recognizing 
in him the spirit of the Master, 
and hearing how he had been owned 
and blessed, and of his devotion, zeal, 
and self-sacrifice, they had enough of 
the spirit of Christ in them to accept 
and receive him gladly, and they soon 
began to realize that he was the Lords 
choice. They saw that the Gospel of 
the uncircumcision was committed unto 
Paul, as the Gospel of the circumcision 
was committed unto Peter, (for he that 
wrought effectually in Peter to the 
Apostleship of the circumcision, the 
same was mighty in Paul toward the 
Gentiles) and when James, Cephas and 
John, who seemed to be pillars, perceived 
the grace that was given unto Paul, 

R551 : page 4 

they gave to him and Barnabas the 
right hand of fellowship. Cvs. 7-9\) 

After his private interview with the 
various Apostles referred to in v ver. 2\ we 
read of the public conference of the 
Apostles and elders and the church at 
Jerusalem. ("Acts 15\) Peters speech 
Cvs. 7-1 T) shows how he was convinced 
that not only should the Gospel continue 
to be preached to the Gentiles, but also 
that faith in Christ the Redeemer, without 
the works of the Law, was all that 
was necessary for justification either for 
Jew or Gentile, reminding them of the 
fact that God had given the Holy Spirit 
to the uncircumcision as to the circumcision, 
making no difference. 

James speech Cvs. 13-2T) was to the 
same effect. And the result of the conference 
was expressed by letter to the 
various churches Cvs. 22-29 v ) commending 
to them their beloved brother Paul 
and the truth he had been preaching. 

But to return to Pauls experience in 
withstanding error and proving his 



apostleship, he shows that he was soon 

met with a new difficulty. Doubtless 

his visit to Jerusalem and the harmony 

of spirit and of faith greatly comforted 

and cheered him, but it seems that notwithstanding 

the decision of the Jerusalem 

church as a whole in this matter, 

there were a few who were determined 

to hold on to the error and to exert 

their influence in advancing it; and their 

influence was felt in retarding the progress 

of truth even among the Apostles 

at Jerusalem. After a time Peter came 

to Antioch, and at first he very properly 

treated the Gentile Christians there as 

brethren, on equal footing with Jews; 

but afterwards when some of these 

came down from Jerusalem, not wishing 

to offend them, he separated himself 

from the Gentiles and ate with those 

who still adhered to their Jewish customs, 

for under the law a Jew might 

not eat with Gentiles. Very soon Peters 

example had its effect on Barnabas and 

other Jews in the church at Antioch, 

who before that, had been led to see 

that there is no difference between Jew 

and Gentile, but that all are one in 

Christ Jesus. 

This aroused Pauls righteous indignation, 
and he withstood Peter to the 
face, because he was to be blamed for 
thus acting deceitfully, and he says- 
right before them all, I exposed his 
deception and let them know that he 
had eaten with the Gentiles before they 
came, and that though he now wanted 
to appear to be in harmony with their 
ideas, he had been acting to the contrary 
by living as do the Gentiles- 
eating with them, etc. CGal. 2:11-21\) 

Thus, he says, I had to contend for 
the faith in Antioch, and now fchap. 3 V ) 
"O foolish Galatians, who hath bewitched 
you that ye should not obey the 
truth? This only would I learn of you, 



Received ye the Spirit by the works of 
the law or by the hearing of faith? Are 
ye so foolish? having begun in the 
spirit are ye now made perfect by the 
flesh? f vs. l-3\) As many as are of 
the works of the law are under the 
curse; for it is written, cursed is every 
one that continueth not in ALL THINGS 
which are written in the book of the 
law to do them." But that no man is 
justified by the law in the sight of God 
is evident. Our only hope then, is in 
that Christ hath redeemed us from the 
curse of the law, being made a curse 
for us-our substitute. Cvs. 10-13".) 

Thus with much reasoning did Paul 
seek to re-establish the faith of the Galatian 
church, in the breadth and efficacy 
of the ransom, and in the reliability 
of his teaching as an Apostle truly 
called of God to minister unto them. 
He then exhorted them to stand fast in 
the liberty wherewith Christ had made 
them free, and not be again entangled 
with a yoke of bondage. 

But these difficulties did not end with 
the Galatian church. Paul also found 
that the Corinthian church had been 
beset by these false teachers, and that 
as a consequence their faith in his Apostleship 
and teaching was somewhat 
shaken. He therefore found it necessary 
to write to them; for, said he, I 
fear lest by any means your minds 
should be corrupted from the simplicity 
that is in Christ. Q2 Cor. 11:3".) Now 
if he that cometh preacheth another 
Jesus whom we have not preached, or if 
ye receive another spirit which ye have 
not received, or, in short, if they present 
another entirely different Gospel, better 
than that you have received, ye might 
do well to hear them fv. 4 V ); but these 
do not pretend to bring you a different 
and a better Gospel, but rather to pervert 
the Gospel ye had received of us. 



"Such are false Apostles, deceitful 
workers, transforming themselves into 
the Apostles of Christ. And no marvel; 
for Satan himself is transformed into an 
angel of light (as a messenger of truth). 
Therefore it is no great thing if his 
ministers also be transformed as the 
ministers of righteousness, whose end 
shall be according to their works." 
Ovs. 13,15\) 

Now as to my Apostleship, I reckon 
that I was not a whit behind the very 
chiefest Apostle. But though I be unpolished 
in speech, yet not in knowledge, 
as you have had opportunity to 
know. fvs. 5,6\) Truly the signs of an 
Apostle were wrought among you. 
Cchap. 12:12\) 

In further proof of his Apostleship, 
Paul speaks of the special revelations 
he received which the other Apostles 
had not received. One very notable one 
is referred to in v chapter 12:2-4\ He 
was caught away to the third heaven- 
Paradise-the new Millennial epoch- 
and saw things so vividly, that he could 
not tell whether physically, or merely 
mentally, absent from surroundings. This 
vision showed him more of the length 
and depth of Gods loving plans for his 
creatures than he had ever before 
known; in fact more than was then DUE 
to be known, and for this cause said to 
be "unlawful to utter;" i.e., the vision 
was for his own personal instruction 
and not to be made known to the 
Church in general, because not yet due 
time. 

It seems evident that Paul saw clearly 
the very same things shown to John in 
symbolic visions-called Revelations- 
the present unfolding of which (because 
now due time) is shedding such an effulgence 
of light upon the entire word 
and plan of our Father. 

But though not permitted to tell or 



utter the deep things seen, it yet proved 
a blessing to the Church, for Pauls 
mind being thereby clearly and strongly 
guided into truth, he was enabled to 
write so powerfully and so clearly on 
every point of Christian doctrine, that 
his letters are the tribunals before which 
all error is uncovered and reproved. 
The glories of that great revelation or 
vision doubtless tinged and guided the 

R552 : page 4 

expressions of every letter and every 
discourse, and are now helpful in the 
understanding of the opening symbols 
of the "Revelation" by John. 

Truly, as Paul said, he was "not a 
whit behind the very chiefest of the 
Apostles," for he had more abundant 
revelations of Gods plan than they all. 
But of these he did not boast, though 
he referred to them as special proofs of 
his calling, and for the strengthening of 
their faith. Neither did he boast of the 
greater work he had accomplished over 
and above the others in making converts, 
and in establishing churches. 
But, he says, "Most gladly rather will I 
glory in my infirmities, that the power 
of Christ may rest upon me. Therefore 
I take pleasure in infirmities, in reproaches, 
in necessities, in persecutions, 
in distresses for Christs sake." 
CChap. 12:9,10\) 

But, he says, you Corinthians have 
thought me a fool for glorying in these 
things, but you ought to have commended 
me, for in nothing am I behind 
the very chiefest Apostles, though I be 
nothing; (it is Christ in me.) fv. IT.) You 
doubtless, thought I sacrificed the dignity 
of the office of an Apostle by the 
things which I suffered for your sake. 
"Have I committed an offence in humbling 
myself that ye might be exalted, 



because I have preached to you the 
Gospel of Christ freely?" I have taken 
wages of other churches to do you service. 
OChap. 10:7,8\) (He also labored 
with his own hands rather than be 
chargeable to those who had not yet 
come to appreciate the value of the 
Gospel and its ambassador, 
fl Cor. 4: 12\) 

"Seeing that many glory after the 
flesh, I will glory also," but I will glory 
in the things I have suffered. "In labors 
I have been more abundant, (than the 
other Apostles) in stripes above measure, 
in prisons more frequent, in deaths 
oft. Of the Jews five times received I 
forty stripes save one; thrice was I 
beaten with rods; once was I stoned; 
thrice I suffered shipwreck; a night and 
a day I have been in the deep. In 
journeyings often, in perils of waters, in 
perils of robbers, in perils by mine own 
countrymen, in perils by the heathen, 
in perils in the city, in perils in the 
wilderness, in perils in the sea, in perils 
among false brethren; in weariness and 
painfulness, in watchings often, in hunger 
and thirst, in fastings often, in cold 
and nakedness. Beside those things 
that are without, that which cometh 
upon me daily, the care of all the 
churches. Who is weak and I am not 
weak? who is offended and I burn not? 
The God and Father of our Lord Jesus 
Christ which is blessed forevermore 
knoweth that I lie not. f 10: 18-3 T.) 

Surely Paul gave full proof of his 
ministry and Apostleship, which consisted 
not only in proclaiming the glad 
tidings, but also in defending the truth 
against the assaults of the adversary to 
overturn it. We find him also exhorting 
Timothy to preach the word without 
fear of men, to be instant in season and 
out of season, (when it suited his convenience 
and when it did not,) to reprove, 



rebuke and exhort with all long-suffering 
and doctrine," telling him also that in 
his own first endeavor to withstand false 
doctrine, no man stood with him, but all 
forsook him. "Notwithstanding," he 
says, "The Lord stood with me and 
strengthened me, that by me the preaching 
might be fully known, and that all 
the Gentiles might hear." He also 
warns Timothy against Alexander the 
coppersmith, saying, "He did me much 
harm, of whom be thou aware also, for 
he hath greatly withstood our words." 
02 Tim. 4:2;14-17\) As we thus view 
his record, from his conversion to the 
end of his life, we must say that Paul 
was not only the greatest Apostle, but, 
next to our Lord, he is the most perfect 
model of a self-sacrificing spirit that 
shines on the sacred records. Without 
doubt his great usefulness, as well as his 
knowledge of Gods plan, was due to 
the fact that with such persevering effort, 
he carried out the consecration he had 
made. 

While, as we have seen, the other 
Apostles did not grow so rapidly in 
grace and in knowledge, because more 
or less fettered by former ideas, and because 
at first they did not have an eye 
so entirely single to the glory of God 
as did Paul, yet we would not be understood 
as underrating in the least, the 
authority of their writings, which beyond 
all doubt were divinely inspired, and 
probably frequently beyond their own 
understanding. Neither would we desire 
to under- value the piety and zeal of 
any of the Apostles. Impulsive Peter 
seemed to gain more self-control, and 
later we find him boldly and freely endorsing 
the teaching and course of his 
"beloved brother Paul." Q2 Pet. 3:15\) 
We find him also afterward warning the 
Church against false teachers who would 
privately endeavor to subvert the fundamentals 



of the Gospel, even denying 

that the Lord bought them, bringing 

upon themselves swift destruction, saying 

that many would follow their pernicious 

ways, by reason of whom, the way 

of truth would be evil spoken of. 

02Pet.2:l,2\) 

We also find John writing to one of 
the churches and to the "beloved Gaius," 
warning them against the evil influence 
of Diotrephes, who, "loving to have the 
pre-eminence among them," received 
not the Apostles, speaking against them 
with malicious words; and having gained 
influence over the church in that 
place, cast out those who received the 
Apostles. 03 John 9: 10\) 

We also find Jude writing to the 
churches warning them against certain 
men who had crept in unawares, turning 
the grace of God into self-exaltation, 
taking advantage of the spread of truth 
to add to their own influence and apparent 
wisdom, and introduce their own 
false teaching. He wrote to put them 
in remembrance of things which they 
already knew, but from which they were 
in danger of being turned aside by these 
false teachers, exhorting them to "contend 
earnestly for the faith once delivered 
to the saints;" and while he would 
have them shun the evil influence of 
these he exhorts the Church to make a 
difference between these wilful enemies 
of the truth, and those weak saints who 
had been partially overcome by them- 
"pulling them out of the fire" (destruction) 
to which their course was tending. 

Though all the Apostles were not so 
prompt in self-sacrifice as was Paul, time 
and discipline proved and polished 
them, and enduring hardness as good 
soldiers, they are ensamples as well as 
Apostles to the flock. May all the dear 
flock consider well the examples and 
divinely inspired teaching left us, that 



we also may war a good warfare, and so 
run as to obtain that to which we also 
have been called. Let us learn from 
these examples, that those who most 
thoroughly lose sight of self and become 
lost in Christ, and in the seeking and 
doing of his will, will be most clearly 
taught and most abundantly used of the 
Master. Paul was the chief of the 
Apostles because he sacrificed more, 
and with greater promptness than the 
others: "Whosoever of you will be 
the chiefest, shall be servant of all." 



R552 : page 4 
TURNED INTO HELL. 



"The wicked shall be turned into hell, and all 
the nations that forget God."- v Psa. 9:17\ 

This statement of the Lord recorded 
by the Psalmist, we find without any 
qualification whatever, and we must 
accept it as a positive fact. If the 
claims of "Orthodoxy" were true this 
would be indeed a fearful thought. 
Hell, to them, means a place of unmitigated 
woe, where untold millions of 
human beings writhe in anguish, tortured 
by literal fire or the gnawing of conscience, 
which, say some, is even worse. 
Under this fearful sentence they see the 
vast majority of mankind hastening, as 
they believe, to their dreadful doom; 
yet feeble indeed are the efforts put 
forth to rescue them. Babylon still has 
plenty of time for social enjoyment and 
festivity, which according to their belief 
should be spent in an almost frenzied 
endeavor to save the perishing. And 
she still has plenty of money to spend 
in gratifying the pride of life and the 
lust of the eye which might be applied 



to the same purpose; but instead, witness 
her costly temples of fashion, her 
grand organs, her costly apparel, her 
contempt of the poor, her greed of 
gain and strife for worldly honors. 

But let us look at the true meaning of 
the word hell, into which God says he 
will turn the wicked and forgetful 
nations. We find that it is the translation 
of the Hebrew word sheol, which 
simply means the state or condition of 
death. There is not in it the remotest 
idea of either life or torment; and no 
scholar can by any manner of twisting 
or turning make it to mean anything 
else. Suffering of any kind would be 
impossible where there is no consciousness, 
no life. The Psalmist says, "In 
death there is no remembrance of thee: 
in the grave (sheol) who shall give thee 
thanks?" f6:5\) And again it is written: 
"Whatever thy hand findeth to 
do, do it with thy might; for there is 
no work, nor device, nor knowledge, nor 
wisdom in the grave (sheol) whither 
thou goest." fEccl. 9:10\) The corresponding 
Greek word is hades, which 
also means the state or condition of 
death, and no other can properly be 
attached to either. Every minister, 
unless he be very ignorant indeed, 
knows that this is true: and ignorance 
on this subject is in no wise excusable in 
these days when books are so plentiful 
and so cheap. But still they go on 
preaching this false idea of hell, which 
is nothing short of a slander against the 
character of God, as though they were 
still enveloped in the ignorance of the 
dark ages. This very text which we 
are now considering, is quoted and 
preached from over and over again by 
men who ought to know, and many of 
whom do know the true meaning of the 
Hebrew word sheol, and who nevertheless 
in their attempt to uphold the 



R552 : page 5 

frightful doctrine of eternal torture, 
knowingly pervert this Scripture. 

R553 : page 5 

Well, you inquire, How, then, did this 
idea first originate, and then obtain such 
universal acceptance? We answer, that 
it originated with Papacy, and was a 
part of her scheme for raising money 
from her ignorant and deluded subjects. 
Papacy taught that this place of torment 
was prepared for all who did not seek 
the protection of THE (Papal) Church. 
All heretics were sure to go there; 
while those of THE Church not counted 
worthy of heaven, were permitted to 
tarry in purgatory, there to suffer reformatory 
punishment, which might be 
shortened and relieved by the liberality 
of their friends in securing the prayers 
of the priests. 

No other doctrine of the Romish 
Church ever did so much towards holding 
her captives in the bondage of fear, 
and increasing her revenues. The 
Protestant Churches in emerging from 
Romanism, rejected the doctrine of 
purgatory, but retained the worse doctrine 
of eternal torture in hell. Though 
the increase and spread of knowledge 
has proved it to be false, yet like 
Papacy, finding it to be such a powerful 
agent in binding her subjects, and exacting 
her revenues, she is loathe to part 
with it; and since reasoning and enlightened 
minds are beginning to question 
this dogma, her policy now is, to 
put the brakes on reason, and to hurl 
her anathemas against investigation. If 
this bondage of fear were once broken, 
and Gods children relied entirely on 
His Word, these great systems of Babylon 



would soon dissolve. 

If we substitute the true meaning of 
the word sheol, our text will read: 
"The wicked shall be turned into the 
condition of death, and all the nations 
that forget God." This we believe; 
but who are the wicked? In one 
sense all men are wicked, in that all are 
violators of Gods law, but in its fullest 
sense the wicked are those who, with 
full knowledge of the exceeding sinfulness 
of sin and the remedy provided for 
their recovery, wilfully persist in sin and 
refuse the remedy. 

As yet few, only consecrated believers, 
have come to a knowledge of God; the 
world knows him not and the nations 
cannot forget God until they are first 
brought to a knowledge of him. The 
consecrated have been enlightened, led 
of the Spirit through faith, to understand 
the deep and hidden things of 
God, which, though expressed in his 
Word, appear only as an idle tale and 
foolishness to the world, but which to 
the consecrated believer reveal the 
glory of Gods character. 

But, as we have hitherto seen, it will 
not be so in the age to come, for then 
"The earth shall be full of the knowledge 
of the Lord as the waters cover 
the sea." flsa. 11:9".) Much that we 
now receive by faith will then be demonstrated 
to the world by sight. When 
he who has ransomed man from the 
power of the grave fHos. 13:14") begins 
to gather his purchased possession 
back from the prison-house of death 
flsa. 61:1".); when the sleepers are 
awakened under the genial rays of the 
Sun of Righteousness, they will not be 
slow to realize the truth of the hitherto 
seemingly idle tale, that "Jesus Christ, 
by the grace of God, tasted death for 
every man." 

We have also seen by previous investigation, 



that the gradual ascent of 
the Kings Highway of Holiness in that 
age will be easy and possible to all, 
when all the stones-stumbling blocks- 
shall have been gathered out, and 
straight paths made for their feet. It 
is in that age that this text applies. 
Those who ignore the favoring circumstances 
of that age, and will not be 
obedient to the righteous Judge or 
Ruler-Christ-will truly be the wicked. 
And every loyal subject of the kingdom 
of God will approve the righteous judgment 
which turns such a one again into 
sheol-the condition of death. Such a 
one would be unworthy of life, and were 
he permitted to live, his life would be a 
curse to himself and to the rest of mankind, 
and a blemish on the work of 
God. 

This will be the SECOND DEATH, from 
which there shall be no resurrection. 
Having been ransomed from the first or 
Adamic death (sheol) by the sacrifice 
of Christ, if they die again on account 
of their own sin, "there remaineth no 
more sacrifice for sins." fHeb. 10:26\) 
"Christ dieth no more; death hath no 
more dominion over him." fRom. 6:9\) 
This second death should be dreaded 
and shunned by all, since it is to be the 
final end of existence to all those 
deemed unworthy of life. But in it 
there can be no suffering. Like the 
first death, it is the extinction of life: 
in fact it would not be called a second, if 
it were not like the first. The work of 
Christ is to destroy the Adamic death. 

It is because mankind had, through 
sin, become subject to death (sheol, 
hades) that Christ Jesus came to deliver 
us and save us from death. For this 
purpose Christ was manifested, that he 
might destroy death, fl John 3:8 V ; 
v Heb. 2:14\) Death is a cessation of 
existence, the absence of LIFE. There 



is no difference between the condition in 
the first and second deaths, but there is 
hope of a release from the first, while 
from the second there will be no release, 
no return to life. The first death 
sentence passed upon all on account of 
Adams sin, while the second death can 
be incurred only by wilful, individual 
sin, and can come only upon those who 
have first been released from the first 
death- -either reckoned or actually 
released. 

That this last proposition is true is 
evident, since a man cannot lose his life 
(die) twice, without having it restored 
once in the interim. The world will 
in the next age have existence actually 
restored to them by resurrection, and 
then, unless obedient to the favorable 
arrangements of that time, will merit 
and receive the second death, or death 
a second time. (Compare "Ezek. 18:2-4" 
and "Jer. 31:29,30".) During this age 
only those can be liable to the second 
death, who first by faith in Christ have 
been justified and reckoned as free from 
the Adamic death. These can become 
liable to the second death by sinning 
willfully, counting the blood of the 
covenant wherewith they were sanctified 
a common thing. ("Heb. 6:4-6" and 
"10:29".) 

But the application of our text belongs 
to the coming age, when all shall 
be set free from sheol or hades, for 
saints and sinners all go into sheol now, 
and this scripture indicates that, in the 
time when it applies, only the wicked 
shall go there. And the nations that 
forget God must be nations that have 
known him, else they could not forget 
him; and never yet have the nations 
been brought to that knowledge, nor 
will they until the coming time, when 
the knowledge of the Lord shall fill the 
whole earth, and none shall need to say 



unto his neighbor, "Know thou the 
Lord," for all shall know him from the 
least to the greatest of them. flsa. 1 1:9"; 
v Jer. 31:34\) Again, we find 
that the Hebrew word shub, which in 
our text is translated turned, signifies 
turned back, as to a place or condition 
where they once were. They once were 
in sheol, and were redeemed by the 
precious blood of Christ, and will be 
brought out of sheol; but if then they 
are wicked, they, and all who forget 
God, shall be turned back to sheol. 



R553 : page 5 

SELLING INDULGENCES. 

In the dark ages, when Papacy held 
control of mens consciences and few 
dared to think, one method which she 
practiced to supply herself with money 
was the sale of indulgences. The indulgence 
was a permission to sin and 
yet be free from its consequences. Like 
all great evils it came in gradually, and 
at first consisted in the forgiveness of 
sins and remission of the penalty to all 
who would fight the churchs battles- 
holy wars as they were called-waged 
against all within her reach whom she 
deemed "heretics" and infidels. Heretics 
included all classes of Christians 
who differed from and did not support 
Papacy. Infidels were those who disbelieved 
in Christianity, such as the 
Mohammedans. Against these she waged 
her wars, and those who engaged in 
them and died in battle were sure of 
heaven, no matter what their previous 
course of life had been. This cancellation 
of sins was offered on account, not 
of repentance and faith in the ransom, 
but for what they termed the "good 



work" of slaughtering the churchs 

enemies in the crusades, etc. Thus indulgences 

got under headway. 

Afterward succeeding Popes and 
councils became still more bold, and 
argued that if they had a right to remit 
sins for service to the church, they had 
also the right to remit them for money 
for the church, and, if right for the living, 
it was right also for the dead. By and 
by they went still further and concluded 
that if they had a right to remit past 
sins for money, they had the same right 
to remit, or excuse, or grant indulgence 
for sins of the future. 

We could not object to this course of 
reasoning if its premise or starting point 
were right. If Papacy had one of these 
rights, we must conclude that she had 
the others also. But what right has 
any man to consider any sin cancelled 
except upon the conditions God lays 
down-not works, not money, but faith 
in the redemption which is in Christ 
Jesus. 

Some of these indulgences expressly 
mentioned the very sins which might 
be committed. Some mentioned the 
number of years that the torments of 
Purgatory would be shortened to the 
indulged one. Of Pope John XII. it is 
recorded that he granted "ninety thousand 
years of pardons for deadly sins" 
for the devout repetition of three prayers 
written in a chapel in Rome. 

It was the sale of these future indulgences 
for money which awakened and 
aroused a few such honest souls as 
Luther and gave rise to the Reformation 
movement, called Protestant, because 
of their protests and objections 
to this and other evils recognized in 
Papacy. 

The crisis was reached when Julius 
I. and afterward Leo X. published indulgences 



R554 : page 5 

to those who should contribute 
money to the erection of the 
world-renowned St. Peters cathedral at 
Rome, commenced A.D., 1506. The 
collecting of these funds from the sale 
of indulgences was committed to monks 
of the "Order of St. Dominic," among 
whom was the notorious Tetzel. According 
to Luthers account they sold 
indulgences in the streets, market-places 
and taverns, teaching that every 
contributor, if he paid on his own account, 
opened to himself the gates of 
heaven, and, if on account of the dead, 
he instantly liberated a soul from 
purgatory. 

Tetzel traveled in state from town 
to town, bearing the official document 
or "bill" of Leo X. on a velvet cushion 
proclaiming to the credulous multitudes: 
"Indulgences are the most precious and 
sublime of Gods gifts; this red cross 
has as much efficacy as the cross of 
Jesus Christ. Draw near and I will 
give you letters duly sealed, by which 
even the sins you shall hereafter desire 
to commit, shall be all forgiven you. 
There is no sin so great that indulgence 
cannot remit. Pay, only pay largely, 
and you shall be forgiven. But more 
than all this, indulgences save not the 
living alone, they also save the dead. 
Ye priests, ye nobles, ye tradesmen, 
ye wives, ye maidens, ye young men, 
hearken to your departed parents and 
friends who call to you from the bottomless 
abyss:-We are enduring horrible 
torment; a small alms would deliver 
us, you can give it, will you not? 
The moment the money clinks in the 
bottom of the chest, the soul escapes 
from purgatory and flies to heaven. 
With ten groshen you can deliver your 
father from purgatory. Our Lord God 



no longer deals with us as God-he has 
given all power to the pope."* 

The following is the form of the indulgences, 
the blanks being filled to 
suit circumstances:- 

"Our Lord Jesus Christ have mercy 
on thee;... and absolve thee by the 
merits of his most holy sufferings. I, 
in virtue of the Apostolic power committed 
to me, absolve thee from all 
...excesses, sins and crimes, that 
thou mayest have committed, however 
great and enormous they may be, and 
of whatever kind.... I remit 
the pains thou wouldst have had to 
endure in purgatory. ...I restore 
thee to the innocence and purity 
of thy baptism, so that at the moment 
of death, the gates of the place of torment 
shall be shut against thee, and the 
gates of Paradise open to thee. And 
if thou shouldst live long, this grace 
[favor-indulgence] continue th unchangeable 
till the time of thy end. In 
the name of the Father and of the Son 
and of the Holy Ghost. Amen. The 
brother John Tetzel, commissary, hath 
signed this with his own hand." 

A scale of prices was so fixed as to 
draw heavily from the rich and yet not 
overlook and miss the pennies of the 
poorer. For instance, the royal crime 
against the laws of the Church, of marriage 
with a first cousin cost $5,000, 
while the terrible sin of wife-murder or 
parricide cost only $20. 

The advantage of Papacy in the promulgation 
of the doctrine of eternal and 
purgatorial torture is here manifest, and 
truly they left no power of eloquence 
unused to prove those awful doctrines, 
one of which-the worst-Protestantism 
has resolutely held on to, and as a sweet 
morsel refuses to give it up, though 
found contrary to Gods character and 
Word. 



No wonder that such deep depravity 
brought its own overthrow, so that even 
the church of Rome subsequently found 
it necessary to condemn it at the council 
of Trent. But even yet the same principle 
is in force, though more carefully 
guarded. 

When Protestantism first stepped out 
it was upon the platform of "Justification 
by faith," and not by money, prayers 
or works. However, as we have seen 
heretofore, the lines of protest are gradually 
disappearing, and in many ways 
many of the sects are closely approaching 
a likeness of their mother. Even in 
this matter of "Indulgences" we find the 
spirit of the mother in the daughters. 
Not that they go to the same extent of 
depravity in the matter: that would be 
impossible, for the Father of lies is too 
crafty to attempt to deceive men in so 
open a manner in this enlightened nineteenth 
century, but it is, nevertheless, a 
fact that indulgences are sold for money 
in Protestant churches in very many 
localities. 

It is so changed now, that a membership 
in the so-called churches is reckoned 
a passport to heaven. And memberships 
may readily be gained by those 
who are far from being saints, if they bring 
influence and money into the church. 
And even though they be known to be 
guilty of crimes against their church 
creeds, or worse, against the laws of 
God and men; if they have money 
which can be drawn from to build or 
furnish a little "St. Peters," or to clear 
a church already built, of debt, they are 
unrebuked and continued in membership 
with all its implied rights of 
heavenly rest and happiness at the end. 

As the unblushing indulgences of Papacy 
aroused the indignation of unfettered 
minds three centuries ago, so this 
modern phase of indulgence is arousing 



the contempt of the saints and of the 
outside world. But here, as there, good 
is resulting, for men are coming to see 
that while a membership of the true 
church, "whose names are written in 
heaven," is a sure guarantee of eternal 
life, etc., membership in earthly institutions, 
called churches, is a totally different 
matter. 



^Words of Tetzel-by H. Guinness. 



R554 : page 5 

OUR LORDS PRESENCE. 

The question is coming up again, "Is 
he present?" 

Some are asking the question, while 
others are asserting that he is not present, 
that those who are teaching the 
presence of the Son of man are drawing 
largely upon their imagination; that 
there is no good ground for believing 
that Christ is now actually upon the 
scene of action among men. 

Prejudice is very strong, begotten of 
early teaching and strengthened with 
years of training; so we may not expect 
to apprehend the truth all at once, nor 
expect our friends will do so. To expect 
it would be to expect something 
different from the general experience of 

R554 : page 6 

mankind. So we must be patient and 
wait for the seed to grow and bear 
fruit. 

Then, as to whether he is or is not 
present, let us ask first, Is it time to expect 
him? That is, is the time for his 



second advent, toward which the prophecies 
point, fulfilled? Is it generally 
supposed by those who study Gods 
word closely and carefully, and have 
His spirit, (others could not understand,) 
that the time has arrived when he should 
be expected? Has there not been special 
inquiry and expectation regarding 
his second coming, similar to that which 
existed at his first coming? Has not 
the time toward which the prophecies 
were supposed to point arrived and 
passed? 

We think that not a few who would 
not like to follow out such an admission 
to its conclusion, would yet feel constrained 
to answer the above questions 
in the affirmative. (See "Times and 
Seasons," "The Jubilee Cycles and the 
Two Dispensations," in Day Dawn, [out 
of print]; also, "How will Christ Come?" 
in "Food for Thinking Christians"; 
and the forth-coming "Millennial Day 
Dawn.") 

For those who have read or shall 
read the articles referred to, and who 
yet are troubled with the words of the 
angel as recorded in "Acts 1:1 1\ we 
subjoin a few thoughts. 

When we say that Jesus presence is 
a spiritual and personal presence, though 
invisible, we are asked if he was not a 
spiritual being at the time when the 
men of Galilee stood "gazing up into 
heaven?" And we answer, yes; but it 
was not his spiritual nature which they 
saw, and whatever it was, whether the 
very same body that was nailed to the 
cross, or another that resembled it, 
though the former is probable, it was 
brought into service at this time simply 
to convey to their minds the evidence 
that he was alive and had power over 
death, having risen from the dead. That 
this was the case, and that they did not 
see his spiritual being, is evident from 



what Jesus said to the disciples fLuke 24:39"), 

"A spirit hath not flesh and 

bones as ye see me have; so it was the 

flesh and bones which they saw, and we 

think this is indisputable evidence that, 

as a spiritual being only, he would be 

invisible to natural eyes, and this is 

farther verified by the fact that he WAS 

invisible most of the time during his 

forty days stay upon earth after his 

resurrection. Why not doubt his presence 

then simply because he was 

invisible? 

Several times during that stay he became 
suddenly visible and again invisible 
in their presence. His object, then, 
in giving us evidence that he had risen 
from the dead, was at that time fully accomplished 
and is now no longer needed. 

We see that his occasional visible 
manifestations during his forty days stay 
were exceptions, and that as a rule he 
was invisible. There was a declaration 
that he would "so come in like manner" 
as they had seen him go, but there is no 
statement that he would be seen again 
in like manner, as in those exceptional 
cases. But, says one, If he come in like 
manner, why can he not be seen in like 
manner? Let us illustrate. Suppose 
your friend leaves his home at noon, 
riding in a carriage; he says I will return 
in like manner as you see me go. 
He returns in the early morning before 
it is light, and you are asleep, Has that 
any connection whatever with his manner 
of return? Certainly not; neither is 
it necessarily implied in this passage 
that he would be seen again in like 
manner. 

But what have we? We have the 
express declaration of Christ himself 
that "If any man shall say to you, Lo, 
here is Christ, or there; believe it not." 
Why? Because false Christs and false 
prophets will arise, and they will be 



visible and will deceive many. If he 
were to appear to the natural eye, surely 

R555 : page 6 

there would be no harm in believing it, 
and instead of warning us to not believe 
it, we should expect to be exhorted to 
believe it, and to give good heed to 
those who should announce, Lo, here is 
Christ. 

But his answer was in harmony with 
the question fverse v 3), "What shall be 
the SIGN of thy coming?" (parousia, 
presence. See E.D. and R.V. margin; 
also Rotherhams translation, which 
reads, "And what the sign of thine 
arrival and conclusion of the age.") 
What sign would be needed of Christs 
presence if he were visible? Surely the 
natural man could ask for no better 
evidence of his presence than to look 
upon him, but the child of God at this 
hour requires, and is furnished with 
better evidence than that, for modern 
science and invention can deceive our 
eyes, but the sign of his presence is 
such that Gods children can rest with unshaken 
faith in it, and the enemy cannot 
wipe it out. After narrating the course 
of events which were to precede his 
coming, he says: "Wherefore, if they 
shall say unto you, behold, he is in the 
desert; go not forth; behold, he is in the 
secret chamber (materialized), believe it 
not." After narrating events still farther, 
up to the time of his presence, he 
says C30th verse"), "And then shall appear 
(the glorified human body of the crucified 
Redeemer? No) the SIGN of the 
Son of man in heaven." Ah! then only 
those who can understand the SIGN 
would know of his presence; for it is 
not a sign that he is soon to come, but a 
sign of his PRESENCE. 

But, says one, it says, "Then shall all 



the tribes of the earth mourn, and they 
shall see the Son of man coming in the 
clouds of heaven." But it is not at the 
same time, nor it is the word idou, as in 
"Luke 17:23\ The root word is horao; 
to discern, i.e., they come to apprehend, 
to recognize the fact that he is indeed 
present; in no other way do we see how 
it can be made to harmonize with the 
preceding statements. 

Now, let us read: "Then shall appear 
the sign of the Son of man in heaven; 
and THEN (still farther on) shall all the 
tribes of the earth mourn, and they 
shall (finally) see (recognize) the Son 
of man coming in the clouds of heaven;" 
all of which was understood at the 
first by those who could read the sign. 

The troublous times cause them to 
mourn, and doubtless they discover that 
sin is the cause of all the trouble, and 
this would lead them to investigate, and 
thus finally they are led to desire as 
well as to recognize him. 

Now let us notice the concurrence of 
some of the events at the time of his 
presence. The good news will have 
been "preached in all the world for a 
witness, and then shall the end (of the 
age) come," (heko, be here.) Has that 
been done? If not, then the end of the 
age has not arrived, and Christ is not 
present. Let such as doubt look up 
the evidence and see if this was not 
accomplished some few years ago. 

There is an intimation given in the 
"48th verse" that an evil servant will be 
saying, "My Lord delayeth his coming." 
This would not be likely to be said 
until some one had said he had come, 
nor would it be delay until after he was 
due to come. Both of these statements 
are now being made by two parties. 
One party says he is present, another 
says he delayeth to come; and they 
who deny his presence, smite their 



fellow servants, because they declare his 
presence. 

In the v 50th verse" we are told 
that "the Lord of that servant shall 
come (heko, be here) in an hour that he 
is not aware of. In v 2 Peter 3:10" we 
read: "The day of the Lord will come 
(heko, be here) as a thief," and in v l Thess. 5:4 V 
it is said: "But ye, brethren, 
are not in darkness that that day should 
overtake you as a thief." Again in 
v 2 Peter 3:4 V we are told of a class 
who will be saying, "Where is the 
promise of his coming, (parousia, presence. 
See R.V. margin, E.D., also 
Rotherhams Translation and Youngs 
Concordance,) for since the fathers fell 
asleep, all things continue as they were 
from the beginning of the creation." 
You say Christ has come and is now 
present? Pooh! The idea! Simply 
ridiculous! Why, everything is just as 
it always has been! ! I dont see any 
difference. Dont the Bible say that he 
will come in the clouds of heaven with 
power and great glory? Yes; and dont 
it say that every eye shall see him? 
Nonsense, then, to say he has come when 
nobody has seen him! 

Thus men talk, and their aggregate 
sayings and doings are the fulfillment of 
the prophecies, and we think constitute 
the sign of the Son of man in heaven. 
(Government or rule.) 

The elements are already taking fire, 
the friction between the contending 
moral and social forces is so great. The 
morning of the day of the Lord is 
cloudy, and thick darkness vails the face 
of nature, and only those who have 
light can see, and not until high noon 
will every eye be able to see (perceive, 
understand) that he is present; and 
when "every eye" sees him every one 
will be holy, "without which no man 
shall see (horao, discern) the Lord." 



J. C. SUNDERLIN, 

Fort Edward, N.Y. 



R555 : page 6 

"FAITH COMETH BY HEARING." 

"Without faith it is impossible to please God." 
-"Heb. 11:6". 

"Faith cometh by hearing and hearing by the 
word of God."- Rom. 10:17\ 

A clearly defined understanding of 
faith will show the theory of Theologians, 
who assert that God is now trying 
to save the world, to be not only at 
variance with his word, but also totally 
opposed to his attributes-wisdom, power 
and love. All wise, his plans are arranged 
for the accomplishment of his 
purposes; all powerful, he knows no 
such feeble word as trying to save, but 
can do whatsoever he will, and his will 
is, love to mankind. "He so loved the 
world." Therefore, Jesus, his representative, 
"shall see of the travail of his 
soul and be satisfied." 

The word of God declares faith, a 
necessity to harmony with the mind of 
God; and its reasonableness will be apparent, 
when it is seen that it could not 
be other than impossible, to be at peace 
with God without it; and not only so, 
but it will then appear beautiful in its 
simplicity, as part of the grand plan of 
the ages, for the gathering together in 
one all things under Jesus. 

Faith in any creed or system of religious 
teaching, not wholly founded on 
Jesus, as the purchaser, or redeemer, and 
expression of God, is a delusion. Jesus 
is the way, the truth, and the life ("John 14:6"), 
therefore, there is no other way 
to God. "No man cometh to the 



Father, but by me"-Jesus; no other 

truth concerning him-- "He hath declared 

him;" no other through whom 

and by whom life is provided, "Neither 

is there salvation in any other-for 

there is no other name under heaven 

given among men whereby we must be 

saved." ("Acts 4:12\) "By grace (favor) 

are ye saved, through faith" in Jesus; 

-"faith toward (or in) our Lord 

Jesus Christ" fActs 20:2 1") is the unquestioning 

acceptance by belief in, and 

conformity of life to Gods plan for the 

redemption of the world, as revealed in 

Jesus. 

There is no merit in faith; it is not 
righteousness; nor does it justify us; but 
we are justified through faith, and it is 
"counted for righteousness." ("Romans 4:5\) 
It is "precious faith" to those 
who are the called according to his purpose, 
because it takes hold of and appropriates 
the "exceeding great and 
precious promises" of his word to them, 
having obtained an "inheritance among 
them that are sanctified by faith that is 
in me"-Jesus. fActs 26:18\) These 
are the sons, or "children of God; and 
if children, then heirs of God, and joint 
heirs with Christ, (to the inheritance of 
a world,) if so be that we suffer with 
him, that we may be also glorified together 
f Rom. 8:17"); that we should 
be a kind of first-fruits of his creatures, 
f James 1:18"). But if the Church be a 
"first fruits," there must of necessity be 
a great ingathering after the Church- 
"the mystery of God, should be finished"; 
otherwise it is no first fruits, nor 
could it be said in any sense, "that we 
should be to the praise of his glory who 
first trusted in Christ, f Eph. 1:12"), if 
the world will not trust in him when the 
Church-"the body of Christ"-is completed. 
And not only so, but God hath 
for this very purpose "raised us up together 



and made us sit together in 
heavenly places in Christ Jesus; that in 
the ages to come he might show the 
exceeding riches of his grace in his 
kindness toward us in Christ Jesus." 
fEph. 2:7\) All this comes within the 
range of "faith in Christ." To those 
who recognize this in Gods word, it 
becomes part of that faith, without the 
exercise of which, it is impossible to 
please God. 

Again, the purport of Jesus prayer 
for those who should believe and have 
faith on him in the Gospel dispensation, 
conveys the same idea: "Neither pray 
I for these (disciples) alone, but for 
them also which shall believe on me 
through their word, that they all may 
be one, as thou Father art in me, and I 
in thee, that they may be one in us; 
that [when they are made one] the world 
may believe [in the next dispensation,] 
that thou hast sent me." fJohn 17:20,21".) 
"For he hath purposed in himself 
that in the dispensation of the fulness 
of times he might gather together 
in one all things in Christ, both which 
are in heaven, and which are on earth. 
"Eph. 1:10\ 

The love of God was manifested in 
giving his Son, not to redeem a few, as 
Calvinism would have us believe, but to 
redeem a world; for he commendeth 

R556 : page 6 

his love towards us, in that, while we 

were yet sinners, Christ died for us. 

CRom. 5:8\) "He died for all." f2 Cor. 5:15\) 

He gave himself a ransom for 

all. ("1 Tim. 2:6\) "My flesh I (Jesus) 

give for the life of the world" lost in 

Adam; therefore there shall be a "resurrection 

of the just and of the unjust" 

--"the resurrection of judgment"— 

trial. 



"God so loved the world, that he 
gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever 
believeth in him should not perish, 
but have everlasting life." fJohn 3:16\) 
And we love him, because (we believe) 
he first loved us. fl John 4:19\) Nor 
could God recognize as children those 
who do not love him; and they cannot 
love him without faith, for it is not possible 
for a child to love a father in whose 
word he has no confidence; therefore, 
"without faith it is impossible to please 
God." Nor can any man ever come 
into harmony with the divine will without 
faith. 

Arminianism, in claiming that the 
heathen who have not heard the Gospel, 
are saved by the natural law of conscience, 
are in direct conflict with Gods 
word, which declares it "impossible." 
Will God save those who do not please 
him? By no means, and they cannot 
please him without faith. No man ever 
has, or ever can be saved, either by the 
law of nature-conscience-or by the 
written law. Paul declares he was chief 
of sinners in all good conscience, and if 
he could be the greatest of sinners in 
good conscience, how can there be hope 
for any by obedience to conscience? 

If man possessed the necessary ability 
to obey the law, and thus through the 
law become righteous, Jesus need not 
have died: "For if righteousness come 
by the law, then is Christ dead in vain, 
i.e., died to no purpose; but, instead of 
its being a means through which he 
could become righteous, it became, because 
of mans weakness and inability 
to fulfill it, a means whereby he could 
realize his helpless and hopeless 
condition in Gods sight. For what 
things soever the law saith, it saith to 
them (all the world except those in 
Christ) who are under the law, that 
every mouth may be stopped, and all 



the world may become guilty before 
God. Therefore, by the deeds of the 
law, there shall no flesh be justified in 
his sight; for by law is the knowledge 
of sin. ORom. 3:19,20\) 

It is apparent, that "all the world" 
includes not only those who have the 
written law, but also those who, not 
having the (written) law, are a law unto 
themselves:. ..their thoughts 
the meanwhile accusing or else excusing" 
them; ("Rom. 2:14,15^), thus 
making "all guilty." "There is none 
righteous, no not one." Jesus said: 
If a man loves me, he will keep my 
commandments. 

It is evident, therefore, that the billions 
of men who never heard "the 
truth" could not have faith in it, and 
could not rejoice in it, and consequently 
cannot have known God, and how could 
they love him? The carnal (depraved) 
mind is enmity against God, it is not 

R556 : page 7 

subject to the law of God, neither indeed 

can be; so then, they that are in 

the flesh (depraved) cannot please God." 

None are exempt from the condemnation 

of law. God hath concluded (shut 

up by law) them all in unbelief that he 

might have mercy on ALL. ("Rom. 11:12".) 

Not, however, by saving them in 

ignorance; provision has been made by 

Jesus ransom whereby God can be just 

and the justifier of him that believeth. 

But how can they believe on him of 

whom they have not heard? for faith 

cometh by hearing. ..the word of 

God. Because Jesus by the grace (favor) 

of God tasted death for every man CHeb. 2:9"), 

the "good tidings of great joy 

...shall be to ALL PEOPLE" 

("Luke 2:10") in order that they may 

have the requisite faith. 



Only a comparatively small portion 
of the race has heard the "tidings" in 
this life, and, if they do not hear, when 
raised from the dead, the promises of 
God never could be fulfilled, but we are 
assured he "will have all men to be 
saved (from the consequences of Adams 
sin- -death) and to come into a knowledge 
of the truth." fl Tim. 2:4\) In 
no other way can Gods word, and Gods 
dealings with mankind be reconciled. 
Think of the ignorance, of the "only 
name" in this enlightened day, as shown 
by the most recent statistics of the population 
of the globe, which we append, 
classified according to religious creeds: 

Roman Catholics 212,000,000 

Protestants 124,000,000 

Greek Church 84,000,000 

Israelites 7,000,000 

Mohammedans 200,000,000 

Brahmins 163,000,000 

Buddhists 423,000,000 

Hindoos 230,000,000 

The Protestant missionary societies 
claim that they are able to reach 100,000,000 
of this vast host of heathens, 
which would leave a balance of about 
900 millions who have never heard the 
name of Jesus. 

Think you, in view of these figures, 
that God is now saving the world by 
faith? If he be, this is a sad showing. 
Only one hundred and twenty-four 
million Protestants, of whom about 
twenty millions are said to be members 
of Protestant churches, which includes 
hypocrites and deceived persons. Truly 
the whole world is either apostate, 
Christian, Mohammedan, or heathen. 
If we accept the teaching called "orthodoxy," 
we must reject Gods character 
or word, but we are safe in concluding 
erroneous that which conflicts with 



Gods word, character, and our reason. 
In what contrast with this do we find 
the Bible doctrines, that the church is 
now being selected from among mankind, 
and, when made partakers of the 
"divine nature," shall be Gods instrumentality 
in causing "the knowledge of 
the Lord to fill the whole earth!" How 
sublime the thought- -how Godlike 
the provision for all his intelligent- 
that all may have a chance to come to 
knowledge of and harmony with Him. 
S. O. BLUNDIN. 



R556 : page 7 

ELIAS SHALL FIRST COME. 

The history of Elijah the prophet, 
called in the New Testament Elias, is 
one full of interest to us, not only because 
it is a history of a courageous and 
faithful servant of God, but because we 
believe that he was also a type, and that, 
through the medium of his life, God has 
given us illustrations of some of the deep 
things of His word. 

Before touching upon Elijah as a type 
we wish to call attention to the peculiar 
prophecy with which his name stands 
connected-the last words of the Old 
Testament: 

"Behold I will send you Elijah the 
prophet before the coming of the great 
and dreadful day of the Lord. And he 
shall turn the hearts of the fathers to the 
children, and the heart of the children 
to their fathers, lest I come and smite 
the earth with a curse." CMal. 4:5,6\) 

This was a prominent prophecy in 
the mind of the Jews, and they therefore 
expected that before Messiah should 
come, Elijah would first appear and prepare 
them. This matter was thrust at 



the early disciples who believed in Jesus, 
and truly Jesus answers gave them but 
little light on the real significance of the 
prophecy; probably because it was 
among the many things he had to tell 
them which they could not yet bear. 

Let us look at Jesus statements: 
He seems to apply this prophecy in 
some measure to John the Baptist. 

"His disciples asked him, saying, Why 
then say the Scribes that Elias [Elijah] 
must first come? And Jesus answered 
and said unto them, Elias truly SHALL 
FIRST COME and restore all things. But 
I say unto you that Elias is come already, 
and they knew him not, but have 
done unto him whatsoever they listed. 
Likewise shall also the Son of man 
suffer of them. Then the disciples understood 
that he spake unto them of 
John the Baptist." CMatt. 17:10-14\) 

But when in another place Jesus says 
of John: "IF ye will RECEIVE IT, this is 
Elias which was for to come," ("Matt. 11:14",) 
it causes us to consider: What had 
their receiving or rejecting of Johns 
work to do with the matter? Would not 
John the Baptist (great as he was) and 
his ministry of six to twelve short 
months, confined in influence to a very 
small part of little Judea, be a rather 
small fulfillment of the great work, etc., 
prophecied of Elijah? It surely would. 
Then, again, was it to be Elijah resurrected 
that the prophet meant? No; but 
we think the prophecy referred to the 
coming of another faithful reprover of 
sin, such as Elijah was in his day, one 
ready to denounce popular and respected 
sin and sinners, as Elijah did the 
priests of Baal in his day. With this 
thought, we see how John, indeed, exercised 
the same godly boldness in reproving 
sin in his day. Thus he 
rebuked the Scribes and Pharisees, 
the great religionists of his day, saying, 



"O generation of vipers, who hath warned 

you to flee from the wrath to come?" 

("Matt. 3:7\) And as part of Elijahs 

work was to point out the true and acceptable 

sacrifice of Jehovah, so it was a 

part of Johns work to point out the antitype 

of those sacrifices, saying, "Behold 

the Lamb of God which taketh 

away the sin of the world." ("John 1:29".) 

This begins to look more reasonable, 
but is it in harmony with the Scriptures? 
We answer, yes; thus it was foretold in 
the announcement of Johns birth: "He 
(John) shall go before him (Jesus) in 
the spirit and power of Elias... 
to make ready a people prepared for 
the Lord." ("Luke 1:17".) This, evidently, 
is the significance of this prophecy 
--that before the coming of the 

R557 : page 7 

great and dreadful day of the Lord 
some power or agency would be raised 
up, which would act as a bold teacher 
to arouse those in a proper condition. 

But still the question arises, Was 
Johns ministry sufficient to fulfill all 
the predictions concerning the Elias? 
Do not Jesus words: "Elias truly 
shall first come and restore all things," 
seem to indicate a greater work than 
John accomplished? What if John the 
Baptist stood for or represented a multitudinous 
Elijah, as Jesus stood for and 
represented a multitudinous Christ, of 
which he was the head and his church 
glorified the body? 

This, we believe, is the proper solution 
of the matter. We have seen heretofore 
that the Christ of power and 
glory, foretold in Scripture, is not only 
Jesus Christ, but all those, also, who being 
justified by his sacrifice have become 
joint-heirs with him, and fellow members 
of the same body, over which Jesus 



is the head, God blessed forever. fEph. 1:22"; 
"Rom. 9:5".) So it does not surprise 
us that as John, in the bold and 
noble spirit of Elijah, introduced and 
made ready the way of Jesus at the 
first advent, so a greater than John-a 
company whom he represented-in the 
same bold Elijah spirit, will prepare the 
way for the reception of the glorious 
and complete Christ. 

Then, the Elias (John) and the Christ 
(Jesus) failed of a full accomplishment 
of the restoring and reigning foretold 
of the Elias and the Christ; but the 
Elias and the Christ complete shall fulfill 
all the prophetic predictions. 

To be brief, we understand that Elijah 
and John represented the true and 
faithful witnesses of this Gospel age, 
whose testimony and labors, under the 
blessing of God, shall prepare the way 
for the reign of the glorified church and 
its glorious head, by making ready a 
people prepared (the "little flock") for 
the Lord. (See "Luke 1:17".) As John, 
in the spirit of Elias, in the end of the 
Jewish age called attention to Jesus, and 
thus prepared those who heard to receive 
Jesus and be exalted at Pentecost 
to the higher spiritual plane, so here, 
the Elijah class will in the end of this 
age call attention to the present Christ, 
that those prepared of the Lord to be 
exalted to glory may be made ready. 

But if we look backward and compare 
the life of Elijah with the history 
of the true church of overcomers, we 
shall see such a marvelous coincidence 
as will convince us of the correctness of 
our supposition that he was the type, 
and the church the real Elijah. That 
the comparison may be the more readily 
made, we place some of the leading 
points of similarity in the history of 
Elijah and the church in parallel 
columns. 



ELIJAH. 

I. 

Elijah persecuted for 
righteousness sake. 

II. 

His principal persecutor 
was Jezebel, the 
wicked Queen of Israel, 
who is mentioned by 
name as the type of the 
enemy of the saints. 
CRev. 2:20\) 

III. 

Jezebels persecuting 
power was exercised 
through her husband, 
Ahab, the king. 

IV. 

Elijah fled from Jezebel 
and Ahab, into the 
wilderness, to a place 
prepared of God, where 
he was nourished. Fed 
by the ravens and by 
the widow. (See 
"1 Kings 17:5,9\) 

V. 

Elijah was "three 
years and six months" 
in the wilderness, and 
during that time there 
was no rain, and a great 
famine was in the land. 
C James 5:17"; "1 Kings 17:7" 
and "18:2".) 

VI. 

When Elijah returned 
from the wilderness, 
the errors of Jezebels 



priests were manifested 

and the true God honored, 

followed by copious 

rains. 

CI Kings 18:41-45\) 

VII. 

The king and the 
people at first rejoice 
and Elijah and his God 
are honored, but the 
spirit of Jezebel is unchanged 
and she still 
sought Elijahs life, and 
he was again compelled 
to flee to the wilderness, 
fl Kings 1 8:40,45 ,46 v ; 
v 19:l-4\) 

VIII. 

Elijahs career ended 
by his being taken from 
the earth. 

THE CHURCH. 

I. 

The Saints suffer for 
the truth. 

II. 

Their principal persecutor 
was the apostate 
Church of Rome, which 
claims to be a "queen" 
and ruler over spiritual 
Israel. CRev. 18:7\) 

III. 

Papacys persecuting 
power was the Roman 
Empire, to which she 
was married. 

IV. 

The true Church fled 



into the symbolic wilderness 
--or condition of 
isolation-to her place, 
prepared of God, where 
she was miraculously 
sustained. "The earth 
helped the woman." 
(See^Rev. 12:6,16\) 

V. 

The church was three 
and a half symbolic 
years (a day for a year 
-1260 literal years) in 
the wilderness condition, 
during which there 
was a spiritual famine 
because of the lack of 
truth-the living water. 
(Comp/Rev. 12:6V 11:3 V ; 
v Amos8:ir.) 

VI. 

At the end of the 
1260 years the power of 
the truth and its witnesses 
was manifested 
(1798 A.D.), and since 
then the truth has flowed 
out and is deluging the 
world at the rate of 
millions of Bibles every 
year. 

VII. 

The teachings of the 
Bible have brought such 
blessings that the empires 
of earth recognize 
the Lords hand, yet 
they have almost gone 
back to the principles 
of Papacy (Jezebel), 
with so-called "Protestant" 
sects, and the saints 
are again compelled to 



flee for the preservation 
of their spiritual life, 
and are again in the 
wilderness condition. 

VIII. 

The saints will be 
changed from earthly to 
heavenly beings. 

These are striking coincidences, and 
we believe are not accidental, but with 
Jesus, we believe that to those who could 
"receive" Johns testimony, he to such 
filled the office or work of Elias, which 
the church more fully accomplishes. 

The expression, "turn the hearts of 
the fathers to the children, and the heart 
of the children to their fathers," is a 
peculiar one, and the sense of the 
Hebrew is even less clear; but we have 
it repeated by the angel as recorded by 
"Luke 1:16", in a manner which makes it 
plain-- "to turn the hearts of fathers to 
children, and the disobedient to the 
wisdom of the righteous." In a word, 
to restore harmony between Israel and 
"the fathers," (the patriarchs, etc.) and, 
in the fuller sense, the world whom 
Israel typified or represented, shall come 
into a condition of harmony and peace 
with God, similar to that of the "fathers." 

When in the foregoing prophecy it is 
said: "He shall turn the hearts... 
lest I come and smite the earth with a 
curse," fMal. 4:5, 6\) it apparently 
teaches that the mission of Elijah would 
be successful-that he would turn the 
hearts. But looking at the ministry of 
John the Baptist, and also at the 
ministry of the church, we find that 
neither SUCCEEDED in turning any considerable 
proportion of men to the Lord. 
This seeming discrepancy causes us 
to look again at the word of the Prophet, 
and looking more closely, we find that 



it is a CONDITIONAL statement. If Elias 
succeeds, the earth will not be smitten 
with a curse, but if he succeeds not, 
the curse will come. 

This harmonizes exactly. If John 
had been heeded in the Jewish church 
and had succeeded in turning that institution 
to the Lord, so that they had 
recognized the present Saviour, then 
that Jewish church would have received 
Him and He would have exalted it; 
but, on the contrary, they (as a church) 
rejected the teaching of Elias, rejected 
the greater one whom he announced, 
and, as a consequence, they as a people 
received THE CURSE mentioned by the 
prophet. Their polity was overturned 
in utter destruction. Now let us look 
at the larger fulfillment. Representatives 
of the Elijah class-the saints- 
have rebuked sin and censured sinners, 
and professing Scribes and Pharisees, 
and sought to turn the people, and 
finally announced the presence of 
Christ; but now as then, there are few 
turned so that they recognize the presence 
which they had expected so differently. 
And here, as in the Jewish prototype, 
the rejection of the Elijah message 
brings the curse mentioned by the 
prophet- the overthrow both of the 
church (nominal) and also of the civil 
powers to which she is wedded. This 
curse or wrath of the "Day of the Lord" 
has already been shown as commencing 
A.D., 1878, lasting 37 years, to 1914, 
A.D.-as the curse upon the nominal 
Jewish church was of 37 years duration, 
from A.D. 33, where Jesus gave them 
up and left their house desolate, till the 
utter destruction of their city and nation, 
A.D. 70. 

However, the work of Elias-the 
church glorified-will be successful. 
"He shall restore all things"; hence, 
while the curse comes and overturns 



much, it shall not be "utterly" cursed 
and forever destroyed, because the 
exalted Elijah-Christ- shall put down 
all opposition and then restore and 
bless. 

The two characters, Elijah and John, 
are both needed to fully illustrate the 
closing work of the saints. The circumstances 
of the close of Johns career, 
combined with those of Elijahs, seem to 
fill out the picture completely. According 
to Johns experience, we should expect 
that as his reproval of Herod for 
having an unlawful wife fLuke 3:19"), 
led to his imprisonment, so here, the 
reproval of the church and world for 
their unlawful union, provokes the displeasure 
of both and leads to the ostracizing 
(beheading) of the faithful 
reprovers. 

Then, too, John died, but Elijah was 
taken to heaven, and thus they two represent 
the last class of the saints. The 
moment of the death of the flesh, will be 
the moment of translation to the new 
nature. 

ELIJAHS SUCCESSOR-ELISHA. 

Before translating Elijah, the Lord 
arranged that he should prepare and 
instruct his successor, and sent him to 
Elisha as such, fl Kings 19: 16"). So, 
if we have found Elijah to represent the 
overcomers, the "Bride" or "Body" of 
Christ, we might reasonably infer that 
Elisha is the representative of those 
who shall succeed the overcomers, as 
the Lords mouth-piece on earth; hence 
our interest in his career. 

From the time of his call to be the 
successor, Elisha followed Elijah. The 
latter expected to be translated, and the 
former did not, but knew that Elijah was 
to be. On the route, Elijah went to 
various villages apparently expecting to 



be taken at each, and seemingly an effort 
was made to test the interest of 
Elisha by inviting him to tarry behind; 

R558 : page 8 

but he evidently represents a persevering 
and faithful company, for he would 
not be discouraged nor leave Elijah. 

There are some things which seem to 
indicate that these various stopping-places 
to which they went, but at none 
of which the desired translation occurred, 
represented or foreshadowed 
various points in the time-proofs where, 
with the then imperfect views of the 
plan, order, etc., it was thought the 
translation of the saints might be due. 
As these various stoppings were, doubtless, 
a test of the faith of Elijah and 
Elisha, so, doubtless, these time-points 
have served to test, and separate, and 
leave behind, all not properly belonging 
to the Elijah and Elisha classes. 

The translation took place when all 
those stopping-places were in the past, 
and at no definite or fixed point. "It 
came to pass, as they still WENT ON 
and talked, that, behold, there appeared 
a chariot of fire and horses of fire, and 
parted them both asunder: and Elijah 
went up by a whirlwind into heaven." 
f2 Kings 2: 1 T). So, also, it is now: 
all those time-points are in the past; 
none of them were times of translation, 
and we are going on without any definite 
points of expectancy, and the two 
classes are now communing together of 
the work, and now it is that we believe 
the change is taking place; that is, 
some are from time to time being 
"caught up"-"changed" from human 
to spiritual beings- with the Lord; as 
men dying, like John, as new creatures, 
translated the same instant to the 
heavenly or spiritual condition. fPsa. 82:6/T; 



v Rev. 14:13^). 

We have heretofore shown the Scriptural 
teaching that the overcomers, or 
Elijah class, will be a "little flock," and 
that there is also developed another 
class-"a great company"-and this 
last seems to be represented in part by 
Elisha. While Elijah remained, Elisha 
was merely a disciple and not a teacher, 
but in view of his work, as Elijahs successor, 
a double portion of Elijahs 
spirit-energy, force, power to teach, 
etc. "-was to be upon him, upon certain 
conditions, viz.: "If thou shalt see 
me taken from thee, it shall be so unto 
thee; but, if not, it shall not be so." 
f2 Kings 2:10\) And we are informed 
that, to see this, will be a "hard thing." 
The significance which we attach to 
this is, that it will be a very difficult 
matter, even for those expecting the 
event, to see [recognize] the change of 
the Elijah class. Since "ye (the saints, 
the Elijah class), shall all die LIKE men," 
it will be only by close affiliation and 
an opening of the eyes of the understanding, 
and the exercise of implicit 
faith in the promises, that these will be 
able to know of the glorious, spiritual 
rapture which occurs in the instant of 
death. In view of this fact, how transparently 
pure and faithful must be the 
life of each member of that Elijah class. 
Absolute perfection need not be expected 
while we have this treasure in 
imperfect earthen vessels, but perfection 
of purpose, aim and effort, should be 
manifest to those about us, that when 
we are taken they may know it. "He 
that hath this hope in him purifieth 
himself even as he is pure." 
01John3:3\) 

Only such as do recognize the change 
of the Elijah class, can fill the teaching 
position. The "sons of the prophets" 
(theologians) will disbelieve; but upon 



this class who shall see, a double portion 
of the Elijah spirit comes. No 
wonder if this class becomes awake to 
the grandeur and importance of their 
work, when they realize the establishment 
of the kingdom-the glorifying of 
the Elijah class. And this is shown in 
type. Elisha received the double portion 
of Elijahs spirit, and if he be, as 
we judge, a type of the second company, 
its career will be a grand and 
glorious one. 

Filled with the Spirit while mourning 
his loss, he returned, smiting the waters 
with Elijahs mantle in the name of "the 
Lord God of Elijah, so that even the 
sons of the prophets [nominal teachers] 
recognized his power, saying: "The 
spirit of Elijah doth rest on Elisha" 
--yet they believed not that Elijah was 
taken; thus illustrating how the world 
(including the nominal church) will be 
as ignorant of the glorification of the 
true church, the body, as it was of the 
glorification of our head at the commencement 
of this age. 

Thus far we have been merely fitting 
the testimony of Gods word with the 
records of the lives of these men; and 
the harmony is so great as to forbid 
our regarding them as anything less 
than designed types. But, should we 
look into the future and attempt to read 
the progress of the Elisha class, from 
his acts we would be upon less firm 
ground; hence, we merely suggest that 
possibly Elishas healing of the waters 
with salt in a new cruise cast into the 
spring, may mean that the channel 
(river) of truth will be cleansed and 
purified at its very fountain by new 
dispensational truth being cast into it, 
by the Elisha class. Q2 Kings 2:19-21\) 
The increase of the widows pot of oil 
until every available vessel was filled 
by which her sons were saved from 



bondage ("chap. 4:1-T), may represent 
the increase of the spirit so that every 
ready and emptied vessel shall be 
filled-the pouring out of the spirit 
upon all flesh. ("Joel 2:28\) The 
healing of the mess of pottage for the 
sons of the prophets, so that they ate 
of it unpoisoned, may represent a healing 
of the food of theologians and the 
putting of an antidote into their poisonous 
mess. ("2 Kings 4:38-41\) The increase 
of food for the people (" verses 42-44") 
may represent a feast of truth 
for the people. The healing of Naamans 
leprosy may represent the healing 
and restitution from the blight of sin of 
which leprosy is a symbol. To be 
made clean, will require not ordinary 
washing, but a seven-fold or perfect 
washing in the God-appointed place, 
and will require faith, as also saith the 
Scriptures. 

If our application be correct, we 
should understand the Elisha class to 
belong to the spiritually begotten family 
and not to the human, hence at their 
death the change from human to spiritual 
conditions would also take place. 
There seems to be an intimation of this 
in the record of Elishas death. ("2 Kings 2:12"; 
"13:14".) Of him the same 
words were uttered which he had used 
concerning Elijahs taking, viz.: "O, my 
father, my father, the chariot of Israel 
and the horsemen thereof." 

In view of the statement: -"No man 
hath ascended up to heaven, but he that 
came down from heaven, even the Son 
of man" ("John 3:13"), some have wondered 
in what sense Elijah "went up 
into heaven." In reply, we suggest 
that the atmosphere, the air, is sometimes 
called heaven: thus the expression 
-"fowls of the heavens." Into 
the air heavens Elijah certainly went: 
where, we are not told, and it would be 



useless to surmise-of his death we are 
not told; indeed, since we see him to 
be a type of the changed saints, it would 
have spoiled that type had his return to 
earth or his death, been recorded; 
and yet we are sure that "death passed 
upon all men," and hence had dominion 
over him, and he could not have been 
free entirely from its grasp anywhere, 
until Jesus had given the ransom price. 

Moreover, we may know that Elijah 
did not go to the heaven promised the 
saints, because not being begotten of the 
Spirit-not being a new creature-he 
was still a human being. [Jesus was 
the first begotten to the spiritual-new 
nature and the Leader and FORE-RUNNER 
of all who enter the heavenly or spiritual 
condition.] And as a human being, 
we cannot but suppose that Elijah 
would have been as uncomfortable out 
of, or away from this or some world, as a 
fish would be out of its element. 

And in harmony with this reasoning, 
from known Scriptural teaching, is the 
above statement: "No man hath ascended 
up to heaven but he that came 
down from heaven." In harmony with 
this thought also, are those other Scriptures: 
"No man hath seen God at any 
time," and "Whom no man hath seen 
nor can see." fl Tim. 6:16\) Only 
those who, during this Gospel age, 
change their nature from human to 
spiritual, shall see him as he is, because 
they shall be like him who is the express 
image of the Fathers person. 
Men can only see God as manifested 
through his works and revelation. 

R558 : page 8 

MOSES AND ELIAS. 

The transfiguration of Jesus in the 
presence of three of his disciples is a 



point of interest to many, not because 
they see its lesson and significance, but 
because they do not see them. We read 
that there "appeared" to the disciples, 
Moses and Elias talking with Jesus. 
("Matt. 17:1-9".) Jesus was transfigured 
[changed in appearance] --his face did 
shine as the sun and his raiment was 
white as the light. A bright cloud 
overshadowed and surrounded them, 
and a voice out of the cloud said: "This 
is my beloved Son, in whom I am well 
pleased; hear ye him." "And when 
the disciples heard it they fell on their 
faces and were sore afraid. And Jesus 
came and touched them and said, 
Arise, be not afraid. And when they 
had lifted up their eyes they saw no 
man, save Jesus only." 

We might wonder and speculate about 
how Moses and Elijah came to be on 
that mountain, how the disciples, who 
never saw either of them, could know 
them, etc., etc., but all such speculation 
is set at rest by Jesus telling the disciples 
that they had seen a vision. "As 
they came down from the mountain, 
Jesus charged them, saying: "Tell the 
vision to no man, until the Son of man 
be risen again from the dead." ("Matt. 17:9".) 
To the disciples the vision 
seemed a reality, just as to John at 

R559 : page 8 

Patmos, the various visions recorded in 
Revelation were clear and distinct, but 
Jesus certainly knew all about it, and 
we will rest on his testimony that it was 
a vision. 

To think otherwise would involve the 
contradiction of sundry plain Bible 
statements; for instance, Jesus was not 
yet crucified, hence had not risen from 
the dead, and we know that he is the 
"first-born from the dead." But if 



Moses had been resurrected, then Jesus 
was not the first. The case of Lazarus 
and others brought back to a measure 
of life, we have heretofore shown is not 
called resurrection, because they were 
not entirely delivered from the power of 
death-but died again. 

But let us see, if we can, what lesson 
was taught or what important truth was 
illustrated by this transfiguration scene 
or vision. Doubtless in that way we 
shall see a reason for the presenting of 
Moses and Elijah in the vision. 

Peter, who was one of those present 
on the occasion, mentions it in his letter 
long afterward. He says: "We have 
not followed cunningly devised fables, 
when we made known unto you the 
power and coming of our Lord Jesus 
Christ, but were eye-witnesses of his 
MAJESTY. For he received from God 
the Father honor and glory, when there 
came such a voice to him from the excellent 
glory: "This is my beloved Son, 
in whom I am well pleased." And this 
voice we heard, when we were with him 
in the holy mount." f2 Pet. 1:16-18".) 

We understand Peter to tell us then, 
that the transfiguration vision was an 
illustration or presentation in vision of 
the "majesty" and "power" of his 
(parousia) presence, [here translated 
coming]. It is, then, to be understood 
as representing the establishment of The 
Kingdom at Jesus second presence. 
Therefore, from our standpoint, it is an 
illustration of the present time, in which 
Jesus is present and the kingdom being 
established. Moses, we have seen, represents 
the human element of the kingdom: 
("Moses, verily, was faithful in 
all his house as a servant." v Heb. 3:5\) 
while Elijah, as we have just been seeing, 
has stood for, or represented the 
entire Gospel Church-the spiritual- - 
the house of sons. Elsewhere we have 



seen that there will be these two classes 
in the kingdom-an earthly and a 
heavenly- -over all which and the 
orderer of both phases, will be Jesus; 
and this fits perfectly with the vision- 
Moses and Elias, with Jesus in the 
midst, transfigured and shining. 

So now, in his presence, we not only 
see the evidences of the spiritual kingdom 
in the harvesting and sifting of the 
wheat, but also preparation being made 
for the establishment of the earthly or 
perfect human phase of the kingdom. 
This is no cunningly devised fable, and 
was not only shown to Peter and others 
in vision, but "we have also a more 
sure word of prophecy," which bears 
the same testimony, "whereunto ye do 
well that ye take heed, as unto a light 
that shineth in a dark place." 
02 Pet. 1:19\) 



page 8 

THE Post-office authorities now refuse 
all papers not properly addressed. This 
will account for some not getting their 
papers recently. When the name of 
your village or town is different from 
the name of the post-office be sure to 
send the latter. Write addresses very 
plainly and thereby save our time and 
your annoyance. 



SEND the names of any to whom you 
think sample copies of the TOWER 
would be a blessing; or we will send 
you samples for your neighbors-Free. 
Do not part with your own papers, you 
will need them for reference. 



THE MILLENNIAL DAY DAWN is enlarging 
entirely beyond our first expectations. 
It is not yet ready. We will 
give ample notice in these columns, 
when it is. 



R559 : page 1 

VOL. V. PITTSBURGH, PA., DECEMBER, 1883. NO. 5. 



page 1 

ZIONS 

Watch Tower 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRISTS PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED MONTHLY AT 

101 Fifth Avenue, Pittsburgh, Pa. 



C. T. RUSSELL, Editor and Publisher. 



The Editor recognizes a responsibility to the Master, 
relative to what shall appear in these columns, 
which he cannot and does not cast aside; yet he 
should not be understood as endorsing every expression 
of correspondents, or of articles selected 
from other periodicals. 

TERMS OF SUBSCRIPTION. 

TERMS :- -Fifty cents a year, postage prepaid. 
You may send paper money to the amount of two 
dollars, by mail, at our risk. Larger amounts may 
be sent by Drafts, P.O. Money Order, or Registered 
Letter, payable to C. T. RUSSELL. 

FOREIGN TERMS. 

Foreign Postage being higher, our terms to foreign 
subscribers will be 65 cents a year. Please 



send us no foreign money or postage stamps, as we 
can make no use of them. Remittances may be 
made by Foreign Postal Money Orders. 

TAKE NOTICE. 

This paper will be sent free to any of the Lords 
poor who will send a card yearly requesting it. 
Freely we have received and freely we would give 
the truth. "Ho, every one that thirsteth, come ye 
to the waters; and he that hath no money, come ye, 
buy and eat-yea, come, buy wine and milk without 
money and without price." And you that have it— 
"Wherefore do ye spend money for that which is 
not bread? and your labor for that which satisfieth 
not? Hearken diligently-and eat ye that which is 
good, and let your soul delight itself in fatness. "- 
ISAIAH 55 :1,2\ 



page 1 

SEND us the addresses of all the moral 
and religious Swedes and Norwegians 
you can gather; for samples of the 
Swedish paper. 



THE safest way to send money is by 
"POSTAL MONEY ORDER." The rates 
have recently been reduced. "POSTAL 
NOTES" are no safer than money. 



R559 : page 1 

VIEW FROM THE TOWER. 

We wish it distinctly understood that 
no arrow from this TOWER is aimed at 
the Lords children; neither at the weak, 
nor at the strong. God forbid that we 
should at all wrestle with flesh and 



blood-especially that we should fight 
against our own kindred, the family of 
God. 

Our arrows, are aimed at errors not 
men; at systems, not individuals. We 
wrestle against princedoms and powers 
in exalted positions of influence ("Eph. 6:12"), 
chief over which is Satan. 

We write thus because a letter from 
one of the readers recently, suggests the 
thought that our words have been 
somewhat misunderstood. This brother 
points us to the success, influence, 
charities, and missions as now witnesses 
of Gods favor to the various sects, and 
warns us against saying anything against 
Gods children therein. 

To this we reply as above, that against 
Gods children we have said nothing, 
but against the errors which have divided 
them and which keep them divided 
into sects contrary to the word 
and Spirit of the Lord. We have said 
something and by the grace of God 
assisting, we will say more, and say on, 
until the last of Gods children shall be 
freed from her enchantments and bondage, 
and regain the liberty wherewith 
Christ hath made them free. 

A casual glance, or even a steady 
gaze if from a worldly standpoint of 
view, would show the various daughters 
of the harlot as creatures of grace and 
beauty; would grasp only the outward 
marks of prosperity, and not notice the 
inward dearth of the true Spirit of Christ. 
Outwardly whited and garnished, inwardly 
full of pride and corruption. 

We have already seen that the Jewish 
Church at the first advent is a likeness 
of the Gospel Church at the second 
advent. Then, the scribes and Pharisees 
represented "orthodoxy" so-called, 
as Jesus testified: "The scribes and 
Pharisees sit in Moses seat. ("Matt. 23:2".) 
That was a time of great prosperity 



in the Jewish Church. Never 
before had it been more prosperous 
outwardly. The Temple was more grand 
than the one Solomon built; their 
charity was noted of the Lord; they 
gave a tenth of all their possessions, 
even to the smallest items of their harvest. 
CMatt. 23:23\) They gave much 
alms in a way to be seen of men; they 
prayed much and long and were not 
ashamed to do it publicly; they sent 
missionaries throughout all the civilized 
world, and had missions in all the principal 
cities of the earth. Jesus testified 
to this also, saying, "Ye compass sea and 
land to make one proselyte"--convert. 
CMatt. 23: 15\) 

Had our Lord joined the Pharisees 
and been "orthodox" (?), we cannot 
doubt that his life would have been 
quite different from what it was. That 
path would have led to honor and praise 
of men, but not to Calvary, and the 
praise of God. To have done so, would 
have been hypocritical as he testifies 
that they were. He shows that their 
hypocrisy consisted in pretending to do 
for Gods glory what was really for their 
own honor among men. (Doubtless in 
some measure self-deceived while deceiving 
others). Is not this much the case 
with the nominally "orthodox" sects of 
to-day? That their donations and labors 
and sacrifices are more for their sect 
than for Gods Church, few will deny. 
Each sect worships, serves, honors and 
advances itself, hence it is hypocrisy of 
the worst form-an attempt to deceive 
God as well as men. 

We honor the spirit of sacrifice 
wherever we find it, whether among 
Protestants, Roman Catholics, Mohammedans 
or Infidels; but when it is remembered 
that the hospitals, schools, 
churches, etc., are still retained as the 
exclusive properties of the sects, we 



wonder whether the name charity is applicable 
to a gift made to ones self. 

We are much pleased at the spirit 
which publishes Bibles by the million 
and scatters the surplus profits in cheap 
copies among the very poor, even 
though it is more zealous in printing 
than in believing or teaching its 
doctrines. 

We are in close sympathy with the 
missionary spirit, but not with missionary 
effort as at present operated by 
the nominal church. Ours is in the 
fullest sense a missionary work. We 
admire the sacrifice, especially of early 
missionaries, who went abroad without 
guarantee of every comfort and luxury 
and of good salaries. We should esteem 
it a great privilege to co-operate 
with such now, if we knew of any who 
as they went preached the "GLAD 
TIDINGS of great joy, which shall be 
unto all people." But we cannot countenance 
present missionary labor, for 
the same reason that our Master could 
not approve of that of the Pharisees. 
The poor heathen will be better off 
to hear nothing in this age and wait 
for the age to come to spread true 
knowledge of God, than to be confused 
and prejudiced against God by 
the usual misrepresentations of his character 
and plans. 

Neither should numbers deceive us- 
"Two or three assembled in Christs 
name in a small room are as much a 
church as a cathedral with as many 
thousands, and they are more likely to 
have their table furnished with living 
bread. If numbers are an evidence of 
Gods blessing, then Jesus had not 
much success as a preacher. If numbers 
prove anything in this age when 
the prince of darkness reigns, it usually 
means his favor and smile, for error 
and errorists abound and predominate 



as shown in the October diagram. 
Think not of numbers, better is the 
communion of two or three saints, than 
the emptiness and formality of a gathering 
of the worldly minded. 

We want to suggest that those who 
feel hurt at such a statement as this, are 
we fear closely related to some of the 
systems denounced; perhaps partakers 
of her sins and therefore sharers in her 
pain. The seven thousand in Israel in 
Elijahs day, who had not bowed the 
knee to Baal, did not-could not feel hurt 
at the prophets words against Baal. 
Israelites indeed, in Jesus day did not 
or should not have been hurt by his 
sharp reproof of those blind leaders 
who were leading the blind people. It 
is as much the duty of the body of 
Christ now, to point out present hindrances 
to growth in grace and knowledge 
--the teaching and theories and mighty 
influences of the nominal church-as it 
was the duty of our head to point out 

R560 : page 1 

that the Church in his day would neither 
enter, nor permit others to enter the 
kingdom. fMatt. 23: 13\) The Lord 
help us each to see clearly the truth on 
this subject and to do his will fearlessly. 
But may we be preserved from any 
spirit of bitterness and malice so that 
"Speaking the truth in love, we may 
grow up into Him in all things which is 
the head-even Christ. fEph. 4:15\) 

page 1 

We subjoin extracts from some 

INTERESTING LETTERS. 

Reed City, Mich. 
DEAR SIR:-Last week ZIONS 



WATCH TOWER was sent to me, and I 

find itjust the paper I want. Brought 

up in the strictest sect of United Presbyterians, 

I find this new message is 

like cold water to my thirsty soul, and 

I wish to learn more of the glad tidings. 

Enclosed find one dollar for one years 

subscription and for the rest send me 

as many copies of the October number 

as you can, I want to send them to my 

friends to whom it will prove glorious 

news. 

I am studying my Bible with new 
interest and it is wonderful that I have 
been so blinded to Gods glorious promises 
all these years. I shall trust to 
clergymen no longer for I find them 
small help in time of need. 

I am truly grateful to the unknown 
one who sent me your paper. It is just 
what I have gone mourning for, for 
years, not knowing God was preparing 
"deliverance to the captives." May he 
bless you in the good work. . 

Kahoka, Mo. 

DEAR BROTHER:-Your highly esteemed 
and welcome letter of the 8th 
inst. was received and read with much 
pleasure. It gave me so much strength 
that opposition and persecution seem 
but trifles. I have received and used 
the copies and samples of "Food" and 
"TOWERS" you sent me. My wife and 
I are working in a private way just now, 
deeming it better than public work under 
the present circumstances. 

Only a few out of the many seem 
willing to receive any new light on 
revealed things, so thick is the veil of 
prejudice drawn over their mental 
vision. But as I suggested, there are 
some who are willing to read and compare 
spiritual things with spiritual. 

I lend the papers rather than give 
them, and to such as seem to be sincere, 



those consecrated ones of the household 
of faith. The papers and books 
are falling into the hands of even the 
unregenerated and by them are highly 
commended. It seems strange to me 
that such marvelous light should spring 
up in this our day, presenting truths 
that I had never dreamed of before. 
Because they are so startling is one 
reason why people do not receive them. 
May the Lord of heaven bless you in 
the glorious work. We will help all we 
can directly and indirectly. We herewith 
send enclosed four names with 
subscriptions for the TOWER. You shall 
hear from us and our work as often as 
we have anything special to write. 
Yours fraternally, . 

New Haven, Conn. 

DEAR SIR:— I see by looking over 
my papers that my subscription has 
nearly expired, so I hasten to renew it. 
I do not want to be without it. I watch 
for it eagerly and enjoy it. I had never 
heard much of this subject until about 
a year ago, but as soon as your book, 
"Food for Thinking Christians" fell into 
my hands I knew it was just what I 
wanted. It seemed to me that I only 
needed to tell my friends who believed, 
to have them rejoice with me. But I 
have been chilled and disappointed. A 
few have seemed to have some light but 
some of my friends think I am going to 
extremes. 

I have wanted to write and let you 
know what a comfort your books and 
papers have been to me, but hesitated 
knowing that you received so many 
letters. But during the years I have 
been trying to serve Christ, I have been 
led in such a way that it seemed impossible 
for me to open my heart to any one 
about me, and for years I struggled 
through a thick darkness of doubts and 



fears. I wanted to serve God and to 
please him, but he seemed so far off. 
Then I heard the Advent Doctrine, and 
then came the first ray of light, but for 
many years after that the light was very 
dim, but still the Lord led me, and my 
heart cried out for him constantly, until 
finally about five years ago he gave me 
rest. Then I said: "Though he slay 
me, yet will I trust him." Since that 
time I have not once doubted him. 
Every day I have grown nearer to him, 
until to-day I can look back over my 
life and thank God for every step of 
the way he has led me. 

The past year has been the richest, 
most blessed year of my life, although 
it has been a time of sharp trial. I 
think it has taken all the faith I had to 
enable me to endure, but I feel stronger 
than ever, and I thank God that the 
light is shining so clearly now; and I 
thank him that it is shining on me. 

I hope I have not written too long a 
letter, but my heart is full and I longed 
to open it. . 

Corunna, Mich. 
MY BROTHER: --Twice you have responded 
and sent me of your literature, 
which I have read; at first with some 
fears of becoming entangled, but now 
with a confidence of being led in the 
right direction: and having a craving 
desire to study with you Gods Word, I 

page 2 

subscribe for the ZIONS WATCH TOWER 

one year. 

Your reading matter has made my 
Bible many times clearer and dearer, 
even in a short time, and I thank God 
for seeing even through a glass darkly. 
Very Truly yours, . 



Eglington, Canada. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-The late 
number of ZIONS WATCH TOWER containing 
the Diagram illustrating the population 
of the earth, in the religious 
divisions, I saw first in a paper 
from Mr. Guinness, of Harley House, 
London, where young men are trained 
for the mission field. It is one of the 
most striking evidences of the failure of 
human power with all its enlightenment, 
to convert the world, and to increase 
the desire and prayer of the believer in 
Jesus, that he may "come quickly" to 
"make all things new." The signs of 
the times are ominous that a great crisis 
is not remote. The persecution of the 
Jews in Europe seems like an evidence 
of the truth taught by the Saviour in the 
parable of the Rich Man and Lazarus. 
"Dead" and "buried" as a nation, they 
are suffering now, more than ordinary, 
the "torments" predicted by the Saviour. 

In a late letter received from 
England, I see that the Society 
of which Earl Shaftesbury is President 
--the "Syrian Colonization Fund," 
designed to aid the Jews desiring 
to settle in Palestine to escape the 
cruelty of their persecutors, has met 
with difficulties, arising from political 
causes. A number of Jews intending 
to settle in Palestine or Syria were not 
allowed by the Turkish government to 
enter the promised land, but obtained 
permission from the British government 
to settle in the island Cyprus. In the 
letter, to which I allude, the writer 
says: "Our Jewish colonists find that 
the land which the governments has 
granted is of excellent quality and in a 
healthy situation. They are clearing 
the ground and digging their wells; 
also doing needful work in road making. 
We have not yet raised enough to 
establish them, but the funds are coming 



in, and we are encouraged to hope 
that the effort will prove successful. As 
to Syria and Palestine the case stands 
thus: Until lately the Sultan and his 
government were friendly to Jews, and 
would have encouraged their settlement 
in Syria, but political intrigues on the 
part of foreigners has been exerted. The 
Sultan has been led to think that England 
is endeavoring to get hold of Syria 
by means of the Jews; and thus, at the 
beginning of this year, the Turkish authorities 
discouraged Jewish immigration 
or settlement. Jewish pilgrims 
coming to die in Jerusalem were allowed 
to land. But then even these were 
for a while prohibited. This state of 
things can scarcely last. There are 
numbers of Jews in the Holy Land, and 
the most of them are in extreme poverty," 
(as Lazarus had been in the parable.) 
To these relief is being sent according 
to the means that are received. 

The foregoing information cannot fail 
to be of interest to believers: The Diagram 
of the six classes of religionists in 
the world which appeared in the last 
number of the WATCH TOWER, is one 
of the best means of exhibiting the hopelessness 
of the worlds conversion to 
God, [by human agency] when up to 
the latter part of the 19th century only 
116 millions of nominal Protestants 
stand up out of the 1424 millions of the 
population. 

I am desirous to use the Diagram to 
awaken interest in the coming of the 
Lord among professing Christians. In 
Toronto the ministers of religion generally 
stand opposed to this doctrine. In 
"McMaster Hall," the theological hall 
of the Baptists, not one of the Faculty 
believed in the Lords coming to reign 
upon the earth. This was evolved by a 
student who believed the doctrine, at a 
meeting specially called to consider it. 



May the Lord greatly bless your labor 
of love. 

I am Yours fraternally, . 

Tangerine, Orange Co., Fla. 
MY DEAR BROTHER IN CHRIST:- 
Nearly a year ago I happened upon a 
copy of ZIONS WATCH TOWER. How 
it came to be in this out-of-the-way 
place I know not, but I saw in it light on 
many things on which I had pondered 
much and had inquired much about, 
among the leaders of all sects, without 
being satisfied. Many of those things I 
wished to know more about. I was poor 
and afflicted and I was and am hard 
pushed to feed my family; but seeing 
your offer to send it to any of the Lords 
poor who would write for it, I wrote and 
requested it, hoping to be able some day 
to pay for it. I have since passed 
through much sickness and write this 
upon a bed of sickness. Whether I will 
now be restored to health or not I cannot 
tell, but God knoweth best what is 
good for me. I know I am unworthy 
of the least of His favors and whether 
He decrees that I shall or shall not live 
to receive more of the light that he is 
bestowing upon His children I can but 
say, His will be done. And how I wish 
I could be assured in this dark day of 
all others, while I lie here and watch 
the dark clouds that reach from the 
ocean to the gulf, and while time passeth 
so heavily, that I have an interest in 
your prayers. I feel it would do my 
soul good to know or learn personally 
that those who have caused me so much 
comfort in affliction had indeed made 
an afflicted and unknown brother a special 
subject of prayer. I have written 
now more than I thought to write, but 
not the half of what I could write if my 
strength permitted. Would I be intruding 
upon your kindness to ask of 



you to send me a few more copies of 
the October number of the TOWER? 
Will you please continue to send it to 
me? Perhaps it will not be long till I 
can do something for the cause, and if 
so, I will, surely. 

Yours in deep affliction, 



Buffalo, N.Y. 

DEAR BRO:-I herewith enclose 
my subscription for the dear Watch 
Tower. I cannot tell you how I appreciate 
its monthly visits with its deep living 
truth from Gods word. How it 
warms and cheers the heart and strengthens 
and encourages us in our pilgrimage, 
unfolding Gods plan of salvation and 
the presence of Jesus. I feel thankful to 
my Heavenly Father for the privilege 
of feasting on these glorious truths for it 
is by his favor that I am what I am. 
May our Fathers richest blessings rest 
on all those loved ones who are feeding 
the household of faith. 

I know your time is limited and therefore 
I do not expect you to correspond, 
but I never forget you at the throne of 
grace, and may the blessing of the Lord 
rest on you all, is the sincere prayer of 
your sister in Christ. . 



R560 : page 2 

WAS IT DOCTORED? 



We desire to ask the attention of the 
readers of ZIONS WATCH TOWER to 
some considerations bearing on the authenticity 
of the New Testament Scriptures. 
It is claimed that the Roman 
Catholic Church, the "Mother of Harlots," 
having had in her possession exclusively, 
for a length of time, the original 



manuscripts, corrupted those manuscripts 

by interpolations and additions, 

in order to give an appearance of divine 

sanction to her corrupt doctrines and 

teachings. It is admitted, of course, 

that there are several passages in the 

New Testament which are marked as 

doubtful, and some, known to be spurious, 

have been rejected altogether; but 

it is not shown that those passages originated 

with a design to corrupt the original 

text. The explanation is offered 

(and there is nothing better, so far as we 

are aware), that those passages first appeared 

probably in the shape of marginal 

notes, and that ultimately, in the 

process of copying, either through carelessness, 

ignorance, or possible dishonesty, 

they were finally embodied in the 

text. But, be that as it may, we propose 

to show, by various considerations, how 

incredible, almost impossible, it is that 

any such attempts as claimed could have 

been made to corrupt the original text. 

You are aware that the Roman Church 
teaches that Mary is "ever a virgin." It 
is one of her "infallible" dogmas that 
Jesus was her "only son." And, yet, 
with surprising carelessness, the manuscript 
doctors have allowed the text to 
read: "She brought forth her first-born 
son," implying, of course, that she 
brought forth other sons afterward. And, 
as if that were not enough, and to put 
caviling at rest forever, they permit the 
original text to tell about "his mother 
and brothers, and sisters." (See v Matt. 1:25"; 
"Luke 2:7V Mark 3:3 1V6:3\) 
All this, rendered into plain English, 
goes before the world, while the infallible 
dogma of the Church is never so 
much as hinted in any part of the Book. 

Again, the "infallible" Church teaches 
the doctrine of the Trinity. A recent 
writer said in his paper, endeavoring to 
show how she had corrupted the Word 



of God, "Where else than in the New 

Testament did she get her doctrine of 

the Trinity?" That writer ought to 

have known (for he has sufficient intelligence) 

that the doctrine of the Trinity 

is not to be found in the New Testament, 

that spurious passage in " 1 John 5:7" 

not even directly affirming it, and 

that is the only text which has the faintest 

semblance of teaching the doctrine. 

But in view of the fact that those crafty 

manuscript corrupters took in hand to 

make the original text teach their dogma, 

what inconceivable blindness, on 

their part, to have allowed Jesus to say: 

"The Son is not able of himself to do 

anything!" ("John 5:19"), and "My 

Father is greater than I." ("14:28".) 

And how could they have suffered an 

Apostle to testify that "he is the first-born 

of all creation," ("Col. 1:15"), and 

the Revelator to say, "he is the beginning, 

or chief, of the creation of God." 

Not to have stated their own dogma 

with any degree of clearness, and at the 

same time to allow such positive testimony 

in condemnation of their dogma 

to go out from under their hands was, 

certainly, bad work for the "doctors," 

wasnt it? 

The Roman Church teaches the doctrine 
of "purgatory," but when they 
were tinkering the manuscripts they 
must have forgotten to put that in-the 
passage in "1 Pet. 3:18,19", read in the 
light of common sense, not giving the 
least countenance to such a notion. 

Then, again, the old Mother teaches 
"eternal torment." But is it not wonderfully 
strange that when she was "corrupting 
the manuscripts" she should 
have left out so completely the very 
foundation doctrines of her system? For 
while she teaches eternal torment (not 
from the Scriptures of truth, but from 
tradition, and by unwarrantable interpretation 



of certain texts,) these very 

manuscripts which she is said to have 

corrupted, are allowed to testify in the 

most unqualified terms that "death is the 

wages of sin;" and that the final punishment 

will be "everlasting destruction." 

OMatt. 10:28^; "Rom. 6:23"; "2 Thess. 1:9\) 

So, also, her dogma of the immortality 

of the soul. Why did she not put that 

in manuscripts when she was "doctoring" 

them to suit her false teachings? 

You know as well as I know-and I 

know to an absolute certainty-that that 

pet doctrine of Romanism is not so 

much as named in the Scriptures, neither 

in Hebrew, Greek nor English: and yet 

we are asked to believe that that corrupt 

Church has so extensively tampered 

with the original manuscripts, in order 

to sustain her abominable system of 

falsehood, that it is usually unsafe to 

trust them; that they cannot be relied 

on at all to tell the truth! However, 

while she teaches that immortality is inherent 

in all men, they teach that immortality 

is a glorious prize to be sought 

for, and to be obtained only by the elect 

of God through Jesus our Lord. ("Rom. 2:7"; 

"6:23"; "1 John 5:11, 12"; 

"John 10:27,28'.) 

"The Church" prays to saints, while 
the manuscripts testify against her-"I, 
Jesus, am the way-no man cometh to 
the Father but by me;" ("John 14:6") and 
"there is one Mediator between God and 
men, the man Christ Jesus." ("1 Tim. 2:5\) 
So, also, in her teaching of the 
merit of works, the testimony of those 
manuscripts is directly against her. She 
teaches that the faithful, by their good 
works, may merit the favor of God, 
while they teach that works are entirely 
excluded, and men are "justified by 
faith." fRom. 3:27,28"; "4:1-8"; 
"Eph. 2:9".) 

Illustrations might be multiplied. But 



from those already noted, it seems fair 
to conclude that, inasmuch as the "doctors" 
did not corrupt the text in those 
places which teach doctrines exactly 
contrary to their own teachings, the 
passages which are known to be spurious 
must be accounted for on some 
other hypothesis than a deliberate design 
to corrupt the original text. 

It is certainly true that the teachings 
of the Scriptures in what are usually regarded 
as "fundamental" truths are in 
direct contradiction of the dogmas of 
the Roman Church, as well, also, as 
those of the Protestant sects. And it is 
no less certain that the teachings of the 
Scriptures are in full harmony with 
themselves throughout, from first to last. 
Take, for example, the story of the miraculous 
conception and birth of Jesus, 
which some in these days find so hard 
to believe. Compare the case of Sarah, 
CGen. 18:9-14^) [Is anything too hard? 
-wonderful-for Jehovah?] of Hannah, 
fl Sam. 1:5-27",) of the Shunamite, 
02 Kings 4:14-17\) of Elizabeth, ("Luke 1:18,20,24".) 
In all of these cases 
there is the miraculous interposition of 
divine power, quickening the natural 
forces, where they had been dormant 
and inoperative, or entirely suspended; 
and it seems to us the miracle is not less 
notable in these cases than in that of 
Mary, where the same divine power attains 
its object, by its own energy directly 
applied, regardless of the usual 
operation of natural law. For, surely, 
He who established natures laws, is able 
to act in any given case by other means, 
if he should see fit so to do. And 
that He did do so, is, as we have said, 
the testimony of the Book, in harmony 
with itself. R. WAKEFIELD. 

Newark, N.J. 



R560 : page 2 

CONVERTED BY A TELEGRAM. 

A young telegraph operator in a provincial 
town was anxious about his soul. 
But he could not have guessed that a 
message would reach him as it did. He 
had been sleepless all night, thinking of 
his need of a Saviour, and in the morning 
he went to his work with his heart 
uttering the publicans prayer. The 
sunny weather and beauty of summer 
scenery did not engage him, for he was 
longing for that peace of God which the 
Christian feels. 

Absorbed with his desire, he continued 
to pray, "God be merciful to me a 
sinner," and was constantly repeating 
the words, when the click of the signal 
told him that his office was called. He 
took his place at the instrument, and 
quickly and with unusual emotion 
spelled his message, from "Herbert," at 
Windermore, to "J.B.," at Warworth: 

"Behold the Lamb of God, which 
taketh away the sins of the world." "In 
whom we have redemption through His 
blood, the forgiveness of sins, according 
to the riches of His grace." 

Such a telegram as that the young 
man had never known to pass the wires 
before. It was sent to a servant girl 
who, in her distress of mind, had written 
a letter to her brother, "Herbert," 
but it proved a double blessing, for it 
came to the operator as a direct reply 
from heaven to his prayer. He accepted 
it as such, and his faith saw and 
rested in the Lamb of God. --Selected. 



page 2 



Some one has said that the fruit of 
the Spirit is all in one word-"love." 
It speaks in Galatians about love, the 
fruit of the Spirit being love, joy, peace, 
gentleness, long-suffering, meekness and 
temperance. The way this writer has 
put it-and I think it is very beautiful 
--is, that joy is love exultant, peace is 
love in repose, and long-suffering is love 
enduring. It is all love, you see, and 
gentleness is love in society, and goodness 
is love in action, and faith is love 
on the battle-field, and meekness is love 
at school, and temperance is love in 
training. -Moody. 



In our last issue we stated that DAY 
DAWN [the work mentioned in "Food"] 
was out of print, since which we find 
that there are still some copies remaining. 
Though we advise waiting on 
"Millennial Day Dawn," we would say 
that if you desire the former we can 
still supply a few copies. Price 50 cents. 



page 3 

I AM THINE. 

Though a cloud of pain and sorrow 

Sometimes hide thy face from me; 
Though my steps are slow and weary, 

Father, still I trust in thee. 
If my way is dark and lonely, 

And no stars above me shine, 
Through the darkness that surrounds me 

Still I whisper, I am thine. 

When in hours of grief and trouble 
Tears have almost dimmed my sight, 

When the tempter tries his weapon 
Sometimes in a robe of light- 



If I lift my eyes to heaven 

Yet I see thy love divine, 
Like a sunbeam through the shadows, 

And I feel that I am thine. 

So my Father, earthly sufferings 

Cannot veil thy love from me, 
And if worldly joy and pleasures 

Try to win my heart from thee, 
Then I look beyond the shadows 

To the crown that shall be mine, 
And I see the day is dawning, 

When 111 be forever thine. 
— K. Lundin. 



R561 : page 3 

WHEN WAS JESUS BORN? 

The subject of ancient chronology is 
confessedly a very difficult one. Of 
many early and important events there 
are no reliable dates; of others, different 
authors assign widely different periods. 
As we search backward, the further we 
go the less reliable is the history, until 
--outside of the Scriptures-we finally 
reach the fabulous age, where all is myth 
and imagination. 

There are a number of reasons for 
this condition of things. 

1. Chronology was, apparently, very 
little used in the earlier ages. 

2. Different eras in starting points 
were used by different authors, and by 
the same author at different times. 

3. Several ways of reckoning time 
were used. 

4. Printing being unknown, and original 
documents unattainable, much was 
written from tradition and conjecture. 

5. We do not in many cases have the 
first or actual record, but only second 
or third-handed and often conflicting 



statements. 

6. Where the original records exist, 
as in Egyptian hieroglyphics or Babylonian 
bricks, we are still dependent on 
meagre and conjectural translations. 

The Bible, so far as it gives chronology, 
seems to be the only reliable 
source, but of course it is reliable, in the 
fullest sense, only to those who have 
faith in it. 

Between one and two hundred different 
systems of chronology have been 
formed; most of them, too, by men of 
learning and research; so that it is not 
wise to become dogmatic over the date 
of ancient events which rest on profane, 
and therefore possibly unreliable history. 
Much less does it become a professed 
Christian to attempt to undermine the 
Scriptures by combatting them with 
data which are acknowledged to be only 
approximate. 

The date of the birth of Christ is one 
which has been in dispute. In the 6th 
century it was proposed that Christians 
should use that date as an epoch from 
which to reckon time. As it was still 
less than 500 years from the days of the 
apostles, the date should have been 
placed with tolerable accuracy. 

In the beginning of the seventh century 
an event occurred which led to 
doubt concerning the accepted date. 
In December, 1603, a conjunction of the 
planets Saturn and Jupiter took place, 
and, about a year after, a new and 
bright star appeared, which shone above 
a year and then disappeared. The conjunction 
was not strange, as it occurs 
regularly every few years, but the new 
and evanescent star was rather unusual. 
To a famous astronomer then living, it 
occurred that if such an event had happened 
just before the birth of Jesus, it 
would have been noticed by a people 
that believed in astrology, and that IF 



the men who came from the East, seeking 
for the King of the Jews, had been 
of this class they might have thought 
something unusual was going to occur, 
and IF a new star happened to appear 
at that time also (a very unlikely thing) 
they might have supposed it to be-etc, 
etc. 

How such a star could travel before 
them from Jerusalem to Bethlehem, and 
then stand still over the place where the 
babe was, does not appear; nor why 
such a star should appear at each and 
every recurrence of the meeting of the 
two planets; but it so happened that 
one of the conjunctions was found to 
have taken place in B.C. 4, and the conclusion 
was jumped at that PERHAPS a 
new star also appeared at that time 
and acted in the very unstarlike manner 
suggested. Believers have been and still 
are anxious to have the events noted in 
Scripture verified by external evidence, 
but an attempt to prove more than is 
warranted may do more harm than good. 

Canon Farrar, in his "Life of Christ," 
has the following to say on the subject, 
after explaining the argument: "The appearance 
and disappearance of new stars 
is a phenomenon by no means so rare 
as to admit of any possible doubt. The 
fact that St. Matthew speaks of such a 
star within two or three years [note the 
indefiniteness] at the utmost of a time 
when we know that there was this remarkable 
planetary conjunction, and the 
fact that there was such a star 1,600 
years afterwards, at the time of a similar 
conjunction can only be regarded as a 
curious coincidence... We are, 
in fact, driven to the conclusion, that the 
astronomical researches which have 
proved the reality of this remarkable 
conjunction are only valuable as showing 
the possibility that it may have prepared 
the Magi for the early occurrence 



of some great event. And this confident 
expectation may have led to their journey 
to Palestine on the subsequent appearance 
of an evanescent star." 

We accept the conclusion so far, but 
must believe that the star was purely 
supernatural, prepared for the occasion 
and circumstances; and, therefore, not 
dependent on the planetary conjunction. 
If so, it might have occurred the same 
year or a dozen years afterward, and 
astronomy could not help us place it. 

That the conjunction did more than 
Farrar suggests is, we believe, accepted 
by no scholar, excepting, perhaps, 
those who, professing Christianity, deny 
the supernatural. 

Some, who could not accept the star 
theory supposed that the movements of 
the planets themselves might have led 
the Magi, but this theory requires more 
faith [?] than to accept the miraculous 
appearance of a star, or, what the Magi 
supposed was a star. 

While these notions prevailed, and 
the early date (B.C. 4) was accepted, 
historical events and dates were bent to 
harmonize, and other events were hunted 
up in support of the theory. Among 
the latter was an eclipse of the moon, 
said by Josephus to have occurred a 
short time before the death of Herod 
the Great-the monster who, as a drop 
in the ocean of his atrocities, slew the 
babes at Bethlehem. 

All we know of the eclipse is as follows: 
Herod had placed a large golden 
eagle over the gate of the temple. Two 
illustrious Jews, named Matthias and 
Judas, persuaded the young men to pull 
it down. They did so, and some were 
arrested and executed. To make the 
matter clear, Josephus relates that there 
was another Matthias who was at that 
time high priest, but was not directly 
concerned in the sedition. He then 



says: "But Herod deprived this Matthias 
of the high priesthood, and burnt 
the other Matthias, who had raised the 
sedition, with his companions, alive, and 
that very night there was an eclipse of 
the moon." 

Now as there occur from one to four 
eclipses of the moon every year, it is 
evident that except, under peculiar circumstances, 
the record of an occurrence 
proves nothing. Where the time of the 
year, the time of night, and the amount 
of obscurity are all given, as has been 
done in several instances, the record is 
of the greatest value in fixing dates. In 
the case under consideration there is 
nothing of the kind, therefore the record 
proves absolutely nothing as far as 
chronology is concerned. Josephus does 
speak of a fast as having been kept before 
the event, but what fast or how long 
before, is not stated. 

As it happens there was only one 
eclipse of the moon in B.C. 4, while in 
B.C. 1, there were three. The eclipse 
of B.C. 4 was only partial (six digits, 
or only half of the moon being hidden) 
while it is rather remarkable that all 
three in B.C. 1 were total eclipses, that 
is, the entire moon was obscured, and 
of course for a longer time; causing the 
event to be much more likely to be 
noticed. 

If the eclipse theory, then, has any 
weight, it is in favor of B.C. 1. 

Of those who follow the early date, 
some suppose an eclipse that occurred 
in the fall of B.C. 5 to be the one recorded; 
others give B.C. 3 and 2 and 
still later, according to their understanding 
of Josephus and other historians. 

Josephus gives the age of Herod at 
some important periods in his history, 
and the date of some of the events but 
they are not considered trustworthy. 
Some of them certainly seem to teach 



that Herod died as early as B.C. 4, but 
others cannot be reconciled with that 
date. 

For instance, he is said by Josephus 
to have died at the age of 70. He was 
made governor of Galilee in B.C. 47. 
Josephus says (Ant. 14.9:2) that at 
that time he was 25 years of age. This 
would place his birth in B.C. 72. (47 + 
25). His death at 70 would then be in 
B.C. 2. 

It is well to note that Fausset, in his 
Bible Cyclopaedia, gives his age when 
made governor at about 20 years. Chambers 
Cyclopaedian and Smiths Bible 
Dictionary (See article Herod,) give his 
age at 15, which is certainly too young. 
The first would bring his death in A.D. 2, 
and the latter two would thus place his 
death in A.D. 6. 

As to the reliability of Josephus, we 
quote from Appletons Cyclopaedia-article 
Chronology: "Josephus also gives 
dates, but he is altogether too careless 
to be taken into account." 

We think the most reliable date is obtained 
in another way, even, if slightly 
roundabout. The greater the person or 
the event the more likely are historic 
facts in regard to them known and 
recorded. 

Herod was but the usurper of the 
kingdom of Judea, a comparatively insignificant 
province of Rome. We have 
a chronology that is based on a greater 
man and event. The death of Augustus 
Caesar, the Emperor of Rome, and who 
made Rome the glory of the world, is 
what might be called established as occurring 
in A.D. 14. His successor was 
Tiberias Caesar. Now "Luke tells us, chap. 3\ 
that in the fifteenth year of his 
reign John the Baptist began to preach. 
John evidently baptized for six months 
before Jesus met him at the Jordan. 
Jesus then was about 30 years of age- 



the age also of John when he began- 

R562 : page 3 

according to Jewish law and custom. 

fNum. 4:3\) Fifteen years, added to 

A.D. 14, bring us to A.D. 29, in the 

spring of which, evidently, John began 

his ministry. His work is recorded in 

"Mark 1:5\ In the autumn Jesus was baptized; 

and he had gathered some disciples 

about him before the Passover of 

the following spring, as recorded in "John V 

and "2\ After that, Jesus preached 

three years; or three and a half years 

from his baptism; and was crucified on 

the Passover in A.D. 33, "in the midst 

of the week," fDan. 9:27",) aged about 

thirty-three years and six months. 

Look now in the margins of your Bibles 
at the last chapters of each of the 
evangelists, and you will find A.D. 33 
the correct time, yet if you look at the 
time of Jesus baptism you will find them 
dated two years too early, and at his 
birth four years too early. The reason is 
this: The B.C. theory compelled the 
editors of our translation to assume that 
Jesus preached for six or seven years- 
a theory without support, and now entirely 
discarded. 

The marginal dates at the two 
ends of the first three Gospels 
do not agree. The B.C. 4 theory 
has made all the confusion-discard 
it, and we have harmony. The birth, 
then, should be placed B.C. 1, the baptism 
A.D. 29, and the crucifixion where 
it is, A.D. 33. W. I. M. 



[We hold that the reckoning of time 
commonly used is substantially correct, 
as shown above. The difference which 
we claim as between it and the true date 



calculated from Jesus birth is about 
three months. "Christmas day," which 
is reckoned the anniversary of Jesus 
birth (January 1 representing the date 
of his circumcision eight days after) is 
mid- winter, and evidently does not comport 
well with the account of the shepherds 
being out with their flocks fLuke 2:8\) 
It is supposed by some to have 
been placed December 25 in order to 
the better take the place of and transform 
an old heathen festival at that date, 
into a Christ-commemorating one-at 
about the time so-called Christianity 
becoming popular with emperors, was 
embraced by thousands of the heathen 
people. 

Our method of reckoning the day of 
Jesus birth is based upon Scripture, 
and is as follows: According to the law 
and custom Jesus could not begin his 
public ministry until the age of thirty; 
and we may reasonably suppose that 
his desire to be about his "Fathers 
business" would induce him to commence 
his work as soon as he was thirty 
years old; hence we shall suppose that he 
was baptized on his birthday. The period 
of seven years onward from his 
baptism is distinctly marked in prophecy 
-the seventieth week, in the midst or 
middle of which he should die or "be 
cut off" from life. CDanl. 9:27\) 

His death, then, on the fifteenth day 
of the Jewish month Ab, was on a day 
just six months from his birthday, which 
consequently would be about October 
2d-about the beginning of the Jewish 
year-or about three months earlier than 
A.D. 1 is usually reckoned.-EDITOR.] 



R562 : page 3 

PROPHETIC PEN PICTURES 



OF OUR DAY. 

Nowhere do we find more striking 
and forcible figures and similes than in 
Jehovahs words through the prophets. 
We here consider some statements of 
"Isaiah 28 v th and v 29'th chapters relating 
to the church nominal. It is described 
under various figures-Ariel, Jerusalem, 
Babylon, Ephraim, Zion, etc. -each representing 
some special feature. 

DRUNKARDS OF EPHRAIM. 

Olsa. 28:l-8\) 

Here the Prophets illustration is Ephraim, 
probably because like Ephraim 
the Nominal Gospel Church was to increase 
in number and influence, and become 
proud and corrupt. The name 
Ephraim came to be applied to the ten 
tribes who revolted against the kingdom 
of the Lord and established a different 
mode of worship. So the prophet 
very aptly uses it here as an illustration. 
He recognizes the fact that it has what 
is considered a glory and beauty, and 
fruitfulness, but shows that their glory 
is really their shame, and that their 
proud and haughty spirit must have a fall. 

The nominal church is represented as 
crowned with pride and overcome with 
wine-intoxicated with the spirit of the 
world and its pleasures. They are not 
on the mountain or hill top enjoying 
their privilege of communion with God, 
but they are down reveling in the fatness 
of the valley, the pleasures of the world. 
And Jeremiah says: "Wherefore gloriest 
thou in the valleys, thy flowing valley, 
O backsliding daughter? that trusted 
in her treasures. fJer. 49:4\) But says 
the Lord, Woe to the crown of pride, 
to the drunkards of Ephraim. The 
crown of pride the drunkards of Ephraim 



shall be trodden under feet. v vs. 1,3\ 
"And the glorious beauty which is 
on the head of the fat valley, shall be a 
fading flower, and as the hasty fruit 
before the summer; which when he 
that looketh upon it seeth, while it is 
yet in his hand he eateth it up. v vs. 4\ 

The glory of the nominal church is in 
numbers, wealth and worldly prosperity. 
She has been more anxious to 
have a show of growth, prosperity and 
fruitfulness before the world, than to 
have fruit acceptable and well pleasing 
to God. Gods plans work out slowly, 
and come to maturity not by sudden 
spasmodic efforts, but by slow and 
steady development, 

"The bud may have a bitter taste, 
But sweet will be the flower." 
But the nominal church was not satisfied 
with Gods plans, and in her haste 
she has discarded his and adopted 
plans and theories of her own. The result 

R562 : page 4 

has been great fruitfulness of a 
certain kind. Moral and philanthropic 
enterprises have been undertaken on a 
gigantic scale and the church has 
rapidly grown to immense proportions, 
and has gained a most prominent and 
influential position and name among 
men. Seeing this hasty fruit and regarding 
it good, the world with its 
spirit of pride has greedily swallowed 
it. The spirit of the world has swallowed 
up all the benevolent enterprises 
and stamped them all with pride and 
boastfulness. And so also its fruit in 
numbers, is swallowed up by the spirit 
of the world. 

Again he says fvs. 7\) "The priest 
and the prophet have erred through 
strong drink; they also have erred 
through wine, and through strong drink 



are out of the way, they are swallowed 
up of wine, they are out of the way 
through strong drink, they err in vision, 
they stumble in judgment." 

What a picture of the present condition 
of things: Not only are the people 
of the Church intoxicated with the 
spirit of the world, but the priests, the 
clergy also. And because of this intoxication 
they err in vision and are 
unable to discern the truth; and they 
stumble over the plain statements and 
marked fulfillments of Gods Word. 

This condition of things is true of the 
whole nominal church of every denomination, 
so that "All tables are full of vomit 
and filthiness so that there is no place 
clean." >. 8\ The tables, which should be 
laden with the bread of truth, are instead, 
covered with a repulsive mass of 
mingled traditions and abominable 
errors. 

The Lord has permitted the unfaithful 
stewards for a long time to pursue 
their own plans and accomplish their 
own desires, but it shall not always be 
so, for the Prophet declares: "Behold 
the Lord hath a mighty and strong one 
which as a tempest of hail and a destroying 
storm, as a flood of mighty 
waters overflowing, shall cast down to 
the earth with the hand. The crown of 
pride, the drunkards of Ephraim, shall 
be trodden under foot." Cvs. 2,3\) 

The Lord has mighty agencies preparing 
for and already beginning this 
very work, as we have seen, for the 
nominal church is already being cast 
down. But while calamity and destruction 
awaits the great nominal church; 
and while their pride is to be humbled 
in the dust, it is not to be so with the 
little flock of faithful ones to whom the 
Lord has called, "Come out of her my 
people, that ye be not partakers of her 
sins and that ye receive not of her 



plagues." 

Of these he says: In that day-the 
very day of Babylons fall-shall the 
Lord of hosts be for a crown of glory, 
and for a diadem of beauty to the 
RESIDUE of his people, ("verse 5\) 
And not only so, but the Lord will be 
"for a spirit of judgment to him that 
sitteth in judgment, and for strength to 
them that turn the battle to the gate." 
He will give judgment, discretion, to 
those of his children who are endeavoring 
to judge, to discern between the 
right and the wrong, the truth and the 
error, and who bring all things new and 
old to the test of his Word. His 
strength also will be furnished to all who 
battle against the forces of error. 

"WHOM SHALL HE TEACH?" 

If such is the condition into which the 
Church has fallen; if the priest and the 
prophet and the people are all thus intoxicated 
and out of the way, Isaiah 
raises the question, "Whom shall he 
[God] teach knowledge? and whom 
shall he make to understand doctrine?" 
and answers, them that are weaned from 
the milk and drawn from the breast." 
>. 9\ 

Here the illustration of an infant is 
used, which Paul so forcibly applied to 
newly consecrated saints, whom he 
terms babes in Christ. ("1 Cor. 3:1\) 
And Peter also says that such should as 
new born babes, desire the sincere milk 
of the word that they may grow thereby. 
"lPet. 2:2\ 

These testimonies agree then, that 
while the doctrines or revelations of 
God are for his children, yet until they 
have passed the infant stage, and appropriated 

R563 : page 4 



the milk of first principles, 
they cannot be taught of him the deeper 
things. Alas! how few to-day make 
such use of the first principles as to 
grow thereby; and how applicable to 
many are the Apostles words-"When 
for the time ye ought to be teachers, ye 
have need that one teach you again 
which be the first principles of the 
oracles [doctrines] of God; and are become 
such as have need of milk and 
not of strong meat. For every one that 
useth milk is unskillful in the word of 
righteousness, for he is a babe. But 
strong meat belongeth to them that are 
of full age, even those who by reason of 
use, have their senses exercised to discern 
both good and evil." 

We find that for this very reason, because 
they do not grow but continue 
babes, many are so weak and helpless 
that in the day of the Lord they will 
have great distress in their inability to 
understand the Lords dealings. 

"For precept must be upon precept, 
precept upon precept, line upon line, 
line upon line, here a little and there a 
little." fv. 10\) 

Because God deals with us as a wise 
parent, with his children knowing that we 
need our food little by little, and the lighter 
diet before the strong meat, therefore 
his truth is so arranged as to meet our 
necessities: A little of the truth on any 
subject is placed here and a little more 
there; and as we take these littles and 
put them together we gain strength 
and are able to appreciate the whole of 
it. As we deal with children, so God 
deals with us, giving us line upon line, 
and precept upon precept-the same 
truths repeated over and over from 
different standpoints, thus enforcing his 
teachings. 

"For with stammering [despised or 
scorned] lips and another tongue will 



he speak to this people-to whom he 
said, This is the rest wherewith ye 
shall cause the weary to rest, and this 
is the refreshing; yet they would not 
hear. But the word of the Lord was 
unto them precept upon precept, precept 
upon precept, line upon line, line upon 
line, here a little and there a little— so 
that they go and have stumbled backward, 
and been broken and snared and 
captured." "vs. 11-13". [Young.] 

Though the word of the Lord has 
been thus plain and sufficient for the instruction 
and growth of his children, 
they have disregarded it and gone backward, 
substituting their own theories in 
its place, and in their attempt to substantiate 
their own theories by a reckless 
and often deceitful handling of the 
Word of God, they have wrested the 
Scriptures, and so stumble over its plain 
and harmonious teaching. The Lord 
had said, This plan for the redemption, 
restitution, and blessing of mankind, as 
revealed in my Word, is the comfort 
wherewith ye may cause the weary to 
rest. But the nominal church has refused 
to hear, and priest and people are 
alike deaf. Therefore the whole church 
nominal has gone backward, is taken in 
the snare of the adversary and must fall 
and be broken. 

But though the great system of religious 
organization must fall, we rejoice 
to know that the saints who are 
blinded and deceived by it, shall be delivered 
by its fall. Though the false 
teachers whom they have heaped to 
themselves, having itching ears for 
worldly praise ("2 Tim. 4:3") saying 
peace, peace, when there is no peace, 
("Jer. 6:14") have misused their office, 
the Lord will raise up other servants 
who will faithfully proclaim his truth. 
They will not seek to please the ear 
with soft words, nor to lull the drowsy, 



but will proclaim the unvarnished truth 
exposing hypocrisy and deception. 
With stammering [despised or scorned] 
lips and another tongue will he speak 
to this people. He will not choose the 
most approved and pleasing instruments 
to human fancy, but the scorned 
instruments in his hand shall be mighty 
in exposing the error and proclaiming 
the truth. 

The great rock of truth on which 
both the houses of Israel fall, is Christ 
as the worlds Redeemer. This was the 
rock over which the typical Jewish 
house did fall, and true to the type, we 
find the Gospel house (nominal) ready 
to stumble over the very same rock. 
No small number of the influential in 
the church nominal have already declared, 
and boldly teach that Christ 
was not our ransom or substitute, bearing 
our death penalty for us, in our 
room and stead. But notwithstanding 
all the deceptive sophistry that men 
may use to establish their theories, the 
plain simple statement of Gods Word 
is that "The wages of sin is death"- 
not everlasting dying but everlasting 
deprivation of life-and that "God sent 
his Son to be the propitiation [satisfaction] 
for our sins... and not for 
ours only, but also for the sins of the 
whole world" fl John 2:T and V 4:1(T); 
that by his paying our penalty we 
might be released from death-have a 
right to life-to a resurrection. 

This is the only foundation of the rest 
wherewith we may cause the weary to 
rest, and whosoever accepts of the ransom 
through the precious blood of 
Christ, may securely rest in full assurance 
of hope: Jesus said, "Come unto 
me all ye that labor and are heavy 
laden and I will give you rest." 

But as with the Jew, so now, men object 
to Gods way and desire a way of 



their own; and the plainest statements 

of Scripture and experiences of life are 

twisted and mystified, and the church is 

found bolstering up Satans lie--"Thou 

shalt not surely die." Their belief concerning 

the future condition of the 

righteous and wicked is expressed in 

the following verses and many others 

of similar import: 

"It is not death to bear 

The wrench that sets us free, 

From dungeon chain to breath the air 
Of boundless liberty." 

And again: 
"What to be banished from the Lord 

And yet forbid to die, 
To linger in eternal pain, 

And death forever fly." 

If eternal pain and deep despair are 
the wages of sin, they do not believe 
that Jesus became their ransom, substitute, 
assuming that penalty and thus 
liberating them. 

The cross of Christ loses its power 
and value in their sight as soon as they 
begin to reason and mix the truth with 
their false traditions. The ransom was 
to the Jew a stumbling block, and to 
the worldly wise of to-day it is foolishness; 
but to us who believe, it is 
precious, and in its merits we rest. 
With such a belief they are unprepared 
to see that Jesus death as a man was 
the settlement of the indebtedness of 
mankind incurred by Adams sin; and 
error on this point blinds to every 
other doctrine of Scripture built upon it. 
This is the very first principle of the 
Gospel and to those who are unskillful 
in this, how can God teach his doctrines 
or plans based on this? It is because 
they fail to use his lines and precepts 
that they fail to grow, and are weak 
against the besetments of the adversary 



in this day of the Lord. Who shall be 

able to stand? fMal. 3:2\) We find 

the great mass of our beloved fellow-Christians 

in just the position described 

where they shall be ensnared and captivated 

by error; hence we cry aloud 

and spare not. 

It is not Gods fault that such stumble 
and are ensnared by the adversary. 
The Scriptures abound with testimony 
as to the reality of death and the necessity 
and value of our ransom. The 
blood marks may be traced from Genesis 
to Revelation. By Apostles, Prophets, 
and types, the Lord has shown that, 
"without the shedding of blood there is 
no remission of sins"; and those who 
stumble on this subject are without 
excuse. 

The nominal church, as a whole, has 
not yet reached this climax of unbelief, 
but their course lies in that direction, 
and such will be the inevitable result. 

As soon as the spirit of inquiry which 
is abroad, forces them to think, they will 
see the dilemma in which they are placed 
between the doctrine of ransom and the 
theory of eternal torment. And so tenaciously 
do they hold to the latter, that 
they will prefer to deny the former when 
pressed for a reason for their belief. 

To the unfaithful teachers of to-day, 
Isaiah calls, "Wherefore hear the Word 
of the Lord ye scornful men that rule 
this people which is in Jerusalem, [another 
symbol of the church] because ye 
have said, We have made a covenant 
with death and with hell [sheol-the 
tomb] we are at agreement, when the 
overflowing scourge shall pass through, 
it shall not come unto us; for we have 
made lies our refuge, and under falsehood 
have we hid ourselves." "Verse 15\ 

This is rather to be understood as the 
Lords opinion. He terms their theory 
that "Death is the angel God has sent," 



an agreement with death, and their 
system of false theories, a refuge of lies. 

"Therefore, thus saith the Lord God, 
Behold I lay in Zion for a foundation a 
stone, a tried stone, a precious corner-stone, 
a sure foundation: he that belie veth 
shall not make haste." V V. 16\ Other 
foundation can no man lay than that 
which God laid- Jesus Christ, who died 
for our sins-the just for the unjust. 
There is no other real foundation, and 
faith built upon any other is not recognized 
nor owned of God. They who 
build upon their own works, and they 
who build their faith on the changeableness 
of the unchangeable God and suppose 
that he who once condemned man 
as unfit to live, will reverse his decision 
and bring him to life again, build upon 
the sand and have no foundation; for 
God lays but the one foundation-Christ, 

R564 : page 4 

who by the favor of God tasted death 
for every man. 

Some in their "haste" pass by the 
ransom and its legitimate fruit the resurrection 
-restitution. This is too slow 
a process for them. They have a speedier 
way by which that which God terms 
"the last enemy"-DEATH-becomes a 
near and hasty road to glory. But he 
that belie veth Gods testimony "shall 
not make haste;" such, taking Gods 
plan instead of hastily constructing theories 
of their own, are resting on the 
sure foundation. They await in hope 
and trust the time when the value of 
the ransom will be shown in the release 
from death of all for whom Christ died 
-every man. Such find it as the Lord 
promised: "This is the rest wherewith 
ye shall cause the weary to rest and this 
is the refreshing." 

"Judgment also will I lay to the line 



and righteousness to the plummet; and 
the hail shall sweep away the refuge of 
lies, and the waters shall overflow the 
hiding place." For centuries God has 
permitted the God of this world, Satan, 
to blind men and to mystify and obscure 
the truth. He has permitted good to 
be called evil, and evil good. He has 
permitted his own character and plans 
to be misrepresented. But now comes 
the time when woe will be unto them 
which call evil good and good evil and 
pervert the way and word of the Lord. 
He will mark out clearly and definitely 
with line and plummet, the right and 
wrong, the crooked and the straight. 
Everything wrong must be overthrown 
and the crooked made straight. The 
more firmly error is rooted the greater 
will be the shock. This will apply to 
truth and error on every subject and 
especially in the greatest of all-religion. 
Already the shock begins to be 
felt both by the church and the world, 
but more especially by the former. 

Water symbolizes truth and hail 
represents hard, cold forcible truths, or 
truths put in a forcible way, as judgments. 
Thus we are shown that when 
Gods time comes, all error and deceit, 
every refuge of lies will be swept away 
and destroyed, for God will have all 
men to come to the knowledge of the 
truth, that they may avail themselves of 
its advantages. 

The burning up of all the hay, wood 
and stubble, errors of those building on 
the rock of Jesus the ransom, is shown 
by Paul, fl Cor. 3:12\) and the overthrow 
of all systems which reject the 
only foundation is well illustrated by 
Jesus in his simile. fLuke 6:48\) The 
difference between building on the rock, 
and building in the sand alongside the 
rock is very great when the floods come 
and beat upon such a faith. 



"And your covenant with death shall 
be disannulled and your agreement with 
hell [sheol, the tomb] shall not stand; 
when the overflowing scourge [whip, 
rod-chastisement] shall pass through 
[in the Day of the Lord], then ye shall 
be trodden down [oppressed] by it. 

R564 : page 5 

From the time that it goeth forth [in its 
very commencement] it shall take you; 
for morning by morning shall it pass 
over by day and by night; and it shall 
be a vexation [distress, perplexity] only 
until he shall make you to understand 
doctrine." [See margin.] "Verses 18,19". 

Because the church is so largely composed 
of babes uninstructed in the word 
of the Lord, and therefore unable to 
understand his dealings, therefore in 
this time of judgment- testing and sifting 
such will be discouraged, vexed, 
and much troubled as they shall witness 
the overthrow of many things which 
they had deemed essential to the progress 
of Gods cause in the world. They 
do not see that the separation of wheat 
and tares, and of the ripe and unripe 
wheat is now due. They do not see 
that those building on the sand must be 
manifested and distinguished from those 
who build upon the foundation which 
God hath laid, hence their distress as 
their wood, hay and stubble faith is 
consumed, and when they see the "refuge 
of lies" which they mistook for truth, 
entirely swept away. But this overthrow 
and destruction of venerated 
theories shall be a vexation to them 
until they are made to understand the 
true doctrine revealed in Gods word. 
When thus liberated they will rejoice in 
the overthrow of every form of error 
and its replacement with truth. 

"For the bed is shorter than that a 



man can stretch himself on it." A bed 
is a place for rest and refreshment and 
symbolizes a faith-a creed. God provides 
the good and suitable resting 
place or faith in his word; saying, "This 
is the rest wherewith ye shall cause the 
weary to rest and this is the refreshing." 
Rejecting his, they have made beds to 
suit themselves- sectarian creeds-but 
God condemns them; they are so short 
and contracted that only babes can 
stretch themselves therein-those who 
are more developed-men ("In understanding 
be ye men." v l Cor. 14:2(0 
being cramped and uncomfortable, can 
find no rest in such, and are getting out 
of them. 

"And the covering is narrower than 
that he can wrap himself in it." The 
assurances offered by the nominal 
Church are so vague and unsatisfactory 
that those in such beds find it difficult 
to cover or assure themselves. Their 
knowledge of God is so narrow and 
meager that they know not the meaning 
of "full [wide; ample] assurance of 
faith." fHeb. 10:22\) The uncovered, 
shivering and doubting condition of the 
great majority is expressed in some of 
the familiar hymns from which we give 
some extracts: 

"Tis a point I long to know, 
Oft it causes anxious thought; 

Do I love the Lord or no, 
Am I his, or am I not." 

"When thou my righteous Judge shall come, 
To take thy ransomed people home, 
Shall I among them stand?" 

"But can I bear the piercing thought 
What if my name should be left out, 
When thou for them shalt call?" 

"Thy pardoning voice O let me hear, 



To still my unbelieving fear, 
Nor let me fall I pray." 

God declares-- "Their fear toward 
me is taught by the precepts of men." 
flsa. 29:13\) The nominal church in 
its "haste" to convert the world has 
exaggerated and wrested parables and 
symbols in using them to threaten the 
world, and to frighten them into their 
beds for promised rest; but their unlawful 
"haste" has worked to their own 
unrest, for they have so convinced 
themselves of Gods injustice that they 
find it difficult to satisfy themselves of 
their own security, fearing lest by some 
thoughtless word or act they should 
endure eternal torture. Hence saints 
who have grown so as to discover the 
shortness of the bed and the narrowness 
of the covering cry out: 

"A point of time a moments space 
Removes me to that heavenly place, 
Or shuts me up in hell." 

"A half-awakened child of man 
An heir of bliss or pain, 
A worm of earth, I cry"— 

"Eternal things impress! 
Give me to feel their solemn weight 
And tremble on the brink of fate." 

"What after death for me remains? 
Celestial joys or hellish pains 
To all eternity! 

"How then ought I to live on earth?" 
"My sole concern, my single care, 
To watch, to tremble and prepare 
Against that fatal day." 

Our hearts are full of pity for these 
whose fear and distress is caused by 
their short beds and narrow covering, 



and we urge them to come out into the 
broad place, and to rest with us in the 
testimonies of God alone. 

Those who rest in Gods word are 
described in "Psalm 149\ While the 
others are in anguish and fear, these 
"Sing aloud upon their beds." The 
high praises of Jehovah are in their 
mouths-the new song; and their security, 
his word is in their hands-the 
sword of the spirit. 

"For the Lord shall rise up as in 
Mount Perazim, he shall be wroth as in 
the valley of Gibeon, that he may do 
his work, his strange work, and bring 
to pass his act, his strange act." fv. 21\) 
The cases mentioned as illustrations of 
the destruction of this day are remarkable. 
At Perazim the idol- worshipers 
who came against Gods newly anointed 
king, David, to oppose the establishment 
of his kingdom, met the power of 
Jehovah whom he represented. f2 Sam. 5:20,21\) 
At Gibeah there was a 
great slaughter by the Lord with hailstones 
from heaven of those who attempted 
to interfere with Joshua and 
Israel in taking possession of the promised 
land. fJosh. 10:10,11\) 

The Lord warns that those who oppose 
the establishment of his anointed 
in the real Canaan, shall similarly bring 
upon themselves destruction. "Now, 
therefore, be ye not mockers lest your 
bands be made strong; for I have 
heard from the Lord of hosts a consumption 

R565 : page 5 

even determined upon the 
whole earth." fv. 22\) 

Some seem inclined to treat lightly 
the predictions of overthrow or consumption 
of the present order of things 
and the introduction of the new order. 
Such feel so confident as they look at 



the perfection of Babylons ramparts of 

defence, and as they look at the formidable 

armament of nations, that they 

need the caution of the Lords words, 

"Be ye not mockers." To take a position 

of opposition is to make the fall so 

much the more severe when it comes. 

Those who reject and mock at the 

truth are more tightly bound by Babylons 

cord of influence and prejudice- 

their bands are made strong. The consumption 

or destruction of hoary and 

venerated systems of error both civil 

and religious, is "the act-the strange 

act," which the Lord will shortly bring 

to pass. It is a strange act to all those 

not instructed from his word, and who 

so highly esteem these false systems 

which are doomed to destruction. 

(TO BE CONTINUED.) 



R565 : page 5 

GO TO THE FOUNTAIN. 

Water is water, wherever it is found; 
but there is a great difference between 
water which is drawn from the fountain, 
and water dipped from a stagnant pool. 
The one refreshes, the other nauseates; 
the one is life giving, the other brings 
poison and death. 

The Word of God is a fountain of 
living water, but how often this water 
becomes stale, adulterated, and defiled, 
in passing through the various channels 
of fallen humanity. There are sermons 
which have many of the thoughts of 
man, and few of the thoughts of God. 
Multitudes of men content themselves 
with a second-hand gospel, which is 
stale, flat and unprofitable. They do 
not search the Scriptures, they do not 



study the living Word, but they depend 
on commentaries, sermons, interpretations 
and misquotations, and thus are 
led into gross errors, and are deprived 
of the freshness and vitality which resides 
in that Word which liveth and 
abideth forever. The Word of God is 
living and powerful. We are to be 
cleansed "by the washing of water by 
the Word;" but that water must be living 
water. No stagnant pool of human 
tradition, no turbid current of doctrinal 
controversy, can refresh and cleanse the 
souls that thirst and pant for the living 
streams which flow from the throne. 

Those who would have living water 
must learn the way to the living fountain 
--the Word of God itself. A writer 
tells of two wells of the Doge of 
Venice: the water of one of them is 
brought in barges from a distance, and 
few care to taste the insipid draught; 
the other is a delicious natural well, 
cool and refreshing, and the people 
strive to obtain water from this fountain. 

Ministers of the gospel, who long to 
be of use in this world, must not content 
themselves with being mere sponges to 
absorb and then give out the thoughts 
and ideas of others; they must, on the 
contrary, draw water for themselves out 
of the wells of salvation, and know the 
virtue of those streams that make glad 
the city of our God. Let us turn away 
from the turbid waters which men have 
fouled and defiled, and let us learn to 
drink from the living fountain, that 
which shall be in us a well of water 
springing up into everlasting life.-Sel. 



R565 : page 5 
FULL OF SELF. 



Of all the empty people, there are 
few more pitiable than those who are 
filled with self. Who has not seen persons 
who seemed to know nothing but 
self, and whose first ambition on meeting 
strangers, seems to be to inform 
them where they had been and what 
they had done, and how much they 
knew. Good old John Bunyan tells us 
of a man named Ignorance who came 
"from the country of conceit;" and 
surely this country has furnished a very 
large emigration of self -filled egotists. 

We never shall amount to much in 
this world or the next so long as we are 
filled with self. If we think that we are 
the central figures in the universe, and 
that everybody is interested in hearing 
our talk and of our exploits, we shall 
win the pity of the judicious, and the 
contempt of the less considerate. Who 
has not seen grave, godly, intelligent 
men and women sit in painful silence 
and listen to the empty rattle of some 
conceited person, who could only talk 
of himself and of things which personally 
concerned him. He who has only 
himself to talk about, may very properly 
question whether he had best talk at all, 
and may find that, much as he values 
the privilege of speech, his reputation 
would be enhanced by judicious bursts 
of silence; which would allow people 
to collect their thoughts, and listen to 
those who might have something to say 
worth hearing. --Christian. 



R565 : page 5 

A MUCH READ TRACT. 

There is a tract that all men read- 
that tract, dear Christian reader, is yourself 
-you are an epistle "KNOWN AND 



READ OF ALL MEN." If you are washed 
in the blood of Jesus, and sealed with 
the Holy Spirit, the life of Christ becomes 
your life; you have to go forth 
into the world, bearing witness to the 
truth, by your word and by your life. 
You have, by Gods grace, so to reflect 
the image of Jesus, that those who 
refuse to receive your word, may, by 
beholding your heavenly life, be led to 
glorify your Father which is in heaven. 

What harm is done with inconsistencies 
in a Christians life, by thoughtless conduct, 
foolish conversation, levity of 
manner! We know how the sun goes 
on shining, and the world goes hurrying 
on around it. Daily it exerts an influence 
for good, by its light and 
warmth, and few take any notice of it. 
But only let a spot appear upon the 
sun, at once every eye and finger is 
towards it, and people are writing to 
the newspapers to say there is a spot 
on the sun. It is just so with the Christian; 
the world is hurrying on about 
him, and as it passes, though few take 
any notice of him, he can exert his influence 
for good. But only let him 
stumble-let him show any inconsistency 
of conduct, and then the world 
will point and scoff at him, and his influence 
for good is hindered. Think of 
this, my dear Christian brother or sister. 

You can do something for your Saviours 
glory. Do what you can by 
word, but above all, live as those who 
are washed in the blood of Jesus, and 
keep yourselves unspotted from the 
world. So shall men see that the life 
which you now live in the flesh you 
live by the faith of the Son of God, who 
loved you and gave Himself for you. 
R. HILL. 



R565 : page 5 

OVERCHARGED. 

"Take heed to yourselves, lest at any time 
your hearts be overcharged with surfeiting, and 
drunkenness, and cares of this life, and so that 
day come upon you unawares. For as a snare 
shall it come upon all them that dwell on the 
face of the whole earth. Watch ye, therefore, 
and pray always, that ye may be accounted 
worthy to escape all these things that shall come 
to pass, and to stand before the Son of man." 

These are the words of Jesus as recorded 
by v Luke21:34,35,36\ 

One would suppose that words so full 
of warning, and of such deep significance, 
spoken by Jesus to his disciples, 
for the benefit of those who should be 
living in the trying time of which he 
speaks, would be kept constantly in 
mind and not for a moment forgotten 
by those who are running for the "prize 
of the high calling." 

One of the strongest evidences which 
we have of the truth of the prophecies 
spoken in connection with these words is, 
that at the very time when they are 
being fulfilled by rapidly succeeding 
events, at the very time when his people 
should be lifting up their heads knowing 
that their "redemption draweth 
nigh," at the very point where expectation 
should be on tip-toe, we find many 
who have been enlightened, so busied 
with a multitude of other things that 
they cannot attend to preparation for 
the coming kingdom. 

They are so overcharged (there is no 
more fitting word to use) that they have 
not time to heed the caution and derive 
benefit from the injunction given in the 
scripture to which we have referred. 

To the lover of Jesus, and who expects 
to be everlastingly and intimately 



associated with and united to him, there 

is, perhaps, no more deeply interesting 

scriptures than the "twenty-fourth chapter of Matthew" 

the "thirteenth of Mark", 

and the "twenty-first of Luke". The 

more deeply interesting because they 

define more particularly, the events 

which are to immediately precede the 

coming of him in whom their "soul 

R566 : page 5 

delighteth," and so mark more clearly 
the time when the bridegroom and 
bride shall be united, and introduce the 
glorious reign of righteousness and 
truth. 

The fact that a deeply trying time is 
to immediately precede the coming of 
the bridegroom, should put every expectant 
soul on the alert. But what are 
the principle dangers of the hour? 

We find they are the liability of being 
deceived. Four times in the "thirteenth of Mark" 
we find Jesus saying, "TAKE 
HEED!" His first caution is, take heed 
lest any one deceive you, "5th ver."; next, 
take heed to yourselves, be careful what 
you do and say, be circumspect, "9th ver."; 
again, take heed to what I have 
told you, "23d ver."; and last, take heed, 
watch and pray, "33d ver." 

While there is a similarity in the 
general narration, as given in these 
three chapters, yet each narrator gives 
some points more prominence than the 
others; and so we find here, in the text 
quoted, more explicit directions given 
regarding ourselves. Take heed lest 
your hearts be overcharged." 

There are three things here mentioned 
with which the heart is especially liable 
to become overcharged- surfeiting, 
drunkenness, and cares of this life. 
Perhaps some who read these pages 
may think they are not troubled with 



the first two. If there are any let them 
take heed and see if they are among the 
number spoken of by "Isaiah 29:9- 14\ 
But many, no doubt, feel the force of the 
last, and are exerting themselves to 
overcome; while still many more, who 
are really "overcharged," are not fully 
conscious of it; but the words of Jesus 
are very peculiar if we will notice them. 
He does not simply say you will have 
a great deal of worldly care, but says, 
"Take heed that your HEARTS be not 
overcharged with the cares of this life." 
Now, it is possible for a man to have a 
great deal of worldly care requiring his 
attention, and yet not have his heart 
much affected or influenced by it. He 
may have just all he can attend to, and 
yet his heart be quite free from the 

R566 : page 6 

burden. Why? Because his heart is 
not in it as much as his head. If he is 
doing all as unto the Lord, there will 
not be much danger of his heart being 
overcharged. We need right here to 
"take heed" and not delude ourselves with 
the idea that our hearts are with the 
Lord, and that we are in full sympathy 
with him and his work, if we do not 
find, or make, or take time to commune 
with him and feast upon his word, and 
partake of his Spirit. So it is the heart 
that is in danger. This being the case, 
what are the methods most likely to be 
made use of by the enemy to load 
down our hearts to the extent of being 
"overcharged"? We may be sure that 
he will not for a moment think of inducing 
us to be recreant to our trust. 
O no, not at all; he would be the last 
one to suggest anything like unfaithfulness; 
he would have us "diligent in 
business, fervent in spirit, serving (?) 
the Lord." If we were likely to forget 



that passage he would quote it to us, 
but not with as much stress upon the 
last part as up on the first. 

O yes, we must be diligent in business 
so that we can provide for our own 
families, for he who provides not for his 
own house has denied the faith and is 
worse than an infidel, fl Tim. 5:8\) 

O yes, provide for your own house, 
certainly, and see that your family have 
a good house, and a large one; see that 
it is full as good as your neighbors; no 
matter if it is a little better, let no one 
get the idea that you are not providing 
well for your own house. 

Now, if we were to picture the whole 
truth to the life, and show to what an 
extent the enemy is leading many who 
mean to be the Lords children, it 
would look absurd enough. In accord 
with our desire to be faithful, the adversary 
is crowding overmuch work upon 
us, all of which is claimed to be duty, 
though the demands are so numerous 
that we have insufficient time for the 
accomplishment of them all. This 
crowding upon us more than we can 
possibly do, is evidently the enemy, and 
is intended to keep us from the most 
important of all work, the study of 
Gods word, through which we are 
enabled to grow in grace and in the 
knowledge of the truth, and by which 
we are thoroughly furnished unto every 
good word and work. Are we not, in 
our over-burdened condition, forgetting 
to "seek first the kingdom of God and 
his righteousness"? There is manifestly 
no work so important as to keep the 
love of God burning brightly upon the 
altar of our hearts, and no means so 
likely to accomplish this as the study 
of the word of God, and prayer. Of 
course we do not mean that these shall 
be done to the exclusion of good works, 
but we do mean that good works 



should not be allowed to exclude these. 

We verily believe that just now the 
enemy is more than usually active in 
his efforts to keep all classes of Christians 
so busy that they shall not have 
time to look after the truth and watch 
for the sign of the presence of the Son 
of man. (See v Matt. 24:3 v -Diaglott.) 

Some who could not be induced nor 
pressed into worldliness, he will keep 
busy looking after the welfare of others, 
to the exclusion of their own growth in 
the knowledge of the truth. Some 
casting out devils; some relieving the 
distressed, and all engaged more or less 
in doing "many wonderful works"; but 
while doing wonderful works they are 
leaving undone that which is of greater 
importance, i.e., fitting themselves for 
union with Christ, and for efficient service 
in the worlds great seed time and 
harvest in the age to come. 

Work done in the Lords vineyard 
now and not done according to his plan 
will be superficial and need doing over 
again. 

So-called revival work has to be repeated. 
Not that we are opposed to 
revivals, in the true import of the term, 
but the work done in the way it is done, 
has to be done over and over; devils 
cast out do not stay out; souls converted 
have to be re-converted, "reclaimed" 
as it is called, until the wonderful 
part of the "wonderful works" 
is, that there is as much demand for the 
"shoddy" as there is, though the demand 
for it is less in proportion as people 
come to understand Gods word. 

We do not question the sincerity of 
those engaged in such work to the 
neglect of the Lords work in their own 
souls, for in their sincerity they will say 
to the judge, "Have we not prophesied 
in thy name and in thy name cast out 
devils, and in thy name done many 



wonderful works?" But they will find 

that such works will be no more appreciated 

then than they are getting to be 

now. 

They will find that their wonders 
were performed under the influence of 
a zeal without knowledge. Love of the 
truth would lead to the exposure and 
rejection of every religious sham, and 
there would be no demand for the 
superficial. Love of the truth would 
lead us more and more into the truth, 
would make business cares and anxieties 
give place and stand aside while we 
take a sufficient amount of time to study 
Gods word and worship him in spirit 
and in truth. 

When we are in any doubt about the 
amount of time we should take for the 
purpose of feeding upon the bread of 
life, let us put into one scale all our 
worldly cares and worldly demands 
upon our time, and into the other these 
words: "Seek ye first the kingdom of 
God and his righteousness." "How 
shall we escape if we neglect so great 
salvation?" J. C. SUNDERLIN. 

Fort Edward, N.Y. 



R566 : page 6 
FAITH AND WORKS. 



But, beloved, we are persuaded better things of 
you, and things that accompany salvation, though 
we thus speak. For God is not unrighteous to forget 
your work and labor of love, which ye have 
showed toward his name, in that ye have ministered 
to the saints, and do minister.— 
"Heb. 6:9,10\ 

This expression refers us back to the 
"preceding verses of this chapter" and the 
Tatter part of the fifth". Paul was disappointed 



in those he addressed, in finding 
less growth in grace and knowledge 
than he had reason to expect. They 
were still merely at the "first principles" 
of the doctrine of Christ, and not even 
very firmly rooted in them. And with 
his characteristic plainness of speech, 
Paul told them that for the time they 
had spent, as pupils in the school of 
Christ, they ought now to be teachers, 
but instead they needed some one to 
teach them again which be the first principles 
of the doctrine. They were still 
babes, having need of milk, and unable 
to receive the strong meat. For strong 
meat (advanced truth) belongs not to 
babes, but it is necessary to those more 
matured. 

Paul then exhorts them to leave the 
first principles and go on unto perfection, 
and not to be forever laying the 
foundation of Christian character by repentance 
and faith in the plan of God 
for their redemption, and renewing their 
consecration; this they had done long 
ago, and now their faith should rest in 
the ransom-the foundation (provided) 
of God which standeth sure. f2 Tim. 2:19\) 
And they should diligently proceed 
in the work of building up a symmetrical 
Christian faith and character on 
this sure foundation. He proceeds to 
show the hopeless condition of those 
who FALL AWAY after having once been 
enlightened on these first principles- 
having tasted of the heavenly gift (justification 
through the precious blood of 
Christ) and being made partakers of the 
Holy Spirit of adoption as spiritual sons 
of God, and as such brought to a knowledge 
(an understanding) of the good 
word of God, and the powers of the 
world to come, or Gods plan and power 

R567 : page 6 



in the coming age. "If they fall away- 
reject the truth from its very foundation 
--"it is impossible to renew them again 
unto repentance, seeing they crucify unto 
themselves the Son of God afresh, and 
put him to an open shame; having thus, 
by open profession, been marked as sons 
of God and representatives of Christ in 
the world. 

In v chap. 10:29\ Paul terms this esteeming 
the blood of the covenant, by which 
we are sanctified, a common or unsacred 
thing-an insult to the Spirit of favor. 
And who could otherwise regard it? 
Much as we might desire to reclaim 
such, Paul says: It is impossible to renew 
them again; and we are of those who 
believe that Paul was inspired to write, 
and made no mistake in this matter. 
And since he says "it is impossible," the 
stubborn facts may be expected to corroborate 
this statement. All sin has its 
hardening effect, and we cannot tamper 
with it with impunity. No sin is so 
hardening as that which is wilfully committed 
in the face of clear knowledge. 
The favor of God in Christ, our propitiation, 
once received, its necessity seen, 
its justification and other benefits accepted 
and partially enjoyed, seems to 
make an after rejection of these first 
principles inexcusable. 

These having had such a clear experience 
as well as plain instruction on the 
subject, are reckoned guilty of ignoring 
the Lamb of God which taketh away the 
sin of the world. And having once professed 
him, this is rightly called putting 
him to an open shame. Thus they cast 
from them the favor of God, even 
their part in the redemption which is in 
Christ Jesus. 

Pride and ambition harden the heart 
and darken reason, and leave no room 
for a wedge of truth to effect an entrance. 
Where pride and ambition have progressed 



to the extent here mentioned, 
in the very nature of the case recovery 
would seem "impossible," and when a 
reasonable amount of time, and patient, 
studious effort has been expended to recover 
out of the snare of the adversary 
those who seem to be stumbling 
into this sin; if they still wilfully 
pursue their course, we can but leave 
them where they place themselves-in 
the hands of a just God, unsheltered by 
the precious blood of Christ, in whom 
alone is redemption. (See 
v Ex. 12:13,22,23\) 

Thank God we have no fear of an 
eternity of torture for such, nor for any. 
No, to be eternally deprived of life and 
its blessed privileges is the final punishment 
of the disobedient. But O that all 
would esteem this favor of God, in the 
gift of his Son, and live. Paul says it is 
a fearful thing, thus out of Christ, to fall 
into the hands of the living God. The 
punishment of those who violated Moses 
law was death, but from that death there 
was deliverance through the ransom; 
but of how much sorer punishment shall 
he be thought worthy who hath trodden 
under foot the Son of God and esteemed 
as a common thing the blood of the covenant, 
and insulted the Spirit of favor. 
This sorer punishment is the second 
death, from which there is no resurrection; 
for there remaineth no more a sacrifice 
for sins. v Heb. 10:26,29\ 

With reference to this sin unto death, 
we think that many make a great mistake. 
It is supposed by very many, 
that open, bold infidels, who blaspheme, 
and reject, and ridicule the Word 
of God entire, have come about the 
nearest of any to committing the sin unto 
death; but, by reading carefully Pauls 
description, we see that it does not at all 
apply to such, nor does it apply to what 
are often termed backsliding Christians. 



Very few Christians, even, have ever 

tasted much of the good word of 

God; they have had considerable of the 

perverted word of God, but Paul does 

not mention that. Very few know anything 

about the powers of the world 

(age) to come-Gods plan in that age. 

No, it is not the weak and erring ones, 

partially overcome by the world, the 

flesh and the devil, and many of whom 

sin contrary to their will, that it is impossible 

to reclaim. God still loves and 

pities such, and will discipline them in 

the furnace of affliction, or however he 

thinks best. These have not knowingly 

and wilfully insulted the Spirit of favor, 

and for these there is good hope of 

recovery. 

But while showing the necessity of a 
firm establishment on first principles, and 
the impossibility of reclaiming such as 
had left them entirely, the Apostle assured 
the church that he believed they had 
not rejected the favor of God, for he says: 
"We are persuaded better things of you, 
though we thus speak." 

These words were to guard them on a 
dangerous point, and to show them the 
uselessness of constantly disputing with 
rejecters of first principles. It is useless 
to spend valuable time and effort in the 
fruitless attempt to reclaim such. Therefore, 
having these things once established, 
settled, made plain, they should go on 
unto perfection: Not that we should 
fail to give first principles or milk to 
babes, or to help a weak or stumbling 
brother by re-enforcing him with the 
power of truth, which he may have let 
slip, for that should be our constant aim 
and effort: but that is quite different from 
wasting valuable time and effort in fruitless 
attempts to reclaim wilful rejecters 
mentioned by Paul, which it is "impossible" 
to reclaim. 

All should make sure that the first 



principles are correct, and firmly established 

by the word of God; but if we go 

no further, we will never reach perfection. 

If a man, after laying a foundation 

for a building, should always be digging 

it up and turning it over and trying to 

fit the stones in some other way, how 

soon would the building be completed? 

There must come a time, and that before 

we begin to build, when we feel sure that 

the foundation is good and properly 

laid; and, in full confidence in that foundation, 

we may proceed with our building 

--go on unto perfection. 

In the few v verses folio wing\ Paul shows 
that the hope of the High Calling depends 
on our works-built, of course, on 
the finished work of Christ, the sure 
foundation. For God is not unrighteous 
to forget your work and labor of love." 
Is it possible, we sometimes say, that 
God will thus esteem our poor, imperfect 
works? And what are they? They 
seem so small that we feel ashamed to 
mention them; and yet it is our little all; 
rendered with carefulness according to 
our covenant, and though imperfect, it is 
rendered acceptable through him whose 
imputed righteousness makes up all the 
deficiency. 

Our small influence is all cast on the 
side of truth, both by word and example; 
our little reputation we gladly part 
with in our effort to advance the truth and 
obey it; our few talents for preaching the 
truth, we use to the best advantage, according 
to our best judgment; perhaps 
some of us have no ability to tell the 
blessed story straight ourselves, but 
such can read it to others, or give it to 
them to read; and all can show its 
moulding and transforming effects in 
daily walk and conversation; we may 
have very little money, possibly no 
more than what will meet the bare necessities 
of life for ourselves and those dependent 



on us, and leave but a mite for 

the spread of the truth; yet if our all is 

consecrated to the Lord, and used with 

an eye single to his glory, it is acceptable 

and well-pleasing to him-- "in the 

beloved." 

Paul here mentions specially their labors 
of love in ministering to the saints. 
Many Christians seemingly fail to appreciate 
their privilege in this direction, 
and spend their principal effort for the 
world, forgetting the injunction: "Do 
good unto all men as you have opportunity, 
especially to the household of 
faith." The time is coming, and is not 
far distant, when there will be abundant 
opportunity to do good to the world; 
but the opportunity to do good to the 
saints, the body, the bride of Christ, will 
not long continue. Soon they will be 
glorified and no longer need your 
ministrations. 

Remember the Masters words: A 
poor woman had brought a box of very 
precious ointment and poured it on his 
head as he sat at meat; and when his 
disciples saw it they said, "To what purpose 
is this waste? For this ointment 
might have been sold for much, and given 
to the poor." But Jesus answered, 
"The poor ye have always with you, but 
me ye have not always; she hath 
wrought a good work upon me." 
OMatt. 26:7-13\) 

So, the body of Christ will not always 
be here to be ministered unto. Whatever 
we can do now for our fellow members 
of the body of Christ, the Head 
will reckon as done unto him. And our 
Father will not forget our labor of love 
in ministering to the saints. It is needless 
for us to suggest that as God is not 
unjust to forget labors of love for the 
saints, neither is he unjust to credit us 
with them, if we have done no labors for 
such-if we have not ministered. Paul 



urges that we continue to be very diligent 
in this labor of love, and suggests 

R567 : page 7 

that continued diligence will give the 
full assurance of hope. 

O, how great is the inheritance which 
our little insignificant labor of love secures, 
when supplemented by the all-sufficient 
merit of our Lord! Let us appreciate 
our privilege of ministering to 
the saints in whatever way we find it 
possible, whether in temporal or spiritual 
things. In the language of our beloved 
brother Paul: "We desire that 
every one of you do show the same diligence 
to the full assurance of hope unto 
the end." Since our covenant is to sacrifice 
and spend ourselves completely, 
full assurance of receiving the reward 
can only come by diligence in self-sacrifice 
-ministering. 

Let us see to it that we have a right 
faith, rooted and grounded in the infallible 
word of God; and being thus assured, 
let us leave the firmly established 
first principles of the doctrine of Christ, 
and go on to perfection- work out our 
salvation as new creatures-rendering 
the justified human in exchange for the 
promised divine nature. 



R568 : page 7 

RELIEF OF PERSECUTED JEWS. 

Violent persecution of Jews in Christian 
countries has again broken out. 
The newspapers daily report fresh outrages 
-here the burning down of a Jewish 
village-there the destruction by a 
furious mob of the Jewish quarter of a 
large town; in another place, a mere 



village, an attack made by twenty peasants 
armed with hatchets, cudgels, and 
scythes, upon an old man, very poor, 
whom they murdered, driving the women 
of the family into the fields. Well 
is it said that "nothing short of madness 
seems to have seized upon the people 
of Hungary and of South Russia," 
the ignorant peasantry who not only 
rob and murder, but destroy, wholesale, 
the property of villages, towns and 
districts. 

It was estimated by Russian Government 
authorities that during the anti- Jewish 
riots of 1881-1882, above twenty-two 
million pounds worth of property 
had been destroyed, and now the same 
insane work is being revived in Russia, 
and carried on in Hungary. Millions 
worth of property is annihilated; life is 
sacrificed in a thousand ways by the 
mob, and in Russia the State-the 
Government itself-is helping forward 
the work of destruction by closing to 
the Jews industry after industry; here 
ruining by one stroke of the pen 20,000 
Jewish agriculturists by abolishing their 
leases; there driving thousands of manufacturers 
into bankruptcy by a sudden 
edict commanding them to dismiss all 
their Christian employees. Because "the 
employment of Christians by Jews 
proved, on the one hand, to be opposed 
to the national spirit of the Russians; 
and on the other hand, a lengthy intercourse 
between Christian employees and 
Jewish employers is found to be subversive 
of the religious feelings of the 
workmen, who become indifferent to 
religious ceremonials, and are even 
found to absent themselves from church 
on Saints days and festivals!" This 
is a quotation from the official Russian 
document. 

During the whole of last year, riot 
and plunder, massacre and expulsion, 



were brought to bear upon sixteen out 
of eighty- six districts in Russia, where 
alone Jews may dwell. In one town 
6,000 persons were driven out during 
an outbreak lasting only a few days; in 
another large city 20,000 Jews were 
systematically expelled, and so on, until 
it became wearisome to read the repetition 
of similar occurrences in hundreds 
of places, large and small. The last 
twelve months have been remarkable 
for the promulgation of new and grinding 
edicts, which multiply tenfold the 
disabilities under which Jews have 
hitherto existed. And now the acute 
symptoms of persecution with violence 
have reappeared. There is one most 
grave feature now to be observed in 
South Russia and in Hungary. Special 
agitators are going about stirring up 
the ignorant people and leading the 
mob against the Jews. In Hungary 
bands of peasants, from 100 to 1,000 
strong, have appeared in various parts 
of the country, usually led by some one 
who, though dressed as a peasant and 
wearing a mask, betrays himself by his 
style of language and deportment as 
belonging to the better classes. There 
is good reason to believe that the money 
and the emissaries who act thus are 
provided by the German Anti-Semitic 
Party, who have long been preaching 
an active crusade against the Jews. 
Shall we say, as some do, that the Jews 
have brought all this upon themselves 
by their usury, their greed, and their 
fraud, goading to madness those whom 
they have oppressed? 

Long acquaintance with the Jewish 
people, and acquaintance with their 
habits, convinces me that in these matters 
they have been unjustly accused. 
It is well to remember that neither race-hatred, 
religious fanaticism, brutish ignorance 
of the masses, nor all of these 



combined, can account for what is now 
going on. Not only in barbarous 
Russia and uncivilized Hungary, but in 
enlightened Protestant Germany, are to 
be found thousands who hate Jews with 
a blind, unreasoning hatred, and combine 
to do them harm. 

We feel that the causes lie deeper 
than those alleged in the newspapers of 
the day. The hand of Divine Providence 
can be traced in the convulsions 
which are shaking the Jews out of the 
lands of their dispersion, and preparing 
them, even by the sufferings which they 
are enduring, for return to their own 
land. 

To succor those ready to perish is a 
Christian duty. "Relief of persecuted 
Jews in token of Christian sympathy," 
is felt to be one means of softening the 
hearts of the sufferers towards Christianity. 
Amid all the distressing accounts 
of cruelties inflicted by Christians 
it is comforting to turn to the 
record of Christian effort to relieve, to 
hear of the refugees placed in safety 
in Cyprus, even though but a few 
families; and that a beginning has been 
made, and that under British protection 
Jewish hands are at this moment at 
work upon the land granted to them at 
the instance of Lord Shaftesbury, that 
they have begun to dig their wells, and 
to prepare for sowing their seed in that 
island-known to us chiefly by its 
New Testament history.-Watch Tower. 



R568 : page 7 

WILLING AND WILLING. 

It is one thing to be willing to have 
the will of God be done and quite another 
TO WILL to have it done. 



Christians everywhere pray "Thy 
will be done." All Christians must acquiesce 
in his will and yield a ready 
and full submission to the will of God. 
But it is quite an advance from that 
passive submission TO WILL, with all the 
strength and power of our souls and 
the energy of our lives to do his will 
and see to it as much as in us lies, by 
all the effort of which we are capable 
that others also do his will. It is his 
will that all men come to the knowledge 
of the truth. It must also be our will, 
not only passively but we should by 
every means in our power, be constantly 
WILLING to bring about this glorious 
consummation. MRS. E. H. DAY. 



R568 : page 7 

THE JUDGMENT DAY. 



DISCOURSE NO. 3. 

Prosecuting our study of the teaching 
of Scripture regarding the second coming 
of Christ and its object; we call attention 
to the harmonious statements of 
David and Paul: David says, "He cometh 
to judge the earth," fPsa. 96:13\) 
And Paul says, that "God. ..hath appointed 
a day in which he will judge the 
world in righteousness by that man 
whom he hath ordained"-Jesus Christ. 
CActs 17:30,31\) And again, "The 
Lord Jesus Christ, shall judge the quick 
(living) and dead at his appearing and 
kingdom." C2 Tim. 4: T.) 

The view generally entertained regarding 
the day of judgment has been, that 
Christ will come seated upon a great 
white throne, and will summon before 



him saint and sinner to be judged, while 
all nature is convulsed with earthquakes, 
opening graves, rending rocks, and 
falling mountains. The trembling sinner 
will be brought from the depths of 
everlasting woe to hear his sins rehearsed, 
and be again remanded to his eternal 
and merciless doom; and the saints are 
brought from heaven to witness the misery 
and despair of the condemned, and 
to hear again the decision of their own 
case. All according to the prevailing 
theory, received their sentence and reward 
at death, and the general judgment 
is merely a repetition of it, but for no 
conceivable purpose. The whole time 
occupied for this work is thought to be 
a literal twenty-four hour day.* 

These views we believe to be at variance 
with the general teaching of Scripture, 
and we will, therefore, present what 
we believe to be the Scriptural view of 
the subject. 

The term day in the Bible, as elsewhere, 
is frequently used to cover a long but, 
definite period of time, as we would say 
this or that event occurred in Martin 
Luthers day. Thus, we read of "the 
day" in which "Jehovah God made the 
earth and the heavens" fGen. 2:4 V ): 
and the forty year day of temptation in 
the wilderness. fHeb. 3:8\) No one 
familiar with the number and variety of 
events which the Scriptures teach are to 
transpire in the day of the Lord, or judgment 
day, could possibly believe it to be 
a twenty-four hour day. Much more 
reasonable is Peters explanation that a 
day with the Lord is as a thousand 
years with men, and a thousand years 
with men as one day with the Lord. f2 Pet. 3:8\) 
This agrees also with Jesus 
statement to John fRev. 20:4 V ) that his 
day or reign is a thousand years-at the 
end of which day Paul says he will deliver 
up the kingdom to God the Father. 



CI Cor. 15:24,25\) 

Quite as vague and indefinite an idea 
also prevails in regard to the term judgment. 
The word judgment signifies 
more than simply sentencing, or the execution 
of a sentence: It includes the 
idea of trial, and a righteous decision 
based on that trial. Thus Moses judged 
the people, fEx. 18:13"); Samuel 
judged Israel forty years, fl Sam. 7:6 V ); 
and Paul appealed to Caesars judgment 



*A recent discourse of Mr. Talmage, delivered 
in the Brooklyn Tabernacle, and published in 
some of the daily papers, gives quite a detailed account 
of this common view of the general judgment 
scene begun and completed within the 
limits of a single literal day. 

R569 : page 7 

seat to have his case tried before Caesar. 
fActs 25:10".) Just so all both quick 
and dead will have their case tried before 
Christ, the great Judge, in due time. 
ORom. 14:10\) 

A righteous judge is something greatly 
to be desired by all, since the mission of 
such a one is to deliver from wrong and 
oppression and to bring liberty, peace 
and happiness to the oppressed. All 
mankind have been oppressed by sin 
and the great deceiver, Satan, but we 
read that Christ comes to give liberty to 
Satans captives, to let the oppressed go 
free, and to destroy Satan, flsa. 61: V; 
v Heb. 2:14\) He is the righteous judge 
before whom all will have a fair and impartial 
trial. He shall not fail nor be 
discouraged till he have set judgment 
(justice) in the earth, flsa. 42:4\) 
The world and the church, (nominal) 
deceived by unscriptural theories, think 
of the day of Christs presence and 



judgment as something to be dreaded; 
but we get a very different idea from 
the expressions of the inspired Psalmist. 
He says: 

"Let the Heavens be glad 

And let the earth rejoice: 

And let men say among the nations, 
The Lord reigneth. 
Let the sea roar and the fulness thereof: 
Let the fields rejoice, and all that are therein; 
Then shall the trees of the wood sing aloud 

At the presence of the Lord, 
Because he cometh 
To judge the earth. 

O give thanks unto the Lord, 
For he is good; 

For his mercy endureth forever." 
For this blessed day of righteous 
judgment Paul says the whole creation 
groaneth fRom. 8:22 v ); yet ignorantly, 
for as yet they know not the righteous 
and merciful Judge who redeemed them 
with his own precious blood, and is, 
therefore, soon to claim his purchased 
possession. 

Since this coming judgment day is 
the day of the worlds trial for everlasting 
life, it is evident that the mass of 
the world are not now on trial. But 
while the Scriptures plainly teach that 
the thousand year day of Christs reign, 
will be the worlds great judgment day, 
they also teach that the judgment or 
trial of the Church is now in progress, 
and will be completed during this Gospel 
Age, before the worlds trial begins. 
Judgment began with the church 
eighteen hundred years ago, as Peter 
said: "The time is come that judgment 
must begin at the house of God"- 
church- "whose house are we?" 
fl Pet. 4:1T; v Heb. 3:6\) During the 
Gospel Age the churchs trial progresses, 
and at its end the overcomers receive 
the reward offered during this age. The 
judgment, trial, began with the Head of 



this "house of God"-Christ Jesus- 
who was tempted (tried) in all points 
like as we are. So Paul, Peter, and all 
the church have been tried and some 
have not yet finished their course. This 
is why the Lords children suffer now, 
while evil doers prosper. During this 
age Satan is permitted to be the Prince 
of the world-to rule as he will; therefore 
it is the ungodly that now prosper 
in the world, and increase in riches. 
CPsa. 73:12\) But "all that will live 
godly shall suffer persecution." 
C2Tim. 3:12\) 

O, how often have the Lords children 
wondered why this was so: but all 
is made plain when we learn that the 
trial of our faith and patient endurance 
now, is to result in "praise and honor 
and glory at the appearing of Jesus 
Christ" fl Pet. 1:T); that it is now our 
Judgment Day, and that we are being 
judged now, in order that we may not 
be judged with the world in the next 
age. fl Cor. 11:32".) The great reward 
of those who finish their course 
successfully during this age is, that they, 
joined with Jesus their head, are to be 
the kings and priests who are to reign 
during the next age. And to be thus 
joined in dominion and heirship with 
Jesus, we are to partake of his divine, 
immortal nature, being raised spiritual 
bodies like unto Christs glorious body. 
v 2Pet. l:4VFhil. 3:21\ 

Peter urges, then, that we think not 
strange concerning the fiery trial that is 
to try us as though some strange thing 
had happened unto us fl Pet. 4:12 v ); 
and Paul says, "Whom the Lord loveth 
he chasteneth, and scourgeth every son 
whom he receiveth. fHeb. 12:6\) It 
is a wonderful privilege which the 
church now enjoys, to have their trial 
in this age that they may enjoy the exceeding 
great and precious reward in 



store for the faithful overcomers "at the 
appearing of our Lord and Saviour, 
Jesus Christ." We do not believe, according 
to the prevailing theory of the 
nominal church, that each member of 
the body or church of Christ receives 
his reward at death, else Paul should 
certainly have received his there, but 
with him we believe, that from the time 
that each one successfully finished his 
course in death, from that time, there 
was "laid up" for such, a crown which 
the Lord, the righteous Judge, shall 
give them at that day-the day of his 
appearing. f2 Tim. 4:6-8\) Trial, then, 
is what the church should expect now, 
and for their strengthening they should 
continually bear in mind that the trials 
of this present time are not worthy to 
be compared with the glory which shall 
be revealed in us-at his appearing. 

ORom. 8:18V 1 Pet. 1:7\) 

But while the present Gospel Age is 
the churchs judgment day, Jesus declared 
that 

THE WORLDS JUDGMENT DAY 

is not during this age, when he said: 

"I came not to judge the world, but to 

save the world." At his first coming 

Jesus redeemed or purchased the world 

from death; but the second time he 

comes to judge the world-to liberate 

his purchased possessions from the 

prison of death and to give them their 

trial for everlasting life. "With righteousness 

shall he judge the world, and 

the people with equity." fPsa. 98:9\) 

In this judgment of the world, the 

saints, those whose judgment is successfully 

completed in this age, take part, 

for "Do ye not know that the saints 

shall judge the world?" fl Cor. 6:2\) 

They live and reign with Christ during 



R569 : page 8 

the thousand years-the worlds judgment 
day. CRev. 20:4\) 

It is the mistaken idea of some that 
great calamities, such as earthquakes, 
famine, pestilence, etc., are judgments 
of God visited upon the world. We do 
not so regard them; Jesus corrected 
this false impression among the Jews 
when they told him of some of the 
Gallileans whose blood Pilate had mingled 
with their sacrifices; "and Jesus 
answering, said unto them, suppose ye 
that these Gallileans were sinners above 
all the Gallileans because they suffered 
such things? I tell you nay... 
or those eighteen upon whom the tower 
of Siloam fell and slew them, think ye 
that they were sinners above all men 
that dwelt in Jerusalem? I tell you 
nay." fLuke 13:l-5\) 

It is very seldom, indeed, that God 
visits punishment upon the world in the 
present time. It is still true, and will 
be so long as Satan is the prince of this 
world, that the wicked spreadeth himself 
like a green bay tree. Their eyes 
stand out with fatness, they have more 
than heart could wish. Widows and 
orphans cry, but oppressors flourish. 
But "The Lord knoweth how to reserve 
the unjust unto the day of judgment 
to be punished." fPsa. 37:35 v ; 
^13:T; v 2 Pet. 2:9\) And Paul says: 
"Therefore, judge nothing before the 
time, until the Lord come, who will 
bring to light the hidden things of 
darkness and will make manifest the 
counsels of the hearts." fl Cor. 4:5\) 
Yes, God hath appointed a day in 
which he will judge the world by Jesus 
Christ. 

Our next inquiry naturally is, Will 
there be forgiveness of sins in that 
judgment age? Jesus answers, "All 



manner of sin and blasphemy shall be 
forgiven unto men; but the blasphemy 
against the Holy Spirit shall not be forgiven 
unto men. And whosoever speaketh 
a word against the Son of man it 
shall be forgiven him; but whosoever 
speaketh against the Holy Spirit, it 
shall not be forgiven him, neither in 
this world, (Gr. aion age) neither in 
the world (age) to come. CMatt. 12:32\) 
Jesus teaching was, that "unto 
whomsoever much is given, of him 
shall be much required." fLuke 12:48\) 
And the opposite is also true- 
that where little is given, little is required. 
During this age the world does 
not possess the full knowledge of the 
truth; and only a small proportion of 
the world have as yet received any of 
the light; therefore they are not on 
trial, and the sins which they now commit 
through ignorance and inherited 
weakness, shall be forgiven, because of 
the ransom through the precious blood 
of Christ. And during the next age, 
as knowledge will be acquired and 
strength developed gradually, all imperfections 
and shortcomings will still 
be forgiven because of the redemption 
through Christ, until men reach 
perfection. 

The world when on trial will be 
affected by their present life just to the 
extent that they had light, and used, 
neglected or misused that light. Jesus 
said: "I am come a light into the 
world," and since then "Ye (the 
church) are the light of the world." 
Men are responsible in proportion as 
they have knowledge-as they see the 
light; but "This is the condemnation, 
that light is come into the world, and 
men love darkness rather than light." 
The punishment will be-"They that 
sin with much light will receive many 
stripes," with little light, "few stripes"- 



"a just recompense." 

The greater the light rejected, the 
more will be the stripes received. In 
harmony with this statement is that 
saying of Jesus, that it would be more 
tolerable for Sodom and Gomorrah in 
the day of judgment than for those who 
would not receive the Lords disciples 
--the bearers of greater light than 
Sodom and Gomorrah enjoyed. CMatt. 10:15".) 
And again, "It shall be more 
tolerable for Tyre and Sidon at the day 
of judgment than for you (Capernaum) 
...for if the mighty works, 

R570 : page 8 

which were done in you, had been done 
in Tyre and Sidon, they would have 
repented long ago in sackcloth and 
ashes. But I say unto you, that it shall 
be more tolerable for the land of Sodom 
in the day of judgment than for thee." 
CMatt. ll:22-24\)..."The 
men of Nineveh shall rise up in judgment 
with the Jews and condemn them, 
for they repented at the preaching of 
Jonah, and a greater than Jonah is here 
-more light, more stripes; the Queen 
of Sheba will be there, and, by her anxiety 
to obtain wisdom, put to shame the 
Jews who attended not to the wisdom 
and words of a greater than Solomon. 
The Jew with more light has greater 
sin and sorer punishment. 

But not only will every evil deed, 
committed against light, receive its just 
punishment- stripes-but every good 
deed will also be correspondingly rewarded. 
Every one is to receive stripes 
or favor "according to that he hath 
done, whether good or bad." f2 Cor. 5:10\) 
Many worldly men believe 
little of Gods word and make no profession 
of being his children; yet have 
large hearts full of pity for the weak, 



poor, and helpless, and take delight in 

giving a cup of cold water or more to 

a disciple of Christ. He is as sure of a 

reward for these good deeds as of punishment 

for the evil ones. Jesus particularly 

states and illustrates this, saying: 

"When thou makest a dinner call not 

thy friends and rich neighbors, but the 

poor, maimed, blind, etc.; they cannot 

recompense thee. Thou shalt be recompensed 

at the resurrection of the just." 

CLuke 14:14\) Not that those works will 

justify any, but being then justified by 

faith in the ransom, then made so clearly 

manifest, these shall be rewarded for 

those good deeds done before the light 

of truth was made so clear-for the improvement 

they made according to the 

measure of light they had. 

Though in the next age full faith 
in and reliance upon the redemption 
through the precious blood of Christ 
will be required of all, yet works according 
to ability will be the ground of 
reward. Under the favorable circumstances 
of that age, it will be possible 
for mankind to do Gods will more perfectly 
than we now can, in our present 
imperfect and oppressed condition, 
therefore more perfect works will be required 
and duly rewarded; whereas 
now, with our limited ability to do 
Gods will, our faith in the ransom and 
our effort and purpose to do that will is 
counted to us for righteousness, and accordingly 
rewarded. 

But Jesus states that there is one sin 
that shall not be forgiven, viz., the sin 
against the Holy Spirit. The Holy 
Spirit, whether manifested in the acts of 
Jesus or his followers, is the great enlightener 
--of the church now, and of 
the world in the age to come. 

In v Luke 12:47\ Jesus explains that 
willful sinners against a measure of light, 
shall be punished, not forgiven. "That 



servant which knew his Lords will and 
prepared not himself, neither did according 
to his will, shall be beaten with 
many stripes." This punishment is not 
destruction, and all other punishment, 
is designed to be corrective. But 
if this sin against the enlightenment of 
the Holy Spirit be continued, to the extent 
of willfully rejecting the redemption 
provided through Christs sacrifice, when 
the Spirit has made that truth plain, 
this willful sin is unto death-the second 
death-for having rejected the one 
Saviour in whom alone there is redemption, 
"there remaineth no more a 
sacrifice for sin." fHeb. 6:4-6\ and 
v 10:26-29\) 

But this sin, which is unto death, cannot 
be committed without full and sufficient 
enlightenment of the Spirit, which 
neither the world nor many Christians 
have yet received. Therefore, though 
many of the worldly have committed 
sins which cannot be forgiven, and 
which are therefore unto stripes, yet we 
know that none of them have committed 
the sin which is unto death, because 
none of the world are yet fully 
enlightened by the Spirit. 

Thus will the world be tried, and 
judged in the age to come-their judgment 
day. And the same principle 
applies to the Church in this, our judgment 
day. To whomsoever much is 
given, of them is much required. A 
faithful following in the light of the 
Spirits leading will bring us to perfection 
as new creatures, and in the resurrection 
we shall be in the likeness of 
our Lord, "fashioned like unto his 
glorious body." If, because of inherited 
weakness, we fail to do perfectly what, 
as new creatures, we desire to do-the 
will of God- -we are forgiven through 
the redemption provided in Christ Jesus. 
And if we become measurably willful, 



not fully submitting ourselves to the 
Lords will according to our covenant, 
as his children, we are now chastened 
with few or many stripes as may be 
found necessary to reclaim us. 

But if we, the Church, being enlightened 
by and made partakers of the 
Holy Spirit, and having tasted of the 
good word of God, and the powers of 
the world to come, should now willfully 
reject the truth thus received, even 
to the ignoring of the ransom through 
the precious blood of Christ, counting 
the blood of the covenant wherewith 
we are sanctified a common or unsacred 
thing, fHeb. 10:29 v ), we should thus 
become subject to the second death- - 
since "Without the shedding of blood 
there is no remission of sins," and there 
remaineth no more a sacrifice for those 
who reject that once provided. This sin 
is not simply a falling back into a condition 
of lukewarmness, though that is 
a dangerous condition, nor is it a sudden 
relapse under great temptation, but it is 
open and deliberate apostacy-a willful 
rejection of the only foundation of hope. 

The churchs judgment day is now 
almost ended, and the trial of faith and 
endurance shall soon bring its rich reward 
to the faithful, and the beginning 
of the worlds judgment day will immediately 
follow the reward and exultation 
of the saints. 

While looking at the judgment of 
the world, let us not forget that ours is 
still progressing, and let us remember 
that though we are now part of the 
Church, we may never "sit with him in 
his throne"-but that high position is 
open to any of us, and we may make 
our calling and election sure. That 
which is most apt to clog and interfere 
with us in this race, is mentioned by 
our Master as a warning to us: "Take 
heed lest your hearts be overcharged 



with the cares of this life." Let us 
then "lay aside every weight and the 
sin which doth so easily beset us, and 
run with patience the race set before us." 
"Neer think the victory won, 
Nor once at ease sit down, 
Thine arduous work will not be done 
Till thou hast gained thy crown." 
Blessed and holy is he that hath part 
in the first resurrection; on such the 
second death hath no power; but they 
shall be priests of God and of Christ, 
and shall reign with him a thousand 
years. fRev. 20:6\) 



R570 : page 8 

PREACHING TO DOCTORS. 

The Rev. Dr. Gatty recently preached 
at Sheffield, England, to the members 
of the British Medical Association, during 
the annual meeting. We give the 
following suggestive extract from his 
discourse upon the appropriate text: 
"They that are whole need not a physician, 
but they that are sick." 

"Some of the smaller philosophers of 
our own time regard the Bible as the 
sacred book common to all forms of religion, 
and so far to be respected, but 
only to be trusted when it does not clash 
with their own deductions. That man 
should have come perfectly formed, by 
an act of creation, from the hand of his 
Maker, is to them less credible than that 
he should be the slow result of a process 
of evolution, no satisfactory traces of 
which can be shown, while all palpable 
experience contradicts the doctrine. I 
do not know where science gives a 
more reliable history of the generation 
of man than is to be found in the 
*1 39th Psalm. 



So far as the records of the bygone 
world extend, they exhibit man, 
both intellectually and physically, as 
quite equal to his descendants at the 
present day. Moses was at least as 
great a law-giver as the first Napoleon. 
The biography of Joseph and his family, 
written more than three thousand years 
ago, has literary merit, surpassing in its 
own style of simplicity and pathos any 
authorship of any other age or country. 
David has shown us in his Psalms that 
he knew human thoughts and feelings 
quite as profoundly as Shakespeare 
himself; and if the sermon on the 
mount and the parables of Christ are 
not unique and supreme in sublimity 
of expression as well as doctrine, 
I want to know why all 
the religious teachers of the world 
have failed to produce what we can 
listen to with the same life-long attention? 
Is there, nevertheless, a fossil 
still deeply hidden, but not beyond the 
final reach of discovery, which will 
prove that grapes once grew on thorns, 
and figs on thistles; or, in other words, 
that man, by some internal effort, protracted 
through ages, released himself 
from the form and nature of a lower 
brute, and has since advanced to the 
position of being able to tell the history 
of their own origin? There is, however, 
one degrading vice peculiar to 
man, and at the present time a national 
disgrace, which is certainly no inheritance 
from any lower animal. The 
drunkard is only to be found in the 
ranks of humanity, and this terrible 
moral stain brings to the candid mind 
an assurance that what revelation 
tells us must be true-that God made 
men upright, but they sought out many 
inventions, by which the noblest handiwork 
of the Creator has become damaged 
and debased." 



page 8 

BIBLE STUDENTS HELPS. 



We have discontinued the sale of "Crudens 
Concordance" in consequence of being able to 
furnish "Youngs Analytical Concordance" at so 
low a price. There is no comparison in values. 
To the discerning student, who wishes to know 
the original word and its English meaning (by 
one of the ablest scholars), there is no 
other such work published. 

In answer to numerous questions, we would 
say: The one we furnished recently is not the 
"Book Exchange" edition, which contains many 
inaccuracies and is on poorer paper. A great 
conflict has existed for some months between the 
American and English publishers of "Youngs 
Concordance," on account of which we were 
enabled to offer one of them (the American) at 
the low price heretofore mentioned, $1.75; but 
now the English firm has bought the electro 
plates of the American edition and destroyed 
them, thus giving the control of the trade to the 
English edition called The Authors Edition, because 
this edition is the only one sanctioned by 
the author, Prof. Young, D.D. 

The plan now is understood to be to put this 
valuable and large work at its proper value, $5— 
this will doubtless be done soon. As a precaution 
we have procured a lot of the Authors 
Edition, which we can furnish you at $2.00 by 
express, or 51 cts. extra, for postage, if by mail. 

We still have some copies of the Variorum 
Testament, giving various readings and renderings 
in foot-notes. Price 50 cts. post-paid: less 
than half the usual price. 

We have no more of the $1.30 "Oxford Bibles." 

We procured a few copies of the "Variorum 
Bible," at a special sale, much below the regular 
price. For description and price see our June issue. 



We cannot take postage stamps in pay, as we 
must pay cash. 



THE EMPHATIC DIAGLOTT. 

We again have a full supply of this very valuable 
work. For the benefit of new readers we 
would state that it is a Greek Testament, having 
under each Greek word the corresponding English 
word, and is thus the most literal translation 
of the New Testament. Besides this, it has in 
another column alongside a very clear and emphatic 
translation, showing the emphasis of the 
Greek, which is generally lost to the English 
reader. 

As we have said before, we repeat now: we 
know of no more valuable help than this in the 
study of the Scriptures. If we could not get another, 
we would not take fifty dollars for the copy 
we use. 

The regular price for the work in cloth is four 
dollars-which, everything considered, is not too 
high; but by special arrangement we are enabled 
to offer it at $1.50 per copy to our subscribers. 



YOUNGS GREEK, HEBREW AND ENGLISH 
CONCORDANCE. 

We very much wish that all our readers possessed 
this very valuable work, for we consider it 
next in value to the DIAGLOTT. 

The regular price was for a time depressed by 
competition, but now the English publishers have 
obtained full control and put the price at $5, 
which they claim is but half its value. 

Knowing beforehand of the advance, we have 
made such preparation as enables us to offer about 
100 copies to our subscribers at $2.25 each. If 
sent my mail, the postage should be added, viz.: 
54c, and 10c. additional if you wish it "registered." 
This is the latest revision. -"THE AUTHORS 
EDITION." 



We cannot send these to our European subscribers, 
because too heavy for the mail, and too 
expensive by express. 

This work is at once a Greek and Hebrew Lexicon 
giving the meaning of the original terms in 
English, and also a Concordance giving each 
word of Scripture and the words which they 
translate. The value of the work is becoming 
more apparent daily, as theorists attempt to palm 
off a private interpretation under a guise of "a 
better definition of the original." 

In this superb volume every word is arranged 
under its own Hebrew and Greek original, exhibiting 
311,000 references and 30,000 various 
readings. Its size is large quarto, 1094 pages. 

A similar work, "Englishmans Greek and Hebrew 
Concordance" (3 vols.) sold at $22, in cloth 
binding, only seven years ago, and usually reached 
only the hands of scholars; but the present work, 
by one of the ripest scholars of the age (Prof. 
Young, of Edinburgh, Scotland), has been printed 
in immense quantities, and its present price brings 
it within the reach of almost all self-sacrificing 
students. Indeed, it seems providential that it 
should be provided so cheaply at a time when it 
can be of so great service to truth- seekers. No 
Bible student can afford to be without a copy. It 
is of more value than two years study of the 
Greek and Hebrew languages. 



PITTSBURGH CHURCH MEETINGS. 

The place of meeting has been changed and is 
no longer at "Curry Institute Hall," but has removed 
to the "Grand Army Hall," No. 101 Federal 
street, Allegheny City, just across the river. 
Readers and friends will be warmly welcomed at 
our new and more comfortable hall. Preaching 
every Lords day afternoon at 3.30 oclock, and 
Bible Class at 2 oclock of the same day. 



