A Long Search Ended
JESUS CHRIST on one occasion said: “Keep on seeking, and you will find.” (Matt. 7:7) Hence, the person who sincerely and diligently seeks to come into an approved relationship with the Creator will succeed in this. At times, however, this may call for much perseverance in not giving up the search for truth.
This is illustrated in the case of a woman living in a predominantly Moslem country of the Middle East. As a little girl, Melek (Angel) was taught that God provided four books to instruct mankind about his will. These books are the Tevrat (the Law or five books of Moses), Zebur (the Prophets and Hagiographa), Incil (the New Testament or Christian Greek Scriptures) and the Koran. Her curiosity in the Tevrat, Zebur and Incil having been aroused by the instructor, Melek asked him why only the Koran was used even though the other three books had also come from God. He encouraged her not to concern herself about them, pointing out that the Koran was given last and therefore superseded the Tevrat, Zebur and Incil. Melek, however, was not satisfied with this answer.
As she progressed through school, Melek asked other religious instructors about the Tevrat, Zebur and Incil. The answer was always the same, ‘These three books are unnecessary.’ Upon finishing school, Melek moved to a larger city. There she inquired at various bookstores about the Tevrat, Zebur and Incil, but all her searching was in vain.
Though many years passed, Melek’s desire to find the three other holy books mentioned by her instructor did not diminish. Late one night she approached three young women waiting at a bus stop. “What are you three young girls doing out so late at night?” she asked. “We are coming from studying the holy books,” they replied. Hopefully, Melek inquired, “Which holy books?” Although now sixty years of age, she was overjoyed when they replied, “Why, the Tevrat, Zebur and Incil.” “Those are the books I have been looking for for almost fifty years!” she exclaimed.
But Melek’s happiness quickly turned to dismay. Just then the bus pulled up and the girls had to leave. There was no time to exchange addresses or even names.
After having searched for so long, Melek, however, was not going to give up easily. For weeks thereafter she would go to the same bus stop on the same night, waiting and waiting in the hope that she would meet the girls again. But her efforts were fruitless.
Then, one day, Melek entered a tailor’s shop. Who should be sitting right across from her? Why, it was one of the three girls! Melek rushed up to her, embraced her, kissed her and declared, “You are the one who has the three holy books. Would you please give them to me?” The young woman, one of Jehovah’s witnesses, replied that she would both give them to her and study them with her. Her life’s search ended, Melek herself is now helping others to benefit from the three holy books that make up the complete Bible.

