Fine Works Glorify God
BY THEIR fine conduct and exemplary works, true Christians bring glory to God. (1 Peter 2:12) This can be seen by what has happened in Italy in recent years.
In September 1997, a violent earthquake struck various parts of the Marche and Umbria regions, damaging almost 90,000 homes. Groups of Jehovah’s Witnesses immediately offered assistance to fellow believers and others. Trailers, sleeping bags, stoves, generators, and other needed items were provided. These relief efforts did not go unnoticed.
The newspaper Il Centro reported: “The first to arrive with relief supplies in the affected areas were the Jehovah’s Witnesses of Roseto [in the province of Teramo] . . . Besides meeting periodically to pray, those faithful to Jehovah work in a practical way, holding out a hand to those who suffer, without worrying about which religion they belong to.”
The mayor of Nocera Umbra, one of the towns most affected, wrote to the Witnesses: “I thank you heartily and personally for the aid offered to the population of Nocera. I am sure that I express the sentiments of all its citizens.” Additionally, the Ministry of the Interior awarded the Congregazione Cristiana dei Testimoni di Geova (Christian Congregation of Jehovah’s Witnesses) a certificate of merit and a medal “to testify to the work done and diligence offered in activities connected with the emergency that arose in the Umbria and Marche regions.”
In October 2000, a disastrous flood struck the Piedmont region in northern Italy. Again, the Witnesses promptly went into action to help provide relief. These fine works also did not go unnoticed. The Piedmont Region awarded them a plaque for their “precious voluntary work in support of the Piedmontese population affected by the flooding.”
Jesus Christ instructed his disciples: “Let your light shine before men, that they may see your fine works and give glory to your Father who is in the heavens.” (Matthew 5:16) Jehovah’s Witnesses happily glorify God, not themselves, by performing “fine works” that help their neighbors spiritually and in other ways.

