Do You Remember?
Have you given careful thought to recent issues of The Watchtower? If so, you will likely recall the following:
□ To what extent did Jesus show his love for mankind?
He voluntarily left a heavenly home of peace and security to come to eat, sleep, and associate with diseased and dying mankind. After this, Jesus voluntarily gave up his perfect human existence so as to provide a ransom for the benefit of mankind. (Matthew 20:28)​—12/15, pages 3, 4.
□ What personal benefits result to the Christian who cultivates self-control?
The Christian gains greater self-respect by exercising self-control. Also, he enjoys greater peace and happiness in family, congregational, and daily relationships. Above all, self-control helps him to build a good relationship with his Creator and to identify himself as a true Christian.​—12/15, page 24.
□ What should be the underlying motive in showing hospitality?
Although it is gratifying to receive expressions of thanks from others and to realize that our efforts have been appreciated, we should want to show hospitality primarily because it is the right and loving thing to do. Moreover, it pleases Jehovah God that we do so.​—1/15, page 22.
□ How does the rider on the white horse, described in Revelation 6:2, affect your life?
Jesus is the rider on the white horse, and he began his heavenly ride in 1914. Foretelling how people would be affected by his reign, he said: “When the Son of man arrives in his glory . . . he will separate people one from another, just as a shepherd separates the sheep from the goats.” Today, all mankind is being separated, and how you respond to the Kingdom message will mean either life or death for you. (Matthew 25:31-33; 24:14)​—1/15, page 6.
□ What are some means by which Jehovah comforts and sustains his servants?
Jehovah comforts and sustains his servants by means of his holy spirit. (1 Peter 4:12-14) He also comforts them by responding to their prayers. (Philippians 4:6, 7) Further, God’s Word is a great source of comfort, assuring his servants that nothing can happen to them that Jehovah does not see or cannot control.​—2/1, page 19.
□ What is the apocalypse that is foretold in the Bible?
It is God’s chosen intervention in human affairs.​—2/15, page 7.
□ What is the meaning of Jesus’ expression “life in yourselves,” at John 6:53?
In John chapter 6, Jesus equates “everlasting life” with having “life in yourselves,” that is, entering at last into the fullness of life. The “little flock” of Kingdom heirs experience that at their resurrection into the heavens, and the “other sheep” do so after the end of the Thousand Year Reign of Christ Jesus. (Revelation 20:4, 5)​—2/15, page 19.
□ What principle emphasized throughout the book of Nehemiah is a lesson for us today?
The principle is that “unless Jehovah himself builds the house, it is to no avail that its builders have worked hard on it.” (Psalm 127:1) Today, in all our undertakings, we will succeed only if we have Jehovah’s blessing.​—2/15, page 26.
□ What sustained Job during his trials, and how can this help us today?
Job was confident that this life is not all there is. (Job 14:13-15) Having this same confidence today, that Jehovah will resurrect his faithful servants, can help us to face any tests that Satan may impose upon us. (Hebrews 6:10; 11:6)​—3/1, page 20.
□ What lesson can parents learn from the outcome of David and Bath-sheba’s sin?
Jehovah extended mercy toward David because of the Kingdom covenant, thus permitting him and Bath-sheba to continue living. However, Jehovah’s spokesman said to them: “Because you have unquestionably treated Jehovah with disrespect by this thing, also the son himself, just born to you, will positively die.” (2 Samuel 12:14) This should emphasize to parents that their conduct can greatly affect their children.​—3/15, page 31.
□ What is required if one is to become an approved associate of Jehovah’s Witnesses?
Such a person must accept the entire range of Bible teachings, including those Scriptural beliefs that are unique to Jehovah’s Witnesses.​—4/1, page 31.
□ If bad thoughts enter our minds from time to time, what should we do?
We should refuse to let our minds dwell on these bad thoughts. To help us do this, we ought to go to Jehovah in prayer immediately, ‘throwing our burden upon Jehovah.’ (Psalm 55:22)​—4/1, page 25.

