2010 District Convention of Jehovah’s Witnesses
 1. Why should we plan to be present for all three days of the 2010 district convention?
1 We eagerly anticipate the spiritual banquet in store for us at the 2010 district convention. All are urged to be present for all three days. There we will encourage one another to walk in integrity with Jehovah as our shield. (Ps. 26:1, 11; Prov. 2:7) Inform teachers and employers well ahead of time that the convention is a necessary part of your worship. By making your plans now and helping others as needed, you can be sure of Jehovah’s blessing on your efforts.—Ps. 37:5; Prov. 10:22.
 2. Where can we obtain information regarding convention locations and lodging?
2 Obtaining Information: A list of all conventions will be in the March 1, 2010, issue of The Watchtower, or at www.jw.org. If it is necessary for you to attend a convention other than the one to which your congregation is assigned, you may obtain a Recommended Lodging List by writing the rooming headquarters for that convention. Please include a stamped, self-addressed envelope with your letter. Your congregation secretary can provide the address.
 3. How can we assist those with special needs?
3 Special Needs: Do you know of someone in your congregation who could use help in getting to and from the convention? Why not offer to assist? (Prov. 19:17) When a publisher requests assistance in obtaining accommodations, the Congregation Service Committee will determine if the publisher qualifies to submit a Special Needs Room Request form. Before the congregation secretary sends the form to the Rooming Department, the Congregation Service Committee should review the guidelines on the form and in the December 14, 2008, convention arrangements letter in the congregation’s permanent file.
 4. (a) How should we make a hotel reservation? (See box on page 4 “Rooming Instructions.”) (b) What reminders will assist us to maintain a good reputation with hotel management?
4 Making Your Hotel Reservation: The Recommended Lodging List of hotels will be posted on the congregation information board after your Service Meeting for the week of January 4. Before making your hotel reservation, carefully review the box “Rooming Instructions.” When we deal with hotel staff, our speech and demeanor should always reflect the fruitage of the spirit. This will “adorn the teaching” of our God, Jehovah.—Titus 2:7-10.
 5. What blessings do we anticipate at the 2010 district convention?
5 Our annual district convention will afford us a grand opportunity both to take in divine instruction and to enjoy the warm association of our brothers and sisters. (Deut. 16:15) May Jehovah bless our efforts as we prepare to attend the 2010 district conventions!
[Box on page 3]
Program Times:
Friday and Saturday
9:20 a.m. - 4:55 p.m.
      Sunday
9:20 a.m. - 3:40 p.m.
[Box on page 4]
Rooming Instructions:
▪ Do not make hotel reservations before your Service Meeting the week of January 4, 2010.
▪ Stay only in the hotels on the Recommended Lodging List. If rooms are already booked, call another hotel on the list.
▪ Accept only the rate shown on the list. Obtain a confirmation number, and make your deposit within 10 days by credit card, check, or money order.
▪ Each room should be reserved in the name of the person who will actually occupy it. Do not reserve extra rooms. Keep your first reservation.
▪ If you must cancel a reservation, do so as early as possible. Be sure to receive a cancellation number.
▪ Fire regulations require that you not exceed the number of adults that the list allows for each hotel room.
▪ Do not call hotels that are not on the list to ask if they have a rate for our conventions.
▪ If there are no rooms available after calling ALL the hotels listed, or if you have a problem with a hotel, inform your congregation secretary. He should communicate with the convention Rooming Department, using the contact information on the Recommended Lodging List.

