Question Box
▪ How can everyone help to maintain an atmosphere conducive to learning at congregation meetings? (Deut. 31:12)
Out of deep respect for Jehovah and his provision of congregation meetings, all are encouraged to arrive early and to be ready to be taught by him. It is helpful to occupy seats toward the front of the hall, leaving seats at the back for those with small children and for those who occasionally arrive late. Before the meeting begins, electronic devices should be adjusted to a setting that will not disturb the audience. Disturbances will be few in number and minor in nature when all present maintain a reverential attitude throughout the meeting.—Eccl. 5:1; Phil. 2:4.
When new ones start attending meetings, someone in the congregation who is acquainted with them may offer to sit with them. This would be especially helpful if there are small children to be trained. Attending meetings may be a new experience for the family. If so, they will most likely appreciate being able to sit toward the back where it would be less distracting for others should the parents find it necessary to leave the main hall temporarily to care for the needs of the little ones. (Prov. 22:6, 15) Families with small children should not be seated in a separate room where the children may feel free to make noise. It is generally best for the parent to administer discipline or care for other personal needs outside of the main auditorium and then return with the children to the main auditorium.
Attendants serve to maintain an atmosphere appropriate for a house of worship. They help families and those who occasionally arrive late to find appropriate seating. The attendants are mindful of being tactful and discreet in helping others to be comfortably seated without unnecessary distraction. They use good judgment when handling any unexpected disturbances. When a child’s conduct becomes distracting to others, attendants may kindly offer assistance.
All present at meetings for worship can contribute to an atmosphere conducive to learning about Jehovah and his purpose for a peaceful and righteous new world.—Heb. 10:24, 25.

