From Our Readers
Toying With Immorality  Thanks for the article “Young People Ask . . . Toying With Immorality​—What’s The Harm?” (February 8, 1994) I was dating a boy, and he would tell me that if he didn’t kiss me or touch me, he couldn’t show how much he loved me. We went too far, and two weeks later, he called off our wedding. I felt so bad​—and used. I wish I hadn’t been so foolish. Thank you for coming out with these articles, which I desperately needed.
N. R., United States
I once got involved with heavy petting, and I thought it was harmless as long as I did not go all the way into committing fornication. This article helped me to appreciate that we cannot mock God and that he knows all things.
T. J., Nigeria
Whenever I meet members of your faith, I accept a copy of Awake! Such was the case with the February 8, 1994, issue. The article on immorality impressed me. The publications of my own Evangelical Lutheran Church do not cover such topics, catering more to homosexuals and Lesbians. In your magazines you broach subjects that are taboo for others. I admire your courage and strong faith.
H. S., Germany
Thank you from the heart for the article “Young People Ask . . . How Far Is ‘Too Far’?” (October 22, 1993) I am dating a young Christian man. Although kissing and petting are common in our community, we set limits with each other from the very beginning. It is not easy to follow Jehovah’s righteous standards, and I am sure this article will help many.
P. S. F., Brazil
Though I am 26 years old, the “Young People Ask . . .” articles are valuable to me. I had been struggling with this particular question. I’m so glad this article says definitely and clearly how far is too far!
V. V., Belgium
Wetlands  I was moved to write because of the article “Wetlands of the World​—Ecological Treasures Under Attack.” (January 22, 1994) The photos helped to stress our obligation to maintain Jehovah’s creation in all its beauty. I am happy that God will soon ‘bring to ruin those who are ruining the earth.’​—Revelation 11:18.
Z. C. B. S., Brazil
I am a teenage boy. I read the article and realized that nature is suffering depletion in many parts of the world. I can see now that even though men talk about being united in their actions, they are unable. I, therefore, want to do my best to study the Bible so that I can be in God’s future Paradise.
Y. K., Japan
Your article was a good example of how the pleasure of reading Awake! comes not only from its contents but also from its makeup and presentation: excellent photography, neat and tidy layouts. Thank you.
M. E., Canada
Concentration Camp Survivor  I was much encouraged by the experience of Feliks Borys, “Protected by Faith in God.” (February 22, 1994) Reading it literally raised goose bumps, and I had to struggle to hold back the tears. It has given me the strength to persevere under trial.
A. C., Italy
The article helped me to appreciate still more Jehovah’s power to protect those putting their trust in him. How moving it was to read about the wonderful way in which Jehovah answered the prayers of Feliks Borys!
E. F., Sweden

