When Will the Tragedy End?
WHEN will children cease becoming victims of abduction, abuse, exploitation, and often the bad influence of their peers? Would more law enforcement and stiffer penalties for crimes committed against children protect them? Would more social programs to provide food, housing, and education stop the abuse and the running? Would teaching better communication skills to parents who care about their children help parents to counter the illusions of excitement that lure their children into destructive environments?
Although such measures might be of help, until the root cause of such tragedies is eliminated, children will remain subject to much suffering. According to one youth, any initiative to deal with the problem of runaway children that does not prevent the abuse or the neglect in the home is not likely to be very effective, since the damage is already done.
The Root Cause
What is at the root of all these problems? How will they be eliminated? The Bible explains that the family unit is under attack by unseen wicked spirit creatures, Satan and his demons, who take pleasure in brutality, sexual exploitation, and perversion. (Genesis 6:1-6; Ephesians 6:12) When Jesus was on earth, children were attacked by these demons. One young boy suffered the torment of being thrown into convulsions and being thrown into a fire.​—Mark 9:20-22.
Even centuries before Jesus was on earth, demons reveled in the torture and the burning to death of young children offered to hideous pagan gods, such as Baal, Chemosh, and Molech. (1 Kings 11:7; 2 Kings 3:26, 27; Psalm 106:37, 38; Jeremiah 19:5; 32:35) Therefore, today, in this world that is becoming more and more depraved, it should not be surprising that demons target children for suffering at the hands of willing human agents who inflict humiliation, pain, and death upon youngsters. Perpetrators of such monstrous crimes often feed their minds on pornography, which fuels their perversions.
The pressure that the demons exert upon the human race has increased in our time, for the Bible calls this period of history “the last days” of the present wicked system of things. It foretold that these would be “critical times hard to deal with.” Now more than ever, the influence of the demons results in humans reflecting the depravity of these wicked spirit creatures. The Bible foretold that people in our day would be fierce, without self-​control, having no natural affection, without love of goodness.​—2 Timothy 3:1-5, 13.
That well describes greedy people who produce films, records, magazines, and books that glorify adultery, drugs, suicide, murder, rape, incest, bondage, and torture. Through these and other means, the demons have promoted a culture that, like vile air, has polluted the minds and hearts of young and old alike, eroding family values and godly morality.
The increase of child abduction, molestation, and killing is part of the sign of the last days. In addition, the Bible said that ‘men would be lovers of themselves, not open to any agreement, disloyal, betrayers.’ Hence nowadays the bonds of marriage are often broken soon after they are made. As divorces increase, so do parental kidnappings. And the battering and killing of present or former mates escalates, the vast majority of victims being women. Thus, we see a generation of children whose parents encourage them to run by neglecting and abusing them. Further, our time is marked by children who are “disobedient to parents,” who are “headstrong,” and who prefer to run with their peers rather than respect godly values.​—2 Timothy 3:2-4.
The Tragedy Soon to End
However, the influence of Satan and his demons is soon to end. (Revelation 12:12) The prophecy of Revelation 20:1-3 states that God will have Satan and his demons put out of the way. After that, God’s heavenly Kingdom, in the hands of Jesus Christ, will rule this earth in righteousness, administering justice and guaranteeing security for all. (Psalm 72:7, 8; Daniel 2:44; Matthew 6:9, 10) Gone will be the greedy commercial systems that oppress the poor and exploit human weakness for a profit, for “the world is passing away and so is its desire.” (1 John 2:17) All those who practice wickedness will be eliminated, as Proverbs 2:22 foretells: “The wicked . . . will be cut off from the very earth.”
Micah 4:4 explains that in God’s new world there will be security and peace for all: “There will be no one making them tremble.” How is that possible? Through the kingly law of love. That supreme law will govern all thoughts and actions. Those living at that time will have learned to reflect the personality of Jesus and his Father, Jehovah God, since if they do not, they will not be allowed to continue living. By their clothing themselves with the ‘tender affections of compassion, kindness, lowliness of mind, and mildness,’ selfishness will be rooted out of the human makeup. (Colossians 3:12) Life will be radiant with happiness; homes glowing with warmth and affection will be the norm earth wide.
Isaiah 65:21-23 promises abundant food and good homes for everyone: “They will certainly build houses and have occupancy; and they will certainly plant vineyards and eat their fruitage. . . . They will not toil for nothing, nor will they bring to birth for disturbance.” No more abuse. No more suffering for children or for parents.
Benefiting Now
Even now, in the last hours of this evil system, knowledge of Jehovah and of his purpose to restore this earth to a paradise brings benefits. It has given many youngsters and parents hope and a reason for happiness, even if they have been victims of our times. For example, Tamara, mentioned in our previous article, explains what took place in her life.
“When I was 18, I got married and more or less left my circle of ‘friends,’ some of whom ended up in jail, in the grip of drugs, or in prostitution. But I still had the same personality, so the arguments began with my husband. However, soon after the birth of our son, something happened that completely changed my life. I found a Bible and began to read it. One evening I read the chapter in Proverbs that says ‘finding wisdom is like finding hidden treasures.’(Proverbs 2:1-6) Before I went to sleep that evening, I prayed for that wisdom. The next morning, Jehovah’s Witnesses rang my doorbell. I began studying the Bible with them, but it took me some time to put into practice what I was learning from the Bible. Finally, I became determined to follow the Christian way of life and was baptized. Now, together with my husband, I help others to receive the relief that God provides.”
Yes, Tamara found the Source of all relief, Jehovah God. He is a heavenly Father who will never abandon those clinging to him. Psalm 27:10 tells us: “In case my own father and my own mother did leave me, even Jehovah himself would take me up.”
Domingos, mentioned earlier, also found a real family that has provided comfort, encouragement, and support. He relates: “One day I received a copy of the book Listening to the Great Teacher and was surprised to learn that God had a name, Jehovah.a I attended one of the meetings of Jehovah’s Witnesses and was amazed to see that there were no class distinctions. The Witnesses began studying the Bible with me in spite of my poor clothing, rough manner, and distrust of everyone. Gradually they helped me to reject my former way of life. They even helped me to get work. Eventually I was helped to make progress toward baptism.”
The congregations of Jehovah’s Witnesses are like a safety net for young people. The Witnesses are happy to assist any who want to learn of the marvelous hope ahead. The comfort brought to those who seek a relationship with their heavenly Father is great, since the Witnesses are trained to provide counsel and direction from God’s Word the Bible. One Witness explains that young people need to be shown that the disgusting situation they may find themselves in is disgusting to Jehovah too. The Witness states: “Jehovah does not want children to be abused. He does not want them to be unhappy. But he doesn’t want them to exchange one form of abuse for another form of abuse​—abuse that they get out in the streets. They can reach out to mature individuals in Jehovah’s organization to talk about their problems and to be shown the way out.”
For children whose hearts are receptive, God’s Word provides a powerful incentive to avoid the snare of peer pressure. Frances, a 17-​year-​old girl, was incited by a schoolmate to play hooky from school a number of times without telling her parents. Finally, she ran away from home. After causing hours of anguish for her parents, she returned. Afterward, two Witnesses from her congregation visited. They learned that the family climate was not the cause of the problem, and they lovingly provided counsel. They explained the Christian obligation of youths to respect their parents (Ephesians 6:1, 2); the need to avoid dishonesty, since she had played hooky without telling her parents (Ephesians 4:25); and the importance of avoiding bad associations. (1 Corinthians 15:33) She responded positively.
Help From on High
Cheryl also found help from Jehovah in dealing with the kidnapping of her children by her ex-​spouse.b When asked what helped her to cope with this nightmare, she said: “The first thing I did was to read the Psalms, especially Psalm 35. It was comforting to know that Jehovah saw the injustice of what I was going through.” Psalm 35:22, 23 says: “You have seen, O Jehovah. Do not keep silent. O Jehovah, do not keep yourself far from me. Do arouse yourself and awake to my judgment, . . . to my case at law.”
After two years, with Jehovah’s backing and help from the Witnesses, Cheryl faced her ex-​husband, and she visited her children. She was able to provide comforting answers as to why this had happened to them and to assure them that she had not abandoned them. Because Cheryl trained her children to honor Jehovah, she was able to tell them of the confidence she had in them. She explained: “I know my children love Jehovah, and he will not let lasting harm come to them.”
That was the way it worked out. With Cheryl’s persistent effort in dealing with foreign immigration officials and with her reliance on Jehovah through earnest prayer, her children were returned to her. Cheryl stated: “I would really have to say that it was only by Jehovah’s hand that I got them back.”
How important it is to teach our children now to know who Jehovah is and to worship him! The Bible states at 1 Peter 3:12 that Jehovah’s eyes “are upon the righteous ones, and his ears are toward their supplication.” Jehovah is indeed a refuge for our children. His name is “a strong tower. Into it the righteous runs and is given protection.”​—Proverbs 18:10.
Although we live in very dangerous times and do not always know what will befall our children, parents who worship Jehovah know that no lasting harm will come to their young ones who are faithful. He has even promised to bring back from the dead those who have suffered as victims of our times and to erase the pain and suffering inflicted upon them.​—Isaiah 65:17, 18; John 5:28, 29.
The hope of God’s new world is a marvelous one. So is the realization that soon God will rid the earth of Satan and his wicked system. Gone will be any threat to our children. One of the songs that Jehovah’s Witnesses sing at their congregation meetings describes that new system this way: “When songs of children fill the air,/​when joy and peace are everywhere,/​then, too, you’ll see the dead arise,/​if you keep your eyes on the prize”!
The next time you meet some of Jehovah’s Witnesses, ask them to show you how you too can learn more about the joys just ahead in God’s incoming new world of righteousness. They will be happy to assist you to see how God’s Word can bring much comfort now and eternal life later.​—Psalm 37:29; Revelation 21:4, 5.
[Footnotes]
Published by the Watchtower Bible and Tract Society of New York, Inc.
See article on page 6.
[Blurb on page 12]
“Jehovah does not want children to be abused”

