
Prophecy

Definition: An inspired message; a revelation of the divine will and purpose. Prophecy may be a prediction of something to come, inspired moral teaching, or an expression of a divine command or judgment.




What predictions recorded in the Bible have already been fulfilled?
For some samples, see the main headings “Bible,” “Last Days,” and “Dates,” also the book “All Scripture Is Inspired of God and Beneficial,” pages 343-346.
What are some of the outstanding Bible prophecies that are yet to be fulfilled?
1 Thess. 5:3: “Whenever it is that they are saying: ‘Peace and security!’ then sudden destruction is to be instantly upon them just as the pang of distress upon a pregnant woman; and they will by no means escape.”
Rev. 17:16: “The ten horns that you saw, and the wild beast, these will hate the harlot [Babylon the Great] and will make her devastated and naked, and will eat up her fleshy parts and will completely burn her with fire.”
Ezek. 38:14-19: “You must say to Gog, ‘This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah has said: “Will it not be in that day when my people [spiritual] Israel are dwelling in security that you will know it? And you will certainly come from your place, from the remotest parts of the north, you and many peoples with you . . . ” “And it must occur in that day, in the day when Gog comes in upon the soil of Israel,” is the utterance of the Sovereign Lord Jehovah, “that my rage will come up into my nose. And in my ardor, in the fire of my fury, I shall have to speak.”’”
Dan. 2:44: “The kingdom [set up by God] . . . will crush and put an end to all these [human] kingdoms, and it itself will stand to times indefinite.”
Ezek. 38:23: “I shall certainly magnify myself and sanctify myself and make myself known before the eyes of many nations; and they will have to know that I am Jehovah.”
Rev. 20:1-3: “I saw an angel coming down out of heaven with the key of the abyss and a great chain in his hand. And he seized the dragon, the original serpent, who is the Devil and Satan, and bound him for a thousand years. And he hurled him into the abyss and shut it and sealed it over him, that he might not mislead the nations anymore until the thousand years were ended. After these things he must be let loose for a little while.”
John 5:28, 29: “Do not marvel at this, because the hour is coming in which all those in the memorial tombs will hear his voice and come out, those who did good things to a resurrection of life, those who practiced vile things to a resurrection of judgment.”
Rev. 21:3, 4: “I heard a loud voice from the throne say: ‘Look! The tent of God is with mankind, and he will reside with them, and they will be his peoples. And God himself will be with them. And he will wipe out every tear from their eyes, and death will be no more, neither will mourning nor outcry nor pain be anymore. The former things have passed away.’”
1 Cor. 15:24-28: “Next, the end, when he hands over the kingdom to his God and Father . . . But when all things will have been subjected to him, then the Son himself will also subject himself to the One who subjected all things to him, that God may be all things to everyone.”
Why should Christians be keenly interested in the Bible’s predictions?
Matt. 24:42: “Keep on the watch, therefore, because you do not know on what day your Lord is coming.”
2 Pet. 1:19-21: “We have the prophetic word made more sure [as a result of what occurred at the transfiguration of Jesus]; and you are doing well in paying attention to it . . . For prophecy was at no time brought by man’s will, but men spoke from God as they were borne along by holy spirit.”
Prov. 4:18: “The path of the righteous ones is like the bright light that is getting lighter and lighter until the day is firmly established.”
Matt. 4:4: “Man must live, not on bread alone, but on every utterance coming forth through Jehovah’s mouth.” (That includes his grand prophetic promises.)
2 Tim. 3:16: “All Scripture is inspired of God and beneficial for teaching, for reproving, for setting things straight, for disciplining in righteousness.” (Thus the entire written Word of God deserves our earnest study.)



If Someone Says—

‘You put too much emphasis on prophecy. All that is needed is to accept Christ as your Savior and to lead a good Christian life’
You might reply: ‘Appreciation of the role of Jesus Christ is certainly vital. But did you know that one reason why the Jews in the first century failed to accept him was that they did not pay sufficient attention to prophecy?’ Then perhaps add: (1) ‘The prophecies in the Hebrew Scriptures had foretold when the Messiah (Christ) would appear and what he would do. But the Jews in general did not pay heed to what those prophecies said. They had their own ideas as to what the Messiah should do, and as a result they rejected the Son of God. (See page 211, under “Jesus Christ.”)’ (2) ‘We today live at the time when Christ has begun to rule as heavenly King and is separating people of all nations, with a view to life or destruction. (Matt. 25:31-33, 46) But most people are looking for something else.’
Or you could say: ‘I agree that being a good Christian is important. But would I be a good Christian if I did some of the things that Jesus taught but ignored what he said we should put first in life? . . . Notice what he said as recorded here at Matthew 6:33.’ Then perhaps add: ‘Isn’t it true that Jesus taught us to pray for that Kingdom, even putting it ahead of our asking for forgiveness because of our faith in him as Savior? (Matt. 6:9-12)’




