Work with Counselors of the New Order Society
What is the New Order society?
The “new order” refers to the new system of things that will follow the end of the present wicked system after the abyssing of Satan. It consists of a “new heavens and a new earth.” The New Order society is that group of men and women today who are living by the principles of that new order and who hope to gain entrance into it and live forever in it. Those principles and that hope are found in God’s Word, the Holy Bible.​—Isa. 65:17; 2 Pet. 3:13; Rev. 21:4.
Who are the “counselors” of the New Order society?
The “counselors” of the New Order society are the overseers and other servants in the various congregations of the Christian witnesses of Jehovah who have been appointed to take the lead. Additionally, these have the obligation to keep Jehovah’s organization clean. Such “counselors” are set in position by the “faithful and discreet slave” organization whom Jesus appointed over all his belongings. (Matt. 24:45-47) These counselors are mature men who have proved faithful over the years, who love justice and mercy, and who are therefore qualified to safeguard the congregation’s doctrinal and moral purity as well as its harmonious functioning.
The provision for counselors is no modern innovation. A similar arrangement was in effect in the days of the early Christian congregation. The twelve apostles and certain other older men served as counselors and judges. They gave counsel by word of mouth and eight of them had a share in providing the inspired counsel found in the Christian Greek Scriptures. In addition, these also served as judges to keep the organization free from sexual and other forms of immorality and from apostasy. The record shows that the apostles Paul and Peter in particular served in this capacity, as can be seen from Acts 5:1-11; 1 Corinthians 5:1-13.
The presence of these “counselors” both in the early Christian congregation and in modern times was foretold by Jehovah’s prophet Isaiah: “I will bring back again judges for you as at the first, and counselors for you as at the start. After this you will be called City of Righteousness, Faithful Town.”​—Isa. 1:26.a
How can members of a Christian congregation work with their “counselors,” their servant body?
They can do this by taking to heart the principles, laws and counsel that these men teach from God’s Word and applying it in their own lives. At times the counsel given may be in the form of correction, admonition or discipline. Of course, as the apostle Paul shows at Hebrews 12:11, discipline is not a pleasant thing to receive. But if the Christian recognizes the source of the counsel or discipline being given him, it will help to overcome any barrier of pride that one might be inclined to erect. Without any such barrier one is truly able to benefit from the disciplinary counsel given.
Members of a Christian congregation also work with and not against their “counselors” when they encourage their fellow Christians to accept counsel. Especially can this be done when difficulties arise because some do not work with their “counselors.” And when there are serious cases of wrongdoing they can show their loyal support by being willing to testify to the extent that they are familiar with the facts, and then by acquiescing to the Scripturally based judgment of these “counselors.”
Individual Christians in the congregations can also work with their “counselors” by visiting the homes of those who are not getting to the congregation meetings, so as to pass on to these the “counsel” they have received and thus strengthen the faith of such absent ones.​—1 Thess. 5:14.
The words spoken by these “counselors” at the weekly meetings of the Christian witnesses of Jehovah are of importance not only to dedicated Christians but also to all other righteously disposed persons. Christians can therefore work with their “counselors” by having an active share in the field ministry, and by pointing out the Scriptural things they learn at these meetings to all whom they find hungering for truth and righteousness; being ready to make return visits upon these and study the Bible with them.
In all such ways the dedicated Christian witnesses of Jehovah can show their appreciation to Jehovah for having provided “judges for you as at the first, and counselors for you as at the start.”
[Footnotes]
For details see The Watchtower, July 1, 1970.

