Scenes From the Promised Land
Going to Shiloh​—Good Children and Bad
WHEN you think of cities, towns, or areas of the Promised Land, do certain notable men and women come to your mind? Probably so, for most Biblical accounts involve adults. But what of the children back then? Do you imagine them in the scenes?
The view above can help us to focus on accounts involving youths, some of whom were fine examples for Christians and others of whom were warning examples. The rounded hill in the center is evidently the site of Shiloh.a
You likely recall that when Israel entered the Promised Land, they first located God’s tabernacle at Gilgal near Jericho. (Joshua 4:19) But when the land was being divided, this sacred tent​—the focus of Israel’s worship—​was moved here to Shiloh. (Joshua 18:1) This was about 20 miles [30 km] north of Jerusalem in the mountainous region of Ephraim. Men and women from all over Israel made their way to Shiloh; large masses could gather in the valley south of where the tabernacle likely stood. (Joshua 22:12) Can you picture children coming here?
Some did. The most notable example that we should know of was young Samuel. His parents, Elkanah and Hannah, lived in a town over the hills to the west. Each year they traveled here, perhaps bringing along some children by Elkanah’s other wife. Finally Jehovah blessed Hannah with a son, who was named Samuel. In time his parents brought him to live at Shiloh so that he could serve at the tabernacle with high priest Eli.​—1 Samuel 1:1–2:11.
The boy had chores to do at God’s house, and he must have had many opportunities to hike in the nearby hills. (1 Samuel 3:1, 15) Some of them were terraced and full of olive trees, as seen in the picture on page 9. Note the small stone watchtower. Isolated farmers or shepherds could keep watch from such a watchtower, but you can imagine young Samuel climbing up for a look too. (Compare 2 Chronicles 20:24.) This would be a fine vantage point from which to watch for wild animals.
Back then, there were more trees than now, even forests where wild animals roamed. (Joshua 17:15, 18) We see this from an incident that happened when Elisha had become God’s main prophet. Elisha was traveling up from Jericho toward Bethel, so he was in this area, some ten miles [16 km] south of Shiloh. What reception would he receive from the people of Bethel, which had become a center for the worship of a golden calf? (1 Kings 12:27-33; 2 Kings 10:29) Evidently the adults were antagonistic toward Jehovah’s prophet, and their attitude seems to have rubbed off on their offspring.
Second Kings 2:23, 24 tells us that a band of youths jeered God’s prophet: “Go up, you baldhead! Go up, you baldhead!” In response, Elisha “called down evil upon them in the name of Jehovah. Then two she-bears came out from the woods and went tearing to pieces forty-two children of their number.” Such Syrian brown bears could be ferocious when surprised or when their cubs seemed threatened. (2 Samuel 17:8; Proverbs 17:12; 28:15) God used them to execute divine justice against those who grossly despised his representative and thus despised Jehovah himself.
That a child might meet such wildlife in the hills around Shiloh should help us to appreciate more the faith that Samuel’s parents showed in bringing him to serve at the tabernacle.
Another true worshiper had earlier shown similar faith and devotion​—Judge Jephthah. He resided in the hill country of Gilead on the east side of the Jordan. Zealous for Jehovah against the enemy Ammonites, Jephthah vowed that the first of his house coming out to meet him would be sacrificed to Jehovah. His virgin daughter proved to be that one. So he brought his only child to God’s sanctuary at Shiloh, where she lived and served faithfully for years.​—Judges 11:30-40.
The faithful devotion that Samuel and Jephthah’s daughter manifested in the area of Shiloh certainly is a fine contrast to the negative example of the 42 delinquents who mocked Jehovah’s prophet in this same region.​—Compare 1 Corinthians 10:6, 11.
[Footnotes]
For a larger picture, see the 1992 Calendar of Jehovah’s Witnesses.
[Picture Credit Line on page 8]
Pictorial Archive (Near Eastern History) Est.
[Picture Credit Line on page 9]
Pictorial Archive (Near Eastern History) Est.
[Picture Credit Line on page 9]
Safari Zoo, Ramat-Gan, Tel Aviv

