VOL. XV. AUGUST 15, 1894. NO. 16. 

BRINGING BACK THE KING. 



"WHY ARE YE THE LAST TO BRING BACK THE KING?" 

"And King David sent to Zadok and to Abiathar the 
priests, saying, Speak unto the elders of Judah, saying, 
Why are ye the last to bring the king back to his house? 
seeing the speech of all Israel is come to the king, 
even to his house. Ye are my brethren; ye are 
my bones and my flesh: wherefore, then, are ye 
the last to bring back the king?"— 2 Sam. 19:9-12. 

IN the scrap of history here recorded we find 
an illustration of a very similar condition 
of things in the world to-day. The kingdom 
of Israel had been thrown into a state of confusion, 
threatening anarchy, in consequence of 
being left for a time without any official head 
or king, by the rebellion of Absalom and the 
divided sentiments of the people. 

Absalom had cunningly managed to alienate 
the hearts of the people from his father David, 
and had finally headed a revolt. And David, 
in fear of the consequences, fled from the city 
and country to the region beyond Jordan, accompanied 
by a few loyal and faithful subjects. 
A great battle took place, which resulted in the 
prompt subduing of the rebellion and in the 
death of Absalom, the would-be usurper. 

Afterward King David did not attempt to 
repossess himself of the Kingdom, but waited 
until the desire of Israel for his return should 
be expressed. 

Meantime, says the record, "All the people 
were at strife throughout all the tribes of Israel, 
saying, The king saved us out of the hand of 
our enemies, and he delivered us out of the hand 
of the Philistines; and now he is fled out of 
the land for Absalom. And Absalom whom we 
anointed over us is dead in battle. Now, therefore, 
why speak ye not a word of bringing the 
king back?" 

Just so it is in the world to-day. Earth's 
rightful King is not upon its throne, nor has 
the world recognized his right to it or desired 
his return. Men have been busy with their 
own schemes and plans of government. They 



have anointed various kings of their own choosing: 
in fact, they have tried every experiment 
of self-government; and, one after another, all 
have ended in failure. And now, after six 
thousand years of human experiment, the whole 
world is on the verge of a revolution, in the outcome 
of which they have nothing to expect 
but anarchy. 

In times past the civil and religious powers 
of the world have been yoked together for 
mutual support, and have defended each other. 
It mattered not, so far as the state was concerned, 
whether the religion was a true or a 
false one, so that it kept the people in subjection 
to the ruling powers. Civil rulers have always 
favored most the religion that best served this 
end. Ecclesiastical rulers have also in turn 
looked to the State for compensating favors; 
and in the days of their power they exacted 
much. Thus the two were in close affiliation. 
Around each there has always gathered a privileged 
aristocracy of wealth and brains and 
education, which has ever kept them at the 
head of social influence and power. But the 
overruling providence of God has in recent times 

R1690: page 260 

been bringing about a change, so that knowledge 

and general enlightenment have been 

brought within the range of the common people. 

The printing press, common schools, daily newspapers, 

the multiplicity of books, cheap and 

rapid means of travel and communication by 

steam and electricity— all of these and minor 

influences have waked up the masses of the people 

and set them to thinking and planning and 

studying and traveling and acquiring and aspiring 

to higher if not to better things. 

So general has this tendency of the people 
become, that the favored aristocratic classes, who 
have long enjoyed a monopoly of this world's 
good things, are in fear lest their glory may 
suddenly depart. And well indeed they may 
be; for the struggling masses are determined to 
reach the top rounds of the ladder of fortune, 
no matter what hoary-headed authorities may 
stand in their way. The struggle is already on, 
and the threatening aspect of things forebodes 
an early fulfilment of that prophecy of Daniel (12:1), 
"There shall be a time of trouble such 
as never was since there was a nation." 

The Scriptures also indicate the character of 
the trouble— that it will be one in which the 
animosities of the masses will be exercised with 
violence against the rich, and the specially favored 



aristocratic classes,— political, social and 
religious. (Jas. 5:1-6; Ezek. 7:19, etc.) And 
what intelligent observer of the signs of the 
times cannot see the rapid development of just 
such a trouble in the present proportions of the 
socialistic and anarchistic movements, and their 
aggressive disposition? Indeed, the civil and 
social condition of the world is appalling, from 
every standpoint, whether it be that of politics, 
social order, finance or religion. 

In every land the tendency of politics is to 
corruption, both in civil and ecclesiastical circles; 
not because people are really worse than 
formerly, but because enlightenment is so much 
greater and more general, that temptations to 
cupidity are a hundred times greater than ever 
before. Social order is continually menaced; 
the strain between capital and labor is unprecedented; 
and true religion, the religion of the 
cross, is at a very low ebb. Many who begin 
to realize the seriousness of the present situation, 
as they forecast the outcome of all these things, 
in substance disconsolately say, as the Prophet 
Jeremiah (8:15-19) foretold they would— "We 
hoped for peace, but no happiness is here; for a 
time of cure, and behold here is terror. When 
I would comfort myself against sorrow, my heart 
is faint in me. Is the Lord not in Zion? is her 
King no more in her?" 

In the religious situation there is little to be 
seen in the way of encouragement: the clash 
of conflicting creeds and their discord with the 
notes of divine revelation are most painfully 
manifest. In consequence of this, and of the 
general awakening and mental activity of our 
day, we find Infidelity, bold and outspoken, rampant 
in every denomination of "Christendom;" 
the truths and the errors of hoary creeds of men 
are being discarded in fact (though not by admission, 
for fear of the effect); and the general 
tendency is to ignore the Bible doctrine and 
terms of salvation, and merely to hold our morality 
as the hope of everlasting life, alike to 
believers in Christ and to unbelievers. A proposition 
so much in harmony with the pride of 
the natural man (which always prefers to pay 
its own way, and feels that it is "nearly good 
enough") is bound to be popular; while the 
cross of Christ has always been a stumbling-block, 
and its preaching unpopular and a cause 
of division to them that stumble at the word, 
being disobedient.— 1 Pet. 2:8. 

Infidelity— i.e., unbelief in the sound doctrine 
taught by the Lord and his inspired apostles 
—sits in the pews, declaims from the pulpits, 
rules in the assemblies, and is even finding its 



way into the Sunday School literature— in the 
interpretations of the International Lessons. It 
is ably seconded by Doubt or Agnosticism; and 
together these strike with increasing determination 
against the very foundation doctrines of 
Christianity— the fall of man and his redemption 
by the vicarious sacrifice of Christ. Discrediting 
the Bible account of the fall of the 
race in Adam, and hence the necessity of its 
redemption through Christ, it substitutes the 
entirely antagonistic theory of Evolution— that 
man was evolved from lower animal forms, by 
his own effort, that he has now reached a higher 
plane than was ever before realized, and that he 

R1690: page 261 

will continue to so make progress indefinitely. 

It institutes what it is pleased to term a 
"higher criticism" of the Word of God, by 
which the sacred record is being gradually 
whittled and trimmed to fit the present state of 
development of human philosophies and science 
—often falsely so called— thereby to lend its 
seeming sanction to the idea that the philosophy 
and science of the nineteenth century are the 
very climax of perfection and the essence of 
wisdom. It slashes its ruthless scissors into 
miracles, calls them all incredible, and believes 
only those things for which it has tangible evidence. 
It claims that at most the apostles and 
prophets of the Bible had an inspiration of 
thought, which they clothed more or less imperfectly 
in language of their own choice; and 
that therefore each reader has the liberty to 
whittle out of their words such thoughts as best 
suit his own conceptions of truth, relying on an 
inspiration of his own mind, equal to theirs 
with the advantages of present-day higher criticism. 
The apostles tell us, to the contrary, 
that they were inspired as to the words they 
spoke and wrote, and not as to the thoughts 
or sentiments. (See 2 Pet. 1:21; 1 Pet. 1:12.) 
It places the Bible and its writers on a par 
with all profane history and historians, and says 
that much of the Bible is fiction, and that it is 
impossible to discover the dividing line between 
truth and fiction. 

Under the various disintegrating influences 
of our peculiar day the old creeds are fast 
crumbling into ruin, and the old institutions 
which they held together are being terribly 
shaken; and the various attempts at reorganization 
on other grounds are all open to a thousand 
objections. The faith of all is being tested, 
and many who really care to have a faith, and 



who long for a firm establishment in divine 
truth, are indeed in dismay. 

Nominal Christianity is fast losing its power 
over the masses; for the general awakening of 
the human mind has loosened the reins of superstition, 
so that the most illiterate begin to 
realize that they are men, with all the prerogatives 
of men, and that the king and the priest 
are nothing more, except as the superior advantages 
of wealth and education have developed 
in them the faculties which are common to all 
mankind. And the unreasonable and unscriptural 
doctrines of the divine right of kings and 

R1691 : page 261 

of the eternal torment of a large proportion 
of humanity, and kindred absurdities, are coming 
more and more into disrepute, and have less 
and less of a restraining influence upon the 
masses of men, who rightly reason that since 
"the earth is the Lord's and the fulness thereof," 
and since "God is no respecter of persons," 
the peasant has an equal right with the 
king or the priest to share its bounties. 

To the awakening masses the only apparent 
way to obtain their ends is by revolt against the 
existing arrangements;--they see not the Jubilee 
of "restitution times" which God has 
promised. (Acts 3:19-21.) And the hearts of 
all classes being under the control of selfish 
principles, it is only a question of increasing 
unrest from increasing knowledge and liberty, 
and of divine permission (Rev. 7:1-3), when the 
terrible crisis of trouble will consume the present 
order of society. 

It is in view of this clearly discernible trend 
of present events that the thrones of earth are 
trembling, and that statesmen are greatly perplexed 
in seeking measures of policy to avert 
the impending disaster. The sea and the waves 
(the restless masses of humanity) are roaring, 
and the mountains (kingdoms) are shaking with 
the swellings thereof.— Psa. 46:3. 

Six years ago Prince Bismark called attention 
in the German Reichstag to the fact that great 
national crises occur about every twenty years, 
and urged that such contingencies should be 
prepared for. And more recently, in justification 
of the last army bill, he recounted the 
special dangers to Germany, lying, as she does, 
in the center of Europe, exposed to the hostile 
powers of France on the east, and of Russia on 
the west, as well as to the dangers of their coalition, 
and the lack of cohesion among her own 
people. Again he said, "European countries 



have something more important to attend to 
than making war upon each other. They should 
unite in suppressing the crime of socialism." 
But that is more easily said than done; for the 
nations are not ready to unite on any thing. 
And where is the power of resistance which the 

R1691 : page 262 

rulers would call to their aid in such a contingency, 
when the armies upon which they depend 
are permeated with socialistic sentiments? 
The power of the churches was relied upon once, 
when the churches demanded and got a superstitious 
reverence for civil potentates and ecclesiastical 
dignitaries; but that day is almost 
past; and the reins of superstition are growing 
more and more slack. The time was when a 
German Emperor stood for three days and 
nights barefoot in the snow, waiting for Papal 
absolution, that the dreaded Papal interdict 
might be lifted and his authority in the empire 
established by the word of the Pope. And glad 
indeed would some of the crowned heads be to-day 
to see that power restored to the control of 
the public mind, for the support of kingly authority. 
This is illustrated by the fact of Germany's 
repealing the law that expelled the Jesuits. 
Although those infamous allies of Papal 
power have been a menace to good government 
in every land, and have been alternately expelled 
and re-instated again and again in almost 
every land, their influence is felt to be a 
necessity now against the increasing influence 
and power of Socialism and Anarchy. 

Dynamite plots and assassinations are getting 
to be common occurrences. Several bills have 
been presented and favorably considered in the 
French Chamber of Deputies looking to the suppression 
of Socialistic movements. And since 
the assassination of President Carnot one of the 
most stringent of these has passed into a law. 
Similar regulations are before the governments 
of Austria and Spain; the latter, indeed, proposes 
to all civilized governments common laws 
for the suppression of Anarchists, their literature 
and their sympathizers. 

The wonderful mechanical inventions of this 
"day of the Lord's preparation" for the Millennium 
(Nah. 2:3), the manufacture of which 
has for a time brought great prosperity to the 
whole world, once gave promise of great future 
blessing to all mankind, by a general increase 
of wealth, and lessening of the drudgery of 
earth. But the masses are awakening to the fact 
that they were dreaming when wasting good 



wages in extravagance or dissipation or sloth, 
thinking that the "good times had come to 
stay." There were others not so short-sighted, 
who, by economic prudence, temperance, etc., 
accumulated a little money, and who foresaw 
that machinery would make the best of all slaves 
—requiring less for maintenance and doing the 
work of many. Some of these frugal, thrifty, far-seeing 
ones, by the aid of their mechanical slaves, 
have become wealthy— immensely wealthy; 
and one half of the world is now striving to 
serve these and to manufacture more slaves for 
them. Thus after the point of demand has been 
reached there comes a halt all around— a stagnation. 
And since human muscle and brain 
cannot compete against these mechanical iron 
slaves, all are dependent upon these and their 
millionaire masters, that they may work with 
these slaves. Under these circumstances, nothing 
can prevent the decline of human labor in 
every channel to a lower and yet lower level, 
until the common, unskilled laborer will scarce 
be worth his board, and must be supported by the 
charity of his fellow-creatures better equipped 
for the battle of life. Unskilled muscle is being 
crowded out by mechanical slaves, and even 
skilled muscle is beginning to feel its pressure. 
Brains, backed by machinery and money, are 
already masters of the situation, and the increase 
of machinery and of wealth is marvelous. On 
the other hand, the population of the world is 
increasing rapidly, and the increase of intelligence 
increases the skilled workmen of the world 
and their competition with each other for the 
luxuries and necessities of life, to be had only by 
serving the slave owners, the world's masters. 

Poor world! This is a gloomy outlook, yet 
one which all who can and will reason must see 
is a true view, if something does not occur to 
alter results by changing conditions or causes. 
All thinking people see this; but many stifle 
reason and reflection, and swim along as near 
to the cream and as far from the dregs of society 
as they can get. 

It is useless to reason with the wealthy owners 
of these iron slaves, for they will get the 
best of the argument,— reasoning upon the generally 
accepted basis. Their answer to those 
who would reason with them is a correct one. 
They say:— 

We are acting upon the same principles upon 

R1691 : page 263 

which you act;— we are no more selfish than you; 
—we give more generously than you to the support 



of educational and benevolent institutions; 
—we pay our employees better wages than others 
can afford to pay;— we pay more taxes than 
do others;— indeed, as society exists at present, 
our brains, capital and iron slaves are necessary 
to the well-being of the world;— we could get 
along without others, but they cannot get along 
without us;— if we, the masters of the world, 
should combine to stop our iron slaves, and close 
our establishments, the world's affairs would be 
thrown into chaos. We do not claim to do our 
business on principles of love and benevolence 
any more than do the farmers and mechanics. 
Each is trying to do the best he can for himself. 
We, like others, are ruled by selfishness; but a 
selfishness less narrow and mean— more generous 
—than that which is exercising many of our employees 
and others less successful than we. You 
can make no laws to hinder our success; for of 
necessity such laws would injure others as much 
as they would injure us, or more. We are independent, 
others are dependent. So long as 
selfishness is recognized as the rule of life, we 
must be conceded to be as generous under that 
law as any. 

Socialism and Nationalism reply that the 
remedy is to do all large business on a communistic 
scale for the public benefit. But they fail 
to see that selfish ambition for wealth, power 
and honor, which at present is pushing the world 
with lightning speed, would, by their program, 
be set aside— with nothing in its stead to take 
its place. It is but a chimerical fancy, that if 
selfish ambition were rendered powerless, loving 
benevolence would step forward in its stead and 
push the world along. Alas! too few of the 
human family have any knowledge of love as a 
motive power. Indeed, we may be sure that 
if selfish ambition were bound hand and foot, 
selfish indolence would take its place amongst 
poor and rich, until necessity would complete the 
release and re-enthronement of selfish ambition 
to keep society from miserably perishing in 
sloth. 

Indeed, the Scriptures indicate that this will 
be the very course, and that anarchy will finally 
result, and that 

THE RELIEF WILL COME ONLY WITH THE 
RETURN OF THE KING, IN POWER 
AND GREAT MAJESTY. 



We wait not for the King as the sweet babe 
of Bethlehem, nor yet as "the man Christ 



Jesus, who gave himself a ransom for all;" but we 
wait for him who, having been "put to death in 
flesh, was quickened [made alive] in spirit"-- 
who was raised from death a spirit being— highly 
exalted above his condition as a man, higher 
even than his condition as a spirit-being before 
he humbled himself to become a man,— highly 
exalted, even to the divine nature, far above 
human nature and angelic nature and every 
other nature. Such is the nature and majesty 
of the King for whom we wait, and whose presence 
and Kingdom we are assured can and will 
bring order out of earth's confusion, and bring 
to the world the blessings purchased with his 
own precious blood, given when he was a man, 
once for all and forever as man's 
redemption-price. 

The same King whom Herod and his soldiers 
crowned with thorns, and in mockery clothed 

R1692: page 263 

in royal robes, and hailed, "King of the Jews!" 

the same whom Pilate crucified between two 

thieves, and over whose head he placed the inscription, 

"Jesus, the King of the Jews"— this 

same King we look for now, but no longer in a 

body of flesh, a body of humiliation, a body 

prepared for our sin-offering. He comes in 

power and great glory, the express image of the 

Father's person, and in the glory and majesty of 

the Father's person, and in the glory and majesty of 

the Father, "whom no man hath seen, nor can 

see" (1 Tim. 6:16), the same whom Saul of 

Tarsus saw, but whom his companions saw not. 

The same wise, sympathizing, loving soul (person) 

that wept and died; but greatly changed 

—resurrected and glorified by divine power; a 

new organism, but the same being; not flesh, 

but spirit; not weak, but powerful; not corruptible, 

but incorruptible; not dishonored, but honored; 

—possessing "all power in heaven and 

in earth."-See 1 Cor. 15:20,42-44,50; Phil 3:10; 

Matt. 28:18. 

Some have dreamed that selfishness is being rapidly 
swallowed up of love, throughout the world; 
but not so: it alters its outward form to meet 

R1692: page 264 

changed circumstances and conditions, but under 
the surface selfishness is still to be found 
everywhere; and in almost every heart it is the 
actual motive power of life. And so strong is 
the selfish power in mankind, so deep seated, 
that it is a vain delusion to presume that the 



preaching of the gospel will ever convert the 
world from the motive power of selfishness to 
that of love. 

True, some are thus converted; but altogether 
these are but a "little flock;" and so different 
from the masses that they are and always have 
been "peculiar people," zealous, not for self-interest, 
but for good works, for God's glory 
and for the welfare of others, regardless often 
of personal prosperity or interest. 

Man's experience is now being so arranged 
for him as to bring to the masses the proof that 
selfishness is not the proper motive power, the 
welfare of all being considered; because, in the 
present condition of physical and mental inequality, 
the mentally and physically strong 
would get all there is, while the weaker and imbecile 
would be wholly dependent upon their 
charity for existence; and as the ratio of difference 
would continue to increase, it would mean 
that ultimately the wealth and government of 
the world would all be in the hands of a few intellectual 
giants. And even if all men were 
mentally and physically perfect and equal, the 
result of the operation of selfishness would mean 
a continual strife for mastery, greatness, power 
and advantage, which would mar the bliss of a 
Paradise. 

The light of invention in this, our day, is intended 
to have this very effect;— to let things 
take this course and to let people see what would 
be the result if selfish principles were allowed 
to go to seed. Many whose senses are exercised 
can already foresee the result, and many are seeking 
the remedy, but in a wrong direction. They 
want the motive power of love substituted for 
the motive power of selfishness in those who 
have control of governments and large enterprises. 
They are seeking in others the character 
and methods of Jesus, but have never adopted 
his character and methods as their own. They 
admit the superiority of love over selfishness, 
and would like to have the wealthy adopt the 
principle of love, while they would, for a time 
at least, continue the policy of selfishness, until 
they too had become wealthy. 

They forget that love cannot become an element 
of daily life, and its controlling force, until 
it has first become an element of character 
in the individual heart. Only those whose hearts 
have been thoroughly converted to the Lord, 
and who are seeking and praying to be dead to 
self, realize what a fight is necessary to keep 
this strongly entrenched element of the fallen 
character under the control of the Word and 
spirit of Christ, our Redeemer and Pattern. 



Others see not the folly of their hopes to introduce 

by laws the rule and motive power of love, 

and to oust the rule and motive power of selfishness, 

while the hearts of the vast majority 

know nothing whatever of such a change of 

principle as a personal experience. As men 

come to realize, by further experience, the folly 

of such hopes and efforts, 

THE NUMBER OF THOSE WHO WILL SPEAK 
OF BRINGING BACK THE KING 
WILL INCREASE. 



Ah, yes! That is the remedy, and the only 
remedy at all adequate to the cure of the disease 
of selfishness, its eradication from the body 
—social, political and financial. 

But while the King of earth (whose right the 
government is, and who will shortly take unto 
himself his great power and reign, and bring 
order out of confusion) is called the "Good 
Physician," let none assume that by this is implied 
that he will cause his patient no pain 
when he lances his boils, amputates those parts 
where mortification has set in, rebreaks bones 
previously improperly set by the patient himself, 
or when he cauterizes the proud flesh of his 
sores: let him not suppose that he will give no 
bitter medicines. To be a Good Physician and 
a Great Physician means that he will cause no 
needless pain; but it also implies that he will 
spare no pains to make the treatment effective 
to the patient's recovery to perfect health. 

And so with Christ's rule and Kingdom: it 
will first of all lay bare, and cut, and scrape, 
the evils of selfish society, down to the very 
bone, exposing depths of corruption never before 

R1692: page 265 

realized by the patient; and it will be a 
fearful ordeal— "a time of trouble such as was 
not since there was a nation." The patient 
(the world) will suffer and groan, and for a 
time prefer the disease to the cure, and seek to 
be released, but he will be helpless, bound hand 
and foot; and the exposition and eradication 
of selfishness must progress until the patient 
shall have fully realized the sinfulness of 
sin and the selfishness of selfishness. Then the 
balms and ointments of love and righteousness 
will be applied; and although they will smart, 
they will begin to heal and strengthen. Then 
the cooling, refreshing, "peaceable fruits of 



righteousness" will begin to be relished, and 
the patient will soon be on the way to recovery 
and prepared for the stronger meat of knowledge 
of God's perfect will. 

Yes, the coming of the King of Earth means 
much of trouble and a general overturning of 
the Kingdoms of this world, which, although 
nominally kingdoms of God, are really under 
the control of the prince of this world— Satan 
—who now worketh in the hearts of the children 
of disobedience. (Eph. 2:2.) It means the shaking 
of society in a manner and to an extent it 
was never before shaken, and so thoroughly that 
another shaking will never be necessary. (Heb. 12:26,27.) 
It means the breaking in pieces of 

the Kingdoms of earth as a potter's vessel. (Isa. 30:12-15; 
Psa. 2:9; Rev. 2:27.) It means 
the shaking and final passing away of the present 
ecclesiastical heavens, and the fall of many 
of its bright ones (stars), and the temporary 
obscuring of the true sunlight of the gospel and 
the moonlight of the Jewish law by the thick 
clouds of worldly wisdom. It means tumult and 
raging amongst the waves of the sea (the masses 
of mankind in anarchy). It means the 
shaking of all the mountains (kingdoms); and 
the melting of some to the level of the people 
(socialism); and the carrying of others into the 
sea (revolution and anarchy). 

But while many would rejoice to see enemies 
bound and society relieved of many of its selfish, 
life-sapping ulcers, they seem to realize that 
so just and impartial a Judge and law might cut 
off some of their long-cherished sins, and might 
pain them by touching some of their personal 
selfishness. And they are right: He will bring 
to light all the hidden things of darkness, and 
correct private as well as public sin and selfishness. 
He will lay justice to the line, and 
righteousness to the plummet, and the hail [hard 
truths] shall sweep away the refuge of lies, and 
the waters [of truth] shall overflow the hiding 
places [of error].— Isa. 28:17. 

"BUT WHO MAY ABIDE THE DAY OF HIS 
COMING? AND WHO SHALL STAND WHEN 
HE APPEARETH?"-MAL. 3:2. 



The coming of the King will mean a personal, 
as well as a national and a church examination, 
judgment and treatment. "Who may abide 
the day of his coming? And who shall stand 
when he appeareth? For he is like a refiner's 
fire and like fuller's soap." (Mai. 3:2.) It will 



mean the curtailment of vice to a degree never 
attempted by any earthly reformer. There will 
be no license to be or to do evil in any form or 
degree. The only liberty will be to do right. 

Ah! No wonder that so few to-day look and 
speak for the coming back of the King! To 
some it would mean the curtailment of present 
advantages over the remainder of their fellows. 
To some others it would mean to check their 
anticipated rising to a point of advantage or 
preference or honor above their fellows. To 
others it would mean the curtailment of sins now 
indulged and enjoyed. 

Nevertheless, both the King and the Kingdom 
—for which the King taught his Church to 
pray, "Thy Kingdom come, thy will be done 
on earth as it is done in heaven"— are coming. 
In fact, they are here; and present troubles in 
church and state are the results of influences 
emanating from that King and Kingdom. 
Though men know it not, it is the smiting by 
this Kingdom of God that is even now preparing 
for the wreck of all the kingdoms of earth 
and the preparation thus of the hearts of men 
for the true King and his righteous government. 
Thus it was foretold by the Lord through the 
prophet.-Dan. 2:34,35. 

Worldly men know not of this, because this 
Kingdom cometh not with outward show or 
display: because they cannot say, Lo here, or 

R1692: page 266 

Lo there, they do not realize it at all. (Matt. 24:23.) 

But God's children, enlightened by 

his Word, know that thus it is written, and that 

R1693 : page 266 

the Day of the Lord will come as a thief and 
a snare upon the world; and that only God's 
people, his fully consecrated Church, will be in 
the light and will not be taken unawares. And 
many of these have been deceived by looking 
for the King again in the flesh— forgetting that 
his only object in becoming flesh was "for the 
suffering of death" as man's corresponding 
price; and that, this over now, he is highly exalted, 
and "dieth no more." They forget that 
"Though we have known Christ after the flesh, 
yet now henceforth know we him [so] no more;" 
and that we must be changed that we may "see 
him as he is,"— not as he was. We now know 
him as the King of glory— the same who was 
dead, but who is now highly exalted— the 
same seen by Saul of Tarsus, a spirit being shining 



above the brightness of the noon-day sun. 

(See Heb. 2:9; Phil. 2:9; 2 Cor. 5:16; 1 Cor. 15:51; 

1 John 3:2; Acts 26:13-15.) Another 

matter which the Lord has permitted to becloud 

this subject of the Lord's second coming, 

so that none except those who hunger and 

thirst after the truth might know, is the translation 

of the Greek word, parousia, by the 

English word, coming, whereas it should be rendered 

presence; for that is the thought. Note 

the wide difference in the sense of the following 

texts where the Greek word parousia should be 

rendered presence in every instance:— Matt. 24:3,27; 

ICor. 15:23; 1 Thes. 2:19; 3:13; 

4: 15; 5:23; 2 Thes. 2: 1,8; Jas. 5:7,8; 2 Pet. 1 : 16; 

3:4; 1 John 2:28. 

True, there is to be an earthly phase or representation 
of the Kingdom of God, visible to 
the natural eyes of men, as the spiritual government 
will be recognized by the eyes of their 
understanding; but it will be established later, 
as it is written, Ye shall see Abraham and Isaac 
and Jacob and all the prophets— all the overcomers 
of the past— in the Kingdom. (Luke 13:28.) 
The unseen Kingdom will be Christ 
and the apostles, and all the faithful overcomers 
of the Gospel age— the body of Christ. 

All that needed to be done to inaugurate the 
present strife for wealth and power, and to bring 
the festering sore of selfishness to a head, was 
to lift the vail and let men see the possibilities 
surrounding them. The lifting of the vail of 
ignorance from men's minds is a good thing of 
itself: only the selfishness of the human heart 
causes it to bring forth evil fruit. And the evil 
fruit is only partial and temporary: the sharpening 
of men's wits, possibly supernaturally as 
well as by the competitive strife for wealth, is 
preparing some of the inventions which will be 
ready for the quicker blessing of the world when 
the new King and his Millennial Kingdom shall 
have assumed full control. 

But the King of Glory waits to be prayed to 
come and take control. He will let the various 
parties and factions of society cut and lance 
and amputate each others defects and prepare 
each others physics. But it will all be under 
the King's eye, and subject to his "all-power." 
And when all are thoroughly sick, and when he, 
as the Good Physician, does come in and offer 
"the balm of Gilead," he and his Kingdom 
will generally be hailed as "the desire of all 
nations." (Hag. 2:7.) The Jews will be first: 
"They shall mourn for him as one mourneth 
for his only son." And when he shall reveal 
his presence and Kingdom, they will shout, 



"Lo! this is our God, we have waited for him, 
and he will save us." (Zech. 12:10; Isa. 25:9.) 
Then "many people shall go and say, Come, let 
us go up to the mountain [kingdom] of the 
Lord, to the house of the God of Jacob; and 
he will teach us of his ways, and we will walk 
in his paths."— Isa. 2:3. 

Surely, those who know that the King and his 
Kingdom are the only remedy and the best 
remedy for all the wrongs and woes of men 
should be pointing the groaning creation to this, 
rather than to the poultices of their own contriving 
which can do no real good. Tell them 
about the Return of the King! Tell them that 
he is the Great Prophet and Great Priest, as well 
as the Great King: that as Prophet [Christ, the 
head, and his Church, the body] he will cause 
an accurate knowledge of the Lord to fill the 
whole earth; and that as Priest he will be ready to 
pardon and succor all who, under that knowledge, 
shall turn from sin to righteousness. Tell 
them that his death was the redemption price 

R1693 : page 267 

for all, and that the return of the King is to 
bind Satan and set free all of his captives who 
will accept the liberty of the sons of God 
under the conditions of the New Covenant.— 
Acts 3:22,23; Gal. 3:29; 1 Cor. 6:2. 

"Tell the whole world these blessed tidings; 
Speak of the time of rest that nears: 
He who was slain on Calvary's mountain 
Soon is to reign a thousand years. 

"What if the clouds do for a moment 
Hide the blue sky where morn appears? 
Soon the glad sun of promise given 
Rises to shine a thousand years. 

"A thousand years! Earth's coming glory! 
'Tis the glad day so long foretold; 
'Tis the bright morn of Zion's glory, 
Prophets foresaw in times of old." 

-HYMNS OF DAWN. 



R1693: page 267 

FORGIVENESS VERSUS MALICE. 



"Forgiving one another, even as God for Christ's 



sake hath forgiven you."— Eph. 4:32. 

A FORGIVING spirit is a part of the spirit of 
love, a part of God's spirit, the holy spirit 
or disposition— the spirit of the truth— inculcated 
in God's Word. It is thus the opposite 
or contrary of the spirit of malice, which is a 
part of the evil spirit or disposition common 
among men in their fallen condition, the spirit 
or disposition of the world. 

A forgiving spirit is kindred to the spirit of 
love, joy, peace, meekness, patience, brotherly-kindness, 
godliness. A malicious spirit is related 
to anger, back-biting, slander, wrath, jealousy, 
hatred and all the works of the (fallen) flesh 
and the devil. 

Recognizing these two spirits in the light of 
God's Word, his people must surely desire and 
seek more and more to cultivate the forgiving 
disposition— a spirit of readiness or willingness 
to forgive, which would rather that the transgressor 
would penitently turn from his evil 
way to the way of righteousness, and which 
would take pleasure in receiving him back into 
fellowship again under such conditions. 

However, on this as upon every question, extreme 
and unscriptural views are sometimes entertained. 
Some feel that the most extreme 
view conceivable must be the right one, because 
of their desire to get as far away as possible 
from the unforgiving or malicious spirit. 
In consequence, some are continually chiding 
themselves for not being able to forgive those 
who have not repented, who have not asked 
forgiveness nor brought forth fruits (evidences) 
indicating repentance. 

This comes of the fall. Human judgments 
have become defective, so that it sometimes 
perplexes us to know how and where to draw 
the lines upon our own hearts and conduct. 
But here God comes to our rescue. He knows: 
his mind or judgment and not our own imperfect 
judgments, therefore, must be our guide or 
criterion; and his Word expresses to us his 
mind (spirit or disposition) on this and every 
subject. If we accept and use it, instead of our 
own imperfect judgments, we are said to have 
"the spirit of a sound mind."— 2 Tim. 1 :7. 

Let us study and adopt as our own the spirit 
of God's sound mind on this subject of forgiveness, 
casting aside as erroneous whatever our 
own depraved judgments may have previously 
accepted. This will be following the instructions 
of the text at the head of this article, and 
we will learn to forgive even as God forgives. 

(1) Our spirit or disposition to forgive any 



one should be of the heart prompted by the 

spirit of love and brotherly kindness. It should 

not be a forgiveness forced out of us by importunity, 

nor by the appeals of many, nor by pity 

for the wrong doers' sufferings or sorrow. It 

should be there pent up in our hearts, ready to 

pour forth upon the offender as soon as he repents 

and gives reasonable evidence of his sincerity. 

God waits to be gracious, desires to 

pardon sinners; and such must be our attitude 

toward those who trespass against us. But 

God always waits for repentance, and never 

grants his pardon to those who are unrepentant, 

nor receives them into fellowship as friends. 

True, he loved us while we were yet sinners 
(John 3:16; Rom. 5:8), and he does good even 
to the unthankful, giving sunshine and rain and 
food to all; but that is a pitying love, not a 
fellowship love, not a communing love: it is 
the sympathetic love of a benefactor. And we 

R1693 : page 268 

are to have this pity-love also, even to our 

enemies. We are to love our enemies, and do 

good to them that persecute us; but with us, 

as with God, this can be no more than pity-love: 

it cannot be fellowship-love, "for what 

fellowship hath righteousness with unrighteousness? 

and what communion hath light with 

darkness?" Nevertheless, while we can have 

no fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness, 

but must rather reprove them (Eph. 5:11), 

we can still have that benevolence of heart 

which would not permit even an enemy to 

perish with hunger. "Therefore, if thine enemy 

hunger, feed him," etc. In so doing we are 

but imitating our Heavenly Father who is merciful 

even to the unthankful and despiteful. 

R1694: page 268 

(2) God's readiness or quickness to forgive 
and receive into fellowship depends upon the 
amount of light and favor sinned against. To 
the ignorant, who know not of his character, 
he sends his children as ambassadors,— evangelists, 
colporteurs, etc.,— to tell them of his love 
and his willingness to forgive their sins through 
Christ. But in proportion as any have tasted of 
the good Word of God and been made partakers 
of the holy spirit, etc., and have sinned wilfully 
against light and knowledge (Heb. 6:4-6; 
10:26-31), in that same proportion God is slow 
to forgive, and will not receive such back into 
fellowship, except they bring forth works proving 



their professed repentance to be sincere. 
And God assures us that there is a degree of 
wilful sin, against full light and ability, that he 
will never forgive— "There is a sin unto death, 
I do not say that ye shall pray for it."— 1 John 5:16. 

In this, also, we should copy our Father in 
heaven. We should be very ready to forgive 
the blunders and errors of either natural or 
spiritual childhood, and to all the weak and inexperienced, 
even before they ask we should 
manifest our willingness to forgive. And with 
all who trespass against us, our willingness to 
forgive should be proportionate to the ignorance 
and lack of wilfulness and malice on the part of 
the transgressor. Whenever malice, wilfulness 
and knowledge have been factors in the transgression, 
it is our duty to be proportionately 
slow to forgive and to require proportionately 
longer and stronger proofs of repentance. 

But this is as far as we may go. Although 
we may be able to decide what would be a sin 
unto death against God (1 John 5:16), we may 
not decide that any transgression against us is 
unforgivable; against us there are to be no unpardonable 
sins. Our imperfect knowledge, as 
well as our imperfect judgments, forbids such a 
decision. Hence our Lord said, "If thy brother 
trespass against thee, rebuke him; and if he repent, 
forgive him. And if he trespass against 
thee seven times in a day, and seven times in a 
day turn again to thee, saying, I repent, thou 
shalt forgive him." Peter said, "Lord how oft 
shall my brother sin against me and I forgive 
him? till seven times? Jesus saith unto him, I 
say not unto thee, Until seven times, but, Until 
seventy times seven."— Luke 17:3,4; 
Matt. 18:21,22. 

From these scriptures it is evident that some 
of God's people make the mistake of forgiving 
transgressors before they repent. It is as much 
the Lord's command that we rebuke the transgressor, 
and that we do not forgive until he turns 
again and repents, as it is his command that we 
do forgive, from the heart, when he does turn 
and repent. And if he trespass seventy times 
seven times he should be rebuked as often (either 
by word or conduct or both), and should repent 
in words and turn in conduct just as often. 

To require less than this is to disobey our 
Teacher's instructions and to do injury to the 
transgressor by giving him lax ideas as to his 
duty. A lack of strict justice, in this respect, 
on the part of God's people has often injured 
their children, whereas a proper exercise of justice 
with forgiveness on proper grounds would 
have helped those children the better to understand 



God's dealings, and would guard them 
against expecting his favor except upon full 
repentance; and also against tempting divine 
mercy by sinning against knowledge. 

But while some need to correct their hearts 
and conduct as above, more, probably, need to 
guard against an unforgiving spirit. Such 
should remember that Christ Jesus by the grace 
of God tasted death for every man— paid the 
price of every man's natural or inherited imperfections 
—and consider that if God can accept 
that ransom price as the full satisfaction 

R 1694 : page 269 

for all except wilful sins or the wilful portion 
of sins, then we can and should do so also; 
and all who have God's spirit or disposition 
will hold wrong-doers responsible for only their 
wilful share in sins and be ready to forgive and 
pass over quickly whatever is of Adamic depravity 
and truly repented of and thereafter shunned. 

Let such remember the words, "If we confess 
our sins, God is faithful and just to forgive 
us our sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness; 
and consider that we who accept our 
Lord Jesus' sacrifice, as being for the sins of the 
whole world, must also, if we would be faithful 
and just, forgive those who trespass against us, 
if they confess and repent, because Jesus paid 
all of their debts, to us as well as to God. 

Justice, therefore, demands of all who trust 
in the merit of Christ's sacrifice as the ground 
of their own forgiveness, that they recognize 
the same precious blood as the covering of all 
Adamic weaknesses when repented of. And 
hence the Lord assures us that unless we forgive 
those who trespass against us (when they repent), 
neither will he forgive us when we repent. 

Moreover, our forgiveness must be from the 
heart (Matt. 18:35)— not a lip forgiveness and 
a heart hatred. The forgiven one may be held 
at a distance for a time to prove the sincerity 
of his repentance; but just as soon as we have 
good cause to believe him sincere we must be 
prompt and hearty in our forgiveness— as a 
heart with a forgiving spirit or desire will 
always be glad to do. But, even then, although 
fully and heartily forgiven, we may not put such 
a one into a place of the same responsibility as 
the one from which he fell until we have seen 
a stronger and truer character developed in him. 
And this would not imply a lack of full forgiveness, 
but merely a proper caution— not only for 
our own protection, but also for the good of the 
one who transgressed and his protection from 



too strong a temptation of same kind. 

We find no mention in the Scriptures of forgiving 
on God's part without the requirement of 
repentance. The passage which reads, "Father, 
forgive them, they know not what they do" 
(Luke 23:34), might be considered to refer to 
a pardon without repentance; but we remark 
that these words are not found in the oldest 
Greek MSS.— the Sinaitic and Vatican. 

A passage frequently misunderstood is: 

"If thou comest to the altar, and there rememberest 
that thy brother hath aught against 
thee, leave there thy gift and first go and be 
reconciled to [or make amends to] thy brother, 
and then come and offer thy gifts." — 
Matt. 5:23,24. 

It should be noted that the one addressed is 
not the brother trespassed against, but the trespassing 
brother. He must leave the offering of 
his gift or prayer, until he has made amends 
to his brother for the wrong he is conscious 
of having done him, in word or deed. Not until 
then will his offering be acceptable to God. 



page 269 

STUDIES IN THE NEW TESTAMENT. 

--INTERNATIONAL S.S. LESSONS.- 

SUGGESTIVE THOUGHTS DESIGNED TO ASSIST THOSE OF OUR 
READERS WHO ATTEND BIBLE CLASSES WHERE THESE 
LESSONS ARE USED; THAT THEY MAY BE ENABLED TO 
LEAD OTHERS INTO THE FULNESS OF THE GOSPEL. 



R1694: page 269 

THE FIRST DISCIPLES OF JESUS. 



III. QUAR., LESSON VIII., AUG. 19, JOHN 1:35-49. 

Golden Text— "We have found the Messias, which is, 
being interpreted, the Christ."— John 1:41. 

These were among the first disciples* of 
the Lord, and, being attentive hearers and 
believers on him, they received a special 
call to follow him, both as learners and assistants 
in his ministry. And having obeyed 
this call they were afterward formally ordained 



as apostles and in due time endued 

with favor from on high and with authority 

as apostles of the gospel dispensation. 

In addition to the review of the above 
subject, which we trust all will notice, it is 
also interesting to note several other features 
in the narrative before us. 

(1) Observe the humility and self-abnegation 
of John in pointing out his cousin 
according to the flesh as "The Lamb of 
God that taketh away the sin of the world," 
—the long-looked-for Messiah, whose rising 
popularity must soon eclipse his own. 
John had no ambition to be greatest, but 
esteemed it a privilege and honor to be 
simply— "a voice crying in the wilderness, 
Make straight in the desert a highway for 
our God." And when some of John's disciples 
came to him, evidently expecting to 
find in him some of the spirit of rivalry, 
saying, "Rabbi, he that was with thee beyond 
Jordan, to whom thou barest witness, 
behold the same baptizeth, and all men 
come to him, John answered and said, A 



*For a full treatment of the subject of this lesson see 
our issue of May 1, 93— "The Twelve Apostles, Their 
Calling, Office and Authority." 

R1694: page 270 

man can receive nothing except it be given 
him from heaven. Ye yourselves bear me 
witness, that I said, I am not the Christ, 
but that I am sent before him. He that 
hath the bride is the bridegroom, but the 
friend of the bridegroom which standeth 
and heareth him rejoiceth greatly, because 
of the bridegroom's voice: this my joy therefore 
is fulfilled. He [as the light] must increase, 
but I must decrease."— John 3:26-36. 

And when a deputation of priests and 
Levites came from Jerusalem to ask him— 
"Who art thou? he confessed, ...I am 
not the Christ. And they asked him, What 
then? Art thou Elias? And he saith, I am 
not. Art thou that prophet? And he answered, 
No. Then said they, Who art thou? 
that we may give an answer to them that 
sent us. What sayest thou of thyself?"— 
what a temptation there was here to claim 
to be some great one and to exalt himself 
in the estimation of his fellow-men. But 
there was no sign in him of self-exaltation. 



He said, "I am the voice of one crying in 
the wilderness, Make straight the way of 
the Lord, as said the Prophet Esaias.... 
I baptize with water, but there standeth 
one among you whom you know not; he it 
is who, coming after me, is preferred before 
me, whose shoe's latchet I am not worthy 
to unloose." 

R1695 : page 270 

How beautifully this grace of humility and 
self-abnegation shines in the characters of 
those ancient worthies whom the Lord was 
preparing for the earthly phase of his Kingdom. 
And verily, said Jesus, "among them 
that are born of women there hath not risen 
a greater than John the Baptist." (Matt. 11:11.) 
Well have the apostles Paul and 
James directed those who are called to share 
in the spiritual phase of the Kingdom to 
the patient, humble faithfulness of the ancient 
worthies (Jas. 5:10; Heb. 11), as examples 
for our imitation. 

VERSES 29-37 show how deliberately John 
turned his disciples over to Jesus. Previous 
to his baptism John knew Jesus only as his 
cousin. The spirit of God had directed him 
to baptize with water and to proclaim the 
coming Messiah; but he testifies that he 
knew not who it would be until he saw the 
promised sign fulfilled in the descent of the 
holy spirit upon his humble cousin, Jesus. 

To a proud or ambitious mind familiar 
acquaintance or relationship is generally 
more conducive to a spirit of rivalry; but 
it was not so with John. He was ready at 
once to exclaim in the presence of his disciples, 
"Behold the Lamb of God!" 

(2) Next we note the manner in which 
the several disciples here named recognized 
Jesus as the Messiah. John had specially 
drawn attention to the prophecies concerning 
him, and by his correspondencies with 
those prophesies they recognized him, saying, 
"We have found him of whom Moses 
in the law, and the prophets, did write, 
Jesus of Nazareth, the son of Joseph." They, 
in common with others, supposed him to be 
the son of Joseph, the mystery of his incarnation 
evidently not being generally 
known at that time. 

The law and the prophets and his works 
were God's witnesses of Christ at his first 
advent; and to the same testimony we are 
referred for the evidences of his second advent.* 



In addition to the testimony of the 
law and the prophets these early disciples 
were invited to "Come and see" for themselves, 
that the power and wisdom of Jehovah 
rested upon his Anointed. And they 
came and saw, not only that the spirit of 
holiness and grace was in him, but also that 
the power of discerning of spirits (of reading 
the thoughts and intents of the hearts) 
and of working miracles was granted to 
him. (Verses 47,48.) Thus God ratified the 
testimony of his holy prophets, and fully 
convinced those who were Israelites indeed 
and in whom was no guile. Later the same 
gifts— of miracles, discerning of spirits, healings, 
prophecy, etc., were granted to the 
Apostles, and for the same purpose.— Heb. 2:3,4; 
1 Cor. 12:1,4,8-11. 

R1695: page 270 

OUR LORD'S FIRST MIRACLE. 



III. QUAR., LESSON IX., AUG. 26, JOHN 2:1-11. 

Golden Text— "This beginning of miracles did Jesus 
in Cana of Galilee, and manifested forth his glory." 

The golden text of this lesson suggests its 
import: this beginning of Christ's miracles 
manifested forth or typified the glory of his 
coming Kingdom and power. The circumstance 
of our Lord providing wine for a 
festive occasion, and that, too, by the performance 
of a miracle, as if to emphasize 
the propriety of its use on such occasions, 
is quite a difficulty in the way of advocates 
of total abstinence, and quite an argument 
in the mouths of those who favor the use 
of wine as a beverage. But both the difficulty 
and the argument disappear before a 



*See M. DAWN, VOL. II., Chaps. 3,4. 

R1695: page 272 

clear conception of the object of the miracle. 

Calling to mind Matt. 26:29-that our 
Lord would no more drink of the fruit of 
the vine with his disciples until he should 
drink it new with them in the Kingdom; 
and also the prophecy of Isaiah 25:6, "In 



this mountain [the kingdom of God] shall 
the Lord of hosts make unto all people a 
feast of fat things, ...of wines on the lees 
well refined"— we recognize in the exhilarating 
wine an apt symbol of joy and gladness. 
To partake of the cup of the Lord in 
the present time signifies to share in his 
sufferings, humiliation and death; but to 
partake of his cup in the coming age will 
mean to share in his glory and joy. That 
will be the new wine in the Kingdom. 

The first miracle was given to symbolize 
this ultimate object of the work upon which 
he was then entering, which was to glorify 
his Church and then to spread a feast of 
fat things (of rich blessings) and of wine 
(of joy) before all people. How appropriate 
that such a foreshadowing of future glory 
should be the first of his wonderful works. 

In observing the typical features of the 
miracle we notice, (1) That its performance 
was on the occasion of a wedding, following 
the wedding ceremony. So the joy and 
blessings of Christ's Kingdom, both to the 
Church, his bride, and also to the world, 
will follow the marriage of the Lamb and 
his espoused virgin Church. 

(2) Next we notice that this typical 
marriage was on "the third day" (verse 1), 
reminding us very forcibly of our Lord's 
statement to some of the Pharisees (Luke 13:32): 
"Go ye and tell that fox [Herod], 

Behold I cast out devils and I do cures to-day 

and to-morrow, and the third day I 

shall be perfected; "and again (John 2:19,21,) 

"Destroy this temple ["the temple of his 

body"— the Church], and in three days I 

will raise it up." The three days here referred 

to were days of a thousand years 

each— the fifth, sixth and seventh thousand-year-days 

from creation. Jesus then lived 

in the fifth; and now, in the dawning of the 

seventh, his body will be "perfected" and 

"raised up" to kingdom power and glory. 

The marriage of the Lamb will be in the third 

day of her existence as the body of Christ, 

and in the seventh of the world's history. 

(3) We notice that the miracle consisted 
in the turning of the water in the vessels 
for purification into the desirable beverage, 
the "good wine." Water is a symbol of 
truth (Eph. 5:26), the use of which is for 
refreshing and cleansing the Lord's people; 
and it is through this very cleansing agency 
that the Church is to be glorified and the 
world blessed. Divine truth, having by its 



blessed inspiration to godliness and holiness, 
accomplished its cleansing purifying work, 
will be gloriously realized in the blessings 
and joys of the Kingdom. 

(4) The Lord's reply to Mary, who informed 
him of the lack of wine, is also significant. 
"Jesus said to her, What [is that] 
to me and to thee, O woman? Mine hour 
has not yet come." (Verse 4— Diaglott.) The 
"woman," the Church, need not yet inquire 
for the new wine of joy. The hour 
for exaltation and glory has not yet come, 
and as yet we have to do only with the 
dregs of the cup of humiliation and sacrifice. 
And if we partake of this cup now we will 
surely drink the new wine with him in the 
Kingdom. Let us take the advice of Mary— 
"Whatsoever he saith unto you, do it," and 
in due time faithful obedience to all his directions 
will be amply rewarded by the 
privilege of participating with him in the 
joys of the Kingdom, the "new wine." And 
following that will come for all people the 
feast of fat things and of wines on the lees. 

By the early disciples this typical significance 
could not have been discerned; but 
they did see in the power that could work 
such a miracle the evidence of his claim to 
be the Son of God, while to us in the light 
of the dawning Millennial day the finer lines 
of type and prophecy are due to be understood 
and are clearly manifest. 

The occurrence has no more bearing on 
the temperance question than had the taking 
of a colt to fulfill the prophecy of Zech. 9:9 
(Matt. 21:1-5) a bearing on the question of 
the rights of private property. All things 
belong to God and have their legitimate 
and illegitimate uses. Under the rule which 
Paul gives (1 Cor. 8:13), the disuse of 
wine as a beverage is certainly commendable 
under present conditions, while its limited 
use for medicinal purposes is warranted 
by 1 Tim. 5:23. 

R1695: page 271 

JESUS CLEANSING THE TEMPLE. 



III. QUAR., LESSON X., SEPT. 2, JOHN 2:13-25. 

Golden Text— "Make not my Father's house a house 
of merchandise. "--John 2:16. 



The several accounts of this action of our 
Lord by the other evangelists place the occurrence 

R1695 : page 272 

unmistakably near the close of his 
ministry, while John here mentions it in 
connection with events at the beginning of 
his public work. It would appear, however, 
that the one event was referred to by 
them all, the last verse of John's account, 
like the others, showing the hostile attitude 
of numerous opponents who sought his life, 
which disposition did not make its appearance 
in the very beginning of his ministry. 

This authoritative action of Jesus had a 
peculiar fitness as a type near the close of 
his ministry. It immediately followed his 
triumphant entry into Jerusalem in fulfilment 
of the prophecy— "Behold thy king 
cometh unto thee, etc." (Zech. 9:9); and 
this course in the temple was an assumption 
of authority consequent upon this rightful 
claim to be the king of Israel— a claim, however, 
which was rejected by the Jews. "He 

R1696: page 272 

came unto his own [people], and his own received 
him not." (John 1:11.) Then, seeing 
they put away the favor of God from them 
and proved themselves unworthy of it, he 
turned to the Gentiles to take out of them 
a people for his name, which selection has 
required the eighteen centuries of the Gospel 
age; and that fleshly house of Israel and 
this spiritual house, the Gospel Church, 
stand related to each other as type and antitype; 
both as to circumstances and time. As 
an event shortly preceding his crucifixion, 
this cleansing of the temple finds its antitype 
in a similar work here, beginning at the 
corresponding date- 1878 (See M. DAWN, 
VOL. II., page 239); viz., the casting out (from 
the spiritual temple— his body, the consecrated 
Church) of such as are unworthy to be 
of that body, while the worthy ones, the pure 
in heart, are being correspondingly blessed. 

The scourge of small cords was a fit emblem 
of the harmonious doctrines of Christ, 
which are accomplishing the cleansing 
work here. 

When asked for a sign of the authority 
by which he did these things, Jesus pointed 
forward to his future power— after his 
death and resurrection. (Verses 18-21.) He 



had no authority to begin the actual work 
then; that which he did being only typical, 
and for our profiting, not theirs. 

VERSES 23-25 (Diaglott). Though the 
people at this time seemed greatly impressed 
by his miracles, and, shouting Hosanna! before 
him, seemed ready to accept him as the 
Messiah and to proclaim him king at once 
(See also Matt. 21:9-1 1), Jesus did not trust 
them; for he knew the fickleness of their 
hearts, and having the gift also of discerning 
of spirits, he needed not that any man 
should testify of them, for he knew what 
was in them.— Luke 20:41-47. 

The Golden Text— "Make not my Father's 
house a house of merchandise"— should 
have the most careful consideration of all 
those who profess to be of his consecrated 
house,— the true temple. In this time of 
cleansing, sifting and purifying of the temple 
of God, none will be permitted to remain 
in it whose purpose is in any way to 
make merchandise of God's holy things. 

R1696: page 272 

JESUS AND NICODEMUS. 



III. QUAR., LESSON XL, SEPT. 9, JOHN 3:1-16. 

Golden Text— "God so loved the world that he gave 
his only begotten Son, that whosoever believeth in him 
should not perish, but have everlasting life."— John 3:16. 

For a consideration of this interview between 
the Lord and Nicodemus, see M. 
DAWN, VOL. I., Chap. xiv. In connection 
with Verse 13 see Acts 2:34 and 2 Tim. 4:8. 

VERSES 14-15. The reference here is to 
the circumstance recorded in Num. 21:4-9, 
when the bite of a fiery serpent was cured 
by a look at the brazen serpent which 
Moses raised up. The fiery serpents here 
represented Sin, from whose deadly bite all 
humanity is suffering. But Christ, who knew 
no sin, was made a sin-offering on our behalf, 
that we might be made the righteousness 
of God in him. (2 Cor. 5:21 -Diaglott.) 
He is the antitype of the brazen serpent. 
The lifting up of the serpent in the wilderness 
prefigured the lifting up of Christ on 
the cross of Calvary; and the look of faith 
to him and the merit of his sacrifice for salvation 
is the never- failing cure for sin, as it 



is also the only hope of our fallen race. 

VERSE 16 suggests the cost of the world's 
salvation to our Heavenly Father. His only 
begotten Son was the delight and treasure 
of his heart; and all the painful process of 
his humiliation and sacrifice even unto an 
ignominious and cruel death were at the 
expense of the fondest affection of him who 
loves as never man loved. With the assurance 
of this example of divine love for our 
race, the Apostle Paul (Rom. 8:31-39) would 
further encourage our faith, saying, "He 
that spared not his own Son, but delivered 
him up for us all, how shall he not with him 
also freely give us all things? If God be for 
us, who can be against us?" 



page 274 

ZION'S WATCH TOWER 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED TWICE A MONTH. 



TOWER PUBLISHING COMPANY, 

"BIBLE HOUSE" 

ARCH STREET, ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

C. T. RUSSELL, EDITOR; MRS. C. T. RUSSELL, ASSOCIATE. 



SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 
By Express Order, Postal Money Order, Bank Draft, or 
Registered Letter. Foreign only by Foreign Money Order. 

FREE TO THE LORD'S POOR. 

N.B.— Those of the interested, who by reason of old 
age or accidents, or other adversity, are unable to pay, 
will be supplied FREE, if they will send a Postal Card each 
December, stating their case and requesting the paper. 



THE "DO YOU KNOW?" TRACT. 



The demand for this tract is phenomenal. 
Nearly a quarter of a million have already gone 
out; and the orders are still coming in at the 
rate about 2000 per day. Some good results are 
manifest, too: quite a number have been interested 
by this means. Let the good work go on. 
Let the light shine everywhere. And let all that 
you do in this and every direction be done in love 
—love for God, for his people and for his Word. 

All whose names are on the TOWER list are 
recognized as members also of the Tract Society, 
and may order free as many tracts as they 
can properly use as samples for free distribution. 
Each should also be an agent or solicitor 
for the WATCH TOWER. A TOWER subscription 
includes a subscription to these Old Theology 
Quarterly Tracts, with the privilege of ordering 
additional tracts. These tracts are published 



out of the voluntary donations to the Tract 
Fund, "Good Hopes," etc. 

Brother Otto Koetitz, now a valued helper in 
the TOWER office, has translated this tract into 
German, and it will soon be published in that 
language. 

R1682: page 274 

ROMANISM IN NEW YORK. 



The American Journal of Politics, referring 
to the way in which the Church of Rome is 
obtaining complete sway in American politics 
says: "In New York the following are Roman 
Catholics: The mayor, the sheriff, the comptroller, 
the counsel to the corporation, the whole 
Board of Assessment, the commissioner of public 
works, the superintendent of the street 
cleaning department, the clerk to the board of 
aldermen, the majority of that board, every 
member of the Board of Tax Commissioners, 
several justices of the Supreme, Superior, and 
Common Pleas Courts, the controllers of the 
Board of Estimate and Apportionment, the majority 
in many of the ward boards of trustees, 
a large portion of the Board of Education, the 
controllers of the Department of Charities and 
Corrections, the majority of the police force, 
the controllers of the fire department, of the 
Board of Street Openings, the whole of the 
Armoury Board, the registrar of deeds, the commissioner 
of jurors, one-half of the commissioners 
of accounts, the supervisor of the city 
records, the collector of the port, the sub-treasurer, 
a majority of the commissioners of the 
Sinking Fund, and, finally, the majority of the 
delegates to Congress, and in the State Senate, 
and Assembly."— Evangelical Churchman. 



R1696: page 275 
