More Emphasis on the Bible!
 1. Originally, for whom was The Watchtower primarily published, and for whom The Golden Age?
1 On October 1, 1919, the first issue of the magazine The Golden Age was published. It proved to be a most valuable tool in the preaching work. Why? Because it was specially designed for the public. That was not the case with The Watchtower, which for many years was viewed as a magazine largely for the “little flock.” (Luke 12:32) Kingdom publishers responded with such enthusiasm to the new publication that for many years the circulation of The Golden Age was far in excess of that of The Watchtower.
 2. What is the name of The Golden Age today, and what has been its purpose from the beginning?
2 The magazine The Golden Age was published to show people that the real solution to mankind’s problems is Christ’s Millennial Reign, which will truly usher in a golden age for humankind. In succeeding decades a number of adjustments were made to The Golden Age to meet the changing needs of the times. In 1937 its name was changed to Consolation. In 1946 it became Awake!, the name we know it by today.
 3. Awake! has been a powerful tool in the fulfillment of what prophecy?
3 From its beginning, this magazine has contributed mightily to the great witness that has been given since 1919. (Matt. 24:14) However, in view of the urgency of our times, it seems wise to make further adjustments to Awake!
 4. (a) What does a person need to do if he is to be concealed in “the day of Jehovah’s anger”? (b) According to Revelation 14:6, 7, what does the “angel flying in midheaven” call on all to do?
4 Millions of people enjoy reading Awake! because it covers a wide variety of secular topics in an appealing way. No doubt the majority of those who attend the Memorial each year are regular readers of Awake! Still, if anyone hopes to be concealed in “the day of Jehovah’s anger,” he will need help to do more than be a regular reader of our publications.​—Zeph. 2:3; Rev. 14:6, 7.
 5. (a) Starting with the Awake! of January 2006, what will be featured more prominently? (b) What may many be moved to do, and in fulfillment of what prophecy?
5 Hence, from January 2006, Awake! will place greater emphasis on God’s Kingdom. It will encourage readers more straightforwardly to look to the Bible for the solutions to their problems and will highlight more prominently the Bible’s explanation of current events. In this way, readers will get a better understanding of current events and perhaps be moved by what they read to learn more about Jehovah.​—Zech. 8:23.
6, 7. (a) How will Awake! seek to help many to apply 1 Thessalonians 2:13? (b) How frequently will Awake! be published, and how many languages will be affected by the change?
6 Awake! will continue to feature topics of general interest. However, more emphasis will be laid on the Bible. (1 Thess. 2:13) Since The Watchtower contains deep Biblical information and Awake! will feature more material that is Scriptural in nature, it does not seem necessary to continue publishing Awake! twice a month. Therefore, beginning with its January 2006 issue, Awake! will be published as a monthly magazine. This will result in considerable simplification in the preparation, translation, and shipping of our literature.
7 This change will affect about 40 percent of the languages in which Awake! is published. In most languages, Awake! is already a monthly or a quarterly publication. There will be no change in the publication of The Watchtower.
 8. How may publishers use Awake! along with The Watchtower?
8 Publishers may offer each month’s Awake! with either issue of The Watchtower for that month. Those who feature Awake! will be able to use the same issue all through the month without having to change their presentation in the middle of the month, as at present.
 9. What role will Awake! continue to play?
9 Since its first issue back in 1919, the magazine successively known as The Golden Age, Consolation, and now Awake! has played a major role in the preaching work. We pray that Jehovah will continue to bless the distribution of the magazine in its revised format and that it will help many more people out of “all nations and tribes and peoples and tongues” to turn to God’s Kingdom as their only hope.​—Rev. 7:9.

