Part 7​—Conducting Progressive Bible Studies
Offering Prayer at the Study
 1. (a) Why is it proper to open and close a Bible study with prayer? (b) How can we introduce prayer at a Bible study?
1 In order for Bible students to make spiritual progress, Jehovah’s blessing is essential. (1 Cor. 3:6) Therefore, it is proper to open and close an established study with prayer. We can often do this from the very first study with people who are religiously inclined. With others, we may need to discern the appropriate time to introduce prayer. You might use Psalm 25:4, 5 and 1 John 5:14 to help the student see why prayer should be offered and also use John 15:16 to explain the importance of praying to Jehovah through Jesus Christ.
 2. If a sister is accompanied on a Bible study by a baptized brother or by an unbaptized male publisher, who would offer prayer?
2 Who should offer prayer at a Bible study? If a baptized brother accompanies a sister on a study, he would offer prayer, although the sister might conduct the study while wearing a head covering. (1 Cor. 11:5, 10) On the other hand, if an unbaptized male Kingdom publisher accompanies a sister on a study, she would offer prayer. In such a situation, she should wear a head covering when praying as well as when conducting.
 3. What are appropriate matters to include in the prayers offered at a Bible study?
3 What the Prayer May Include: Prayers at a Bible study need not be lengthy, but they should be specific. Besides seeking God’s blessing on the study and giving thanks for the truths learned, it is fitting to give praise to Jehovah as the Source of instruction. (Isa. 54:13) We can also include expressions that reflect our sincere interest in the student and our appreciation for the organization that Jehovah is using. (1 Thess. 1:2, 3; 2:7, 8) Our asking for Jehovah’s blessing on the student’s efforts to apply what he is learning can help him to see the importance of being a ‘doer of the word.’​—Jas. 1:22.
 4. Opening and closing a Bible study with prayer brings what benefits?
4 Many are the benefits of prayer. It brings God’s blessing. (Luke 11:13) It emphasizes the seriousness of studying God’s Word. As the student listens to our prayers, he is learning how to pray. (Luke 6:40) Moreover, prayers that spring from a heart filled with love for God and gratitude for his matchless qualities can help the student to develop a personal relationship with Jehovah.

