Service Meeting Schedule
Week Starting March 14
Song 132
10 min: Local announcements. Selected Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry. Encourage everyone to watch the video David​—He Trusted in God in preparation for the Service Meeting the week of April 4. Use the suggestions on page 4 (if appropriate for your territory) to demonstrate how to present the March 15 Watchtower and the March 22 Awake! Other realistic presentations may be used. In one of the presentations, demonstrate making a return visit on a magazine-route call. When concluding the presentation, use the back cover of the March 15 Watchtower to remind the householder of the upcoming Memorial observance.
20 min: “More Emphasis on the Bible!”a
15 min: A Provision to Strengthen Us. Following an introduction of less than a minute, conduct an audience discussion of the 2005 Yearbook. Meditating on Jehovah’s marvelous activity in modern times draws us close to him and to our brothers worldwide. (Ps. 77:12-14) It fortifies us to take our stand against the Devil, “solid in the faith.” (1 Pet. 5:8, 9) It helps new ones develop appreciation for Jehovah’s organization. Invite audience to relate points they appreciate from their reading of the 2005 Yearbook. Arrange in advance for one or two to comment on how they schedule their personal reading of the Yearbook.
Song 137 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting March 21
Song 140
10 min: Local announcements.
15 min: “Conducting Progressive Bible Studies​—Part 7.”b When preparing this part, consult the July 15, 2002, Watchtower, page 27, paragraphs 5-6.
20 min: What Is Armageddon? Following an introduction of less than a minute, conduct a question-and-answer discussion based on pages 44-9 of the Reasoning book. Invite the audience to comment on the questions in bold type, using the quoted and cited scriptures. Discuss how we can use this information in the field ministry.
Song 109 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting March 28
Song 144
10 min: Local announcements. Read accounts report and donation acknowledgments. Remind all to watch the video David​—He Trusted in God in preparation for next week’s Service Meeting. Encourage all to invite interested ones to attend the special public talk on April 10. Mention the literature offer for April and May.
15 min: Local needs.
20 min: Feature The Watchtower and Awake! Review the suggestions for increasing magazine placements in the February 2005 Our Kingdom Ministry, page 8. Discuss talking points in the current issues of the magazines. Using the suggestions on page 4 (if appropriate for your territory), demonstrate how to present the April 1 Watchtower and the April 8 Awake! Other realistic presentations may be used. In each of the presentations, explain how our worldwide work is financed.​—See The Watchtower, p. 2, or Awake! p. 5.
Song 116 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting April 4
Song 119
 5 min: Local announcements.
15 min: Have Love Among Yourselves. (John 13:35) Talk by an elder based on the February 1, 2003, Watchtower, pages 15-18, paragraphs 10-21. As mentioned in the literature offer for April and May, we are encouraged to try to start Bible studies with those who have already studied the Knowledge book and the Require brochure. Highlight how publishers can work in cooperation with the elders in assisting those who are weak.
25 min: “A Video With a Timeless Message.” Read Psalm 91:2 and 31:14, making a very brief comment on each. Then get right into an audience discussion of the quiz for the David video, using all the questions listed in the second paragraph as well as the question posed in the third paragraph. Afterward, ask families to relate how they have benefited from participating in the suggested “Learning Activities” on the DVD. Conclude by reading Psalm 56:11.
Song 36 and concluding prayer.
[Footnotes]
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.

