Do You Find Joy in “the Privilege of Kindly Giving”?
EARLY Christians in Philippi were known for their generous support of true worship. In his inspired letter to them, the apostle Paul wrote: “I thank my God always upon every remembrance of you in every supplication of mine for all of you, as I offer my supplication with joy, because of the contribution you have made to the good news from the first day until this moment.” (Phil. 1:3-5) Paul well remembered when Lydia and her household were baptized and she hospitably insisted that he and his preaching companions stay in her house.—Acts 16:14, 15.
Not long thereafter, the newly formed congregation in Philippi twice sent provisions to Paul during his stay of several weeks with fellow believers in Thessalonica, nearly 100 miles (160 km) away. (Phil. 4:15, 16) A few years later, while the Philippians and other Macedonian brothers were experiencing affliction and “deep poverty,” they heard about the need of persecuted Christians in Jerusalem and wanted to help them. Paul testified that this was really “beyond their actual ability.” Yet, he wrote: “They . . . kept begging us with much entreaty for the privilege of kindly giving.”—2 Cor. 8:1-4; Rom. 15:26.
Some ten years after the Philippians first embraced Christianity, they were still displaying the same generous spirit. Having heard that Paul was imprisoned in Rome, they sent Epaphroditus 800 miles (1,287 km) over land and sea carrying supplies to the apostle. Clearly, the Philippians wanted to provide for Paul so that he could keep on strengthening the brothers and preaching, even while he was imprisoned.—Phil. 1:12-14; 2:25-30; 4:18.
Today, true Christians consider it a privilege to support the Kingdom-preaching and disciple-making work. (Matt. 28:19, 20) They promote Kingdom interests by contributing time, effort, and funds. The accompanying box presents some ways in which you can share in supporting this God-given activity.
[Box on pages 22, 23]
WAYS IN WHICH SOME CHOOSE TO GIVE
CONTRIBUTIONS TO THE WORLDWIDE WORK
  Many set aside, or budget, an amount that they place in the contribution boxes labeled “Worldwide Work.”
  Each month, congregations forward these amounts to the office of Jehovah’s Witnesses that serves their respective countries. Voluntary donations of money may also be sent directly to Watchtower Bible and Tract Society of New York, Inc., Attention Treasurer’s Office, 25 Columbia Heights, Brooklyn, New York 11201-2483, or to the branch office of Jehovah’s Witnesses that serves your country. (Voluntary donations specified in the sections below can also be sent to the branch office of Jehovah’s Witnesses that serves your country.) Checks sent to the above address should be made payable to “Watchtower.” Jewelry or other valuables may be donated as well. A brief letter stating that such items are an outright gift should accompany these contributions.
CONDITIONAL-DONATION TRUST ARRANGEMENT
  Money may be placed in trust with Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society of Pennsylvania for use worldwide. However, upon request the funds will be returned. For more information, please contact the Treasurer’s Office by writing to the address noted above or by telephoning (718) 560-7500.
CHARITABLE PLANNING
  In addition to outright gifts of money, there are other methods of giving to benefit Kingdom service worldwide. These include:
Insurance: Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society of Pennsylvania may be named as the beneficiary of a life insurance policy or a retirement/pension plan.
Bank Accounts: Bank accounts, certificates of deposit, or individual retirement accounts may be placed in trust for or made payable on death to Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society of Pennsylvania, in accord with local bank requirements.
Stocks and Bonds: Stocks and bonds may be donated to Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society of Pennsylvania as an outright gift or Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society of Pennsylvania may be named as a Transfer on Death beneficiary.
Real Estate: Salable real estate may be donated either by making an outright gift or, in the case of residential property, by reserving a life estate to the donor, who can continue to live therein during his or her lifetime. Contact the branch office in your country before deeding any real estate.
Gift Annuity: A gift annuity is an arrangement whereby one transfers money or securities to a designated corporation that is used by Jehovah’s Witnesses. In exchange, the donor, or someone designated by the donor, receives a specified annuity payment every year for life. The donor receives an income-tax deduction for the year in which the gift annuity is established.
Wills and Trusts: Property or money may be bequeathed to Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society of Pennsylvania by means of a legally executed will, or Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society of Pennsylvania may be named as beneficiary of a trust agreement. A trust benefiting a religious organization may provide certain tax advantages.
  As the term “charitable planning” implies, these types of donations typically require some planning on the part of the donor. To assist individuals desiring to benefit the worldwide work of Jehovah’s Witnesses through some form of charitable planning, a brochure has been prepared in English and Spanish entitled Charitable Planning to Benefit Kingdom Service Worldwide. The brochure was written to provide information on a variety of ways that gifts may be made either now or through a bequest at death. After reading the brochure and conferring with their own legal or tax advisers, many have been able to help support our religious and humanitarian activities worldwide and maximize their tax benefits while doing so. This brochure may be obtained by requesting a copy directly from the Charitable Planning Office.
  For more information, you may contact the Charitable Planning Office, either in writing or by telephone, at the address listed below, or you may contact the branch office that serves your country.
Charitable Planning Office
Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society of Pennsylvania
100 Watchtower Drive
Patterson, New York 12563-9204
Telephone: (845) 306-0707

