Announcements
● Literature offer for August: Three books for 70c. Should include two 384- or 416-page books and one pocket-size book. The following older books may be used in this offer: “Your Will Be Done on Earth” (other than latest printing; see below); Life Everlasting​—in Freedom of the Sons of God; “Then Is Finished the Mystery of God”; “The Nations Shall Know that I Am Jehovah”​—How?; Paradise Restored to Mankind​—By Theocracy!; God’s Kingdom of a Thousand Years Has Approached; Man’s Salvation out of World Distress at Hand!; Did Man Get Here by Evolution or by Creation?; God’s “Eternal Purpose” Now Triumphing for Man’s Good and Is the Bible Really the Word of God? The Society has a supply of the Man’s Salvation, Know Jehovah and “Eternal Purpose” books that can be ordered. Alternative offer, any pocket-size book for 35c. Offer for September: Youth book for 35c; Great Teacher book or other pocket-size book may be offered where circumstances make it more appropriate.
● The 384- and 416-page books mentioned above may be obtained by publishers for use in the special offer in August for 15c each. Congregations may request 30c credit for each of these books. (Pioneers may obtain them at the regular rate.) For details, see Announcements in January 1978 Our Kingdom Service.
● Additional copies of the October 8 Awake! and the October 15 Watchtower, which will be special issues, should be ordered early to insure delivery. It is suggested that they be ordered by the end of August.
● A year’s supply of forms for use by the congregation will be sent to the congregation’s secretary early in August, including a sheet of instructions on properly using and ordering these in the future. Pioneer report cards should not be ordered as they will be sent to the secretary according to the number of pioneers.
Literature Inventory forms will be included with the July statement. The secretary can alert those handling literature, magazines and accounts as to what will be required by the end of August so that the report can be completed and the original mailed to the Society no later than September 6.
● Two slips (S-10) for reporting the congregation’s activity for the past service year were mailed in July and should be completed by the secretary. The original should be returned to the Society with the September monthly report, and the duplicate copy retained for the congregation’s files.
● Old monthly report cards for congregations and pioneers should be used up before beginning to use the revised ones. At the bottom, the words “presiding overseer” can be changed to “secretary,” since the latter will now be signing the card.
● The Society now has a supply of the question booklet for the book Is the Bible Really the Word of God? available in Grade-2 English Braille. A free copy may be obtained by submitting a written request to the Society, Attention: Braille Desk. This booklet is not to be stocked by the congregation.
● The Society has produced a limited reprinting of the book “Your Will Be Done on Earth” on a better grade of paper. This edition of the book should not be used in any offers at the reduced rate for older books.
● Beginning September 3, all circuit overseers will be presenting a slide program entitled “A Close Look at the Churches.” District overseers will be giving the talk “Meeting the Test of Christian Loyalty.”
● New Publications Available:
Holy Bible​—Tagalog (Prices: Pioneer, $1.50; Congregation, $2.40; Public, $2.50.)
New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures (Large print edition)​—Portuguese
Listening to the Great Teacher​—Hungarian
Bible Topics for Discussion​—German, Spanish
Is There a God Who Cares?​—Norwegian, Polish

