Presenting the Good News​—With the Youth Book in September
1 The Bible indicates that the “last days” would have an adverse effect on the family unit. (2 Tim. 3:1-4; Rev. 12:12) Even theocratic families often find it a real challenge to bring up children in the faith, isn’t that so? We can be sure that many families in the world are floundering and in need of help. No doubt thousands will appreciate the help extended to them during September as we offer the book Your Youth​—Getting the Best out of It.
2 Often young people answer the door when we call. Many in their teens appreciate it when we engage them in a conversation. And when we treat them with respect, not “talking down” to them, they often respond favorably. You might say: “I am glad to have the opportunity to speak to you because I would like to get the viewpoint of a younger person. God said something in the Bible that is especially directed to young people like yourself. [Read Ecclesiastes 12:1.] It shows that we must remember God in our youth if we want a happy future. Do you feel that a young person should be interested in God, our Creator? Does this have anything to do with our being happy? [Allow for response.] Let me show you a comment made in this book.” Turn to page 191, paragraph 15 and read the first two sentences. Then turn back to the table of contents and point out a few of the subjects on which young ones want frank comments and help. Offer Youth book for 35c. This suggested presentation may work for you, or you may have another that you prefer to use.
3 Some publishers have had good success by offering the Youth book to young folks as they go to and from school. It could be done much the same as magazine street work by displaying the book and speaking to passersby. Also, teachers and administrative personnel at schools can be approached. Of course, children in school have many opportunities to witness to fellow students and teachers. For example, a young witness at school in the Dominican Republic left a copy of the Youth book on his desk, which excited the interest of students and teachers as they would see it. The result? He placed 75 Youth books in two months.
4 What if grown-ups or even elderly persons come to the door? Most people have children, nieces, nephews or grandchildren who mean a great deal to them. In addition to suggesting that they may wish to read the book themselves, we could tactfully suggest that they obtain it as a gift for young relatives.
5 In addition, carry a Great Teacher book with you during September and offer it where small children are involved. There may be cases when you may wish to offer the Youth book and the Great Teacher book in combination for 70c, such as when there are very young children and those in their teens in the home. Our desire is to help people of all ages, and the literature is a means to this end. So during September you may feel free to use any pocket-size publication that you feel would be most beneficial to the householder. But, wherever possible, let us help young people and families to counteract the influence of Satan the Devil on family life. It has been proven that the information in the Youth book, when applied, can do just that. Let it help you to present the good news in September.

