A Blind Man Shows the Way
Disaster struck ten years ago, when I was in my early 20’s. Heavy drinking and other abuses to my health had simply taken their toll. I became totally blind. With so much of my life still ahead of me, I often wondered what I could possibly make of it.
Concerned over world events and the future for our daughter, my wife started to study the Bible with Jehovah’s Witnesses. Although I was skeptical at first, I eventually joined in the discussions. It did not take us long to recognize that what we were studying was the truth, and so in 1978 we were baptized.
The desire to share my newly found faith soon became overwhelming. With the help and encouragement of my wife, I learned Braille in seven months. It brought me great joy to be able to call from home to home with other Witnesses, proclaiming the good news of God’s Kingdom. (Matthew 24:14) But, what could I do to become more active in this vital work?
A Braille Bible is extremely bulky and heavy; using one in public preaching was quite impractical. The suggestion of putting a marker in the Bible and memorizing the text was good, but limiting. Then I had an idea! If I got some thin sheets of clear plastic I could type on them in Braille the gist of any text I wished to use. By sticking these sheets into my Bible I could point to the scriptures through the plastic at the same time as I read the texts with my fingertips. I experimented, and it worked well. My prayers to expand my Christian ministry had been answered!​—Colossians 4:3.
As my ability to handle the Bible grew, so did my confidence. Soon I was witnessing alone from house to house in some areas. For the past year, I have had the pleasure of serving as a pioneer (a full-time Kingdom proclaimer) and of conducting many home Bible discussions.
Blessed now with spiritual sight, how I rejoice in being able to help those who are still blind to the good news! (2 Corinthians 4:4-6) How happy I am, despite my handicap, to have such a full share in praising Jehovah!​—Contributed.

