Meetings to Help Us Make Disciples
WEEK STARTING MAY 3
Song 18
 5 min: Our Kingdom Service Announcements; local announcements.
15 min: “Planning Spiritual Activities.” Question-and-answer discussion. In connection with paragraph 2, include brief demonstration of calling back on someone who took single issues of the magazines to see if householder wants to subscribe. Discuss point of interest in issue left and offer subscription.
20 min: “Youths, Why Have Spiritual Plans?” Question-and-answer part to be handled by an elder. If possible, have school-age publishers answer questions and read scriptures. What should we remember about material possessions? (1 John 2:15, 16) What do we want to keep in mind about this world? (1 John 2:17) Since that is the case, why is it unwise to pursue riches and a position in the world in this system of things? (1 Tim. 6:9, 10) What work has Jehovah granted us a share in? (Matt. 24:14; 28:19, 20) What activity do young people do well to consider pursuing? (Matt. 6:33) Why is a lifetime of serving Jehovah the best goal to have? (Eccl. 12:1) What help would we have in pursuing such a course? (Matt. 11:29, 30) Even though you still may be in school, what can you do during the summer to show your whole-souled desire to serve Jehovah? What kind of a schedule could you work up to auxiliary pioneer during the school vacation? (May interview one or two who auxiliary pioneered in past vacation period and did well.) Conclude by encouraging the youths to think about how they would answer these questions: How do you feel about the congregation of Jehovah’s Witnesses? Is it the religion of your family and therefore it is your religion? Or is it the best religion you have seen? Or is it the truth? If you really believe it is the truth, you should be motivated to offer yourself for its activities and its way of life.—Ps. 110:3; Heb. 6:10.
 5 min: Consider some talking points from magazines that will be used this coming Saturday, such as “What’s This World Coming To?” in May 8 Awake! and “The Kingdom Government—Is It Real to You?” in the May 15 Watchtower. Demonstrate one brief presentation.
Song 13 and prayer.
WEEK STARTING MAY 10
Song 99
 5 min: Local announcements, including field service arrangements; accounts report.
18 min: “Congregation Meetings—Part VII.” Question-and-answer discussion. When considering paragraph 2, inform congregation of local meeting attendance averages. May use chalkboard, if desired.
12 min: “How I God the Truth.” Interview two publishers or a married couple, having them relate how they learned the truth, and so forth. Invite them to comment on how attending congregation meetings helped to strengthen them spiritually.
10 min: Elders can prepare locally to care for needs in congregation or consider experiences from audience related to their offering the Watchtower subscription.
Song 85 and prayer.
WEEK STARTING MAY 17
Song 58
 8 min: Local congregation announcements. Discuss “Service to Subscribers.”
15 min: “Cultivating Interest Through Return Visits.” Service overseer discusses material with audience. According to local circumstances, include appropriate suggestions similar to those in paragraph 5. Inform congregation how they are doing in making return visits and offer encouragement for more to share in this feature of service.
12 min: “Timothy—Paul’s New Helper.” Discussion of Story 110 of My Book of Bible Stories with two or three young children. Highlight the value of using younger years profitably in serving Jehovah. As time permits, you may read some portions directly from the Bible, making proper application.
10 min: Points to use in current magazines. Briefly ask audience what points they plan to use from current magazines in field service, and why. Demonstrate presentation of current magazines or the subscription offer.
Song 92 and prayer.
WEEK STARTING MAY 24
Song 10
 5 min: Local announcements, including field service arrangements. Ask audience to bring Happiness book for next week’s service meeting.
15 min: “Presenting the Good News—By Developing Magazine Routes.” Talk and demonstrations. Have qualified publisher demonstrate what can be said to establish a magazine route, incorporating presentation outlined in paragraph 3 when returning with latest issues. (Chairman may draw attention to suggestions in paragraph 2 in preparation for return call.) Invite congregation to relate experiences they have had with magazine routes, as time allows.
25 min: Insert on “1981 ‘Kingdom Loyalty’ District Conventions.” Question-and-answer consideration.
Song 64 and prayer.

