Part VII—Congregation Meetings: Getting People to Meetings
1 Following the outpouring of the holy spirit on Jesus’ disciples at Pentecost, 33 C.E., Christian congregations were formed in one locality after another. These were now the people upon whom God had put his spirit, and they regularly met together. (Acts 2:1; 13:1) Likewise, Jehovah’s people today appreciate the need of regularly attending congregation meetings. We want to encourage all members of the congregation, as well as interested persons living in our territory, to assemble regularly with us.
2 During the 1980 service year, the average attendance for the five weekly meetings was as follows: Public Meeting—124 percent; Watchtower Study—117 percent; Theocratic School—101 percent; Service Meeting—98 percent; and Congregation Book Study—101 percent. Is that not encouraging? How does your meeting attendance compare with these figures? What can be done to encourage even more sheeplike ones to assemble with us each week?—Heb. 10:24, 25.
HELPING INTERESTED PERSONS
3 We should regularly direct Bible students to the organization, as suggested in the February 1981 Our Kingdom Service. Weekly, we can progressively explain the operation and function of Jehovah’s organization, as well as the local congregation. Explain the purpose of the five weekly meetings, how they are conducted, textbooks used, and so forth. For additional suggestions, note Qualified to Be Ministers, pp. 215-218.
4 Make good use of the handbills that list the five meetings and provide the address of the Kingdom Hall. Traveling overseers have expressed concern that in many congregations these handbills are not being stocked or used by the friends. Does your congregation have a supply? If you do not have them on hand, the secretary may submit an order promptly. Do you carry handbills with you and, if possible, leave one in every home? Many experiences have been related in which individuals came in contact with the truth because of receiving a handbill.
5 Follow through in assisting interested persons who attended the Memorial in April to continue coming to the Kingdom Hall. When new ones come, we are pleased. But what can we do to help them appreciate the need of meeting regularly with us? If they are going to grow spiritually, they need regular association with Jehovah’s people. Think back to the first time you attended the Kingdom Hall and recall what it was that impressed you. What made you want to come again? Was it not the friendliness of those who greeted you when you entered? They took the initiative and got acquainted, making you feel at home. As you listened to their conversation, you may have realized that many had gone out of their way to bring others with them. They obviously were happy people who were interested in others and who loved one another. This made a lasting impression. Can we do more to greet new ones and make them feel welcome?
6 Do you provide transportation for others? Usually interested persons are more apt to attend meetings if we make definite arrangements each week to stop by their home and provide transportation. One sister who is now serving at Brooklyn Bethel with her husband related that, when she was in her early teenage years, others in the congregation would regularly come by her home and provide transportation to the meetings. By the friends extending themselves she was especially encouraged to attend the congregation book study weekly, as well as other meetings. As she now looks back, she is thankful that others took a personal interest in her, helping her to get to the Kingdom Hall. Could we personally do more to assist others in this regard?
HOW SERVANTS CAN ASSIST
7 Elders and ministerial servants can do much to stimulate interest in local meetings and help publishers and family groups to support the congregation. Periodically they should visit the friends in their homes to offer encouragement. (1 Pet. 5:2) Could better arrangements be made to assist the sick and infirm to get to meetings? What about others who are spiritually weak or who are without transportation?
8 Interest can often be stimulated by “whetting the appetite” of the congregation. To illustrate: Post a list of the coming public talks on the information board. In addition, the subject and name of the speaker can be mentioned when making local announcements on the service meeting. Congregation book study conductors can keep the publishers informed as to future meeting parts, material that requires special preparation, and so forth. Are you appointed servants doing everything possible in this regard?
9 All of us will want to have a full share in assisting others to get to meetings. This will result in more of our brothers being strengthened and encouraged.

