Planning Spiritual Activities
1 “Many are the plans in the heart of a man, but the counsel of Jehovah is what will stand.” (Prov. 19:21) People make many different plans. Our plans should always take Jehovah into consideration and be in harmony with his will and purposes. (Jas. 4:15) It is good for us to plan in such a way as to give evidence that we are orderly and are spiritually minded. And were we not all encouraged to ‘Imitate Our Loving God of Order’ at the “Divine Love” District Convention last summer?—1 Cor. 14:33.
2 We are now into May, the second month of the current Watchtower subscription campaign. It would be good to make plans to have as full a share as possible in offering subscriptions from house to house and on return visits. Do we plan to call on interested people who might like to subscribe? Why not make a definite schedule to call on them and offer the subscription? Also, did we meet people last month who wanted to read single issues of the magazines before deciding whether to subscribe? Or did we meet people who said they would subscribe later when they had the money? It would be fine to plan to call on these individuals during May. When we consider how much we benefit from The Watchtower it motivates us to want others to receive this spiritual food regularly too.
PLANNING FOR SUMMER
3 Summer will soon be here and with it, of course, convention time. Are our plans all made for attending the district convention? The “Kingdom Loyalty” conventions will be the highlight of the summer’s activities. It may be that you are planning to take a vacation in connection with the convention. In this regard it would be good to keep in mind the privilege we have of sharing the good news with others. Will it be possible to share in service with the congregation where you go so that you can enjoy witnessing in a different territory? Plan to meet with your brothers and share in service where you will be spending your vacation. (Usually Kingdom Hall addresses may be found in the telephone directory.) Even though summer is a time for many to go on vacation ‘to get away from it all,’ as some say, do not neglect spiritual activity in your plans during this time of the year.—Rom. 13:14.
4 Some congregations have already made arrangements to assist in covering unassigned or seldom-worked territory. If your congregation has done so, have you planned to enjoy this special activity?
5 With vacation from secular work or school in store for many during the summer months, it would be good to see if sharing in the auxiliary pioneer work can be included in plans for spiritual activity. Many have found that when they are able to have a greater share in field service and can follow up on all the interest found in the territory, they add much joy and satisfaction to their vacation. Having a full and enjoyable share in the service in such a way really can be “recreation,” for that means “refreshment of the strength and spirits after toil.” How refreshing it is to be able to share the good news with others and to help them grow spiritually! Giving in such a way brings true happiness and lifts our spirits.—Acts 20:35.
6 Now, before the summer actually starts, would be the time for us to plan as individuals and families for a spiritually rewarding vacation period. Planning helps us to get things done regularly and on time. Many have done very well in supporting field service arrangements on the first Sunday of the month because of advance planning. Can such activity be included in our summer plans too?
7 May all of us conscientiously plan our spiritual activities now and in the months ahead, seeking Jehovah’s rich blessing on our united efforts to stay loyally in his service, as we talk about the glory of his kingship.—Ps. 145:10, 11.

