Do You Remember?
Have you read recent issues of The Watchtower carefully? If so, you will doubtless recall these points:
● How could those who heard Jesus Christ speak in the first century C.E. ‘pass over from death to life’?​—John 5:24.
Because of being sinners, the people in the days of Jesus’ earthly ministry were under the condemnation of death. However, by listening to the Son of God, repenting of their transgressions and accepting him as the promised Messiah who would redeem them from sin and death, individuals ceased to be under condemnation. Thus, in a figurative way, they ‘passed over from death to life.’​—9/1 p. 18.
● What did the apostle Paul mean when he wrote, “love never fails”?​—1 Cor. 13:8.
As seen from the context, the apostle was discussing the fact that love will continue, whereas miraculous gifts will cease. Hence, “love never fails” in the sense that it will never end or be lacking.​—9/15 p. 21.
● Who were the Nephilim?
In Noah’s days, they were the offspring of disobedient spirit sons of God and women. The name Nephilim means “fellers,” persons who caused others to fall. These powerful hybrids contributed greatly to the violence existing in Noah’s days.​—10/1 p. 4.
● What is the significance of the conviction expressed at Psalm 41:3 regarding Jehovah’s changing a righteous person’s bed in time of sickness?
Jehovah God strengthens his servants to endure illness and engenders within them the kind of hope that is essential for recuperation. Thus the Most High transforms or changes the bed of sickness into one of recuperation.​—10/15 pp. 6, 7.
● Why is it urgent from a personal standpoint for disciples of Jesus Christ to maintain exemplary conduct and to be zealous in doing public witnessing and other fine works?
Regardless of what a person’s age may be now, either death or the “great tribulation” will end his opportunity to build up a record of fine works with Jehovah God. Hence, the individual cannot be negligent in discharging Christian responsibilities, as that affects his record with his Maker and can lead to loss of divine blessings.​—11/15 p. 25.
● When especially should serious consideration be given to the length of time a man has been a Christian before appointing him as an elder?
This is when the congregation already has elders with many years of experience in Christian living. When a man who has been baptized in recent years is appointed in such a congregation, this can lead to his getting “puffed up with pride.” (1 Tim. 3:6) However, if the congregation is made up of new converts, the appointment of a man who may be relatively new but who meets the Scriptural qualifications does not pose the same spiritual danger. Such a man realizes that he is serving because of a need and not because of his being particularly outstanding as a spiritual person.​—12/1 pp. 19, 20.

