Announcements
FOREWARNED OF ASSAULT BY GOG OF MAGOG
It is said that ‘to be forewarned is to be forearmed.’ But this is true only if the warning is heeded. Today a world-wide warning is being sounded that a final onslaught will soon be made by Gog of Magog, namely, Satan, together with all his hosts, on true worshipers of Jehovah God. (Ezek. 38:3, 4; 39:1, 2) To withstand the assault and abound in God’s favor, knowledge is a primary essential. Jehovah’s witnesses and their companions will manifest that they are ‘forewarned and forearmed’ during the month of September by going from house to house to tell others of the approaching assault. To all they meet the modern New World Translation of either the Christian Greek Scriptures or the Hebrew Scriptures and a splendid hardbound Bible study aid book will be made available on a contribution of only $2. You are invited to share in sounding the warning, demonstrating the fact that you are on the side of the Most High, whose name alone is Jehovah.
“EQUIPPED FOR EVERY GOOD WORK”
This expression is found in the Bible at 2 Timothy 3:17 (NW). To be “equipped for every good work” one must use the Bible, for it is “beneficial for teaching, for reproving, for setting things straight, for disciplining in righteousness.” (2Ti 3 Verse 16) This calls for an understanding of the Bible, a knowledge of its contents and skill in its use. As a means for enabling one to get well acquainted with the contents of the Bible in a comparatively short space of time the book “Equipped for Every Good Work” is published. It contains important information about the Bible’s origin, composition and preservation. Also, it has an epitome on each one of the Bible’s sixty-six books, and a summary of Bible doctrines, composed entirely of Scripture texts topically classified and without comment. “Equipped for Every Good Work” is a splendid 384-page book for anyone who wants to get general knowledge of the Bible’s contents. You may obtain a copy for a contribution of only 50c.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES
Week of September 12: The Power of Hope.
Week of September 19: Endurance Through Hope.

