The Wise Course to Take
SURELY the wise course to take is to investigate further, proving to your own satisfaction which is the true religion. Do not conclude that this is too difficult to do, or that there is no provision for such an investigation. There is.
True, the churches have woefully neglected study of God’s Word. But Jehovah’s witnesses in your community will be happy to assist you to learn the basic teachings of the Bible. They have a program designed for this purpose. Commenting on the benefit of their regular Bible discussions, one person wrote in a prominent Canadian church magazine, The United Church Observer:
“It has only been through Jehovah’s Witnesses that I have been able to discuss and argue and finally develop a keener understanding of Christianity, of God and his works, because with them, we always look up questions in the Bible. It’s not possible to absorb much in an hour on Sunday, and there’s so much difference of opinion amongst our clergy that you can’t take anyone of them too seriously.”
The program of Bible study offered by Jehovah’s witnesses discusses the basic Bible teachings. This will allow you to see whether yours or any other religion measures up to what the Bible actually teaches. How rewarding this can be! Many questions that you perhaps have always wondered about will be answered to your satisfaction. Questions such as, What happens to a person when he dies? Where are the dead? Why has God permitted wickedness? What future is there for the earth and man?
Would you not enjoy learning the answer of God’s Word to these and many other important questions? They are all covered in the Bible-study aid The Truth That Leads to Eternal Life. Truly it is significant that, next to the Bible, this is the most widely circulated book in the Western world. In less than two years over 25 million copies of this book have been printed in more than 40 languages.
This book is designed especially for Bible discussions, with printed questions on the material under discussion being provided at the bottom of each page. Over a million persons are now benefiting from such weekly discussions that are conducted free of charge in the privacy of their own homes. Jehovah’s witnesses in your community also will be happy to assist you in such a study.
And what can persons who take the wise course now expect? “The upright are the ones that will reside in the earth, and the blameless are the ones that will be left over in it. As regards the wicked, they will be cut off from the very earth.”​—Prov. 2:21, 22.
Those who do God’s will are promised survival when this wicked system ends. They will be ushered into a righteous new order of things: “The meek ones themselves will possess the earth, and they will indeed find their exquisite delight in the abundance of peace. The righteous themselves will possess the earth, and they will reside forever upon it.” (Ps. 37:11, 29; Rev. 21:3, 4) Everlasting life on a peaceful earth​—what a grand blessing from God!
Truly the wise course to take in these momentous times is to study carefully God’s own Word the Bible. Only in this way can you be sure of worshiping Jehovah God in the way that he approves, and avoiding false religion that will soon experience his judgment. Jesus Christ emphasized the importance of taking this wise course when he said: “This means everlasting life, their taking in knowledge of you, the only true God, and of the one whom you sent forth, Jesus Christ.” (John 17:3) Therefore, do not put off beginning a serious study of God’s Word!
[Picture on page 28]
Those who take the wise course now will enjoy forever the peace of a Paradise earth under God’s kingdom

