VOL. XXV. DECEMBER 1, 1904. No. 23. 



CONTENTS 

Christendom's Anxious Situation 355 

Outlook of Congregationalists 356 

Rationalistic Seminaries 356 

New Missionaries Infidels 357 

No "Trumpet" in Christendom 357 

An Illustration in Hypocrisy 358 

A Giant Specter 358 

Price List of Bibles, Helps, Etc 359-362 

"Thou Shalt Worship the Lord thy 

God" 363 

The Prince of Peace 364 

page 354 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-24 EVERSHOLT ST., LONDON, N.W. 
GERMAN BRANCH-MIRKER STR., 45, ELBERFELD. 
AUSTRALIAN BRANCH-32 JOHNSTON ST., FITZROY, MELBOURNE. 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE, 5c (2-l/2d.) A COPY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER, will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



THIS JOURNAL IS PUBLISHED IN THE 

FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN LANGUAGES. 

SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



R3465 : page 354 



CLUBBING ARRANGEMENT FOR 1905. 



As usual, all WATCH TOWER subscriptions for the United 
States for 1905 will include subscriptions to the Old Theology 
Quarterly. And this year we have effected a special arrangement 
by which all paid WATCH TOWER subscriptions for 1905 
will include without extra charge, a subscription to the Solon 
Journal (monthly) for four months. It is a secular journal of 
good tone; price with privileges $2 a year. Its claims for 
public recognition we heartily endorse, having profited thereby 
ourselves. Its advantages apply only within the United 
States, hence this offer is thus limited. All U.S. subscribers 
may look for their first number in January. 

BROTHER RUSSELL'S SUNDAY DISCOURSES 



The following journals are now publishing Brother 
Russell's sermons regularly, viz.,— 
The Schenectady Union, - Schenectady, N.Y. 

The State, Columbia, S.C. 

The Pittsburg Gazette, - Pittsburg, Pa. 

The arrangement with the latter was for one year, 
and expires with the present month. Should it not be 
renewed all of its unexpired subscriptions sent to us for it 
will be placed in other journals publishing the discourses. 



R3465 : page 355 

CHRISTENDOM'S ANXIOUS SITUATION. 

BY REV. E. F. BURR, D.D. 

WE SEE, in many pleasant respects, just what 
the Fathers saw. The old Christian flag is 
still waving; the old Christian creeds still 
maintain their places; the old Christian sanctuaries 
are still open every Sabbath; ministers preach and 
pray in them still; there are still prayer meetings, and 
sacraments, and Sunday Schools, and Bible Schools, 
and Salvation Armies, and Northfields, and Bible 
Leagues, and Christian Endeavorers. It is not a surface 
Sahara by any means. 

And yet the condition of things among us is very 
serious— so serious that it would be the height of unwisdom 
to blink it. Beneath the fair crust of Christian 
forms and professions boils and tosses an amazing 
amount of un-Christian and anti-Christian thinking. 
We do not know exactly how much; but that it is 
formidably great we do know. Every now and then 



eruptions occur which startle us as with a blow. Latterly, 
these outbreaks have sometimes come in groups 
and with almost volcanic violence; and the impact 
on us has been as when the smith with both hands 
smites the anvil. We are shocked— shocked at the 
mass of destructive material belched out from most 
unexpected quarters; from pulpits noted for orthodoxy; 
from seminaries supposed to be bound to the 
old Gospel by more than seven green withes, which 
not even a Samson could break; from Associations, 
Presbyteries, Conferences where grey heads listen 
patiently to attacks on the Bible, which a few years 
ago would have raised a storm of astonishment and 
protest. 

Lo, the new departures of a few years ago have 
expanded into the "New Christianity" of the Higher 
Criticism, the destructive criticism of the Bible. Under 
the aegis of the Christian name this unwelcome immigrant 
has come to great estate among us. Its shadow 
covers and chills great denominations, great presses 
and great educational institutions. To multitudes 
the Old Testament is gone and the New Testament is 
either gone or going. Not a few deny or question 
fundamental Christian doctrines— the Messiahship of 
Jesus, his miraculous birth and incarnation, his miracles, 
his atonement, his resurrection and ascension, 
and even his reliability as a religious teacher. Many 
whose standing in the ministry is still unchallenged 
question all these doctrines; and very many more are 
plainly feeling their way to the same depths at various 
stages of descent. These men, even the most 
radical of them, are preaching their views without 
hindrance in our churches and presses. They occupy 
chairs in our colleges and seminaries. The defection 
is so great that no ecclesiastical discipline is attempted. 
Courts, civil and ecclesiastical, have been appealed 
to in vain to prevent the perversion of trust 
funds defended by oaths and creeds as strong as human 
ingenuity could make them. In spite of ironclad 
creeds and quinquennial paths rationalism has 
appropriated many strategic positions in the high 
places of the field. The leading colleges of New England 
invite to their chairs and pulpits the most radical 
Unitarians, Universalists and Rationalists; and, as if 
the home supply was not large enough, are at the 
trouble of importing them. Whole Associations, 
Presbyteries, Conferences are dominated by views of 
the Bible which defy all the Protestant confessions 
and which would, a few years ago, have been met 
by storms of protest and excommunication. 

In view of this general situation the friends of 
the old Bible naturally look with anxious eyes to see 
where stand their Missionary Societies. What do 
they find? I will speak only for Congregationalists. 
Other Protestant denominations must speak for themselves. 



R3465 : page 356 

Just now they may find themselves much better 
off than their neighbors; but they will, at least, 
find that they are being menaced by like conditions. 
We should at least serve as a warning. 

OUTLOOK OF CONGREGATIONALISTS. 

What do Congregationalists find? They find that 
the higher criticism now sits at the council board and 
swarms in the constituency of each of their three missionary 
societies. Whoever sees that much sees reason 
for grave apprehension. All these societies are 
on the brink— liable to be crowded over it at any moment 
by the pressure from behind.... 

Is there not cause for uneasiness? Have not 
evangelical churches reason to fear that as little discrimination 
is made in the laborers sent into the home 
mission fields as exists among the men sending them? 
Is it not certain that men who think that higher critics 
of an extreme type are suitable persons for the championships 
and directorships and presidencies of missionary 
societies will think them suitable for mission 
work in the field? Our misgivings are very great. 
Our fears are stronger in the battle than our hopes. 
We are willing and even anxious to contribute to 
send the old Gospel into all fields, believing it to be 
the power of God unto salvation; but we are not 
willing to do as much for another Gospel. It is forbidden 
us. So we feel obliged to query with our two 
home missionary societies: "What are you doing 
with our contributions? What sort of men are you 
sending into the mission fields in our names? Let us 
know. It looks more and more as if you must be 
sending forth men whom it is against our consciences 
to send and support. Is it so?" 

Again our three missionary societies are so linked 
to a fourth that whatever patronage is given to one is 
measurably given to all. They present themselves 
for patronage in a lump, make a common appeal, 
have a common publication, divide among themselves 
certain common expenses and receipts, and are thinking 
of a common anniversary. We cannot bless one 
without blessing all; cannot help the American Board 
of Commissioners for Foreign Missions without helping 
the Congregational Sunday School and Publishing 
Society. 

And yet this latter society, acting in the name of 
all our churches, and at the expense of all of them, 
is engaged in publishing books and Sunday School 
helps and a weekly newspaper notoriously and 
grossly in the interest of the Higher Criticism— the 
newspaper presumably bought and supported, in 
part at least, by denominational funds and claiming 
denominational authority. Moreover, this 



society has just come into avowed alliance with a 
well known organ of the Higher Criticism; namely, 
"The American Institute of Sacred Literature," for 
the purpose of capturing in its interests our Sunday 
School teachers. 

Such is the society which all our churches are 
now being urged to support liberally— urged by the 
common voice of all our denominational societies, as 
expressed in innumerable circulars, in a plan for having 
a special agency for each society in each church, 
and in the actual appointment of a field secretary to 
give his whole time to the work of swelling the contributions 
of all the churches to all the societies— not 
excepting the most objectionable. Is this tolerable? 
Do not the other missionary societies see that their 
working in harness with such a society, and even 
helping to gild and draw its special chariot, is fitted 
to disturb confidence in themselves? Would not all 
evangelical churches feel wronged at having their contributions 
so used if they were aware of it? 

R3466 : page 356 

But they are not aware. For some reason the 
shepherds have not spoken, or have spoken the wrong 
thing. Even watchmen who have clearly seen the 
enemy entering the gates in force, and have deplored 
the fact, have not seen their way clear to put trumpet 
to their lips. Wonderful silence! And so the 
churches do not know that the Philistines are upon 
them. Are not misgivings (or more) in order under 
such circumstances? Unless something is done, in 
due time our whole city will be taken, our whole 
lump will be leavened with unbelief, at the expense, 
largely, of believers. Are believers ready for this? 

"RATIONALISTIC SEMINARIES." 

Another fact gives us even profounder concern- 
gives vast weight and exasperation to our other sources 
of anxiety. If all our educational institutions were in 
the hands of believing and faithful men, backsliding 
missionary societies would not mean so much. They 
must soon retrace their steps or die. But, as matters 
now stand, they threaten to go from bad to worse by 
endless reinforcement from behind. All the leading 
colleges in the East, and all our technical Congregational 
seminaries both East and West, are in active 
sympathy with the principles and methods of the 
Higher Criticism— as is shown either by the position 
of those who control them, or by publications of their 
professors, or by the reports of their students, or by 
the radical critics invited to their lectureships and 
decorated with their honors. 

This is the condition of things which actually exists 
among Congregationalists, and threatens all our 



Protestant denominations. It is a very serious condition 
—so serious that to realize it almost takes one's 
breath away; only leaving breath enough to exclaim, 
"When the foundations are destroyed what can the 
righteous do!" 

Of course rationalistic seminaries must be expected 
to produce, mostly, rationalists. Here and 

R3456 : page 357 

there, one heavily reinforced by a sound conversion 

and a sound home training, will resist the influences 

of the seminary; but such cases will be few. Practically, 

the entire output of our seminaries at present 

is higher critics. What becomes of them? Somehow 

the Congregational public absorbs them all. Some, 

by grace of easy-going councils, become pastors of 

self-supporting churches. The rest are being sent 

forth by our missionary societies. How can it be 

otherwise? From what other sources than their seminaries 

can these societies draw their recruits? They 

must take higher critics or none. As matters now 

stand they must do it or go out of business. But they 

have not gone out of business. They are still busy 

at sending out appeals and missionaries— sending them 

out at the expense of all the Congregational churches, 

nearly or quite all of whom, in the older States, have 

evangelical creeds and histories. Are we content 

with this? Ought we to be? 

NEW MISSIONARIES INFIDELS. 

Just now, on all the mission fields, are many men 
to whom no exception can be taken— men of an earlier 
and better training. But they are becoming fewer 
every year, and their places are being filled with their 
opposites. If the present condition of our seminaries 
continues, and our missionary societies continue to do 
as they are now doing, and have been doing for some 
time, what but the Higher Criticism, with its eviscerated 
Bible, will occupy the field at home and abroad? 
Can evangelical churches be reasonably asked to assist 
such a result by their contributions? It is asking 
them to commit suicide. 

Are we invited to bear in mind that all the forms 
of Higher Criticism which the seminaries are engaged 
in teaching, and the missionary societies are engaged 
in distributing, are not equally gross? We do bear 
it in mind. We remember that some higher critics 
are standing on the crumbling edge of the precipice; 
that others are clinging to its ragged sides at various 
stages of descent, and that very many are lying on the 
jagged rocks at the bottom, all broken to pieces. No 
—all are not as yet broken to pieces; but all are in 
imminent danger of being so. For, they all decline 
to treat the Old Testament as Christ treated it, and, 



in the treatment of both Testaments, all approve and 
act on those general principles and methods of Biblical 
criticism whose logical and historical terminus is 
a Bible without supernaturalism and without authority. 

"THOROUGH-GOING INFIDELS." 

And, somehow, the most broken of these critics 
manage to do their work under shelter of the old 
creeds, and while wearing the purple robes of Christian 
professors and ministers. We do not see how they 
can put this and that together. To us the man seems 
like a thorough-going infidel. He talks like an infidel 
in private; he writes like an infidel; he is doing the 
work of an infidel; and infidels rejoice over the work 
he is doing and call him Brother. But he denies the 
kinship. He says that he is a Christian and doing 
Christian work. Does he not subscribe to a Christian 
creed, hold a high Christian office, draw a Christian 
salary, sometimes praise the Christian Bible to the 
skies? Though he rejects all the fundamental Christian 
doctrines and tears the Bible to tatters, he says 
to all the azimuths that he is the best of Christians. 
It looks to us extremely like saying that black is 
white; that falsehood is truth, that sin is holiness, 
that infidelity is Christianity. We tremble for the 
dictionary as well as for the Bible. Have words no 
meaning that can be depended on? Are we all at sea 
in the use of the English language? The Son of Man 
was betrayed with a kiss— perhaps our friend, the 
enemy, will take it hard that we remind him of that 
ancient tragedy. In war, the soldier who, being in 
command of a fortress for his king, busies himself in 
making breaches in its walls and hewing down its 
gates in the presence of the enemy is not called a 
loyal subject though he continues to fly the king's 
flag and wear his uniform and eat his bread. 

NO "TRUMPET" IN CHRISTENDOM. 

In view of the foregoing facts, are not the friends 
of the old Bible justified in grave misgivings, even 
anxieties, as to the future of their missions and 
churches? But these anxieties may well be enhanced 
when they consider that the churches in general do 
not as yet fully realize their danger. Individual laymen, 
here and there, have come to know and feel the 
peril; but the churches, as such, are not awake. No 
trumpet has sounded— at least none to which they 
are tuned. They are not given to reading controversial 
theology, bristling with technicals and subtleties 
and dead languages. In a dim sort of way they 
may know that the Bible is under fire; and they experience 
that lowering of spiritual tone and activity 
that naturally comes from living in an atmosphere 
largely charged with impurities of doubt and cavil, 



but they do not realize the extent to which ministers 
and institutions have fallen away from the Fathers 
and the Mayflower. They are still relying on certificates 
of church membership, of seminary training, of 
licensures and examinations and approvals by councils 
and associations, to protect their pupils from fundamental 
errorists. Once these were reliable safeguards. 
They are such no longer. But the laymen are not 
awake to the fact; do not understand that now, at 
least in New England, there is little or nothing to 
hinder errorists of the most radical sort from appearing 
in their pulpits. The doors are wide open— wide 
open. 

R3466 : page 358 

AN ILLUSTRATION IN HYPOCRISY. 

A man enters. Who is he? Possibly, a higher 
critic of the grossest kind. He has no Old Testament 
at all. As to the New Testament, he has little of 
that left— no incarnation; no miracles; no resurrection; 
no ascension; no atonement; no infallible teacher 
—nothing but a poor sort of Buddha loaded down 
with blasphemous pretensions and speaking a bit of 
the Sermon on the Mount. If his parishioners could 
hear him talk in private, or in ministerial circles more 
or less sympathetic, they would be astonished and 
dismayed. They would say, "This man is an infidel 
—as much so as Tom Paine." And they would say the 
truth. An infidel is what he really is. But it is not 
what he appears to his hearers. He appears at first 
to them as a devout Christian. He comes to them in 
the name of Christ and his Christianity. He marches 
under a Christian banner and wears a Christian uniform. 
He wears clerical clothes and manners, stands 
in what has long been an orthodox pulpit, has orthodox 
looks and tones and words in preaching and praying, 
has actually joined their local church with its 
Puritan creed. Must he not be all right? Being victims 
of appearances, his hearers are likely to say Yes; 
are likely to receive the man for what he appears to 
be— a teacher come from God, an angel of light. They 
will have open ears for what the angel will have to say. 

What will he say? The people expect serpents 
to hiss, dogs to bark, lions to roar and infidels to advertise 
themselves with a trumpet. This infidel will 
do nothing of the sort. Nothing startling nor disturbing 
will come from him at first. He has been 
taught better. His teachers have shown him by example, 
if not by precept, a more excellent way. It is 
a prudent way, a cautious way, a way of preparation 
and education by littles and littles. He will introduce 
a new newspaper. He will recommend a new book. 
In due time he will confess that he does not think so 
highly as some do of creeds and dogmas and heresy 



trials. So he proceeds by easy stages from hesitations 
to insinuations, from insinuations to plain doubts, 
from doubts to denials— at last the whole camel follows 
the nose. He has prepared his way just as his 
teachers did theirs. He has walked in velvet slippers 
for a while; for a while has been careful not to tread 
on ancient and rheumatic toes. To the last he continues 
to pose as a true sheep whose fleece is of the 
finest and heaviest; as a warm friend of that Bible 
whose integrity and authority he is engaged in shredding 
away. Is it to be wondered at that he meets 
with a measure of success; perhaps warps over a 
majority of his church into rationalism— all but the 
impossible elect? 

R3467 : page 358 

Behold a church stripped of all safeguards and 
then exposed to the sharp practice of a supposed 
friend! No wonder if it falls an easy prey. Caesar, 
without his shield and cuirass and mail, easily falls 
when friend Brutus strikes. 

The fact is that the misgivings and anxieties 
warranted by the present condition of our colleges 
and seminaries and denominational societies, great 
as these anxieties are, should be much enhanced when 
we consider that our churches generally are not aware 
of the extent of the ministerial apostasy, have lost the 
ancient safeguards against it, and are now being attacked 
from within by enemies who swear by all the 
evangelists that they are best friends. 

"A GIANT SPECTER." 

Such is the state of things in the constituency of 
our Congregational Missionary Societies. It is at least 
a condition that threatens all the Protestant denominations. 
One part of the people have lost all faith in 
the Bible as a supernatural book; and they are largely 
the leaders of the people. Another part is uncertain 
what to believe. And still another part that believe 
as firmly as ever have, at the very least, great misgivings 
as to what their societies are actually doing; 
whether they are not sending forth another gospel, 
and sending it at the expense of the evangelical 
churches. All parts are breathing an unwholesome 
atmosphere, misty with doubts and cavil and venturesome 
speculations. Is not this sufficient cause for 
almost any amount of falling off in missionary contributions 
and ministerial supply? 

And yet the managers of our missionary societies 
ignore the anxious situation altogether. They express 
surprise that their operations are so poorly supported. 
What can be the matter with the churches! Why are 
they giving rills instead of rivers! Not an audible 
word comes from officialdom to show that they understand 



the situation. Neither in their official organs, 
nor in the formal reports and appeals at anniversaries, 
is there anything to show but that they have before 
them the public of fifty years ago. They do not even 
recognize the presence anywhere in their fields of 
such a thing as the Higher Criticism. Is it possible 
that their eyes are holden so that they do not see 
a giant SPECTER stalking through the Protestant 
world and smiting the very foundations of Christian 
Missions? It is not possible. They are aware of "the 
pestilence that walketh in darkness and the destruction 
that wasteth at noon day;" but, for some reason, 
they think it best, on the whole, not to manifest their 
knowledge. They may be right. But if all friends 
of the Bible should do the same— should neglect to 
give the plague its true name, to warn the public 
against it, and to take measures for quarantining and 
suppressing it— common sense would be outraged, the 
Truth and Christ betrayed, and the whole land become 
a charnel house. Which may God and his people 
forbid! 



page 359 
BIBLES, TESTAMENTS, STUDENTS' HELPS, ETC. 
SUPPLIED AT WHOLESALE COST PRICES. 



IN presenting our list of Bibles this year we have dropped 
a number which we have previously carried and have 
selected others which we think more desirable. We give 
below a list which, although not very large, we think will 
cover a range sufficiently large to suit the wants of nearly 
all. However, should any of the friends desire a more 
complete list to select from we shall be pleased to mail 
publishers' catalogues upon postal card application. 



Divinity Circuit Teachers' Bibles. 

No. (Add Postage on these 25c each.) Pub. Our 

8701 Long Primer, French Morocco, div. cir., red Price Price 

under gold, full teachers' helps 8-3/8 x 5-1/2 1.95 1.25 

8709 Same as 8701, leather lined 2.75 1.80 

(Add Postage on these, 20c each.) 
8301 Minion, French Morocco, div. cir., red under 

gold, full teachers' helps, 7-3/4 x 5-3/4 1.45 .95 

04403 Minion, French Seal, div. cir., selected 

helps, 7-1/4 x 5 1.20 .84 

Combination Teachers' Bibles. 



These Bibles show the variations of the Revised Version at the 
foot of each page. Otherwise it is an ordinary "Teachers' Bible," 
with maps, concordance, etc., illustrated. 

(Add Postage on these 25c each.) 
610 Bourgeois, French Seal, div. cir., red under 

gold, 8 x 6 x 1-3/4 5.00 1.25 

612 Same as 610, linen lined 5.50 1.38 

614 Same as 610, leather lined 6.00 1.55 

Linear Teachers' Bibles. 

Hitherto these Bibles have been sold by Subscription Agents only. 
Its special feature, differentiating it from other Teachers' Bibles, is 
that it shows the readings of the Common and Revised Versions side by 
side in the same line. (This is the Bible of which we procured a special 
edition with wide margins and DAWN and TOWER references 
thereon; and of which edition we have no more.) 

(Add Postage on these 25c each.) 
350 Small Pica, French Seal, red under gold, 

full teachers' helps, 8-3/4 x 6 x 1-1/2 6.00 2.10 

355 Small Pica, French Morocco, div. circ. red 
under gold, leather lined, full teachers' 

helps, 8-3/4 x 6 x 1-1/2 8.00 3.15 

360 Small Pica, Levant Morocco, div. circ, red 
under gold, kid lined, full teachers' helps, 
8-3/4 x 6 x 1-1/2 10.00 4.25 

Pocket Bibles. 

(Add Postage on these 15c each.) 
01327 Minion, French Morocco, div. circ, red under 

gold, text and maps, 5-3/4x3-3/4 1.00 .70 

01329 Minion Arabian Morocco, div. circ, leather 

lined to edge, red under gold, text and 

maps, 5-3/4 x 3-3/4 1.45 1.00 

01 150 Ruby, French Morocco, limp, round cor., 

red under gold, text only, 5-5/8x3 -7/8 65 .46 

01153 Same as above, div. circ 75 .53 

194 Minion, French Seal, div. circ, red under 

gold text only, 5-3/4 x 3-5/8 x 1 1.10 .75 

03008 Pearl, French Seal, div. circ, linen lined, 

5-3/4 x 3-3/4, references 1.00 .60 

India Paper Pocket Bibles. 

(Add Postage on these, 8c each.) 
031 14x Ruby, Persian Levant, div. cir., leather lined, 

silk sewed, red under gold, 5-5/8 x 4-3/4, refs 3.25 2.15 

01157x Ruby, French Morocco, div. cir., leather 

lined, 5-5/8 x 3-7/8 x 1/2 2.00 1.35 

01103x Diamond, French Morocco, div. cir., red under 

gold, 4-1/2 x 2-1/2 x 1-1/2 1.40 .98 

(Add Postage on these 4c each.) 
0602x Brilliant, Persian Morocco, limp, round cor., 

red under gold, 3-5/8 x 2 x 5/8 (Vest Pocket 



Bible) 2.25 1.55 

02002x Same as 0602x, div. cir., leather lined, silk 

sewed, references 2.50 1.70 

India Paper Bibles. 

(Add Postage on these 15c each.) 
0865-l/2xLong Primer, Levant, div. cir., calf lined to 

edge, silk sewed, round corners, red under 

gold, full teachers' helps, 7-3/4 x 5-1/4 $8.00 $5.20 

03554x Brevier, Alaska Seal, div. circ, leather lined 

to edge, silk sewed, red under gold edges, 

full teachers' helps, 8-1/8 x 5-1/2 5.50 3.60 

9635x Brevier, French Morocco, div. cir., red under 

gold, 7-1/8 x 5, 1 in. thick, references 2.75 1.93 

9636x Same as 9635, leather lined, references 3.75 2.50 

03265x Minion, Levant Morocco, div. circ, calf 

lined, silk sewed, 6-7/8 x 4-5/8 x 1 1-16, refs 4.50 2.90 

03274x Minion, Alaska Seal, div. cir., leather lined 

to edge, silk sewed, red under gold, with 

maps and concordance, 7-1/4 x 5 4.50 3.00 

8635x Minion, French Morocco, div. cir., red under 

gold, 7 x 4-3/4, only 5/8 in. thick, references 1.75 1.13 

8636x Same as 8635x, leather lined, references 2.70 1.89 

THE FOLLOWING THREE ARE NEW AND SPECIALLY DESIRABLE BECAUSE 
TYPE IS VERY LARGE AND CLEAR FOR SIZE OF BOOK. 

3596xA Bold Face Brevier, Alaska Seal, calf lined to 

edge, etc., (specimen type on next page), 

full teachers' helps, 7-1/4 x 5 4.70 2.50 

2596xB Same type and binding as 3596x, with Maps 

Biblical Gazetteer and Concordance 4.70 2.40 

2596xC Same type and binding as 3596x, with Maps 

and Biblical Gazetteer 4.70 2.30 

Revised Version Bibles. 

(Add Postage, 10c.) 
040 Pearl, Cloth, red edges, 5-1/2x4-1/2 40 .30 

(Add Postage, 20c.) 
060 Minion, Cloth, red edges, 8-1/4x5-1/2 1.00 .75 

Oxford Revised Bibles (Am. Com.) 

(Add Postage on these 25c each.) 
3750 Brevier, Cloth, round cor., red edges, maps, 

8x5-5/8 1.00 .70 

3752 Brevier, French Morocco, div. cir., red under 

gold, 8 x 5-5/8 2.00 1.30 

American Standard Revised Bible. 

(Add Postage on these 20c each.) 

160 Bourgeois, Cloth, References 1.00 .80 

172 Bourgeois, French Seal, References 2.00 1.60 



(Add Postage on these 30c each.) 

260 Long Primer, Cloth, References 1.50 1.15 

272 Long Primer, French Seal, References 3.00 2.25 

Lap Bibles for the Aged— References, Light Weight, 
Large Print. 

(Add Postage on these 25c each.) 

2002 Pica, Cloth, red edges, 9-1/4 x 6-1/2 x 1-1/4 2.00 .90 

2014 Pica, French Seal, limp, size same as 2002 2.75 1.37 

2022 Pica, French Seal, div. cir., size same as 

2002 3.50 1.75 

Children's Illustrated Bibles. 

(Add Postage on these 6c each.) 
252 Minion, French Morocco, limp, red under 

gold, 32 illustrations, 5-3/4 x 3-5/8 1.20 .80 

254 Same as 252, French Morocco, div. cir 1.40 1.40 

Testaments. 

(Add Postage on these 5c each.) 
030 Ruby, French Morocco, limp round corner, 

red under gold, 4 x 2-3/4 25 .18 

033 Same as 030, div. cir 40 .24 

0130 Same as 030, with Psalms 35 .24 

0133 Same as 033, with Psalms 50 .35 

010 Diamond, Venetian Morocco, limp, round 

cor., 3-3/4 x 2-1/4 x 1/4 50 .35 

014 Diamond, Arabian Morocco, div. cir., 
leather lined to edge, red under gold, 

3-3/4 x 2-1/4 x 1/4 1.15 .75 

2142px Nonpareil, French Seal, limp, leather lining, 
round corners, red under gold, Psalms, 

self-pronouncing 1.00 .50 

2142x Same as above, without Psalms 80 .40 

287 Brevier, Roan, gilt edge, Psalms 35 .35 

New Testaments for the Aged. 

(Add Postage on these 10c each.) 

212 Small Pica, Roan, square cor., 5-3/4x8-1/4 35 .35 

283 Same as above, with Psalms, 8-1/4x5-1/2x3/4 55 .55 

Revised Testaments. 

000 Nonpareil, Divinity Circuit, leather lined, red 

under gold, refs., 5-1/4 x 3-7/8 x 1/2 (job lot).... 2.00 .45 
0100 Brevier, Cloth, red edges, 16 mo., including postage, 23c. 

Thumb Index on any Bible, 25c Extra. 



page 360 



CONCORDANCES AND OTHER BIBLE STUDY HELPS. 

First in this list we mention the several volumes of 

MILLENNIAL DAWN SERIES 

—referring inquirers to the second page of each issue of this 

journal for prices, etc. We commend also, as aids, the following 

publications by other presses, which we supply at specially 

low prices because of the assistance they will lend to the study 

of God's Word. We mention these somewhat in the order in 

which they seem to us to be desirable aids,— putting the concordances 

last, though they are not by any means least 

important. 

THE EMPHATIC DIAGLOTT. 

This very valuable work, published under the author's 
copyright by Fowler & Wells Co., New York City, has been 
sold by them at $4 in cloth and $5 in half leather binding. For 
several years a friend, an earnest Bible student, desirous of 
assisting the readers of our Society's publications, has supplied 
them through us at a greatly reduced price; now he has purchased 
the copyright and plates from the Fowler & Wells Co., 
and presented the same to our Society as a gift, under our assurance 
that the gift will be used for the furthering of the 
Truth to the extent of our ability, by such a reduction of 
price as will permit the poor of the Lord's flock to have this 
help in the study of the Word. 

REDUCED PRICES.-These will be sold with ZION'S WATCH 
TOWER only. In cloth binding $1.50 (6s. 3d.)— includes postage 
and one year's subscription, new or renewal, to Z.W.T. 
On thin paper, in full morocco leather, divinity circuit, red 
under gold edges, silk sewed leather lined, $2.50 (10s. 6d.)— 
includes postage and one year's subscription to Z.W.T. 

THE TISCHENDORF NEW TESTAMENT. 

This is the ordinary Common Version in cloth binding. 
As footnotes it gives the reading of the three oldest Greek 
MSS., Sinaiticus, Vaticanus and Alexandrine, wherever these 
differ from the Common Version. This is a very valuable 
little work, published in Europe, which we specially import for 
the benefit of our readers. Price 40c, including postage. 

THE SYRIAC-PESHITO NEW TESTAMENT- 
MURDOCH'S. 

This, too, is a valuable work, and an aid in critical study. 
It is translated from the Syriac instead of from the Greek. It 
is claimed by some that it was the language in which our Lord 
and the apostles spoke and wrote, and that the Greek was 
translated from this. Our price, in half leather binding, postage 
included, $2.00. 



LEESER'S TRANSLATION OF THE OLD TESTAMENT. 

This is the standard translation amongst English reading 
Hebrews, by one of their own rabbis. It is not perfect, but is 
a valuable aid in critical study of the Old Testament. Our 
special price, in leather binding, including postage, is $1.10. 

ANALYTICAL CONCORDANCE TO THE SCRIPTURES. 

In English, Hebrew and Greek, by Prof. Young (Presbyterian). 
A valuable work for all critical students. Price, in 
cloth binding, $5, including postage. We are not permitted 
by the publishers to cut this price; but may and do give postage 
free and give besides a premium of any six volumes of the 
MILLENNIAL DAWN series in cloth binding with each Concordance, 
or six volumes if purchaser pays the expressage. 

THE EXHAUSTIVE CONCORDANCE TO THE 
SCRIPTURES. 

In English, Hebrew and Greek, by Prof. Strong (Methodist). 
This is also an able work and useful in critical study. It 
has some advantages over Young's; after getting used to it we 
prefer it. Price, in cloth binding, $6; half leather, $8; full 
leather, $10. We will pay mail or express charges on these, 
and in addition give as a premium all six volumes of the 
DAWN series in cloth binding, with each Concordance, or nine 
volumes if purchaser pays expressage. 

CRUDEN'S CONCORDANCE TO THE SCRIPTURES. 

A valuable work, but scarcely necessary to those who 
have either one of the above mentioned. English only. Cloth 
binding, $1, postage included. 

SMITH'S BIBLE DICTIONARY. 

This is one of the most desirable editions of Prof. Smith's 
work. It is a large volume of 1020 pages. In cloth binding, 
$1.30, including postage. 

"BIBLE TALKS IN SIMPLE LANGUAGE." 

This is the best book of its kind we have ever seen. It 
presents the Bible stories in simple, but not childish language, 
and seems remarkably free from the bad theology so common 
in this class of books. All Christian parents should have a 
Sunday Bible lesson with their children, and this book furnishes 
interesting topics, to which may be added as much concordant 
"present truth" as the age of the children will justify. 
Parents are responsible for their children's training in theology 
as well as morals. This will assist you in the discharge of this 
duty, and thus be a blessing to yourself as well as to your 
children. 

624 pages, 250 illustrations; cloth sides, leather back and 
corners, gilt edges. A subscription book at $3. Our special 



price 75 cents, plus 25 cents postage. 

HEAVENLY MANNA 
FOR THE HOUSEHOLD OF FArTH 

This is a new publication of our own which we believe will 
be in great demand as soon as known. It is a text-book for 
each day in the year— and good year by year continuously. 
Sister G. W. Seibert has selected the texts, which is assurance 
enough that they are appropriate. 

But this is more than a text-book; it has an appropriate 
comment under each text selected by the same dear Sister 
from the columns of back issues of the WATCH TOWER. You 
will surely agree with us that our dear Sister has exercised excellent 
judgment in making these selections,— and more, that 
she was, in harmony with prayers offered, specially guided of 
the Lord in the selections. 

The pages will be of same width as those of DAWN, but a 
little shorter. The paper, etc., are good and the cloth binding 
is neat and attractive; 190 pages, price 35c postpaid;— to 
WATCH TOWER subscribers at the wholesale rate, 20c each, 
postpaid or in quantities, charges collect, 15c. Free to any 
WATCH TOWER subscriber too poor to pay for it, on request. 
We hope to begin filling orders January 1 . 

We hope that this little book will find a place at every 
breakfast table; and that spiritual refreshment may thus be 
enjoyed with the natural food, stimulating thankfulness to the 
Giver of all Good and thus inducing the peace of God and 
favoring both spiritual and natural health and well-being. 



SPECIMEN LINES OF VARIOUS SIZES OF TYPE REFERRED 
TO ON REVERSE PAGE: 

This line is Brilliant type. This line is Diamond type. 

This line is Pearl type. This line is Ruby type. 

This line is Nonpareil type. This line is Emerald Minion. 

This line is Emerald type. 

This line is Minion type. 

This line is Brevier type. 

This line is Bourgeois type. 

This line is Long Primer type. 

This line is Small Pica type. 



Specimen of Boldface Brevier Edition (No. 3596x). 
Christ purges the temple. ST. JOHN 3. Necessity 



R3470 : page 360 

THE SOLON ASSOCIATION. 

What the WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT 

SOCIETY does for its patrons in the matter of securing 

them wholesale rates on Bibles, etc., the SOLON ASSOCIATION 

does for its members in all lines of goods; 

and on many lines there is a still greater discrepancy between 

the wholesale and the retail prices than on Bibles. 

The managers of the Solon are well-known to us as in 

every way honorable and reliable and we give this announcement 

without solicitation for the benefit of 

WATCH TOWER readers,-that they all (as well as the 

Bible House force) may benefit by the wholesale purchasing 

arrangement, effecting large savings in our purchases 

yearly. See notice on page 2. 



page 361 

YOUR "GOOD HOPES" 1905. 



[The plan here proposed we designate "GOOD HOPES," 
because nothing is actually promised— only your generous 
hopes expressed, based upon your future prospects as they 
now appear to you. The plan proved not only so beneficial 
to the cause of truth, but also so blessed to the hopers, for 
some years past, that we again commend it to all as Scriptural 
and good. Those who desire to make use of this plan 
can fill out both of these memoranda. One should be kept 
for the refreshment of your memory; the other mail to us.] 

To the 
"WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY." 

Dear Friends:— I have read with interest of the openings 
for the Dawn and Tract work in foreign lands and here 
at home. I need not tell you that I am deeply interested 
in the spread of the Glad Tidings of the lengths and 
breadths, the heights and depths of redeeming love expressed 
for us in God's great Plan of the Ages. 

I am anxious to use myself— every power, every talent, 



voice, time, money, influence, all— to give to others this 
knowledge, which has so greatly blessed, cheered and comforted 
my own heart and placed my feet firmly upon the 
Rock of Ages. 

I have been considering carefully, and praying to be instructed, 
how to use my various talents more to my Redeemer's 
glory and for the service of his people— those 
blinded by human tradition who are, nevertheless, hungering 
for "the good Word of God," and those also who are 
naked, not having on the wedding garment of Christ's imputed 
righteousness, the unjustified, who stand at best in 
the filthy rags of their own righteousness. I have decided 
that so far as my "money talent" goes, I will follow the rule 
so clearly laid down for us by the great Apostle Paul (1 Cor. 16:2), 
and will lay aside on the first day of each week, according 
to my thankful appreciation of the Lord's blessings 
during the preceding week. Out of this fund I wish to contribute 
to the several parts of the Lord's work specified on 
the back of this letter. Of course, I cannot in advance 
judge or state particularly what the Lord's bounty may enable 
me to set apart weekly, and hence you will understand 
the sum indicated to be merely my conjecture or hope, based 
upon present prospects. I will endeavor to contribute more 
than I here specify; and should I not succeed in doing as 
well, the Lord will know my heart, and you, also, will know 
of my endeavors. 

My only object in specifying in advance what I hope to 
be able to do in this cause is to enable those in charge of 
the work of publishing and circulating the Tracts, etc., to 
form estimates, lay plans, make contracts, etc., with some 
idea of what I will at least try to do in the exercise of this 
my highly appreciated privilege. 

My present judgment is that during the coming year, by 
self-denial and cross-bearing, I shall be able to lay aside on 
the first day of each week for Home and Foreign Mission 
Work (to assist in circulating Millennial Dawn in foreign 
languages, and in publishing the "Old Theology Tracts" in 
various languages, and in supplying these gratuitously to 
brethren who have the heart and opportunity to circulate 
them widely, and in meeting the expenses of brethren sent 
out as "Pilgrims" to preach the divine plan of salvation, 
and in general to be expended as the officers of the Society 
may deem best), the amount of per week. 

To comply with United States Postal Laws, all or any 
portion of my donation may be applied as subscription price 
for Watch Tower or O.T. Tracts sent to the Lord's poor 
or others, as the Society's officers may deem advisable. 

That the work be not hindered, I will endeavor to send 
you what I shall have laid aside for this cause at the close 
of each quarter. I will secure a Bank Draft, Express Order 
or Postal Money Order as I may find most convenient, and 
will address the letter to 

WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 

"Bible House," Allegheny, Pa. 



(Name) 

(Post Office) (State). 



page 362 

WATCH TOWER SUBSCRIPTIONS 

-ON GOOD HOPES ACCOUNT.- 

The friends who contribute to the "Good Hopes" (described 
on the reverse of this sheet) at times desire to send 
the Watch Tower to friends who are not yet interested 
enough to subscribe for themselves; or to deeply interested 
friends who are too poor to subscribe and backward about 
accepting our Lord's Poor offer. They are invited to give 
us such addresses below— the expense to be deducted from 
their donations. Give full addresses, and write very plainly 
please, mentioning the length of the subscriptions. 



CHRISTIAN HOME EMBELLISHMENTS. 



For several years we have been supplying our readers 
with handsome text and motto cards for the walls of their 
homes. Their influence is excellent; for they continually 
and cheerfully catch the eye and remind the heart of our 
great favors present and to come, based upon the exceeding 
great and precious promises of our Father's Word. We 
commend these as helps in the "narrow way,"— helps in 
character-building . 

We aim to have a good supply of these very choice cards constantly 
on hand, and for particular description of some (not all) 
of the styles would refer you to our illustrated list, which will 
be sent on request. We still recommend the dollar packages 
as the most satisfactory way, all things considered, of acquiring 
these texts. They are sent carriage paid for $1.16, by prepaid 
express whenever feasible. 

OLD THEOLOGY TRACTS. 



These are published quarterly, copies being sent to all subscribers. 
Other copies, for distribution among friends, from 
house to house, for enclosure in letters, and in general for use 
in such ways as seem judicious, are supplied freely, the expense 
entailed by the great demand for them being borne by the 
Tract Fund of voluntary contributions. Write for the tracts as 



you feel able to use them, even if not so well able to contribute 
toward the expense; some who are not able, and do contribute, 
do not have opportunities personally to use all that their 
contributions pay for, so that the matter is equalized, 
and all may have a part in this service of disseminating 
the truth. 

A PRIVILEGE AND A SERVICE. 



We are convinced that the Watch Tower lists do not contain 
the names of one-half of those deeply interested in its teachings. 
The total is small enough surely, and we are not content that 
the name of any should be missing. We believe that all such 
will be stimulated and encouraged on the "narrow way" by 
its semi-monthly appearance on their table, reminding them 
afresh of spiritual matters which the world, the flesh and the 
devil continually tend to crowd out of mind and heart. 

Hitherto we have required that all desiring the Watch Tower 
on credit, or free, as "the Lord's Poor," should make personal 
application; but now we request every subscriber to inquire 
among those whom he knows to be interested in present truth, 
and to obtain the consent of all such to send in their subscriptions 
either on credit or free, as their circumstances may necessitate. 
Any getting it on credit may at any future time request 
that the debt be cancelled, and we will cheerfully comply. We 
desire that as nearly as possible the Watch Tower lists shall 
represent all those deeply interested in its message. 

Our object is not the gain of "filthy lucre," but "the perfecting 
of the saints for the work of ministry"— present and to 
come. (Eph. 4:12.) We offer no premiums, desiring the 
co-operation of such only as appreciate the privilege of being 
co-workers with us in this ministry. Our list is now about 
17,000; but it should be at least 25,000, and we confidently 
expect the above program to bring it to that figure. Let as 
many as appreciate it as a privilege, join at once in this service. 

WATCH TOWER SUBSCRIPTION RENEWALS. 



Most of our subscriptions end with the year, so we take this 
opportunity to remark that we will be glad to hear promptly 
from such as desire the visits of the Watch Tower continued. 
This applies to all who get it on the Lord's Poor list as well 
as to those who pay. When names are dropped and afterward 
renewed it makes us unnecessary trouble. 



R3467 : page 363 

"THOU SHALT WORSHIP THE LORD THY GOD, AND HIM ONLY SHALT 
THOU SERVE." 



--LUKE 4:8.-DECEMBER 18.- 

THIS is the Golden Text of a review lesson intended 
to refresh our minds respecting the Lord's dealings 
with Israel, as portrayed in all the lessons of the 
present quarter. It is placed before the end of the three 
months, that the last Sunday of the period, being Christmas, 
may have a more suitable topic. 

We recommend a general re-examination of the lessons 
of the quarter as a good means of refreshing the mind 
and the heart. Others see in the Lord's special dealings 
with Israel his general supervision of the nations of the 
world and a general responsibility of all peoples, similar 
to that of the Jews; but we see in all these things the very 
reverse lesson, namely, that the children of Jacob, called 
Israel, subsequent to the division into the two kingdoms 
known as Ephraim and Judah, were God's specially covenanted 
people, and were dealt with in a different manner 
from other nations. The Word of the Lord on this subject 
is very explicit. Through the Prophet he declares, 
"You only have I known of all the families of the earth." 
(Amos 3:2) This nation alone had special divine supervision 
of its affairs and the promises and instructions, 
through the Prophets, the Law, etc. The Gentile nations, 
as the Apostle explains, were "strangers, aliens and foreigners 
from the commonwealth of Israel"— "without 
God, having no hope in the world."— Eph. 2:12. 

Very true, the Lord did in a general way exercise 
toward all nations a law of cause and effect which we still 
see in operation in every quarter of the world, and he did 
supervise the affairs of the other nations to the extent of 
not permitting them to interfere with the general outlines 
of his plan and his times and seasons. For instance, we 
see that at the appropriate time for the exodus God specially 
raised up Pharaoh to the throne of Egypt because 
he was a particularly headstrong man, who would resist 
the exodus of that people and thus bring down upon the 
nation the ten plagues which they well deserved and which 
would be typical of certain plagues in the end of this age 
against the antitype of Pharaoh, namely, Satan, who shall 
be ultimately overwhelmed, and all people desiring to be 
God's people shall be delivered from his yoke of bondage. 

Similarly, at the time for the removal of the typical 
diadem from Israel, God's providences favored the exaltation 
of Nebuchadnezzar as a world emperor, the head, the 
first of a series of universal empires whose united reigns he 
foreshowed would constitute the "times of the Gentiles," 
the beginning and ending of which times are clearly marked. 
Evidently divine power had to do with the beginning of 
these times of the Gentiles and will have even more to do 
with their closing, at which time Immanuel shall take the 
reigns of government, the result being the dashing to pieces 
of the nations by the iron rod of his authority.— Rev. 2:27. 

It is interesting to note that although the higher critics 
of today take precisely the same grounds as the open infidels 
of a century ago, so far as an attempt to discredit the Bible 



is concerned, nevertheless they have been obliged to alter 
and amend those arguments to fit the new conditions. 
Modern excavations in Babylon and in Egypt have brought 
to light many interesting matters which all tend to corroborate 
the Scripture records which infidelity of a century 
ago held as unauthentic and totally misleading. But while 
forced to acknowledge that in a general way they corroborate 
the Scriptures, these modern infidels do attempt 
to prove by these old records that the scriptural chronology 
is wholly at fault. They attempt to stretch out history 
so as to prove that some of the records were written 
earlier than the date which the Scriptures assign to Adam. 
Their reasonings are specious, false, but nevertheless they 
are deceptive to some who do not discern that these 
learned gentlemen are striving hard to make these ancient 
records contradict the Scriptures. 

There is a deceptive plausibility in their reasoning, 
too: they attempt to count up the many kings, assigning 
each his period, and the sum of these reigns would indeed 
extend back a long distance; but do we not see that they 
are manifestly and willingly ignorant of the fact that 
probably many of these "kings" were merely under kings 
and princes, just as we have today an illustration in Germany: 
the emperors are one line of monarchs in Germany 
while the kings of the various states of Germany 
have so many other lines of ancestry. To string these all 
together and treat them as one dynasty would mean confusion, 
blindness to the truth; it would imply a quadrupling 
of the length of German history. We may be sure 
that in due time, when all the facts shall be opened up, 
the Bible record will be substantiated, as it has been substantiated 
in every contest in the past. A little history 
of some of the findings referred to may not be amiss here. 
We quote:— 

SUCCESSFUL RESEARCH IN ANCIENT LANDS. 

"Many discoveries in the temples of Egypt and the 
ruins of Assyria, buried for twenty-five hundred years, 
throw great light on the Old Testament Scriptures. There 
has been discovered at Karnak, near Thebes in Egypt, a 
splendid structure erected by the very Shishak, king of Egypt, 
who conquered Rehoboam (I Kings 14:25-28; 2 Chron. 12:1-12), 
for the purpose of commemorating his victories. 
On the walls is sculptured the giant figure of the great 
conqueror, standing erect among the thirty -eight kings and 
rulers he has subdued. Among these captives stands a 
Jewish figure, distinguished by his beard, with a rope 
around his neck to indicate that he has been conquered. 
The Egyptian king is represented as striking down the 
Hebrews with a colossal club. The name of Judah appears 
on the sculptures. 

"The Moabite stone, discovered in 1868, in Dibon, 
east of Jordan, and now in the Louvre, Paris, contains an 
inscription by Mesha, king of Moab, recording events in 
the reigns of Omri and Ahab, and reads almost like a 



chapter of 2 Kings. The black obelisk discovered by Mr. 
Layard in Nineveh, describes the campaigns of Shalmaneser, 
and mentions Jehu and his tribute to Assyria. Royal 
tablets from the stone libraries of Nineveh mention Uzziah, 

R3468 : page 364 

Pekah and Hoshea. On one slab from his palace Sargan 
tells the story of the capture of Samaria. The Taylor 
Cylinder, found in Nineveh in 1830, and now in the British 
Museum, describes Sennacherib's conquest of Judah in 
the time of Hezekiah. The stone records of Assyrian history, 
called the 'Eponym Canon,' discovered in 1862, in 
Nineveh, by Sir Henry Rawlinson, help us to gain a more 
exact knowledge of the dates of this period." 

Our Golden Text, which constitutes the caption of 
this article, contains a valuable thought for any occasion, 
but one especially suited to this review. Looking at the 
history of God's earthly people, Israel after the flesh, we 
can readily see that all of their difficulties and failures to 
attain to the blessings that were before them, were closely 
associated with neglect of the truth set forth in our Golden 
Text. They did not sufficiently sanctify the Lord God 
in their hearts and let him be the only fear and only dread 
—fear to displease him, dread to come under his reproof. 
On the contrary, they were prone to forget the Lord and 
all the blessings and mercies they had received from him 
and the obligations they were under to him. 

They forgot, too, that a part of the Covenant entered 
into between the Lord and them was that if as a people 
they would honor him and serve him he would bless and 
honor them, but if as a people they rejected or neglected 
him, they were to have special disciplines and corrections. 
Their neglect of the Lord, their seeking without the Lord 
to establish themselves and to have the assistance and co-operation, 
and to adopt the manners, customs, etc., of 
foreign nations, all these were a part of their failure to 
properly worship the Lord and serve him alone. How 
great was their mistake! And yet we are to remember 
that a remnant did not make this mistake, though they 
were few. This remnant already received a blessing in 
the present life and are to have a still greater share in the 
favors of God in the coming age. 

Similarly nominal spiritual Israel has neglected the 
counsel of this Golden Text, and, instead of having the 
Lord first, has been disposed to forget the Lord and to 
affiliate with the world, to seek worldly favor and co-operation. 
Fear to displease the world has largely controlled 
Churchianity; desire to have the world's favor and approval 
has apparently been more important before the 
mind of Churchianity than the approval of the Lord and a 
fear of the loss of his favor. 

As a result we see today worldly customs in the professed 
Church of Christ, and note that these worldly customs 
have drawn into the nominal Church, as they were 
intended to do, large numbers of the world, unjustified, 



unsanctified, "tares," and that these now quite overwhelm 

the few who are loyal to the Lord and the spirit of his 

Truth. Nevertheless there is today, and has been all 

throughout the Gospel age, a "little flock," a "remnant," 

which did indeed trust the Lord, and which did 

indeed sanctify the Lord God in their hearts and 

make him alone their fear and him alone their dread 

—fear to displease him, dread to lose the light of his kindness, 

his favor. We trust, dear friends, that the majority 

of those who read these words are of the latter class. If 

so all things are working together for good to such, because 

they love the Lord and have been called according 

to his purpose, and are seeking to make their calling and 

election sure by so running as to obtain the prize. 



R3468 : page 364 

"THE PRINCE OF PEACE." 

-ISAIAH 9:l-7.-DECEMBER 25.- 

Golden Text:— "His name shall be called Wonderful, Counsellor, 
Mighty God, Everlasting Father, Prince of Peace."— R.V. 

EVEN though Christmas day is not the real anniversary 

of our Lord's birth, but more properly the annunciation 

day or the date of his human begetting 

(Luke 1:28), nevertheless, since the celebration of 

our Lord's birth is not a matter of divine appointment or 

injunction, but merely a tribute of respect to him, it is 

not necessary for us to quibble particularly about the date. 

We may as well join with the civilized world in celebrating 

the grand event on the day which the majority celebrate 

—"Christmas day." The lesson for the occasion is 

a most happy choice, fitting well to the series of lessons 

it follows. 

The first verse seems much better translated in the 
Revised Version, thus: "But there will be no gloom in 
her that was in anguish. In former time he brought into 
contempt the land of Zebulun and the land of Naphtali, 
but in the latter time hath he made it glorious, by way of 
the sea, beyond Jordan, Galilee of the nations." The 
Prophet penned these words probably shortly after the 
ten-tribe kingdom known as Ephraim had gone into captivity 
to Assyria. Zebulun and Naphtali were the names 
of the principal districts of Ephraim; and Isaiah, prophetically 
looking from those desolated lands of his time, under 
the guidance of the holy Spirit, points out that in the 
latter time a great blessing is coming to those very lands. 

It was centuries after Isaiah's prophecy that our dear 
Redeemer appeared among men and spent most of his 
time, did most of his mighty works, and performed most 
of his mighty miracles in these lands of Zebulun and 
Naphtali, called Galilee, which in the time of Isaiah had 



been denuded of its Jewish population and had been settled 
by Gentile emigrants, "Galilee of the Gentiles." 
Subsequently these Gentiles gathered more particularly in 
the vicinity of the city of Samaria, and became known as 
Samaritans, and, noting the hopes of the Israelites, were 
inclined to claim a certain share in the blessings belonging 
to the people into whose lands they had been introduced. 
The Jews, however, disowned them as being 
still Gentiles, and would have no dealings with the Samaritans, 
as the Apostle pointed out. 

Our Lord himself instructed the apostles to go not in 
the way of the Gentiles nor into any city of the Samaritans 

R3468 : page 365 

to announce him, declaring that he was not sent to 
any but the lost sheep of the house of Israel. He again 
declared to one of these Samaritans, "Ye worship ye know 
not what: we [the Jews] know what we worship: for salvation 
is of the Jews." (John 4:22.) Outside of the Samaritan 
districts all of Galilee became repopulated with 
Jews, though they represented generally the less noble 
class, so that it was rather as a mark of disrespect that our 
Lord and the apostles were called Galileans, Nazareth of 
Galilee being our Lord's home in his youth— a dis-esteemed 
city, as in the expression, "Can any good thing come out 
of Nazareth?" Our Lord indeed was born in Bethlehem, 
a more honorable city. Under divine providence he was 
taken to Nazareth, to the intent that a certain amount of 
odium might attach to him and to his cause. Thus often 
the Lord permits some unsavory influence to attach to the 
Truth, to the intent that none may receive his message 
except from the love of the Truth— that none should be 
influenced to receive it from any earthly consideration. 

THE LIGHT SHINED IN THE DARK VALLEY. 

The second verse of the lesson fitted well to Galilee: 
"The people that walked in darkness have seen a great 
light." As our Lord declared, "The light shined in 
darkness and the darkness comprehended it not." He was 
the light of the world and was in the world and the world 
knew him not. But there is a higher and deeper and 
broader sense in which these words are to be understood 
—they apply to all peoples who have been favored with 
the opening of the eyes of their understanding during this 
Gospel age. 

The people of Galilee in the day of our Lord's personal 
ministry, and other parts of the earth since with a 
similar humble class of people, have more or less had 
amongst them representatives of the true light, and in 
every case the light has shined in darkness and the darkness 
comprehended it not, as our Lord declared to be the 
case. Only a few appreciate this shining now because, 
as the Apostle declared, "The god of this world hath 
blinded the minds of them that believe not"— the eyes of 



their understanding are so darkened by false doctrines, 
misunderstanding and superstition that they cannot see 
those glorious things which can now be seen only by the 
eye of faith, the eyes of their understanding being opened. 

That the prophecy was not confined to the people of 
Galilee is evident from the last clause of the second verse, 
"They that dwell in the land of the shadow of death, 
upon them hath the light shined." The land of the shadow 
of death is the whole world, for the shadow of death 
has been on the whole world ever since the first transgression 
in Eden, ever since the curse or sentence of death 
was pronounced against our race. As the Prophet David 
describes it, the Lord's true people are blessed even while 
in the present valley and under the shadow of death: he 
says, "Though I walk through the valley of the shadow of 
death, I will fear no evil for thou art with me." It is to 
this class who walk with the Lord, who trust him, that 
the true light now shines— not as the glorious Sun of 
Righteousness, as it will shine by and by when the Millennial 
Kingdom is established, but merely as the little lamp, 
"Thy Word is a lamp to my feet, a lantern to my 
footsteps." 

This lamp shines not for the world but for those who 
are the Lord's special people, to whom the light of his 
revelation, the lamp of enlightenment is granted. All 
these thus walking in this valley, under the guidance and 
care of the great Captain of our Salvation, have indeed seen 
a great light in him, have seen a light which the world 
sees not. But, thank God, the world's time to see the 
great light is shortly coming, drawing nigh. As soon as 
the present work of selecting the Church, the Bride, the 

R3469 : page 365 

body members, is complete, these— changed, glorified— 
shall constitute the great Sun of Righteousness to shine 
forth upon the world, the light of divine Truth, the message 
of divine love and mercy and instruction in righteousness. 
These— Christ the Head and the Church his 
body— shall be the great Teacher of the world, who shall 
instruct all, and shall bring as many as are willing into 
full fellowship and perfection— destroying the unwilling 
and unworthy in the Second Death. 

JACOB'S RESCUE NEAR. 

But evidently the Prophet's vision, while it glanced 
upon the preaching of our Lord and the apostles in Galilee, 
and glanced down through the Gospel age and noted 
how this light glinted here and there as a wonderful 
"lamp," nevertheless rested not until it reached the very 
end of this age. There in prophetic vision Isaiah seems 
to see the end of Jacob's trouble— Israel's deliverance from 
the blindness that has been upon her, her acceptance of 
the Lord as the Messiah at the time mentioned by another 
Prophet, when the Lord would pour upon them the spirit 



of prayer and supplication and they should look upon him 
whom they had pierced and mourn for him— at the time 
mentioned by the Apostle Paul, when the fulness of the 
Gentiles having come in (the full number of the Gentiles 
to complete the elect number of the Church), divine 
mercy shall go forth from the Church to bless the world 
and shall rest first of all upon Israel according to the flesh, 
"They shall obtain mercy through your mercy."— 
Rom. 11:31. 

The third and fourth verses of our lesson, we believe, 
are near fulfilment. In the Revised Version it reads, "Thou 
hast multiplied the nation, thou hast increased her joy: they 
joy before thee according to the joy in harvest, and as men 
rejoice when they divide the spoil. For the yoke of his 
burden and the staff of his shoulder, the rod of his oppressor, 
thou hast broken as in the day of Midian." The nation 
of Israel is much increased today, the estimate at the present 
time being between ten and twelve millions. Their joy 
is not yet accomplished because this great deliverance here 
mentioned has not yet been accomplished. It is to be accomplished 
in the day of trouble, shortly after October, 
1914, we believe. The reference here to their deliverance 
being similar to that in the day of Midian signifies that, as 
in the days of Midian the Lord specially manifested divine 

R3469 : page 366 

power by which Gideon and a handful with him smote an 
immense army and delivered Israel from the oppressor, so 
here in the end of this age the glorified Lord and his glorified 
Church, the little flock, the antitype of Gideon and 
his band, will deliver Israel with a similar mighty manifestation 
of divine power. 

This coming deliverance is mentioned particularly in 
the prophecy of Zechariah, as follows:— "Behold, the 
day of the Lord cometh and thy spoil shall be divided in 
the midst of thee. I will gather all nations against Jerusalem 
to battle; and the city shall be taken, and the 
houses rifled and the women ravished: And half of the 
city shall go forth into captivity, and the residue of the 
people shall not be cut off from the city. Then shall the 
Lord go forth and fight against those nations as when he 
fought in the day of battle [the ancient time when the 
Lord worked miracles for Israel's deliverance as at Midian]. 
And his feet shall stand in that day upon the Mount of 
Olives. "-Zech. 14:1-4. 

The fifth verse seems to be more intelligently rendered 
in the Revised Version thus: "For all the armor of 
the armed man in the tumult, and the garments rolled in 
blood, shall even be for burning, for fuel of fire." The 
thought seems to be that at that time will come the end of 
warfare, as the Scriptures have declared. The time of 
trouble with which the Millennium will be introduced 
will be the means by which the Lord will overthrow all 
the powers of evil, as it is written, "He shall cause wars 
to cease unto the ends of the earth." Under the righteous 



reign which will then follow men will learn war no more, 
but will beat their swords into plowshares and their spears 
into pruning hooks. At the present time the reverse of 
all this is in operation, nor can we hope for a change such 
as the Lord's Word here and elsewhere predicts by any 
other power than that from above. Hence our prayer as 
our Lord instructed and in harmony with our hopes, "Thy 
Kingdom come and thy will be done on earth as it is done 
in heaven." 

THE GOVERNMENT UPON HIS SHOULDERS. 

As the verses three to five indicate the coming joys 
and blessings and cessation of war, verse six points out 
how this would be accomplished. This is shown by its 
introduction with the word "for." This verse is the Golden 
Text of our lesson, its center, its pivot point. It goes 
back of the promised blessings to point out how they will 
be introduced. (1) A child will be born— a Son will be 
given— a gift from God. (2) Passing over his earthly 
ministry and faithfulness, whereby the Lord Jesus was 
tested and proven worthy of the favors here prophetically 
assured him as the overcomer, we have the declaration that 
the government will be upon his shoulders. This is an 
old-style figurative way of declaring that the authority and 
honor will be laid upon the Lord Jesus. The same 
thought is still carried out in the armies of the world, 
whose generals have upon their shoulders epaulets in 
which the dignity of their rank is noted, is indicated. 
So upon our Lord Jesus the heavenly Father has placed 
the dignity and responsibility of being the great King 
who in due time, as the Father's representative, as the 
great glorified Mediator, shall reign for a thousand years 
to restore order in the world, to put down all insubordination, 
to destroy every enemy of righteousness and truth 
and to exalt every one who is the friend of these divine 
principles. 

It is worthy of note that this authority or government 
is conferred upon our Lord before he assumes the various 
offices subsequently made: remarkably few recognize the 
authority of this great Captain of our Salvation whom God 
has set forth. Only comparatively few recognize him 
truly and render him obedience and refuse not him who 
speaketh from heaven. These few have the eyes of their 
understanding opened and see what the others do not see, 
and the ears of their understanding opened that they hear 
and comprehend what others do not comprehend. To 
them the Master is the Father's representative and all in 
all even now— even before the time has come for him to 
take his great power and reign, even before he has established 
truth and righteousness in the world. By the eye 
of faith they see him, recognize him, worship, adore, obey 
and follow him. 

KNOWLEDGE OF HIS GLORY WORLD-WIDE. 



But our lesson implies much more than such an acknowledgment 
of our Lord Jesus by the Church. It implies 
a world-wide knowledge, as it is written, "Unto him 
every knee shall bow, and every tongue confess, to the 
glory of God the Father." The government or authority 
is not laid upon his shoulders in vain, and the fact that he 
has not exercised this authority in now nearly two thousand 
years' triumph and ascension up on high is merely in 
accord with the scriptural declaration that the Father has 
a due time set at which the Son shall take unto himself his 
great power and reign, and in association with himself the 
Church, the little flock, now being gathered out from 
the world during this Gospel age. 

The time when the Lord shall manifest to the world 
his government, his authority, his rule, is represented in 
Daniel 12: 1,2, by the words, "stand up." "At that time 
shall Michael [another name for our glorious Lord] stand 
up, and there shall be a time of trouble such as was not 
since there was a nation; and at that time thy people 
shall be delivered, every one found written in the book." 
Our Lord will not have the authority in vain. When he 
shall have the authority he will use it, and one of the first 
works, we are assured, will be the suppression of evil— not 
only the suppression of Satan, the prince of this world, 
who now worketh in the hearts of the children of disobedience, 
and who, we are assured, will be bound at the beginning 
of that Millennial reign, but additionally all the 
works of the devil, all institutions of evil, moral, social, 
financial, that are now injuring the world of mankind and co-operating 
in effecting the groaning and travailing of the 
whole creation. All these will be suppressed as soon as the 
proper time shall come, and he upon whose shoulders the 
power and authority have been placed shall take unto himself 

R3469 : page 367 

his great power and shall begin his reign. No longer, we 
may be sure, will any evil be licensed; no longer will the 
making of spirituous liquors be permitted, authorized and 
licensed, nor the sale of these nor any other harmful thing 
be allowed to do injury in God's holy Kingdom. ~ 
Isa. 11:9. 

It will be then, at that time, that the whole world 
shall begin to recognize the great King whom God will 
thus set in the throne of the world's dominions to rule it, 
to order it to subdue it, to lift it up out of sin and degradation 
and to bring it into harmony again with God as 
it was before sin entered. 

"COUNSELLOR," MIGHTY ONE, FATHER. 

The great Mediator, the Christ, "Prophet, Priest 
and King," Judge, the Seed of Abraham in whom all the 
families of the earth shall be blessed, shall have various 
names; his character and work shall be recognized from 
various standpoints. He will be the Wonderful in that 



in himself he will manifest more than others the Father's 
character and likeness and nature; he will be Counsellor, 
Teacher, Instructor, Helper, Guide, for the whole world 
of mankind; he will be Mighty God— the one with all 
power and authority to deal with mankind throughout the 
Millennial age. 

There will be no appeal from his righteous laws, regulations 
and decisions because the Father hath committed 
all judgment unto the Son: the whole matter will be left 
in his hands. From another standpoint he will be the 
Everlasting Father; having purchased the life of Adam 
and his race with the sacrifice of his own human life, our 
Lord having been granted a new life in his resurrection, 
will have at his disposal the life which he bought in the 

R3470 : page 367 

sacrificing of his own in such measure as will be sufficient 
to supply every member of Adam's race. Each member 
of our race as he shall respond to the knowledge that shall 
then be filling the whole earth, may receive life more and 
more abundantly from the glorified Christ— everlasting 
life, the life that was lost in Adam's disobedience and that 
was redeemed by Christ's sacrifice of himself. 

The one from whom all life for the world must proceed 
is fitly called the Father of the world, since the word 
father signifies life-giver; and since this Father gives life 
everlasting, it is eminently proper that he should be called 
the Father of everlasting life or the Everlasting Father. 
Prince of Peace is another of his titles, but this one evidently 
will not be appropriate to him until, toward the 
close of the Millennial age, he shall have accomplished 
the putting down of everything obnoxious to divine righteousness, 
the subjugation of all things to himself— until 
he shall have finished the use of the iron rod in smiting 
the nations in dashing them to pieces as a potter's vessel. 
Then it will be seen that the motive beyond all this activity 
against unrighteousness was the bringing in of everlasting 
righteousness, the bringing in of everlasting peace, 
and it will be seen that the title well fits our great King, 
Prince of Peace. 

NO END OF RIGHTEOUS GOVERNMENT. 

The seventh verse of our lesson gives another precious 
assurance, and that is that this Kingdom once being attained 
by our Lord will never be surrendered to another, 
never pass into other hands. Of his government and of 
his peace which he will establish there will be no end. 
Not only Israel, but all mankind have been witnesses that 
the best of kings as well as the worst of kings have at times 
surrendered their dominions, and that the best of kings 
might be followed by the worst. How appropriate then 
the suggestion that when the Kingdom of this great King 
of kings and Lord of lords shall have conquered the world 
and have subdued all things unto him and brought all 



things into harmony with the divine will, it shall never 
again be overturned by evil. 

The expression, "upon the throne of David, and upon 
his kingdom to establish it and to uphold it with judgment 
and righteousness from henceforth even forever; the 
zeal of the Lord shall perform this," signifies that this 
great Kingdom which our Lord Jesus at his second advent 
will establish— his Church as members of his body, members 
of his Kingdom class, his Bride associated with him 
—will be the outcome, the antitype of that which was 
typically presented to Israel in the kingdom, the government 
of David. As previously seen, the name David signifies 
"Beloved," and the David who was the first king on 
Israel's throne, and of whom it was said that he sat upon 
the throne of the Lord, was merely a type, a figure of the 
greater David, the Anointed, the Messiah. Jesus Christ, 
the first Lord of all, and the Church his body associated 
with him, constitute the antitypical David, the antitypical 
Beloved of the Lord, whose kingdom shall be an everlasting 
Kingdom "henceforth even forevermore." 

UNENDING KINGDOM TRANSFERRED. 

The Apostle points out (I Cor. 15:28) that, at the 
close of his thousand-year reign, our Lord (his Church associated 
with him) will abdicate the throne of earth. Having 
accomplished the work which the Father has set apart 
to be accomplished by the Anointed in this Millennial 
reign, at its close the entire authority, with the world in 
complete subjection to the divine law and fully restored 
to the divine likeness and all wilful transgressors cut off, 
will be surrendered to the Father's hands, and in accordance 
with his pre-arrangement will be redelivered to mankind, 
that the perfect human family, in the image and 
likeness of God, may rule the world in harmony with the 
divine regulations. But the government will never cease, 
because the government which Christ establishes is the 
divine government, and having given up this special work, 
the Christ will be even more particularly associated with 
the Father in his throne in the general government of the 
universe; and since the government of earth is merely a 
part of the government of the universe, it will still be in 
that particular sense under the supervision of the glorified 
Christ. 

The zeal of the Lord shall perform this. It will not 
be the arm of man nor the zeal of man, however good 
or well meaning, which could bring to pass such wonderful 
changes as those which the Lord has pointed out. The 
Lord himself will accomplish it; he will put all things 
into subjection to the Son— all things, the Apostle explains, 
except himself, for he is excepted who thus puts all 
things under the Son.— I Cor. 15:27. 

From this standpoint, looking back over the history 
of the world, we get a grand view of the divine power and 
wisdom and justice and love. We see how God has been 
continually overruling in respect to the efforts of man, to 



the intent that ultimately, without interfering with the 
free moral agency of any, every man of the whole race of 
Adam shall be fully and thoroughly tested and proven respecting 
his loyalty to the Lord, and thus respecting his 
worthiness of life eternal. How glorious is the divine 
plan! What wonder is there that with its accomplishment 
every voice in heaven and in earth shall be heard 
expressing praise and thankfulness, glory, honor, dominion 
and might to him that sitteth upon the throne and to 
the Lamb? 



page 369 

SEMI-MONTHLY. 