International Conventions in 2003
ON Saturday, October 6, 2001, the annual meeting of members of the Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society of Pennsylvania was held in Jersey City, New Jersey, U.S.A. After that meeting, a special program was enjoyed by the members and their guests. The following day, at supplemental meetings held in four cities in Canada and the United States, members of the Governing Body of Jehovah’s Witnesses made the following announcement after their closing talk:
“As we look to the future, it is highly important that all of God’s people not forsake the assembling of themselves together. The apostle Paul exhorted that this, along with encouraging one another, be done all the more so as we behold Jehovah’s great and fear-inspiring day drawing near. (Hebrews 10:24, 25) In harmony with this Scriptural injunction, we hope to have district conventions in all parts of the world next year [2002]. Then in the year 2003, if it be Jehovah’s will, it may be possible to hold special international conventions in certain regions of the world. Now is the time to stay awake and keep on the watch, discerning how events on the world scene develop.”
Despite the mounting uncertainty and tensions as this present system nears its end, the activity of God’s people must move ahead. The Kingdom good news, including the Bible’s warning message, must be declared to every nation, tribe, tongue, and people, calling upon them to ‘fear God and give him glory because his judgment hour draws ever closer.’ (Revelation 14:6, 7) Therefore, according to our heavenly Father’s will and good pleasure, international conventions are being planned in various regions of the world for the year 2003.
To begin with, such gatherings are tentatively scheduled for a few cities in North America and shortly thereafter in Europe. A little later in 2003, arrangements will be in place for groups of delegates to travel to a few cities in Asia; and toward the end of the year, additional groups will go to Africa, South America, and the Pacific area. Certain branches will be requested to send a limited number of delegates to specific convention locations, so it will not be possible to give everyone an open invitation to attend. Nevertheless, it will be encouraging to have limited delegations representing different countries at each place.
Congregations of Jehovah’s Witnesses will soon be receiving information concerning these gatherings. Information about the exact dates and specific cities where invited delegates are able to attend will be provided by their respective branches. Hence, it is requested that you do not write or make inquiries about this matter at this time.
Those eventually selected as delegates will be limited to dedicated and baptized Witnesses who will be fine examples and show brotherly affection to the local brothers. These, in turn, will have fine opportunities to extend to the visitors a loving welcome and genuine hospitality. (Hebrews 13:1, 2) This will result in “an interchange of encouragement.” (Romans 1:11, 12) Further details regarding these arrangements will be supplied by the branches that are invited to send delegates to a particular country or countries.
Three-day district conventions for the year 2003 will be arranged in most countries as usual. By assembling together, all will have the opportunity to ‘listen, learn, and be encouraged.’ (Deuteronomy 31:12; 1 Corinthians 14:31) This will afford all of God’s people an opportunity to “taste and see that Jehovah is good.” (Psalm 34:8) At all international conventions, as well as at many of the district conventions, missionaries will be present, some of whom will be featured on the program.
During this calendar year, we are enjoying the “Zealous Kingdom Proclaimers” District Conventions, which stimulate us to give a greater witness. As we do this, our anticipation will surely grow for what Jehovah has in store for the coming year. This will help us to ‘keep on the watch, stay awake, and prove ourselves ready’ in view of these critical and momentous times.—Matthew 24:42-44.

