Walking in Jehovah’s Paths Brings Rich Rewards
HAVE you ever hiked in the mountains? If you have, you likely felt as if you were on the roof of the world. How delightful it was to breathe the fresh air, to see far into the distance, to absorb the natural beauty! Perhaps the cares of the world below seemed a little less important.
For most people such excursions are few and far between, but if you are a dedicated Christian, you may have been walking in high country for some time—in a spiritual sense. Like the psalmist of old, you have no doubt prayed: “Make me know your own ways, O Jehovah; teach me your own paths.” (Psalm 25:4) Do you remember how you felt when you first went up to the mountain of the house of Jehovah and began to tread in high places? (Micah 4:2; Habakkuk 3:19) Doubtless, you soon realized that walking along these elevated paths of pure worship brought you protection and joy. You came to share the psalmist’s feelings: “Happy are the people knowing the joyful shouting. O Jehovah, in the light of your face they keep walking.”—Psalm 89:15.
Sometimes, though, hikers in mountainous terrain have to contend with long, steep slopes. Their legs begin to ache, and they become weary. We too can experience difficulties in our godly service. Recently, our steps may have been a little labored. How can we regain our vigor and our joy? A first step is to recognize the supremacy of Jehovah’s ways.
Jehovah’s Elevated Laws
Jehovah’s ways are ‘higher than man’s ways,’ and his worship has been ‘firmly established above the mountains and lifted up above the hills.’ (Isaiah 55:9; Micah 4:1) Jehovah’s wisdom is “the wisdom from above.” (James 3:17) His laws are superior to all others. For example, at a time when the Canaanites practiced cruel child sacrifice, Jehovah gave the Israelites laws that were morally elevated and marked by compassion. He told them: “You must not treat the lowly with partiality, and you must not prefer the person of a great one. . . . The alien resident . . . should become to you like a native of yours; and you must love him as yourself.”—Leviticus 19:15, 34.
Fifteen centuries later, Jesus gave more examples of Jehovah’s ‘majestic law.’ (Isaiah 42:21) In the Sermon on the Mount, he told his disciples: “Continue to love your enemies and to pray for those persecuting you; that you may prove yourselves sons of your Father who is in the heavens.” (Matthew 5:44, 45) “All things, therefore, that you want men to do to you, you also must likewise do to them,” he added. “This, in fact, is what the Law and the Prophets mean.”—Matthew 7:12.
These elevated laws have an effect on the hearts of responsive people, motivating them to imitate the God they worship. (Ephesians 5:1; 1 Thessalonians 2:13) Think of the transformation that occurred in the case of Paul. When we first hear of him, he “was approving of the murder of” Stephen and dealing “outrageously with the congregation.” Just a few years later, he was dealing gently with the Christians in Thessalonica like “a nursing mother [who] cherishes her own children.” Divine teaching changed Paul from a persecutor to a caring Christian. (Acts 8:1, 3; 1 Thessalonians 2:7) He was certainly grateful that his personality had been molded by Christ’s teaching. (1 Timothy 1:12, 13) How can a similar appreciation help us keep walking along God’s elevated paths?
Walking Appreciatively
Hikers delight in the spectacular views that high country affords. They also learn to savor small things alongside the footpath, such as an unusual rock, a pretty flower, or a glimpse of a wild animal. Spiritually, we need to be alert to the rewards—large and small—that come from walking with God. This awareness can put a spring in our step and transform a tiresome trudge into an invigorating walk. We will echo the words of David: “In the morning cause me to hear your loving-kindness, for in you I have put my trust. Make known to me the way in which I should walk.”—Psalm 143:8.
Mary, who has walked for many years in Jehovah’s paths, says: “When I look at Jehovah’s creation, I see not only the intricate design but God’s warm personality. Whether it be an animal, a bird, or an insect, each one is a little world, full of fascination. The same enjoyment comes from spiritual truths that become clearer over the years.”
How can we deepen our appreciation? In part, by not taking for granted what Jehovah does for us. “Pray incessantly,” Paul wrote. “In connection with everything give thanks.”—1 Thessalonians 5:17, 18; Psalm 119:62.
Personal study contributes to a grateful spirit. Paul urged the Colossian Christians: “Go on walking in union with [Christ Jesus], . . . overflowing with faith in thanksgiving.” (Colossians 2:6, 7) Reading the Bible and meditating on what we read strengthens our faith and draws us closer to the Bible’s Author. Throughout its pages are treasures that can incite us to ‘overflow in thanksgiving.’
Serving Jehovah alongside our brothers also makes the way easier. The psalmist said of himself: “A partner I am of all those who do fear you.” (Psalm 119:63) Some of our happiest moments are spent at Christian assemblies or otherwise in the company of our brothers. We recognize that our precious worldwide Christian family owes its existence to Jehovah and his elevated ways.—Psalm 144:15b.
Besides appreciation, a sense of responsibility will strengthen us to keep progressing along Jehovah’s elevated paths.
Walking Responsibly
Hikers with a sense of responsibility recognize the need to walk carefully if they are to avoid getting lost or straying too close to steep drops. As free moral agents, Jehovah allows us a fair measure of freedom and initiative. But such freedom requires a sense of responsibility as we fulfill our Christian obligations.
For example, Jehovah trusts his servants to fulfill their obligations responsibly. He does not state how much energy and time we should expend in Christian activities or how much we should contribute financially or in other ways. Rather, Paul’s words to the Corinthians apply to us all: “Let each one do just as he has resolved in his heart.”—2 Corinthians 9:7; Hebrews 13:15, 16.
Responsible Christian giving includes sharing the good news with others. We also show that we are responsible by contributing to the worldwide Kingdom work. Gerhardt, an elder, explains that he and his wife increased their contributions significantly after visiting an assembly in Eastern Europe. “We saw that our brothers there have so little in a material way; yet they appreciate our Bible literature so much,” he says, “so we decided that we wanted to give as much support as we could to our needy brothers in other lands.”
Increasing Our Endurance
Walking in high country demands stamina. Hikers exercise whenever they can, and many take short walks to prepare themselves for long hikes. Similarly, Paul recommended that we keep busy in theocratic activities in order to maintain our spiritual fitness. Those who wish “to walk worthily of Jehovah” and to be “made powerful,” Paul said, should “go on bearing fruit in every good work.”—Colossians 1:10, 11.
Motivation contributes to the hiker’s staying power. How? Keeping focused on a clear objective, such as a distant mountain, has a stimulating effect. And when the hiker arrives at intermediate landmarks, he can measure his progress toward his ultimate goal. As he looks back at the distance already traveled, he feels satisfied.
Likewise, our hope of everlasting life sustains and impels us. (Romans 12:12) Meanwhile, as we walk in Jehovah’s ways, we find accomplishment in setting and then attaining Christian goals. And what joy we feel when we look back on years of faithful service or observe the changes that we have made in our personality!—Psalm 16:11.
To cover long distances and conserve energy, walkers move at a steady pace. Similarly, a good routine that includes regular meetings and field service will keep us moving intently toward our goal. Thus, Paul encouraged fellow Christians: “Let us go on walking orderly in this same routine.”—Philippians 3:16.
Of course, we do not walk alone along Jehovah’s paths. “Let us consider how we may spur one another on toward love and good deeds,” Paul writes. (Hebrews 10:24, New International Version) Good spiritual company will make it easier to keep up the pace as we walk with fellow believers.—Proverbs 13:20.
Finally, and most important, we must never forget the power that Jehovah gives. Those whose strength is in Jehovah will “walk on from vital energy to vital energy.” (Psalm 84:5, 7) Though we at times must traverse rough terrain, with Jehovah’s assistance we can do it.

