Kingdom Proclaimers Report
“You Know So Much About the Bible”
WHEN 12-year-old Jesus courageously spoke to the religious leaders in Jerusalem, “all those listening to him were in constant amazement at his understanding and his answers.” (Luke 2:47) Similarly today, many young servants of Jehovah muster up courage to speak to their teachers and schoolmates about God and the Bible, and often they experience equally gratifying results.
Tiffany, age 14, was in a class where one discussion was directed to the Bible prophecy of the 70 weeks of years, found at Daniel 9:24-27. The teacher gave a few facts about the verses and quickly glossed over the subject.
At first, Tiffany was hesitant about raising her hand. “But for some reason,” she says, “it really bothered me that the verses were not fully explained. And before I knew it, my hand was up.” The teacher was amazed that someone actually had something to say on the subject, since most of the students were having a difficult time understanding it.
Given the opportunity to explain the prophecy, Tiffany stood up and spoke extemporaneously. As she finished, there was absolute silence in the classroom. Tiffany was a little nervous. Then the class broke out in a generous round of applause.
“That’s very impressive, Tiffany, that is very impressive,” said the teacher over and over again. He admitted that he knew that there must be more to those verses, but Tiffany was the first person ever to explain them to him so clearly. At the end of the class, he asked Tiffany how she knew so much about the Bible.
“It’s because I am one of Jehovah’s Witnesses,” she replied. “My parents had to explain that prophecy to me several times before I understood it.”
The classmates too were amazed at her knowledge of the Bible. One student said to Tiffany: “Now I know why you Jehovah’s Witnesses go from door to door; it’s because you know so much about the Bible.” Others promised that they would never again tease her about her beliefs.
When Tiffany told her parents about her experience, they suggested that she offer the book Knowledge That Leads to Everlasting Life to her teacher. When she did so and showed the teacher the portion that explains Daniel’s prophecy, he readily accepted the book and thanked her for it.
Truly, when Christian youths courageously speak about what their parents have taught them regarding God and the Bible, they bring praise and honor to Jehovah and blessings to themselves.—Matthew 21:15, 16.

