Announcements
FIELD MINISTRY
Servants of Jehovah must be faithful and dependable during this “time of the end” of Satan’s wicked system of things. In December Jehovah’s witnesses will continue to prove their faithfulness to God by sharing fully in the ministry, offering to all persons the New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures, and a Bible-study booklet, on a contribution of $1.
CONVENTION REPORT
You will be glad to know that the complete Report on “Everlasting Good News” Assembly of Jehovah’s Witnesses is now ready. After setting out the high points of the entire eight-day program in New York’s Yankee Stadium, it relates interesting experiences and outstanding events in connection with each of the assemblies held around the world. From the assembly’s starting point in Milwaukee, Wisconsin, it takes you to New York, then on to Europe, over to Palestine, on to the Far East, and around to the finale of this grand Around-the-World Assembly ten weeks later in the Rose Bowl at Pasadena, California. Bound with this fascinating 192-page report, which is liberally interspersed with pictures, are 32 additional pages of pictures on fine glossy paper showing some of the most interesting things seen by those who traveled with the assembly all the way around the world. You may have as many copies as you can use, for 35 cents each.
IS THE BIBLE A CLOSED BOOK TO YOU?
The Holy Bible is the best seller of all times. Though universally acknowledged as the Book of Books—already distributed in over two billion copies in 1,200 languages—yet it is still a closed book to many! Archaic, outdated language and stiff, obscure translation have long combined to discourage most persons from Bible reading. Now, the New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures, a new modern translation in our everyday speech, opens up the Book of books to you and your family. Send for your copy today and receive free a 32-page booklet on a timely Bible subject. Send only $1. Reading this translation will be a new experience for you.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES FOR THE WEEKS
January 5: Victory for God’s Woman over Her Ancient Enemy, ¶1-29. Page 712.
January 12: Victory for God’s Woman over Her Ancient Enemy, Part Two, ¶1-31. Page 719.

