Declare Jehovah’s Glory
1 The psalmist proclaimed: “Sing to Jehovah, all you people of the earth. . . . Declare among the nations his glory, among all the peoples his wonderful works.” As we ponder what Jehovah has done, is doing, and will yet do for us, our hearts stir us to declare his glory!​—Ps. 96:1, 3.
2 In Our Ministry: Jehovah’s Witnesses are privileged to bear God’s name and to praise it publicly throughout the earth. (Mal. 1:11) What a contrast to Christendom’s clergy, who presumptuously remove God’s name from their Bible translations! The work of making known God’s name is urgent, since people must call upon that name in faith in order to be saved through the coming great tribulation. (Rom. 10:13-15) Moreover, universal peace, including peace among earth’s inhabitants, depends on the sanctification of God’s name. Indeed, all of God’s works are linked to his name.
3 “Jehovah is great and very much to be praised.” But in order for people to “ascribe to Jehovah the glory belonging to his name,” they must know the truth about him. (Ps. 96:4, 8) However, some deny that God exists. (Ps. 14:1) Others malign him as powerless, or they claim that he is not interested in mankind’s affairs. As we help honesthearted ones gain accurate knowledge about our Creator, his purposes, and his endearing personality, we glorify Jehovah.
4 By Our Conduct: Living in harmony with Jehovah’s righteous standards honors him. Our fine conduct does not go unnoticed. (1 Pet. 2:12) For example, our clean and neat personal appearance may elicit favorable comments from others, providing us with an opportunity to talk about the benefits of living by the principles found in God’s Word. (1 Tim. 2:9, 10) How delighted we are when others ‘see our fine works and give glory to our Father who is in the heavens’!​—Matt. 5:16.
5 By word and deed, let us extol our magnificent God each day, thereby responding to the joyful call: “Sing to Jehovah, bless his name. From day to day tell the good news of salvation by him.”​—Ps. 96:2.

