What Our Ministry Accomplishes
 1. How does Jehovah view our ministry, and what is the response of humans?
1 God’s Word describes Christians as marching triumphantly in Jehovah’s service, as though in a victory procession. (2 Cor. 2:14-16) As we make known the knowledge of God, our offerings of service are like pleasing incense to Jehovah. Some people are drawn to the sweetness of the good news; others turn away from it. But the negative response of the majority does not mean that our work is unsuccessful. Consider what our ministry accomplishes.
 2. What does our ministry enable us to demonstrate?
2 Magnifying Jehovah: Satan contends that humans serve Jehovah for selfish reasons. (Job 1:9-11) The Christian ministry provides us with an opportunity to demonstrate that our devotion to God is genuine. Many publishers continue to obey the command to preach and make disciples despite difficult personal circumstances or the indifference of people in general. Such loyal endurance makes Jehovah’s heart rejoice!​—Prov. 27:11.
 3. Why is it so important for us to continue making known God’s name and purpose?
3 Additionally, our ministry plays a role in the outworking of God’s purpose. In connection with the coming destruction of Satan’s world, Jehovah says: “The nations will have to know that I am Jehovah.” (Ezek. 39:7) For the nations to know this, it is imperative that God’s servants continue declaring his name and purpose “to every nation and tribe and tongue and people.”​—Rev. 14:6, 7.
 4. How does the preaching work serve as a basis for judgment?
4 Basis for Judgment: The preaching of the good news also serves as a basis for judgment. The apostle Paul stated that Christ Jesus will bring vengeance upon “those who do not know God and those who do not obey the good news about our Lord Jesus.” (2 Thess. 1:8, 9) People will be judged by their response to the good news. What a serious responsibility this places upon God’s servants! In order to avoid bloodguilt, we must not hold back from making known the lifesaving Kingdom message.​—Acts 20:26, 27.
 5. How is God’s mercy reflected in our ministry?
5 Our ongoing efforts to help our neighbors gain God’s favor are an expression of Jehovah’s mercy. (1 Tim. 2:3, 4) Knowing that the lives of people are constantly changing, we go to them again and again and urge them to seek Jehovah while there is yet time. By so doing, we reflect “the tender compassion of our God,” who “does not desire any to be destroyed but desires all to attain to repentance.”​—Luke 1:78; 2 Pet. 3:9.
 6. How does keeping busy in Jehovah’s service benefit us?
6 Benefiting Ourselves: Keeping busy in Jehovah’s service is a protection for us. It helps us to keep “close in mind the presence of the day of Jehovah” and to avoid becoming defiled by the present wicked system of things. (2 Pet. 3:11-14; Titus 2:11, 12) May we, therefore, be “steadfast, unmovable, always having plenty to do in the work of the Lord,” knowing that our efforts in the Christian ministry are not in vain.​—1 Cor. 15:58.

