Christmas​—A Time of Festivity for Orientals
GIANT Christmas trees, bright lights, colorful banners​—they are seen in every shopping center and department store. Strains of Christmas carols blare over loudspeakers, and announcements encourage people to buy more. Men and women clad in Santa Claus costumes stroll up and down the streets offering giveaways in a patronizing manner. Is this a scene in a “Christian” country? No, this is in Japan, where less than 1 percent of the population claims to be Christian.
Similarly, on the neighboring island of Taiwan, both “Christians” and non-Christians celebrate Christmas with their traditional gift giving. And in the Chinese communities in Malaysia, firecrackers add a new dimension to the festivities of the “Christian” holiday.
Why do these people celebrate Christmas? Do they believe in Christmas? Or do they believe in the festivities of Christmas? The evidence shows that “eat, drink, and be merry” is the message that they get from the Christmas celebrations. Many practice “Christianity” on December 24 and 25 but go back to their own way​—Buddhism, Shintoism, Taoism, or whatever—​the next day. How, though, could people of such diverse religious backgrounds possibly take part in a “Christian” holiday?
When a little boy in Japan was asked about whether he believes in Santa Claus, he answered, ‘I believe in Santa because he gave me many games.’ His answer reflects the thinking of many in the Orient: ‘Be open-minded. Do not be too rigid about religion. If you can get something out of it, enjoy it. But keep it in its place so that it does not affect other aspects of your life.’
This way of thinking is clearly seen in a survey conducted by a major Japanese newspaper. One of the questions asked was: “In Japan, it is common for the same person to participate in various religious events such as omiyamairi [a Shintoist event to celebrate the growth of children], ohigan [a semiannual Buddhist ritual to commemorate the deceased], and Christmas. Do you think this is objectionable?” Only 19 percent answered “objectionable.” Even among those who claim to be Christians, 60 percent felt there was nothing wrong in celebrating festivals of different religions.
This mentality results in a peculiar religious phenomenon​—many claim to be adherents of more than one religion. According to the Agency for Cultural Affairs, the grand total of adherents of religious groups in Japan was 207,080,000 at the end of 1982, whereas the estimated population of Japan in 1982 was only 118,600,000. This means that the total membership of the religions in Japan amounted to 170 percent of the total population!
“Impossible!” people in monotheistic cultures might exclaim. But the same ambivalence in religious attitudes prevails in the Western way of celebrating Christmas too. How could this be? And if it is so, should you celebrate Christmas?
[Picture on page 3]
Total membership of religions in Japan: 207,080,000
Total Japanese population: 118,600,000

