Do You Remember?
Have you enjoyed reading the last several issues of The Watchtower? Then see if you can remember the following points:
□ In what sense could Paul say that he was “clean from the blood of all men”? (Acts 20:26, 27)
Evidently, during his lifetime Paul had never shed blood in warfare, nor had he eaten blood. Most important, however, he had shown great interest in the lives of others as represented by their blood. He was concerned that none would lose their lives in God’s day of judgment because he had failed to give them a thorough witness.​—9/1, page 27.
□ Why was Jesus’ sermon on the mountainside so valuable?
Jesus’ sermon was valuable not only because of its spiritual content but also because of its simplicity and clarity.​—9/15, page 9.
□ What made the apostle Paul’s counsel so effective?
Its effectiveness lay in the fact that those to whom it was directed knew that Paul loved them. Also, he relied on godly wisdom, not on his own opinions, and he offered counsel in a spirit of mildness. (2 Timothy 3:16; Titus 3:1, 2)​—9/15, pages 12, 13.
□ What is represented by the four beasts seen by Daniel in his dream recorded at Daniel chapter 7?
They represent world powers dating from Daniel’s day onward until the setting up of God’s Kingdom. These were: Babylon, Medo-Persia, Greece, and Rome with its outgrowth, the Anglo-American World Power.​—10/1, page 7.
□ Why is preaching the good news about the Kingdom a practical way of showing love for one’s neighbor?
The preaching work is practical because it helps people apply moral principles. This, in turn, enables them to avoid many problems in life.​—10/1, page 23.
□ Why was the term “Son of man” appropriate for Jesus?
When Jesus applied this term to himself he was a human, so he was literally “a son of man.” He also gave his life to ransom humans, thus acting out the role of mankind’s closest relative​—truly a “Son of man.” (Matthew 20:28; Hebrews 2:11-17)​—10/15, page 6.
□ Why is meaningful communication between parents and children so important?
Such an interchange creates mutual understanding and a caring for one another. When children show a willingness to talk even about intimate matters, their parents are able to sense what is in their hearts. Also, the children begin to see that their parents’ emotions and motivations are much the same as their own. All of this contributes greatly toward a happy, united family.​—11/1, pages 18, 19.
□ How can a Christian avoid many difficulties in business relationships?
Before entering any business venture, a Christian should carefully examine his motives. The Bible’s counsel at Romans 14:19 should always be kept in mind, to “pursue the things making for peace and the things that are upbuilding to one another.”​—11/15, page 19.
□ What are the benefits of following the inspired counsel to marry “only in the Lord”? (1 Corinthians 7:39)
Christian mates can encourage each other in successfully meeting different trials and thus remain faithful to God. Unitedly, they can resist various pressures that can weaken marriage bonds. Their efforts to serve Jehovah and to live according to his ways can contribute to a successful marriage that honors Jehovah. 11/15, page 26.
□ What good suggestion regarding contributions did the apostle Paul give to the congregation in Corinth?
Paul wrote at 1 Corinthians 16:2: “Every first day of the week let each of you . . . set something aside in store as he may be prospering.” Regularity was the key emphasized, not so much the amount. Today, this same principle can be applied by Jehovah’s people to meet necessary Kingdom Hall expenses or to make other Kingdom-interest contributions.​—12/1, page 30.

