VOL. XXV. JANUARY 15, 1904. No. 2. 
CONTENTS. 



Views from the Watch Tower 19 

Employers of Labor Agitating 19 

Fertilizing Soil with Bacteria 20 

Our Year-Text for 1904 21 

Fishers of Men 25 

The Good Physician 27 

The Pilgrim's Wants (Poem) 31 

New Arrangements for Pittsburgh 

Gazette 31 

Public Ministries of the Truth 32 

General Conventions, 1904 32 

page 18 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-24 EVERSHOLT ST., LONDON, N.W. 
GERMAN BRANCH-MIRKER STR., 45, ELBERFELD. 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE, 5c (2-l/2d.) A COPY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER, will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



VOL. V. IN GERMAN. 



This translation is in good stock, and orders will have 
prompt attention. 



THE MUSICAL TOWER. 



A new edition of this choice selection of 12 numbers 
of Music, with words appropriate to our Scriptural 
hopes and aims has been issued. We supply them 
in any quantity at 2c per copy, post-paid. 

PASTOR RUSSELL'S DISCOURSES EVERY MONDAY. 



By a special arrangement with The Pittsburgh Gazette a stenographic 
report of Pastor C. T. Russell's discourses will be printed 
on Mondays. We will send you "The Pittsburgh Gazette" 
(daily) and ZION'S WATCH TOWER twice a month for a period 
of 12 months for $3.25, which is about the price of The Gazette 
alone. The subscriptions must be paid in advance and sent to us. 

NOTICE.— Where Gazette agencies are established the issues 
desired can be readily obtained through them. The Gazette refuses 
to mail papers to towns where they would interfere with 
the agents already located. 



R3303 : page 19 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 

EMPLOYERS OF LABOR AGITATING. 

THESE ARE THE CONDITIONS WE HAVE BEEN ANNOUNCING 

SINCE 1875, AS EVIDENCES THAT WE ARE 

IN THE GREAT "DAY OF THE LORD" AND 

THAT ITS BATTLE OR STRUGGLE IS 

IMPENDING. 

IN December last two important meetings of manufacturers 
and labor employers were held; one in Dayton, 
O., the other in Chicago, Ills. The proceedings 
at Dayton and the object of the meeting are thus 
described in the daily press— 

A resolution was adopted asking Congress not to 
indorse the eight-hour bill, when that document comes 
up for action. Another resolution requests all employers' 
associations throughout the country to affiliate 
with the national body. 

AGAINST UNION LABEL. 

The determined stand to be taken by the association 
is indicated in the passage of a resolution instructing 
all members of employers' associations affiliated with 
the national body not to place the union label on any of 



their output. 

It is proposed also to establish a labor information 
bureau, where will be kept a tabulated record of all law-breaking 
and undesirable workmen. 

The present methods employed by unions in conducting 
a boycott were bitterly denounced. 

A bureau of organization, publication, and education 
will likely be located at Dayton, although the headquarters 
will be at Indianapolis. 

PLATFORM ADOPTED. 

The following platform was adopted as an open 
letter to the public and affiliated associations: 

Resolved, By the executive committee of the Citizens' 
Industrial Association of America, that the present 
industrial conditions have become so deplorable by reason 
of the indefensible methods and claims of organized 
labor that the time has come when the employing interests 
and good citizenship of the country must take immediate 
and effective measures to reaffirm and enforce 
these fundamental principles of American government 
guaranteeing free competitive conditions. 

"In its demand for the closed shop organized labor 
is seeking to overthrow individual liberty and property 
rights, the principal props of our government. Its 
methods for securing this revolutionary and socialistic 
change in our institutions are also those of physical 
warfare. Because of this warfare the industrial interests 
of the nation during the last years have been injured to 
an irreparable degree. Many firms have been driven 
into bankruptcy, and the cases are innumerable in which 
workingmen have been disabled and even murdered, 
while numerous families have been rendered destitute by 
reason of the tyranny and seditious attacks upon society 
by the strike organizations. 

"CONDITION OF ANARCHY." 

"A condition of anarchy has existed continuously in 
some States for months past, and, in fact, the acts of 
lawlessness committed under the sacred name of labor 
are of such frequent recurrence that the public sense of 
their enormity has become blunted. The period of great 
prosperity brought about by the unrestricted operation 
of the law of supply and demand is also being destroyed 
by the acts of violence of organized labor, and as a result 
we are now confronted with the possibility of a period of 
depression. 

"While we most emphatically object to being classed 
as enemies of organizations of labor that are conducted 
upon lawful and beneficent lines, yet we are unalterably 
opposed to the present programme of violence, boycotting, 
and tyranny now being carried out by the majority 
of labor unions. 

"We therefore urge the rapid organization of those 



who believe in the maintenance of law and order and the 
perpetuation of our free institutions, to the end that 
they may wield their full and proper influence upon the 
destinies of the nation. Since organizations exist for the 
apparent purpose of defying law and common sense, and 
are able to intimidate and influence public men and 
municipal authorities, there is no alternative left to those 
who desire to preserve bearable conditions in our body 
politic than that of forming counter organizations. 

ORGANIZATION THE ONLY MEANS. 

"It is only through the machinery of organization 
that we can hope to exercise a potent and salutary influence 
over public thought and the conduct of public officials, 
to the end that the rights of American citizenship 
can be assured to free and independent labor, the rights 

R3303 : page 20 

of property protected and legislation of a socialistic 
nature prevented from being enacted into law. 

STRONG WORDS AT THE CHICAGO SESSION. 
BLOODSHED PREDICTED. 

"If the fight for the closed shop is allowed to continue 
there will be scenes of bloodshed in this country 
that will surpass the days of the French revolution. 
The closed shop is un-American, unrighteous, a restriction 
of the liberties of our people, and a death blow to the 
individualism that makes for success." 

The foregoing sentiment, expressed by W. B. Brinton, 
president of the Peru Plow Company, was cheered by 
600 members of the Illinois Manufacturers' Association at 
their annual banquet. 

"Our rights," declared Mr. Brinton, "are dependent 
on the settlement of the question once for all as to 
whether an employer can hire whom he pleases without 
being subject to the dictation of any organized body. 
The Chicago City Railway has won a great victory in 
establishing its right to engage its own employees. 
Without this right, which is becoming recognized by the 
great mass of people, the commercial supremacy of the 
United States will be at an end." 

FERTILIZING SOIL WITH BACTERIA. 

Because we are in the dawning of the Millennium, 
the Lord is graciously lifting the curtain and 
letting in the light upon one subject after ano there- 
to prepare for the great blessings of that 
glorious time and its re-awakened billions of humanity. 
From this standpoint the following article from the 
Literary Digest will be read with interest. It shows one 
of the ways the Lord's promises may be expected to be 



fulfilled and cause the wilderness to blossom as the rose. 
And every evidence of the kind adds to our general 
faith in our Father's willingness and ability to do all that 
he has spoken by the mouth of all his holy prophets since 
the world began. 

The article follows:— 

Soil that will not bear crops is suffering from starvation. 
This may be remedied by properly "feeding" 
it with fertilizers; but in certain cases the trouble 
may also be cured, like some diseases, by inoculation. 
In other words, soil deficient in nitrogenous matter may 
be treated with cultures of certain bacteria that enable 
plants to absorb and utilize atmospheric nitrogen, as has 
been shown in Germany by Professor Nobbe. Fertilizing 
material sufficient for an acre may now be purchased 
in a small glass bottle. Ray Stannard Baker tells in 
Harper's Magazine just how this discovery was made and 
how it has been utilized. According to Mr. Baker, it had 
its beginning in the earlier discovery that plants are fed 
largely from substances in the air and from consequent 
study of the problem of how the plant is able to appropriate 
this aerial food. Says the writer: 

"The chief chemical elements in all vegetable substances 
are oxygen, carbon, hydrogen, and nitrogen. 
...Nitrogen is the all-important element. 
Potassium and phosphorus are usually present in abundance, 
or they can be easily supplied in the form of wood-ashes 
and other fertilizers; but nitrogen is more expensive 
and more difficult to restore. Nitrogen is what 
makes the muscles and brain of a man; it is the essential 
element of all elements in the growth of animals and 
plants. ...If the world ever starves, it will be 
from lack of nitrogen; and yet if such starvation takes 
place, it will be in a world full of nitrogen. For there is 
not one of the elements more common than nitrogen, 
not one present around us in larger quantities. Four-fifths 
of every breath of air we breathe is pure nitrogen— 
four-fifths of all the earth's atmosphere is nitrogen. If 
mankind dies of nitrogen starvation, it will die with food 
everywhere about it and within it. 

"But unfortunately plants and animals are unable 
to take up nitrogen in its pure form as it appears in the air. 
It must be combined with hydrogen in the form of ammonia 
or in some nitrate. These facts have been well 
known to science for many years. At the same time it 
has been known, as a matter of experience among farmers, 
that when land is worn out by overcropping, with 
wheat or oats, for instance, both of which draw heavily 
on the earth's nitrogen supply, certain other crops would 
still grow luxuriantly upon it, and that if these crops are 
left and plowed in, the fertility of the soil will be restored, 
and it will again produce large fields of wheat and 
other nitrogen-demanding plants. These restorative 
crops are clover, lupin, and other leguminous plants— a 
classification including beans and peas. Everyone who 
is at all familiar with farming operations has heard of 



seeding down an old field to clover, thereby restoring its 
fertility in a degree." 

That this property of clover, beans, etc., is due to 
small nodules growing on their roots, and that these are 
produced by so-called "nitrifying" bacteria, is now 
known to all students of scientific agriculture. Acting 
on this knowledge, Professor Nobbe has developed his 
plan for soil-inoculation. Says Mr. Baker: 

"If these nodules were produced by bacteria, then 
the bacteria must be present in the soil; and if they were 
not present, would it not be possible to supply them by 
artificial means? In other words, if soil, even worn-out 
farm soil— or, indeed, pure sand, like that of the seashore 
—could thus be inoculated, as a physician inoculates a 
guinea pig with anthrax germs, would not beans and peas 

R3304 : page 20 

planted there form nodules and draw their nourishment 

from the air? It was a somewhat startling idea; but all 

radically new ideas are startling, and after thinking it 

over, Professor Nobbe began, in 1888, a series of most remarkable 

experiments, having as their purpose the discovery 

of a practical method of soil-inoculation. He 

gathered the nodule-covered roots of beans and peas, 

dried and crushed them, and made an extract of them in 

water. Then he prepared a gelatin solution with a little 

sugar, asparagin, and other materials, and added the 

nodule extract. In this medium colonies of bacteria at 

once began to grow— bacteria of many kinds. Professor 

Nobbe separated the radiocola— which are oblong in 

shape— and made what is known as a clean 'culture'— 

that is, a culture in gelatin consisting of billions of these 

particular germs and no others. When he had succeeded 

in producing these clean cultures, he was ready for his 

actual experiments in growing plants. He took a quantity 

of pure sand, and in order to be sure that it contained 

no nitrogen, nor bacteria in any form, he heated 

it to a high temperature three different times for six 

hours, thereby completely sterilizing it. This sand he 

placed in three jars. To each of these he added a small 

quantity of mineral food— the required phosphorus, 

potassium, iron, sulphur, and so on. To the first he supplied 

no nitrogen at all in any form; the second he fertilized 

with saltpeter, which is largely composed of nitrogen 

in a form in which plants may readily absorb it through 

their roots; the third of the jars he inoculated with some 

of his bacteria culture. Then he planted beans and 

awaited the results— as may be imagined, somewhat 

anxiously. 

"The beans in the first jar, we are told, starved for 
want of nitrogenous food, exactly as a man would starve 
under the same conditions. Those in the second jar 
grew about as they would in the garden. But the third 
or 'inoculated' jar showed really a miracle of growth. 



R3304 : page 21 

The soil in this jar was originally as free of nitrogen as 
the soil in the first jar, and yet the beans flourished 
greatly, and when some of the plants were analyzed, they 
were found to be rich in nitrogen. Nodules had formed 
on the roots of the beans in the third jar only, thereby 
proving that soil-inoculation was a possibility— at least 
in the laboratory. Mr. Baker goes on to say: 

"Having thus proved the remarkable efficacy of soil-inoculation 
in his laboratory and greenhouses, where I 
saw great numbers of experiments still going forward, 
Professor Nobbe set himself to make his discoveries of 
practical value. He gave to his bacteria cultures the 
name 'Nitragen'— spelled with an a— and he produced 
separate cultures for each of the important crops— peas, 
beans, vetch, lupin, and clover. In 1894, the first of 
these were placed on the market, and they had a considerable 
sale, altho such a radical innovation as this, so 
far out of the ordinary run of agricultural operation, and 
so almost unbelievably wonderful, can not be expected to 
spread very rapidly. The cultures are now manufactured 
at one of the great commercial chemical laboratories 
of the river Main. I saw some of them in Professor 
Nobbe's laboratory. They were put up in small 
glass bottles, each marked with the name of the crop for 
which it is especially adapted. The bottle was partly 
filled with the yellow gelatinous substance in which the 
bacteria grow. On the surface of this there was a mossy-like 
gray growth, resembling mold. This consisted of 
innumerable millions of the little oblong bacteria. A 
bottle cost about fifty cents, and contained enough 
bacteria for inoculating half an acre of land. It must be 
used within a certain number of weeks after it is obtained, 
while it is still fresh. The method of application is very 
simple. The contents of the bottle are diluted with 
warm water. Then the seeds of the beans, clover, or 
peas, which have previously been mixed with a little soil, 
are treated with this solution and thoroughly mixed with 
the soil. After that the mass is partially dried so that 
the seeds may be readily sown. The bacteria at once 
begin to propagate in the soil, which is their natural 
home, and by the time the beans or peas have put out 
roots they are present in vast numbers, and ready to begin 
the active work of forming nodules.... 

"Prompted by these experiments, a valuable series 
of tests has recently been made by the United States Department 
of Agriculture, and an improved method for 
distributing the bacteria has been devised. Instead of a 
moist culture in glass tubes the bacteria are put up in a 
small dry mass that resembles a yeast-cake. These may 
be sent anywhere without deterioration; a little soaking 
is all that is needed to prepare them for use in the soil. 
The Department is now formulating a plan for introducing 
these cultures extensively in localities in this country 
which are deficient in nodule-forming germs." 



R3304 : page 21 

OUR YEAR TEXT FOR 1904. 

[Reprint from Pittsburgh Gazette.] 

PASTOR C. T. Russell of the Bible House chapel, 
Allegheny, yesterday afternoon spoke on "A 
Text for the New Year." He said: 

I choose for my text the exhortation of the Apostle 
Paul to the Church at Philippi— appropriate to us also. 
I suggest that we each make it our year-text, and trust 
that our minds, continually recurring to it, may be 
profited, strengthened and assisted in the right ways of 
the Lord. The words are: 

"Finally, brethren, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things 
are pure, whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever things are reputable, 
if there be any virtue and if there be any praise, think on these 
things. "--Phil. 4:8. 

Few seem to realize the power of the mind, the 
power of thought, as an element in the formation of character. 
"As a man thinketh so is he." How important, 
then, it is that we should think properly— that our minds 
should be rightly directed. The Scriptures assure us, 
and the experiences of the noblest people of the world 
convince us, that we have all so inherited degeneracy 
from our father Adam, that "there is none righteous, no 
not one; all have sinned and come short of the glory of 
God." This degeneracy affects us physically— we are 
a dying race under the Creator's sentence, "Dying thou 
shalt die." And this dying affects us not only physically 
but mentally and morally. "We are prone to sin as the 
sparks to fly upward." The taint is in us from our 
birth, for were we not "born in sin and shapen in 
iniquity"? 

HUMAN REGULATIONS NECESSARY. 

There are various methods of appealing to humanity, 
the success of each varying with the individual. Some 
need imprisonment and "stripes," others can be profited 
by moral suasion, by appeal to their reason, by appeal to 
the better elements of their natures, even though tainted 
or tarnished through original sin. Both of these methods 
of appeal are recognized in the world to-day. Pulpits 
and newspapers are appealing to the minds of men with 
more or less propriety and with more or less success; 
but nevertheless society protects itself by penal institutions 
—reformatories, jails, penitentiaries, etc. So it is 
with the divine government. Nature has some general 
laws by which the whole world of mankind is dominated 
—laws of retribution, by which every virtue brings a 
certain degree of reward, satisfaction and peace, and 



every crime brings a certain measure of chastisement, 
pain, trouble and unrest. 

Nevertheless, the course of nature is so disordered in 
the present time by the prevalence of sin and its penalty 
and the operation of the laws of heredity that we cannot 
say that the laws of nature are at the present time absolutely 
just as respects each individual, whatever we may 
say of their general justice in respect to the race as a 
whole. Hence, as the Scriptures declare, "some men's 
sins go before to judgment and some they follow after." 

In the coming millennial age, when Christ's Kingdom 
shall administer justice amongst men, the rewards 
and punishments will be equitable. No longer will the 
child suffer for the sins of the parents. No longer will the 
righteous suffer; but only the evil-doers, for thus it is 
written. (Jer. 31:29; Psa. 72:7.) In that blessed 
time the Lord will use both methods of appealing 
to the world. (1) An appeal will be made to their 
hearts and consciences, with inducements and rewards 
for obedience to the principles of righteousness— the reward 
of physical, mental and moral restitution or uplift, 
which will bring the obedient gradually back to the full 
image and likeness of God enjoyed by father Adam before 
his fall. (2) This appeal to the hearts and consciences 
of mankind will be supplemented by stripes, judgments, 
chastisements "upon every soul of man that doeth evil." 
We can to some degree realize the great advantage that 
will accrue to mankind under such dealings— how great 
will be the assistance. 

R3304 : page 22 

THE LORD'S METHOD AT THE PRESENT TIME. 

In the present age the Lord does not use this double 
method of appeal, but merely the first. He appeals to 
our hearts, our reasons, saying, "Come, let us reason 
together." But those who will not reason with the 
Lord now are not chastised, even if they go into grievous 
sins. The worldly are permitted to take their course; 
they receive no particular stripes or corrections from the 
Lord, because the day of the world's trial or judgment 
has not yet come. As the Apostle says, "The wicked 
shall do wickedly and none of the wicked shall understand;" 
and so we have on every hand sin, wickedness 
abounding, and that without interference from the Lord. 
Only with one class is the Lord now dealing, namely, the 
Church. We recognize, of course, that there is a divine supervision 
over the nations; that the Lord has kept in his 

R3305 : page 22 

own power more or less of the times and bounds of the 
nations, as the Apostle expresses the matter. (Acts 17:26.) 
However, these dealings with the nations 
have little to do with the world as individuals, and nothing 



to do with the world's trial, which belongs to the 
next age. "God hath appointed a day [the millennial 
day— a day with the Lord is as a thousand years] in the 
which he will judge the world in righteousness by that 
man whom he hath afore ordained"— the Christ, head 
and body.-Acts 17:31; I Cor. 6:2. 

We repeat, then, that the Lord's special dealings at 
the present time are with those who believe and not with 
unbelievers. He sends his message, "speaking peace 
through Jesus Christ," to him that hath an ear to hear 
and a heart to receive the message— and these are very 
few, comparatively. The appeal of the evangelist who 
follows the scriptural pattern is an appeal to the heads 
and the hearts of the people who have the ears to hear. 
He is not privileged to mete out stripes or other judgments 
or corrections to those who disregard his message. 
Those who have the ears, and who receive the word with 
gladness, get a great blessing— and that in proportion as 
they receive it into good and honest and obedient hearts. 
Those who do not hear at all, whose hearts are not in the 
condition to respond to the Gospel message, suffer a loss— 
a loss of the joy and peace and blessing and "comfort of 
the Scriptures" which the believers enjoy. 

"BY THE FOOLISHNESS OF PREACHING." 

Not only does the Lord begin the work of grace among 
his people with the above-described message, speaking 
forgiveness and peace through Jesus, but, to those who 
do receive the message and who are exercised by it he continues 
the same process of dealing— still appealing to their 
hearts, heads and consciences. This is what the Apostle 
means when he says, "It pleased God by the foolishness 
of preaching to save them that believe."— I Cor. 1:21. 

To the world this method of appealing merely to the 
heads and hearts seems like a weak and unsatisfactory 
method of dealing. The world finds it necessary to 
resort to force, and wonders that the Almighty does not 
resort to force to compel obedience to His laws rather 
than merely to exhort obedience to them. We have 
just seen that in the millennial age the Lord will use both 
methods, and the question properly arises, Why does he 
not use both methods of appealing to mankind in the 
present time— first, appeal through the intellect and 
heart, and second, appeal through force? 

We answer, that the reason lies in the fact that God 
is now selecting a peculiar class— to use scriptural terms, 
he is now electing "a peculiar people." The class he is 
now seeking needs no stripes or punishments to constrain 
their obedience. They are constrained by love- 
love for God, love for the Redeemer, love for the principles 
of righteousness and a sympathetic love for the 
whole world of mankind, even their enemies. 

If force were introduced in the present time it would 
be a hindrance to the development of this particular 
class which the Lord is now seeking, each of whom must 



be in heart, in intention (not in flesh) a copy of God's 

dear Son. Those who require stripes, punishments, etc., 

to enforce obedience to the divine requirements cannot 

be of the "very elect," whose disposition of heart is represented 

by the words of our Lord expressed through the 

prophet: "I delight to do thy will, O my God; thy law is 

written in my heart."— Psa. 40:8. 

HOW GOD WORKS IN US TO WILL AND TO DO. 

It is in harmony with this thought that God is now 
operating in the Church along the lines of appeal to our 
sentiments and not along the lines of force. As the Apostle 
says: "It is God that worketh in you both to will and 
to do of his good pleasure." God works in this class 
through the intellect and heart. He makes known to 
them "the riches of his grace" little by little as they are 
able to appreciate and willing to respond. 

The first effect of this upon the proper heart is to induce 
a responsive sentiment, expressed by the Apostle 
thus: "The love of Christ constraineth us: for we thus 
judge, that if one died for all, then were all dead; and 
that we who live should henceforth live not to ourselves, 
but to him who died for us." (2 Cor. 5:14.) The 
class represented in this text have experienced the Truth 
working in them as the power of God up to the point of 
willing— willing to do the Lord's will; willing to renounce 
self; willing to follow in the footsteps of our Lord Jesus; 
willing to be copies of God's dear Son. The power of God 
continues to operate in such and unfolds to them more 
and more of the lengths and breadths and heights and 
depths of the love of God which passeth all understanding, 
and which is expressed to these in the "exceeding great 
and precious promises" of the divine Word. 

These promises operate upon the heart and mind 
and lead to works— obedience, self-denial, self-sacrifice- 
even unto death. It is such as are thus rightly exercised 
by divine grace and truth who may now hope to 
attain to all the great and wonderful things which God 
hath in reservation for them that love him. 

Not only does God thus appeal to our minds, our 
thoughts, our reasoning faculties, with his explanation 
of right and wrong, truth and untruth, righteousness and 
sin, and promises of his continued favor unto life eternal, 
or for the disobedient his disfavor unto cutting off from 
life in the second death; but he urges upon us co-operation 
with him along the same lines— that we take hold of 
our minds, of our thoughts, and shape them into conformity 
with the divine mind, with the divine will. 

This is the signification of our text: On the principle 
that every thought has its influence upon our words and 
conduct, the Apostle urges that our thoughts be the 
special objects of our solicitude, care, watchfulness. 
Our Redeemer expresses the same sentiment in different 
language saying, "Out of the abundance of the heart 
[mind] the mouth speaketh." And out of the heart 



R3305 : page 23 

(mind) proceedeth envies, malice, strife, etc.,— or contrariwise 
kindness, gentleness, goodness, love. 

IMPORTANCE OF A RIGHT HEART. 

It is all important, then, that we have right hearts; 
for as a bitter fountain cannot send forth sweet waters, 
neither can a heart that is in the bitterness of sin send 
forth blessing to those in contact with it. We admit 
that a certain amount of refinement and grace belonging 
to the children of God may be copied by the unregenerate, 
but it has no depth, it fails easily, it quickly discloses the 
real bitterness, selfishness and acrimony of the natural 
heart which underlies. 

In the present time, therefore, the Lord does not appeal 
to these bitter hearts to send forth sweet waters. 
The appeals of the Scriptures are to the regenerated 
hearts of consecrated believers, addressed in all the 
epistles as "saints," "children of God," "the sanctified 
in Christ Jesus," "the Lord's brethren," etc. These having 
new hearts, new wills, sanctified or set apart to the 
Lord, to righteousness, to truth, to goodness, need nevertheless 
to keep watch over their every deed, word and 
thought. 

Our text is the apostle's appeal to this class along 
this line. It is well that we should scan our outward conduct, 
to take note that our good intentions may not be so 
exhibited to others that they will misapprehend our real 
sentiments— "Let not your good be evil spoken of." It 
is right, too, that we should "set a guard upon our mouth 
lest we should sin with our lips," lest our words be such 
as would not be honoring to the Lord or edifying to the 
brethren or to the world. But the number of watchmen 
or pickets doing duty and standing guard over our 
actions and words will be fewer in proportion as the 
picket line guarding our minds, our thoughts, is a strong 
one. It is here that we need to be especially on the alert. 

"Out of the abundance of the heart the mouth 
speaketh." This general truth is particularly exemplified 
in the regenerate, who are more open in their conduct and 
language, proportionately, than others. Having the 
right sentiments at heart they are less on their guard in 
respect to their manner of expression perhaps than previously; 
but all the more, they need to remember the 
words of the Apostle. "If any man sin not with his lips, 
the same is a perfect man."— Jas. 3:2. 

LIKELIHOOD OF ERROR. 

The inference is that even the most advanced of the 
Lord's people are liable at times to err with their lips. 
Hence the appropriateness, to all of the Lord's people, of 
the prayer, "Let the words of my mouth and the meditations 



of my heart be acceptable in thy sight, O Lord, my 
strength and my Redeemer."— Psa. 19:14. 

Before coming more particularly to the items of our 
text let us briefly glance at the preceding context; for 
we notice that the Apostle introduces the text with the 
word "Finally." What comes before Finally? Let us 
see. His words are, "Rejoice in the Lord alway; and 
again I say, Rejoice! Let your gentleness be known to 
all men. The Lord is at hand: be not worried about anything 
but in everything by prayer and supplication, 
with thanksgiving, let your requests be made known 
unto God. And the peace of God, which passeth all 
understanding, shall guard your hearts and minds 
[thoughts] in Christ Jesus." 

What a wonderful exhortation this is! Those of us 
who are able to do so will do well to take the entire four 
verses for our Scripture text for the new year. The 
Christian is not to be sorrowful and moping. If he is a 
true Christian and understands the Father's message he 
must rejoice. True, as the Apostle elsewhere remarks, 
through manifold trials, discouragements, weaknesses, 
etc., there may be moments of dejection and sorrow; but 
these are only like the sun-showers of the summer-time. 
To the true followers of the Lord, instructed through his 
Word, the light of the Lord's kindness shines through all 

R3306 : page 23 

earth-born clouds and troubles, to bring him joy and 
peace and blessing. 

FORGETTING THE THINGS BEHIND. 

At the present time, at the close of the old year and 
the dawning of a new one, it is especially appropriate that 
the Lord's people should clearly apprehend the great lesson 
which the Apostle is here inculcating and which he 
also taught in another place, saying, "Forget the things 
which are behind, and press forward to things which are 
before." In the year that is past every enlightened and 
proper-minded child of God will be able to discern both 
weakness and success, defeats and victories. We know 
this because "There is none righteous, no not one"— 
none that come fully up to the mark of perfection. 

Hence all may look back and find in the year that is 
closing sources of regret as well as sources of joy and 
comfort. Are we to mourn over the failures of the past? 
Is this the will of the Lord concerning us— that we should 
stop, because we find that we have not been able to walk 
perfectly in every particular— not even up to our own 
imperfect standards? Nay, verily! With the Apostle we 
exclaim, "Let us go on to perfection." 

Perfection is not a thing of the past, but of the 
future. We cannot be satisfied with the past but we 
"shall be satisfied when we awake in his likeness," 
sharers in the glorious first resurrection. For this we are 



pressing along, forgetting the things that are behind. 

We forget the things that are behind, because it is 
right that we should do so. Because God forgets them, 
and declares that he has cast all of our imperfections behind 
his back; that our imperfections are all covered 
from his sight, by the merit of him who loved us and 
who died for us, and whom we love, and in whom we are 
trusting, and in whose steps we are seeking to walk with 
more or less of imperfection according to the defects we 
have inherited in the flesh. We are not meaning to suggest 
that slips or failures should be lightly esteemed or 
quickly forgotten; they should be rectified to the extent 
of our ability, and Divine forgiveness should be sought 
for these defects daily. 

It is for this very purpose that the Lord has provided 
access to the "throne of heavenly grace, where we 
may obtain mercy and find grace to help in every time of 
need." We merely mean that it is the Lord's will respecting 
us that, having corrected errors to the best of our 
ability, and having appealed for Divine forgiveness, we 
should believe the word of the Lord and accept his forgiveness 
and start afresh with rejoicing with each new day— 
and now, as we near it, start afresh for the new year, 1904. 

CULTIVATION OF GENTLENESS. 

"Gentleness," the forbearance or moderation mentioned 
in the context, is to be cultivated by each of us to 
such an extent that it will not only be manifested to ourselves 
and to the brethren, but to others. This may not 

R3306 : page 24 

mean the same amount of gentleness in each of the Lord's 
people, because the treasure of the new mind is in earthen 
vessels in every instance; and the possibilities for one 
may exceed the abilities of another. But, in any event, 
this quality of gentleness (moderation or forbearance) 
should be increasingly an outward manifestation of the 
grace of the Lord, dwelling in us richly and abounding, so 
that those who have known us in the past will at least be 
able year by year to see in us progress, development 
along this line. 

We have already referred to the necessity for prayer, 
supplication, mentioned by the Apostle. We now observe 
that those who are dwelling in close fellowship with 
the Lord will be so appreciative of the favors and blessings 
already enjoyed that they will not feel like asking for 
greater blessings, but rather like giving thanks with a 
realization that they have already received not only more 
than they deserved at the Lord's hands, but more than 
they could have asked or thought. And what has already 
been received is only a foretaste of the promised 
coming blessings. 

Our requests should be, increasingly, for grace and 
wisdom and the fruits of the spirit and opportunities for 



serving the Lord and the brethren, and for growing more 
and more into the likeness of God's dear Son. 

Under these conditions who can doubt that the promised 
"peace of God beyond all understanding" would 
"guard" such "hearts" and their "thoughts"? This 
peace would of itself dispel one of the great evils that 
afflict the hearts of many. Selfishness and ambition 
would find little room in a heart so filled with gratitude. 
God's peace, and not merely the peace of the world, 
would reign in such a heart, controlling ambitions and 
energies. Divine peace can dwell in our hearts and rule 
in them, so as to keep out the worry and turmoil of the 
world, even when we are surrounded by these disadvantageous 
conditions— even when the adversary himself 
is besetting us through deceived agents. 

EMPTIED OF THE OLD; FILLED WITH THE NEW. 

Then comes our text, suggesting that, with this 
peace ruling in our hearts, and keeping guard over our 
thoughts, so that they are spared from many of the intrusions 
of the world, the flesh and the devil, we should 
see to it that our hearts are not merely barren and empty 
of evil, but should give our thoughts food even as we provide 
sustenance for our bodies. We should see that their 
exercise is in a proper direction to produce proper and 
helpful conditions. 

We all know how easy it is to allow the old natural 
mind to assert itself, to allow envy, gossip, backbiting, 
malice, strife, pride, vain-glory, to enter our minds and to 
absorb time and attention. We all know that these need 
to be continually repelled; but all do not know how necessary 
it is that, while repelling these, we invite into our minds 
proper thoughts that will fill them and thus effectually bar 
the way and hinder the coming again of evil thoughts. 

It is along this line that the Apostle exhorts, that 
we believe it will be profitable for us all to specially exercise 
our attention during the year just at hand. While 
thanking God for the forgiveness of sins and for the new 
hearts, new wills, which we have attained by his grace, 
let us keep guard over our thoughts— let us exercise 
them upon the lines the Apostle lays down in this text. 

"Whatsoever things are true." The Lord's people 
are to be so in accord with righteousness that everything 
that is false or unjust or untrue in word, thought or act 
will be offensive to them— cause them pain. Truthfulness, 
then, must be the first test to apply to any matter 
that will be accepted by our minds. It is not for us to 
waste our time and attention chasing imaginary matters, 
errors, fictions, etc. First of all, we want to know, Is it 
true? While this truth will apply in a general way to 
everything in life, and to everybody, and promote a love 
for the right and the true, and a heart-opposition to all 
that is adulterated, yet the principle is specially applicable 
to the affairs of the new creation and to their spiritual 
food. 



In respect to the latter, our first inquiry should be, 
Is this the truth or is it to any extent contaminated with 
traditions of men, calculated to "make void the Word of 
God"? as our dear Redeemer expressed it. The prophet 
declares, speaking of God, "Thou desirest truth in the 
inward parts"— sincerity of heart. It is remarkable how 
many people would shun to tell an open falsehood, who 
nevertheless appear not to have a heart-love for the truth. 
Let us during the year beginning cultivate a love for the 
truth wherever we may find it, and at any cost. Let us 
take time to "prove" everything we receive as truth. 

THE THOUGHTS WE SHOULD ENTERTAIN. 

"Whatsoever things are honorable." This is a 
second test of what our thoughts should be permitted to 
rest upon. We cannot avoid the intrusion of thoughts 
which our judgments would disprove, but we must scrutinize 
and test our thoughts, as they present themselves, 
and must refuse to entertain or harbor those which are 
ignoble, dishonorable, unworthy of us as human beings, 
and especially as members of the new creation, "the 
body of Christ." Many things may be true which are 
not honorable, and their truthfulness must not give them 
a resting-place in our minds if they will not stand this 
second test. 

"Whatsoever things are just," or equitable. This 
is the third test which the Apostle would have us apply as 
we scrutinize suggestions made to our minds from any 
quarter. Things might be true and might be honorable 
so far as the principles were concerned, and yet not be 
just or equitable to others. A story might reach us of an 
honorable exploit of some friend; we might know it to be 
true, and yet it might reflect against some one else unfavorably, 
unjustly, inequitably. If so, the thought 
must not be entertained, but must be repelled. 

"Whatsoever things are pure." This is the fourth 
test which the Apostle urges us to apply to our thoughts as 
they present themselves from any quarter. Many things 
are true, just and perhaps not dishonorable that are not 
pure— calculated to awaken impure desires. Such 
things are strictly barred according to this inspired rule. 

"Whatsoever things are lovely." This is the fifth 
test. Amongst true, honorable, just, pure things which 
we may properly consider, there is a variety, some more 
and some less lovely, some more and some less admirable; 
and our thoughts, the Apostle suggests, should give preference 
to the lovely and loveable as being more ennobling, 
more calculated to lift us and profit us, and hence 
more inclined to help others through us; because our influence 
with others is on a parity with our mental status. 

"Out of the abundance of the heart [the mind] the 
mouth speaketh;" and hence those who follow this 

R3307 : page 25 



counsel of the Apostle will be found more and more speaking 
nothing but the truth, and avoiding truths that are 
not honorable, or not just and equitable, or not pure; 
and preferring especially those topics for meditation that 
are lovely. What a lovely character would be assured in 
one who could strictly and completely follow the Apostle's 
advice herein given. He would be a copy of Jesus— just 
what we all wish to be. None of us can attain this. 
"Whatsoever things are reputable, possessing any 
virtue or any praise." By this expression the Apostle 
seems to throw out general lines of test and examination. 
His words imply that we should have a scrutiny of our 
thoughts to the intent that only things that could be 
profitable to us and to others should be entertained, considered, 
discussed. Frivolous things would be excluded 
also by this test. Who will not admit that a mind thus 
freed from rubbish and evil and allowed only to entertain 
true, good, clean, profitable thoughts would be a mind 
which the Lord would be pleased with and which would 
conduce to the development of the character-likeness of 
our Lord Jesus, which is demanded of us if we would be 
his joint-heirs in the kingdom.— Rom. 7:29. 

"PERFECT AS YOUR FATHER IN HEAVEN." 

The standard which the Apostle has here raised resembles 
the standard which our Lord raised before us 
when he said, "Be ye perfect even as your Father which 
is in heaven is perfect." We cannot be perfect as the 
Father is perfect, but we can and do aim at that perfection; 
and whatever we come short in while thus endeavoring 
is made up to us of the Lord's grace through the merit 
of the precious blood. Likewise we cannot hope to attain 
so complete a control of our thoughts as the Apostle's 
words in this beautiful text suggest, but we can make 
that our standard; and in proportion as we view this 
standard and daily strive to measure up to it, in that 
sense and proportion no doubt we will have a blessing 
every day throughout the year, and at its close find ourselves 
considerably strengthened in mind, and advanced 
along these lines, which the Apostle elsewhere speaks of 
as "bringing every thought into captivity to the will of 
God in Christ."-2 Cor. 10:5. 

The scriptural proposition is that even the most 
saintly of the Lord's people, the most developed in character, 
will need the merit of Christ's righteousness imputed 
to them until they are made perfect in the first 
resurrection. Only in our minds, in our wills, have the 
old things passed away and all things become new. 
Actually, this great change will be accomplished when 
this mortal shall have put on immortality, when this corruptible 
shall be raised in incorruption— raised in glory, in 
power, spirit beings. But meantime, in order to be counted 
worthy of a share in the first resurrection, it is required 
of us that we shall demonstrate our willingness of mind, 
our earnest desire to be all that the Lord would have us 



be; and in no way can this be better demonstrated to the 
Lord and to ourselves, or prove more helpful, than by keeping 
a strict surveillance of our hearts and of our thoughts. 
The Lord's blessing will surely be upon all who shall seek 
to follow this word of his grace during the new year. 



R3307 : page 25 

FISHERS OF MEN. 

--LUKE 5: 1-11. --JAN. 31.- 

Golden Text:— "If ye continue in my Word, then 
are ye my disciples indeed."— JOHN 8:31. 

CAPERNAUM lay near the shore of the Sea of 
Galilee, a beautiful little lake of world-wide honor 
and distinction because of our Lord's association 
with it, and well stocked with fish, as we may judge from 
this lesson. It was to this lake shore near Capernaum 
that Jesus came after his rejection at Nazareth. He had 
a different reception here: the people pressed upon him 
to hear of the word of the Lord, and for convenience to 
himself and to them Jesus got into the fishing boat belonging 
to Simon Peter, that he might from the boat more 
effectually address the people, who doubtless sat or stood 
on the shore. 

We are inclined to wonder frequently that more of 
our Lord's discourses have not been preserved for us in 
the Gospel accounts. What we have are fragmentary, 
the sermon on the Mount being the principal one. As 
for the other references to Jesus' preaching, they are 
merely brief extracts— his parables and dark sayings. 
As an illustration of the latter, note his declaration that 
he was the bread that came down from heaven, of which 
if a man eat he should never die. Many of those who 
heard said, This is a hard saying, and walked no more 
with him. Our chief instruction in the great doctrines of 
the Gospel— respecting the ransom, our justification 
through faith in the precious blood, our adoption, begetting, 
resurrection, and the difference between the 
First Resurrection and that of others subsequently, etc., 
—comes to us through the epistles of the apostles and 
through the record of their discourses as given in the book 
of Acts. 

At first we would be inclined to wonder why this 
should be so, why we should not get our chief instruction 
on matters pertaining to the future life and godliness 
from the words of our Lord. But we understand the matter 
clearly since we discern that it was necessary that our 
Lord should pay the ransom price before any of our race 
could be adopted by the Father and receive the spirit of 
adoption. This explains the whole situation; for without 
the spirit of adoption we could not understand 



spiritual things, and consequently the things of a heavenly 

character which Jesus declared were parables and 

dark sayings to those of his time who heard them; for 

instance, his discourse on the new birth to Nicodemus, 

who could not understand. Our Lord remarked in this 

connection the fact that he taught merely earthly things 

and not heavenly things, saying, "If I have told you 

earthly things and you understood not, how would you 

understand if I should tell you of heavenly things?" 

(John 3:12.) Seeing that his hearers were not prepared 

to understand the heavenly things, our Lord gave his attention 

chiefly to discourses on earthly things, and to 

parables and dark sayings, which the Spirit would subsequently 

make known to his faithful ones. 

THE NATURAL MAN APPRECIATES NOT SPIRITUAL 
THINGS. 

This gives us a larger view of our Lord's ministry: 

R3307 : page 26 

first, teaching the natural man such things as the natural 
man could understand; secondly, healing the natural 
man's ailments, and thus laying a broad foundation for 
the spiritual work which he would begin at Pentecost and 
carry out during this Gospel age through his representatives 
the apostles, and those who should believe on him 
through their word. Throughout this Gospel age the 
Lord himself has been the teacher of the Church, which is 
"his body"— "his brethren": he has been attending to 
every feature of our instruction, feeding us upon the Truth 
—"things new and old." He is still the instructor, and 
whatever we receive through the apostles is merely his 
message through them and not their own messages. And 
whoever now speaks in the Lord's name is authorized to 
speak merely as a representative and ambassador, who 
must refer for his authority back to the words of the 
Lord himself, or to the words of those whom he inspired 
or directed in a plenary manner— the twelve apostles, 
Paul taking the place of Judas. 

Our Lord had been probably a year engaged in 
preaching, first in Judea, and latterly in Galilee, at the 
time this lesson opens. He was evidently already acquainted 
with these fishermen mentioned in our lesson, 
Peter, Andrew, James and John. It was probably at an 
earlier interview that our Lord gave Simon his surname 
of Peter, as it occurs in this lesson. These fishermen had 
probably met with Jesus and heard his preaching on other 
occasions, and were his disciples in a general sense of the 
word— that is, followers of him, believers on him, advocates 
of his teachings. Now, however, the time had 
come for our Lord's selection of the twelve apostles who 
should be with him continually and see his miracles and 
hear his teachings and be witnesses of all things said and 
done: and they in turn might in due time serve as his 



special representatives and be able to give to us, and to all 
of his subsequent followers accurate and truthful records 
of the principal events of his ministry. 

After preaching to the company on the shore from his 
seat in the boat, Jesus proposed to Simon and Andrew, 
the owners of the boat, that the boat be taken into 
deeper waters and the nets cast for fish; but Peter informed 
the Lord that this would be useless as the day was 
unfavorable, or for some reason the fish were not in that 
quarter of the lake at that time, for he and his companions 
had toiled all night and caught nothing. 
Nevertheless, to please the Lord, they did as he suggested. 
As they began to gather in the net they found it to be 
heavily laden with fish, more than their boat could hold. 
Their partners in the other boat were beckoned to, and 
gave a helping hand to save some of the fish. The lesson 
had its designed effect; Simon Peter at once fell on his 

R3308 : page 26 

knees before the Lord, recognizing that no ordinary 
human being could have produced such results under 
such circumstances. 

THE LORD LOVES ZEAL AND ENERGY. 

There is something very noble about Simon Peter: 
his impulsiveness by itself is an attractive trait. The 
zeal and energy with which he was disposed to take hold 
of any matter considered worthy of his attention is admirable. 
Indeed we know that Peter, James and John 
were the three whom the Lord specially loved of the 
twelve— the three who seemed to have the zeal, energy 
and vim which the Lord appreciates. They were practical 
illustrations of the admonition, "Whatsoever thy 
hand findeth to do, do it with thy might." Peter's 
words to the Lord, "Depart from me, O Lord, for I am a 
sinful man," represented his acknowledgment of the 
great difference between himself and the Master. He 
caught the true situation, that he was a sinful, imperfect 
man, while the one before him, the Master, was perfect 
and in full accord with the Father, and therefore permitted 
to be the dispenser of the Father's mercies. 

Peter's real sentiment was probably the reverse of 
his expression. He meant, "O Lord, although I am a sinful 
man, permit me to be near thee, that I may be 
blessed by contact with thee." This was the proper attitude 
of heart and the real prayer, which Jesus answered 
in making him one of his chosen twelve. 

The narrative breaks off suddenly and does not tell 
us whether it was the same hour or the next day that 
Peter, Andrew, James and John forsook their fishing 
business— their boats and nets— that they might be 
specially the companions of our Lord and ultimately his 
representatives, his apostles. We may reasonably suppose 
that the partnerships in this fishing business were 



family affairs, and that Peter left his boat and implements 

in the hands of brothers or sons or other partners 

or associates; and that likewise the sons of Zebedee left 

their paraphernalia in the hands of their father or others 

who had previously been interested with them in business. 

Indeed this thought is fully borne out by the fact that 

after our Lord's death, about two years later, these same 

men proposed returning to the fishing business, and apparently 

had some interest still in the boats, nets, tackle, 

etc. It was on the last-mentioned occasion that Jesus 

again gave a great draft of fishes, and that Simon Peter 

was the first again to recognize that the power to perform 

such a miracle could belong to no other than the crucified 

but risen Lord, whom he then recognized as the one upon 

the shore. 

CALLED TO A HIGHER VOCATION. 

Our Lord's words to Peter were, "From henceforth 
thou shalt catch men." These words were applicable 
also to Peter's associates, and doubtless were applied to 
them later as an invitation that they should with Peter 
join the Lord as his disciples or apostles. The account 
in Mark 1:17 mentions Andrew the brother of Simon 
Peter, and his partner in business also, and gives the invitation 
in slightly different language, namely, "Come ye 
after me and I will make you to become fishers of men." 
Probably the Lord made use of both expressions, but in 
any event they are of similar import. 

All of life's affairs will teach us lessons profitable 
throughout its future, if we will receive them. Ordinary 
affairs and business of every kind, in proportion as it is 
conducted along honest, proper and reasonable lines, will 
give valuable instruction and preparation for spiritual 
usefulness in the Lord's service, if they be properly received 
and wisely improved. Perhaps, however, there 
was something peculiarly helpful in the fishing business- 
something peculiarly like the great work in which the 
apostles were to engage the remainder of their lives. 
Our Lord intimates this in his call. Fishing requires 
energy, tact, proper bait, and that the fisherman keep 
himself out of sight. And these four things are requisites 
in the spiritual fishing in which the Lord privileges 
us to engage. Thus he admonished, "Be ye wise as 
serpents and harmless as doves." The Apostle Paul, 

R3308 : page 27 

speaking along this same line of the wisdom he used in 
presenting the Gospel tactfully, says, "Being crafty 
[wise] I took you with guile"— with bait. The Apostle 
took advantage of the natural tendencies and inclinations 
of his hearers to present the Gospel in the most practical 
form without, however, shunning or refusing to declare 
one single feature of it. In this his course is a model for 
us. We are to remember that as fish are easily alarmed 



when they find that any one wishes to take them, so 
humanity is shy of being captured by anything— especially 
if they have the least suspicion that they may lose 
their liberties: and thus consecration appears to the 
world. 

The apostles were not, as fishers for men, representing 
men or human institutions. They were not trying to 
get disciples into some sectarian bondage. They were 
fishers of men for the Lord and as the Lord's representatives; 
as though God did beseech men through them. 
Their mission was to catch men with the glorious hopes 
and prospects of the Gospel; to bring them into such 
relationship with the Lord that they would fully and 
gladly surrender their all to him. And this is the same 
course that is properly before the Lord's representatives 
to-day. We are to catch men for the Lord and for his 
service, not for our personal profit or gain,— not for sectarian 
upbuilding. We are not to give our own liberties 
to men, nor to seek to take away the liberties of others at 
the behest of men or sects. The message that goes forth 
from the true fishers of men whom the Lord commissions 
is nevertheless a message which implies a loss of liberty 
and a loss of life to those who are successfully caught. 
However, the fishing business does not fully illustrate the 
matter, because all who are of the Lord's catch must be 
willingly his, else they will not remain caught, but be cast 
forth: and their loss of personal liberty and life means 
a gain of glory, honor and eternal life. 

Our Lord used this fishing business as the basis of 
one of his parables, saying that the Kingdom of heaven 
is like unto a net cast into the sea which after gathering 
fish of every kind will be finally brought to shore. That 
net undoubtedly represented this Gospel age, and a 
general catch of all classes of people, suitable and unsuitable 
for the Lord's purpose as respects the Kingdom. 
The bringing of the net to the shore properly represents 
the "harvest" time of this age— the reckoning time, the 
time when this catch is concluded. The parable proceeds 
to say that the suitable fish were gathered into baskets 
and the unsuitable were cast away,— cast back into the 
sea. So the Gospel call, the Gospel net, the Gospel fishermen 
of this Gospel age are gathering out of the world of 
mankind a peculiar class of people suitable to the Lord's 
purposes in the Kingdom, and though others may get into 
it they are not desired and will relapse again to worldly 
conditions. The fishing of the next age will be different 
and on a much larger scale. 

APOSTLESHIP MORE THAN DISCIPLESHIP. 

There is a difference between apostleship and discipleship. 
There are but "twelve apostles of the Lamb" 
(Rev. 21:14), but the number of disciples is considerably 
larger. The word disciple signifies pupil or learner; 
and all who are now being called of the Lord, all who are 
now being caught as acceptable fish under the present 



arrangement are those who desire to be taught of the 
Lord and willingly respond to his teachings. Our Golden 
Text sets forth the conditions upon which we may be disciples, 
namely, that we not only accept the Lord but 
that we continue in his word— continue to be taught of 
him— continue to learn in the school of Christ. Before 
we enter his school we must learn that we are sinners by 
nature and that we need just the washing or the cleansing 
that he prescribes as necessary before we can enter 
his school or become his disciples. After we accept the 
word of counsel respecting the need of washing in the 
precious blood, and after by faith accomplishing this 
cleansing of sins, and after we have started as pupils, we 
find that there are various lessons to be learned, all necessary 
to our progress. 

It is the Teacher who is to be the decider of what 
lessons we need, what experiences, what trials, what 
difficulties, what encouragements, what assistance are 
necessary to us. The promise is, that no good thing will 
he withhold. He will give the warnings, the corrections, 
the encouragements, the blessings and the promises, according 
as we need them and are in a condition to make 
profitable use of them. Not everyone who starts to be a 
disciple will win the great prize as a graduate from the 
school of Christ into the Kingdom of glory and join t-heirship 
with the Master; but he who faithfully and 
patiently continues in discipleship— continues to learn 
the lessons which the great Master teaches, until he shall 
have finished his course, will surely receive his crown at 
the hands of the Lord. 



R3309 : page 27 

THE GOOD PHYSICIAN. 

-MARK L21-34.-FEBRUARY 1 .- 

Golden Text:— "He laid his hands on every one 
of them, and healed them."-LUKE 4:40. 

ALTHOUGH Simon Peter and Andrew were natives 
of Bethsaida, a few miles north of Capernaum 
(Jno. 1:44), they had evidently settled down in 
the latter city, perhaps because larger and more favorable 
to their business. When Peter, Andrew, James and John 
accepted the Lord's invitation to become fishers of men 
they did not immediately depart from home. Some hours 
if not some days elapsed between the fishing experience 
and the narrative of this lesson. The Sabbath was come, 
and Jesus with the four disciples went into the synagogue 
where he was recognized and given an opportunity for 
teaching. In the synagogues of olden times there was 
great liberty to anyone who had the necessary education 
and faith in the holy Scriptures, to discuss their messages. 



In some respects that greater liberty was more 
favorable to the Truth than the present circumscribed 
methods of Christendom, in which each party or sect 
holds absolute control and refuses liberty of discussion of 
its own tenets as well as of the Scriptures. The Lord's 
people should jealously guard Lord's day opportunities, 
so that they be not occasions for the overthrow of faith 
by those who reject the Word of God. At the same 
time the blessing of the Lord's day, the purity of Truth 
and the clearness of the faith would certainly be greatly 

R3309 : page 28 

stimulated by a full liberty of discussion of the meaning 
of the Scriptures in a reverent manner. 

In very few Church gatherings of today would our 
Lord Jesus be granted opportunity to set forth his doctrines. 
He could not and would not accept authority 
from any of the denominations of Christendom, because 
he could not and would not indorse any of their creeds as 
a whole; hence he would be deprived of any opportunity 
for promulgating the Truth in this manner in this our enlightened 
twentieth century. Likewise those who follow 
his word closely, and who for similar reasons cannot indorse 
fully any of the creeds of Christendom, are deprived 
of opportunities for presenting the Truth in the 
synagogues of today; and are obliged to adopt other methods 
of reaching the Lord's sheep with the message of 
the great King, now due to be understood. However, 
the Lord has greatly blessed and used these efforts outside 
the synagogues— especially the printed page, DAWNS, 
Tracts, WATCH TOWERS, etc. 

Our Lord's teaching impressed his hearers as being 
reasonable and positive; and this is one of the characteristics 
of the Truth today. The Lord's message is so 
clear and so forceful that it cannot be gainsaid. It appeals 
to the minds as well as to the hearts of reasonable 
people now as it did then. On the contrary, the general 
mixture of error as then held by the Scribes and Pharisees 
and Doctors of the Law, and as now held by the 
various denominations of Catholics and Protestants and 
their Doctors of Divinity, is confusing, indefinite, self-contradictory 
and generally unsatisfactory. 

THE DEVIL A CHURCH GOER. 

The devil went to Church then as he not infrequently 
does now, and he was as opposed to having the Truth 
preached then as he is now. The attendants of the 
Capernaum synagogue, however, were seemingly of a 
nobler type than that of Nazareth, which gnashed upon 
our Lord and sought to take his life. In this case the 
majority of the people were less under the influence of 
Satan, although one of their number was more particularly 
possessed by a demon, here called "an unclean 
spirit." We know nothing of our Lord's discourse, but 



from the fact that this demon became so excited under 
the preaching, we may draw the inference that our Lord 
was explaining to the people the origin of sin and the 
power of Satan and of the fallen angels in respect to 
humanity, how all these downward tendencies were 
more and more injurious to men and should be resisted, 
how divine fellowship and communion should be sought, 
and how repentance and reformation and resistance of 
the evil one were necessary to physical health as well as 
to a closer approach to our God. 

The demon— one of the fallen angels from the time 
of the flood, mentioned by Jude and by Peter (Jude 6,7; 
2 Pet. 2:4)— believed that the Lord's teachings were 
condemnatory of himself and his associates in evil, and 
cried out, using the mouth of the possessed man. Unquestionably 
the fallen angels, although restrained by 
chains of darkness from manifesting themselves to humanity 
until a certain time, have contact with each 
other and are well aware of procedures in general. As 
Satan recognized Jesus in the temptation, so all of the 
fallen angels knew that the Holy One of God had become 
a man for the purpose of redeeming and reclaiming and 
restoring humanity from the fallen condition superinduced 
by Satan's lying ambition. Apparently, too, these 
demons had some knowledge of the divine times and 
seasons, though we need not suppose that they had a 
particular or definite knowledge, for our Lord declared 
that at that time neither himself nor the holy angels 
knew of the day and the hour of his coming in glory and 
the establishment of his Kingdom. It is not supposable, 
therefore, that the fallen angels knew more on this subject. 
However, there is a great difference between not 
knowing the exact day or hour of a matter and not having 
any idea whatever respecting it. Apparently this 
demon recognized that the time was still distant when 
the power of Satan and all the fallen angels is doomed to 
be overthrown. 

"BE YE CLEAN THAT BEAR THE VESSELS OF THE 
LORD'S HOUSE." 

The testimony of the demon seemed to be reverential, 
and might by some have been construed to be a 
testimony in the Lord's favor. Jesus, however, was not 
willing to accept such a testimony from such a source, 
even as the Apostle Paul was similarly unwilling to 
receive testimony of the possessed woman, who declared 
of Paul and Silas, "These be the servants of the 
Most High God, which show unto us the way of life." 
(Acts 16:17.) The divine method seems to be to make 
a clear separation between the servants of God and the 
servants of evil. The privilege of testifying for God or 
being ambassadors for the Truth is a favor reserved for 
the Lord's own people. He seeketh not the evil one nor 
the fallen demons nor evil men or women to be heralds of 
the good tidings. The Lord's people should note this 



matter carefully, and resent the services of any who do 
not give evidences of being in heart-union with the Lord. 
"Unto the wicked God saith, What hast thou to do to 
take my covenant into thy mouth? Seeing thou hatest 
instruction, and casteth my words behind thee." (Psa. 50:16.) 
Spiritualists, Trance Mediums, Hypnotists, 
Christian Scientists, etc., would fain associate themselves 
more or less with the name of Jesus and seem to be servants 
of the light; but all children of the light should be 
on their guard against these, who, however sincere they 
may sometimes appear, are undoubtedly the tools of the 
prince of darkness, who would array himself as an angel 
of light that he might deceive and mislead the children of 
the light— the children of God. 

But some one will say, Did not Jesus surely say, 
"Greater works than these shall ye do because I go unto 
my Father," and are not those words genuine? Yes, we 
answer, they are genuine, and most precious words; but 
how have they been fulfilled? Have any of the Lord's 
disciples done any greater miracles than Jesus did so far 
as healing physical ailments are concerned? Assuredly 
not. We have no record of greater works of this kind 
than are recorded in the Gospels. Have any of the 
Lord's disciples at any time done as great works according 
to the flesh as Jesus did? Have any of them ever 
awakened the dead? Surely none except the apostles 
have done this wonderful work. What then could our 
Lord have meant by this expression? 

"GREATER WORKS THAN THESE SHALL YE DO." 

We answer that in our last lesson we saw that Jesus in 
his ministry dealt only with the natural man, and could 
not communicate to natural man respecting spiritual or 

R3309 : page 29 

heavenly things except in parables and dark sayings, 
which could be but imperfectly comprehended until 
after Pentecost gave the enlightenment of the holy Spirit. 
To our understanding, therefore, the greater works that 
have been done by the Lord's followers since the ascension 
have been such works as related to the hearts of men 
rather than to their bodies. The whole creation is 
groaning and travailing in physical discomfort, but the 
worst of all groans and pains comes from the anguish of 
the soul— broken hearts. 

The Lord's followers, even the humblest of them, in 
proportion as they receive of his Spirit, may communicate 
it through his word and bring to wounded and 
broken hearts peace and joy and blessing, regardless of 
physical conditions of discomfort, so that as the Apostle 
explains they may rejoice even in tribulation, knowing 
what the tribulations are working out for them in the 
way of greater glory and blessing and association with 
the Lord in his Kingdom. (Rom. 5:3.) Would not he 



who has had the eyes of his understanding opened, that 
he might see with clearness the lengths and breadths and 
heights and depths of the love of God, esteem this blessing 
as of much greater value and importance than simply 
the restoring of natural sight? Who that has tasted that 
the Lord is gracious has not participated in a greater 
miracle than did those who tasted of the loaves and fishes 
which our Lord so miraculously increased that they fed 
the five thousand? It is true indeed, then, that the Lord 
has made it possible for his humbler servants in the 
humbler walks of life and with few natural abilities, but 
possessing his Spirit and his Word, to do mighty works 

R3310 : page 29 

even today— "Mighty through God to the pulling down 
of strongholds" of error and of sin. 

THE NECESSITY FOR MIRACLES IS PAST. 

There was a reason why miracles were necessary at 
the beginning of this Gospel dispensation. Had our 
Lord Jesus performed none of the miracles recorded in 
the Scriptures how could we today feel the confidence, 
the assurance, that we do feel respecting him? Had he 
gone about as a preacher of righteousness and expounder 
of the divine Word merely, and had he then died just as 
he did die, would the proof have been as sufficient as it 
now is that he was indeed the Son of God and that his 
death was indeed the sacrifice of a perfect one for the imperfect 
one and his progeny? Would our Lord in preaching 
to the Jews have accomplished any work without the 
use of miracles? Were they not necessary to him as a 
demonstration of his right to take the place of Moses as 
the antitypical leader of the Israelites indeed? Assuredly 
this is true. But we have no necessity for such 
manifestations of miraculous power today. On the contrary, 
we behold Christianity already too popular with 
the world. As it is, too many tares are pretending to be 
wheat. The conditions, therefore, seem to be the very 
reverse of those which at the first advent demanded miracles 
for the establishing of the Church on a proper faith 
basis. 

"WHO HEALETH ALL THY DISEASES." 

But some one will urge, Does it not seem more reasonable 
that the Lord's people should go to him in prayer 
or go to the elders for healing by miraculous power, than 
that they should use drugs or medicines or surgery? 
Yes, we reply; it is very natural. That is just what the 
natural mind would expect and crave, but the Lord is not 
dealing with his people of today as with natural men. 
We are not natural Israelites, but spiritual Israelites. It 
is to the New Creature that the Lord now appeals; it is 
the New Creature that now has the privilege of experiencing 



healing at the Lord's hands, forgiveness of sins, 

covering with the robe of Christ's righteousness, so that 

we have the standing before the Father of absolute righteousness, 

without spot, wrinkle, or any such thing; we 

know no man after the flesh, we know no perfection after 

the flesh, but we do know the perfection and miracles 

after the spirit; and many a time have the Lord's people 

marveled at the wonderful healing of mind and faith and 

hope, and the wonderful refreshments, with joy unspeakable, 

—the holy anointing oil received from our spiritual 

and glorified Head. 

"WE ARE TO WALK BY FAITH AND NOT BY SIGHT." 

Not only is this the clear statement of the Word, but 
the logic of the proposition must be evident to any one. As 
for the Lord's saints, have they not taken their physical, 
human, earthly rights and privileges, secured through 
the death of Christ, and exchanged these with the Lord 
for heavenly things, the heavenly body that is to be received 
at the First Resurrection, the heavenly hopes and 
heavenly joys which are already the first-fruits of the 
Spirit in us? Yea, verily, they have. Have they not 
sacrificed thus the earthly interests, hopes, rights, privileges, 
for the heavenly ones? How then can we who 
have thus devoted or consecrated our earthly advantages 
for the heavenly ones ask to have again the earthly 
advantages? Would not such a prayer, such a request 
intelligently made, signify a withdrawal of our consecration 
—signify our preference for the earthly rather than 
the heavenly gifts, privileges and advantages? And 
would we as spiritual Israelites be willing to make such an 
exchange again if the Lord were willing to let us do so? 
Surely not. Would one who appreciates the privilege 
of sacrificing earthly interests with Christ, of laying 
down the earthly life and its privileges in participation 
with the Lord and in hope of joint-heirship with him in 
the divine nature and Kingdom, wish for a moment to 
have the Lord cancel this arrangement and give him 
back earthly rights, restitution privileges? 

As for the world we grant that the Lord has secured 
for them restitution privileges and blessings, and that in 
due time they will have them— that in due time Satan 
will be bound and all of his coadjutors be restrained, and 
that then the good Physician, with his whole staff of co-laborers, 
the members of his body, his Bride, will participate 
in the great uplifting of the millennial age, in administering 
the blessings of restitutions, mental, moral 
and physical, to all the willing and obedient of that 
glorious time. (Acts 3:19-23.) But the time of restitution 
has not yet come. It will not come until the close 
of this Gospel age— until the Church shall have finished 
her course, walking by faith and not by sight, enjoying 
the spiritual miracles and not the natural ones. 

The demon came out of the man, tearing him— that 
is to say, causing a convulsion, a fit. Luke, describing 



the event, says that he threw the man in the midst— that 
is, he fell on the floor of the synagogue in the midst of the 
people in a fit, but was otherwise unhurt, the demon not 
having power to do him injury, under the Lord's command. 
The assembled company was astonished, and 

R3310 : page 30 

inquired, What new teaching is this which has authority 
to cast out the evil demons? Our Lord's enemies, it will 
be remembered, subsequently charged him with casting 
out demons by Beelzebub, the prince of demons, Satan; 
hence we see the wisdom of his having refused to receive 
testimony from this demon. To have received their 
testimony would have been more or less acknowledging 
them and giving them credit for truthfulness; whereas 
the Scriptures everywhere represent Satan and his 
fallen spirits as lying spirits, deceiving the people. 

Undoubtedly there are cases of demon possession today 
—obsession. The custom of our day removes these 
to asylums, where they are called insane. It is not our 
thought that all the inmates of insane asylums are 
possessed of demons; but that many of them are. So far 
as we are able to form a conclusion on the subject, it 
would be that probably more than half are demon 
possessed, and less than one half are insane through 
disease of the brain. In all parts of the world this demon 
possession seems to prevail, and the tendency seems 
always to be downward— they are unclean spirits, delighting 
not in holy, pure and good things, but in impurity 
and unholiness. Their influence is exerted not 
only upon the possessed ones but upon others, in an evil 
direction. 

WE ARE NOT IGNORANT OF SATAN'S DEVICES. 

Even spirit mediums are well aware of the danger 
they encounter in acting as mediums at all. They caution 
one another not to yield the will too far, to maintain 
a self control to a certain extent, to yield themselves to 
the control of these spirits only in a definitely limited 
degree lest they become obsessed, because the evil spirit 
obtaining full control, the human will is therefore powerless 
to expel the intruder and they are at the mercy of the 
demon, and from man's standpoint are denominated 
crazy— more particularly so if several demons gain possession 
of the same person and thus several wills seek to 
control the one organization. In proportion as a knowledge 
of God and the principles of righteousness advance 
and open the eyes of human understanding, in this same 
proportion the evil spirits find it necessary to be coy in 
their deceptions, and proportionately the Lord's people 
need the protection which the Lord has provided for 
them, namely, the holy Spirit, the spirit of a sound mind, 
the spirit of love, joy and peace in the holy Spirit of the 
Lord. 



Apparently, however, the masses of the people were 
less deceived on this subject at that time than they are today. 
Today Satan, acting more skilfully than in the 
past, is leading on as a scientist and is pooh-poohing suggestions 
that there are evil spirits or a Beelzebub or 
prince of demons. To such an extent has he prevailed 
that many of the leading theologians of the world, in all 
denominations of Christendom, agree that there is no 
devil, that there are no demons and that our Lord performed 
no such miracles as are here recited. They claim 
that the poor ignorant people of our Lord's day did not 
understand what they were talking about, and said that 
a man had a devil when he merely had a nervous disease, 
a fit, etc. Christian Science is one of Satan's latest fads, 
which, under the guise of morality, is seeking to destroy 
both common sense and Christianity amongst the Lord's 
people. It is one of Satan's latest devices, disproving 
himself and thus turning attention away from the powerful 
influence which he exercises in the world. "We are 
not ignorant of his devices." (2 Cor. 2:1 1.) "We 
wrestle not with flesh and blood, but with principalities 
and powers, and wicked spirits in high places." (Eph. 6:12.) 
"But greater is he that is for us, than all they 
that be against us." (2 Kings 6:16.) The revised 
version translation of the 28th verse is preferable. It 
reads, "And the report of him went out straightway everywhere 
in all that region of Galilee round about." This 
fame of Jesus subsequently aided greatly in his ministry, 
when he went to all the towns and villages throughout 
Galilee. 

ST. PETER'S MOTHER-IN-LAW CURED. 

After the synagogue incident our Lord went to the 
home of Simon Peter and Andrew, James and John accompanying 
him. Peter's mother-in-law lay sick of a 
fever, and one of the evangelists intimates that it was a 
violent form of fever. For the first time it seems to have 
occurred to the disciples that the Lord's power, which 
they had seen manifested on various occasions, might be 
exercised on behalf of this sick woman. Now, their faith 
grown stronger, they mentioned her case to Jesus and he 
took her by the hand and lifted her up. Immediately 
the fever left her. Not only so, but instead of being 
weak and enervated, as is usually the case after a severe 

R3311 : page 30 

fever, she was strong and vigorous and able to serve the 
family, probably in the setting forth of refreshments and 
other household matters. This demonstrates that her 
cure could have been nothing short of miraculous. The 
operation of the mind, even if it could in any measure 
have destroyed the fever condition, could not have made 
good the waste of strength in the system accomplished 
by the fever. 



Sunset saw the gathering of numbers of the sick and 
demon-possessed ones. This was probably for two 
reasons: (1) that it would be during the cooler time of 
the day in which the diseased could come in a warm country 
such as Palestine; (2) it was the Sabbath day, and 
the Jews, however irreligious and even devilish some of 
them were, were all strict Sabbatarians. We remember 
how on another occasion the Pharisees found fault with 
Jesus because he had healed a man on the Sabbath day, 
and how our Lord exposed their hypocrisy in the matter 
by showing that if it had been an ox or an ass that had 
fallen into a ditch, and where there might be a monetary 
loss if the creature were not assisted, their reasoning 
would be more correct. Our Lord, however, seems to 
have preferred the Sabbath days for his healing work: 
at all events some of his most notable miracles were done 
on the Sabbath days. His reason for so doing was not, 
we believe, to exasperate the Pharisees and Scribes or 
merely to show the hypocrisy of their formalism, but because 
the Sabbath days served a special purpose as an 
illustration of the great Sabbath that is to come, the 
Millennium, in which all the families of the earth shall be 
blessed by this good Physician, who has already given 
his life for the redemption of the life of the world, and 
who during the millennial age (his Bride, the Church, 
cooperating) will bless and heal all the willing and obedient 
of the human family— lifting them up, up, up out of 
Adamic sin and death conditions to the perfection of life 
lost in Eden through the disobedience of the first Adam. 

SATANIC POWER CAN AND DOES NOW CURE. 

Many of the Lord's consecrated people of today, 

R3311 : page 31 

noting the cure of diseases by spirit mediums, mind 
curists, hypnotists, Christian Scientists, Mormons, etc., 
are inclined to think of these cures of our day in much the 
same light as we think of our Lord's cures recorded in 
this lesson and its Golden text. This is a natural tendency 
—it is natural for us to seek to walk by sight and not 
by faith. Some of these dear friends inquire of us, Is not 
our Lord Jesus as able to heal the sickness of our bodies 
today as he was able to heal the sickness of the Jews at 
Capernaum? We answer, Yes, unquestionably. More 
than this, we hold that our Lord has more power today 
than he had then. 

It was after our Lord had finished his sacrifice, after 
he had risen from the dead, a life-giving spirit, that he declared 
to the disciples, "All power is given me in heaven 
and in earth." We have not a question, therefore, respecting 
the ability of our Lord to perform today and 
through his people of today any miracles that he performed 
at the first advent in person. We are asked, If 
this be so, should we not expect such healings? Did not 



our Lord say, "These signs shall follow them that believe: 
In my name shall they cast out devils and heal the sick, 
and if they drink any deadly thing it shall not harm 
them, etc."? (Mark 16:18.) We answer, that these 
words are spurious,— that they are not found in any of 
the old manuscripts, that all scholars admit that they are 
forgeries, and that no part of the 16th chapter of Mark, 
after the 8th verse, is genuine. 



R3311 : page 31 

THE PILGRIM'S WANTS. 

I want that adorning divine, 

Thou only, my God, canst bestow; 
I want in those beautiful garments to shine, 

Which distinguish thy household below. 

I want— Oh! I want to attain 

Some likeness, my Saviour, to Thee, 
That this longed for resemblance I at once may attain, 

Thy comliness put upon me! 

I want to be marked for Thine own, 

Thy seal on my forehead to wear; 
To receive that "new name" on the mystic white stone 

Which none but thyself can declare. 

I want so in Thee to abide 

As to bring forth some fruit to Thy praise. 
The branch which thou prunest, though feeble and dried, 

May languish, but never decays. 

I want Thine own hand to unbind 

Each tie to terrestrial things— 
Too tenderly cherished, too closely entwined, 

Where my heart too tenaciously clings. 

I want, by my aspect serene, 

My actions and words, to declare 
That my treasure is safe in a country unseen— 

That my heart's best affections are there. 

I want, as a traveller, to haste 

Straight onward, nor pause on my way; 

Nor forethought, nor anxious contrivance to waste 
On the tent only pitched for a day. 

I want— and this sums up my prayer— 

To glorify Thee till I die; 
Then calmly to yield up my soul to thy care, 

And breathe out, in faith, my last sigh!— Selected. 



R3311 : page 31 

NEW ARRANGEMENTS FOR PITTSBURGH GAZETTE. 

MANY of our readers have been anxious to procure 
the Pittsburgh Gazette on account of its 
containing Pastor C. T. Russell's Sunday discourses 
in each Monday's issue. About 1000 of our readers 
have accepted the arrangement for a clubbing rate, which 
would make the Gazette cost them for the year $2.25. 
Many of these desire extra copies of the Monday issue 
only, but the Gazette people refuse to supply the papers 
by mail in this way. We have arranged with them, 
however, that those who wish may subscribe for three 
months for 60c. or for six months for $1.15. These 
prices they would not accept direct from the subscribers, 
but will accept from us on the clubbing principle. 
Some may desire to subscribe for the shorter periods, and 
if so we will be pleased to hear from them at once. 

In the interest of the friends who desire to circulate 
numbers of these Monday papers amongst their neighbors, 
and who believe that matter thus printed is more 
likely to be read than if conveyed in some other form, we 
have made an arrangement with the Gazette and a news 
agent by which ANY ONE WHO IS A SUBSCRIBER FOR THE 
Gazette (either for three months, six months or a year) 
shall have the privilege of ordering extra Monday copies 
of the discourse sheet through us at the following rates, 
viz.: 

Seven copies every Monday for 10 weeks, by mail, $1.00 
Fifteen copies every week for 10 weeks, by mail,. 2.00 
Fifty copies every week for 10 weeks, by express, 
prepaid 5.00 

In sending orders for extra Monday issues, the 
writer must state explicitly that he is a regular Gazette 
subscriber, or must include an order for a regular 
subscription. 

We are bound to consult the wishes of the Gazette 
publishers, because only upon condition of their securing 
a good list of regular subscribers do they propose to continue 
the publication of these discourses. The arrangement, 
however, is, that in the event of their discontinuing 
a proportionate amount of the subscription money will 
be returned. 

By this new arrangement one regular subscriber can 
act as agent for the others of the friends in his vicinity, 
and thus all who desire may be supplied for their own 
reading, as well as have such supply as they desire for 
giving or loaning to their friends and neighbors. We 
believe that good is being accomplished in this manner, 
and trust for a still larger fruitage. Some of the friends 
have interested newspapers in their vicinity, and thus 
secured a re-publication of the discourses. The daily circulation 



of the Gazette is about 70,000, amongst the most 
intelligent and religiously inclined people of this city and 
Pittsburgh. 

We are not at liberty to order for the Monday issues 
under this arrangement for less than ten weeks to any one 
person. 

We have still special issues of the Gazette containing 
reports of the entire six debates. These can be supplied 
at 2c. each, postpaid, or 50 or more at lc. each by 
express prepaid. 



page 33 

SEMI-MONTHLY. 