VOL. XXI. SEPTEMBER 15, 1900. No. 18. 



CONTENTS. 



Views From the Watch Tower 275 

What is the End of Life? 275 

The Spread of Mohammedanism 275 

Methodism and Higher Criticism 277 

Presbyterians Being Sifted 277 

High Church Performances 279 

Calamities— Why Permitted 279 

Times of Refreshing 280 

The Christian's Course Delineated 280 

The Dallas, Texas, Convention 283 

Sabbath Dinners and How to Utilize 

Them 283 

The Proper Kind of Table Talks 284 

A Royal Banquet Declined 286 

"Zion's Glad Songs" 274 



The Volunteer Work 274 

page 274 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
--ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, N.Y. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



BRITISH BRANCH NO. 131 GIPSY LANE, FOREST GATE, 
LONDON EAST, ENGLAND. 



R2697 : page 274 

"ZION'S GLAD SONGS." 



OUR dear Brother McPhail, who has quite a talent for music, 

has collected a number of new and beautiful hymns,— the 

music to the majority being his own composition. These, fifty-four 

in number, are well printed, and appropriately bound in 

paper covers,— price 10 cents each, or $1 per dozen, postage free. 

This little book, entitled "Zion's Glad Songs," has another 
feature which we are sure will be appreciated by many, viz., 
the addition of the music for twenty-eight old tunes, long, short, 
common, and peculiar meters. These are inserted in the interest 
of our regular hymn book, "Poems and Hymns of Dawn," 
the tunes of the remainder being copyrighted. 

It is not at all the thought that the new book will supplant 
the old one; for many of the grand old hymns cannot be equaled 
by any new ones, either in words or tunes. The thought is to 
make it supplementary. As such we recommend it to you all. 
Our first edition of 6000 is now ready and orders will be filled 
as received. 



THE VOLUNTEER WORK. 



This branch of the service has lagged a little during the hot 
weather, because of small attendance at church services. Now 
that cooler weather has come we expect that it will revive. 
Some who have finished their own cities are branching out- 
endeavoring to serve nearby towns. This is commendable. 
Every faithful soldier of the cross is sure to receive blessings 
both now and hereafter from "the Captain of our salvation." 
Let us be faithful. 

page 274 

"Lift high the royal banner, It must not suffer loss." 



R2694 : page 275 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 



[The following, author unknown, came from India, from 
a Christian Missionary. It is excellent.] 

WHAT IS THE END OF LIFE? 



THE END OF LIFE is not to do good, altho so 
many of us think so. It is not to win souls— 
altho I once thought so. The end of life is— to do 
the will of God. That may be the line of doing good 
or winning souls, or it may not. For the individual, 
the answer to the question, "What is the end of my 
life?" is "To do the will of God, whatever that may be." 

Spurgeon replied to an invitation to preach to an 
exceptionally large audience, "I have no ambition to 
preach to 10,000 people, but to do the will of God"— 
and he declined. 

If we could have no ambition past the will of God, 
our lives would be successful. If we could say, "I have 
no ambition to go to the heathen; I have no ambition 
to win souls; my ambition is to do the will of God, 
whatever that may be," that would make all lives equally 
great or equally small, because the only great thing in 
a life is what of God's will there is in it. The maximum 
achievement of any man's life, after it is all over, 
is to have done the will of God. 

No man or woman can have done any more with 
a life— no Luther, no Spurgeon, no Wesley, no Melanchthon 
can have done any more with their lives; and 
a dairymaid or a scavenger can do as much. 

Therefore, the supreme principle upon which we 
have to run our lives is to adhere, through good report 
and ill, through temptation and prosperity and 
adversity, to the will of God, wherever that may lead us. 



It may take you to China, or you who are going to 

Africa may have to stay where you are; you who are 

going to be an evangelist may have to go into business; 

and you who are going into business may have 

to become an evangelist. But there is no happiness 

or success in any life till that principle is taken possession 

of. And the highest service is first, moment 

by moment, to be in the will of God. It may be to 

work or to wait; to stand fast or to lay still. Tis 

he, our blessed Lord, who will keep us in his will, 

if our eyes are fixed on him. 

How can you build up a life on that principle? 
Let me give you an outline of a little Bible reading:— 

The definition of an ideal life: 

Acts 13:22— "A man after mine own heart, which 
shall fulfil all my will." 

The object of life: 

Heb. 10:7— "I come to do thy will, O God." 

The first thing you need after life, is food: 

John 4:34— "My meat is to do the will of him that 
sent me." 

The next thing you need after food is society: 

Mark 3:35— "Whosoever shall do the will of my 
Father in Heaven, the same is my brother, and sister, 
and mother." 

You want education: 

Psa. 143:10— "Teach me to do thy will, O my God." 

You want pleasure: 

Psa. 40:8-"I delight to do thy will, O my God." 
A whole life can be built up on that vertebral column, 
and then, when all is over, 

1 John 2:17-"He that doeth the will of God abideth 
forever." 

THE SPREAD OF MOHAMMEDANISM. 



If reports are to be believed Mohammedanism is 
spreading in Asia and Africa much more rapidly than 
is Christianity. This is credited to three reasons. 
(1) Its simplicity of doctrine, which makes it commendable 
to persons of low intellectual capacity— 

R2695 : page 276 

Believe in Mohammed and obey his simple law and 
have an eternity of sensuous bliss. (2) Its permission 
of polygamy, common throughout those countries. 
(3) Its uniform requirement of total abstinence 
from intoxicants. 

Recognizing the fact that Christianity makes few 
proselytes from Mohammedanism, and that the latter 
is growing rapidly in numbers and influence, the 
British Government has of late years been attempting 
to gain the confidence and support of her Mohammedan 



subjects, whose number is estimated at one hundred 
and fifty millions— fifty millions more than all 
denominations of Protestant Christians in the whole world. 

Doubtless this change of attitude toward the very 
religion against which all the Crusades of medieval 
times were waged, tho due to political policy, is backed 
by the changed religious sentiment of our day;— 
which under the lead of the higher critics has 
declared,— 

"The hope of the race lies in a deeper study of 
the great, inspired writers of the past, such as Shakespeare, 
Homer, Dante and a few others, whose works 
have charmed the minds of people of culture. The 
Bible, also, though a little out-of-date, has been recognized, 
in the past, as a work of inspiration, and 
you may find it helpful to include it in your course of 
reading." 

General sentiment, therefore, resolves itself into 
this,— Since our wise men tell us that the Bible is 
unreliable, and that the death of Christ Jesus no more 
redeemed the world than did the death of other reformers; 
and since they tell us that future happiness 
depends upon the cultivation of our mental and 
moral qualities, and that Shakespeare's and other 
writings are quite as good or better than the Bible for 
such culture, how do we know but what the Mohammedan's 
Bible— the Koran— is as good or better than 
our own, and they as right as we or more so? Therefore 
let us not any longer say with the Bible that 
there is no other name than that of Jesus given under 
heaven or among men whereby we must be saved; but 
let us say, Get morality and education in the name 
of Mohammed or Jesus or Confucius or whomsoever you 
please. 

Such would be the logical outcome of such teachings; 
and thereby we are reminded of our Lord's 
words respecting these times— "When the Son of 
Man cometh shall he find the faith on the earth?"— 
Luke 18:8. 

WHAT GREAT BRITAIN IS DOING FOR MOHAMMEDANISM. 



Shortly after the capture of Khartoum by General 
Lord Kitchener, and at his instance, a Mohammedan 
college was founded, known as Gordon College, and 
more recently another Mohammedan school was 
founded at Sierra Leone, on the west coast of Africa. 
This latter institution was opened with considerable 
ceremony under the auspices of the acting-governor, 
Major Nathan, and of it the New York Sun says 
editorially:— 

"The ceremony began with a prayer in Arabic 
offered up by the Imaum of the mosque, Alfa Omaru, 
who afterward gave a short account of the efforts to 



promote education made by the Sierra Leone Moslems. 
He referred to the years 1839 and 1841, when the 
Mohammedan religion was considered as a danger to 
the colony, when Moslems were persecuted and their 
mosques pulled down by excited mobs. Thanks, however, 
to an enlightened policy, matters were set right, 
and for more than fifty years the Moslems have enjoyed 
full toleration and the protection of the British 
Government. In 1872 the festival of the Lesser Bairam 
had been attended by the governor, Sir John Pope 
Henessy, with a military escort, and in 1 879 another 
governor, Sir Samuel Rowe, had entertained seven 
hundred Moslems at Government House on the occasion 
of the Bairam Festival of that year. In 1 89 1 
Governor Hay handed over a fine property with commodious 
buildings to the Moslem community for educational 
purposes, accompanied by a grant for the 
payment of the teachers. These successive events 
were important epochs in the history of Islamism in 
West Africa, and the Imaum looked forward to the 
day when the present elementary school would become 
the stepping-stone to a college." 

In his reply Major Nathan cited examples of 
Mohammedans occupying official positions in India 
and in Egypt, and added that,— 

"He wished them to perfect themselves in Arabic 
in order that they might know what real Mohammedanism 
is. When they understood the Koran, he 
said, they would see that their religion was one telling 
them how to live, and not a religion of charms and 
gewgaws. Knowing English, they would have the 
literature and wisdom of the white man open to them: 
and with Arabic, they would be able to read not only 
the Koran, but the 'Makamat' of El Hariri, known 
already to some of them, and the 'Alif Lailat wa 
Lailah,' the translation of which English people read 
with pleasure. In concluding, Major Nathan urged 
them not to rest content until they had in Sierra 
Leone a Moslem college whence wisdom and knowledge 
might go forth over the whole of West Africa." 

The Sun believes that the importance of the 
incident can hardly be overestimated. It says:— 

"The news of the official encouragement given 
to the Mohammedan religion and the culture of its 
sacred language, Arabic, will in a very short time 
spread from the Atlantic to the Red Sea, and the 
wisdom of the policy that dictated it will be justified 
by the resulting spread of British influence among the 
Moslem populations of North Africa. In all probability 
it will lead to a corresponding rivalry on the 
part of the French, whose hold on the Arabs of 
Algeria is none too strong, owing to mistakes in 
policy and the want of character of many of those 
appointed to office. 

R2695 : page 277 



"The next century no doubt has many surprises 
in store; but whatever they may be, not the least 
strange will be the spectacle of the two Western 
nations that led in the crusades promoting, for political 
and territorial reasons, the creed they then tried 
to crush." 

However peculiar all this may appear from the 
standpoint of nominal "Christendom," it is perfectly 
clear to all of the "royal priesthood." We see the 
fallacy of the claim that European kingdoms are 
Christ's kingdoms— that the Word of God never did 
recognize them as anything but "kingdoms of this 
world" ruled by "the prince of this world." We 
see that the nominal churches are not the one true 
Church of "saints," whose names are written in 
heaven. We see that the Crusades, Inquisitions, and 
all similar attacks upon human beings and their moral 
and religious liberties were never authorized by the 
Lord; but were wholly contrary to his Word and 
spirit. We see that it is perfectly proper and consistent 
for worldly people and governments (English, 
French, German or what not) to favor any system 
or all systems of education and religion that will in 
any degree counteract vice and immorality, and preserve 
peace. 

True, we who have had the eyes of our understanding 
opened to see matters clearly from the Bible 
standpoint could do nothing against the truth and in 
favor of error— nothing to foster and encourage the 
error or even to apparently bid it Godspeed. But we 
are not in official positions where such questions could 
come to us: because we are "not of this world" even 
as our Redeemer was not (John 17:16), therefore the 
world disrespects us (John 17:14), and offers us no 
places of public influence. Fidelity to our Lord's 
principles thus saves his faithful from perplexities: 
they have died to worldly politics and its aims and 
duties and methods, and have been "translated into the 
Kingdom of God's dear Son," and are thus members 
of the "holy nation" which has not yet come 
into power and ruling authority— waiting for their 
King to exalt or set them up in power and great glory 
at the time when his Kingdom shall be revealed to the 
world as the supplanter of all kingdoms of this world. 

METHODISM AND HIGHER CRITICISM. 



"The 'heresy' case of Professor Mitchell (see 
The Literary Digest, January 27), has been effectively 
disposed of for, at least, some years to come. By the 
recent General Conference of the Methodist Episcopal 
Church at Chicago it was referred to the bishops, 
who, apparently finding it as embarrassing a subject 



to handle as did the Conference, referred the matter 

of Dr. Mitchell's retention to the trustees of Boston 

University, by making him eligible to re-election for 

five years— until, conveniently, after the next meeting 

of the General Conference. The fact that the trustees 

of one of the leading Methodist theological seminaries 

have now unanimously re-elected Dr. Mitchell, 

who is one of the most prominent American exponents of 

the higher criticism, and has been accused of deviating 

widely from the traditional view as to the authorship 

of certain Old Testament books, is regarded as an 

event of significance. The largest Protestant denomination 

in America thus tacitly votes to retain an upholder 

of the higher criticism as official instructor of her young 

clerics."— Literary Digest. 

PRESBYTERIANS BEING SIFTED. 



The General Assembly of the Presbyterian Church 
recently in session in St. Louis, in reply to overtures 
for a revision of its Westminster Confession of Faith, 
referred the matter to a committee, whose business it 
shall be to learn the opinion of the local Presbyters 
and to report to the Assembly of 1901 . The Presbyterian 
weekly journals give the best clue to the results, 
for they are generally under the care of the 
leaders amongst the ministry, who generally "try to 
be on the winning side." 

From the trend of comments by these journals 
(The Interior and The Herald and Presbyter alone seem 
to urge revision) we opine that the Confession will 
probably not be revised but reaffirmed. The result 
of this course would be to sift out the honest but 
deluded souls in pulpit and pew who for years have 
burdened their consciences (and in many instances 
hardened them) with slander against the divine character 
and deceit toward all mankind in professing the 
Westminster Confession. These have for years consoled 

R2696 : page 277 

themselves with the thought that (1) the Confession 
is a dead letter anyway, which today nobody 
believes, and (2) that it would soon be changed, 
"perhaps next year,— and my conscience can stand 
the strain that much longer." If now that Confession 
is reaffirmed by the denomination these will be 
thereby forced out to maintain even a vestige of peace 
with God and a good conscience toward God and 
man. The pity is that their consciences are not more 
tender and their hearts more loyal to God and his 
truth that they should act more promptly. 

"The children of this world [the "tares"] are 
wiser in their generation than the children of light 



[the "wheat"], said our Lord. And so in this case 
undoubtedly the reaffirming of the Westminster Confession 
is the wisest course so far as the preservation 
of the "tare" organization is concerned. For tho, 
as above suggested, this will drive out some of the 
most conscientious, it will be found that they all told 
are but few. On the other hand were the Confession 
revised or repudiated it would mean to the rank and 
file of Presbyterianism, "We have lost our gods! We 

R2696 : page 278 

have admitted that we were all wrong in respect to 
our faith— blind men who for centuries have attempted 
to lead the confessedly blind world into truth, and 
now confess ourselves bewildered, yea totally blind as 
respects the divine plan!" Every Presbyterian would 
feel abashed at such a confession, and hence it is 
that such a revision of creed is improbable: and if it 
were seen to be inevitable many would transfer their 
"good names" and titles to other denominations before 
the funeral. 

"THE PRESBYTERIAN" ARGUES AGAINST REVISION 
THUS,- 

"Too much has been said recently to weaken the 
force of our doctrinal statements. Many who never 
thought of calling them in question are wondering 
what they really teach." 

The people would have little difficulty in deciding 
the meaning of that very explicit and carefully 
worded "Westminster Confession," were it not that 
the theologians having told them, "These be thy 
gods, O Presbyterians!" are fearful that the pews 
(more honest than the pulpits) shall discover how 
terribly homely, yea, devilish, are these gods which 
they have so long worshiped and served. 

Continuing, The Presbyterian says, "Others who 
regard the false constructions put on them as the 
work of adversaries, now find that even Presbyterian 
ministers are declaring them legitimate inferences. 
Damage is being done by the outgivings of radical 
revisionists. The church is suffering, and will continue 
to suffer in name and in accomplishment, with 
years of revision agitation. Her interests would be far 
more advanced, in our judgment, by standing by the old 
standards of faith and by their reaffirmation by our 
Presbyteries and General Assembly." 

What does this language mean in plain English? 
Is not the following construction a reasonable one? 

For a long time now our ministers and religious 
editors have presented a solid front to the world, and 
by claiming that black in the creed is white they 
have succeeded in convincing Presbyterians, at least, 
that the black parts are at very most not darker than 



grey or mist and fog color. But now this discussion 

is in danger of disillusionizing the people. Already 

it is giving us great trouble and is likely to cause 

more disturbance and dissatisfaction, not only with 

our Diana, but also toward us, the well-paid and 

honored shrine-makers and servers. We are not 

thinking about the truth and its service, nor about 

the interests of the true Church, whose names are 

written in heaven; we are merely considering the interests 

of our sect, the Presbyterian Church, and how 

these matters will affect her interests and worldly prosperity. 

We feel provoked that Presbyterian ministers 

who have stifled their consciences for years should be 

so weak, so pusillanimous, as now to show the white 

feather and confess that they and we all have for years 

been hoodwinking and deceiving the Lord's flock who 

gave us liberally of their golden fleece to lead them 

into pastures of truth. As for us, we are committed 

to the prosperity of Presbyterianism— all of our name 

and title and earthly hopes are attached to it, and 

hence, false tho the Confession be to every instinct of 

justice and love, we must stick to it— sink or swim, 

live or die, survive or perish! 

Does the foregoing seem to be an uncharitable 
paraphrase of the Presbyterian's position? Let those 
who so think read carefully the following extract from 
the Confession and decide then whether anything better 
or nobler than policy leads it to defend and call for 
a reaffirmation of those sentiments of a darker period. 
We have too much respect for the Presbyterian's brains 
to suppose that it does not comprehend the language, 
and too much respect for its heart to suppose that it 
at heart endorses the presentation as true and just: 
hence we can only conclude that its advocacy is insincere 
and for policy's sake. The policy, as already 
suggested, is worldly-wise and will serve to keep together 
a little longer one of the most respected of 
the human organizations falsely styled churches; but 
the end of all such is not far distant, as clearly shown 
in God's Word and pointed out in MILLENNIAL DAWN, 
VOL. III., Chaps. 4 to 7, and VOL. IV., Chaps. 11 to 13. 

The following is the referred to— 

EXTRACT FROM THE WESTMINSTER CONFESSION OF 
FAITH. 

"By the decree of God, for the manifestation of 
His glory, some men and angels are predestinated 
unto everlasting life and others foreordained to everlasting 
death. These angels and men, thus predestinated 
and foreordained, are particularly and unchangeably 
designed; and their number is so certain and 
definite that it can not be either increased or 
diminished. 

"Those of mankind that are predestinated unto 
life, God, before the foundation of the world was laid, 



according to his eternal and immutable purpose and 
the secret counsel and good pleasure of His will, hath 
chosen in Christ unto everlasting glory, out of His 
mere free grace and love, without any foresight of faith 
or good works or perseverance in either of them, or any 
other thing in the creature, as conditions or causes moving 
Him thereto; and all to the praise of His glorious 
grace. 

"As God hath appointed the elect unto glory, so 
hath He, by the eternal and free purpose of His will, 
foreordained all the means thereunto. Wherefore they 
who are elected, being fallen in Adam, are redeemed 
by Christ, are effectually called unto faith in Christ by 
His Spirit working in due season; are justified, adopted, 
sanctified, and kept by His power through faith 
unto salvation. Neither are any other redeemed by 
Christ, effectually called, justified, adopted, sanctified and 
saved, but THE ELECT ONLY. 

R2696 : page 279 

"The rest of mankind God was pleased, according 
to the unsearchable counsel of His own will, whereby 
He extendeth or withholdeth mercy as He pleaseth, 
for the glory of His sovereign power over His creatures, 
to pass by and to ordain them to dishonor and 
wrath for their sin, to the praise of his glorious 
justice." 

DEFECTIVE EDUCATION OF MINISTERS. 



Rev. D. S. Gregory, D.D., says:— 
"In a ministerial body of say seven thousand 
there are perhaps several thousands of us that nobody 
will hear preach: many more that are heard by good 
people under stress of duty; and comparatively few 
that are heard gladly.... 

"The psychology of the average educator is fundamentally 
defective, and hence his pedagogics must 
be fatally false. He recognizes the existence of a 
cognitive faculty, the power of acquiring the simple 
elements or raw materials, so to speak, of knowledge, 
in perception external and internal; of a conservative 
faculty, or memory, the power of keeping knowledge 
so acquired for future use; of a comparative faculty, 
the power of thought for working up the knowledge 
acquired and conserved into conceptions, judgments, 
and reasonings. But just there his psychology of the 
intellect strikes a dead wall which it seems powerless 
to pass. He fails to recognize the existence of the 
supreme intellectual faculty, to which all the others 
are merely subordinates and for which alone they exist 
—the constructive or systemizing faculty. He does 
not find it in his text-books; it has been practically 



ignored in educational aims and methods...." 

This is too highflown language for the majority 
of readers; we give its sense in few words thus,— The 
average minister learns at college to collect certain 
facts and theories, and to memorize them; but he never 
learns how to systemize what he has learned. 

We reply that this is true; nevertheless, it is the 
bulwark of Churchianity; for had honest ministers or 
laymen attempted to systemize their theology (the 
errors so largely predominating) they would have 
found long ago that all their theories are as irrational 
as they are unscriptural. No theology but the old 
theology of the Bible— the divine plan of the ages- 
can be systemised; and it is system and plan and order 
and beauty throughout, and thus bears the impressions 
of its divine Author, Jehovah. 

EPISCOPAL HIGH CHURCH PERFORMANCES. 



The Christian Commonwealth (London) describes 
a mass recently performed in St. Michael's Church, 
London, as follows:— 

"The mass 'for the repose of the soul' of the deceased 
was celebrated, and at the funeral service in 
the church all the accessories of Vatican mummery 
were observed. Each of the congregation of ten received 
a little candle, which was lighted before the 
Gospel was read, and blown out after the reading. 
The people's candles were rekindled at the Sanctus, 
after incense-burning. After mass the celebrant left 
the chair, and at the sedilia changed his chasuble for 

R2697 : page 279 

a black cope with yellow orphreys and then headed a 
procession with a crucifix. The catafalque was sprinkled 
with holy water, and censed, while petitions were 
mumbled for the soul of the deceased. After the 
clergy were gone the people were invited to asperse 
the catafalque with the holy water." 

CALAMITIES-WHY PERMITTED. 



The inundation of the city of Galveston, Texas, 
accompanied by great loss of life and property, has 
shocked the world. And no wonder; it was surely a 
great calamity that five thousand human beings should 
so suddenly be swept into death— the grave. Yet the 
real horror, affecting many minds in connection with 
this matter, is never even hinted at in the great headlines 
of the daily press announcements. What a shock 
it would give if these papers were edited in so-called 



orthodox style, thus:— 

JESUS CAME TO 5000 GALVESTON PEOPLE. 

OF THE NUMBER HE FOUND ONLY ABOUT 100 SAINTS 

FIT FOR THE KINGDOM OF HEAVEN. 

THE REMAINDER, 4900, 

HE BANISHED TO ETERNAL HOPELESS AGONY IN 

TORMENT, PREPARED FOR THEM, 

ACCORDING TO HIS FOREKNOWLEDGE AND 

LOVING DESIGN, 

BEFORE THE FOUNDATION OF THE WORLD. 

If our dear friends who profess to believe such 
blasphemous things respecting our Heavenly Father's 
plan would come out honestly and state their views 
thus plainly we should be glad of it. It would be a 
great service to the truth. It would act upon many 
as an emetic, and help them to get rid of the unhealthy 
mass of error which now sickens them and hinders 
their appetite for the true heavenly manna of the divine 
Word, which then would be to all the Lord's true 
people "sweeter than honey." 

Tract No. 2, of the "Old Theology" series, treats 
this subject of "Calamities and Why God Permits 
Them." We recommend its liberal circulation at 
times like this when great calamities awaken thoughts 
respecting divine providences, etc. And we might 
here remark that we will not be surprised if the next 
fifteen years shall witness an increasingly large number 
of calamities. To our understanding there are 
physical changes necessary to the full introduction of 
Millennial conditions: these will probably come about 
gradually, and incidentally cause great trouble and 
losses. These we understand are so timed as to form 
a part of the great time of trouble with which our age 
is to end, which, however, the Lord designs shall prepare 
man as well as the earth for further, future blessings. 
"When the judgments of the Lord are abroad 
in the earth, the inhabitants of the world will learn 
righteousness." 



R2699 : page 280 

TIMES OF REFRESHING. 



THE GATHERING at Saratoga Springs, N.Y., 
was not expected to be a large one; because the 
railroad excursion rates extended over only a very 
limited area. It was therefore a local rather than a 
general meeting; but as such it served its purpose 
grandly, and brought to many clearer views of the 
divine plan, and fresh energy in its service, because of 
renewed consecration to the great Giver of all good. 
About one hundred were in attendance, and these 



were nearly all visitors from abroad, as only about 
three WATCH TOWER subscribers reside there, and few 
outsiders attended. The Lord was with the Convention 
and blessed the two days of its session greatly; 
and we believe that the grace there experienced will 
not only be a lasting blessing to those in attendance, 
but that its overflow upon others not privileged to 
attend, will be a lasting joy and benefit. 

En route we spent Sunday at Toronto, Canada, 
where another local Convention of about one hundred 
had gathered. This also was a feast to our souls. 
We thanked God for the tie that binds our hearts in 
Christian love— and realized afresh that— 
"The fellowship of kindred minds 
Is like to that above." 

The home route permitted a meeting between 
trains with some of the dear friends at Washington, 
D.C., where about thirty were hastily convened, to 
whom we spoke on "Pressing toward the mark for 
the prize of our high calling." Departing, we thanked 
God for the fulfilment of Mark 10:30; and felt that if 
faithfulness to the truth had gained us many bitter 
enemies, it had also brought us such devoted friends 
as very few in this world could boast of. 

We arrived home, at Allegheny, in good season 
for Sunday services (Sept. 9), where our joy further 
abounded in addressing about two hundred of the 
home congregation, and in receiving their hearty welcome 
back after an absence of two Sundays. We can 
only wish and hope that each of the one thousand 
dear brethren and sisters "scattered abroad," with 
whom we communed and shook hands during the past 
two weeks (beginning with the Chicago Convention 
and ending at Allegheny), experienced one-half the 
blessing that has come to your pastor. He most heartily 
thanks you all for your many kindnesses and expressions 
of Christian love extended to him and the 
associated "Pilgrims;" and he thanks God for the 
privileges enjoyed in serving his flock, in Jesus' name. 
"A table God has furnished me 

In presence of my foes; 
My head he doth with oil anoint, 
And my cup overflows." 



R2697 : page 280 

THE CHRISTIAN'S COURSE DELINEATED. 



DAVID, the Prophet, in the first Psalm, has 
significantly marked out the proper Christian 
course and its blessings and outcome. In the 
first verse he designates three classes from whom the 



Lord's people should stand aloof— three classes with 
whom, if they have fellowship, it will be to their 
detriment. (1) The ungodly, or more properly, the 
wicked (margin, Leeser, Young). (2) Sinners. 
(3) The scornful. "Blessed is the man who walketh 
not in the counsel of the wicked, nor standeth in the 
way of sinners, nor sitteth in the seat of the scornful." 
-Psa. 1:1. 

Applying this Psalm prophetically, it is proper 
that we should determine what classes of persons are 
meant by the wicked, the sinners and the scornful. 
We suggest that under the terms of the present Gospel 
age, not murderers and thieves, etc., can be 
meant by the wicked, for such, generally at least, are 
deluded and "blinded by the god of this world," so 
that they have never seen the true Gospel light; and 
not seeing it they have not had such responsibilities 
in connection with it as would properly brand them 
as wicked from the divine standpoint. The "wicked" 
are to be looked for in the Church, and in harmony 
with this thought is our Lord's parable which, referring 
to the Church and the talents bestowed upon its 
members, declares respecting the one who received the 
talent of the Lord, but failed to use it— "Thou wicked 
and slothful servant." The "wicked" of this age 
would seem to be those who have enjoyed the light 
of divine favor, who have come to a knowledge of the 
truth, been made partakers of the holy spirit, etc., 
and who then, despite all these favors and blessings, 

R2698 : page 280 

and despite their covenant with the Lord to be his 
servants and to lay down their lives in his service, 
neglect the same. 

The Apostle also points out a certain class in the 
Church as wicked, saying of them that if they fall 
away "it is impossible to renew them again unto repentance" 
(Heb. 6:6), "for it had been better for 
them that they had never known the way of righteousness, 
than that having known it they should turn 
from the holy commandment." (2 Pet. 2:21.) The 
same class is again described as those who sin wilfully 
after receiving a knowledge of the truth, and for 
whom, consequently, no further share in the sacrifice 
for sins remains; and consequently no hope for them 
in the coming age. (Heb. 10:26.) In a word, then, 

R2698 : page 281 

the wicked class of the present age would seem, from 
the Lord's standpoint, to be those in the Church 
nominal who have received clear light and knowledge 
respecting the divine plan, and who have either sinned 
wilfully by turning away from a life of righteousness 
to a life of intentional sin, or those who repudiate 



the precious blood of Christ and the atonement made 
for them by the same, counting the blood of the 
covenant wherewith they were sanctified a common or 
ordinary thing. 

If then we have found a class denominated "the 
wicked," let us consider what can be meant by the 
injunction that the blessed of the Lord should not 
walk in the counsel of these wicked ones— should not 
follow their guidance, their suggestions, their instructions, 
their leading. 

Every man and every woman has more or less of 
an influence which attracts others to walk in his way. 
And all who repudiate the ransom, all who deny 
original sin and its sentence of death, and the necessity 
for our redemption from sin and death,— all who 
thus deny the foundation of the Gospel, the "wicked" 
above described, seem to make it their special business 
to endeavor to seduce the minds of others— to 
lead others astray by their evil counsel. If they cannot 
secure prompt attention, they invariably suggest, 
—Walk with us awhile, keep our company, and see 
whether you will not gradually come to believe as 
we do, that we were not bought with a price, even the 
precious blood of Christ— that man needed not to be 
bought; that he did not fall from perfection; that he 
was not sold under sin by our first parents; and, hence, 
that he needed not a redemption in any sense of the 
word, and therefore the Scriptures are false and misleading 
in making this the centre and pith of the 
Gospel. 

Their false suggestion is that our only need was 
a good and holy example. They are blind to the fact 
that all through the past there were many noble 
examples, and that there are many today, far beyond 
the ability of the average natural man to follow, and 
that we needed something decidedly more helpful and 
efficacious than an example. They seem blind to the 
fact that an example would never justify to life one 
who was justly condemned to death. They do not 
seem to realize that God was just in pronouncing the 
penalty against our race, and that he could by no 
means clear the guilty through any process of injustice; 
and that, therefore, it was necessary that a ransom, 
a corresponding price, should be paid before the 
resurrection and reconciliation were possibilities. 
(Rom. 3:26.) But they say, Walk with us in our 
counsels and see; and, as the Apostle suggests, many 
follow their pernicious ways, denying the Lord having 
bought them. -2 Pet. 2:1,2. 

Those who would be of the class pronounced 
"blessed" of the Lord, in our text, must not follow 
the counsel of these "wicked," but, on the contrary, 
should stand firmly by the Gospel of the redemption, 
and seek no other. Let all who desire to be blessed 
of the Lord mark well this counsel and follow it, and 
have no fellowship whatever with the "wicked," nor 



in any degree walk after their counsels. 

"Sinners" are mentioned as another class, separate 
and distinct from the "wicked" above referred to, 
and they are evidently a class whose transgressions 
are much less heinous in the sight of the Lord: these 
sinners we must look for in the Church also, not in 
the world. Since the world is not yet on trial there 
is nothing to demonstrate the standing of any of 
its people. The "sinners" of our text we would understand 
to be those who, without repudiating the covenant, 
without denying the Lord that bought them, 
and thus falling utterly from divine favor, are nevertheless 
failing to live according to the terms of their 
covenant, their consecration. These would seem to 
be sinners against the covenant they have made— 
those who fail to carry out the covenant of self-sacrifice. 
This class possibly includes some who are described 
by the Lord as "overcharged with the cares 
of this life and the deceitfulness of riches," and 
who for these reasons are sinners against their covenant, 
violators of it. The Lord's people who would 
be of the "blessed" of the Lord, and receive his 
ultimate "Well done," are not to stand with these 
covenant-violators even. To stand with them might 
imply to treat them as companions, to enter into their 
plans and schemes; and surely all who would thus do 
would be likely to become partakers of their spirit, 
and to become careless of their consecration vows, 
and overcharged with earthly cares and ambitions. 

The "scorners" are designated as a still different 
class, and might possibly represent some not of the 
Church, but possessing more or less knowledge of 
holy things and rejecting them, speaking of them 
lightly and scornfully. The Lord's people are not to 
be intimately associated with such, nor make them 
their companions and friends. They cannot have 
fellowship with such without receiving injury; hence, 
so far as possible the Christian is to avoid this class, 
in business partnerships, in society, and especially in 
marriage. No one who could speak lightly or scornfully 
of our Heavenly Father or of our Lord Jesus 
or of the exceeding great and precious things set 
before the Lord's people in his promises, could be 
other than a hindrance to those who are seeking to 
gain the prize of our high calling. He therefore who 
would be blessed of the Lord, and who would attain 
that for which he was "called," should take heed to 
the instructions and avoid the scornful. 

R2698 : page 282 

This does not signify, however, as the Apostle 
points out, that we are to have no dealings in the 
world with any but saints, for, as he tells us, in that 
event we would needs go out of the world (1 Cor. 5:10); 
but it does imply a recognition of the principle 



that evil is contagious, and that the Lord's people 

cannot be too careful to avoid every contact with 

evil. They should separate themselves to the Lord, 

to holiness, and seek to place themselves under influences 

in harmony with their holy and true and 

pure aspirations, begotten by the holy spirit. 

The Prophet implies that those who have fellowship 
with the scornful and with covenant-breakers 
and with the wicked who deny the precious blood of 
the covenant, cannot be blessed of the Lord, because 
they are in a wrong attitude of heart; for, as his 
words imply, those who are in the right attitude of 
heart to be blessed of the Lord can readily find something 
much better, much more interesting, much more 
profitable, than fellowship with any of these classes; 
"Their delight is in the Law of the Lord, and they 
meditate in his Law by day and by night." 

This does not imply a reading over of the Ten 
Commandments, nor of the Mosaic ritual, but to the 
Christian it implies a delight in the Law of righteousness, 
which law is briefly comprehended in the word 
"Love." The right-minded Christian who is in the 
line of heavenly blessing now, and of heavenly glory 
by and by, has found and will continually find in the 
great Law of Love something well worthy of his time 
and his study. He finds this Law applicable to every 
relationship between the heavenly Father and himself; 
he sees that all of his conduct, his every service 
toward God as a son, adopted into his family, must 
be the result of love. He sees also that love is the 
Law which must govern all of his conduct toward the 
brethren in Christ and toward all men; and he finds 
in this abundant and satisfactory food for reflection 
in his leisure hours, so that he is interested neither in 
the speculations and quibblings of the "scoffers," nor 
in the worldly matters which overcharge the "sinners," 
nor in the false Gospel which engages the 
attention of the "wicked," who deny the ransom. 

He finds that this Law of God contains, or is related 
to, every feature of the divine plan; and hence 
his meditations and studies of its various ramifications 
lead his thoughts hither and thither, in contact 
with all the exceeding great and precious promises 
which God has bestowed upon them that love him, 
both as respects the life that now is and also that 
which is to come. And the more this is his attitude 
the more is he blessed of the Lord; and the more 
blessed he is of the Lord the more surely will this be 
his attitude and experience. 

Such an one, the Lord declares through the 
Prophet, will be like a tree planted near rivulets of 
water, which will always be abundantly refreshed and 
never fail in his yield of the fruits of the spirit, which 
under such circumstances must grow and flourish 
exceedingly. And as his fruit will be abundant, so 
his leaf (his hopes) will be ever green; he can and 



will have faith in him who promised the coming 

blessings, and whose riches of grace he comes to appreciate 

more and more daily. 

"All that he doeth shall prosper." This is literally 
true, tho not, perhaps, in the way in which the world 
might view the subject. But what is it that such a 
child of God doeth? What is his aim? What is his 
object in life? Wealth, fame, worldly honors? No, 
none of these. His aim, that which he doeth, that 
which he seeketh, is to glorify his Heavenly Father 
and eventually to attain to the glory, honor and immortality 

R2699 : page 282 

which God has promised to them that love 

him. (Rom. 2:7.) If then the Christian but attain 

these his objects, surely all his experiences will have 

been prosperous, and that abundantly. What matters 

it to him if under divine providence he was permitted 

to err in judgment respecting some business venture, 

so that instead of earthly prosperity it brought financial 

loss, if it worked out spiritual gain? To this 

blessed man the loss was prosperity, and he proved the 

truth of the divine promise, that all things shall work 

together for his good. Under such a promise, under 

such guidance of divine wisdom in his affairs, guaranteeing 

him just such experiences, trials, difficulties, 

earthly disappointments and disadvantages as will, 

under the Lord's providence, bring him richest blessing 

in the attainment of the great prize of the future 

which he seeks, and for which every other thing, 

interest, hope and aim has been sacrificed, how could 

any be considered otherwise than prospered? (Rom. 8:28.) 

Surely indeed, all that he doeth shall prosper 

—not because of his own wisdom, not because of infallibility 

in the management of his affairs, but because 

his infallible Lord is supervising his interests, and outworking 

them for good to him. 

It is this same class of blessed ones that our Lord 
addresses, saying, "Blessed are ye when men shall 
revile you and persecute you, and say all manner of 
evil against you falsely for my sake"— things may 
seem to be going contrary to your welfare, and hence 
to be working out incalculable harm; but have faith 
—"Rejoice, and be exceeding glad; for great is your 
reward in heaven:" and it is this heavenly reward for 
which you have been called, and for which you have 
entered the race, and the attainment of which will be 
exceedingly abundant above all that you could ask 
or think. -Matt. 5:11,12; Eph. 3:20. 



R2697 : page 283 

THE DALLAS, TEXAS, CONVENTION. 



-SEPT. 29,30 & OCT. 1.- 

WE DO not expect many from outside the State 
of Texas at this Convention; for the special 
excursion rates are restricted to near-by territory. 
Oklahoma, Indian Territory, Arkansas and Louisiana 
we believe participate, in whole or in part. As Texas 
is a very large state we endeavored to arrange for two 
Conventions, but could not obtain the excursion rates 
except for Dallas. 

Our Convention will take advantage of the cheap 
rates of fare granted on account of the "Dallas Fair," 
and such tickets should be called for. If you desire 
to attend, inquire of your ticket agent at once for rates, 
train time, etc., and as soon as possible let us know 
on which road and train you expect to arrive; and how 
many will be of your party, males and females; if colored, 
mention it. State if you desire room and board 
at one dollar per day. Those who cannot afford even 
this moderate expense will please say so, and some 
comfortable arrangement will be made for them also. 

"WOODMEN'S HALL" has been secured for the 
use of the Convention. It is centrally located at No. 
349 Main Street. It is an easy walk from all depots, 
but those who desire can use electric car direct from 
the depots to the door of the hall. 

A RECEPTION COMMITTEE will so far as possible 
meet all who arrive on the morning of Sept. 29th; but 
any failing to be recognized near the Ladies' Waiting 
Room door can readily find Woodmen's Hall as above 
and should proceed there at once. 

We hope for a good attendance and warrant a 
warm welcome and a rich blessing to all true soldiers 
of the cross; and to those seeking to find and put on 
the whole armor of God. Come, intent upon doing 
good unto all— especially to the household of faith, 
as well as praying a blessing upon yourself, and you 
surely will not go away empty. 

Arrangements for water baptism will be complete, 
robes, towels, etc. Yes, "Bro. Russell" will attend. 



R2699 : page 283 

SABBATH DINNERS AND HOW TO UTILIZE THEM. 

-LUKE 14:1-14. -OCT. 1 .- 

GOLDEN TEXT:-"Whosoever exalteth himself shall be 
abased; and he that humbleth himself shall be exalted." 

SO FAR as we know, our Lord Jesus never refused 

an invitation to feasts, banquets, etc., 

to which he was asked, with his disciples. The present 



lesson tells us of such a banquet, probably specially 
arranged in Jesus' honor, by a Pharisee high in social 
position as a ruler in the synagogue. The feast was 
appointed for the Sabbath day, as was frequently the 
case, many of the Sabbath feasts being quite sumptuous; 
but the viands were always served cold, it being a 
part of the Jewish code that fires should not be kindled 
nor victuals cooked on the Sabbath day. And altho 
we, as Christians, are entirely free from the Jewish Law, 
including the fourth commandment as well as all the 
other commandments of the Decalogue, but are under 
a new commandment, the perfect Law of Love, to God 
and to man; nevertheless, we concede that considerable 
blessing might be experienced, and additional opportunities 
for spiritual development enjoyed, if Christian 
people were to cook a double portion on Saturday, and 
thus leave themselves freer from domestic responsibilities 
on the day which, according to the laws of the 
land (tho not according to any law of the Scriptures) 
we appropriately observe by abstinence from the ordinary 
business of life, utilizing the leisure for worship, 
study and spiritual communion. 

Evidently before entering the dining room, probably 
in the court-yard, our Lord, while surrounded by 
many notables of the scribes and Pharisees, noticed a 
man afflicted with dropsy; and it would appear that 
our dear Redeemer was so full of love and sympathy 
that he had a desire to bless and to heal every such 
person with whom he came directly in contact. The 
loving character thus manifested gives us assurance 
that when the Kingdom comes and our Lord shall take 
unto himself his great power and reign, he will assuredly 
bless and uplift so many as will accept his favors 
in a proper manner— so many as really desire to be 
blessed by him. Thus our Lord's general character 
fully substantiates and corroborates all the prophetic 
statements made respecting him and the character of 
his Millennial work of blessing all the families of the 
earth. 

Our Lord well knew the extreme of fanaticism to 
which the Jews had gone, especially the outwardly 
pious and formal ones, representatives of whom were 
now gathered about him. He knew that they would 
regard the healing of the dropsical person as a violation 
of the Sabbath. Indeed, as illustrating the sanctity 
of the Sabbath, the Jewish Talmud tells of an 
instance in which a house took fire, and three young 
girls were burned to death, simply because their friends 
and neighbors interpreted the law against making a fire 
as implying also that it would be wrong to quench a 
fire on the Sabbath day, and when expostulated with 
respecting the matter, the answer was that it was "a 
sacrifice acceptable to God, who would reward them 
for having allowed their dear ones to perish rather 
than break his commandment!" 

Jesus wished not only to correct such a false interpretation 



of the Law, but also, in harmony with his 

R2699 : page 284 

custom, to do a large proportion of his miracles on the 

Sabbath day; because that day typified the coming 

Millennial day, the great seventh thousand-year day in 

which, his Millennial Kingdom being established, he 

will scatter blessings of healing, mental, moral and 

physical, amongst all the people. By way of instructing 

his disciples and the Pharisees respecting the improper 

view of the Sabbath generally entertained them 

by religious teachers, our Lord enquired of the Pharisees 

what they had to say on the subject: Is it or is 

it not lawful to heal on the Sabbath day? They made 

no reply; no doubt feeling themselves somewhat incompetent 

to discuss any question with one whom they 

had all learned to recognize as a great Teacher, however 

much they rejected his Messiahship. 

Then Jesus, as showing his own understanding of 
the matter, that it would be right, that it would be in 
full harmony with the spirit of the Law to heal a man 
on the Sabbath day, touched the dropsical man and 
healed him. Then, by way of pointing out to his 
auditors the inconsistency of their line of thought on 
this subject, he reminded them that it was a recognized 
privilege and duty of every Jew to deliver his 
ox or his ass, fallen into some pit or difficulty, and to 
consider this a work of necessity and mercy, not forbidden 

R2700 : page 284 

by the fourth commandment of the Jewish 

Law. He allowed his auditors to draw the inference 

from this illustration, that as it could not be wrong to 

assist a dumb animal out of difficulty on the Sabbath, 

much less could it be wrong to relieve the distress 

of a human being made in the image of God. 

Thus he would show that God's laws are not arbitrary, 

but that it is always proper to do good. 

THE PROPER KIND OF TABLE TALKS. 



Every Christian family should utilize the excellent 
opportunities afforded for social converse at meal -times. 
Not only does pleasant and profitable conversation 
assist digestion, and thus prove physically helpful, 
but, additionally, these regular family gatherings should 
be recognized as opportunities for mental profit and 
for growth in knowledge respecting both temporal and 
spiritual things. Particularly for the last fourteen 
years this has been the custom of the Bible House 
family at Allegheny,— and a very profitable one. Our 
topics are usually propounded in the question form, 



the privilege of questioning being open to all at the 
table. Answers to the questions are sought from each 
one present, thus stimulating thought and a proper 
expression of it, very helpful to all, as subsequently 
they may be called upon to answer such a question 
before others in public or in private. We commend 
the plan to all of our readers, suggesting that 
in such a gathering the one supposed to be most conversant 
with such matters reserve his reply for the last. 

Where the family is composed wholly of "new 
creatures" the questions would properly differ somewhat 
in general character from what they would be if 
it were a mixed company: nevertheless, appropriate 
subjects should not be refused from anyone present; 
as, for instance, questions respecting table etiquette, 
good breeding, proper language, the events of the day 
that do not partake of the nature of gossip, etc. It is 
a shame that Christian people, even in the humblest 
walks of life, and when perhaps surrounded by poverty, 
have no thought of what valuable opportunities are 
afforded at such times of breaking of bread— to break 
to their families mental or spiritual food also, strengthening 
and elevating. 

In proportion as Christian people realize their 
privileges and duties in such matters they will find 
that coarseness and rudeness at the table will disappear, 
refinement and intellectuality gradually displacing 
them. And one of the features most conducive 
to true table etiquette, and the drawing together of 
hearts and minds in true fellowship and intellectual 
enjoyment at the times of physical repast, will be found 
to be the giving of thanks to God— the recognition that 
every good and every perfect gift cometh down from 
our Father. The family which at table neglects to return 
acknowledgement to the Giver of every good, will 
scarcely succeed in properly recognizing each other and 
having intellectual fellowship one with the other. 

That our Lord was prompt to avail himself of all 
such table-talk opportunities, is very manifest. On 
each occasion of his attendance at a banquet we find 
him utilizing the opportunity for the inculcation of 
some truth— natural or spiritual. In the present instance 
he evidently did not consider his hearers to be 
in a favorable condition for high spiritual teachings, 
and hence his table-talk was on a lower plane, adapted 
to the natural man, yet nevertheless inculcating lessons 
which, if learned, would prepare the learners for the 
heavenly things. And this should be the thought in 
every family circle,— that the tendency of all conversation 
should be ennobling as well as instructive— leading 
upward as well as outward. 

The guests had been invited to the table, and 
our Lord noticed how they were each seeking the 
seats of chief honor, thus showing the pride and 
ambition of their hearts. We may safely assume that 
our Lord and his disciples took the less distinguished 



seats, in harmony with the Scriptural injunction, "In 
honor preferring one another." 

A favorable opportunity offering, our Lord indirectly 
called attention to the wrong self-seeking 
course,— not by saying anything against the action in 
this particular case, but by suggesting a propriety of 
conduct in a general way; he based his illustration upon 

R2700 : page 285 

a marriage feast, at which, more than any other, distinctions 
as to title, honor and position, received much 
consideration. As was his custom, he taught by a 
parable, permitting his hearers to draw the inference 
and make the application in some measure to the banquet 
to which they were then gathered; and he wound 
it up by making this a great lesson on a general principle; 
viz., that "Whosoever exalteth himself shall be 
abased, and he that humbleth himself shall be exalted," 
—a lesson of vital importance to all who would 
be ready for and enter the Kingdom. 

This is a great lesson applicable, not only to the 
natural man, seeking progress back to fellowship and 
harmony with God, but there is in it also a lesson to 
the "new creature" all through life's journey,— that 
if divine favor is desired and to be expected it must be 
sought; not in pride, not in self-sufficiency, but in 
humility. The Lord resisteth the proud, the self-sufficient, 
the boastful, and showeth his favors unto 
the humble. The Apostle James likewise calls attention 
to the importance of this grace of humility, assuring 
us that no true progress can be made in the way to 
God, except by the humble. (James 4:10.) And 
the Apostle Peter, after exhorting to humility, saying, 
"Yea, all of you, be subject one to another, and be 
clothed with humility," adds, "Humble yourselves, 
therefore, under the mighty hand of God, that he may 
exalt you in due time."— 1 Pet. 5:5,6. 

If the hearers had received the message and been 
corrected by it, it might indeed have worked considerable 
difference in their standing amongst their brethren, 
the Pharisees, but it would also have worked a considerable 
difference in their favor with God. By receiving 
such a spirit of humility they would be coming 
into that relationship with God and the truth which 
would have divine approval, and be thus the stepping-stone 
to further favor, by preparing their hearts to receive 
the good things which God has to give, but which 
cannot be received by any except the humble-hearted. 
Indeed, we know of nothing today that is so great a 
stumbling-block to the majority in nominal Christendom 
as the prevalent spirit of self-seeking. It is a 
great barrier before the minds of many, in and out of 
the pulpit, continually hindering them from seeing, 
hearing and obeying present truth— they love the approval 
of men rather than that of God. 



The table-talk later turned in another direction, 
probably considerable being said in the interim that is 
not recorded, not pertinent; but before the feast was 
ended an appropriate opportunity came for the Lord to 
present some words of counsel to his host, and this was 
done in so kind and so wise a manner that it surely 
could give no offence, but, on the contrary, must have 
led the thoughts of all the hearers to higher and 
heavenly things. He advised that the banquets of the 
well-to-do in this world's goods be extended to their 
poorer, less fortunate neighbors and friends; assuring 
his hearers that such a course would bring the greatest 
blessing, as every good deed brings its blessings, forthwith 
—in the consciousness of having done good; and 
in the reactionary effect upon one's own heart of every 
good deed, every benevolence. And, in addition to 
these blessings, our Lord pointed out that for such an 
one there would be a blessing in the future also— a reward 
that would fully compensate every such 
benefaction. 

Our Lord's words were in part a commendation of 
the course pursued by his host in inviting himself and 
his apostles to dinner, for they were poor. Indirectly 
his remarks meant that if that very feast were given 
with a proper sentiment of heart, as we have every 
reason to presume was the case, his host might expect 
a reward for his conduct in the future— besides the 
blessing that had already come to his house through 
our Lord's presence and words of instruction. 

Sunday School lesson comments will be found to 
misinterpret the blessing which our Lord declared 
would come to those who received the poor. One of 
these commentaries says, on this point, that "Our 
Lord refers to the first resurrection, mentioned in Rev. 20:4,5, 
assuring him that he would be raised in that 
resurrection as one of that glorious class. He would 
have the rewards that God gives, and can give only, 
to those who are righteous." 

This is a grievous mistake, a misapprehension of 
our Lord's meaning. The first resurrection is not to 
be attained merely by the doing of kind acts to either 
the worthy or the unworthy poor. As explained in 
the connection (Rev. 20:4) none will have part in the 
first resurrection except those who have been "beheaded 
for the witness of Jesus and for the word of 
God." And, altho this beheading is figurative and 
not literal, it nevertheless has a deep significance, implying 
much more than making a feast to the poor. It 
signifies, not only death to self-will, but also to be cut 
off from all other heads, governments and law-givers, 
and to recognize no "head" but Jesus, whom God 
hath appointed to be the Head of the Church which is 
his body— the head of every member of it. 

It means, not only to be cut off from institutional 
heads and authorities, but also to cease to have heads 
and wills of our own, and to accept, instead, the headship, 



the will, of our Lord Jesus. It is the same 

thought that is drawn to our attention by the Apostle 

in Romans 6:3, where he declares that we are baptized 

into the body of Christ, as members of that 

body, under the one Head, Christ, by being baptized 

into his death,— a full consecration of our wills, and 

R2701 : page 286 

ultimately a full laying down of our lives, faithfully 
unto death. The attainment of this first resurrection 
and its joint-heirship with Christ in the Millennial 
Kingdom was clearly understood by the Apostle Paul, 
and was his aim: and respecting it he said, "I count 
all things but loss for the excellency of the knowledge 
of Christ Jesus my Lord: for whom I have suffered 
the loss of all things, and do count them but dung, 
that I may win Christ.... That I may know him, 
and the power of his resurrection." (Phil. 3:8,10.) 
Had St. Paul understood our Lord's words as the 
above quoted Sunday School lesson commentator did, 
he would have chosen the easy and pleasant plan of 
feasting the poor, rather than the years of privation 
and self-sacrifice in the narrow way which he pursued. 
And to this our Lord's words on another occasion 
agree, "Through much tribulation shall ye enter the 
Kingdom." 

What, then, did our Lord intend to promise as a reward 
for a good deed— done without hope of reward in 
the present life? We answer, that he meant to promise 
the same thing that he promised to anybody who would 
give even so much as a cup of cold water to one of his 
disciples. He wished to assure them that all such would 
by no means lose their reward. (Matt. 10:42.) Not a 
reward of glory, honor, immortality and joint-heirship 
in the Kingdom of God, but a good reward, more than 
compensating for the kindness they performed. This 
rewarding of everyone who has done good, either to 
the poor of this world or especially to the Lord and his 
faithful brethren walking in his footsteps, will come 
to them, not in the first resurrection, but at that time; 
—after the first resurrection shall have glorified the 
Church and inaugurated the Kingdom, then Millennial 
blessings and the reign of righteousness beginning will 
bring rewards to everyone who has done kindnesses, 
helping them forward and abundantly rewarding them; 
while all who have done evil shall have some measure 
of "stripes" in compensation and retribution. 



R2701 : page 286 

A ROYAL BANQUET DECLINED. 
LUKE 14:15-24.-OCT. 14. 



"Come, for all things are now ready." 

JESUS continued his table-talk of our last lesson 
at the Pharisee's dinner. Our Lord had led the 
attention of his associates, not only to the proprieties 
of life, but to future things, by the suggestion that 
feasts should be given in the interest of the poor, whose 
inability to return the favor would insure a divine 
blessing more than compensating in the future— in the 
Kingdom. This led one of the company to a remark 
which we loosely paraphrase, thus,— Ah, yes! that 
Kingdom, for which we hope, will be a blessed time. 
How blessed it will be to share the bounties which God 
has promised in the great feast which he shall spread! 
The speaker probably was well acquainted with Isaiah's 
prophecy respecting the Kingdom (Isa. 25:6) 
in which God's mercies and blessings to the world are 
figuratively represented as a feast, in the words, "In 
this mountain [Kingdom] shall the Lord of hosts 
make unto all the people a feast of fat things, a feast 
of wines on the lees, of fat things full of marrow." 

Thus gradually the minds of the company present 
had been led from earthly things and from commonplace 
matters and social chit-chat, which might have 
occupied their attention, to the consideration of the 
gracious promises of God. And undoubtedly this was 
our Lord's very object in accepting the Pharisee's invitation, 
and in leading the conversation gradually in 
this direction. Now he had an opportunity to teach 
something respecting this Kingdom and its blessings 
and the call to share it; and he improved it. His 
hearers, if they had in mind Isaiah's prophecy and 
God's promise to Abraham, would understand that the 
Kingdom or mountain of the Lord would be the house 
of Israel, in some glorious and exalted condition under 
Messiah, and that it was in and through this Kingdom 
that the feast of divine blessings, for all nations, was to 
be spread. Our Lord now, by a parable, drew attention 
to the Gospel call of great blessings and privileges, 
and would have his hearers note the fact that while in 
a general way they would all assent to the statement 
that the Kingdom would be a blessed one, and the 
feast there something to be greatly desired, nevertheless 
when the offer of that Kingdom would be made them 
temporal things closer to their hearts would make it of 
no effect to the majority. 

The parable represents a great feast, with a large 
number of friends of the host invited in advance, that 
they might be ready at such a time as the feast would 
be ready and announced. God himself is the host in 
this parable, and the Jewish nation were his friends 
to whom, as a people, he had given much advantage 
every way, chiefly in that to them were committed the 
oracles of God,— much knowledge of the divine plan 
for human salvation and the promises that if they, as 



the seed of Abraham, were faithful, they should have 
the invitation and privilege and opportunities of this 
great feast. The Lord addresses them through the 
Prophet, saying, "You only have I known [recognized] 
of all the families of the earth." (Amos 3:2.) Israel 
only was invited to this feast; but the feast was not 
ready until our Lord's day, and hence the invitation 

R2701 : page 287 

to partake of it did not go forth until then. Finally, 
however, the time had come; Christ, as represented in 
the bullock of the sin-offering, had already given himself, 
—the sacrifice being counted as accomplished from 
the time of its offering, when our Lord presented himself 
to John at Jordan, making a full consecration of 
his entire being, even unto death. In view of this 
sacrifice for sins, God could begin at once to call the 
already promised guests to the great feast of blessing 
and manifestation of divine favor toward those to whom 
he had promised it so long before, through their father 
Abraham. 

And thus it was that when Jesus came and called 
his disciples and sent them forth, the message was, 
"The Kingdom of Heaven is at hand;" the great feast 
of fat things for this nation, that God has so long 
promised, is ready; and whosoever wills may come 
and be received and participate in it. The message of 
Jesus and the twelve, and later the seventy, throughout 
all Judea, was the invitation of that favored people to 
come and enjoy the great feast for which they had impatiently 
waited and hoped and prayed for over sixteen 
centuries,— the great privileges and opportunities of 
the Kingdom. 

But as the parable shows, when the offer of the 
Kingdom was really made, when the invitation to partake 
of the blessings of the great Feast was really put 
before them, it proved that they loved the Kingdom 
and the future things far less than they and others 
might have supposed. On the contrary, the unanimity 
with which the invitation to the Kingdom was rejected 
made it appear almost as tho the rejectors had acted 
in concert in the matter. Their excuses for so little 
interest in the things which God had promised, and 
which they claimed to be eagerly longing for, were the 
apparent pressure of other duties which they must 
attend to, and which left no time for responding to the 
divine invitation to the Kingdom. With one the pressure 
came in the direction of seeing to his farm, and 
thus being not slothful in business; another felt that it 
might do very well for people who had nothing else to 
do, to give attention to a spiritual feast, but as for him, 
his time was fully occupied with his property, his 
oxen, sheep, store-business, and what not. Another 
felt that his duties, social ties, wife, children, etc., demanded 
all of his attention, and that therefore he could 



not accept the Kingdom privileges. 

And this, which was the sentiment of fleshly Israel, 
is largely that of spiritual Israel, also, now that the 
spiritual Kingdom is announced. Many seem to feel 
that what they would call the real and practical things 
of life need all of their attention. They want to "get 
along" in this world's affairs, and to be somebodies in 
it, and they find such interest in social and material 
matters a great hindrance to any response to the divine 
invitation to a share in the glorious Millennial Kingdom, 
as joint-heirs with Christ,— the great feast, the 
high calling which has come to us. Well, in one sense 
of the word this is all right, for it merely keeps out of 
the Kingdom a class which the Lord does not desire 
should be in it, and which if it did come in would 
need to be sifted out, later. Altho God has bidden 
many, he is seeking for this feast only such as will 
highly appreciate it above all other privileges— those 
who would be willing to sacrifice any and every other 
thing in order to share it. 

The first invitation to the feast, recounted in the 
parable, represents the first years of our Lord's ministry, 
which were specially directed toward interesting 
the scribes and Pharisees and Doctors of the 
Law, who, as the leading men of that nation, and as 
our Lord said, occupying Moses' seat, really represented 
that nation as a whole; and the rejection of the invitation 
by these meant the rejection of it by that nation 
as a whole. Thus our Lord was careful to bring before 
the priestly class of that time the evidences of his 
Messiahship, so that when, for instance, he healed the 
ten lepers, he charged them to tell no man, but go and 
show themselves to the priests. Thus the priestly 
class was informed respecting the miraculous work of 
our Lord, perhaps more particularly than others. They 
therefore had the invitation to the feast more particularly 
than others. However, the fact that the chief 

R2702 : page 287 

representatives of Israel were unready for the invitation 
was not permitted to hinder, and our Lord, through 
his disciples, subsequently extended the invitation to 
another class. 

The trial of the nation as a whole, represented by 
its leaders, ended at Calvary, or rather five days before 
Calvary, when our Lord rode on the ass and wept 
over the city of Jerusalem, saying, "O Jerusalem, 
Jerusalem, thou that killest the prophets and stonest 
them that are sent unto thee: how oft would I have 
gathered thy children, as a hen gathereth her chickens 
under her wings, and ye would not! Behold, your 
house is left unto you desolate!" As a nation, as a 
people, you have rejected the divine invitation to the 
great Feast, and as a nation you cannot taste of it. 
Nevertheless, according to divine intention and promise, 



through the prophets, God extended mercy to various 
individuals of that nation, after the nation as a whole 
had proven itself unworthy of the Kingdom privileges. 
The apostles were sent to gather, not the nation, but 
such individuals as were of humble mind, to share in 
the feast, and this calling of individuals, instead of the 
nation of Israel, was responded to exclusively by those 
who realized their own unworthiness,— the lame, the 
halt, the blind, who confessed that they were not perfect, 

R2702 : page 288 

but who desired perfection, and who rejoiced in 

the call to partake of the Kingdom privileges, and 

gladly forsook all else for it. Amongst them, we are 

assured, there are not many wise, not many great, not 

many learned, but chiefly the poor, for altho the poor 

are not always humble by any means, yet amongst 

them proportionately more were found who were of 

acceptable character; amongst the rich and the great 

humility would appear to have been at all times correspondingly 

scarce. 

This second invitation to the poor, the halt and 
the blind, in the streets and lanes of the city, as a 
picture would be very difficult to appreciate in our day 
of hospitals and almshouses, etc., provided by general 
taxation; but in the days of our Lord it would be very 
easy indeed to have collected a large crowd of indigent 
and infirm in short order. 

It will be observed that both of these first calls 
belong to the city— that is, Israel, the nominal Kingdom 
of God. But the two calls failed to find the sufficient 
number which God had predestinated should 
constitute the Kingdom class. He could indeed have 
induced others to come in, but, on the contrary, he 
purposely put the invitation to the Feast in such a 
form as would repel those who were not of the right 
attitude of heart— in such a form as would attract 
Israelites indeed, who felt and acknowledged their own 
unworthiness, and who would be glad, on entering the 
feast, to have on the robe provided for the guests 
(symbolical of Christ's righteousness), to cover the 
filthy rags of their own imperfection. But now, because 
a sufficient number was not found in Israel to complete 
the elect number, the message must be sent outside the 
city, outside of Judaism,— to the Gentiles; and thus 
the third message was, "Go ye into the highways and 
whosoever you meet, compel them to come in." The 
word "compel," however, gives a wrong thought here: 
it should properly be rendered, urge, persuade. 

And thus it has been that throughout the Gospel 
age, since the bringing in to the Gospel favor of as 
many Jews as were ready for it, the message has been 
turned to the Gentiles, "to take out of them a people 
for God's name," to partake of the great Feast with 
the remnant of Israel. As the Apostle Paul said to 



some of the Jews in his preaching: "It was necessary 

that the word of God should first have been spoken 

to you; but seeing ye put it from you, and judge yourselves 

unworthy of everlasting life, lo, we turn to the 

Gentiles; for so the Lord hath commanded us." (Acts 13:46,47.) 

They showed themselves unworthy of 

this great blessing or gift, in that they were interested 

more in the things that perish than in the glorious 

promises of the everlasting future. 

The Apostle Paul calls attention to this fact in 
Rom. 9:27: "Tho the number of the children of Israel 
be as the sand of the sea, a remnant [only] shall be 
saved." The Apostle further shows that the call of 
the Gentiles to be sharers in the Kingdom is merely 
the continuation of the original call, and that we are 
called in to take the places of those who neglected so 
great salvation and privilege. He illustrates this by 
the olive tree, saying that the natural branches were 
broken off that we, who by nature were wild, might 
be grafted in and become partakers of the root and 
fatness of the olive.— Rom. 11:17. 

This third call to the great Feast of the Kingdom 
blessings and privileges has progressed throughout this 
Gospel age, and to our understanding is now nearly 
complete— nearly all the places at the table have been 
provided with guests; only a few are yet vacant; and 
so soon as these places are filled, the great feast will 
begin, and we shall indeed enter into the joys of our 
Lord, and not only be privileged to feast ourselves, but 
to carry of its bounties and blessings to all the families 
of the earth. 

The same matters which hindered the Jews, under 
the first call, from accepting this invitation, have hindered 
to a large extent also many of the Gentiles who 
have heard the third call. It is impossible to be 
thorough-going business men, wealthy, influential, etc., 
and at the same time follow in the footsteps of Jesus, 
giving all of our hearts, talents and energies to the 
Lord in acceptance of his invitation to this Feast. The 
acceptance of the invitation to this Feast means a deep 
interest in it, beyond everything else, so that all other 
matters, whether houses or lands, father or mother, 
wife or children, shall be secondary to the interests of 
the Kingdom, and to our responsibilities to the terms 
and conditions of the invitation. Consequently, what 
was true respecting Israel has been true as respects the 
Gentiles, viz., that the call to the Kingdom has been 
generally rejected by those who had a considerable 
measure of this world's blessings and advantages— 
those who are rich, either in honor of men or social 
position or talents or reputation or money, have found 
it difficult to leave these all to follow Jesus in the narrow 
way: and, consequently, the Scriptural assurance 
is, not only that those elected in the end of the Jewish 
age were chiefly the poor and lowly, but that the same 
has been true amongst the Gentiles, and is true to-day: 



"Not many wise men after the flesh, not many mighty, 
not many noble;" but chiefly the poor of this world, 
rich in faith.— 1 Cor. 1:26; James 2:5. 

This does not debar those who have riches of any 
kind, but really gives them all the greater privilege 
and opportunity; for they have that much greater 
talent which, if they will, they may sacrifice, and thus 
the more fully demonstrate their appreciation of the 
invitation and of the Feast, and be correspondingly 
appreciated by the Host. Let us all, like the Apostle 
Paul, lay aside every weight, every hindrance, every 
besetment, everything precious to us of an earthly 
kind, that we may run with patience the race set before 
us, in response to this invitation to the great Feast of 
joint-heirship with our Lord in the Kingdom.— Heb. 12:1,2; 
Rom. 8:16-18; 12:1,2. 



page 289 

SEMI-MONTHLY. 


