Announcements
● Literature offer for January and February: Any 192-page book published before 1980 and printed on groundwood (newsprint) paper that the congregation now has in stock, for a contribution of 50¢. (Congregations may request credit for books obtained by publishers and pioneers for the January and February offer. During this campaign only, the rate for regular and special pioneers for the pocket-size books is 30¢. For congregation publishers and auxiliary pioneers, the rate is 50¢ each.) Books printed on better-grade (free-sheet) paper are not to be used in this offer. Choosing, Commentary on James, and Word of God, although printed on better-grade paper, may also be offered for 50¢ during these two months. Congregations that do not have these older books may offer any other 192-page book available locally for a contribution of $1.00 each. March: Revelation​—Its Grand Climax at Hand! for a contribution of $3.00. April and May: Subscription to The Watchtower. See article on page 8 relative to ordering extra magazines for April and May.
● Starting in February, and no later than March 1, the new public talk for circuit overseers will be “Will God’s Judgment Day Come Upon You as a Snare?”
● Selective Service regulations require that all men register when reaching 18 years of age. All of those required to do so should take care of the matter promptly, viewing it as a Christian’s obligation to the superior authorities. Elders will want to have this in mind and give appropriate reminders to young brothers nearing the age of 18. Questions as to the young Christian’s responsibilities in this regard may be answered by the elders.
● The special public talk for the 1989 Memorial season will be given worldwide on Sunday, April 2, 1989. The subject of the talk will be “Come, You Who Thirst for the Truth!” An outline will be provided. Those congregations having the visit of the circuit overseer, a circuit assembly, or special assembly day that weekend will have the special talk the following week. No congregation should have the special talk before April 2.
● New Publications Available:
Life​—How Did It Get Here? By Evolution or by Creation? (Large size)​—Indonesian
Life​—How Did It Get Here? By Evolution or by Creation? (Small size)​—Danish
My Book of Bible Stories​—Mono-Kutuba
Sing Praises to Jehovah (Small size)​—Swedish
Watch Tower Publications Index 1981-1985​—Spanish
Watch Tower Publications Scripture Index 1946-1985​—Dutch
Worldwide Security Under the “Prince of Peace”​—Icelandic
Jehovah’s Witnesses and the Question of Blood​—Norwegian
● New Cassette Recordings Available:
The First of Samuel (set of two; congregation and public: $3.00; pioneers: $2.50)​—Danish
The Second of Samuel (set of two; congregation and public: $3.00; pioneers: $2.50)​—Danish
Jehovah Delivers Those Calling Upon His Name (single cassette; congregation and public: $2.00; pioneers: $1.75)​—Dutch, Greek, Italian, Turkish
Listening to the Great Teacher (set of five cassettes and a book in an album; congregation and public: $11.25; pioneers: $9.50)​—Dutch
My Book of Bible Stories (set of four cassettes in an album; congregation and public: $8.00; pioneers: $6.00)​—Korean

