Meetings to Help Us Make Disciples
WEEK STARTING JANUARY 2
Song 206
10 min: Local announcements. Read December 15, 1988, district convention assignment letter from Society. Highlight January offer of any 192-page book published prior to 1980, for 50¢. Provide names of older publications in stock locally. Briefly consider introductions that might be used with current Topic for Conversation. (See Reasoning book, subheading “Kingdom,” pages 12-13.) All baptized Witnesses should make special effort to be present at Service Meeting next week.
17 min: “1989 ‘Godly Devotion’ District Convention”​—Part One. Question-and-answer consideration of paragraphs 1-8 of insert by congregation secretary. Read ONLY paragraphs 4, 6, and 7, and make application of scriptures as time allows.
18 min: “1989 ‘Godly Devotion’ District Convention”​—Part Two. Discuss with audience paragraphs 9-13 of insert. Highlight need to select accommodations from “Recommended Lodging Locations List” and avoid abuses. To be handled by presiding overseer.
Song 144 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING JANUARY 9
Song 207
 7 min: Local announcements. Encourage all to share in field service on second Saturday of month. Suggest one or two articles that may be appropriate for local territory.
 7 min: Medical Document and Identity Cards. Talk by secretary. Distribute cards to all baptized Witnesses present. Briefly review highlights of Society’s letter of December 21, 1987, to all congregations. Encourage all to fill out cards promptly and see that they are properly signed and dated.
16 min: “Do You Give a Reason for the Hope in You?” Discussion and demonstration. When considering paragraph 5, arrange for brief demonstration by qualified publisher making transition from last scripture in Topic for Conversation and presenting older publication or suggested alternate.
15 min: “Presenting the Good News​—With Older Publications.” Question-and-answer coverage. When considering paragraph 6, arrange for brief demonstration, featuring current offer.
Song 119 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING JANUARY 16
Song 93
10 min: Local announcements and selected Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry. Theocratic News. Include accounts report. Mention any contributions sent by congregation to Society for Kingdom work or the Society Kingdom Hall Fund as noted on December statement from Society.
20 min: “Benefit Fully From the Service Meetings.” Question-and-answer coverage. Briefly obtain expressions from audience as to how they have personally benefited from Service Meetings.
15 min: Serving Where the Need Is Greater. Two brothers discuss article “Go Out From Your Land and From Your Relatives” from the August 15, 1988, issue of The Watchtower, pages 21-3. Highlight need to seek the advice of local elders, communicate with the Society, and count the cost before moving. (Note Our Ministry book, pages 112-13, and January 1985 Our Kingdom Ministry, page 7, paragraphs 7, 8.)
Song 21 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING JANUARY 23
Song 164
12 min: Local announcements. Question Box. Encourage all to share in field  service on fourth Saturday of the month.
18 min: “Youths​—Develop a Strong Relationship With Jehovah.” Questions and answers. Appeal to youths locally, encouraging them to keep making progress spiritually.
15 min: Listening to the Great Teacher. Talk and interviews. Highlight value of the Great Teacher book on cassette tapes for young persons. The 46 Bible stories appeal to children and teach them important Bible principles. These stories help to draw children to Jehovah, Jesus Christ, and the Bible. Review key points of the message from the publishers of Great Teacher book, pages 5-6. Interview youths and parents, highlighting benefits that children have received.
Song 205 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING JANUARY 30
Song 101
10 min: Local announcements. Encourage all to share in the field service on first Sunday of month. Announce which older publications are available to be offered during February. If older stock is depleted, use any other 192-page book available locally for contribution of $1.00. As time allows, have publishers relate experiences highlighting success in offering older publications during January.
15 min: “How Shall We Repay Jehovah?” Warm, informative talk based on article in the December 1, 1988, Watchtower, pages 25-8.
20 min: 1989 Yearbook Highlights. Well-prepared talk on introductory material in 1989 Yearbook. Feature outstanding results from unitedly saying “Come!” to people everywhere. Blessings come to all who share in extending the invitation. Call attention to outstanding increases set out in the worldwide report. As time allows, refer to some of the experiences given and show how these serve to encourage and benefit the brothers locally.
Song 18 and concluding prayer.

