Presenting the Good News​—With Older Publications
1 Making the decision to worship God is vital. It means our life. Thus, acquiring accurate knowledge and the wisdom to apply it is a worthwhile goal.​—Prov. 23:23; John 17:3.
2 To acquire knowledge and grow in wisdom, we must diligently study God’s Word. In this way we become familiar with his commandments, laws, reminders, and counsel. We also need to meditate on the history of Jehovah’s dealings with his people. Jehovah generously grants knowledge and wisdom to those who sincerely seek him. Through the years, by means of his organization, he has provided an abundance of publications that cover many fields of Bible knowledge. These can be of great benefit to many who have not come to know Jehovah.
VALUE OF OLDER PUBLICATIONS
3 During January and February, any of the 192-page books published prior to 1980 may be used. There is a wealth of information in these publications. They can be of real spiritual value to people. (See Matthew 5:14-16.) So during these two months, let us endeavor to place all the older publications our congregation may have in stock.
4 The importance of getting these publications into the hands of people can be seen by considering the experience of a person who received a gift copy of one of the older books from his wife, who was a Witness. Up to that time, he had not shown any interest in the Bible. To her surprise, he read the book through in one evening. This so established his faith in the Bible as the Word of God that he attended the next congregation meeting and requested a Bible study. Within three months, he was going out in the field ministry and now is baptized.
HAVE A POSITIVE ATTITUDE
5 Do not underestimate the power of God’s Word. Since these older publications highlight Bible truths, present them with a positive attitude. Of course, you will want to make sure that the older books you offer are in good condition. If the books are damaged or the pages have turned yellow, they should not be offered from house to house, since this could detract from the message.
6 If your congregation does not have any 192-page books designated for use in this campaign, then you may feature any other 192-page publication for a contribution of $1.00. After considering Revelation 21:4 with the householder, you may want to read paragraph 3 on page 184 in the Happiness book or call attention to the box on page 25 in the “Kingdom Come” book as a means of tying in the offer.
7 May we all enjoy a productive ministry by sharing knowledge from God’s Word with these older publications! This can work to the eternal welfare of those to whom we witness.

