Announcements
▪ Literature offer for July and August: Any of the following 32-page brochures may be used: Does God Really Care About Us?, Enjoy Life on Earth Forever!, Should You Believe in the Trinity?, The Divine Name That Will Endure Forever, The Government That Will Bring Paradise, What Happens to Us When We Die?, What Is the Purpose of Life​—How Can You Find It?, and When Someone You Love Dies. The brochures A Book for All People, Our Problems​—Who Will Help Us Solve Them?, Spirits of the Dead​—Can They Help You or Harm You? Do They Really Exist?, and Will There Ever Be a World Without War? may be offered where appropriate. September: Life​—How Did It Get Here? By Evolution or by Creation? October: Individual copies of The Watchtower and Awake! Where interest is found on return visits, subscriptions may be offered.
▪ Starting in September, circuit overseers will give the public talk entitled “Human Rule​—Weighed in the Balance.”
▪ Since the annual meeting of the Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society of Pennsylvania will be held on Saturday, October 7, 2000, no tours will be conducted that day at the Society’s facilities at Brooklyn, Patterson, and Wallkill, New York. Any who have planned to visit on that Saturday should reschedule their visit to another convenient time. No congregation literature requests will be processed for shipment or for pickup that day.
▪ If you wish to provide monetary assistance for disaster relief, you may send your donations to the Society, where a relief fund is set aside for this purpose. The address is: Watchtower, 25 Columbia Heights, Brooklyn, NY 11201-2483. (See the December 1, 1985, Watchtower, pages 20-2.) Please do not send clothing, supplies, or materials to the Society or to the disaster area unless specifically requested to do so by the Society or the relief committee. This will ensure an orderly relief effort and the proper distribution of goods.
▪ New Publications Available:
“All Scripture”​—Authentic and Beneficial (Brochure for use in 2000 Theocratic Ministry School)—​Russian, Ukrainian
Bible Topics for Discussion​—Romanian
Does Fate Rule Our Lives?​—Or Does God Hold Us Responsible? (Tract No. 71)​—French, Wolof
Hellfire​—Is It Part of Divine Justice? (Tract No. 74)​—French
Jesus Christ​—Who Is He? (Tract No. 24)​—Italian, Kinyarwanda, Persian
My Book of Bible Stories (Small size)​—French
Questions Young People Ask​—Answers That Work—​Maltese, Serbian
Watch Tower Publications Index 1997​—Arabic
Watch Tower Publications Index 1986-1995​—French
What Hope for Dead Loved Ones? (Tract No. 16)​—Miskito
Will Suffering Ever End? (Tract No. 75)​—Vietnamese

