Are You a Shy Person?
1 We are not surprised when we see a young child peeking at us from behind his mother or father. Shyness is natural in early childhood. Even in adulthood, many are somewhat shy by nature. If shyness affects your participation in the ministry, what can you do?
2 Coping With Shyness: It is important to give attention to “the secret person of the heart.” (1 Pet. 3:4) Strengthen your love for Jehovah and for your neighbor. Be thoroughly convinced that fulfilling the preaching commission is one of the best ways to demonstrate self-sacrificing love. Pursue a good routine of personal study and meeting attendance. Pray regularly and specifically for Jehovah’s help. Strong faith and trust in him will build confidence and give “all the more courage to speak the word of God fearlessly.”​—Phil. 1:14.
3 Fight feelings of inadequacy. It appears that Timothy had to do this. Paul encouraged Timothy to “let no man ever look down on [his] youth,” reminding him that “God gave us not a spirit of cowardice, but that of power.” (1 Tim. 4:12; 2 Tim. 1:7) Timothy was used fully by Jehovah, who will also use you if you move forward with complete confidence in Him.​—Ps. 56:11.
4 Reflecting on a Bible text, such as Matthew 10:37, helped a sister whose timidity made her fearful of her opposed husband. As she persevered, the ministry became easier for her, and eventually her husband, mother, and brothers all accepted the truth!
5 Preparation Is Essential: Your confidence will further increase when you prepare thoroughly for the ministry. Select a simple presentation from the Reasoning book or past issues of Our Kingdom Ministry, get it well in mind, and rehearse it. Rather than building up unnecessary anxiety, think positively. Draw courage from working closely with others. Keep in mind that many of the people you will meet at the doors are timid, just like you. Everyone needs the Kingdom message.
6 If you are shy, do not despair. As you apply yourself, Jehovah will help you to be an effective preacher of the good news. Then you will have joy in your ministry.​—Prov. 10:22.

