Do You Appreciate Jehovah’s Patience?
1 If Jehovah had not been patient for the past 10, 20, and more years, allowing an extended witness to be given, would you have learned the truth? How grateful we are that he has allowed many more people “to attain to repentance.” Yet, Jehovah’s great day of judgment “will come as a thief.” (2 Pet. 3:9, 10) Hence, the patience of God should not be misinterpreted as a delay in bringing the end to this system of things.​—Hab. 2:3.
2 Feel Pity for People: Jehovah’s long-suffering far exceeds our comprehension. We must not lose sight of its purpose. (Jonah 4:1-4, 11) Jehovah sees the pitiable condition of mankind and has compassion for them. Jesus feels the same way. Having pity for the crowds to whom he preached, he wanted the evangelizing work to expand so that more would have the opportunity of gaining everlasting life.​—Matt. 9:35-38.
3 When tragedies and disasters strike, do not our hearts go out to people who do not know the truth? People today are like “sheep without a shepherd” as they try to cope with and make sense of the chaos in the world. (Mark 6:34) By zealously preaching the good news, we comfort those of rightly disposed heart and demonstrate our appreciation for Jehovah’s patience.​—Acts 13:48.
4 Our Work Is Urgent: Last year 323,439 were baptized and over 14,000,000 attended the Memorial. What potential there is for many more to escape the destruction of this wicked system! How large the “great crowd” will be, we do not know. (Rev. 7:9) How long our commission to preach will last, we do not know. But Jehovah knows. The good news will be preached to his satisfaction, “and then the end will come.”​—Matt. 24:14.
5 The time left is reduced, and God’s day is imminent. (1 Cor. 7:29a; Heb. 10:37) Without a doubt, “our salvation is nearer than at the time when we became believers.” (Rom. 13:11) Let us not miss the purpose of divine patience. Instead, let us urgently preach so that more who yearn for righteousness may experience Jehovah’s great mercy.

