Service Meeting Schedule
Week Starting July 10
Song 7
12 min: Local announcements. Selected Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry. Comment on April field service report for the country and the local congregation. Direct attention to the box “Look at the Back Page,” and demonstrate one of the suggested presentations that would work well in the local territory.
15 min: “We Cannot Stop Speaking.” Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion. Stress reasons why we take our preaching assignment so seriously. Include pertinent points from January 15, 1997, Watchtower, pages 23-4.
18 min: “Let All Things Take Place for Upbuilding.” Two elders discuss the article. Read each paragraph and cited scriptures. Highlight the principles involved. Emphasize the need for discernment when handling business matters or making investments. Review counsel in March 15, 1997, Watchtower, pages 18-19, 22.
Song 15 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting July 17
Song 23
15 min: Local announcements. Accounts report. Briefly explain how to use the Divine Name brochure to help an interested person appreciate the need to know and use God’s personal name.​—See Reasoning book, pages 196-7.
10 min: “New Circuit Assembly Program.” Questions and answers. Announce date of the next circuit assembly, and urge all to attend both days. Encourage all to make a special effort to invite Bible students. Attending the assembly may quicken their desire to associate regularly with the congregation.
20 min: Who Should Be Your Role Model? A father conducts his family study with one or two teenage children. He has recently observed that their conversations often dwell on sports heroes, movie stars, TV personalities, and musicians. He expresses concern because this type of fascination is a manifestation of the spirit of the world. They discuss the May 22, 1998, Awake!, pages 12-14. The youths realize that there is danger in idolizing worldly figures and agree that worldly prominence has nothing to offer Christians. They consider the benefits of viewing parents, elders, other exemplary ones in the congregation​—and especially Jesus Christ—​as their role models.
Song 34 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting July 24
Song 45
 5 min: Local announcements.
15 min: Recommending Ourselves as God’s Ministers. Two ministerial servants discuss the Scriptural admonition given in the December 15, 1998, Watchtower, pages 19-20. They appreciate the need to measure up in a fine way as ministerial servants and review what they personally can do to show that they are fulfilling their assignments. They see the importance of being good examples in the field ministry and discuss ways they can be helpful to the elders in giving personal assistance to others. They agree that they want to do all they can to help the congregation appreciate the urgency of the times and grow and prosper spiritually.
10 min: Writing Letters to People Whom We Are Unable to Contact. Talk and audience discussion. As it is increasingly difficult to find people at home, some publishers get good results by writing letters. Consider these guidelines. Letters should be brief, Scripturally based, and respectful. Do not send anonymous letters. Write or type neatly and legibly. Give the Kingdom Hall address and the congregation meeting times along with an invitation to attend. Do not use the Society’s return address. Review suggestions offered in the School Guidebook, pages 87-8, and the November 1996 Our Kingdom Ministry Question Box.
15 min: Use Effective Introductions. Select two or three introductions from pages 9-15 of the Reasoning book, and discuss how these can be used effectively in local territory. Ask the audience, “What introductions do you use when approaching someone on the street, informally, or otherwise?” Demonstrate one or two introductions as time allows.
Song 54 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting July 31
Song 66
15 min: Local announcements. Remind all to turn in field service reports for July. Invite audience to relate personal experiences enjoyed this month when distributing brochures.
12 min: Local needs.
18 min: “Do You Appreciate Jehovah’s Patience?” Questions and answers. Include pertinent comments about Jehovah’s long-suffering.​—See Insight, Volume 2, pages 263-4.
Song 75 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting August 7
Song 88
10 min: Local announcements.
17 min: “Are You a Shy Person?” Questions and answers. Relate an encouraging experience from the 1997 Yearbook, pages 43-4.
18 min: Become Wise in Your Future. Talk by an elder. Young people desire to enjoy a happy future with those they love. While this is natural, they must apply godly counsel if they are to enjoy success. (Prov. 19:20) Attraction toward the opposite sex is strong in youth. If feelings are not controlled, the results can be disastrous. Many questions arise about the wisdom of teenagers becoming emotionally involved with the opposite sex, developing romantic relationships that lead to dating. Review admonition given in Young People Ask book, pages 231-5. Highlight major points in November 15, 1999, Watchtower, pages 18-23, that show the importance of youths fulfilling their whole obligation to God. Encourage teenagers to reflect on this counsel and to discuss it with their parents if they have questions.
Song 101 and concluding prayer.

