“Let All Things Take Place for Upbuilding”
1 In dealing with our brothers, we should do what is good for their upbuilding. This means being concerned about protecting their spiritual interests. If we engage in some type of secular work that involves promoting a product or service, we need to be careful that nothing we do will stumble our brothers.​—2 Cor. 6:3; Phil. 1:9, 10.
2 Some have become involved in various business ventures, targeting fellow Christians as potential customers. Certain sales organizations encourage their representatives to view everyone as a potential customer​—including those who belong to the same religion as they do. Some brothers have organized large gatherings of Witnesses for the purpose of encouraging them to become involved in a business enterprise. Others promote their venture by directing unsolicited articles, brochures, information on the Internet, or tapes to fellow believers. Would it be proper for a Christian to use his theocratic contacts to take advantage of his spiritual brothers? No!​—1 Cor. 10:23, 24, 31-33.
3 Brothers Should Beware: This does not mean that a Christian cannot do business with a brother. That is a personal matter. However, some initiate business schemes that encourage greed, and they prompt fellow believers to become their partners or investors. Many of these ventures fail, costing participants huge sums of money. Although those who joined in the enterprise may have been motivated by a desire to make quick money, the organizer should not feel that he is free from blame if the undertaking fails. He should carefully consider in advance how the spiritual and physical well-being of his brothers would be affected in the event that the venture does not succeed. Those holding positions of theocratic responsibility should be especially cautious about their secular endeavors because others may look to them with respect and place considerable trust in them. It would be wrong to abuse that trust. Privileges of sacred service may be forfeited if a brother loses the respect of others.
4 Our goal should be to “let all things take place for upbuilding.” (1 Cor. 14:26) We must avoid doing anything that introduces commercial activities into the congregation or promotes them. Such things have nothing to do with our Scriptural reasons for assembling together.​—Heb. 10:24, 25.

