True Justice Under God’s Government
BIBLE prophecy reveals that the present world is about to be replaced by a new one of God’s making. Moreover, that new world will have just one government—God’s Kingdom, of which Jesus Christ is King. (Revelation 11:15) How will God’s Kingdom eradicate injustice? It will act on two levels.
1. God’s Kingdom will eliminate unjust, inept human rulership. Daniel 2:44 states: “In the days of those kings [governments] the God of heaven will set up a kingdom . . . It will crush and put an end to all these [man-made] kingdoms, and it itself will stand to times indefinite.”
2. God’s Kingdom will destroy the wicked and preserve the just. Says Psalm 37:10: “Just a little while longer, and the wicked one will be no more.” Verse 28 reads: “Jehovah is a lover of justice, and he will not leave his loyal ones. To time indefinite they will certainly be guarded.”
Those “loyal ones” will experience the fulfillment of a statement Jesus made in his model prayer. He said: “Let your kingdom come. Let your will take place, as in heaven, also upon earth.” (Matthew 6:10) What is God’s will for the earth?
When God’s Kingdom Rules the Earth . . .
Corruption and oppression will cease. Concerning Jesus Christ, Hebrews 1:9 says: “You loved righteousness, and you hated lawlessness.” As a truly just Ruler, Jesus “will deliver the poor one crying for help, also the afflicted one and whoever has no helper. . . . From oppression and from violence he will redeem their soul, and their blood will be precious in his eyes.”—Psalm 72:12-14.
All will have an abundance. “The earth itself will certainly give its produce; God, our God, will bless us.” (Psalm 67:6) “There will come to be plenty of grain on the earth; on the top of the mountains there will be an overflow.” (Psalm 72:16) Jesus miraculously fed thousands at a time—a foregleam of what he will accomplish through God’s Kingdom.—Matthew 14:15-21; 15:32-38.
Justice will not be hampered by human limitations. “There is not a creation that is not manifest to [God’s] sight, but all things are naked and openly exposed to the eyes of him with whom we have an accounting.” (Hebrews 4:13) Concerning Christ, we read: “He will not judge by any mere appearance to his eyes, nor reprove simply according to the thing heard by his ears. And with righteousness he must judge the lowly ones, and with uprightness he must give reproof in behalf of the meek ones of the earth.”—Isaiah 11:3, 4.
Kingdom Rule Is Near!
The deteriorating state of the world testifies to its imminent end. “When the wicked ones sprout as the vegetation and all the practicers of what is hurtful blossom forth, it is that they may be annihilated forever,” says Psalm 92:7. How can you avoid deserving God’s disapproval and be among those whom he preserves? Jesus Christ said: “This means everlasting life, their taking in knowledge of you, the only true God, and of the one whom you sent forth, Jesus Christ.”—John 17:3.
Do you desire that precious knowledge? If so, like Heide, Dorothy, and Firuddin, mentioned earlier, why not discuss the matter with Jehovah’s Witnesses? They will be pleased to answer your questions without charge or obligation.
[Box/Picture on page 9]
WHEN LIFE ITSELF SEEMS UNFAIR
  Emily, who lives in the United States, was diagnosed with leukemia when she was seven years old. While her friends have dealt with the occasional cold or flu, Emily has endured years of intense medical treatment, including chemotherapy. “Leukemia is scary!” she says.
  Even though life has dealt her a hard blow, Emily has not withdrawn into despair. Rather, she awaits the time when, under God’s Kingdom, “no resident will say: ‘I am sick.’” (Isaiah 33:24) “My favorite scripture,” says Emily, “is Mark 12:30: ‘You must love Jehovah your God with your whole heart and with your whole soul and with your whole mind and with your whole strength.’ When I pray to Jehovah, he makes me strong. I thank Jehovah for giving me my family, my congregation, and the hope of everlasting life in the Paradise new world. This hope has helped me very much.”
[Pictures on pages 8, 9]
Under God’s Kingdom, all mankind will enjoy an abundance of food, as well as true justice and life without prejudice

