R86 : page 1 

VOL. I. 

PITTSBURGH, PA., APRIL, 1880. 

NO. 10. 



page 1 

ZION'S 

Watch Tower 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S 
PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED MONTHLY. 101 Fifth Ave., PITTSBURGH, PA. 
C. T. RUSSELL, Editor and Publisher. 



REGULAR CONTRIBUTORS. 

J. H PATON, .... ALMONT, MICH. 
W. I. MANN, .... SWISSVALE, PA. 
B. W. KEITH, . . . DANSVILLE, N.Y. 
H. B. RICE, . . . W. OAKLAND, CAL. 
A. D. JONES, . . . PITTSBURGH, PA. 



In no case will the Editor be responsible for all sentiments 
expressed by correspondents, nor is he to be understood as 
indorsing every expression in articles selected from other 
periodicals. 



TERMS, 50 CENTS PER YEAR, In Advance-includes 
postage. 



All communications should be addressed to "ZION'S WATCH 
TOWER," as above, and drafts, money orders, etc., made 
payable to the Editor. 



R86 : page 1 



The Melchisedec Priesthood. 

DIALOGUE. 

B. We have not had our usual talks of late, Brother A., and I 
called for one this evening. Suppose we drop our study of 
Revelation, tonight, and consider the Melchisedec Priesthood. I 
have a new idea concerning Melchisedec, viz. : that he was really 
Christ Jesus in another manifestation; the same person who was 
afterward born in Bethlehem. What do you think of it? 

A. It may be a new thought to you, Brother B., but it certainly is 
an old one to most of the deep thinkers of the church; i.e., they 
have usually thought of the question, but usually, also, have 
concluded that it is a mere random thought, suggested by the 
statement that he was "without beginning of days, nor end of 
years," but upon close examination of the subject it has been 
dropped. This, however, is not an argument against your view, 
which you supposed new. If you have any good reasons, let me 
have them, and let us reason together, and let the new idea stand 
or fall accordingly. It is a thing we should always remember, 
however, that all new things are not, because new, true. 

B. I may have been hasty in deciding on this subject. The text 
you refer to has been the one on which I built most- "Without 
beginning of days, nor end of years." How would you 
understand this text unless by supposing that it refers to God, 
who is "from everlasting to everlasting"? 

A. Well, to take your view of it would make Melchisedec the 
Father, and not our Lord Jesus, who is called the "first- 
begotten," "only-begotten," "the Son," "the beginning of the 
creation of God. " We believe that Jesus had an existence before 
He came into the world, that it was in glory, and that He left the 
glory which He had with the Father "before the world was." We 
believe the word to teach that since "His obedience unto death, 
even the death of the cross," "God (the Father) hath highly 
exalted Him, and given Him a name above every name," etc.; 
that now all power in heaven and earth is given unto Him. " We 
believe that "of His kingdom there is no end," and that "His 
throne is forever and ever. " But we cannot suppose that He 
never had a beginning, since it is positively stated that He was 
"the beginning of the creation." This, of course, involves the 
idea that the Heavenly Father and Son are no more one person 
than an earthly father and son could be one in person. There is a 
one-ness, however, a unity, existing between them, the one-ness 
of will, aim, &c, as it was written of Jesus, "Lo, I come to do 
Thy will, O God. " We remember further that Jesus prayed for 
us, His church, that we might have the same kind of unity; not 
unity of person, but unity of purpose, aim, and interest. He prays 
"That they all may be ONE, even as Thou, Father, and I are 
one. " This shows us clearly the kind of one-ness existing 
between our Father and our Lord. 



If, then, the text, "without beginning of days, nor end of years," 
as applied to Melchisedec, means that he never had a beginning 
nor end of life, it would prove not that he was Jesus, but 
Jehovah. We think, however, that this is not its meaning, but- 

B. Let me first explain my process of reasoning on the matter, 
that you may more fully answer. Paul says that Jesus was made 
a priest after the order of Melchisedec. Now, I reason that if of 
that order, He must have been the head or founder of it; that 
therefore Melchisedec was Christ. If Melchisedec was only a 
man, if he were not Christ, would it not imply that Jesus must be 
lower than him, and consequently not in as high honor as the 
man Melchisedec, who was the head of the order? 

A. I do not think your reasoning sound. You seem to forget that 
men are sometimes used as types of Christ, and that the type is 
always inferior to the antitype. For instance: Adam was a type, 
as the head of the human family; David was the first king who 
ever "sat on the throne of the Lord;" Moses was a figure of Him 
that was to come, as it is written: "A prophet shall the Lord your 
God raise up unto you like unto me. " 

If Christ is a prophet like unto or after the order of Moses, does 
it prove that Moses was not a man— that Moses must have been 
Christ? If David (the name means the anointed -the Christ) was 
a type of Christ, and called "the Lord's anointed," does it prove 
that he was not a man? If Adam was the head of the race was he 
really not a man; was he Christ in some previous manifestation? 
By no means. Adam, David, Moses, Aaron, as well as Solomon, 
Isaac, Jacob, Melchisedec, &c, were but figures of the true 
Head, King, Prophet, Priest, and Melchisedec, as a type, showed 
how the kingly and priestly offices (separate under the law) 
would both unite in Him, so that He would be a "Priest upon His 
throne. " All the types are natural, representing things higher. 
First, the natural head, king, prophet and priest: afterward, the 
spiritual. 

R195 : page 1 

B. This, I admit, seems to overturn my new ideas, but let me 
know how Melchisedec was without father or mother? 

A. It would scarcely be necessary to remind you that Christ was 
not without a Father. Call to mind His words— "Father forgive 
them; " "Father, glorify Thou me with the glory which I had with 
Thee before the world was." It could not then refer to Christ in 
His pre-existent state, nor, can it apply to Him as "the man, 
Christ Jesus," for Jesus was "born of a woman." Wakefield's 
new version renders this (Heb. 7:3) "Of whose father, mother, 
pedigree, birth, and death, we have no account. " There was a 
strict record kept of parentage, birth, death, &c, of every Levite, 
so that any one claiming to be a priest or Levite could prove it 
by the records. 



The Diaglott, renders this text, "without father, without mother, 
without genealogy, having neither a beginning of days nor an 
end of life, but having been made like to the Son of God, 
remains a priest perpetually. " Some take the view (as does 
Wakefield, quoted above) that this text only means that no 
account was kept of his birth, death, &c. While we may feel sure 
that he had a father and mother and a beginning of days, we are 
not sure that he died. Verse 8 seems to imply that he, like Enoch 
and Elijah, did not die— "Here, indeed, men (the Levitical 
Priesthood) receive tithes, who die; but there, one (Melchisedec 
received tithes), of whom it is affirmed that he lives. This is a 
positive statement that Melchisedec did not die. We must 
suppose that he was translated. 

B. Would not the fact that he was called a priest, and that he did 
not die, give strength to my suggestion that he was Christ? 

A. No, the very reverse. It is testified of Melchisedec that he did 
not die, "that he lives," but it is testified of Christ that He did 
die. This same Paul could say of Christ: "Jesus Christ, by the 
grace of God, tasted death for every man. " We conclude, then, 
that as Christ, on the spiritual plane of life, had a Father, and on 
the earthly plane a mother, and did "die for our sins," "even the 
death of the cross," therefore He was not the same person as 
Melchisedec. 

B. Yes, now I see clearly that they are not the same, but can you 
show why the two priesthoods are given, and why they are 
contrasted? 

A. Jesus fills up so large a work, and so varied, that many types 
are required to illustrate His work. David illustrated His kingly 
power -putting down all enemies. Solomon represented His 
peaceful reign (the millennium), and His wisdom. "In His day 
the righteous 

R195 : page 2 

shall flourish." But these were only imperfect types. Their 
kingdoms and lives had an end. A type was needed which would 
show that His kingdom would have no end. 

Again, the Aaronic Priesthood was a type of the Christian 
priesthood, during the time Christ and His body suffer and die, 
down until they shall appear in the glory of the kingdom. Here 
the Aaronic type ceases, and where it ceases the Melchisedec 
type begins. The Melchisedec type shows no death, no sacrifice, 
only the reigning and blessing -king and priest. How beautifully 
it illustrates what we must shortly be. With Jesus our head, we 
soon shall be "kings and priests unto God, and reign on the 
earth. " One of the most notable events of that reign will be the 
blessing of the natural descendants of Abraham, as shown in the 
type (Gen. 14:18-20): "And Melchisedek, king of Salem (type of 
Christ-head and body) ...blessed Abraham." Then "the elder 



(natural Israel) shall serve the younger" (spiritual Israel), and 
pay them tribute and homage, as Abraham paid tribute and 
homage to Melchisedec. 

"If He were on earth He could not be a priest," says Paul. I am 
not trying to prove to you that Jesus' claims as a priest are based 
upon titles of the law. No, we claim that He came of Judah, the 
kingly tribe. As a priest, He did not attempt to usurp your office. 
No, He was offered on the great altar-the earth itself, and when 
He went in with the real blood of sin-offering, He did not 
attempt to go into the holy places made with hands, but into the 
real ones, of which yours is only a type or shadow. Soon the 
sacrifice will all be over. He has left a measure of suffering and 
death to be filled up by us, His body. Soon all will be over, and 
we "shall appear with Him" to "bless the people" (as you do in 
symbol), but it will be with kingly power united to our priestly 
office. And then, too, when complete, our priesthood shall 
continue forever. See, God gave you a type of this higher 
priesthood in Melchisedec, "King of Peace" and "Priest of God," 
of whom it is testified "he lives." So when our priesthood 
reaches the plane typified by Melchisedec, we will never die, 
but abide a "Royal Priesthood" forever. How indispensable are 
both of these types, the Aaronic, showing how we must die with 
Him, and the Melchisedec, how we shall live with Him and be 
glorified together; "no cross, no crown." 



R86 : page 2 

DEATH SWALLOWED UP. 

"Then shall be brought to pass the saying, which is written: 
Death is swallowed up in victory." 1 Cor. 15:54. The apostle has 
just led us down the stream of time, to the resurrection of the 
church, when they who sleep in Jesus awake immortal, and the 
living members of His body are changed to His likeness, and 
together are caught up to meet the Lord in the air. And here he 
quotes from Isaiah 25:8, saying, that then that prophecy will be 
fulfilled, not that it is fulfilled by the resurrection of the saints, 
but that it "then" begins to be fulfilled. The bruising of satan 
("under your feet"), Rom. 16:20, and the destroying of death, 
have both been deferred until the body of Christ (the church) is 
complete. With the first resurrection, that company, "the Royal 
Priesthood," is complete, and their work is before them. That 
work includes the binding of Satan, the destruction of death; i.e., 
the "swallowing up of death in victory, " and the restoration of 
mankind to harmony with God, and to that condition of life 
enjoyed before sin entered-a condition of at one-ment. 

This work of restoration apparently occupied all of the thousand 
years (Rev. 20:4), since it is called "the times (years) of 



restitution. " Just as death, like a huge monster, has devoured the 
human family gradually for six thousand years, so 

R87 : page 2 

death is to be destroyed gradually ("swallowed up") during the 
millennial reign, until, at its close, He shall have completely 
destroyed death, and him that has the power of death, that is, the 
devil. 

That this is the apostle's thought may be seen by referring to the 
prophecy from which he quotes. After describing the coming 
time of trouble in grandly awful and symbolic language, and the 
exaltation of the kingdom when "the Lord shall reign in Mount 
Zion," continues: "And He will destroy in this mountain 
(kingdom) the covering cast over all people, and the veil that is 
spread over all nations. He will swallow up death in victory." 
Thus our work is seen to be two-fold —destroying and removing 
sin and its effects, and thus restoring to man happiness, purity, 
and all that was lost through sin. But while our work really 
comes in the next age, let us not forget that if we are in full 
sympathy with the object of "our high calling," we will be 
interested in doing all in our power, in the present age, to 
counteract sin, and to restore mankind to harmony with our 
Father. We are thus ambassadors for God, as though He did 
beseech them through us: We ask them in Christ's stead; be ye 
reconciled to God. 2 Cor. 5:20. 



R87 : page 2 

FROM AND TO THE WEDDING. 

A brother requests our explanation of Luke 12:36, and Matt. 
25:10, intimating the possibility of a mistranslation in one of 
them. 

We have no fault to find with the translation nor do we know of 
any critic who materially alters either of these texts. The 
Diaglott renders Luke 12:36. "Be you like men waiting for their 
Master when he will return from the nuptial feasts; that when he 
comes and knocks they may instantly open to him. " And Matt. 
25:10, is rendered: "And while they were going away to buy, the 
Bridegroom came and they who were prepared entered with him 
to the nuptial feasts." 

The fact that one text speaks of going in to the marriage, and the 
other of a return from a marriage has troubled some and has 
given rise to the query: "May not Luke refer to a company not 
the bride, but coming after?" We think not, for the reason that 
the context addresses them as "Little flock"-vs. 32. The 
marriage (union) of Jesus and his church is so different in many 
respects from earthly marriages that it can be but imperfectly 



illustrated by them. In the earthly, the Bridegroom comes to the 
Bride's home and there they are married; but not so the 
heavenly. True the Bridegroom comes- "The Lord himself shall 
descend," but the church also goes— "We shall be caught up 
together to meet the Lord in the air," &c. There is in fact no one 
scene which could fully picture the event, therefore several are 
used. 

Our Lord comes as "a thief" upon the world and takes away his 
Bride. It is not to be in the general form of a marriage, rather an 
elopement. He has communicated to the virgin (chaste) church 
his design and instructed that during all the night she "sleep not 
as do others," (2 Thes. 4.) but be awake, robed, ready and 
eagerly watching the various signs promised. The earthly 
marriage feast at the Bride's home lasted an indefinite time and 
when it was over Bridegroom and Bride went to his home where 
all things were in readiness and the servants on the alert, robed 
in their best livery were watching and waiting to receive their 
Master and Mistress; and woe to the servant found careless or 
napping on this important occasion. Our Lord used this 
illustration to show the proper attitude of his church at his 
coming. They are to be on the alert, watching, robed and 
waiting, having their "loins girt about with truth," i.e., being 
nerved up, made strong by the truth and ready for any service. 
Our Bridegroom does not come to us after the marriage, but 
when he comes we are to be as those servants were under those 
circumstances. 

The Bride only, thus awake and expecting the Bridegroom hears 
his knock and opens to him. The sleeping world and drowsy 
worldly church, neither hear the knock nor heed his ("parousia") 
presence, but eat, drink, plant, build and marry as ever and 
"know not" of His presence. This scripture has, we believe, been 
largely fulfilled. The prophetic arguments have rapped loudly 
enough for some to hear who were awake and ready. They 
declare to us plainly that- 

"Our Lord has come to take us home; 
O hail happy day!" 

Yes we heard his knock and opened by faith and received him, 
and his words have been fulfilled- "Blessed are those servants." 
Yes truly blessed has been our experience since we recognized 
his presence and received him. Verily he has girded himself 
(become our servant) and caused us to sit down to meat 
(heavenly food,) and we have feasted and are still feasting upon 
Jesus and His word. We thank him that ours has been a 
continuous growth in grace and in the knowledge of our Lord 
Jesus, whom to know is life everlasting. True, we have long 
known him in a measure and have known much of his plan, &c, 
but our realization of his love and of the fullness which is in our 
"Head" and our experimental knowledge of "the deep things of 
God" have been greater than we could have supposed possible. 



It has been "a feast of fat things" of "wines (Joys) well refined." 
But this knock has not been heard by all the servants at once. It 
is an individual matter; each must hear for himself as Jesus 
further explains -Rev. 3:20 "Behold, I stand at the door and 
knock; if any man hear my voice and open the door, I will come 
in to him and sup with him and he with me. " The presence and 
knock began in the Fall of 1 874. It still continues and many have 
received him and are being feasted and prepared for the 
elopement. Soon from the field, mill and bed one shall be taken 
and another left- "caught up to meet (unite with) the Lord in the 
air. 

We understand the word to teach that those taken, although 
knowing neither the day nor hour of their taking will not be in 
darkness on the subject but will have discerned the Lord's 
presence, received him and been feasted before going to him. 
Have you heard his knock and opened to him? 

Let us next examine the parable of Matt. 25. 

"THE TEN VIRGINS." 

Unlike many of our Lord's parables this one is placed and fixed 
by the word "then. " Taken in connection with the preceding 
chapter, it is fixed as belonging to the last generation of the 
church living when the Lord comes. The kingdom of heaven is a 
term applicable to the church, which, from its establishment at 
Pentecost has always been God's kingdom in which He is King 
and over which his will is law. True, in the future it will be "set 
up" and then it will be more generally recognized by mankind 
but even now we are really his kingdom; and when it has nearly 
finished its course in the world- "Then shall the kingdom of 
heaven be likened to ten virgins who took their lamps and went 
forth to meet the Bridegroom. " 

The name virgin means chaste, pure; in the parable ten are made 
to represent a larger company of chaste ones in the church. The 
conditions of this parable have been fulfilled by the church of 
our day. At any other period as well as the last, the church might 
have been properly represented by virgins of any number, but of 
no other than the last could it be said: "They took their lamps 
and went forth to meet the Bridegroom," because not until this 
nineteenth century has the "lamp" ("Thy word is a lamp") been 
in the hands of the virgins-the church, to give them light on the 
subject of the Bridegroom's coming. 

During the three and a halftimes or 1260 years of Papal 
supremacy, ending A.D. 1798, these two witnesses (the old and 
new testaments) had been clothed in the sackcloth of a dead 
(Latin) language, but since that time it has been taken up by 
Bible and tract societies and scattered over the world by the 
million. And it is since this book has been thus among the 
virgins that its teaching of the coming kingdom and coming 



Bridegroom has begun to contradict the assumptions of Papacy— 
that it was his kingdom and its Pope his vicegerent. 

Just at a proper time then, as the word of God had begun to 
circulate freely, comes what is commonly known as the Miller 
movement. It was a movement among Christian people of all 
denominations, principally Methodists and Baptists, a general 
awakening, and included many of the best people in all of the 
churches. Mr. Wm. Miller, a very Godly man, (a baptist) was 
the prime mover in this country, though simultaneously Wolf 
and others were calling attention to the same subject in Europe 
and Asia; the real movement, however, was in our own land. 

But the parable mentions a going forth to meet, &c. What does 
this signify? This is another evidence of our stage of the church, 
for although 



(Continued on seventh page.) 
R87 : page 7 

From and To the Wedding. 

(Continued from second page.) 

the Bible had always taught the "second coming of Christ," yet 
it had been understood in so general a way that none were able 
to settle upon any definite time and say— then he will come; 
consequently there could be no such going forth to meet him, as 
is demanded by the parable. Now the case is changed, Wm. 
Miller's attention is attracted to and riveted upon the prophecies. 
He reads: "Unto 2300 days and the sanctuary shall be cleansed." 
He counts and finds that it would end in 1 843 or 1 844. He 
supposes the earth to be the sanctuary and expects its cleansing 
to be by literal fire. He, though a calm deliberate man, could not 
forbear to tell his fellows that so read the prophecies, and so he 
believed. It spread rapidly, among old and young alike, and 
many virgins after examining with the lamp, were convinced 
that 

R88 : page 7 

the word taught them to expect the coming of their Bridegroom 
in 1844; and on the strength of this faith they went forth to meet 
him. In going they walked by faith, not by sight, but they did 
what the virgins never had done before, because never before 
had the word, or lamp led them to thus definitely expect him. 
(We believe him to have erred both in what the sanctuary is and 
what the fire is.) 

Five of the virgins were wise and five were foolish. Of those 
who went forth, some were actuated by excitement, and carried 
along with the occasion, but others-the wise- not only had the 
zeal of the moment, but it was backed by a deep, heartfelt desire 



and spiritual yearning for the Bridegroom's presence. "While the 
Bridegroom tarried, they all slumbered and slept. " Their 
expectations of the coming of the Bridegroom, and burning of 
the world, met with disappointment. He "tarried," and they slept. 
They dreamed all sorts of foolish things, and various times for 
His coming, as illustrated by the various fanciful and fanatical 
views held by them during many years succeeding. 

At midnight, or during the night (the Greek word is not definite, 
like ours), there was a cry made: "Behold, the Bridegroom 
cometh; go ye out to meet Him. " Who made the cry is a matter 
of no consequence. The cry was made before morning too; i.e., 
the announcement and preaching that the Bridegroom was due 
to be here in 1 874, was made, as is well known by many of our 
readers. (We understand that morning began to dawn in 1873, 
where the 6,000 years from Adam ended.) It was made first 
among the Second Advent denomination. 

The evidences from scripture that the 6,000 years would end and 
the morning dawn in 1873, and that, with the morning the 
Bridegroom was due, was preached upon by a brother of very 
marked ability as a prophetic student, who also published a 
series of articles on the subject in the leading paper of that 
denomination, ("The World's Crisis") as well as afterward in a 
pamphlet, and finally as a monthly paper called "The Midnight 
Cry." The message attracted general attention from the people of 
that denomination, so that in a few issues its circulation ran up 
to 15,000, or more than all other papers devoted to the subject of 
the Second Advent together. This, we believe, fulfilled this 
parable, not that Advent people alone are virgins, but they were 
the part of the company that were at that time looking for the 
Bridegroom, but asleep and unconscious as to the time of His 
coming. 

"Then all those virgins arose and trimmed their lamps." Their 
lamps once pointed them to 1 844, but He "tarried. " A cry is now 
made that the tarrying time was thirty years (from 44 to 74), as 
paralleled by the thirty years of the Jewish age, from the birth of 
Jesus until He "came," being thirty years of age. This cry 
proclaimed to the virgins that the "2,300 days" did end in 1844, 
but that the thing expected was wrong. Instead of the "sanctuary 
cleansing" meaning the burning of the world, it is now seen that 
the sanctuary, or God's dwelling-place, is the church, and 
therefore it is the church that is to be cleansed. It is to be 
cleansed by the separation of the wise and foolish virgins at the 
end of the tarrying time- 1 874- when the Bridegroom came. 
When the cry is heard, the virgins begin to awaken. Some have 
of the oil (the spirit) in their vessels (themselves), as well as in 
their lamps (the word). These are able to see. To see what? That 
the Bridegroom is coming merely? No, they all knew that, but it 
enables them to see the time of his coming and to again go forth 
by faith as before. 



As the lamp shed forth light on time at the first going forth, so it 
shed light again on the same subject —the time— and that time 
was 1 874. And bear in mind that the cry is made before 
morning-in the night, and that it announces the "Bridegroom" 
and further, if at all right— if it was the true cry, "the Bridegroom 
came" as it had announced. 

All of this has been wonderfully fulfilled, it seems to us. It was 
first seen that the night (6000 years) would end with 1873. 
There the Millennial morn began to dawn. And the monthly, 
called the "Midnight Cry" ceased because the name was no 
longer applicable when the morning had begun to dawn. The 
editor of that magazine tersely remarked (p. 30), "Will some one 
inform me how a "Midnight Cry" can be made in the morning?" 
The division between the wise and foolish virgins, the one part 
seeing the 1 874 time as taught in God's sure word of prophecy, 
and the others interested at first, but unable upon examination of 
the word to see any light on the subject, is illustrated by the fact 
that the 15000 readers of the "Midnight Cry" dwindled down to 
about 2000. The others went to the "Eastern Question," &c, to 
look for light, confessing that they no longer had light from the 
sure word of prophecy on the time of the Bridegroom's coming. 
They took the paper, examined the arguments and apparently 
sought to get oil or light from the wise, but it must be an inward 
oil (the indwelling Spirit) that will reveal some of the deep 
things of God. Of this Spirit the wise can have enough for 
themselves but never enough to spare. Each virgin must buy for 
herself. 

While the advent people have been used to a large degree as 
representatives in the movements of the parable, yet we do not 
think that it is confined to them, nor to people who were 
interested in the movements prior to the coming of our 
Bridegroom. (1874.) The writer, among many others now 
interested, was sound asleep, in profound ignorance of the cry, 
etc., until 1876, when being awakened he trimmed his lamp (for 
it is still very early in the morning.) 

It showed him clearly that the Bridegroom had come and that he 
is living "in the days of the Son of Man." Yes the Bridegroom 
has come and is making up his jewels, and early before the 
servants of the house or the outside world are awake the chaste 
virgin church will be caught away to be united to her Lord. 

"They that were ready went in with him to the marriage. " Some 
time ago we supposed that this going in meant translation, but it 
now seems clear to us that it is a going in to a condition rather 
than a place; that it implies a withdrawing from the world and a 
coming in to a condition of special preparation for the marriage. 
This too has been fulfilled to a great extent, and particularly of 
late. The theme of most of our writers and public and private 
speakers has been Holiness— the "Wedding Garment" -for 
without holiness no man shall see the Lord. And this preparation 



still continues. Some are just awakening, and others are more 
nearly dressed in the spotless robes of Christ's righteousness. It 
is a time of helping each other to put on the wedding dress. 
("His Wife hath made herself ready.") 

Another parable (Matt. 22:1 1) shows a work which must take 
place before the marriage, viz. : "When the King came in to see 
the guests." This shows an inspection among those assembled, 
and one not having the wedding garment is cast out from the 
light of the position into which all had come; cast into "outer 
darkness," the darkness which covers the world on this subject; 
the darkness in which the foolish virgins were when their lamps 
would not burn. These so cast out are not "counted worthy to 
escape the things coming on the world, and consequently have 
part in the time of trouble, when there will be "weeping and 
gnashing of teeth. " 

But when will our Lord be present as King? We answer that the 
parallels of the Jewish and Gospel ages, so perfect throughout, 
indicate this point also. It was just three and a half years after 
John had announced Jesus as the Bridegroom (John 3:29) to the 
typical house of Israel, that He came to them as their "King." 
"Behold, thy King cometh unto thee" was fulfilled the day Jesus 
rode into Jerusalem on the ass. The parallel point in the Gospel 
age shows Him to have been due here as King in the Spring of 
1878, just three and a half years after He came as Bridegroom, 
and some time this parable must be fulfilled, and the King 
inspect the company assembled for the marriage supper. So at 
some time after 1878 we may look to see some (we wish there 
were none) cast out of the light into which all had come. As the 
light was on the time of the Bridegroom's coming, it would seem 
to teach that some would come to disbelieve the Bridegroom's 
presence. Why? Because not clothed with the wedding garment. 
Probably they will trust in, and "go about to establish their own 
righteousness," which is as "filthy rags," and endeavor to climb 
up some other way, " and win their way to eternal life. 

After inspection, we expect translation -to be "changed in a 
moment, in the twinkling of an eye"- to be "made like unto 
Christ's glorious body," and to be "caught up to meet the Lord in 
the air." This will be our marriage— being made like and united 
to Him. But the supper is apparently delayed until the company 
of our loved brethren -those who go through the trouble, and 
"wash their robes," etc.-shall have "come up out of (after) the 
great tribulation," because, after the marriage of the Lamb, the 
message goes forth: "Blessed are they that are called unto the 
marriage supper of the Lamb." (Rev. 19:9). Among this great 
company, whom no man can number, will doubtless be many of 
the foolish virgins. They have lost the position and honors of the 
Bride, but evidently, ultimately get oil and may gain a place 
among "the virgins, her companions that follow her." Psa. 14:14. 



When the Bridegroom says, in answer to their appeal, "I 
recognize you not," we believe it has reference to His not 
recognizing any as part of His Bride when once that company is 
complete, or the door to that position closed. 

Have you heard the cry, the knock announcing our Bridegroom's 
presence? Are you awake? Are you seeing to it that you are 
clothed with the righteousness of Christ as with a garment. See 
that, under His direction, you have it "without spot or wrinkle or 
any such thing," and help one another, "and so much the more as 
you see the day approaching," remembering that it is written, 
"The Lamb's wife hath made herself ready. " Rev. 19:7. 



R195 : page 3 

WAITING AND WATCHING. 

Waiting and watching the livelong day, 
Lifting the voice of her heart to pray; 
She stands in her sorrow the bride and queen, 
Counting the hours that lie between. 

Lone as a dove, on a storm-swept sea, 
Teaching her heart hope's minstrelsy; 
With a cheerful note, though a weary wing, 
She learns o'er sorrow to soar and sing. 

Abroad through the earth is a sound of war, 
Distress among nations, wide and far; 
And the failing of strong men's hearts for fear 
Of the dreadful things that are drawing near. 

Famine and pestilence stalk abroad; 
Scoffers are slighting the Word of God; 
And the love of many is waxing cold; 
Dimmed is the sheen of the once fine gold. 

But she stands in her safety, the bride and queen, 
Leaning as only the loved can lean 
On the heart that broke in its love for her, 
When bearing the burden she could not bear. 

-British Evangelist. 
R89 : page 3 

THE TWO LIKENESSES. 

"There are two likenesses spoken of in the Bible— the likeness 
of men, and the likeness of God. From several scriptures it is 
evident these cannot be the same, though they are sometimes 
confounded in the minds of the people. David says: "I shall be 



satisfied when I awake with thy likeness." Psa. 17:15. As much 
as to say I am not satisfied now, because I am not in thy 
likeness. We know the Psalmist had the form and likeness of 
man; hence man is not in the likeness of God. If it be claimed 
that this was a prophecy of Christ, the conclusion can not be 
weakened, but rather strengthened, on account of positive 
statements. "Who being in the form of God, thought it not 
robbery to be equal with God: But made Himself of no 
reputation, and took upon Him the form of a servant, and was 
made in the likeness of men." Phil. 2:6,7. 

Here we have a clear statement of the condescension of Christ; 
in leaving His own exalted condition- "The glory He had with 
the Father before the world was"— and coming down to the 
condition of man. He had the nature and form of God, and took 
not the nature of Angels. Heb. 2; but the seed of Abraham, the 
nature and form of man. But if man is in the nature and form of 
God then the condescension of Christ exists only in name. 
"Though He was rich, yet for your sakes He became poor, that 
ye, through His poverty, might be rich. " This passage gives us 
the object of His condescension, to enrich us. But the value of 
this offering of Christ depends upon the depth of our poverty, or 
the contrast between what He was and what He became. Or the 
difference between what we are and what we may become 
through Him. He came down to our level that we might go up to 
His level. He took our nature and form, that we might become 
partakers of the Divine Nature, and in due time be made like 
Him when we shall see Him as He is. 

Wondrous love and abasement on His part, glorious exaltation 
on our part! But all these scriptures mean nothing, if human 
nature and Divine Nature are one and the same; or if man is in 
the likeness of God. 

We, makes a distinction between the terms, nature and form as 
applied to persons, the former being the foundation of the latter. 
The nature is in the seed, but properly speaking, the form is not. 
The apple nature, in a seed, will produce an apple tree. The tree 
has the form. Human nature produces human forms, and Divine 
nature produces Divine forms. Those who in this age become 
partakers of the Divine nature, have the assurance, that "when 
He shall appear we shall be like Him. " "Who shall change our 
vile body that it may be fashioned like unto His glorious body, " 
&c. Phil. 3. 

The terms form, likeness and image are used, in reference to 
persons interchangeably, and apply primarily to what we term 
body, though it may be proper to use them also in reference to 
mental conditions, as when the Heart is used to represent the 
mind. "Son give me thine heart." "I will create within you a new 
heart." 



The term flesh as used in the New Testament, evidently refers to 
humanity as a whole and not to what covers our bones, in 
common parlance called flesh. "That which is born of the flesh 
is flesh, and that which is born of the spirit is spirit." John 3:6. 

This passage is not designated to teach whether man is unit, dual 
or tripartite, (one, two or three) but simply, that which is 
produced by human beings is human, and that which is produced 
by the Divine Spirit is Divine. "The Word was made flesh," 
means simply, what is elsewhere taught in scripture. That "He 
was made in the likeness of men"— became a human being. As a 
human being— born of the flesh, he was a Jew. But Jesus has 
been born again, not of the flesh, but of the spirit; "The firstborn 
from the dead" and as such is "declared to be the Son of God. " 

That human beings as represented by "The first man Adam" are 
"of the Earth, Earthy" is clearly taught by Paul, 1 Cor. 15:47. 
Man made of the dust, is sustained from the ground, and returns 
thither again. "Naked came I from the Earth, and naked shall I 
return thither again. " All who are born of the flesh "bear the 
image of the Earthy." (Ver. 48,49.) Christ Himself in becoming 
our brother on the plane of the flesh, bore the same image. But 
now, born of the spirit having "returned to the glory he had with 
the Father before the world was." "He is the brightness of His 
(Father's) glory, and the express image of His Person." Heb. 1:3. 
That is, He was in the likeness of man, but He is in the likeness 
of God. Here we have the two likenesses fully developed in the 
same person. First the Natural, and afterward the Spiritual. 

That the foundation for that spiritual body, was laid during His 
earthly life, in the spirit given Him without measure, we fully 
believe, but He was not, as a man (to leave out the idea of His 
Preexistence for in that He is an exception and not our 
Forerunner, of course) a fully developed spiritual being, until 
His Resurrection which was His second birth. He being the 
"First Born from the dead." Col. 1:18. He had the Divine Nature, 
before He was put to death but he was in human form. 

In His life, death, and resurrection, or in the process of 
development from the lower to the higher, from the Natural to 
the Spiritual, He is the Forerunner of His saints; the "Head," that 
in all things He might have the pre-eminence. Col. 1:18. He 
opens the way and Himself is our Leader. All who ever enter the 
Heavenly life, and bear the Divine Image, as Sons of God, must 
go the way He went. 

While in the flesh, which is the first or lowest stage of 
development, they, by the spirit of God imparted, become 
partakers of the Divine Nature. They are thus begotten to a 
lively hope, which hope is consummated when they, like their 
Head, are borne from the dead. Those thus begotten by virtue of 
the spirit given them, call God, Father, claiming Divine Sonship. 
By faith they grasp the glorious realities of that Blessed Hope, 



and so count themselves, as God also counts them, in Christ, as 
on the Risen side, to die no more. This is indeed a glorious 
privilege, and we can exclaim, as John says: "Now are we the 
sons of God, but," we add, which tends both to humility and 
encouragement, "It doth not yet appear what we shall be, but we 
know that when He shall appear, we shall be like Him, for we 
shall see Him as He is." 

This order of development must be observed by us as it is by the 
Lord. "First, the natural, &c. " Some overlooking the order, and 
quoting from Paul, "There is a natural body, and there is a 
spiritual body," conclude at once that both bodies exist together, 
and that at death the spiritual body leaves or is withdrawn from 
the natural body, and that this is the Resurrection. By this view 
they are forced to ignore the Apostolic teaching concerning the 
Resurrection and the coming of Christ. 

Nothing is more simple than that death and resurrection are not 
at the same time. "As in Adam all die, so in Christ shall all be 
made alive, but every man in his own order. Christ, the first 
fruits, afterward they that are Christ's at His coming. Even 
Christ was not raised until the third day after His death. But they 
that are Christ's, no matter when they died, are raised at His 
coming. "At the last trump," says Paul, and all must admit the 
seventh or last trumpet did not sound all the way through, as 
men have been dying. 

The stress laid by some on the present tense of the verb, be, in 
the passage: "There is a natural body and there is a spiritual 
body," is of no value as an argument. It proves nothing. "Unto 
us a child is born," spoken by Isaiah hundreds of years before 
the birth of Christ, is understood by all. In common language we 
say: "As the twig is bent, the tree is inclined." All understand it 
is first the twig and afterward the tree. "As is the child, so is the 
man." 

Describing the order of seasons in a year we may say: There is 
Spring, it is followed by Summer, &c. Paul was speaking on the 
same principle in reference to the order of human development, 
from the lower to the higher; and of its stages he says: "There is 
a natural body and there is a spiritual body." (1 Cor. 15:44.) 

The first half of the same verse shows that they do not exist 
together, but, "It is sown a natural body, it is raised a spiritual 
body. " But as if he were anticipating the caviling which would 
come, and determined to give a clear offset to it, he says: 
"Howbeit that was not first which was spiritual, but that which is 
natural, (is first) and AFTERWARD that which is spiritual. " 
(Ver. 46.) The whole passage is luminous with the glorious hope 
of Eternal life and glory at the coming of Christ, the Life Giver, 
at the last trump. "As we have borne (in this life) the image of 
the earthly, we shall also (in the future life) bear the image of 
the heavenly." (Ver. 49.) Glorious promise and hope. Here again 



is the positive evidence that here, in the flesh, men have not 
attained the likeness or image of God, but that it is something to 
be attained, when that which is perfect is come. 

It is, we are well aware, the general impression, and not without 
apparent good reason, that man was at first created, and is, in the 
image of God. "Let us make man in our own likeness." But the 
harmony will be seen by those, and those only, who will take a 
glimpse at God's revealed plan as a whole, and remember that 
all that is done on the plane of the flesh is preparatory, and that 
the natural life is only the first step in the plan of development. 

It may be said that the first is typical of the second, or higher, to 
which the lower points. The whole plan is built on the two 
phases, "First the natural and afterward the spiritual." There are 
two creations, two Adams, two Eves, two marriages, two births 
and two lives, and consequently the two likenesses. 

R90 : page 3 

Christ, as already seen, was Adam-like, the first to enter the 
second, or higher life. 

R90 : page 4 

By his life, drawn from his side, so to speak, the church, Eve- 
like, derives her life, and being called out during the gospel, 
enters fully on her higher life at his coming to claim his Bride, 
when the marriage takes place. 

Then the plan reaches the world; as on the plane of the flesh, 
none entered life excepting Adam and his wife until after their 
marriage, so none enter the higher— the Eternal Life— excepting 
Christ and his wife -the Church-until after the marriage of the 
Lamb. Then follows the Regeneration. 

The life to come is the perfect life, and until that is reached, we 
must ever speak of God's plan as in process and not complete. 

The New Testament is the complement of the Old, and it clearly 
reveals when and how we are to attain the maturity— the glory, 
the perfect day. The prophetic eye of the Psalmist looked 
forward, and seeing the perfection of character and person 
combined, he exclaimed, "I will behold thy face in 
Righteousness. I shall be satisfied when I awake in thy 
likeness." (Psalm 17:15.) 



R90 : page 4 



STAND FAST. 



Stand fast therefore in the liberty wherewith Christ hath made 
us free, and be not entangled again with the yoke of bondage. 
Gal. 5:1. To stand, is to adhere to fixed principles; or in other 
words, to be steadfast, immovable, always abounding in the 



work of the Lord, forasmuch as ye know that your labor is not in 
vain in the Lord. 1 Cor. 15:58. We are frequently exhorted to 
stand; to be steadfast; to continue, etc. Watch ye, stand fast in 
the faith, quit you like men, be strong. 1 Cor. 16:13. Stand fast 
in one spirit, with one mind striving for the faith of the gospel. 
Phil. 1:27. 

But no one can stand in his own strength; so we are admonished 
to stand fast in the Lord. Phil. 4:1. Take heed, brethren, lest 
there be in any of you an evil heart of unbelief, in departing 
from the living God. But exhort one another daily, while it is 
called to-day, lest any of you be hardened through the 
deceitfulness of sin. For we are made partakers of Christ, if we 
hold the beginning of our confidence steadfast unto the end. 
Heb. 3:12,14. 

Be sober, be vigilant, because your adversary, the devil, as a 
roaring lion, walketh about, seeking whom he may devour; 
whom resist steadfast in faith. 2 Pet. 5:8-9. 

Stand fast therefore, in the liberty, wherewith Christ hath made 
you free. But what is the liberty, or freedom, which we have in 
Christ? But now being made free from sin, and become servants 
to God, ye have your fruit unto holiness, and the end-not 
beginning-everlasting life. Rom. 6:22. Whereby are given unto 
us exceeding great and precious promises; that by these ye 
might be partakers of the divine nature, having escaped the 
corruption that is in the world, through lust. 

And besides this, giving all diligence, add to your faith, virtue or 
fortitude; and to virtue, knowledge; and to knowledge, 
temperance; and to temperance— or self-control, Godliness; and 
to Godliness, brotherly kindness; and to brotherly kindness, 
love; for if these things be in you and abound, they shall make 
you neither barren nor unfruitful in the knowledge of our Lord 
Jesus Christ. 2 Pet. 1:4-8. Therefore has reference to something 
previously stated; so we read in Gal. 4. : When we were children, 
(under the law,) we were in bondage under the elements of the 
world; but when the fullness of the time was come, God sent 
forth his son, made of a woman, made under the law, to redeem 
them that were under law, that we might receive the adoption of 
sons. And because ye are sons, God hath sent forth the Spirit of 
His Son into your hearts, crying Abba, Father. Wherefore thou 
art no more a servant, but a Son; and if a son, then an heir of 
God through Christ. How be it then, when ye knew not God, ye 
did service unto them which by nature are not Gods; but now 
after that ye have known God, or rather are known of God, how 
turn ye again to the weak and beggarly elements, whereunto ye 
desire again to be in bondage? 

And you, that were some time alienated and enemies in your 
mind by wicked works, yet now hath he reconciled in the body 
of his flesh through death, to present you holy and unblamable 



and unreprovable in his sight; if ye continue in the faith 
grounded and settled, and be not moved away from the hope of 
the gospel, which ye have heard. Col. 1:21-23. 

As ye therefore have received Christ Jesus the Lord, so walk ye 
in him; rooted and built up in him, and stablished in the faith, as 
ye have been taught, abounding therein with thanksgiving. 
Beware lest any man spoil you through philosophy and vain 
deceit, after the rudiments of the world, and not after Christ. 
Col. 2:6-8. Wherefore if ye be dead with Christ from the 
rudiments of the world, why as though living in the world, are 
ye subject to ordinances, after the commandments and doctrines 
of men? Touch not; taste not; handle not; which (ordinances) are 
all to perish with their using. Col. 2:20-22. 

Again, in Gal. 4., freedom in Christ is illustrated by an allegory. 
Tell me, ye that desire to be under the law, do ye not hear the 
law? For it is written, that Abraham had two sons, the one by a 
bond-maid, the other by a free woman. But he who was of the 
bond- woman was born after the flesh; but he of the free woman 
was by promise. (They which are the children of the flesh, these 
are not the children of God; but the children of the promise are 
counted for the seed. Rom. 9:8). 

Which things are an allegory; for these are the two covenants; 
the one from Mount Sinai, which gendereth to bondage, which 
is Agar. For this Agar is, or signifies, Mount Sinai in Arabia, 
and answereth to Jerusalem which now is, and is in bondage 
with her children. But Jerusalem which is above is free, which is 
the mother of us all. Now we brethren, as Isaac was, are the 
children of promise. But as then he that was born after the flesh 
persecuted him that was born after the Spirit, even so it is now. 
Nevertheless what saith the scripture? Cast out the bond-woman 
and her son; for the son of the bond- woman shall not be heir 
with the son of the free woman. So then, brethren, we are not 
children of the bond- woman, but of the free. 

Stand fast therefore in the liberty or freedom, wherewith Christ 
hath made us free, and be not entangled again with the yoke of 
bondage. In this condition, we are exempt from the works of the 
old law, and are under a new law. The law of the Spirit of life in 
Christ Jesus, hath made us free from the law of sin and death. 
Rom. 8:2. Behold, I, Paul, say unto you, that if ye be 
circumcised, Christ shall profit you nothing. For I testify again 
to every man that is circumcised, that he is debtor to do the 
whole law. Christ is become of no effect unto you, whosoever of 
you is justified by the law; ye are fallen from grace. For we, 
through the Spirit wait for the hope of righteousness by faith. 
For in Jesus Christ neither circumcision availeth anything, nor 
uncircumcision, but faith which worketh by love. 

Ye did run well; who did hinder you that ye should not obey the 
truth? 



There are many things to overcome, requiring constant effort; a 
continual putting off the old man with his deeds, and putting on 
the new man; being renewed in the inner man, day by day; 
which is Christ in you, the hope of glory. 

Brethren, ye have been called unto liberty; only use not liberty 
for an occasion to the flesh, but by love serve one another. Walk 
in the Spirit, and ye shall not fulfill the lust of the flesh. There is 
a warfare between the flesh and the spirit, but if ye be led of the 
spirit, ye are not under law. The works of the flesh are manifest, 
which are these: fornication, impurity, debauchery, idolatry, 
sorcery, enmities, quarrels, jealousies, resentments, altercations, 
factions, sects, envyings, inebrieties, revelings, and things 
similar to these; respecting which I tell you before, even as I 
previously told you; that those who practice such things, shall 
not inherit the kingdom 

page 4 

of God. 

But the fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, forbearance, 
kindness, goodness, fidelity, meekness, self-control; against 
such things there is no law. And they that are Christ's have 
crucified the flesh, with the affections and desires. If we live in 
the Spirit, let us walk also in the Spirit [Diaglott]. 

B. W. K. 



page 4 

Thoughts on the Lord's Prayer. 
Matt. 6:9-13 

The 17 chapter of John is more properly the Lord's prayer, the 
earnest expression of his own heart. This, usually so called, is 
rather the disciple's prayer, learned from the Lord in answer to 
the request, "Lord teach us to pray. " 

Coming from His lips it can not be unimportant. We are 
impressed with its simplicity, brevity, and comprehensiveness. It 
contains no "vain repetitions." Christians should follow Christ 
rather than the heathen, who "think they shall" be heard for 
much speaking." Ver. 7. Prayer is not designed as a lecture of 
suggestion or instruction to the Lord, for he knoweth what 
things we need before we ask. Ver. 8. And yet he teaches us to 
pray. It seems important that we should feel our need, and 
dependence on the Lord as the Giver. 

R90 : page 4 

To express our wants makes a deeper impression on our own 
hearts. Even vocal prayer has thus an important use, though we 
are glad our Father recognizes even our thoughts, and "is able to 



do exceeding abundantly above all that we ask or think. " Eph. 

3:20. 

We do not regard this as designed for a stereotyped form of 
prayer. There may be as much danger of mere formalism in 
repeating this as any other form of prayer. 

It is the manner of the prayer on which Christ lays the stress. 
"After this manner, therefore, pray ye." It is clear, childlike and 
pointed; and it is in harmony with God's plan. We should know 
what we want, and ask expecting to receive. Prayer must be 
intelligent in order to be of faith, for faith is not feeling, but a 
depending on God's promises; it is taking him at his word. 

It is interesting to observe the divisions of this prayer. It has 
three parts. The first relates to God, the second to others, or the 
general cause, and the third to ourselves. This is important. True 
prayer is 

R91 : page 4 

humble worshipful and unselfish— "Our Father" first, ourselves 
last. He should be recognized first because of what he is and 
what he deserves. Let his sacred Name be spoken with 
reverence. A careless use of God's name is profanity. Morality 
relates to human relations Christianity includes both human and 
Divine. A proper recognition of our relations to God will best 
secure the performance of our duty to humanity. As God in man 
is man's hope, so to realize God, is the mainspring of life. For 
this reason doubtless God is placed first in the arrangement of 
the prayer. 

R91 : page 5 

The prayer recognizes the plan of the ages, and the 
dispensational steps of advancement; and to lose sight of God's 
order of development is as unreasonable as to expect harvest 
without seedtime, or fruit before the tree is grown. "Our Father" 
savors of the Gospel dispensation, which was dawning when 
Christ taught his disciples. Former dispensations revealed God 
as Creator, Lawgiver and Judge, and the terrors of Sinai were 
characteristic of the effect produced on the minds of the people. 
The gospel reveals him as a Father, and we as brethren. That 
was bondage; but God hath not given us the spirit of bondage 
again to fear, but the spirit of adoption whereby we cry Abba- 
Father. Rom. 8:15. 

The former church were mere servants and to them Christ came, 
but to as many as received him he gave power to become sons. 
John 1:12. This new name brings new and exalted privileges, 
even fellowship or unity with God and his Son Jesus Christ. 
This gives a new basis for action, love instead of fear and leads 
to certain success. The complete realization of this unity, is the 
prime element of our Blessed Hope. For this the Savior prayed- 
the marriage -"That they all may be one," "even as we are one," 



"made perfect in one" "that the world may believe." John 17:20- 
23. This unity is thus shown to be not only the Christian's life 
and hope, but also the basis of the world's hope. Certain it is that 
the world cannot be saved until after the church is glorified. 

Do we, when we say "Our Father" realize how much it means. 
He that does not receive Christ as his Savior and elder Brother 
cannot consistently or truthfully say "Our Father." This is the 
prayer of the disciples of Christ, or the son of God, not by Adam 
but by the Divine Nature. 

The prayer is prophetic. The second part shows this. In this it 
resembles the 17th of John. The fact that they were taught to 
pray "Thy Kingdom come" is an indication of God's plan, and 
the assurance of its success. Prayer moved by the spirit will be 
answered. "Thy will be done in Earth" finds its assurance in the 
promise. "The Earth shall be filled with the knowledge of the 
Lord," and its many kindred statements. The coming of the 
kingdom must precede the state of holiness referred to. In "Thy 
kingdom come, Thy will be done, " the relation of cause and 
effect between the two parts of the sentence is too often lost 
sight of. The prayer, "Thy will be done," is certainly appropriate 
to cases where, as individuals, we are subjected, in God's 
arrangements, to trying circumstances, as when Jesus said, "Not 
as I will, but as Thou wilt. " But is it not too often applied where 
the circumstances are not of God, but of our own arrangement? 
That this second phase of the prayer is for others, more than for 
ourselves, will be most appreciated by those who know the 
glorious truth that the object for which Christ and the saints will 
reign is to bless the nations. With this in view, the Christian's 
hope is unselfish. As the joy set before Christ was the well- 
being of others, for which he endured the cross, and despised the 
shame, so for the same joy we can endure hardness as good 
soldiers of Jesus Christ; and as now in part, by and by to the full 
extent, we shall "enter into the joy of our Lord." Whoever can 
appreciate this fact concerning the coming kingdom, must of 
necessity appreciate the gospel dispensation and its privileges. 
As we are being nourished for Christ and His work, all personal 
benefits are given by Our Father, and received by us as a means 
to a great end, and we can, for this reason, pray, "Father, give 
us"— to use for Thee. 

J. H. P. 



R91 : page 5 



NUMBER SEVEN. 



Seven is a peculiar and much-used number in the Bible. It is the 
basis of reckoning in many prophetic arguments. It is what may 
be termed a complete number. It represents the whole of that to 



which it is applied, and the whole is often divided into seven 
parts. It may be to others, as well as ourselves, both interesting 
and profitable to consider the relation of this number to the 
various elements of God's revealed plan. 

The thoughtful reader of the Bible may have been impressed 
with the oft-repeated use of this number. It suggests to our 
minds, in harmony with many other things, the idea of order in 
the plan. The idea of the Bible being a chance book cannot long 
be entertained by those who can see the systematic development 
in its revelations. We believe the veil will be removed from the 
face of the nations (Isa. 25:7), by the manifestation of long- 
hidden truths, whatever means God may use to bring it about, 
and it is doubtless the duty and privilege of all who have any 
degree of light, to let it shine. 

The first use of the number seven in the Bible is in the formation 
of the week. The creation week was seven days. We do not 
assert that they were each twenty-four hours in length. A day is 
any specified period of time. The twenty-four hour day, as is 
well known, is caused by the revolution of the earth on its axis. 
The evening and morning of such a day are caused by the sun's 
shining on each part of the earth half the time during the daily 
revolution. For this reason it seems clear that the creation days 
could not have been mere twenty-four hour days, because the 
record shows that the sun was not made to shine on the earth 
until the fourth creation day. Gen. 1:14-19. Those days were 
doubtless long periods, as geologists claim, and yet the principle 
is made the basis of our ordinary week. Why should there be 
seven days in a week rather than some other number? We regard 
it, of course, as of Divine arrangement. Attempts have been 
made to change it, as when the French arranged one day in ten 
for rest, but it proved a failure. This cycle of seven is not caused 
by astronomy, as are the length of the day and the year. We 
believe it is caused by the Divine impression of God's plan of 
salvation on the history of mankind. Can any skeptical friend 
suggest a better reason for this otherwise arbitrary arrangement? 

There are many reasons for believing that the seven days of a 
week are typical of the seven thousand years of the world's 
history. The statement that "One day is with the Lord as a 
thousand years, and a thousand years as one day" (2 Pet. 3:8), is 
not proof of the position taken, but it suggests that a thousand 
years, rather than a million or some other number, is one of the 
kinds of day used in God's plan. According to the Bible 
chronology, with which many of our readers are more or less 
familiar, the six thousand years from the creation of Adam 
ended in the year 1873, and the seventh thousand is therefore 
commenced. Not only is the number seven made prominent, but 
in many cases the seventh is made specially prominent. In six 
days the Lord made heaven and earth, but the seventh day is the 
Sabbath. This prominence of the seventh day holds good in the 



week of creation, the ordinary week and the week of thousands. 
The number seven is made prominent in several ways between 
the creation and the coming out of Israel from Egypt, but up to 
that time there is no Bible evidence that the Lord commanded 
the observance of the seventh day, or that anyone did observe it, 
or that anyone was punished for its non-observance. That the 
seventh day of the creation week is the rest-day of the Lord, and 
that He set it apart for some great purpose, are both true. Gen. 
2:2,3. That the same principle of six days of work and the 
seventh day for rest (not any day of the seven, but the seventh), 
was afterward made the basis of the ordinary week, is also true. 
Ex. 20:8-1 1. But there are reasons for believing that the grand 
object of the Lord in setting apart the seventh day, was to make 
it a type of the Great Sabbath, or seventh thousand years. It may 
be asked: "If the six thousand years are ended, and the seventh 
thousand is the Sabbath, why do so many of the conditions of 
the times past still continue? We believe even this is 
foreshadowed in the stated facts concerning the seventh day of 
the creation week. The work of the six days extended into and 
was ended in the seventh. "On the seventh day God ended his 
work, and He rested on the seventh day." Gen. 2:2. This double 
statement has often been overlooked, but the first is as true as 
the second, and there is a meaning in both. 

There are many evidences, which have been given from time to 
time, that the Millennium is to be introduced by a time of 
trouble, in which existing organizations are to be removed, as 
rubbish, to make way for the verdure of peace and righteousness 
which is to follow. But there is another phase of this subject in 
which we are specially interested. The closing work of the old 
creation, before the generation of the family began, was getting 
a wife for Adam, and it would therefore appear that this was the 
work extended into the beginning of the seventh day. It is often 
said that man is the noblest work of God; "but the woman is the 
glory of the man. " 1 Cor. 11:7. This progression, from the lower 
to the higher, in creation, illustrates the progression, in God's 
plan of the ages. The last work of the new creation, before the 
millennial work, is getting a wife-the 

R92 : page 5 

church— for the Second Adam, and, according to the evidences, 
this work is extended into the beginning of the seventh thousand 
years. With this in mind, we may see a significance in the 
promise of Christ to the overcomer: "I will give him the 
morning star." Rev. 2:28. Christ is called both the "Morning 
Star," and the "Sun of Righteousness," and these seem to be 
related to each other as the "day dawn" and the "perfect day." 
When Christ rose from the dead, on the first day of the week, it 
was "early, when it was yet dark." John 20:1. It was in the dawn 
of the day, (Matt. 28:1), and this, together with the many 
evidences, seem to show that the same is to be true of the church 



in the dawn of this great day. It is during this day-dawn, or 
transition between the Gospel Age and the Millennium, that 
Babylon is to go down to rise no more, as a millstone cast into 
the sea; and when this takes place, the holy apostles and 
prophets are called upon to rejoice over the destruction of that 
corrupt system. Rev. 18:20,21. The inference is, that the 
resurrection of these holy men of old takes place before Babylon 
falls. Then, indeed, they would have the "morning star," and it 
would be very early in the morning, while it is yet dark to the 
world at large. It seems that it will require the terrible events of 
the day of wrath to awaken the world from its stupor, and bring 
them to the consciousness of the presence of the "King of Kings 
and Lord of Lords." There are several otherwise dark sayings 

R92 : page 6 

of our Lord, that seem clear with the idea that the seven 
thousand years are known as seven days. In answer to the 
statement of the Pharisees, "Get thee out, and depart hence, for 
Herod will kill thee," He said: "Go ye, and tell that fox: Behold, 
I cast out devils, and I do cures to-day and to-morrow, and the 
third day I shall be perfected." Luke 13:31,32. These days could 
not have been twenty-four-hour days in any case. The third day 
could not have been the day of His death (even if that could 
have brought perfection), for in the next verse He added: 
"Nevertheless I must walk to-day, and to-morrow, and the day 
following, for it cannot be that a prophet perish out of 
Jerusalem. " This shows that He was not to be put to death until 
He had reached Jerusalem, and that it was not accomplished on 
the third day from the time He spoke. His use of the word day in 
two senses in the same connection, without an explanation, is 
similar to His use of the word death in two senses in the 
statement: "Let the dead bury their dead. " Even had He been put 
to death on the very day He used the language, He could have 
had no reference to His resurrection on the third literal day, for 
He did not do cures and cast out devils when He was dead. 
There was a complete suspension of both physical and spiritual 
healing from the time He left their house desolate until the day 
of Pentecost. Take the broad view that He spoke not merely of 
Himself, but of the body of which He is the Head, and that 
instead of twenty-four-hour days He meant thousand-year-days, 
and all seems plain. 

It was near the beginning of the fifth thousand years that He 
spoke. That was the "to-day" of His language; "to-morrow" was 
the sixth thousand, and the "third day" is the seventh thousand. 
We cannot doubt that the physical cures that Jesus performed 
while in the flesh were used, partly, to represent the higher work 
of the healing of spiritual maladies. On this principle, He, in and 
by His body— the church-has been doing His work, but in only a 
limited and imperfect manner. The mortal phase of the church is 
always called His body- even "the whole body;" Eph 4:16 -but 



it is so only in a preparatory and representative sense. He is not 
perfected until all, both the living and the dead members, are 
glorified with Him. As Eve was the glory of Adam, and his 
complement, so of the church in relation to Christ. 

While doing the work of Christ during the fifth and sixth 
thousand-year-days, the church has also been called upon to 
suffer with Christ, and to have conformity to His death. Phil. 
3:10. Another dark saying of Jesus seems to represent this phase 
of the experience of His church. "Destroy this temple and in 
three days I will raise it up." John 2:19. 

We are told that He spake of the temple of His body. This had of 
course, its primary fulfillment in Jesus personally. He often 
showed that He would rise the third day. But what was true of 
Him personally on the third day, of twenty-four hours, is true of 
His body-the church-in the third day of a thousand years each. 
Jesus was talking of the temple and this was what confused the 
minds of His hearers. But the temple was a type of the church as 
well as a type of each member of the same. Jesus was the temple 
of God, for God dwelt in him. The body of each Christian is the 
temple of God, by the indwelling of the Holy Spirit. 1 Cor. 6:19. 
And the whole church groweth into a holy temple for the 
habitation of God. Eph. 2:20-22. The words that Jesus used 
referred to the type, but the spirit, or meaning, of those words 
was the antitype. All through the period of their sufferings, the 
church could be comforted with the assurance that when they 
suffered He, the sympathizing Friend, suffered with them. "Why 
persecutest thou me?" Acts 22:7-8. "Inasmuch as ye did it unto 
one of the least of these my brethren, ye did it unto me. " Matt. 
25:40. 

Paul declares that Jesus "rose the third day according to the 
scriptures." 1 Cor. 15:4. He must have referred to the Old 
Testament, for the New Testament was yet unwritten. But what 
scriptures foretold that Christ should rise the third day? None 
directly, that we can find; but indirectly it is taught, like many 
other things. 

When asked for a sign, the Savior referred to Jonah as a sign, 
and the only one that wicked generation could have. The time 
that Jonah was in the deep, the Savior Himself applies to the 
period of His own death. It was not thirty-three years and a half, 
but "He died, and rose again the third day. " But there can be no 
doubt that it has a broader if not a deeper meaning as we have 
applied it to the church. We are satisfied that the reason that 
Christ rose the third day, instead of any other, was to represent 
the days of the great plan, each day being a type of a thousand 
years. What is true of the glorification of the church of Christ, as 
to time, has been shown to be true also of the restoration of 
Israel. And if anyone who believes the many scriptures which 
teach the idea of their restoration, will read the prayer of Jonah, 
while he was buried in the deep, as recorded in the second 



chapter of the book of Jonah, he will have but little difficulty in 
seeing a type of the history of the nation of Israel since Jesus left 
their house desolate. Another prophecy of the same thing and in 
very plain words may be found in Hosea 6:1-3. "He hath torn, 
and He will heal us; He hath smitten, and He will bind us up. 
After two days will He revive us: in the third day He will raise 
us up, and we shall live in His sight. Then shall we know if we 
follow on to know the Lord &c. " The third day has come since 
Jesus cut them off, and we can see the cursed fig tree beginning 
to put forth its leaves. By this we know that summer is near, and 
also that our redemption draweth near. Of Number Seven more 
anon. 

J. H P. 



R92 : page 6 

QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS. 

QUES. Is it true that the Greek word anastasis always means a 
resurrection to spiritual life? 

ANS. Our English word resurrection signifies to raise up again 
and it does not indicate whether the body or thing raised has any 
life. The Greek word anastasis translated resurrection seems to 
have a similar meaning— to raise up again. In scriptural use it is 
understood to imply that the ones raised up have life since it is 
so stated sometimes, but that it always means a resurrection to 
spiritual life, is not true. There shall be a resurrection (anastasis) 
both of the just and unjust- All shall live again, but to rise 
spiritual beings, immortal &c, is promised only to those who 
have part in the first resurrection. "Blessed and holy are all they 
that have part in the first [anastasis] resurrection; On such the 
second death hath no power. " The natural inference is that those 
who arise in subsequent resurrections, are not blessed and holy 
and that over these the second death has power. In other words 
the teaching is, that the first class are raised with such a life as 
cannot die, (immortal) while all others are raised to a life which 
can be forfeited. 

In the teaching of Jesus and the Apostles the difference between 
these resurrections is clearly discernable as expressed in the 
Greek. (Our regular English version fails to show it properly.) 
Thus, Jesus says that in THE resurrection (i.e. the special 
resurrection) they neither marry nor are given in marriage, but 
are like unto the angels &c. Paul knew that all would rise, but 
says, "If by any means I might attain unto THE resurrection" - 
the first— the prize. He knew that because Jesus had ransomed 
all, all must be released from death, but he knew also that to the 
realization of the "exceeding great and precious promises" of 
"being like Him," and "like unto the angels "-possessing 



"immortality" i.e. such a condition of life that he could not die 
any more, nor be hurt of the second death; all these, as well as 
the sitting in the throne depended upon his attaining the "first"- 
"THE resurrection. " 

The following texts show that the word anastasis does not 
always mean raising to spiritual life. Matt. 22:23. "Scribes say 
that there is no (anastasis) resurrection." Luke 20:27. "Deny that 
there is any {anastasis) resurrection." Luke 2:34. "This child is 
set for the fall and {anastasis) rising again of many in 

R93 : page 6 

Israel. " Israel stumbled and fell as a nation as well as 
individually and is to rise again. They did not fall from being 
spiritual bodies nor are they to rise in that way. Again, Heb. 
11:35, "Women received their dead {anastasis) raised to life 
again. " Were they raised to spiritual life or to natural? The latter, 
certainly, Christ Jesus being the first born to the higher plane. 
We read further- "Others were tortured... that they might obtain 
a better {anastasis) resurrection." Better than what, if anastasis 
means a giving of spiritual life? 

QUES. In the text- "Woe unto them that desire the day of the 
Lord"-how are we to understand the Prophet? Why is there a 
woe on them? 

ANS. It cannot refer to those who are "accounted worthy to 
escape;" they are to "lift up their heads and rejoice." I suppose it 
has reference to the great mass of the human family which Paul 
says is waiting and expecting— "The earnest expectation of the 
creature waiteth for the manifestation of the Sons of God. " Yet 
mankind will be subjected to a great time of trouble before their 
expectations are realized. Before the morning of joy, comes the 
night of weeping. 

Woe [trouble] to the great mass of the human family desiring 
and expecting that day. 

Yet by their woes they'll be, 
Brought nearer, my God, to thee. 



R93 : page 6 

Quicken Your Mortal Bodies. 

QUES. Please give me your explanation of the text, "He that 
raised up Christ from the dead shall also quicken your mortal 
bodies by His spirit that dwelleth in you. " Does it refer to the 
resurrection of the saints at the coming of Christ referred to in 1 
Cor. 15. If so, how shall we harmonize this statement with the 
one there made, viz. : "It is sown a natural body; raised a 
spiritual body. " "It is sown in corruption; it is raised in 
incorruption. " Now, if God merely makes alive (quickens) the 



mortal body, would it be anything more than a living mortal 
body? Can it be properly termed "a spiritual body?" 

ANS. Undoubtedly a living mortal body is not a spiritual body; 
and Paul is not in the text quoted referring to the same thing as 
in 1 Cor. 15. But before we explain, please read the text referred 
to, Rom 8:1 1. Now read the ten preceding and the five 
succeeding verses. 

Christians die literally and will have an actual resurrection, as 
mentioned in 1 Cor. 15, and elsewhere but they are frequently 
spoken of as dying in another sense, as in Rom. 6:1 1: "Reckon 
ye yourselves to be 

R93 : page 7 

dead indeed unto sin, but alive unto God through our Lord Jesus 
Christ. Let not sin, therefore, reign in (control) your mortal 
bodies, ...but yield yourselves [while still mortal bodies] unto 
God, as those that are alive from the dead." So also in the text 
you quote. The preceding verse declares that "If Christ be in 
you, the body is dead," but the spirit is alive, and in this verse 
1 1 , he assures that the power of God, which was mighty enough 
to raise up Jesus, is able and "shall quicken our mortal bodies by 
His spirit which dwelleth in us." In other words, the same spirit, 
by which we crucify the flesh and reckon ourselves dead, is able 
to so subdue and control this mortal body, that it will be alive 
and active, in harmony with our new or spiritual nature. Would 
that more of God's children knew, experimentally, of this death 
and this quickening. We become alive toward God just in 
proportion as we become dead to sin. 

QUES. Can the term church be properly applied to any but that 
company of saints who will have part in the first resurrection? 

ANS. The term church signifies congregation. The Greek is 
ekklesia, and signifies the called-out ones. It would be, 
therefore, proper enough to apply it to any called-out company. 
In the New Testament use of the word, however, it is almost 
invariably used in reference to the first resurrection saints, of 
whom it is said: "God did visit the Gentiles to take out of them a 
people for His name. " An exception to this rule occurs in Acts 
7:38, where the word congregation— ekklesia-is applied to 
fleshly Israel. 

QUES. Will dead saints be resurrected in their mortal bodies, 
and afterward changed along with the living? 

ANS. We think not. Paul is our authority for saying "It is raised 
a spiritual body "-"raised in incorruption" -"power," and 
"glory." (1 Cor. 15:42-44.) 



R93 : page 8 



OUR AUTHORITY. 

Some facts relative to the return of the Jews mentioned in our 
last, seemed to directly point to the fulfillment of the prophecies 
relative to their return, that some seem disposed to question the 
reliability of our information, Bro. H. A. King writes, "what is 
your authority for saying that Russia has enacted laws 
compelling the Jews to leave that country?" (The peculiarity 
noted, was, that just as God had opened up Palestine so that the 
Jew might return and enjoy a measure of liberty, He, at the same 
time, was forcing them from Russia where about one-third of all 
that people are living.) We answer, as Brok, that the public press 
is our authority and it certainly is a disinterested witness; for 
instance, we clip from The Pittsburg Dispatch of to-day (March 
29th) the following: 

"Instead of the concessions expected before the anniversary of 
the Czar's accession to the throne, regarding the position of the 
Jews, there is increased severity. The Jews are driven to 
represent themselves as Protestant Christians, to escape 
expulsion from St. Petersburg. In the Governments of Tula, Orel 
and Charkoff, Jews in business for many years, are ruthlessly 
expelled. " 



R93 : page 8 

THE FORGIVENESS OF SINS. 

When we speak of a sin forgiven it implies that a sin has been 
committed, and that the one who committed it is a sinner. And 
when of Jesus it is written: "Behold the Lamb of God that taketh 
away the sin of the world," we realize somehow that the whole 
world are sinners and that Jesus is their Redeemer from all sin. 
This is Paul's thought when he wrote: "All have sinned." John 
1:1-10, says: "If we say we have not sinned, we make him (God) 
a liar." As all are sinners and "The wages of sin is death," we 
read: "Death hath passed upon all men in that all have sinned. " 
We are in a bad condition in two ways; first, our characters and 
lives are stained with sin— and secondly because so marred by 
sin we are cut off from life and placed in the grasp of death. We 
are apt to take a superficial view of the matter and to think of 
being released from death as the thing chiefly to be desired, but 
this is a false view. If released from death and not from sin 
which causes death, you would again die. You would die 
because as a sinner you would have no right to life. The wages 
or legitimate end of sin is death. "Sin when it is finished 
bringeth forth death and if you could be released from death a 
thousand times yet not forgiven the sin, you would again be 
obliged to die. 



Our real aim and desire should be to get forgiveness of sins, for 
then the penalty-death-can be removed legally. And in fact 
when we are forgiven or justified in God's sight, he is bound by 
his own justice to release such a forgiven and justified one from 
death. But can we obtain forgiveness of sins if God's 
punishment for sin was a just penalty? Could he be just and 
forgive or excuse sin? We answer, no; God's mercy and love can 
never be exercised at the expense of his justice. How then can 
we be forgiven? We answer: "The Lamb of God taketh away the 
sin of the world." John 1:29. Yes says John (1:35) "Ye know 
that he was manifested to take away our sins and in him is no 
sin. " First, he was manifested, tried in all points yet without sin, 
that he might after being thus proved, act as our High Priest and 
"put away sin by the sacrifice of himself." Heb. 9:26. He who 
knew no sin was made sin for us," i.e. on our account he was 
treated as though he were the sinner (2 Cor. 5:21), and God 
"Laid upon him the iniquity of us all," and "We have redemption 
through his blood, even forgiveness of sins." Col. 1:14. "The 
blood (life given i.e. death) of Jesus Christ cleanseth us from all 
sin." 1 John 1:7. "We have redemption through his blood, the 
forgiveness of sins." Eph 1:7. Thus "Jesus Christ by the grace 
of God tasted death for every man;" therefore "God for Christ's 
sake hath forgiven you;" (Eph. 4:32.) because 

Jesus paid it all, 
All the debt we owe; 
Sin had left a crimson stain, 
He washed it white as snow. 

And because thus ransomed and bought from sin with a price, 
even the precious blood of Christ, the "sins are blotted out when 
the times of refreshing shall come from the presence of the Lord 
and He shall send Jesus etc." Acts 3:19. For 

R94 : page 8 

as God was just to punish for sin and would by no means clear 
the guilty, so also "He is just to forgive us our sins and to 
cleanse us from all iniquity" since Jesus paid for us the price of 
our sins. And if the sin is forgiven will not its wages-death -be 
abolished? Yes, by ransoming us from sin Jesus obtained the 
right to destroy death; and when sin is abolished, it may well be 
asked- "O death, where is thy sting? For the sting of death is 
sin. " THANKS be to God who giveth us the victory through our 
Lord Jesus Christ. Verily, as in Adam all die so, in Christ shall 
all be made alive. All were condemned to death because of sin 
and all are justified to life again because "Jesus paid it all. " 

But what shall we say of those who claim that Jesus was a 
sinner, who claim that he died for himself, that he appeared in 
the world on the "lowest round of the ladder," a sinner among 
sinners merely to set us an example and by working his way up 
to life to show humanity how they could work their way up and 



each win life for himself?" We say: God pity them and show 
them the value of "the blood of the cross," (Gal. 1 :20.) that it 
was because the penalty of our sin was death that "He became 
obedient unto death, even the death of the cross" that we might 
be forgiven. Oh no; Add nothing to their burden, they will have 
enough to bear; They will find it a difficult task to do as he did- 
keep the whole law blameless, and thus work their way up to 
life. They will in time find a necessity for "forgiveness through 
His blood," of whom it was written -"Ye shall call his name 
Jesus, for he shall save his people from their sin." By and by 
they will learn- 

What grace was in the Lamb of God, 
Who died to make them free. 

The doctrine of "forgiveness of sins through his blood" (Col. 
1 : 14) is the one on which the whole fabric of Christianity is 
built. It is the basis of all our faith and hopes as Christians. If we 
are not forgiven, we cannot approach God as "Our Father." He is 
not the father of sinners. Unless forgiven we cannot approach 
God in prayer, for "God heareth not sinners." We must first have 
his forgiveness before any of the blessings are ours, as it is 
written: "Being justified by faith (in the perfection of his 
offering) we have peace with God through our Lord Jesus 
Christ. " And we must first be forgiven before we can receive the 
Holy Spirit, as Paul says: Eph. 1:13. "In whom ye also trusted 
after ye had heard the word of truth-the gospel (good news) of 
your salvation, (from sin, i.e. forgiveness.) In whom also after 
ye believed that ye were sealed with the Holy Spirit of promise. " 

Brethren, "Let us draw near (to God) with a true heart in full 
assurance of faith, (that our sins are forgiven) having our hearts 
sprinkled from a consciousness of evil, (sin) and our bodies 
washed in pure water" (our fleshly nature cleansed by, and 
brought into harmony with the truth.) (Heb. 10:22.) and "Let us 
hold fast the profession of our faith without wavering," for, in 
this— God's way of forgiving sin. "The righteousness of God is 
manifested" most beautifully and his justice, mercy and love all 
find harmonious expression for, "Herein is manifested the love 
of God, in that while we were yet sinners Christ died for us." 



R94 : page 8 

CHRIST OUR PASSOVER. 

Christ, our Passover, is sacrificed for us; therefore, let us keep 
the feast." (1 Cor. 5:7). The Passover was one of the most 
important of the types given to the Children of Israel, and was 
ever observed by them as one of their most solemn feasts. They 
kept it in remembrance of the passing over of their first-born 
when the tenth plague was visited upon the first-born of Egypt. 



They commemorated it every year on the anniversary of the 
event, slaying a lamb each year on the fourteenth day of the first 
month. They saw only the type: We, instructed by the Holy 
Ghost through the apostles, are able to recognize the antitype as 
"Christ our Passover Lamb slain for us"-"the Lamb of God." 
Death would pass upon us, were it not that our Lamb's blood is 
sprinkled upon us, but in Him we have life. 

As the typical lamb was put to death on the fourteenth of the 
first month, so our Passover Lamb was put to death on the same 
day. No other day would fulfill the type, and so it was, as we 
read, Luke 22:7. As they feasted on the typical lamb, we feast on 
our Lamb. It was on this same day that Jesus gave to the 
apostles the symbols of His broken body and shed blood, saying: 
"THIS do in remembrance of me;" i.e., keep this feast hereafter, 
thinking of me as your Lamb. 

It has for several years been the custom of many of us here in 
Pittsburgh to do this; i.e., remember the Passover, and eat the 
emblems of our Lord's body and blood, and it has ever been an 
occasion of solemn pleasure and communion, and was 
particularly so this year. We met on the night of March 24th, as 
usual, at the house of Brother and Sister Conley (it being the 
most commodious); and ate together the unleavened bread- 
eating, meantime "the truth" which it symbolized, viz: That 
Jesus was unleavened (without sin), holy, harmless, undefiled, 
and therefore food "of which, if a man eat, he shall never die." 
We said, with Paul, "Christ, our Passover is slain; therefore, let 
us keep the feast. " We saw clearly that because we had Christ 
within, therefore (soon, we believe), all the church of the first- 
born will be passed over, and spared, as it is written: "I will 
spare them, as a man spareth his only son that serveth him, " and 
we said one to another, "Watch that ye may be accounted 
worthy to escape all these things coming upon the world, and 
stand before the Son of Man." 

We read, also, how that if we are Christ's, we are part of the 
same loaf; to be broken as He was; to die, as He did to the flesh- 
-crucifying the flesh. "The loaf, which we break, is it not the 
communion of the body of Christ? For we, being many, are one 
loaf and one body." (1 Cor. 10:17.) We saw, also, that if we 
would count ourselves parts of that loaf, and be broken, we must 
first "purge out therefrom the old leaven" of sin, that we may be 
like our Master, "who knew no sin. " 

After supper, we took the cup— the wine. As we took it, we 
remembered that it was not represented by the type, the Passover 
supper, but that it was the symbol of joy and life. After supper, 
He took the cup,... saying, "Drink ye all of it," and we realized 
that, when the present night of eating the Lamb with bitter herbs 
(afflictions) has passed, our Lord will give us the new life and 
new joys, saying, "Enter thou into the joys of thy Lord," And we 
realized, even now and here, a foretaste of those joys of 



Paradise. Thus, the wine of our feast was but typical of the joys 
of the kingdom, when we shall drink it new with Him, in our 
Father's kingdom- "after supper." 



R94 : page 8 



"i 



'Day Dawn" or the 
Gospel in Type and Prophecy. 

This is the title of the new book referred to in our Feb'y No. we 
are pleased to know that it will soon be ready— probably about 
May 1st. The table of contents before us, show it to contain 28 
chapters (probably from 350 to 400 pages.) on subjects of 
deepest interest to all of us. It will we doubt not supply a long 
felt want, viz: A book containing a connected and well 
expressed account, of our understanding of the prophecies their 
import and teaching as well as their harmony with the other 
teachings of God's word. In a word "The Law," "The Prophets" 
and "The Gospel" and their unity. 

We cannot but be benefited and strengthened by going over the 
Time arguments which establish our whereabouts on the stream 
of time. Our foundations are so strong, the evidences so many 
and so weighty, that when fully comprehended, it is easier to 
believe than to doubt, the presence of the heavenly Bridegroom. 
It will strengthen and build you up in your most holy faith, we 
hope. Again it is a pleasure to have a book to hand to your 
neighbor and friend written in a simple but scholarly manner. 
(Though we have not seen the MSS. we have reason to expect 
all of this from our brother's pen.) Bro. Paton of Almont, Mich., 
one of our regular contributors is the author. Bro. A. D. Jones, 
Pittsburgh, Pa., also a correspondent is the publisher. 

It is unnecessary to say that the book is not gotten out for money 
making purposes, but for the glory of God and blessing of the 
household of faith. We are authorized to say that any interested 
but unable to pay can have the book FREE. To those who can 
pay, the price will be 

In paper covers postage prepaid each, $ .50 

6 copies paper covers by express 2.00 

12 copies paper covers by express 4.00 

Cloth covers, postage prepaid 75 

6 copies cloth covers postage prepaid. . . 3.50 
12 copies paper covers by express 7.00 

Orders should be addressed to 

A. D. Jones, Pittsburgh, Pa. 


