





COVER SUBJECT | HAS SCIENCE REPLACED THE BIBLE?
Science Has Its Limitations




In recent times, a number of books setting out the views of the so-called new atheists have come into circulation. These publications have caught the attention of many and have brought about no little discussion and debate. Regarding this, neuroscientist David Eagleman wrote: “Some readers walk away . . . with the impression that scientists think they have the big picture solved.” Then he added: “But good science is always open-minded, and the history of science is one of surprises.”





Down through the ages, talented scientists have indeed made surprising breakthroughs in their search for answers to puzzling questions about nature. Some, however, have also made serious errors in the process. Isaac Newton was one of the greatest scientists of all time. He showed how the force of gravitation binds the planets, stars, and galaxies into one universe. He invented calculus, a branch of mathematics used in computer design, space travel, and nuclear physics. However, Newton also pursued alchemy, a pseudoscience that used astrology and magical formulas in attempts to turn lead and other metals into gold.
Over 1,500 years before Newton, the Greek astronomer Ptolemy explored the heavens with his eyes alone. He tracked the planets across the night sky and was skilled as a mapmaker. But he believed that the earth was the center of everything. Astrophysicist Carl Sagan wrote of Ptolemy: “His Earth-centered universe held sway for 1,500 years, a reminder that intellectual capacity is no guarantee against being dead wrong.”





Today scientists face similar challenges in their pursuits. Will they ever find a complete explanation of the universe? While it is proper to acknowledge the progress science has made and the benefits it has brought us, it is also essential to bear in mind its limitations. Physicist Paul Davies observed: “The search for a closed logical scheme that provides a complete and self-consistent explanation for everything is doomed to failure.” Those words state an undeniable truth: Humans cannot completely understand the natural world. So when assertions are made about the potential of science to provide an explanation of everything that exists, it is only reasonable to take such assertions with reservations.
Clearly the Bible fills our needs in ways that science cannot

The Bible speaks of the wonders of nature in these words: “Look! These are just the fringes of [God’s] ways; only a faint whisper has been heard of him!” (Job 26:14) There remains a vast store of knowledge that is beyond human perception and understanding. Admittedly, the words of the apostle Paul, written nearly 2,000 years ago, still hold true: “O the depth of God’s riches and wisdom and knowledge! How unsearchable his judgments are and beyond tracing out his ways are!”​—Romans 11:33.



Guidance That Science Cannot Provide
While science offers knowledge of the natural world, the Bible provides principles and guidance that lead to peaceful human relations and a happy, satisfying way of life. Consider the following examples.





Crime Prevention
Have regard for life
“You must not murder.”​—Exodus 20:13.
“Everyone who hates his brother is a murderer.”​—1 John 3:15.
Make and keep peace
“Turn away from what is bad and do what is good; seek peace and pursue it.”​—Psalm 34:14.
“The fruit of righteousness is sown in peaceful conditions for those who are making peace.”​—James 3:18.
Shun violence
“Jehovah examines the righteous one as well as the wicked one; he hates anyone who loves violence.”​—Psalm 11:5.
“Do not envy the violent man nor choose any of his ways, for Jehovah detests a devious person.”​—Proverbs 3:31, 32.






Family Happiness
Obey your parents
“Children, be obedient to your parents in union with the Lord, for this is righteous. ‘Honor your father and your mother’ is the first command with a promise: ‘That it may go well with you and you may remain a long time on the earth.’”​—Ephesians 6:1-3.
Teach your children properly
“Do not be irritating your children, but go on bringing them up in the discipline and admonition of Jehovah.”​—Ephesians 6:4.
“Do not be exasperating your children, so that they do not become downhearted.”​—Colossians 3:21.
Love and respect your marriage mate
“Each one of you must love his wife as he does himself; on the other hand, the wife should have deep respect for her husband.”​—Ephesians 5:33.






Protection of the natural world
Regarding polluters of various kinds in ancient Israel, the Bible stated: “The land has been polluted by its inhabitants . . . Those inhabiting it are held guilty.” (Isaiah 24:5, 6) God will hold wanton destroyers of the environment accountable. He will “bring to ruin those ruining the earth.” (Revelation 11:18) They will not get away with their actions.




