From Our Readers
Teen Depression  How happy I was to receive the Awake! cover series “Help for Depressed Teens”! (September 8, 2001) I have been battling this illness for several years. Thank you for this helping hand at a difficult time.
L. D., France
I am a pediatric nurse. The scope of depression is underestimated by many but not by you. I have ordered a hundred copies of this magazine. I intend to deliver them to all the pediatricians and mental-health workers in this area.
B. P., United States
I have a number of relatives who have been diagnosed with depression or bipolar disorder. Recognizing these as illnesses rather than weaknesses goes a long way in restoring the dignity that many have lost. The suggestions you gave will help us all to be compassionate and supportive.
C. M., Canada
As soon as I got hold of this magazine, I began to read it. I shed tears of joy over the fact that young people are dear to your heart and that you dedicated 12 pages to the subject. Thanks ever so much!
M. M., Austria
This article really helped me to calm down and to be settled in my heart. Also, it made me aware that I am not the only one with this illness. I pray that Jehovah gives comfort and help to all people suffering from depression.
Y. T., Japan
I am going to keep a supply of this issue on hand at all times. It is exactly what our teenagers need, and I believe it will help many of them and their parents to get through what you accurately described as a disease. It will probably save lives.
R. F., United States
I was comforted to know that this emotional pain does not come from some spiritual deficiency. My heart felt lighter, and I cried when I read that “Jehovah is near to those that are broken at heart.”—Psalm 34:18.
A. I., Japan
I am 16, and I have had recurring bouts of depression for years. This magazine was just what I needed! These articles gave me the advice I needed.
L. B., Australia
I was a depressed teen, and I never told my parents or anyone that I wanted to kill myself. This was a grave error. It is important to get help when you are depressed. Thank you for showing your care and concern for young people.
S.G.C., United States
Steel  I work in the steel industry, and I offered the article “A Hard Worker With a Soft Touch” (September 8, 2001) to my technical director. He said that even though the article deals with a complex subject, it is clear and accurate, without using too many technical terms. Such articles enable us to help others become acquainted with Awake!
G. B., Italy
Since I have just finished occupational training for metal materials testing, I didn’t much fancy reading an article about steelmaking. But the way you handled such an extensive and extremely complex subject absolutely fascinated me.
M. F., Germany

