The Best Way to Satisfy Your Spiritual Needs
WHY DO PEOPLE need religion? Some would say that humans turn to spiritual matters in order to find security in an insecure world. But there is more to it than that. An article in the journal American Sociological Review noted: “The need for security is not the only attraction of religion. People have always sought answers to such questions as: Where do we come from? Where are we going? Why are we here?”
No doubt you would agree that those are profoundly important questions. As such, do they not require reliable answers? Such questions are too important, too weighty, to be resolved by simply selecting religious beliefs from various traditions because these appeal to us personally. If we are to find solid, reliable answers to life’s deeper questions, surely we need a better method.
Is there something better? Ferrar Fenton, a translator of the Bible, said something remarkable about that book. He called it “the only key that unlocks the Mystery of the Universe to Man, and the Mystery of Man to Himself.” Yes, the Bible answers questions about the past, the present, and the future. It tells us where we came from, what the meaning of life is, how we can find happiness, and what the future holds for us. No other book in history has been as influential as the Bible; nor has any other book survived so many virulent attacks. Why, though, do so many disregard this unique book in their search for answers to life’s questions?
Many people have not paused to consider the profound differences between the Bible and the churches they have known. They have seen how so-called Christians slaughter one another in God’s name. Many have complained, as The Guardian noted, that “priests are more interested nowadays in raising money than in pastoral visits.” They think, perhaps, that the Bible endorses or condones such behavior. The truth is, the Bible commands Christians to “love one another,” and it tells those who preach the word, “You received free, give free.” (John 13:34; Matthew 10:8) Is it fair, then, to judge the Bible by the deeds of people who claim to respect it but do not follow it?
Many believe that the Bible is unscientific, self-contradictory, and old-fashioned. But a thorough investigation shows the opposite. Granted, the Bible is not a science textbook. Yet, when it does touch on subjects relating to science—such as the order in which living things appeared on earth, the shape of the earth, or the proper treatment of infectious diseases—the Bible says nothing incorrect. On the contrary, it contains statements that were centuries ahead of their time. And although the Bible is composed of 66 books written over a period of 1,600 years, all of them are in harmony with one another. Furthermore, the Bible exhibits extraordinary insight into human nature, making it as up-to-date today as ever.
This remarkable book says something crucial about the worship of God. It says that such worship must be carried out, not on man’s terms, but on God’s terms. (John 5:30; James 4:13-15; 2 Peter 1:21) But few people have truly observed that principle. From earliest times men have made religions to suit their own purposes. That is true when people carve their gods from pieces of wood and worship them. It is true when religious institutions teach doctrines that they have invented. And is it not also true of those individuals who tailor a private religion to suit their own preferences?
Consider an alternative. Why not do as a chief justice of the United States Supreme Court did? In the same way that he tried cases in court, he impartially investigated the evidence for and against the truthfulness of the Bible. With what result? He said: “I have come to the decision that the Bible is a supernatural book, that it has come from God.”
How can you make a similar investigation yourself? As a suggestion, you might try a systematic study of the Bible, examining its answers to the questions raised at the outset of this article. There are about six million of Jehovah’s Witnesses, in 235 countries, who have made such a study. They volunteer their time in order to share with others what they have learned. The home Bible study course they offer without charge has helped millions to find a faith that is more than a fad or a matter of taste. The true, pure Christianity presented in the Bible is not just another religion. It represents the truth about God and his purposes. So why settle for less?—John 17:17.
[Pictures on page 10]
The best way to satisfy your spiritual needs is to learn about God from the Bible and associate with true worshipers

