A Letter From the Governing Body
AS WE move into the early years of the 21st century, it is a pleasure to write to you, “the whole association of brothers” around the world, and commend you for your hard work. (1 Pet. 2:17) Nearly 2,000 years ago, Jesus asked: “When the Son of man arrives, will he really find the faith on the earth?” (Luke 18:8) Your zealous activity during the past service year answers Jesus’ question with a resounding yes! Some of you have been scorned and ridiculed for your faith. In many places, you endure in the face of wars, disasters, disease, or hunger. (Luke 21:10, 11) Thanks to your zeal for right works, Jesus can still “find the faith on the earth.” Surely there is rejoicing in heaven because of that!
We know that endurance is not easy. Consider the trials of our brothers in one country of western Asia. Violence against Jehovah’s Witnesses is almost routine in that land. Recently, police broke up a peaceful assembly of about 700. Roadblocks prevented another 1,300 from attending. A mob of masked people, some of them policemen, stormed the assembly site, beat many of the delegates, and set fire to the structure that was to be used for the assembly. On other occasions, religious extremists have brutally beaten our brothers with nail-studded clubs.
Such assaults are shocking but not surprising. The apostle Paul was inspired to write: “All those desiring to live with godly devotion in association with Christ Jesus will also be persecuted.” (2 Tim. 3:12) In the first century, Christians endured verbal and physical persecution, and some were even killed. (Acts 5:40; 12:2; 16:22-24; 19:9) The same was true in the 20th century, and undoubtedly it will continue to be so in the 21st. Still, Jehovah tells us: “Any weapon whatever that will be formed against you will have no success.” (Isa. 54:17) What wonderful assurance that is! Indeed, so precious are we to Jehovah that through his prophet Zechariah, he said: “He that is touching you is touching my eyeball.” (Zech. 2:8) Enemies of Jehovah’s worshipers have no chance of ultimate victory. Pure worship will prevail!
For example, in the country mentioned earlier, Jehovah’s Witnesses enjoyed two new peaks in the number of publishers during the 2001 service year. Yes, our brothers persevere there despite hardship, as they do everywhere. Worldwide during the past service year, 5,066 each week were baptized in symbol of their dedication to Jehovah. Now these new ones are determined, along with the rest of us, to “stand complete and with firm conviction in all the will of God.”​—Col. 4:12.
Consider, also, recent developments in Greece. Despite years of intense opposition from the Greek Orthodox Church, Jehovah’s Witnesses are now acknowledged by the government as a “known religion.” The document granting this recognition further states that the Greece Bethel complex is “a sacred and consecrated place, dedicated to the worship of God.” We are also happy to tell you that during the past service year, courts have handed down favorable legal decisions affecting our worship in Bulgaria, Canada, Germany, Japan, Romania, Russia, and the United States. How we thank Jehovah for keeping the door to activity open in those lands!
As we consider the ways that Jehovah supports his people during these last days, we see that he is the best Friend we could ever have. We delight in our relationship with him, knowing that he loves us, teaches us, and corrects us. Yes, trials of faith will continue to come our way. But unshakable faith in Jehovah will carry us through. James wrote: “Consider it all joy, my brothers, when you meet with various trials, knowing as you do that this tested quality of your faith works out endurance.” (Jas. 1:2, 3) Moreover, our endurance demonstrates our love for Jehovah, and this brings us much joy! Be assured, dear brothers, that Jehovah will support each one of us. If we remain faithful, he will without fail help us to make it into the new world. He wants us to succeed.
Hence, we urge you brothers and sisters, young and old, to keep close in mind the marvelous blessings that lie ahead. May our attitude be like that of the apostle Paul, who wrote: “I reckon that the sufferings of the present season do not amount to anything in comparison with the glory that is going to be revealed in us.” (Rom. 8:18) Rely on Jehovah when facing adversity of any kind. Endure, and refuse to give up. You will never, never regret it. God’s Word assures us: “As for the righteous one, by his faithfulness he will keep living.”​—Hab. 2:4.
Your brothers,
Governing Body of Jehovah’s Witnesses

