Curaçao
The islands of Aruba, Bonaire, and Curaçao are known as the ABC islands. Lying off the coast of Venezuela, they have a beauty of their own. Theirs is, not the lush beauty of other Caribbean islands, but the beauty of the desert, of mysterious shadows at night, and of stark, contrasting colors by day.
Because of low rainfall, giant cactuses​—the pride of which is the kadushi—​grow profusely, dominating the landscape. The divi-divi tree, distinguished by its peculiar lopsided crown, also flourishes. Like silent sentinels, plantation houses stand silhouetted against azure skies, reminders of the colonial past. Goats roam the countryside and scamper across the roads.
Aruba and Bonaire boast a vibrant tourist industry, while Curaçao depends on income generated by oil refining and offshore business. A feature of each island is a desalination plant, which distills seawater, providing both water for drinking and steam for electricity.
The islands, which now have a population of just under 250,000, were discovered in the 15th century by the Spaniards. Later, the Dutch took possession, and though the islands were in the hands of the French and the English for brief periods, they reverted to the Dutch in 1815. Since 1954, the federation of the Netherlands Antilles, originally consisting of the ABC islands and three of the Leeward Islands, has been self-governing in internal affairs. In 1986, though, Aruba was granted status aparte, or separate status.
Culture and Language
Under the Dutch government, the islands enjoy a climate of religious tolerance. The inhabitants are predominantly Roman Catholic, though there are large groups of Protestants. A strong Jewish community also exists in Curaçao. People from 40 to 50 nations of the world live together peaceably in a racially integrated society. Though these people share a common language, each island retains its own distinctive identity. It is in this diversified society that Bible truth took root and has continued to flourish.
The people are multilingual and apt to forget which language they are speaking, since switching languages is so normal. Although Dutch is the official language and English and Spanish are widely used in the business sector, Papiamento is the native tongue. One theory suggests that Papiamento developed in the Cape Verde Islands of West Africa before the 17th century. The Portuguese used those islands as a base for forays into Africa, and to enable the Africans and the Portuguese to communicate, a new Creole tongue​—a mixture of African languages and Portuguese—​came into existence. Such a language that allows communication between different language groups is called a lingua franca. Later, slaves who were brought to the islands introduced this language. Over the years, the language was influenced by Dutch, Spanish, English, and French. The resulting Papiamento came to be a blend of all of them.
The lingua franca developed by the slaves and introduced to the islands was, in essence, a way to bridge the communication gap and unify them. Another lingua franca came to be adopted, however. It is the one spoken of at Zephaniah 3:9, which says: “Then I shall give to peoples the change to a pure language, in order for them all to call upon the name of Jehovah, in order to serve him shoulder to shoulder.” It is this “pure language” that not only unified some of the islanders​—allowing them to transcend social, racial, and sometimes national differences—​but also united them with the worldwide association of Jehovah’s Witnesses. So although there are separate Papiamento, English, Spanish, and Dutch congregations, the lingua franca of Bible truth draws the brothers into a tightly knit circle of love.
Dawning of Truth
It is not known precisely how the first seeds of truth were planted in the islands. Almost imperceptibly, the light of truth dawned, dispersing the darkness cloaking the islands, which had long been bastions of Roman Catholicism. In the late 1920’s and in the 1930’s, several people preached here. Also, a peddler who sold religious books inadvertently sowed seeds of truth, for among his books were publications produced by God’s organization. The peddler’s two daughters, Pearl and Ruby, worked alongside him and became Witnesses of Jehovah years later. They both remain faithful to this day.
In 1940, Brother Brown, a Trinidadian employed at the oil refinery, performed the first baptism in Curaçao​—that of five people with whom he had studied. Among these were Martin and Wilhelmina Naarendorp and Eduard van Marl, all originally from Suriname.
Anita Libretto, daughter of the Naarendorps, reminisces: “In 1940, I was six years old. I remember that my parents were studying with an English-speaking brother. They spoke only Dutch and could barely understand English, but they struggled through and in six months’ time were baptized. Meetings were held at our house, but they were not as well organized as now. They were study evenings that lasted until after midnight, as my parents struggled to understand books written in English.” Preaching was done mostly in English, since the tiny group was not fluent in Papiamento and there was no literature available in that language.
In general, the local people were unaccustomed to reading the Bible because the Catholic Church forbade it. It was not uncommon for the priests to confiscate any Bibles they found. Initially, one of them would follow the brothers around, stamping his foot and shouting: “Leave my sheep alone!”
Seeds Sown in Aruba and Bonaire
In 1943, John Hypolite, who had been an Adventist, and Martin Naarendorp visited Aruba and spent their vacation publishing the good news. As far as can be ascertained, they were the first to preach the good news there. After their return to Curaçao, Brother Hypolite wrote to headquarters in Brooklyn requesting help in the field. Missionaries were sent three years later, but sadly, he died before they came. However, courageous Curaçaoan brothers, such as John Hypolite, had followed the admonition found at Ecclesiastes 11:6 and had liberally sown seed, which later took root and sprouted.
In 1944, Edmund Cummings of Grenada and Woodworth Mills of Trinidad arrived in Aruba. They took up employment at the oil refinery in San Nicolas. Situated on the east end of the island, the town of San Nicolas bustled with immigrants who had come from all parts of the West Indies to work at the oil refinery. Brother Mills, a particularly motivating public speaker, gave a tremendous boost to the preaching of the good news. On March 8, 1946, Brothers Mills and Cummings started the first English-speaking congregation in San Nicolas. The congregation had 11 publishers, and Brother Mills was company (congregation) servant.
The first baptism there took place on June 9, 1946. Among the four baptized were Timothy J. Campbell and Wilfred Rogers, and by the end of 1946, the number of publishers had doubled. Later on, Witnesses who were immigrants​—the Buitenmans, De Freitases, Campbells, Scotts, Potters, Myers, Titres, Faustins, and others—​joined the congregation.
Brother Mills enjoyed considerable success with informal witnessing, and one of his colleagues, a stenographer named Oris, responded favorably. She was baptized in January 1947. Brother Mills had not only gained a sister but found a bride, for he and Oris were later married. In 1956 they were invited to attend the 27th class of Gilead and then were assigned to Nigeria.
Until 1950, most of the preaching in Aruba was done in San Nicolas, since the people there were predominantly English speaking and the brothers spoke little Papiamento. Thus far, no Aruban had embraced the truth. Relentless opposition from the Catholic Church incited the normally friendly Arubans against the Witnesses and slowed the progress. In the early days, it was quite common for a Witness to be chased by an irate householder wielding a machete. Sometimes the brothers had hot water thrown at them or dogs set on them. On other occasions the brothers were invited into homes by householders who would walk out and leave them sitting there. In the islands, it is an insult not to attend to visitors.
Edwina Stroop, a pioneer in Aruba, recalls: “The priests would terrorize people by telling them that they would put a curse on them if they left the church.” Nevertheless, this did not dampen the zeal of the brothers, whose love for Jehovah and their neighbor impelled them to persevere.
Seeds of some desert plants lie dormant for decades until the right amount of rainfall enables them to sprout and eventually to bear beautiful blossoms. It was similar in the case of Jacobo Reina, a customs officer in Bonaire. He obtained a copy of the book Creation in 1928. Though born into a Roman Catholic family, he had examined the Protestant religions but had never been satisfied. On reading Creation, he recognized the ring of truth. The book listed the titles of other books published by Jehovah’s servants, but Jacobo was not able to obtain them. It was not until 19 years later, while visiting his fleshly sister in Curaçao in 1947, that he met a missionary who was conducting a study with her. He asked the missionary if she had the books named on a list he had kept in his wallet all those years. He took all the literature in her bag, at least 7 bound books and 13 booklets, and subscribed to the Watchtower and Awake! magazines. His spiritual appetite that had been whetted long before would finally be satisfied. Yes, the seeds of truth that had lain dormant for so many years would now be supplied with the water necessary for their growth.
The First Missionaries Arrive in Curaçao
On May 16, 1946, Thomas Russell Yeatts and his wife, Hazel, graduates of the sixth class of Gilead, arrived in Curaçao, a territory that had barely been touched. Brother Yeatts was to have a tremendous impact on the work in the islands, remaining in his assignment for over 50 years until his death in 1999. With the exception of a brief interruption, he had oversight of the branch from 1950 until 1994. A man of unfailing good humor, boundless optimism, and unshakable faith, he was privileged to see the Kingdom-preaching work expand greatly.
Hazel, a loyal supporter of her husband, has remained faithful to her assignment until today and is a source of encouragement to all. She recalls arriving at the airport and being warmly greeted by Brothers Naarendorp and Van Marl along with Clement Fleming, an interested person.
Clement, by the way, had acquired the book Children, read it, and was convinced that he had found the truth. When he was young, he left the Roman Catholic Church because he did not agree with many of its teachings. Later on, he started to associate with the Witnesses, so he was on hand to welcome the first missionaries. In July 1946, new missionary Russell Yeatts baptized him. Brother Fleming is still a Kingdom publisher and says: “At age 93, I haven’t given up the hope of being among those who go through Armageddon into the new system without ever having to die.” What a wonderful example of faith and endurance!
Sister Yeatts says: “We were taken from the airport to a two-room apartment over a shop that sold pig’s tails and salt fish. The apartment had no furniture and no bathroom, so we had to shower downstairs for the next six months until we found better lodging.” Though Hazel had one spell of dysentery after another, she and Russell did not become discouraged. Years later, Brother Yeatts wrote: “What makes life interesting, especially for Jehovah’s ministers, is not the conditions, not the scenery, not even the language, but the people. And you have them in every assignment.”
While learning the native tongue, Papiamento, these courageous missionaries were to teach the pure language, the lingua franca of the truth, to people of Curaçao. One of these was Camilio Girigoria, the first of the local people to be baptized, in 1950. Employed at an oil refinery, he had come into contact with the truth by talking to various brothers, including Henricus Hassell, an ardent proclaimer of the good news. Camilio, now 78, is an elder and has assisted 24 people to the point of dedication. In 1946 the missionaries organized the first English-speaking congregation in Curaçao, but it was not until 1954 that the first Papiamento-speaking congregation was started.
Aruba Continues to See the Light of Truth
In July 1949, Henry and Alice Tweed, Canadians of the 12th class of Gilead, went to Aruba, where they were to play a significant role in the teaching of the pure language. Henry was a tall, spare figure and was known for his kind and gentle disposition; Alice, for her sharp wit and unflagging energy in the service. They were the only missionaries who lived and worked in all three islands and are fondly remembered decades later for their self-sacrificing spirit and zeal.
In 1950, William Yeatts (Russell’s cousin) and his wife, Mary, graduated from the 14th class of Gilead and were assigned to Curaçao. In 1953 they went to Aruba. Almost 50 years later, they are still in their assignment​—sterling examples of faith and endurance. In the course of time, Mary distinguished herself by her extraordinary zeal in the ministry. She was always in the forefront of the witnessing work, while Bill concentrated on translating Bible publications. Until Bill and Mary arrived, the two English congregations had made little progress among the local people. Patiently and methodically, Bill and Mary began to sow seeds of truth among the Papiamento-speaking Arubans. Slowly their efforts were rewarded. Bill remembers: “We started to hold Watchtower Studies under the big kwihi tree in the yard of the missionary home. Sometimes as many as 100 were present. We sat on benches that had been discarded by the Catholic church.” The Memorial of Christ’s death was held in 1954, and following that, a Congregation Book Study was organized in Papiamento.
First Aruban Learns Bible Truth
As a young man, Gabriel Henriquez would sometimes indulge in liquor on weekends, so that he could not show up for work at the oil refinery on Monday mornings. His boss wanted him to improve his life-style, and though an atheist himself, he gave Gabriel a gift subscription to Awake!, confident that this would help him. Later, Gabriel came into contact with the Tweeds, who were studying the Bible with his father-in-law. Since the study book was in Spanish, Gabriel translated for him. Soon, Gabriel’s own interest grew, so in 1953, Bill and Mary Yeatts began to study with him. Gabriel says: “At last, I could have answers to all my questions.” In 1954 he dedicated his life to Jehovah and became the first Aruban to be baptized.
The first Papiamento-speaking congregation, consisting of 16 publishers, was organized in 1956, and at the close of the 1957 service year, 26 publishers were reporting. Once Arubans have their eyes opened to the false teachings of “Babylon the Great” and lose their fear of man, they become lovers of truth and zealous proclaimers of the good news. (Rev. 17:5) One such person was Daniel Webb. He and his wife, Ninita, who was originally opposed, accepted the truth, and they both became ardent publishers of the Kingdom. Would others follow their example?
Like Daniel, many others learned the truth and allowed it to shape their life and that of their families. One such person who started to study was Pedro Rasmijn. On coming home one day, Pedro discovered that his mother, Maria, a devout Catholic, had destroyed his study books. Not having yet put on the new personality, he retaliated by breaking his mother’s images. Upset at what Pedro had done, Maria complained to the priest, who said that Pedro was right in thinking that the images were valueless! Now indignant, she drove the priest away and decided to investigate the Bible. As a result, Maria and her husband, Genaro, dedicated their lives to Jehovah. They and their 11 children, 26 grandchildren, and one great-grandchild​—a total of 40 persons—​are all serving Jehovah!
Daniel van der Linde, a son-in-law of Maria, got baptized in spite of being disowned by his parents. Put out of his home and struck by a Catholic priest, Daniel persevered, confident that he had the truth. Despite this opposition, Daniel considers himself blessed, since he has been used by Jehovah to help many learn Bible truth. His daughter Prisquela and her husband, Manuel, are commuter Bethelites who serve in the Translation Department at the Curaçao branch office. Another son-in-law, Tony, also had to show great faith in Jehovah and His promises to sustain us, for he got sick and had to undergo five operations. Tony says: “The doctors have given up hope for me, but I keep praying to Jehovah for strength. My fleshly brothers, who have more or less disowned me, can see that I have thousands of spiritual brothers around the world.”​—Mark 10:29, 30.
Progress in the Islands
In 1965, Albert Suhr, graduate of the 20th class of Gilead, had to leave Curaçao because of ill health, but he left behind excellent “letters of recommendation.” (2 Cor. 3:1, 2) One of them, Olive Rogers, became a regular pioneer in September 1951. Olive had lived with a man out of wedlock for 17 years. When she learned of Jehovah’s high standards, however, she left the man, who belatedly offered to marry her. She refused, was baptized, and joined the pioneer ranks, where she remained for almost 40 years until she became ill. Sister Rogers could be seen everywhere as she cheerfully combed the territory. Today, people tell glowing tales about this sister. Her indomitable spirit and tenacity enabled her to help many people, including big families, to dedicate their lives to Jehovah.
Today there are numerous hardworking families serving Jehovah in the Antilles and Aruba. Large families, such as the Marthas, Croeses, Dijkhoffs, Rasmijns, Likets, Faustins, Ostianas, and Roemers, form the bedrock of the congregations and contribute much to their stability.
Friendly Eugene Richardson began to be taught by Jehovah at the age of 15. Even though he had no formal Bible study, he made steady progress by attending all the meetings and was baptized at the age of 17. In 1956 he was appointed as a regular pioneer and was confronted by what he regarded as a major problem​—lack of transportation. He says: “My assigned territory was 15 miles [20 km] from home, so to solve the problem of transportation, I traded my piano for a bicycle. My family was horrified at this deal, and 40 years later they still talk about it. However, for me it proved to be very practical. Especially since four months after that, I was appointed to serve as a special pioneer in the unassigned territory of Banda Abao.”
Opening Up New Territory
The countryside of Banda Abao, locally known as the kunuku, is situated on the western side of Curaçao and covers almost half the island. It consists of gently rolling land and is somewhat greener than the rest of the island. Scattered houses dot the landscape, so working this territory requires a great deal of time. Clinton Williams, another young, zealous pioneer, joined Eugene, and together they embarked on opening up this new frontier. Eugene remembers: “This was not an easy territory, compared with the rest of the island. The people were very friendly and really nice to talk to, but usually that was as far as it went. However, we worked there for two years and had wonderful experiences. In the first month, I met a man who said that if we could prove that God’s Kingdom had been established in 1914, he would become a Witness. And a Witness he did become, along with his wife and children. Later on, I talked with a woman who said that her nephew was very interested in the Bible. That same evening I returned and witnessed to him. His name was Ciro Heide.”
Ciro, an outgoing person, tells the story from his point of view: “I was a very devoted Catholic and knew the catechism so well that I could teach it at school. But something always puzzled me. I could not understand why if you missed church, you were guilty of a mortal sin and would go to hell if you did not quickly confess this. One day a young man on a bicycle came to the door and spoke to my aunt about the Bible. Knowing of my interest in religion, she invited him to return when I was at home. I was anxious to meet him, for I felt that I knew more than he did about religion. That same evening, Eugene turned up at my door. I was dumbfounded when he pointed out to me that the Apostles’ Creed, which I recited every day, stated that Jesus had gone to hell. Because I was just rattling it off without thinking about it, I had missed its meaning. What amazed me most of all was that Eugene used the Bible to explain everything, while I could not locate even one scripture. From that moment on, my life changed drastically, for I started to study immediately.” Ciro was later baptized despite opposition from his wife. Eventually, because of his good example, she also devoted her life to Jehovah. They have been serving Jehovah loyally for 30 years, and Ciro has been an elder for 25.
Eugene attended Gilead School in 1958 and was reassigned to Banda Abao, where there was still a transportation problem. He relates: “When sharing in field service, we would sometimes have a group of 13 brothers and only one car​—mine. This meant making two trips of 20 miles [30 km] each way. I would drop the first group off in the territory and hurry back for the second. In the late afternoon, I would follow the same procedure as in the morning to get the brothers back home. But we spent the whole day in service. It was tiring, but what joy we had!” Eugene was also privileged to serve in the traveling work for some years.
Changes in the Kunuku
In 1959, Clinton Williams, who by that time had also graduated from Gilead School, continued to work in the kunuku. He later married Eugenie, a zealous pioneer whose kind nature endeared her to many. In 1970 a congregation of 17 publishers was formed in the village of Zorgvliet bij Jan Kok, and meetings were held in the home of the Pieters Kwiers family. Special pioneers Juana Pieters Kwiers and her daughter, Esther, together with the Minguel and Koeiman families worked hard to build up the congregation. By 1985 the congregation had grown to 76 publishers with a meeting attendance of 125. In that same year, love moved brothers from the United States to volunteer to construct a Kingdom Hall in Pannekoek, and the old Kingdom Hall was converted into a missionary home. In two years’ time, the number of publishers rose to 142, so that in 1987 the Tera Corá Congregation was formed.
Finding accommodations for pioneers was always a problem, and Eugene remembers having to renovate an unused house that had been occupied by goats. He spent weeks trying to get rid of their “perfume.” Goat meat is considered a local delicacy. For years, when food was prepared at assemblies, goat was the common fare, and the brothers spent pleasant lunchtimes enjoying a nicely spiced dish of goat meat. On occasion, however, the meat was bad, giving rise to many a trip to the rest room.
Russell Yeatts liked to tell the story of a goat named Mimi. She once ate three Bibles, several songbooks, other books, and numerous magazines. Her owner, Rita Matthews, said: “She ate so much of our literature that we called her the holy goat.” Mimi was sold.
Assemblies Foster a Spirit of Love and Unity
Through the years, finding suitable meeting places​—especially for assemblies—​has been a problem. Max Garey, of the fifth class of Gilead, organized the building of the first Kingdom Hall to be owned by the brothers, in Buena Vista, Curaçao. The brothers wholeheartedly threw themselves into the building of this hall and were thrilled when it was finished. In 1961 the second Papiamento-speaking congregation of Curaçao was formed and met in the beautiful new hall, with Victor Manuel, now a publisher of the good news for almost 50 years, serving as congregation servant. Nathan H. Knorr, from Brooklyn Bethel, dedicated this hall on March 28, 1962.
In the 1970’s, the land adjacent to the Buena Vista hall was leveled, a concrete floor was poured, and a platform was erected. This was used for conventions and assemblies for many years, and as very little rain falls in Curaçao, the gatherings took place under the stars, with few problems. However, the brothers were occasionally surprised by a sudden downpour that dampened their clothes and books but never their spirits. They would simply open their umbrellas and continue to pay rapt attention to the program. In the past, these gatherings were bilingual, with some talks given in English and interpreted and others summarized in Papiamento. District conventions were held alternately in Aruba and Curaçao, and some of the delegates would fly by chartered plane to the convention island, while others went by boat. On one occasion, a large group of conventioners who traveled by the boat Niagara got seasick. In spite of this discomfort, their enthusiasm for the upcoming spiritual banquet remained undimmed.
Ingrid Selassa, who was 16 years old at the time, recalls that her grandmother sold a pig to finance the trip. The delegates stayed at the homes of the brothers and even slept on the floor. Lasting friendships were forged, and a joyful spirit of love and unity prevailed. In 1959 the first Papiamento-language convention took place at the Santa Cruz plantation house in Banda Abao. Ingrid reminisces: “We loaded up buses with food, cots, and equipment and set off for the convention. The program was a spiritual feast, and in the evening we played Bible games and sang Kingdom songs under the night sky. I shall never forget the three days spent there, where we truly felt part of a brotherhood.” Faith-strengthening international gatherings, such as the “Peace on Earth” International Assembly in 1969, also served to promote the spirit of love and unity among the brothers.
New Assembly Halls
As the years passed, the site at Buena Vista became too small, but with generous donations from the congregations, the brothers were able to purchase a building from the oil refinery. Situated in the district of Schelpwijk, this building was given a face-lift, and for many years circuit assemblies and district conventions were held there. Recently, the branch office has received approval to demolish this structure and build a double Kingdom Hall that can also function as an Assembly Hall with seating for 720 persons​—a provision that delights the brothers.
Before 1968, assemblies in Aruba were held in rented halls, but as expansion took place, the need arose for a permanent Assembly Hall. Consequently, it was decided to build a Kingdom Hall large enough to be used for assemblies. In 1968, through hard work and self-sacrifice, the local brothers constructed a fine-looking hall in which to praise Jehovah. While the hall was being built, a patch of tall cactuses hid the construction project from passersby. The week before the first assembly, the government ordered that the cactuses be cut down. Lo and behold, the hall appeared overnight​—or so it seemed! The local people deemed it a miracle, many believing that the hall had indeed been built overnight. But that phenomenon would come later in the form of quickly built halls.
The Work Takes Shape in Bonaire
In 1949, Joshua Steelman, a special representative of headquarters in Brooklyn, visited Bonaire, where by now Jacobo Reina and Matthijs Bernabela, a farmer, were actively preaching. Neither of them had been baptized. Arrangements were made for the first public talk in Bonaire. About 100 people came, but only 30 entered the hall. The other 70 had been sent by the local Catholic priest to disrupt the meeting. Russell Yeatts once reminisced: “Stones began to rain on the tin roof like hail in Egypt. Firecrackers went off, and the people beat on buckets.” This effort was unsuccessful, for seeds of truth were spread and took root. The following year, Jacobo and Matthijs, the first Witnesses in Bonaire, were baptized in Curaçao.
In 1951, Russell and Bill Yeatts organized meetings at the home of Brother Bernabela, and in 1952, Clinton Williams was assigned to Bonaire to set up the new congregation in a rented hall in Kralendijk. In doing this, he incurred the wrath of the Catholic priest, who tried to have him deported. This priest tried to persuade one of Brother Williams’ Bible students to accuse him of making improper advances to her, but she refused. Thwarted, he called Brother Williams a wara-wara, which is a predatory bird found on the islands, accusing him of snatching his sheep. But with Jehovah’s spirit, Brother Williams continued to strengthen the fledgling congregation until he was reassigned to Curaçao. In 1954 the first circuit assembly was held, and from then on assemblies and conventions have played a vital role in the spiritual life of the brothers in Bonaire. People also flocked to see the films produced by Jehovah’s Witnesses, which stirred interest, but little progress was seen until two special pioneers, Petra Selassa and her daughter, Ingrid, were sent in 1969.
When Petra and Ingrid arrived, they had no car; yet they covered almost the entire island on foot. Many of their students were later baptized. Seated and with their heads covered, the two sisters conducted all the meetings. Once a month a brother would fly over from Curaçao to work with them and to give a public talk. Later, when Petra had to leave, another special pioneer, Claudette Tezoida, joined Ingrid, and they continued to help people learn Bible truth.
A Politician’s Wife Finds the Perfect Government
Among those who learned the pure language was the wife of a prominent politician. Caridad Abraham, fondly called Da by all, was the wife of a minister of the government of Bonaire. Her two sons and her son-in-law were also actively involved in politics. Da herself campaigned vigorously for her husband and was widely known and respected. A Protestant minister who was godfather to one of her children told her that Jehovah’s Witnesses do not believe in Jesus Christ. Since the man was both her friend and a minister, she believed this false statement.
After the death of her husband, Da moved to the Netherlands, and there she was shocked to see on television two Protestant ministers openly confessing their homosexuality. Disenchanted with religion, she stopped going to church. Later she accepted a Bible study, became a Witness, and moved back to Bonaire. Da said: “The truth was so wonderful that I had to go back and share it with my people.” Now, instead of advocating a human government as the solution to Bonaire’s problems, she started to preach about the real and permanent solution​—God’s Kingdom in the hands of Jesus Christ. Believing that she had come to canvass for her son, people opened their doors to her and were astounded by her message. Still, because Da was so well-known, many who would not have listened to other Witnesses began to take note of the Kingdom message.
Literature Made Available in the Local Language
Truth touches the heart more quickly if people can read Bible publications in their mother tongue. But when the first missionaries arrived, no Bible literature existed in Papiamento. Meetings were conducted in a mixture of English and Papiamento, using English, Spanish, and Dutch publications, so the brothers had to struggle to understand the truth. Hence, there was a real need for translated publications. However, the vocabulary in Papiamento was limited, there was no dictionary, and no two people could agree on how Papiamento should be written. Years later, Bill Yeatts, a veteran translator, wrote: “In publishing the Kingdom message, we had to say and write things that had never been said or written before in Papiamento. It was a challenge to establish the standards to go by.” Certainly no easy task! In 1948 the brothers translated the first booklet, The Joy of All the People. In 1959 translation of “Let God Be True” was completed. This was followed by the translation of other bound books as well as regular translation of the Toren di Vigilancia, as The Watchtower is called in Papiamento, and Spierta, or Awake! Gradually, the iron grip that the church had on the local people began to loosen as they began to read and understand the truth of God’s Word in their own language.
Translation also affected singing at the meetings. When Antilleans sing, they do so lustily and loudly. In the early days, however, this enthusiasm was somewhat tempered by the fact that the songbooks were in Spanish. But in 1986 when the brothers received songbooks in Papiamento, the halls resounded with voices that rang out clear and true. At last, in song they could give full vent to their feelings for their great God, Jehovah. Maria Britten said: “What impressed me most on my first visit to the Kingdom Hall was the singing. It was so beautiful that I was moved to tears.”​—Isa. 42:10.
As the work increased, more translators were needed, and two young, zealous pioneers​—Raymond Pietersz and Janine Conception—​began to do translation work. Today a team of nine forms the Translation Department. In 1989, computers arrived with MEPS software, a valuable tool in assisting the translators, eventually making it possible to publish The Watchtower in Papiamento simultaneously with other languages​—a wonderful boon to the preaching activity.
More Missionary Help
In 1962, John Fry, of the 37th class of Gilead, was appointed branch overseer to replace Russell Yeatts, who was to attend the Gilead School refresher course. After 18 months, when Sister Fry became pregnant, the Frys returned to England, and Brother Yeatts once more resumed branch work. On December 31, 1964, Age van Dalfsen of the Netherlands arrived in the islands after graduating from the 39th class of Gilead. The magnificent sight of exploding rockets and the deafening sounds of firecrackers reverberating in the night air greeted him as he set foot on Curaçao. No, it was not the islanders welcoming him. Instead, it was the annual tradition of the local people, their way of banishing the bad spirits and jinx of the old year and of heralding the new year. Young and energetic, Brother van Dalfsen took up circuit and, eventually, district work. Like most missionaries, he came to love his new home and says: “The people are warm, welcoming, and honest. It is a pleasure and a privilege to be assigned here.”
In 1974, Age married Julie, a sister from Trinidad, and she joined him in the traveling work. Julie recalls: “I was struck by the friendliness and tolerance of the people. I could speak no Papiamento, but preaching was made enjoyable by their helpfulness. It was easy to ask ‘Con ta bai?’ (How are you?) and to inquire about every member of the family, which is the custom here. Placing literature was also easy. What was hard was carrying around a heavy bag of literature in four languages and battling the dust and wind! But for me, it was pure joy.” In 1980, Age and Julie went to the Netherlands to care for Age’s father, who was suffering from Alzheimer’s disease, but they returned to Curaçao in 1992.
Robertus Berkers and his wife, Gail, of the 67th class of Gilead, continued circuit work in the absence of the Van Dalfsens and greatly stimulated enthusiasm for the full-time ministry. In 1986, Otto Kloosterman and his wife, Yvonne, came to Curaçao from Gilead, and Brother Kloosterman was appointed branch coordinator in 1994. They returned to the Netherlands in 2000. In March 2000, Brother van Dalfsen was appointed to the Branch Committee, and he and his wife were invited to Bethel, where they are now serving. In 1997, Gregory Duhon, from the Graphics Department in Brooklyn, and his wife, Sharon, were assigned to Curaçao as Bethelites in Foreign Service. Sharon, a registered nurse, and others were of invaluable help in caring for Brother Russell Yeatts, who was suffering from terminal cancer. In March 2000, Brother Duhon was appointed branch coordinator, and his kindness and approachability are deeply appreciated by all. At present, Gregory Duhon, Clinton Williams, and Age van Dalfsen serve on the Branch Committee.
Pioneering Brings Rich Rewards
When Margaret Pieters started to study the Bible, she was satisfied with her own religion. She recalls: “In the beginning I had no intention of changing my religion. I was an active member of the Catholic Church, the Legion of Mary, and the church choir. But after studying the Bible, I came to realize that what I had been taught was wrong. I did not wait to be invited to go out in the field ministry; I asked to go. I wanted others to get out of false religion and to take their stand for the truth.” Baptized in 1974, she has been a regular pioneer for the past 25 years.
Jehovah has blessed Margaret, as is evident from one of her many experiences. A young girl named Melva Coombs was referred to her, and Margaret suggested that she ask her father for permission to study. Mr. Coombs, impressed by Margaret’s respect for him, said that not only would his daughter study but his whole family would​—all seven of them! Margaret had the joy of seeing all of them get baptized, and one of the sons later became an elder.
Another pioneer who has tasted of Jehovah’s goodness is Blanche van Heydoorn. She was baptized in 1961, and her husband, Hans, in 1965. She has been pioneering for the past 35 years. During that time, Blanche raised six children, two of whom are now regular pioneers. This would not have been possible without physical and emotional support from Hans. Together they have helped 65 people to the point of dedicating their lives to Jehovah.
One of Blanche’s many experiences involved her neighbor, Serafina. Blanche had started to study with Serafina, but her husband, Theo, objected strenuously. He burned Serafina’s books and forbade Blanche to enter their home, telling everyone that he was sharpening his machete for her. Hans found out why Theo was so opposed. It seemed that he had a friend whose wife had started to study with a minister of one of the local religions. Later, she ran away with the minister. So Theo was afraid that his wife might do the same. Using Hebrews 13:4, Hans explained our viewpoint on marriage. Greatly relieved, Theo allowed her to continue the study. Serafina got baptized, and after some time, Theo did too. Both are now faithfully serving Jehovah.
Blanche tells of conducting a Bible study at 11:00 a.m., returning home for lunch, and giving birth to her son Lucien two hours later! She continues to treasure her privilege of pioneering. Blanche says: “Pioneering makes you prepare and study continually and gives you satisfaction that cannot be found elsewhere.”
Power Beyond What Is Normal
Marion Kleefstra has also found great satisfaction in serving Jehovah full-time. As a teenager, she became interested in the truth by reading the magazines to her blind grandmother. She dedicated her life to Jehovah in 1955, and in 1970 she became a regular pioneer. Her son Albert followed in her footsteps and has been pioneering for the past 18 years.
Marion studied with Johanna Martina, who was the mother of nine children. Johanna’s husband, Antonio, was very much opposed, and Marion was not able to study with her when he was present. Johanna would tie a piece of cloth on the gate if he was at home, so when Marion saw it, she would return later. With Marion’s patience and Johanna’s perseverance, both Johanna and Antonio accepted the truth and were baptized at the same time. They helped eight of their nine children to dedicate their lives to Jehovah.
Sadly, Antonio was later killed in a traffic accident. Some years later, two of Johanna’s children were killed in the same manner, and a third died under other tragic circumstances. But through it all, Johanna has stood firm, trusting in Jehovah for “the power beyond what is normal.” (2 Cor. 4:7) Strong faith has sustained her not only to endure times of almost intolerable sorrow but also to continue her pioneer service during the past 25 years. Johanna is now 81 years of age and says: “Jehovah is great, and he is the one who sustains me. I implore him constantly, and he never fails me.”
These are just a few examples of the loyal, hardworking pioneers who form the backbone of most congregations, enriching them. When the hour requirement for pioneers was adjusted in 1998, the possibility opened up for many others to enter this field of service. The pioneers have expressed deep appreciation for the Pioneer Service School, which has been a tremendous help in training them to be better ministers. Zealous publishers also add their shout of praise to Jehovah, and some of them are very successful in informal witnessing, as can be seen from the following experience.
In the early 1950’s, Albert Heath, a young doctor from Guyana, was lecturing at a university in Djakarta, Indonesia. There, he began to learn of a different kind of healing. An eye specialist, he could appreciate the “eyesalve” that Jesus spoke about to the Laodiceans, as recorded at Revelation 3:18. Albert decided that it was this “eyesalve” that he wanted to prescribe. In 1964 he and his family moved to Curaçao, and he continued to learn of the program of spiritual healing that Jesus had entrusted to his slave class on earth. (Matt. 24:45) In 1969, Albert and his son were baptized at the same assembly. At his clinic he witnessed extensively to patients and employees alike. Albert was responsible for guiding many to the waters of truth, some of whom are elders today.
An Unexpected Disruption
Life in Curaçao had always moved along at an even pace. For many years nothing had happened to break the almost idyllic peace. But events were unfolding that would drastically change this. In early May 1969, the zone overseer, Robert Tracy, warned against complacency and the danger of being lulled into a false sense of security by the seeming serenity of the island. That serenity was about to be shattered. Within weeks, on May 30, a labor dispute turned violent. Looting and burning broke out, transforming the once placid community into a maelstrom of political unrest. Clinton Williams recalls: “One man, shirtless, started toward my car, rage in his eyes. Suddenly, a onetime Bible student of mine came to my rescue, yelling: ‘Not that one! He’s a good person.’ The man advanced, tossed some canned goods that he had just looted from the supermarket onto the seat of my car, and walked away. I heaved a sigh of relief and thanked Jehovah for his protection.”
In the midst of the confusion and uncertainty of those troubled times, Jehovah’s people remained calm, secure in the knowledge that in the near future, God’s Kingdom will provide everyone with a perfect government. Then Jehovah will satisfy the desire of “every living thing.” (Ps. 145:16) Today people look upon May 30, 1969, as a turning point in the history of the island.
New Branch Offices
Nathan H. Knorr, who served as a member of the Governing Body of Jehovah’s Witnesses until his death in 1977, always showed keen interest in the missionaries and frequently traveled to foreign lands to strengthen the brothers. In 1956, zone overseers also began to visit the brothers around the globe, and these “gifts in men” have been “a strengthening aid,” giving impetus to the work in the ABC islands. (Eph. 4:8; Col. 4:11) In 1950, Brother Knorr paid his first visit to these islands and while in Curaçao arranged for a new branch office, with Russell Yeatts as branch servant. Concerning Brother Knorr’s talk “Liberty to the Captives,” Brother Yeatts wrote: “It was as if he had asked each individual up on the stage and was giving him personal advice.” In 1955, Brother Knorr visited again and spoke in the unfinished Kingdom Hall in Oranjestad, Aruba. He then traveled to Curaçao for an assembly, accompanied by a group of brothers. On his last official visit in 1962, he dedicated the Kingdom Hall in Buena Vista, Curaçao, and encouraged the brothers tremendously by his timely talks. He also approved the building of a new branch office, missionary home, and Kingdom Hall in one, in Oosterbeekstraat, just outside of Willemstad.
The father of the architect hired to design the building was a Jewish man who had been in a Nazi concentration camp with Jehovah’s Witnesses. He told Hazel Yeatts: “There is only one true religion​—that of Jehovah’s Witnesses.” This branch office was dedicated in 1964 and extended in 1978, on the recommendation of Albert D. Schroeder, zone overseer. By 1990, it became evident that bigger facilities were necessary, and efforts were made to find a new location on which to build, all without success.
During November 1998, a decision was made to buy an existing building and convert it into branch facilities. The brothers decided on an apartment complex conveniently located on the street called Seroe Loraweg, just outside of Willemstad. On December 4, the purchase was made. The speed and ease with which everything took place assured the brothers that Jehovah was blessing the effort, in harmony with Psalm 127:1. The renovated buildings are attractive and comfortable and are serving to bring honor and glory to Jehovah’s name.
On November 20, 1999, the dedication of the new branch was held in the branch courtyard, and 273 were present. Gerrit Lösch of the Governing Body quoted the prophet Isaiah to show how the new buildings would be used to serve Jehovah’s grand purpose. On the following day, 2,588 attended a special program at the sports stadium, and for many, this was the highlight of the 2000 service year.
Radio Coverage of the Blood Issue
Jehovah’s Witnesses cherish life and consider it a gift from God. In harmony with Acts 15:29, they abstain from blood. Their Bible-based refusal to accept blood transfusions has been misunderstood by well-meaning doctors and authorities. In 1983 a judge in Curaçao refused to recognize the God-given parental authority of Esmond and Vivian Gibbs and ordered a blood transfusion for their baby. The case was given wide coverage in the news, and much negative publicity ensued. A radio station aired a program to clarify matters, and a panel of seven​—including Hubert Margarita and his wife, Lena, together with Robertus Berkers, the circuit overseer—​discussed the topic for three hours. The brothers skillfully explained the Bible’s law on blood, and the program succeeded in relieving the existing tension and in helping people understand Jehovah’s requirements.
There are also doctors who respect the patient’s right to choose not to have a blood transfusion. For example, Gerda Verbist, a schoolteacher, was involved in a serious car accident and had to have immediate surgery. She bled so profusely that her blood count dropped to two. The surgeon decided to operate in two stages so that Gerda would not lose more blood. The operation was successful. Jehovah’s Witnesses are grateful to such skilled and dedicated doctors, who sometimes have to struggle with their own conscience yet have the courage and integrity to respect their patients’ right to choose not to take blood.
Guillermo Rama, chairman of the Hospital Liaison Committee in Curaçao, states: “We are regularly asked for help in crisis situations. Without the committee, there would be many more problems.” Alfredo Muller, chairman in Aruba, agrees. He notes that although there was initially some resistance in Aruba, most doctors are now cooperating with Jehovah’s Witnesses.
The Loving Service of Circuit Overseers
Though growth in the three islands was very slow in the beginning, there was always a steady increase, and literature placements were easily made. In 1964 there were four congregations with 379 publishers, and in 1980 the congregations increased to 16 with 1,077 publishers. Between 1981 and 2000, the publishers increased to 2,154, and with the addition of two Dutch and two Spanish congregations, the number of congregations grew to 29, with a Memorial attendance of 6,176.
To serve the different language groups, circuit overseers were needed who could speak at least three languages, and such brothers are not always easy to find. However, the ABC islands have been blessed with traveling overseers who, like Paul, were well pleased to impart their own souls. (1 Thess. 2:8) Engaged in this work were Humphrey and Ludmila Hermanus, now missionaries in Suriname, and Edsel and Claudette Margarita, local pioneers. Aruban pioneers Frankie and Maria Herms also served in the circuit work until they were called to Bethel, where they now serve as part of the translation team.
In 1997, Marc and Edith Millen, previously in the circuit work in Belgium, came far away from home to strengthen the brothers. Like all new missionaries, the Millens had to learn the language, a challenge sometimes with very amusing results. Brother Millen recalls that he was trying to say that a Christian must not be like a soldier who hides in a trench (buracu) and, instead, he said not to be like a soldier who hides in a donkey (buricu)! In spite of the challenges, Marc and Edith persevered. Becoming proficient in the language, they now serve the Dutch and Papiamento congregations with joy. In 2000, Paul and Marsha Johnson became the first couple to participate in a new arrangement wherein a circuit overseer from Puerto Rico serves the local English and Spanish congregations.
Quickly Built Kingdom Halls
In 1985, from as far off as Alaska, 294 brothers from the United States came to build a Kingdom Hall in Pannekoek, Curaçao. Completed in nine days, the new hall generated enormous publicity and served as a wonderful witness and an evidence of love and unity in action. People were amazed to see men, women, and children eagerly helping the volunteers from the United States. Ramiro Muller says: “As usual, there were technical problems; but these were overcome, and Jehovah’s spirit worked mightily in the building of the hall. On Sunday evening the brothers were able to worship Jehovah in a brand-new hall, much to the astonishment of the skeptics, who said it could never be done.”
It seemed that this accomplishment also astounded the local clergy, for one morning after the report on television, a car pulled up in front of the hall. Who stepped out of the car? None other than the bishop of Curaçao accompanied by three priests, their flowing white gowns billowing in the breeze, shaking their heads in obvious amazement and disbelief.
Time would fail us if we were to go on to relate all the unselfish acts of the brothers: of early missionaries like the Van Eyks, the Hoornvelds, the Phelpses, and Cor Teunissen, who left their homes to serve the brothers here; of Pedro Girigorie, who could neither read nor write but who directed many to the truth; of Theodore “Tall Boy” Richardson, striding through the streets of Cher Asile to make countless return visits; of zealous pioneers Maria Selassa, Edna Arvasio, Isenia “Chena” Manuel, and Veronica Wall; of cheerful Seferita Dolorita, blind and stricken with multiple sclerosis but still persevering in preaching and never failing to encourage those who go to encourage her. Images of these faithful ones and others, who gave of themselves unstintingly, are imprinted deeply in the minds and hearts of the brothers in the ABC islands.
The Desert Blossoms
In the 1980’s, Aruba experienced an explosion of economic prosperity. Ultramodern hotels now line the white beaches, and brightly lit casinos beckon the jet-setters of the world. Inevitably, this has influenced the mentality of the population, as materialism has raised its gilded head to affect many​—even some in the congregations. However, there is much spiritual success, especially in the Spanish field, and a pressing need for capable brothers to take the lead.
Curaçao, on the other hand, is experiencing severe economic depression, and many people are moving to the Netherlands. This exodus of brothers has affected the congregations, and in both Curaçao and Bonaire, there has been little increase in the past few years.
As we move ahead in the 21st century, however, there is reason for us to lift up our heads and rejoice. God’s glorious Kingdom is at hand, and God’s people are continuing to teach the truth to all those “rightly disposed.” (Acts 13:48) This once parched, spiritual desert has been drenched with the waters of truth.
[Box/Pictures on page 72]
Flamingos and Donkeys
  In quiet, unspoiled Bonaire, extracting salt from the sea is an important industry that generates income for the islanders. Flamingos feed on food that has a high salt content. This is readily available in the island’s salt pans, making Bonaire one of the few places in the world ideal for the breeding of these colorful birds. Half-wild donkeys, originally imported to work in the salt pans, were left to fend for themselves when they were replaced by machines. They now roam the countryside. To preserve them, a donkey sanctuary and a Foster-a-Donkey program have been organized on the island.
[Box/Picture on page 87]
Curaçao’s Gables and Pontoon Bridge
  Willemstad, the capital of Curaçao, is a quaint, picturesque town. The gabled buildings are reminiscent of Amsterdam but are painted in vivid colors. St. Anna Bay cuts through the center of town. The Queen Emma Pontoon Bridge connects the two parts of the town and can be opened in a matter of minutes to allow large ships to enter the deep harbor. Originally, a toll had to be paid to cross the bridge unless a person was barefoot, which was a sign of poverty. The result was that the poor borrowed shoes so as not to be considered poor and the rich hid theirs so as not to pay the toll!
[Box on page 93]
Salute First the Priest?
  “The dignity of a priest is so elevated and sublime that if along the road we should meet a priest and an angel, we would salute the priest first.”​—Translated from the Catholic weekly La Union, August 10, 1951, published in Curaçao.
[Box/Picture on page 95]
The Value of a Good Reputation
  In September 1986, Russell Yeatts picked up a package sent from Jamaica, addressed to the Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society. On opening it in the presence of postal inspectors, he was amazed to find under a layer of magazines a parcel containing four kilos of marijuana! Immediately the police detained him. However, he was given a good recommendation by the postmaster general of Curaçao, who said that it was impossible for Brother Yeatts to be involved with illegal drugs. Had the official not vouched so unequivocally, Brother Yeatts would have been put into prison. As it was, he was quickly released. The incident was given wide coverage in the local newspapers, one of which called Brother Yeatts “a very decent and honest man” and “very much interested in preaching the good news to all.” This experience underscores the value of a good reputation.
[Box/Picture on page 96]
An Unusual Feature of the Kingdom Work
  A great many copies of the booklet Examining the Scriptures Daily are placed every year. During some years, pioneers have been able to place hundreds of them. Giselle Heide was hospitalized, so she used the opportunity to witness informally to her fellow patients. One of them, Ninoska, responded favorably, asking Giselle if she had “the little book.” At first, Giselle did not know what book she was referring to but finally understood that it was the Examining the Scriptures Daily. From then on, they discussed the text every morning. Arrangements were made to study the Bible after they were both discharged from the hospital. In less than a year’s time, Ninoska was baptized. Currently, her husband and children are studying the Bible with the Witnesses.
[Picture]
“Examining the Scriptures Daily” in Dutch, English, and Papiamento
[Box on page 104]
“Zeal for God; but Not According to Accurate Knowledge”
  One morning while in field service, Hubert Margarita and Morena van Heydoorn met Morella, a schoolgirl. Morella’s expression gave evidence that she had “zeal for God; but not according to accurate knowledge.” (Rom. 10:2) She explained that she was receiving daily instruction in Roman Catholicism and that she was convinced that this was the way to worship God. Hubert and Morena arranged to study the Bible with her. These were the arrangements: She would go to her instructor, the priest, to verify what she was learning. If he did not agree with a teaching, she would ask him to give her Scriptural reasons why. If she ever felt that what the Witnesses were teaching her was contrary to the Bible, she would stop studying. Morella soon discovered that the teachings of the Catholic Church were unscriptural. When she realized that the priest was becoming more and more uncomfortable by her questions, she stopped attending his classes altogether. Morella continued her study of the truth, got baptized, and is now serving Jehovah faithfully.
[Box/Picture on page 107]
The Sand and Rock of Aruba
  The gigantic rock formations of Casibari and Ajo are a fascinating feature of the Aruban landscape. Grottoes containing rock drawings, believed to have been done by the Dabajuro Indians, are also remarkable. Perpetually sunny weather and long, white, sandy beaches are a magnet for thousands of tourists who return year after year to the island.
[Box on page 110]
“Out of the Mouth of Babes”
  Jesus said: “Out of the mouth of babes and sucklings you have furnished praise.” (Matt. 21:16) This is also true of the children of the ABC islands. Fifteen-year-old Maurice lives on Aruba. When Maurice was seven years old, his mother could not find him at a district convention. Concerned, she searched for him and finally found him at the back of the room where the meeting for Bethel applicants was being held. Maurice wanted to apply for Bethel. The chairman of the meeting, not wanting to discourage him, had allowed him to stay. Well, Maurice’s fervent desire to serve Jehovah at Bethel has not dimmed. He was baptized at the age of 13 and works very hard in the congregation, preparing well for all assignments. He is as determined as ever to serve at Bethel.
  In Bonaire, six-year-old Renzo was invited to the Kingdom Hall and enjoyed it very much. A Bible study was started with him, and from then on he refused to go to the Catholic church. He asked his parents why it was that they were not being taught in church about the Paradise, and this aroused their curiosity. They started to study with Jehovah’s Witnesses. Subsequently, Renzo’s father and mother along with one of Renzo’s Bible students were baptized. Renzo, now eight years old, was baptized at a circuit assembly in Bonaire.
[Box/Picture on page 115]
Iguana Stew Anyone?
  Iguanas, such as the one in the picture below, are common throughout the ABC islands. These reptiles are prized but not as pets. Iguana is a key ingredient in soups and stews. “It tastes just like chicken,” states a local chef. “The meat is very soft and tender.”
[Maps on page 71]
(For fully formatted text, see publication)
HAITI
CARIBBEAN SEA
VENEZUELA
ARUBA
  ORANJESTAD
  San Nicolas
CURAÇAO
  WILLEMSTAD
  Santa Cruz
  Buena Vista
BONAIRE
  Kralendijk
[Full-page picture on page 66]
[Picture on page 68]
People of many nationalities cooperate together peaceably in the Hooiberg Congregation, Aruba
[Picture on page 70]
Pearl Marlin sold religious literature alongside her father. She later became a Witness
[Picture on page 73]
The first English-speaking congregation in San Nicolas, Aruba
[Pictures on page 74]
Some who immigrated to Curaçao: (1) Martha Faustin today, (2) her husband, Hamilton, who has since died, and (3) Robert and Faustina Titre
[Picture on page 75]
Woodworth and Oris Mills on their wedding day
[Picture on page 76]
Edwina Stroop, a pioneer in Aruba
[Picture on page 77]
Jacobo Reina obtained a copy of the book “Creation” in 1928 and recognized the ring of truth
[Picture on page 78]
Left to right: Russell and Hazel Yeatts, graduates of the 6th class of Gilead, and Mary and William Yeatts, of the 14th class
[Picture on page 79]
Henricus Hassell, far left, was an ardent proclaimer of the good news
[Picture on page 79]
Camilio Girigoria was the first of the local people to be baptized, in 1950
[Picture on page 80]
Alice and Henry Tweed are fondly remembered for their self-sacrificing spirit and zeal
[Picture on page 81]
Gabriel Henriquez was given a gift subscription to “Awake!” He became the first Aruban to be baptized
[Pictures on page 82]
Ninita Webb originally opposed the truth. She and her husband, Daniel, became ardent proclaimers of the Kingdom
[Picture on page 82]
Maria Rasmijn was a devout Catholic until she was told by her priest that religious images were valueless
[Picture on page 83]
Albert Suhr left behind excellent “letters of recommendation”
[Picture on page 84]
Olive Rogers helped many to dedicate their lives to Jehovah
[Picture on page 85]
Top: Eugene Richardson, baptized at 17, served as a zealous pioneer
[Picture on page 85]
Bottom: Young Clinton Williams joined him in opening up the “kunuku”
[Picture on page 86]
Missionary home in Aruba, about 1956
[Picture on page 89]
Above: In 1962, Nathan H. Knorr, from Brooklyn Bethel, dedicated this Kingdom Hall, the first to be owned by the brothers in Curaçao
[Picture on page 89]
Right: Victor Manuel, a publisher of the good news for almost 50 years, served in the second Papiamento-speaking congregation
[Picture on page 90]
Above: “Peace on Earth” International Assembly in 1969, Atlanta, Georgia, U.S.A.
[Picture on page 90]
Right: Curaçao convention site for the same program
[Picture on page 94]
Petra Selassa (right) and her daughter, Ingrid, special pioneers who were sent to Bonaire to help in 1969
[Picture on page 97]
“The Watchtower” in Papiamento
[Picture on page 98]
Top: Pauline and John Fry
[Picture on page 98]
Bottom: Age van Dalfsen arrived in 1964 after graduating from the 39th class of Gilead
[Pictures on page 99]
Above: Janine Conception and Raymond Pietersz are part of a nine-member translation team
[Picture on page 99]
Right: Estrelita Liket works with a computer and MEPS software, valuable tools in assisting the translators
[Picture on page 100]
Robertus and Gail Berkers (left), serving in the circuit work, greatly stimulated enthusiasm for the full-time ministry
[Picture on page 100]
Julie and Age van Dalfsen (below) returned to Curaçao in 1992 and were invited to Bethel in 2000
[Picture on page 100]
Age van Dalfsen, Clinton Williams, and Gregory Duhon serve on the Branch Committee
[Picture on page 102]
Blanche and Hans van Heydoorn have helped 65 people to the point of dedicating their lives to Jehovah
[Picture on page 108]
(1) The branch office dedicated in 1964
[Pictures on page 108]
(2, 3) The current branch, dedicated on November 20, 1999
[Pictures on page 112]
The ABC islands have been blessed with couples in the traveling work, such as (above) Ludmila and Humphrey Hermanus and (left to right) Paul and Marsha Johnson and Edith and Marc Millen
[Pictures on page 114]
Early missionaries: (1) the Van Eyks, (2) the Hoornvelds, and (3) Cor Teunissen left their homes to serve the brothers here

