Announcements
ACTIVELY TRUSTING JEHOVAH FREE FROM FEAR—Isa. 12:2, AS.
In their active service for Jehovah God, his witnesses proceed with confidence, free from fear. They can truly say, “Behold, God is my salvation; I will trust, and will not be afraid: for Jehovah, even Jehovah, is my strength and song; and he is become my salvation.” With this assurance and appreciating that the day is here for Jehovah to vindicate his word and name, his witnesses press on in Kingdom service, doing the work that He has directed for them to do. They continually go from door to door and take advantage of all opportunities to acquaint others with Jehovah’s purposes. During December they will offer a volume of the New World Translation of the Scriptures and a book on a contribution of $2. All persons of good will are invited to share in this important activity, trusting Jehovah and free from fear.
1956 YEARBOOK AND CALENDAR
Have you ever thought how valuable it would be to review every issue of The Watchtower for this year? Limited time makes it difficult, does it not? Yet for proper Christian growth and maturity it is essential to deepen the mental impression made by these rich spiritual truths. Repetition assists us to make them our own. The daily Bible texts with comments from The Watchtower that appear in the 1956 Yearbook of Jehovah’s Witnesses provide an invaluable aid in this accomplishment. New points of doctrine, as well as Christian admonition regarding conduct and service, find their place among these carefully chosen portions from The Watchtower for 1955. As a single jewel takes on added brilliance in an isolated setting, so these choice excerpts often appear completely new though being read for the second, third or even fourth time. If read every day and meditated on, they will spiritually refresh, strengthen and develop you. In addition, the 1956 Yearbook of Jehovah’s Witnesses keeps you abreast of the remarkable growth of the New World society world-wide. Obtain your copy today for 50c and benefit immediately from the stimulating material it contains. Order at the same time your copy of the beautiful 1956 calendar that contains the Bible service text for the new year. They are 25c each; five for $1 to one address.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES FOR THE WEEKS
January 22: The Test That Leads to a Blessing, ¶1-22. Page 745.
January 29: The Test That Leads to a Blessing, ¶23-29, and Blessed Results from Making the Test. Page 751.

