‘Sorry, I Have No Time!’
“SORRY,” the lady said, “but I’m too busy.” A man down the block had said the same thing. Though many people really are busy when Jehovah’s witnesses call at their homes, what this lady actually meant was: “I don’t think it’s worth my time.” Rarely is a person too busy for what he really wants to do, or for something that he really considers important.
Would the householder be “too busy” if the person at the door had come to pay a long-standing debt? Then why turn down something far more important than money? Why is the spiritual mission of less importance than a financial one? Is it that the person thinks that the money is more important than peace and life? or is it that he has been misinformed about the nature, purpose and importance of the message that Jehovah’s witnesses bring? It could be either reason, or a combination of both.
In Bible times Jesus was received into the home of Mary and Martha. Mary was interested in the beneficial things Jesus had to say, but Martha was concerned about other matters, “attending to many duties.” She even protested that Mary was not busy with her. But Jesus said: “Mary chose the good portion, and it will not be taken away from her.” Would you, like Martha, have been “too busy,” or like Mary would you have had time for the more important things?—Luke 10:38-42, NW.
Saul, like many people today, had been misinformed about the activity of first-century Christians. He participated in the persecution of them, and even had part in the murder of Stephen. It took a blinding miracle to open his spiritual eyes to the truth. Would you require such a jolt to see the importance of the message that true Christians, like those of nineteen hundred years ago, are bringing to people’s homes today?—Acts 9:1-19.
This activity is in harmony with Jesus’ specific instructions: “This good news of the kingdom will be preached in all the inhabited earth for the purpose of a witness to all the nations, and then the accomplished end will come.” He further specifically commanded that this Christian message be taken right to the homes of the people: “When you are entering into the house, greet the household; and if the house is deserving, let the peace you wish it come upon it; but if it is not deserving, let the peace from you return upon you.” “He that listens to you listens to me too. And he that disregards you disregards me too. Moreover, he that disregards me disregards also him that sent me forth.”—Matt. 24:14; 10:12, 13; Luke 10:16, NW.
Jesus himself journeyed “from city to city and from village to village, preaching and declaring the good news of the kingdom of God.” Yes, the first-century Christians did teach from house to house. Paul explained: “I did not hold back from telling you any of the things that were profitable nor from teaching you publicly and from house to house.” And even after being flogged for this activity, “every day in the temple and from house to house they continued without letup teaching and declaring the good news about the Christ, Jesus.”—Luke 8:1; Acts 20:20; 5:42, NW.
Sometimes people who are thus contacted at their doors say: “I’ve been to church this morning, thank you!” Then, is that not all the more reason why they should be interested in discussing spiritual matters with anyone who is interested in them? If they went to church to learn about God, and if they learned what they went to learn, then surely they would be interested in talking about the things they learned there. And if they did not learn anything that they consider important enough to want to talk about, then certainly they do need the very message that is being brought to their doors!
The message that is brought by visiting ministers of Jehovah is of the utmost importance. It is equally important as was the message that the disciples preached in the same manner during the first century. Back then the message was that Jesus was the Messiah, while the message today is that Christ’s second presence has occurred! This is the message to which all the faithful men of God looked, and particularly since Jesus told his disciples to watch for the establishment of his righteous kingdom that would bring lasting peace to the earth.
It is this message that Jehovah’s witnesses bring to your door. Their publications, like the one now in your hand, contain Scriptural proof of these facts. They concern a firm assurance of peace, health, happiness and everlasting life. They point out the reason for earth’s present difficulties and show their specific outcome. Such a message is strengthening and vital! Could anything be more important, more worth your time?
Jehovah’s witnesses, too, are busy people. They are busy working, supporting their families and doing all the things that you must do. But their conviction regarding the truth of these Scriptural promises is so great that they readily take their own time, without pay, to come to your home and show you these things from your own Bible. They are that interested in you. Are you interested enough in yourself to listen to them and to examine their message to prove whether it is true or not? You have nothing to lose by doing so, and actually everything to gain!
Most people take time for the things that they really want most to do, whether it is keeping up with their favorite football team’s scores, reading magazines or an occasional novel, studying trade papers that help them improve their business, watching television, attending movies or just talking with their friends. All of these can be enjoyable and perhaps even profitable things, but the point is that busy people have time for them when they really want to do them.
Do you want life? Do you want more contentment and a freer mind? Do you want to know why earth is in its present difficulties and what the outcome will be? Are these things as important to you as the baseball scores, the current best seller or the evening’s television programs? If they are, then you will have time to study the Bible. And especially will you have time when someone freely offers you a hand with it.
Taking this view, you will never say “I’m too busy” to people who are offering you the one thing above all things that is most certainly worth your time!

