Do You Remember?
Have you found recent issues of The Watchtower to be of practical value? Then why not test your memory with the following?
□ What facts argue against hallowing the supposed site of Jesus’ birth?
The Bible does not mention the exact site of Jesus’ birth. The Gospel accounts of Matthew and Luke give only the bare essentials. (Matthew 2:1, 5; Luke 2:4-7) A reading of John 7:40-42 shows that people in general were ignorant of his birthplace, some thinking that he was born in Galilee. Also, during Jesus’ own earthly life, he never advertised the details of his birth.​—12/15, page 5.
□ How can a Christian maintain his joy while coping with trials of physical sickness, depression, and economic hardship?
God’s Word supplies the needed comfort and guidance. By reading or listening to the psalms, much needed refreshment can be provided. David advised us: “Throw your burden upon Jehovah himself, and he himself will sustain you.” He also assured us that Jehovah is indeed the “Hearer of prayer.” (Psalm 55:22; 65:2) Jehovah’s organization, through its publications and its congregation elders, stands ever ready to help us grapple with our problems.​—1/1, pages 14-15.
□ What did Jesus mean when on his way to being impaled, he said: “If they do these things when the tree is moist, what will occur when it is withered?” (Luke 23:31)
Jesus was referring to the tree of the Jewish nation. Because of the presence of Jesus and a remnant of Jews who believed in him, the nation still had some moisture of life in it. However, when all of these were taken out from the nation, only a spiritually dead tree would remain, a withered national organization.​—1/15, page 9.
□ How can “the pure in heart,” spoken of at Matthew 5:8, “see God”?
They “see God” when they observe him acting in behalf of integrity keepers. (Compare Exodus 33:20; Job 19:26; 42:5.) However, the Greek word at Matthew 5:8 rendered “see” also means “to see with the mind, to perceive, know.” Since Jesus perfectly reflected God’s personality, insight into that personality enabled “the pure in heart” to “see God.” (John 14:7-9)​—1/15, page 16.
□ Why do we conclude that Jesus is the archangel Michael?
God’s Word mentions only one archangel, and it speaks of that angel in reference to the resurrected Lord Jesus: “The Lord himself will descend from heaven with a commanding call, with an archangel’s voice and with God’s trumpet.” (1 Thessalonians 4:16) At Jude 9 we find that this archangel’s name is Michael.​—2/1, page 17.
□ What are four areas in which we can show honor to other people?
We should show honor to political rulers, to employers, to members of our family circle, and to those in the congregation.​—2/1, pages 20-2.
□ Shortly before Jesus’ death, what fine example did he set for those with aged parents?
While Jesus was still hanging in agony on the torture stake, he gave consideration to the physical and spiritual welfare of his mother by entrusting her to the care of his beloved apostle John. (John 19:25-27)​—2/15, page 8.
□ Why did Jesus have to suffer?
Jesus’ sufferings served to settle the issue of the integrity of God’s servants. They also equipped him for his role as a merciful High Priest for mankind. (Hebrews 4:15)​—2/15, pages 14-15.
□ What vital issues were raised by the rebellion in Eden?
Is man able to rule himself successfully apart from God? Is it just on God’s part to demand submission to his sovereignty? By extension, would any humans unselfishly choose to serve God of their own free will?​—3/1, page 6.
□ Why have some wrongly partaken of the Memorial emblems?
Some immature ones may not yet have a balanced appreciation of God’s purposes. They may not acknowledge that anointing “depends, not upon the one wishing nor upon the one running, but upon God.” (Romans 9:16) It is not up to the individual to decide that he or she would like to be taken into the new covenant and become a joint heir with Christ. Jehovah’s choice is what counts, and his spirit bears witness to that choice. (Romans 8:16; 1 Corinthians 12:18)​—3/15, page 21.
□ What is the “pure language” that is spoken about in Zephaniah 3:9?
It is a proper understanding of the truth about God and his purposes.​—4/1, pages 21-2.

