Announcements
▪ Literature offer for November: What Does God Require of Us? or Knowledge That Leads to Everlasting Life. If people already have these, Mankind’s Search for God or another older publication may be offered. December: The Greatest Man Who Ever Lived. As an alternative offer, you may use My Book of Bible Stories, The Bible​—God’s Word or Man’s?, or You Can Live Forever in Paradise on Earth. January: Any 192-page book published prior to 1987 that the congregation may have in stock. Congregations that have on hand Mankind’s Search for God may also offer it. February: Life​—How Did It Get Here? By Evolution or by Creation?, Revelation​—Its Grand Climax At Hand!, or any older 192-page book that the congregation has in stock.
▪ The presiding overseer or someone designated by him should audit the congregation’s accounts on December 1 or as soon as possible thereafter. When this has been done, make an announcement to the congregation after the next accounts report is read.
▪ Congregations should begin requesting the 2002 Yearbook of Jehovah’s Witnesses with their November literature request. The Yearbook will be available in Albanian, Arabic, Cebuano, Chinese, Croatian, Czech, Dutch, English, Finnish, French, German, Greek, Hungarian, Iloko, Indonesian, Italian, Japanese, Korean, Polish, Portuguese, Romanian, Russian, Serbian, Slovak, Spanish, Swedish, and Tagalog. Until the Yearbook is available and shipments are made, it will appear as “Pending” on congregation packing lists. Yearbooks are special-request items.
▪ Congregation publishers must not put handbills, tracts, magazines, or any other literature in householders’ mailboxes without proper postage. The same postal regulation that prohibits this also applies to mail slots in doors.
▪ Those associated with a congregation should submit all new and renewal subscriptions for The Watchtower and Awake!, including their personal subscriptions, through the congregation.
▪ The branch office does not fill individual publisher’s requests for literature. The presiding overseer should arrange for an announcement to be made each month before the congregation monthly request for literature is sent to the branch so that all interested in obtaining personal literature items may advise the brother handling literature. Please keep in mind which publications are special-request items.
▪ Awake! is now published in Kirghiz as a quarterly edition.
▪ Awake! in Japanese is now available on audiocassette.
▪ The Watchtower is now available as a large-print edition in Chinese Simplified (Pinyin) and Swahili.
▪ New Publications Available:
A Book for All People​—Efik
Apply Yourself to Reading and Writing​—Croatian, Haitian Creole
Awake! (2000 bound volume)​—Dutch
Bible Topics for Discussion​—East Armenian, Estonian
Comfort for the Depressed (Tract No. 20)​—Tongan
Does Fate Rule Our Lives?​—Or Does God Hold Us Responsible? (for Muslims) (Tract No. 71)​—Spanish
Enjoy Family Life (Tract No. 21)​—Tongan
Hellfire​—Is It Part of Divine Justice? (for Muslims) (Tract No. 74)​—Spanish
How Can Blood Save Your Life?​—Vietnamese
How to Improve Your Speaking and Teaching Ability​—Albanian
How to Start and Continue Bible Discussions​—Ukrainian
Isaiah’s Prophecy​—Light for All Mankind I—​Chinese, Chinese (Simplified), Persian
Isaiah’s Prophecy​—Light for All Mankind I—​Large Print​—Italian, Korean, Portuguese, Spanish
Jesus Christ​—Who Is He? (Tract No. 24)​—East Armenian, Japanese
Life in a Peaceful New World (Tract No. 15)​—Tongan
“Look! I Am Making All Things New”​—Lahu
New World Translation of the Christian Greek Scriptures​—Igbo
Pay Attention to Daniel’s Prophecy!​—Tamil
The Greatest Man Who Ever Lived​—Myanmar
The Greatest Name (for Muslims) (Tract No. 72)​—Spanish
The Watchtower (2000 bound volume)​—Dutch
Watch Tower Publications Index 1998​—Spanish
Watch Tower Publications Index 1998-1999​—Arabic
What Does God Require of Us?​—Dinka, Georgian, Mahorian (Arabic script)
What Do Jehovah’s Witnesses Believe? (Tract No. 14)​—Lingala, Tongan
What Happens to Us When We Die?​—Igbo
What Hope for Dead Loved Ones? (Tract No. 16)​—Tongan
Who Are Jehovah’s Witnesses? (for Muslims) (Tract No. 73)​—Spanish
Would You Like to Know More About the Bible? (Tract No. 26)​—Cambodian, Chinese, Chinese (Simplified), Greek, Italian, Korean, Papiamento, Portuguese, Swahili, Twi, Vietnamese, Yoruba
You Can Be God’s Friend!​—Baoule, Laotian, Tamil, Turkish, Wolof
▪ New Audiocassettes Available:
The First of Samuel (single cassette)​—Dutch
The Second of Samuel (set of two cassettes)​—Dutch
▪ New Videocassettes Available:
Noah​—He Walked With God—​Portuguese
The Greatest Man Who Ever Lived​—On Videocassette, Volume 3—​American Sign Language

