Part 1​—Blessings From Showing Appreciation for Jehovah’s Love
1 The apostle John wrote: “As for us, we love, because [Jehovah] first loved us.” (1 John 4:19) When we think of all that Jehovah has provided for us, we are motivated to show our deep appreciation in return. Jesus set the example in doing this by obediently witnessing about God’s name and Kingdom. (John 14:31) We do well to consider some ways that we may show our appreciation for Jehovah’s love and the blessings that result.
2 Going From House to House: Jesus taught his disciples how to perform the Kingdom-preaching work. His directions clearly indicate that they went from house to house, spreading the good news. (Luke 9:1-6; 10:1-7) It takes love for God and neighbor to keep going from door to door when we meet up with apathy and opposition. In the process, however, we personally benefit because our faith becomes firmer, our conviction stronger, and our hope brighter.
3 Working under angelic direction, we have found many who are hungering and thirsting for the truth. (Rev. 14:6) Householders have said that they had been praying for help when a Witness came to their door. Two Witnesses and a small child were going from house to house on a Caribbean island. When the adults decided that they would stop for the day, the child went ahead by himself to the next door and knocked. A young lady opened the door. When the adults saw this, they went over and talked to her. She invited them in and explained that she had just been praying for God to send the Witnesses to teach her the Bible!
4 Witnessing on the Streets: Since it is very difficult in some areas to find people at home, street witnessing is an effective way to give people a witness. Furthermore, many people live in gated communities or high-security buildings where we cannot go from door to door. However, our appreciation for Jehovah’s love prompts us to take advantage of every possible means to contact people with the Kingdom message, including street witnessing.​—Prov. 1:20, 21.
5 Making Return Visits: Since we are looking for those who are “conscious of their spiritual need,” we want to do what we can to satisfy that need. (Matt. 5:3) This requires that we return to water the seeds of truth that we planted. (1 Cor. 3:6-8) A sister in Australia placed a tract with a woman who did not seem to show much interest. Nevertheless, the sister persisted in trying to find her home again. When she finally contacted her, our sister found that after the initial visit, the woman had purchased an expensive Bible. The sister began a study with her!
6 Conducting Bible Studies: This can be the most enjoyable and rewarding feature of our ministry. What a blessing it is to help people learn about Jehovah, to see them make changes in their lives to please him, and then to witness their Christian baptism in symbol of their dedication to God!​—1 Thess. 2:20; 3 John 4.
7 In the next issue, we will consider more ways in which we are blessed for showing appreciation for Jehovah’s love.

