Service Meeting Schedule
Week Starting November 12
Song 170
 8 min: Local announcements. Selected Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry. Outline special field service arrangements for November 22.
15 min: “Rely on Jehovah for Strength.”a Include brief comments on the October 1, 1999, Watchtower, pages 18-19, paragraphs 6-8.
22 min: “We Have a New Tool for Starting Studies!” Audience discussion to be handled by the service overseer. Have attendants distribute to everyone in attendance one copy of the new tract Would You Like to Know More About the Bible? if available. Include demonstrations of two well-prepared presentations, using the suggestions in the box “What to Say About the Magazines.” One publisher presents the November 15 Watchtower, and another presents the November 22 Awake! In each case, the publisher concludes by handing the Know the Bible tract to the householder​—to one who does not accept the magazines and to one who does. Encourage everyone to give the new tract to all whom they meet in the ministry.
Song 191 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting November 19
Song 172
 8 min: Local announcements. Accounts report.
15 min: Local needs.
22 min: “Develop Your Perceptive Powers.”b An elder conducts a lively review of the special assembly day program that was held during the past service year.
Song 195 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting November 26
Song 177
15 min: Local announcements. Remind publishers to turn in field service reports for November. Using the suggestions in “What to Say About the Magazines,” demonstrate two well-prepared magazine presentations​—one using the December 1 Watchtower and the other using the December 8 Awake! Then explain how to find a presentation to use when offering the Greatest Man book or one of the alternative publications during December. Look in the Watch Tower Publications Index under “Presentations” and the centered subheading “List by Publication.” Share one or two examples. Remind everyone to make liberal use of the tract Would You Like to Know More About the Bible?
15 min: “Where Can I Find the Time?” Talk and audience discussion. Include main points from the October 1, 2000, Watchtower, pages 20-1, paragraphs 9-10, under the subheading “How Some Make Room for Studying.” Invite audience to relate practical ways that they have conserved time for more important things by eliminating unnecessary pursuits. Emphasize the need to apportion one’s time for personal and family study, congregation meetings, the field ministry, and daily Bible reading.
15 min: Young Ones Are Praising Jehovah. Audience discussion. Most congregations have many youngsters who share in the preaching work. It is appropriate for them to do so, even if it means witnessing mostly to adults. (Ps. 148:12, 13; Matt. 21:15, 16) When parents and other publishers take an interest, providing training and encouragement, young ones experience much joy in the field service. Invite audience to suggest ways to include young ones in door-to-door and return visit work. Ask parents to relate what they have done to help their children learn how to offer magazines, to use the Bible in their presentations, and to speak with confidence at the doors. Stress the benefits of giving children commendation. Interview one or two young publishers, and let them tell what they are enjoying about the preaching work and why.
Song 198 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting December 3
Song 179
 8 min: Local announcements.
17 min: Features of the Reasoning Book. Audience discussion. Consider the following examples of how various features in the book are very useful in explaining Bible teachings: Definitions, such as for “Kingdom” (pages 225-6) or “spirit” (page 380); comparative renderings from a variety of translations, showing where and how God’s name is used in the Bible (pages 191-3) or the truth about hell (pages 169-70); lists, detailing beliefs that set us apart from other religions (pages 199-201) or showing how a person can know which religion is right (pages 328-30); historical background, revealing the origin of Christmas (pages 176-8) or the neutrality of early Christians (pages 273-5); scientific evidence, supporting creation (pages 85-6) or showing the harmfulness of marijuana and tobacco use (pages 108-11). Encourage publishers to use this fine teaching aid whenever opportunities arise in the field ministry.
20 min: “Blessings From Showing Appreciation for Jehovah’s Love​—Part 1.”c When discussing paragraphs 3-6, invite the congregation to relate encouraging experiences they have had in house-to-house work, street witnessing, and return visit and Bible study activity.
Song 200 and concluding prayer.
[Footnotes]
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.

