“Where Can I Find the Time?”
1 That is the lament of many of us, for our lives are filled with activities. It has been said that time is both the most valuable and the most transient of our assets. So where can we find the time for things that are truly important, such as reading and studying God’s Word?​—Phil. 1:10.
2 The key is, not looking for more time, but deciding what we want to do in the time that we have. We all have 168 hours a week, some 100 of which may be spent in sleeping and in working. So how can we use the remaining hours to best advantage? Ephesians 5:15-17 recommends that we walk “not as unwise but as wise persons, buying out the opportune time . . . , perceiving what the will of Jehovah is.” This indicates a need to make full use of every opportunity to do the things that Jehovah says are essential.
3 Jesus compared our days with those of Noah. (Luke 17:26, 27) The people back then were busy with the everyday affairs of life. However, Noah made the time to build an immense ark and to preach. (Heb. 11:7; 2 Pet. 2:5) How? By putting God’s will first and obeying him by doing things “just so.”​—Gen. 6:22.
4 What Should Come First? Jesus said: “Man must live, not on bread alone, but on every utterance coming forth through Jehovah’s mouth.” (Matt. 4:4) Every week, we receive a “measure of [spiritual] food supplies at the proper time.” (Luke 12:42) This requires a regular, personal reading and study schedule to assimilate all of it if we are to be truly benefited. Out of gratitude for spiritual food, we do not view it like fast food, to be consumed quickly as one might eat physical food on the run. Instead, proper appreciation moves us to take the time to study and savor spiritual things.
5 Taking in spiritual food can lead to everlasting life. (John 17:3) It deserves a primary place in our daily schedule. Can we find the time to make room for daily Bible reading and preparation for Christian meetings? Yes, we can. Then, we will receive the “large reward” that comes from knowing and doing God’s will.​—Ps. 19:7-11.

