VOL. XXXII AUGUST 1 No. 15 
A.D. 1911-A.M. 6039 



CONTENTS 

Views From The Watch Tower 227 

"Unto the Third and Fourth Generation" 227 

Insanity Threatens Race, Says Dr. Wiley 228 

We're a Nation of Wrecks, Says University 

Head 229 

Denver to Portland and Homeward 

Conventions 230 

The Church Not a Part of the Ransom 233 

The Work of the Scapegoat Class 234 

Blessed are the Persecuted 235 

Dark Prophecies Fulfilled 236 

"Overturned Until He Come" 237 

Interesting Questions 238 

Ancient Worthies Not Represented in 
Court 238 

"Offering" Used in Two Senses 238 

The Two Altars Contrasted 238 

Incense Abode in Most Holy 239 

Both Had to Do With Justice 239 

I.B.S.A. Convention Railroad Rates 239 

page 226 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY 
CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
BROOKLYN TABERNACLE, 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N.Y., U.S.A. 

Foreign Agencies:-British Branch: LONDON TABERNACLE, Lancaster 
Gate, W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, Barmen. Australasian 
Branch: Flinders Building, Flinders St., Melbourne. Please address 
the SOCIETY in every case. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. FROM 

FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:— All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 



not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the STUDIES, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, AND DANISH EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N.Y., POSTOFFICE 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA 



MOUNTAIN LAKE PARK CONVENTION 

September first to eleventh on the mountain top will surely 
be quite cool; and as Mountain Lake Park is a "Camp Meeting" 
village the houses are not so tight as your homes. For 
these reasons plenty of warm clothing will be needed, especially 
for evenings. Remember this ! 

The various other Conventions this year will probably 
leave us a smaller crowd here than the General Convention 
last year at Celoron. But neither are the possibilities for 
lodging so good. All, therefore, desiring board and lodging 
should apply at once at $1, or at hotels at $1.25, $1.50, 
$1.75, $2 up. None should count on less than $1.25 daily 
expense. We have contracted for all the board and lodging 
available and desirable. Large rooms must accommodate 
three or four persons, small ones at least two, even to accommodate 
the smaller crowd we are expecting. We are even 
arranging for cots in temporary shelters. Surely, then, when 
you decide to come, send us one dollar, each person, which we 
will pay over to secure your space. It will apply on your 
board bill. 

Give full particulars re your party— which prefer to room 
together, when you will arrive and when depart, etc. We 
will gladly do our best for all. 

Particulars re railroad rates on another page. 

COLPORTEURS AT THE CONVENTION 

A "Brother" has remembered the Colporteurs and proffers, 
under the following restrictions, one-half the railway fare to 
such as need the aid to get to the Mt. Lake Park Convention: 
(1) The half-fare shall not exceed five dollars. (2) The 
Colporteur shall have paid the Society at least twenty-five 
dollars for SCRIPTURE STUDIES during this year. 

The Society has arranged for the free entertainment of 
said Colporteurs on a very economical basis. It will supply 
cots in two large buildings and will supply food which these 
dear friends can prepare for their own use, as many of them 
are accustomed to doing. 

Our Society regards the Colporteur service as one of the 
most important branches of the "harvest" work— if not, indeed, 



the most important. We trust that the above arrangement 
may assist a considerable number of Colporteurs to 
attend. It is our hope that the day devoted to Colporteur 
Instruction may start some on better methods and to greater 
success than in the past. We will do all in our power to 
further the usefulness of all desiring to co-operate in this 
branch of the service. 



R4866 : page 226 

MIRACLE WHEAT IN DEMAND 

The notice in THE WATCH TOWER of June 15 that Brother 
Bohnet has "miracle wheat" in abundance now, and that he 
will sell it at $ 1 per pound and donate the entire proceeds to 
our Tract Fund, has brought in many orders. These will be 
filled between August 15 and September 1. No limit as to 
supply has been noted. Sent by Express, prepaid, the price 
will be twenty-two pounds for $20; fifty-five pounds for $50; 
larger quantities at the latter rate. The merits of this wheat 
over the common variety have been mentioned in previous 
issues of THE WATCH TOWER. 

page 226 



BETHEL HYMNS FOR AUGUST 

After the close of the hymn the Bethel Family listens 
to the reading of "My Vow Unto the Lord," then joins 
in prayer. At the breakfast table the MANNA text is 
considered. Hymns for August follow: (1) 145; (2) 
299; (3) 99; (4) 108; (5) 110; (6) 270; (7) 41; (8) 
293; (9) 12; (10) 230; (11) 170; (12) 114; (13) 95; 
(14) 307; (15) Vow; (16) 123; (17) 176; (18) 109; 
(19) 273; (20) 333; (21) 222; (22) 160; (23) 152; 
(24) 137; (25) 312; (26) 267; (27) 9; (28) 7; (29) 
259; (30) 281; (31) 46. 



R4859 : page 227 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER 
"UNTO THE THIRD AND FOURTH GENERATION" 



Exodus 20:5; 34:7; Numbers 14:18; Deuteronomy 5:9. 

RADICAL CHANGE IN THE VIEWS OF SCIENTISTS CAUSED BY 
MENDEL'S EXPERIMENTS. 



WHY is it that a man of genius will not infrequently 

become the father or grandfather 

of perfect dunces? Why do a fair-haired 

husband and a fair-haired wife sometimes 

beget a dark-haired baby? Why are 

there such differences in size, appearance 

or intelligence between the children of the 

same, identical mates? 

"If we observe the so-called 'vagaries 
of Nature' in the plant and the animal 
world, we observe that the dwarf pea, sprung from tall 
ancestors, breeds true to dwarfness; that the progeny of 
a black and a white rabbit are in one case all black and 
in another all the wild gray color; that two white peas 
being crossed may give a purple flower; that two hairless 
plants may revert to the hairy form. 

"We used to call such phenomena 'curious reversions.' 
We believed first that through slow evolution certain 
characteristics of certain types had either become over-developed 
or obliterated, like the lizard's third eye, the 
bat's wings, the tadpole's tail. 

"We also believed that acquired characteristics, a love 
for music, a taste for strong beverages, would be transmitted 
to all of one's descendants. 

"Now come the Mendelian experiments, proving apparently 
that heredity and evolution are mere dreams, 
that species are immutable and that Nature's vagaries are 
merely Nature's logical efforts to extricate the original 
type from the tangle of cross-breeds due to man's 
tampering. 

"Even should the far-famed 'missing link' show up 
in the wilds of Oceania, where it is strongly suspected of 
keeping itself in the strictest incog., we would no longer 
have to deplore our descent from a simian ancestor. 

"The man who gave a concrete form to such theories 
was an Austrian monk by the name of Mendel, born in 
1822. The result of his biological experiments were embodied 
in a modest paper read before the natural history 
society of a little Austrian town, Brunn. He also wrote 
a few letters on the subject to the botanist Naegeli. 

"Unfortunately, pamphlet and letters were written at 
a time when Darwin's theories, as to the origin of species, 
had become the scientific fad of the day. And what 
chance had the modest old monk of being even noticed? 
He died inglorious in 1884. 

"Not until a few years ago did R. C. Punnett, an English 
scientist with an inquisitive turn of mind, look over 
Mendel's records of experiments. So appalled was he 
by their importance that he published a book, christening 
the new theory 'Mendelism.' 

"The world lent an indifferent ear to the new leitmotive; 
but by and by the Englishman dinned Mendelism 
into the consciousness of the scientific world. At the present 
day there is a big English magazine devoted to the 
new science and called 'Mendelism.' 



"Let us now turn to Mendel's own account of his experiments 
on plants and on animals. In one series of experiments 
he concentrated his attention on the height of 
certain plants. He first made crosses between giant peas 
and dwarf peas. It mattered not which was the pollen-producing 
and which the seed-bearing plant; in all cases 
tall peas resulted from the cross. For this reason Mendel 
called the tall pea 'dominant,' and the dwarf 'recessive.' 

"The next step was to collect seeds of the new plant 
and to sow them in the following year. When this was 
done it was found that both tall and dwarf plants appeared 
in the offspring. Each individual was either 
frankly tall or frankly dwarf, and no intermediate appeared, 
the proportion of tall to dwarf being three to one. 
The following year seed from the dwarf peas gave only 
dwarfs; seed from the tall gave a large proportion of tall 
and a few dwarfs. 

"In the following year tall seed brought forth tall 
plants only, dwarf seed dwarf plants only. The reversion 
to the prototype was complete. In the process, however, 
the tall plant, the dominant, appeared three times as frequently 
as the recessive. 

"The experiment was tried with various animals, and 
it was found, first, that after several generations the individual 
reverted to the pure type of either the male or 
female ancestors, and, secondly, that one type was dominant 
—that is, produced many more individuals than the 
recessive type. 

"Crossing colored and white mice produced in the long 
run pure colored and pure white, with a majority of colored; 
the Angora fur of some rabbits was found recessive 
to the normal short fur; the rose comb which occurs 
in certain breeds of poultry, such as Hamburgs or 
Wyandottes, behaves as a dominant to the high serrated 
single comb of the Leghorns. 

"Freakish cases in which one of the parents was in 
a markedly abnormal condition were considered. Japanese 
waltzing mice were crossed with normal mice. The 
'waltzers' are driven to circle round sometimes for hours 

R4859 : page 228 

by a painful malformation of the labyrinth of the ear. 
After a couple of generations the crosses bred true to 
either the normal mouse or to the 'waltzer,' the latter 
being recessive to the former. 

"Interesting experiments were made to ascertain 
whether crossing increased or diminished the resistance to 
disease. 

"Some varieties of wheat are susceptible to the attacks 
of a fungus that causes 'rust,' some are immune. 
When 'susceptible' and 'immune' were crossed, every 
hybrid was susceptible to 'rust.' The following year the 
hybrid became differentiated, the 'rusty' and 'immune' 
plants being in the apparently universal ratio of three 
to one. 



"We have, then, the explanation of facts which Darwin 
refused to consider as very important. He held that 
'freakish variations' in the production of species would 
rapidly become swamped by intercrossing with the normal 
form. He considered that species had been and were being 
built up by the process of natural selection. As a matter 
of fact, no species is being built up, and deviations 
from the prototype are corrected in the course of three 
generations. 

"Before experiments can be made on human beings 
the Mendelian discovery can be applied practically to 
the improvement of animal breeds. We know for sure 
that in most cases a cross means greatly increased vigor 
for the progeny. Breeders, however, are very shy in 
making crosses for fear of breaking up and losing the 
desirable combination of characters found in the original 
strains. 

"Mendel's discovery may reassure them on this point. 
In three generations breeders can reproduce the parental 
types with all the increased vigor resulting from a cross. 
We must also revise our conception of a 'pure breed.' 
Until recently we said that the criterion by which we could 
judge the purity of breed was the pedigree of the individual. 
Today we know that a plant or an animal can be 
pure breed, not only owing to its ancestry, but in spite of 
its ancestry. 

"Where the problem becomes fascinating, however, is 
where it touches the mooted question of heredity, and here 
again it upsets absolutely our previous notions. Man 
being the slowest breeding animal, observations are difficult, 
and only imperfect statistics can be relied upon at 

R4860 : page 228 

the present day to supply evidence. 

"The study of certain diseases, however, in the course 
of several centuries fortunately enabled scientists to establish 
heredity tables. One of the most interesting cases 
observed is that of the transmission of 'brachydactily.' 
In people affected with this malformation the joints of 
the fingers and toes are two instead of three, and the 
whole body presents a stunted appearance. 

"It has been shown that this condition is unfortunately 
dominant to the normal state, which means that 'brachydactily' 
in one of the parents will affect the progeny in the 
proportion of three abnormal to one normal descendant. 
The normal descendants will, however, breed true to 
normal, while the abnormal children will give birth to 
both abnormal and normal children in the proportion of 
three to one. 

"Another interesting case is that of the eye color. All 
colored eyes have pigment at the back of the iris. In addition 
to this there is frequently some yellow-brownish 
pigment on the front of the iris. Where it is absent the 
color of the eyes is blue, gray or violet. Highly pigmented 
eyes are dominant to those in which pigment is 



absent. When one of the mates has dark eyes and the 
other blue eyes, the proportion of dark-eyed and blue-eyed 
descendants will be three to one, the dark-eyed hybrid 
begetting only dark-eyed, the blue-eyed hybrid begetting 
three 'dark-eyed' to one 'blue-eyed.' 

"While Mendel's theories throw no light upon the 
origin of species, at least they seem to prove against Darwin 
the immutability and the lasting individuality of 
species. We may have to believe in a distinct act of creation 
for each and every species, but we can no longer assume 
that the difference between species arose from the 
accumulation of minute and almost imperceptible differences. 
Neither can we believe that a drop of tainted 
blood will taint the family blood for generations. 
We know who will bear the taint and who will not." 
--N.Y. Times. 

THE BIBLE PROVED TRUE 

The heading to this article with the references are 
ours. The Monk Mendel and those who are now exploiting 
his findings and theories of course never thought of 
the Bible supporting their teaching. But let us put the 
matter the other way about and say that these scientific 
gentlemen are supporting the Bible and proving it true. 
Their experiments, they tell us, show that special peculiarities, 
virus in the blood, etc., will work itself out in the 
third generation; the Bible says the third or the fourth. 
We shall stick to the Bible. 

Let those who prefer take Darwin and boast of their 
monkey parentage of gradual development. We prefer 
the Bible statement, that by nature we were children of 
God, created in His image and likeness, from which we 
fell through disobedience and to which the willing and 
obedient will be privileged to return "in due time" through 
the merit of the redemption-sacrifice finished at Calvary. 
Let us rejoice in the special invitation now ours of becoming 
members of the Body of the great Messiah, who 
provides both the redemption and the restitution of Adam 
and his race, and who will destroy in the Second Death all 
who shall wilfully and intelligently spurn Divine favor. 



INSANITY THREATENS RACE, SAYS DR. WILEY 

Alienists the country over are sounding a solemn note 
of warning to the American people over the alarming 
rush in which we live. According to Dr. Harvey W. 
Wiley, federal pure food and drugs expert, nearly every 
man and woman at some time in their lives border on 
insanity. That view is also indorsed by the famous Dr. 
William A. White, head of the United States government 
hospital for the insane, who backs up the stand taken recently 
by Dr. Owen Copp, new head of the Pennsylvania 
Hospital for the Insane. They also commend Dr. Copp's 



view that extremely few families survive three or four 
generations without the outcropping of insanity. 

Surprise was expressed by Dr. Wiley that more people 
do not become completely insane. Because of the terrible 
ravages of drink and drugs, particularly in the United 
States, thousands of people are rendered so extremely 
nervous that they are always on the verge of going crazy, 
he says. The rush and worry of modern life, the chase 
after money and pleasure, he gives as the causes for 
threatened insanity. "Yes, it is certainly true that there 
are very few people who have not been on the verge of 
going crazy," he stated. "Many have to be sent to asylums, 
but thousands of others save themselves in time. 
There are moments in practically every person's life when 
he feels that one more worry will snap the strings of his 
mental balance."— Woman's National Daily. 



Not only are we today living under a greater strain 
than anything known by our forefathers, but additionally 

R4860 : page 229 

the majority of mankind lack the necessary help in bearing 
the strain. At the very time when help Divine is a 
four-fold need, faith in God and in His Divine supervision 
of human affairs is being lost. In the smaller worries 
of a less busy time there usually was at least one in 
a family who had respect for religion and for God, and 
who would speak a word of comfort to the others. But 
now in humanity's time of greatest stress, verging on insanity, 
many families are without God and without hope. 
Faith has been broken down from two great causes:— 

(1) The so-called Higher Critics have destroyed the 
faith of the learned in the Bible as the Word of God and 
have substituted a theory of Evolution. The learned, in 
turn, although they have not ventured to give their unbelief 
unstintedly to the lower classes, have nevertheless 

left them without the consolation of the Scriptures and 
its guidance. They have taught Evolution and other 
things contrary to the Bible. As a consequence, few today 
think of going to the Word of God for the assistance 
which they can gain from no other quarter. 

(2) The other difficulty contributing to this unbelief 
is the horrible nightmare of error handed down to us 
from the "Dark Ages" through all of our Church creeds. 
Those monstrosities are too horrible for sensible people 
to believe and have caused a revulsion of feeling— they 
have driven thinking people away from the Bible, as well 
as away from the creeds. They have prepared them for 
the inoculation of unbelief, as expressed by the Higher 
Critics, Evolution theories, etc. The people have discarded 
the Bible also, believing that its teachings were 

fairly reflected in the creeds which they can no longer 
accept. 



The remedy for all this is to get the only proper view 
of the Bible consistent with itself. This necessitates a 
study of the Bible along new and independent lines, wholly 
free from the bias and coloring of the creeds of the past. 
The Bible must be allowed to interpret itself. It must be 
recognized as being partly literal and partly symbolical in 
its statements. Above all we must recognize that the 
understanding of it and interpretation of it to others is 
not committed to any special cult nor by any peculiar laying 
on of hands. It can be understood only by those who 
are in full harmony with God and guided by His Spirit— 
"The secret of the Lord is with them that reverence Him, 
and He will show them His Covenant." 



WE'RE A NATION OF WRECKS, SAYS UNIVERSITY HEAD 

The restless, moving life we lead will drive us all to 
neuresthenia. Leading the pace that kills, not so much as 
regards vice, but the desire to be always on the move, has 
ruined our schools and colleges and has attacked the 
mental and moral fiber of the American brain. 

These are some of the signals of danger set up in the 
roadway of American life by the Rev. John Cavanaugh, 
president of Notre Dame University, in an attack on modern 
living as compared with ancient customs and development, 
in which the latter in no way suffer. Three passions, 
he says, amazingly developed in the American 
people, are tearing at the foundations of our characters 
and home lives. These are the passion for travel from 
place to place, the passion for public spectacles, whether 
they be good or bad, and the passion for gregariousness 
as against home life. 

Father Cavanaugh said: "It is often disputed upon 
good grounds whether there has been any real progress 
of the human race within the time of recorded history. 
In my mind the old poems are the best poems; the old 
philosophy the best philosophy; the old sculpture, paintings 
and architecture are still the models. Demosthenes 
and Cicero still hold their prominence. In every important 
phase of expression modern life has made no development. 

"Within my lifetime I have seen three passions developed 
in the American people— the passion for travel from 
place to place; the passion for public spectacles and entertainment, 
and the passion for gregariousness as against 
home life. In the poorest parts of the country, in the 
hardest times, among the people least favorably conditioned 
financially, I find the railroad trains and the street 
cars crowded with all sorts of people darting here and 
there on errands of pleasure. The theaters are crowded, 
the dance hall and the public garden are more frequented 
than ever, and a new and horrible form of popular entertainment 
has been found in the 5 -cent theater. 

FAMILY HEARTH IS OBSOLETE 



"Steam heat and the modern methods of living have 
driven out the old family hearth in the literal sense; and 
the passion for living in crowds or among strangers has 
killed off the old family hearth in the poetic and social 
sense as well. An evening that a young woman spends 
with her family alone is dull, flat and unprofitable; a night 

R4861 : page 229 

that a young man spends with his mother and father at 
home is a lost night. In a cartoon a doting father is pictured 
as trying to catch a glimpse of his pet boy home 
from college for the Christmas holidays. The time the 
old man has darting in and out around the home is amusing 
in the picture, but not in life. That college boy is 
legion. 

"Obviously, what the country needs is chloroform or 
locomotor ataxia. The effect of this restless, moving, unreposeful 
life will be national neurasthenia. Its effect on 
the mentality of the people is already seen in the thin, 
pale courses of our high schools, and in the fact that our 
colleges are deep in social things and shallow in intellectual 
things. 

MODERN FICTION A NARCOTIC 

"I know an eminent neurologist who is treating a dipsomaniac 
at the present time, and one of the prescriptions 
he has laid down with most earnestness is that the patient 
shall abstain from reading popular fiction and from frequentation 
of the play. The old tragedies scourged the 
moral power into action; so did the old books. Modern 
fiction and modern drama are narcotics to the will. They 
are developing a tribe of maudlin weaklings. 

"But in scoring the modern life for negative developments 
surely something may be said for science, however, 
and very much may be said for the things that 
make for comfort and convenience in life. To some of 
us the railroad train, the steamship and the automobile 
appeal as conveniences, but to the greater number of Americans 
such inventions and fruits of the few great brains 
are merely instruments of their desire to lead the pace 
that kills."— St. Louis Post-Dispatch. 



OPPOSITION TO THE ZIONIST MOVEMENT 

The Missionary Review reports that "the Zionist 
movement has suffered a setback through opposition recently 
expressed in the Turkish parliament. The Grand 
Vizier in particular has spoken with contempt of Zionism 
and its expectations."— The Outlook. 



FOR THE STUDY OF SPIRITUALISM 

A brother of the late Senator Stanford, of California, 
has given $50,000 to Stanford University to found a department 
for the investigation of occult phenomena, 
chiefly the manifestations of spiritualism, in which Mr. 
Stanford has for years been a believer.— The Outlook. 



R4861 : page 230 

DENVER TO PORTLAND AND HOMEWARD CONVENTIONS 

GOD'S BLESSING has surely been richly 

with us on this second division of our Convention 

Tour. The Bible Students in the 

various stopping places had been working 

hard for success, and they were full of enthusiasm. 

The touring party, nearly two 

hundred in number, are full of fervor, adding 

to the spirit of the various occasions. 

We rejoiced together as we rehearsed 

Divine providences, blessings, favors, and 

united in praise and testimony, and in public presentations 

of the Truth. The profit and interest of the Conventions 

were augmented by occasional symposiums, 

participated in by nearly all of the brethren of the party. 

Some of these had been accustomed to public speaking 

and some had not, but all were quite conversant with the 

Truth. These impromptu addresses seemed to encourage 

the speakers and their audiences. 

Sunday, June 18, at 3 o'clock, we gave a public discourse 
on the "Hereafter" in the Auditorium at Denver. 
The attendance was estimated at four thousand, of which 
about four hundred (men) were on the platform. We had 
excellent attention, and feel sure that many left the place 
with very changed conceptions of the "Hereafter" and of 
our Heavenly Father and His great Plan of the Ages. 

The evening subject, "Zionism, the Hope of the World," 
had not been so widely advertised, and, as was expected, 
the audience was considerably less— less than one-half. 
A considerable number of Jews attended. We had closest 
attention, and at the close many expressions of appreciation 
were made. 

The following day we took an excursion into the 
mountain wilds, where we had very enjoyable services, in 
the nature of praise, prayer and testimony. The evening 
meeting was held in the auditorium of the Woman's Club, 
where an excellent address was given by Brother Barton. 

The following day was spent in the mountains of Colorado 
and Utah, journeying to Salt Lake City over the 
Denver and Rio Grande Railway. The scenery was very 
beautiful, picturesque and interesting. The convulsions 
of nature which threw up those great mountain ranges 



spoke to us of a Power Divine, while beautiful mountain 
flowers told of the same Divine Power exercised in a 
more pacific manner. It was a day of rest from oral 
preaching, affording us an opportunity for preparing sermons 
for future use. Our faithful stenographer, Brother 
Rutherford, Jr., materially assisted in the work. 

SALT LAKE CITY, UTAH 

Our one-day stop here, Wednesday, June 21, was an 
interesting and profitable one. The city is very beautiful 
and prosperous looking. Our morning services (a rally 
and testimony meeting) adjourned in time for us to attend 
the organ recital in the Mormon Tabernacle, an immense 
structure with a seating capacity of five thousand. 
The organ and recital interested us greatly; the music 
was very fine. 

Our afternoon meeting was a symposium on the fruits 
and graces of the Holy Spirit. Several participated, our 
own part being the conclusion. The evening meeting at 
Salt Lake Theater was crowded, nearly two thousand being 
present. The interest was great. Close attention 
was given by the mixed audience of all denominations. 
It is our opinion that Mormons are as honest as others- 
more honest than many. We understand that their institution, 
while financially strong, is theologically weakened; 
that is to say, the original doctrine of Mormonism is being 
called in question by newer elements, differently educated 
than their fathers. We trust that some good fruitage 
may result from the meetings. The class of Bible 
Students there is quite small. 

AT LOS ANGELES, CAL. 

Here the class of Truth friends number about one 
hundred and twenty-five. It is a zealous class in many 
respects. They had all worked hard for the convention, 
and the Divine blessing made it a great success. Those 
in attendance at the meetings of the interested numbered 
nearly six hundred, and included friends from nearby 
places as well as our touring party. The forenoon was 
given to testimonies, our own being the concluding one of 
about half an hour. In the afternoon, by request, we had 
a meeting for the consecration of children; about thirty-five 
children were presented. A Question meeting followed. 
The questions were good and were answered to 
the best of our ability. 

The evening meeting for the public was in the Auditorium, 
our topic being "The Great Hereafter." About 
three thousand people were present, including those on 
the platform. An overflow meeting was held in another 
room in the same building. It was addressed by Brother 
Sexton. At the conclusion of our discourse in the main 
auditorium, we gave a further half-hour talk to the overflow 
meeting, the conclusion of the service being at nearly 
11 o'clock. Here again the people heard with great earnestness, 



as though they were hungry. Again we had 

proof of the Word of the Lord to the effect that there is 

a famine in the land; not a famine for bread nor for 

water, but a famine for the hearing of the Word of the 

Lord. 

SANTA CRUZ, CAL. 

About sixty Los Angeles friends journeyed with us to 
Santa Cruz, and the following day to San Francisco; 
some even accompanied us as far as Sacramento, contributing 
to our pleasure and to the success of the meetings. 

Our train was delayed in reaching Santa Cruz, where 
there is but a small class of Bible Students. We had a 
very enjoyable time, however. Our afternoon meeting 
was held in the Casino Theater, at the beach, where the 
friends rested meanwhile. At the hour appointed for the 
public service, we discussed "The Hereafter" to a very 
intelligent audience, numbering about a thousand. Close 
attention was given for two hours, and we hope the interest 
will prove abiding. Following the service, the speaker 
was escorted by some local friends in an automobile to a 
park of big trees, where some pictures were taken and a 
bountiful supper enjoyed. A delightful ride returned us 
to Santa Cruz, where we had a meeting for the interested, 
which concluded the day. 

SAN FRANCISCO, CAL. 

Sunday, June 25, was an interesting day for the Truth 
friends at San Francisco. The Bible Students here are 
very energetic and surely worked hard for the attainment 
of the good results achieved. The afternoon service for 
the public at 3 o'clock was splendidly attended by about 
four thousand, our topic being "Hereafter." We had close 
attention. The evening service on "Zionism, the Hope of 
the World," was less advertised, but there was a good attendance 
also, about one-half that of the afternoon service. 
Those present in the afternoon (kept late and filled 
full) had little time or inclination to hear further the 
same day. 

At the evening meeting it was estimated that about 
five hundred Jews were present. They heard very coldly 
and cautiously until we were about half through, when 
their interest seemed to grow. When they heard things 
respecting their nation and its history, and the outworking 

R4862 : page 23 1 

of prophetic promises, they were apparently greatly interested. 

We feel here like reminding our readers 

afresh that we are not to expect any considerable number 

of Jews to manifest interest in Present Truth now. 

We hope for them that the message they are now hearing 

will direct their hearts and minds and prayers toward 

God and the Holy Scriptures, and thus prepare them for 



further glorious experiences in the midst of troubles in 

the near future. We remind you afresh that it is our expectation 

that the interest of the Jews will really come in 

the midst of the time of trouble, and that the Great Company 

will have the opportunity and honor of leading 

them to a fuller appreciation of the Divine Program, 

with the Messianic Seed of Abraham on the spirit plane, 

and the Jews in conjunction with Abraham, Isaac and 

Jacob and the Prophets on the earthly plane, to bless the 

world of mankind. 

AT OAKLAND, CAL. 

Monday was given to Oakland, which lies just across 
the bay from San Francisco. In many respects, the two 
classes are one— their interests at least co-operated happily 
with our program for the day. Our first meeting was 
with the Elders and Deacons of the two classes, numbering 
about thirty. It was a pleasant experience and lasted 
for nearly two hours. We talked of the local interests of 
the work and the best methods of promoting them. At 
10 o'clock there was a general rally and testimony meeting 
which we could not attend. The First Baptist Church 
was at our disposal for the entire day. Its capacity is 
estimated at fifteen hundred. 

At 2 p.m. we gave a talk on the propriety of parents 
consecrating their children to the Lord. We reminded our 
hearers of how the Jewish parents had a custom of consecrating 
their male children to the Lord by a circumcision 
ceremony. We reminded them that many Christian 
denominations practice infant sprinkling with really 
the significance of consecration. We pointed out the unscripturalness 
of infant sprinkling, because it is understood 
to mean baptism and to be performed instead of it, 
baptism being prescribed in the Bible only for the consecrated 
believers. We reminded our hearers of how the 
parents of Samuel had specially presented him to the 
Lord for service. We called their attention to how Jewish 
mothers brought their children to our Lord, desiring 
them to be blessed. 

We explained that there is nothing in the nature of a 
command in connection with such consecration of children 
—at very most it is a privilege, an opportunity to 
such as may desire to avail themselves of it without the 
slightest reflection against those who might think and act 
differently. We recommended that it be considered applicable 
only to children who have not reached maturity of 
judgment so as to have a will of their own in such a matter. 
We suggested that, later in life, children coming to 
know that they have been devoted to the Lord in infancy 
might to some extent gain a measure of blessing in this 
connection. We suggested to the parents that we hoped 
that the consecration of their children formally to the 
Lord would help to impress upon them their responsibility 
toward their children and toward the Lord— furthermore, 
from this standpoint they might be helped to a 



fuller acknowledgment of the Divine will in respect to 

the child— for sickness or health, for life or death, for 

interests great and small. Approximately forty-two participated 

in the Consecration and its prayer for Divine 

blessing. 

Next came a discourse on Baptism, which was followed 
by the symbolical immersion of forty-three. We 
learned afterward that three Baptist Ministers were in 
the audience and that one of them in particular was very 
angry because we had intimated that water baptism was 
the door into the Baptist church, so that none were permitted 
to partake of the Lord's Supper or be classed as 
members of the Church of Christ unless immersed in 
water. Thus we intimated also that their theory is that 
all others, not immersed, not being members of the Church 
of Christ, cannot be partakers of His blessings— one of 
which is the heavenly estate, and that all unimmersed, 
therefore, are lost, by which Baptists in general must 
mean that Episcopalians, Congregationalists, Methodists, 
Lutherans and others, not immersed, will spend eternity in 
torment. We certainly had no unkind intentions, but on 
the contrary endeavored to choose such words as would 
express the Truth in the least offensive form. One member 
of the church thanked us, rejoicing that her daughter 
had been led by the discourse to give her heart to the 
Lord. 

The church was crowded for the night service, and 
approximately two hundred of the friends of the Truth 
gave place to strangers and constituted an overflow meeting, 
which was held in a Disciple Church nearby. 

AT SACRAMENTO, CAL. 

Tuesday, June 27, found our party at Sacramento, 
where the class of Bible Students numbers about twenty. 
The first session of the morning was a Testimony Meeting. 
This was followed by a talk on Baptism by Brother 
Swingle, three being immersed later in the day. In the 
afternoon we had a symposium, participated in by twelve 
brethren, our own talk in conclusion being based upon a 
colloquy between Moses and the Lord: "If thou go not 
up with us send us not up hence"; and the Lord's reply: 
"My presence shall go with you, and I will give you 
peace." The evening meeting, topic "Hereafter," was 
held in Clunie Theater. A splendid audience of about a 
thousand was present, and the closeness of the attention 
could scarcely be exceeded. We will hope for some good 
results and some encouraging reports. At all events the 
dear friends at Sacramento, ourself and touring party 
may well rest contented that, having done what we could, 
the matter is in the Lord's hands, for His over-ruling according 
to His own will. 

We are writing this report on the day following the 
Sacramento meetings, as we are en route for Portland. 
Mt. Shasta has been in sight for several hours, its snowy 
peak rising fourteen thousand four hundred feet above 



the sea level. Our train stopped for a few minutes at 
Shasta Springs, allowing us to drink of the effervescent 
waters. We anticipated the pleasure of meeting a company 
of friends assembled on the railway platform at 
Ashland, Oregon, but our special arrived nearly two hours 
ahead of schedule, so we missed all but two. One dear 
brother met us at another station. He had ridden nearly 
seven miles on a bicycle. We would have had but a few 
minutes with them, but would have been glad to greet 
them and to receive their greetings in return. We spelled 
our disappointment with an h instead of a d. How wonderful 
the Spirit of the Lord, in His people of every nation, 
kindred, tongue and place— manifesting love for the 
Lord, the Truth and the brethren! 

PORTLAND AND HOMEWARD CONVENTIONS 

We had a fine time at Portland. All along the Pacific 
coast the weather was cool and bracing. The attendance 
at the meetings for the interested in Portland averaged 
about four hundred, while the public service at the Auditorium 
on Thursday night had about fifteen hundred in 

R4862 : page 232 

attendance. Friday night was a question meeting with 
an attendance of about seven hundred. Their questions 
were unusually good, and the entire audience seemed 
deeply interested in the answers. The meeting lasted 
for two hours, some remaining with other questions. 
Brother Bohnet was to follow us the following Sunday. 
We feel sure that the work in Portland is making considerable 
progress. 

TACOMA, WASH. 

Saturday, July 1, was devoted to Tacoma. Nowhere 
have we had more interesting meetings. The Tacoma 
Theatre was crowded, a remarkable thing for a religious 
meeting on Saturday night. About two thousand were 
present. The meetings for the interested were precious 
ones, and attended by about three hundred and fifty. The 
city seemed to have been greatly stirred. 

SEATTLE, WASH. 

We were warmly welcomed here, also. About five 
hundred attended the meetings for the interested. Some 
of these came with our party from Portland and Tacoma. 
Others came to meet us from Victoria and Vancouver. 
We had a splendid season of spiritual fellowship and refreshment, 
which concluded Monday night with a love 
feast, although the convention was carried over a day 
after our leaving. Two of our party remained to give 
addresses. About twenty-five children were presented in 
consecration to the Lord, and eighteen adults were immersed. 



Here again Brother Morton Edgar gave a discourse 
on the Pyramid. Brother Swingle preached the 
baptism sermon, and Brother Ritchie gave the address 
preceding the love feast. 

The Sunday service consisted of a rally and testimony 
meeting, participated in by many. Then followed 
our Sunday morning discourse, which already has been 
published in the newspapers, topic, "The Two Babylons." 
The afternoon meeting for the public drew a crowded 
house, estimated at twenty-two hundred. We had excellent 
attention for two hours. The evening service in the 
same place was for questions, about a thousand being 
present. Questions were good, the interest was excellent, 
many hearing for the first time some of the things of 
the Word of the Lord explained. 

VICTORIA, B.C., CAN. 

Wednesday morning, July 4, we proceeded by steamer 
to Victoria. The ride was a very enjoyable one, cool and 
bracing, and our hearts were full of love for the Lord 

R4863 : page 232 

and for each other, and with a strong, sympathetic love 
for neighbors and enemies. We were thus prepared to 
enjoy all the experiences which came to us in the Lord's 
providence. 

Our arrival at Victoria was in time to enjoy an afternoon 
service with the interested, and to give an evening 
address to the public, on "Hereafter." Our topic to the 
interested was, "We know that we have passed from 
death unto life, because we love the brethren." (I John 3:14.) 
We pointed out that a true loyalty to God includes 
a love for all those whom He has recognized by the 
begetting of the Holy Spirit, and is a part of our 
loyalty to Him and to the Captain of our Salvation. 
We pointed out, also, that the brethren are not always 
lovable, so that the loving of them all implies a considerable 
growth in grace. We noticed that such a growth in 
grace implies frequent polishings and much instruction in 
the School of Christ, and in the fruits and graces of the 
Holy Spirit. We noticed that it is more difficult, sometimes, 
to exercise meekness, gentleness, patience, long-suffering, 
brotherly kindness, the fruits and graces of the 
Holy Spirit, toward the brethren than toward others. 
We found from our text that such a development of character, 
in the heart, at least in the will, is essential, and 
that without it we lack a strong proof of our acceptance 
of the Lord as New Creatures in Christ. 

Meetings for the interested numbered about two hundred 
and thirty-five. The address to the public was heard 
with deep interest by about seven hundred and fifty. 

VANCOUVER, B.C., CAN. 



A night's ride on the boat brought us to our next 
convention stop. Here, also, we were warmly and cordially 
greeted by the friends. The class here numbers 
about seventy; about a hundred were in attendance from 
outlying districts, besides about one hundred and seventy 
of our excursion party, making a total of about three 
hundred and fifty. We had a blessed season of fellowship 
together, very interesting testimony meetings, etc. 

The service for the public in the evening had been 
thoroughly advertised, and was held in the city's largest 
auditorium. The numbers present were estimated at 
between three thousand and four thousand. The interest 
was good, notwithstanding the slight interruption by a 
socialist, who wanted his good things right away instead 
of waiting for the Lord's "times of restitution." His disregard 
for the rights of others brought upon him the 
police, who arrested him. We declined, however, to give 
any information against him, so that probably he lost 
his liberty for the one night only. The audience in general 
manifested deep interest in the "Hereafter," as 
presented. We trust that much studying of the Bible and 
prayer will be the result. 

ONE DAY AT CALGARY, ALTA., CAN. 

This is one of the new, booming cities of the Northwest. 
Although nearly everybody there is overcharged 
with a love for money and a desire to make it quickly, in 
real estate, we had an excellent meeting with about a 
thousand in attendance— an excellent showing, under all 
circumstances. We had a very attentive hearing, and we 
trust that good was accomplished. The class here numbers 
about twenty. We had a very interesting, and we 
trust profitable fellowship with the interested. 

UNEXPECTEDLY AT REGINA, SASK., CAN. 

Our train made an unexpected stop at Regina, the 
capital of the Province of Saskatchewan. We arrived 
at 3 p.m. and left at 8:30. The brethren of our party 
were equal to the emergency, and we had a public meeting, 
beginning at 6:45. They engaged the City Hall, had 
bills printed and circulated them far and wide. The result 
was a splendid audience for the little city, and under 
the circumstances. About four hundred and fifty were 
in attendance. The editor of one of the local papers 
introduced us and we had a splendid hearing, from which 
we trust some fruitage will result. The entire matter 
seemed to be of Divine providence. A local minister of 
the Presbyterian church was with us on the platform and 
expressed himself as deeply interested; said that he was 
reading the sermons in the newspapers, and that he had 
read four volumes of STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES. He 
expressed great satisfaction with what he heard. One 
of our audience came to the platform to shake hands, 
after the service. To our surprise it was the pastor of 



one of the principal Baptist churches of London, England, 
located near the London Tabernacle. It seems remarkable 
that we should meet as we did five thousand miles 
distant from where we both sat on the platform at the 
Guild Hall meeting, held by the Lord Mayor of London 
for the endorsement of President Taft's suggestion of the 

R4863 : page 233 

peace pact between the United States and Great Britain. 

WINNIPEG, MAN., CAN. 

We visited Winnipeg a year and a half ago, and were 
pleased to re-visit it. The class there has grown considerably, 
notwithstanding it has lost numerous of its members 
by removal. It now numbers about thirty-five. 
Meetings for the interested were attended by about four 
hundred, and we believe they were very profitable. About 
thirty were baptized and about twenty-five children presented 
in consecration. The evening meeting for the 
public was a success every way. A good theater had 
been obtained; thorough advertising had been done; a 
large audience of about two thousand was present, and 
we had closest attention to our discourse on "Hereafter." 
In the evening we had a question meeting which had not 
been previously announced. A thousand were in attendance. 
The questions were excellent. At ten o'clock we 
left it to the audience to express themselves by raising 
the hand whether or not they desired the service to be 
continued. About six hundred hands went up, and we 
continued the service until about twenty minutes to 
eleven, we trust with good results. 

AT DULUTH, MINNESOTA 

Tuesday, July 1 1, was spent in Duluth. We were hospitably 
entertained, as usual. The class here numbers 
about twenty; about sixty were present from various 
parts. We missed our trainload of helpers who stopped, 
instead, at Minneapolis, and went from thence to the 
conclusion of their journey, Chicago. At Duluth we had 
a baptism service at which eighteen were immersed. 
Our subject for the occasion was: "If ye then be risen 
with Christ, seek those things which are above, where 
Christ sitteth on the right hand of God. Set your affection 
on things above, not on things on the earth."— 
Col. 3:1. 

The meeting for the public was a success. The advertising 
had been well and thoroughly done. The audience 
numbered about seven hundred, which for a week night, 
in the summer time, was certainly extraordinary. 

PORT HURON, MICHIGAN 

This stop was not scheduled, but we found that we 



could make it and still be able to keep our appointment 
at Toronto— reaching there on Sunday morning. Although 
the friends at Port Huron had but a brief notice 
of our coming, we received a warm welcome. 

A good crowd was in attendance, some coming from 
Detroit. We had an interesting session in the afternoon 
with the interested, considering the text, "If ye, then, be 
risen with Christ seek those things which are above." 
In the evening the public was fairly well represented— 
about three hundred being present. We considered this 
excellent for a Saturday night meeting that had an 
unfavorable announcement. 

FINALE AT TORONTO 

Our last stop was at Toronto. The convention had 
already been in session a day before we arrived. The 
attendance was nearly six hundred, from all parts of Canada. 
Some said it was the very best convention of their 
lives. The Sunday afternoon session for the public had 
been thoroughly advertised, and the largest auditorium in 
the city had been secured— Massey Hall. It was jammed 
with about four thousand people, and they said that nearly 
two thousand were turned from the doors. Unfortunately, 
the acoustics of the building are not the best, and 
some, unable to hear satisfactorily, in going out disturbed 
others. Nevertheless the meeting, we believe, 
was a grand success. Some testimonies which reached 
our ears implied that the Truth had struck home in some 
instances. The newspapers gave good reports also. 

By special invitation we addressed some Jews at their 
synagogue, where the birth of Dr. Herzl was commemorated 
with Zionist speeches. We addressed them briefly 
along the lines of their meeting. 

The evening meeting was largely Jewish, and the 
attendance was estimated at nearly two thousand. We 
had excellent attention to our subject, "Zionism, the 
Hope of the World." Some brethren, circulating among 
the interested ones, took subscriptions for THE WATCH 
TOWER, and orders for STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES from 
some who had heard for the first time. 

Monday forenoon we gave an address on "Baptism, 
and the New Life." Sixty-three symbolized their consecration 
to the Lord, even unto death. 

We arrived home early July 18. We met the Bethel 
family at noon. Some special flowers had been arranged, 
and as we entered the room all arose and joined in singing, 
"Blest be the tie that binds our hearts in Christian 
love." We gave thanks to the Lord, related briefly our 
experiences, and proceeded with dinner. We expressed 
ourselves as pleased with the trip and also pleased to be 
back again at the Central Depot of the Harvest Work. 



R4864 : page 233 



THE CHURCH NOT A PART OF THE RANSOM 

IN THE SCRIPTURES the word ransom is 

used in two different senses. The one is 

illustrated in the statement, "The man 

Christ Jesus, who gave Himself a ransom 

for all" (I Tim. 2:6); the other in the 

text which says, "I will ransom them from 

the power of the grave." (Hosea 13:14.) 

The Church is not a part of the ransom-price, 

and is not referred to in I Tim. 2:6. 

The ransom-price is one man, our Lord 

Jesus, who laid down that price during the three and a 

half years between His consecration at Jordan and His 

death at Calvary. After He had ascended on high, He 

did not apply the ransom-price for the whole world, nor 

has He yet so applied it. Later, however, He will apply 

it for the whole world. 

But He is now imputing this merit to a little class, so 
that this class may be made acceptable to the Father, to 
participate in the sufferings of Christ and to have fellowship 
with Him also, in His glory, in His great Office as 
Mediator between God and men. Thus the Church becomes 
a part of the Sin-Off ering. This does not imply, 
however, that she has a share in the ransom; for one 
man— not many men— was the ransom-price. The Church's 
share, therefore, as part of the Sin-Offering, is not to be 
confounded with our Lord's ransom-price. Even in the 
sin-offering, the Church does not offer (sacrifice) the 
Sin-Off ering. In the typical picture the high priest offered 
(sacrificed) both the bullock and the goat. It is 
not that the high priest offered the bullock and the underpriests 
offered the goat— as though we offer ourselves. 
The utmost that we can do is to consecrate ourselves to 
be willing sacrifices. It then remains for the High Priest 
to come forth and impute a sufficiency of His merit to 
make an acceptable sacrifice of this class represented by 
the goat. 

Thus it is seen that we do not share in the Sin-Offering 
in the same sense as did our Lord. His offering was of 
two parts, the bullock and the goat— representing His own 
person and the persons of His followers. Where, then, 

R4864 : page 234 

does the Church appear? We answer that, not the Church, 
but the human beings which have offered (presented) 
themselves are represented in the goat. When our sacrifice 
takes place, the personal offering of the High Priest 
having been accepted, we are counted in as a part of His 
sacrifice, and are accepted as His members and His 
Under-Priests. From that time on, as His members, we 
have participation with Him in everything, sacrificially 
and otherwise. But we have no personal identity in the 
Holy. The New Creature that is in the Holy is a member 



of the Body of the High Priest, under His robe, 
under His merit, in the Divine arrangement. 

OUR LORD'S WORK AND THAT OF THE CHURCH 

Nowhere in the Scriptures is the thought presented 
that we, the Church, will follow our Lord into the Most 
Holy, as under-priests, and there sprinkle our blood in the 
Most Holy, as the typical high priest sprinkled the blood 
of the bullock. On the contrary, the high priest alone 
sprinkled, first, the blood of the bullock and, later, the 
blood of the goat. Consequently, we, as individuals, have 
nothing to do with the antitypical sprinkling of the blood. 
Our individuality, as human beings, is lost as we become 
members of the great High Priest and take His Name. 
But we do not mean to say that we shall have no individuality 
beyond the veil; for the Scriptures assure us 
that we shall be like Him. (I John 3:2.) The thought is 
that we shall have no individuality in respect to the glorious 
Office. There is but the one Melchizedek Priest. All 
others are lost sight of. There will be not only a Priestly, 
but also a Kingly Office, both of which we shall share in our 
relationship to Him. But any association that we have in 
the work of Sin-Offering, from the Divine standpoint, is 
all accredited to Christ and included in the work of 
Christ; and we are members of Him. It is to be remembered 
that the participation of the Church in the Sin-Offering 
is not, in any sense of the word, a necessity for 
the satisfaction of Justice, but because the Divine Plan 
has been so arranged as to permit us to share with Christ 
His glorious, higher nature and work. The participation 
in the suffering is purely a favor to the Church and is 
entirely unnecessary. It is, therefore, a wonderful favor 
bestowed upon us, that we might be privileged to be associated 
with Christ. His death and His alone was necessary 
for the satisfaction of Divine Justice. 

It is important that we have clearly in mind the difference 
between the work of presenting our bodies as 
living sacrifices, and our Lord's work, as the great High 
Priest, in offering us sacrificially. The two acts seem to 
be distinctly separate, as shown in the type. There the 
goat was brought and presented at the door of the Tabernacle 
and tied, picturing the Covenant of Sacrifice 
which we make. (Psa. 50:5; 1 18:27.) But the goat had 
not yet been offered, and no one but the high priest was 
qualified to make the offering. The work of the high 
priest in killing the goat was the only offering, in the 
Scriptural sense of the word. 

Even after we have presented ourselves acceptably to 
the Father, and after we have become New Creatures, 
living members of Christ's Body and members of the 
Royal Priesthood, there is a continuous work going on— 
the presenting of ourselves daily. So the Lord Jesus has 
continued the offering all through the Gospel Age. At 
the end of this Age, He will finally complete the offering, 
which will all be considered as one; and the New 



Creatures will all be admitted to the Most Holy as members 

of His Body. It is important that we keep in mind 

that the sacrifice which God has accepted must continue 

to be presented. If ever our Lord, through our unfaithfulness, 

should abandon the sacrifice and let go of us, we 

would fail utterly. The sacrifice would be incomplete. 

THE WORK OF THE SCAPEGOAT CLASS 

If it be true that the Church has no merit and that the 
Church's sacrifice does not enter meritoriously into the 
matter of the satisfaction of Justice, that it is merely the 
merit of Christ that does so, and that we disappear, as individuals, 
after consecrating ourselves, what shall we say 
in respect to the Great Company and the fact that the 
iniquities and trespasses of the people were laid upon the 
scapegoat, which typifies that class? Is there more efficacy 
and merit in the scapegoat than in the Lord's goat? 

We answer, the atonement for sin was accomplished 
by the sacrifices of the Day of Atonement, and these sacrifices 
were only the two— the bullock and the Lord's goat. 
With the blood of these two animals atonement was made 
for the sins of the priests and the Levites and all the 
people. 

When the two Sin-Offerings were accepted, the atonement 
for sin was finished. In the antitype, this will mean 
that the life of the man Adam and his race is purchased 
back from condemnation. The "great company" class had 
neither part nor lot in the Sin-Off ering. They had the 
opportunity, but they failed to go on until the sacrifice 
was completed; therefore, they failed to be of the priesthood. 
Those sins of the people that were not atoned for 
by the high priest, with the blood of the bullock and of the 
goat, were not Adamic sin. The question, then, is, What 
sins were they? We answer that the sin not atoned for 
was conduct that was reprehensible, sins that had been 
committed with more or less intelligence or responsibility, 
as, for instance, the killing of the Prophets and the crucifixion 
of our Lord. Although there was a certain amount 
of ignorance, nevertheless the Jews and their leaders 
were largely responsible for the death of the Prophets and 
of our Lord. So there have been many similar instances 
of violence against the Lord's saints, down through this 
Gospel Age; and in proportion to the intelligence of the 
guilty, the world has been more or less responsible for all 
these violations of Justice. Thus no one is released from 
responsibility who does anything against any of these 
"little ones," as the Lord calls them. 

In the Lord's arrangement these sins of the world, the 
sins outside of sins of ignorance, sins against the Lord's 
people, must be settled for and cancelled in the "great time 
of trouble" upon the world. The Lord's arrangement is 
that the "great company" class shall have a special trial 
and testing and shall be forced forward in the time of 
trouble, inasmuch as they did not carry out their covenant 
of sacrifice willingly. Hence the Divine provision that 



their flesh must be destroyed in this manner. Apparently 
the Lord would say, "We will allow this 'great company' 
class to participate in this time of trouble and suffering 
upon the world, so that the world will have that much 
less to suffer later." This principle would apply to the 
"great company" class all down through the Age. All 
must have had their flesh destroyed by suffering. But 
we know that they have been few in number in the past 
as compared with the number in the end of this Age. 

We must remember that the types of the Law Covenant 
were arranged to represent matters as they would 
be seen by us in the conclusion of the antitypical Day of 
Atonement, and not to represent the things as they would 
be seen while they were in progress. In the type, first, 
the Levites were chosen, and afterward some were 
selected to be priests. Just so with us. Today we might 
be of the priestly class; and later we might lose our standing 
and become merely Levites, of the servant class. We 

R4864 : page 235 

might, for a time, be of the "Lord's goat" class, and, 
through carelessness in performing our sacrifices, lose 
our place in the sacrificial class. Some one might take 
our crown and we might be thus relegated to the "great 
company." So these things represent the results as they 
will be in the end of this Age. There will be a "great 
company" class, which will bear certain iniquities. 

WE DO NOT ENTER THE "HOLY" AS INDIVIDUALS 

In the type the under priests were representatives of 
the high priest in that they were his sons, his family, his 
body. When he had finished his sacrifice of the bullock, 

R4865 : page 235 

he went into the "Most Holy," typically representing 
the ascension of our Lord and the Father's manifested 
acceptance of the Church sacrificed at Pentecost 
and since. When the sacrifice of those who are of 
the consecrated class is accepted of the Lord, then it is 
true of this class, "Ye are dead." The life of the antitypical 
goat is ended. "Your [new] life is hid in Christ 
by God."-Col. 3:3. 

We have not entered the Holy as individuals. The 
privileges and blessings which we enjoy are ours as members 
of the Body of Christ. Whenever the Scripture 
speaks of the Priest, it refers to but one Priest. The 
others were privileged to assist, but neither to go into the 
Tabernacle, individually, on the Day of Atonement, nor 
to sprinkle the blood nor to offer the Sin-Off ering. 

We have seen that those who are of the "little flock," 
the Royal Priesthood, might, through failure to live up 
to the terms of their consecration, be rejected from the 
priesthood and become merely of the servant class, ordinary 



Levites. The question might arise, Could these, 

after being relegated to the "great company" class, be reinstated 

and accepted to the priestly class again? Our 

answer is, No. This picture of the Atonement Day shows 

the matter as it will be in the conclusion of the antitypical 

Day of Atonement. God, who knows the heart, never 

relegates any one to the "servant" class until that person 

shows that he has not the proper spirit to be a true "overcomer." 

The decision being once given, the Divine wisdom, 

foreknowing and foreseeing, would not reverse it. 

He could not err in His judgment that the person would 

not be fit for a place in the Bride class. 

LET US NOT JUDGE ONE ANOTHER 

Those who are of the sacrificing class should know 
that they are sacrificing and what is their relationship to 
the Lord. While they cannot be so positive about others, 
yet they ought to know about themselves. Concerning 
those who will be of the "great company" class they may 
not be able to judge. It would seem, however, that there 
would be certain evidences by which we might have some 
measure of judgment on the subject; as, for instance, in 
Revelation 19, it is shown that there are those who are 
disposed to remain in Babylon after having heard the call 
to "come out of her." We may infer that any brother or 
sister in Babylon who understands the call of God should 
obey. It is the duty of all those who appreciate the light 
of present Truth to do this. Any of these who, under 
these circumstances, should continue in Babylon indefinitely, 
would be there probably because of their failure to 
have sufficient courage to be sacrificed, because desiring 
the approval of men, or family, or whatever. These things 
would stand in their way and hinder them from attaining 
the glory, honor and immortality with their Lord. Such 
will not be permitted to enter into the Kingdom glory, 
for they have not a sufficiency of the spirit of overcomers. 
They have some of this spirit, but not sufficient; they 
are lukewarm. 

It is very improper, however, for the Lord's people to 
give time and attention to specially judging people. If we 
know of a dear brother or sister in the nominal church, 
we could wish that he or she would come out. But we 
are to remember that we are not sufficiently able to judge 
to say that he or she is of the "great company" class. 
Some persons who have been quite awhile under just such 
conditions have stepped out suddenly and shown wonderful 
courage thereafter. 



R4865 : page 235 

BLESSED ARE THE PERSECUTED 
--JEREMIAH 37.-AUGUST 20.- 



"Blessed are ye when men shall revile you, and persecute you, 
and shall say all manner of evil against you falsely for My 
sake. "--Matt. 5:11. 

PERSECUTION implies that the person or 
thing persecuted possessed some qualities or 
powers that are feared. When the persecution 
is for religion it proves that the 
persecutor realizes his own weakness to 
meet the arguments in a more rational way. 
It implies either that the persecutors are 
weak, or that the arguments of the persecuted 
are strong. 

There have been persecutions from the 
earliest dawn of history. Cain persecuted his brother Abel 
to the death because the latter was right and the persecutor 
was wrong. It is safe to say that the persecutors 
are always wrong even if we cannot say that the persecuted 
are always right. The principle of persecution is a 
wrong one. Whoever, therefore, finds himself disposed 
to persecute another, either with physical torture or by 
harassings of slander and epithets should immediately inquire 
respecting his own heart condition, for there is 
surely something wrong. Whoever witnesses persecution, 
either physical or slanderous, should immediately decide 
that the persecutor is in error and should give his sympathy 
to the persecuted if he be able to do no more. He 
will thus be cultivating in his own mind a principle of 
justice— righteousness— which will make for his own 
character-development. 

FAITHFUL JEREMIAH PERSECUTED 

Today's study draws our attention to the persecutions 
endured by one of the Lord's faithful Prophets. He was 
a patriot in the highest sense of the word, namely, in that 
he looked for the highest good of his nation along the 
lines of Divine wisdom. His principle was "God First," 
and he knew that only this procedure could bring Divine 
blessings to his nation. He was of course misunderstood 
by the king and his counsellors. They did not like him 
because he told the truth, and that fearlessly— they preferred 
prophets who would tell them of their own wisdom, 
greatness and the success of their policies. 

At the time of this study Zedekiah was on the throne. 
He was a vassal to Nebuchadnezzar, king of the Chaldeans, 
whose seat of empire was to the north. Hoping 
for assistance from Egypt on the south, Judah revolted, 
contrary to the warning of the Lord through Jeremiah. 
The Chaldeans laid siege, and the Egyptian army started 
for their deliverance. 

The siege was temporarily raised and the hopes of 

R4865 : page 236 



Judah rose. Nevertheless, Jeremiah persisted in declaring 
as at first that the end of the kingdom was near, that they 
would be swallowed up in Babylon. 

Selfwilled, the king and his princes esteemed Jeremiah 
as a traitor to the nation, and their opponent. Alas! they 
should have realized that the nation was God's and that 
Jeremiah alone was standing faithfully with the great 
King. 

When the Chaldean army had withdrawn from the 
siege, Jeremiah concluded to cast in his lot with some of 
the nation living outside the city walls— in the portion of 
the tribe of Benjamin. Attempting to carry out this 
program, he was arrested on the charge of disloyalty, that 
he had given himself over to co-work with the Chaldeans 
against the interests of his own land. Although he denied 
the charge he was put into prison. 

Jerusalem was honeycombed with underground cisterns 
and vaults, arched overhead, and these were called 
"cabins." They were designed to be reservoirs for water 
in time of drouth or in time of siege. The bottoms of 
these "cabins," or cisterns, after the removal of the water, 
were frequently deep with mud and slime. The next 
chapter tells us of the terrible condition of the dungeon 
into which Jeremiah was put. We read, "They let down 
Jeremiah with cords, and in the dungeon there was no 
water but mire; so Jeremiah sank in the mire." When 
finally they drew him out, we read they took "old cast-off 
clouts and rotten rags and let them down by cords into 
the dungeon to Jeremiah," who put them under his arms 
and was drawn up. In this dungeon the Prophet remained 
"many days." 

FEAR OF SUFFERING DID NOT DETER THE PROPHET 

Not from sympathy, not from righteousness, but from 
a desire to inquire of the Prophet respecting the future, 
the king had him taken out of the dungeon. However 
much the king despised Jeremiah and refused to recognize 
his words, he, nevertheless, in his heart, realized 
that he was a servant of Jehovah, and he feared that his 
message was true. 

The Prophet's courage in answering the king's question 
is very praiseworthy. He altered not a word of 
what he had previously told. In a kind way he urged the 
king not to heed the contrary prophecies, stating that his 
own dire statements must be true because they were the 
Word of the Lord. 

At his entreaty he was no longer put down into the 
mud bottom of the cistern, but was allowed to remain a 
prisoner in the court of the prison, and was granted daily 
a loaf of bread for his sustenance. 

When thinking of prisons and of their forms of persecution, 
physical and mental, it is well that we remember 

R4866 : page 236 



that the mental attitude of the one persecuted has much 
to do with the amount of the sufferings. As, for instance, 
Jeremiah in his dungeon, with all those unhappy surroundings, 
had a mind at peace with God, whereas the very 
king who caused him to be put in prison, a little later, 
captured by the Chaldeans, had his sight destroyed and 
was put into a dungeon. Poor man! Disappointed in 
everything, with no human sympathy and no fellowship 
with the Almighty, his must have been a terrible dungeon 
experience. 

THE GRACE OF GOD GIVES POWER 

We are reminded of others who were put into prison 
for righteousness' sake— Saints Peter and John, Saints 
Paul and Silas. The world can never understand the 
power which, operating in these men, enabled them to rejoice 
in persecutions. With their backs bleeding from 
the whips of torture and hands and feet fast in the stocks, 
most uncomfortable, they were yet able to sing praise to 
God for the privilege they enjoyed of suffering with 
Christ, suffering for righteousness' sake, and thus filling 
up a share of the sufferings of Christ. Such characters 
we are to emulate. We are to understand that such joy 
and peace in the midst of sorrow and persecution can 
come only from the Lord. 

The Master's words in our text apply yesterday, today 
and tomorrow— so long as the reign of evil is permitted 
—"Blessed are ye when men shall revile you and 
persecute you, and say all manner of evil against you 
falsely, for My sake." But to be worthy of this blessing, 
and to receive it means to develop and possess a character 
which the enemies of righteousness would deem worthy 
of persecution. The Scriptures declare that persecution 
will be the portion of the faithful people of God throughout 
this Age— until the establishment of the Kingdom of 
Messiah. Under the new regime suffering for righteousness 
will not be possible. Mark the Apostle's words, 
"Whosoever will live godly in this present time shall suffer 
persecution." To live godly means, not merely to abstain 
from vicious and overt sin, but to be a hero in the 
strife, a defender of the right and an opposer of the 
wrong— a servant of righteousness, a soldier of the cross. 



R4866 : page 236 

DARK PROPHECIES FULFILLED 
-JEREMIAH 39.-AUGUST 27.- 

"Be sure your sin will find you out."— Num. 32:23. 

THE DARK PROPHECIES which the Lord 
sent through Jeremiah the Prophet finally 



reached fulfillment. The besieging army of 

the Chaldeans, after a year and a half of 

siege, finally, with battering rams, succeeded 

in making a breach in the wall 

through which an entrance was effected 

and the city forced to capitulate. King 

Zedekiah and his small army escaped toward 

the south, going in the direction of the Jordan, 

but they were soon overtaken by the Chaldeans. 

Nebuchadnezzar, in person, was some miles distant from 

Jerusalem, at Riblah, and thither Zedekiah, the royal prisoner, 

was taken for sentence— to be punished for having 

violated the contract with Nebuchadnezzar, who really 

placed him upon the throne. 

The punishment was after the manner of the time, illustrated 
on some of the victory tablets which still remain. 
The king's eyes were put out and, a blind prisoner, he was 
taken to Babylon. Thus were fulfilled two very striking 
prophecies which, until fulfilled, seemed quite contradictory. 
In this we get a lesson of how carefully we should 
study Divine prophecy, and how faithfully we should trust 
its every detail if we would receive light instead of 
darkness. 

One of these prophecies respecting Zedekiah is found 
in Ezekiel 12:10-13. The other is found in Jeremiah 32:3-5. 
Ezekiel declared that king Zedekiah would 
be taken to Babylon a captive, and that there he 
would live and there die, and yet again declared that he 
would never see the city, apparently a contradiction. Jeremiah 
predicted the downfall of Jerusalem, declaring that 

R4866 : page 237 

Zedekiah would speak with Nebuchadnezzar mouth to 
mouth and see his eyes. This seemed to contradict 
Ezekiel's statement, for if he would speak with the king 
mouth to mouth and see him eye to eye, how would it be 
possible that he would not see the city of Babylon? 

The fulfillment met all the requirements. King 
Zedekiah saw Nebuchadnezzar and spoke to him at Riblah 
in Palestine. His sight was there taken from him and he 
was taken a prisoner to Babylon. He lived and died in 
Babylon but saw it not. 

"With repentance his only companion he lay, 
And a dismal companion was he." 

CRUELTIES OF THE PAST 

"In the Bas Reliefs, representing the capture of Lachish 
by Sennacherib, the prisoners are represented, some 
pegged down to the ground to be flayed alive— others having 
their eyes put out. In one of the sculptures at Khossabad, 
Sargon represents himself in person holding a 
prisoner by a thong attached to a ring passed through his 
under lip. The victim kneels before him, while with a 



spear he pierces his eyes. Others are chained and, with 
hooks through their lips, are held awaiting their turn. In 
other cases the king slays the prisoner with his own 
spear. In another an executioner flays a captive chained 
to a wall. It was especially in Persia that the cruel practice 
of blinding prisoners prevailed, and it is mentioned 
by most Greek historians. In Turkey it was formerly 
the custom for a Sultan on his accession either to slaughter 
or blind his half brothers that he might have no rivals 
or dangerous ones near his throne. In modern Persia the 
Shahs have invariably, even up to the present century, put 
out the eyes of all their brothers who did not escape in 
time to distant provinces."— Canon Tristran. 

Our forefathers were once savage and presumably as 
cruel and as heartless as those described by the Canon. 
Thank God for a civilization which to a large extent has 
lifted "Christendom" to a higher plane of civilization— to 
greater moderation in dealing with foes— to a greater degree 
of human sympathy! Thank God that the prisons of 
today are reformatories instead of dungeons! Thank 
God that we are gradually realizing that as a race we 
were born in sin and shapen in iniquity! (Psa. 51:5.) 
The realization of this is helping to make us sympathetic 
to the depraved and degraded— not to the extent of approving 
their wrong, but to the extent of attempting to 
intelligently assist them to better mental views and to 
better self-control. 

TO WHAT SHOULD THE CREDIT BE GIVEN? 

To what, therefore, shall we give the credit of our 
progress and civilization? We cannot give the credit to 
any church, sect or party. We must honestly acknowledge 
that every sect, in its turn, has displayed more or less 
of bitterness, bigotry, superstition and persecution— contrary 
even to its own standards. In the last analysis we 
must admit that the great influence which has moulded 
the civilization of our day has come to us from the words 
and example of "the Man Christ Jesus, who gave Himself 
a ransom for all, to be testified in due time." (I Tim. 2:6.) 
The great Truths which He uttered have come echoing 
down the centuries, speaking righteousness, peace and 
love, even for our enemies. Everywhere His "Wonderful 
Words of Life" have made an impression, and here 
and there have effected the transformation of character. 

We should more and more feel our obligation to the 
great truths which come to us from the Bible, and less 
and less obligation to the sects and parties which have 
quarrelled and battled over those Words of Life. 

Thus, gradually, we will come to discern the truth of 
the Bible declaration, namely, that there is but one Lord, 
one faith, one baptism, one God and Father of all, and one 
Church of the living God, the Church of the First-Borns, 
whose names are written in heaven. These, found 
scattered in all the denominations and outside of all, constitute 
the saintly few who have the promise of the First 



Resurrection, as joint-heirs with the Messiah in His glorious 
Kingdom which will soon be established in the earth 
and enforce righteousness. 



R4867 : page 237 

"OVERTURNED UNTIL HE COME" 

--EZEKIEL 21:25-27-SEPT. 3D.- 

"Depart from evil and do good; seek 
peace and pursue it."— Psalm 34:14. 

AT THE GIVING of the Law God plainly told 

the nation of Israel the terms and conditions 

upon which they were received as 

His people. If they would be obedient to 

the Divine requirements all things would 

work well with them. They would be rich, 

prosperous, the blessed nation of the Lord. 

But if, on the contrary, they should neglect 

the Divine Statutes and become idolatrous, 

the Lord would oppose them and would 

deliver them into the hand of their enemies for chastisement, 

and "seven times" would pass over them.— 

Lev. 26:18,21,24,28. 

God of course knew the end from the beginning. 
Nevertheless, Divine patience was manifested throughout 
the experiences of the nation leading up to the overthrow 
of Zedekiah's government— he being the last king of the 
line of David to sit on the throne. We have seen how 
evil followed good, in the kings and in the practices of 
the nation; and how Divine providence chastened the 
people, yet repeatedly brought them back from idolatry. 
Now had come the time for the complete overthrow of 
the national polity, for a period of "seven times," or 
seven years, as foretold by Moses. In this case, however, 
the years must have been symbolic, because frequently 
they had captivities of more than seven years. Accepting, 
then, as a fact, that these seven years or "times" were 
symbolic years, how long a period would they indicate? 

It is an accepted fact that in Bible symbolism each 
day represents a year; and the Jewish year had twelve 
months of thirty days each. Thus each year represented, 
symbolically, three hundred and sixty years; and the seven 
years of chastisement represented 7 x 360 = 2,520 years. 

When, therefore, we read that the kingdom would be 
"overturned, overturned," until Messiah should come, we 
are to understand that the period of the overturned condition, 
as a whole, would be 2,520 years, beginning with 
the time the crown was taken from Zedekiah— in 606 
B.C. (70 years prior to the proclamation of Cyrus permitting 
the people to return— 536 B.C.). 



A LOOK AT THE FACTS 

It is always interesting and profitable to the students 
of the Bible to note the fulfilment of Divine predictions. 
It establishes faith, it makes all of God's promises more 
real; it assures us of Divine supervision in respect to 

R4867 : page 238 

Israel's affairs, and thus gives ground for confidence also 
in the supervision of the affairs of Spiritual Israel— the 
Church. 

As we look back along the aisles of history we see the 
fulfilment of the declaration that the nation of Israel 
would be overturned and overturned. After its restoration 
by Cyrus, B.C. 536, it continued to have a sort of 
national existence for 600 years; yet in all that time it had 
not a king of the line of David, the line of Divine promise, 
and it was ruled over by the various adjoining nations; 
as it is written, "Jerusalem shall be trodden down 
of the Gentiles until the times (years) of the Gentiles be 
filled full." Some may point to the Maccabean kings. We 
answer that they were not Divinely appointed nor of the 
royal family. Does some one else remind us of the reign 
of Herod at the time of Jesus, at the beginning of Anno 
Domini? We reply that the Herods were not of the line 
of David— they were Edomites, or of the Esau branch, 
who ruled over the children of Israel as the representatives 
of the great Roman Empire. 

THE TIMES OF THE GENTILES 

When God removed the typical kingdom of Israel and 
His typical throne in the world, as represented by David's 
family, he gave over the earthly dominion to the Gentiles; 
and this lease of power, as represented in Daniel's prophecy, 
was to continue for "seven times"— 2,520 years. In 
other words, during the same period that Israel would 
be having "seven times" of tribulation and subjection, the 
Gentiles would be having "seven times" of prosperity, and 
both will terminate at the same time— in 2,520 years from 
B.C. 606-October, A.D. 1914, the close of the Gentile 
Times. If any be disposed to dispute the exactness of these 
figures we need have no quarrel, but simply say that any 
difference in the calculation must of necessity be but 
small— possibly one year, possibly twenty years— but in so 
long a period how trifling would be such a variation. 

What we are specially interested in is the facts of the 
case, and what will occur when this long period terminates. 

(1) The facts are as already noted in Israel's case, 
a national subserviency for nearly seven hundred years, 
and a national destruction for more than 1,800 years; and 
so far as the Gentiles are concerned, a prosperity for 
2,520 years, as follows:— for (a) Babylon, the first Universal 
Empire; (b) Medo-Persia, the second Universal 
Empire; (c) Grecia, the third Universal Empire, and (d) 



Rome, the fourth Universal Empire. According to the 
Scriptural view of the matter this fourth Universal Empire 
is still represented in the Papacy and the various so-called 
Christian governments of the world. These have 
practiced and prospered during this long period of Israel's 
subjection and the overturned condition of God's typical 
kingdom. 

(2) The next thing in order, following the expiration 
of the "seven times" (2,520 years, to 1915 A.D.), 
will be the establishment of Messiah's Kingdom and its 
recognition by the children of Israel, and the blessing of 
all the families of the earth. 

The date, October, 1914, and the setting up of Christ's 
Kingdom, let us remember, have nothing whatever to do 
with the burning of the world, as some surmise. On the 
contrary, they have to do with the blessing of the world; 
they mark the beginning of what St. Peter styles "The 
times of restitution of all things, which God hath spoken 
by the mouth of all His Holy Prophets since the world 
began. "--Acts 3:19-23. 



R4867 : page 238 

INTERESTING QUESTIONS 

ANCIENT WORTHIES NOT REPRESENTED IN COURT 

QUESTION. -Were the Ancient Worthies in 
the condition represented by the Court of 
the Tabernacle? 

Answer.— In their day the antitypical 
Priest had not come and the antitypical 
Tabernacle and Court had not been established; 
hence, they could not be in it. 
But according to their hearts, as expressed 
in their conduct, they must have been members 
of the household of faith. It is our 
understanding that, ultimately, they may be granted a 
place with, and as a part of, the Great Company, the antitypical 
Levites of the antitypical Court condition. 



"OFFERING" USED IN TWO DIFFERENT SENSES 

Question.— "For the bodies of those beasts, whose 
blood is brought into the sanctuary by the high priest for 
sin, are burned without the camp." (Heb. 13:11.) Would 
this show that the Sin-Offering is made in the antitypical 
Most Holy? 

Answer.— In general those who have translated 
anything in the Bible respecting the Tabernacle have 
seemingly been very careless in the use of the terms 
Holy, Most Holy, Holy place, etc. They did not discern 



that these terms were used in different senses by the Jews, 

in connection with different portions of the Tabernacle. 

Correctly translated, our text reads: "The bodies of those 

beasts, whose blood is taken into the Most Holy as an 

offering for sin, are burned without the camp." We must 

remember that the word "offering" is Scripturally used in 

two different senses. In one sense of the word, our Lord 

offered himself at baptism, when He gave Himself to do 

the Father's will. That was His offering of Himself, His 

gift, when He presented Himself at Jordan. He finished 

the offering of His gift when He laid down His life on 

Calvary; and that life, laid down on Calvary, is an appropriate 

Sin-Offering. But it remained for the High 

Priest to ascend up on high, there to appear in the presence 

of God for us, to make application of the Sin-Offering. 

The sprinkling of the blood on the Mercy Seat was 

done in the Most Holy. But the presentation of that Sin-Offering 

was made at Jordan— or, in the type, when the 

bullock was slain. 



THE TWO ALTARS CONTRASTED 

Question.— "We have an altar whereof they have 
no right to eat which serve the Tabernacle." (Heb. 13:10.) 
What is meant by this passage? 

Answer.— In this passage the Apostle is contrasting 
the Levitical priesthood, their services in the Tabernacle, 
and the table in the Holy at which they ate the shew 
bread, with the antitypical Tabernacle and its better table. 
In this connection he points out that, so far as the priesthood 
of Aaron was concerned, not only could the Church 
not be priests, but our Lord Jesus could not be; for this 
priesthood sprang from Levi, and Jesus was from another 
tribe, Judah. Therefore, if Jesus was on earth he could 
not be a priest. But now God had intended another order 
of Priests, namely, the Melchizedek Order, saying to 
David, "The Lord hath sworn and will not repent: Thou 
art a priest forever after the Order of Melchizedek." 
(Psa. 1 10:4; Heb. 5:6.) It is evident, then, that if Christ 
was to be a Priest after the Order of Melchizedek, He 
would not be a Priest after the order of Aaron. 

When the Apostle has proved that we, as priests, have 

R4868 : page 239 

no right to intrude into the typical Holy or Most Holy, he 
then shows that they, of the house of Aaron, have no 
right to our place. They have no right to come into this 
antitypical Holy, which we enter. If they become members 
of the Royal Priesthood, they may enter; but their 
standing as members of the Aaronic priesthood does not 
give them the privilege. Thus he shows a discrimination 
between these two priesthoods, the Aaronic and the 
Melchizedek. We have the "better sacrifices"; we have 



the better services. We have, on the higher plane, everything 
that they had, typically, on the lower plane. 



INCENSE ABODE IN THE MOST HOLY 

Question.— Was it necessary that the incense should 
precede the high priest into the Most Holy when he went 
in to offer the blood of the goat? 

Answer.— The offering of the incense originally on 
the Day of Atonement by the high priest gained for him 
recognition by the Almighty, and manifested his worthiness 
to appear in the presence of God. Therefore, there 
was no need of his offering any other sacrifice than this. 
All the work of Atonement was divided into two parts. 
If the type had shown the under-priests as going into the 
Most Holy, then it would seem to have been necessary for 
each to stop and offer incense before entering. 

We are represented, not individually, but as members 
of the Body of Christ. So it would not be necessary for 
the incense to be offered more than the one time. It 
would seem, however, that the incense abode in the Holy 
and Most Holy. The sacrifice is still appreciated by the 
Heavenly Father, and always will be. 



BOTH HAD TO DO WITH JUSTICE 

Question.— In the type, was the incense that which 
satisfied Divine Justice? If not, how is the satisfaction 
of Justice accomplished, and why was incense burned? 

Answer.— Both the incense and the blood had to 
do with the satisfaction of Justice. We read that the incense 
must cover the Mercy-Seat. (Lev. 16:13.) In 
other words, unless the incense had gone forth the high 
priest would not have lived. This shows that unless our 
Lord had rendered up His human life satisfactorily He 
would have forfeited His right to life. In consecration 
He had agreed to this and had surrendered His earthly 
life-rights. If He proved faithful to His engagement, He 
would receive a higher life beyond the veil. So the satisfaction 
of Justice, represented in type by the incense preceding 
the high priest beyond the veil, would be a satisfaction 
for Himself and would testify that He had faithfully 
fulfilled the required conditions. 

But as for the satisfaction of the sins of the Church 
and of the world, this is accomplished subsequently, not by 
the incense, but by the blood. 



page 239 

INTERNATIONAL BIBLE STUDENTS ASSOCIATION CONVENTION 



MOUNTAIN LAKE PARK, MD„ SEPT. 1 TO 11, 1911 

ROUND TRIP RAILROAD RATES GRANTED 

Mt. Lake Park, Md., is a well-known Summer Resort 
where Camp Meetings, Bible Conferences, etc., are frequently 
held. It is located in the top of the Allegheny Mountains, on 
the Baltimore & Ohio Railroad. Naturally the B.&O.R.R. 
offer the best rates, consequently visitors do best in purchasing 
the round-trip tickets via this road. Fortunately it is an 
extensive system, extending from Philadelphia in the East to 
St. Louis, Chicago and Cleveland in the West, and passing 
through many important cities. We quote below the special 
rates granted by the B.&O.R.R. Those residing at other 
points should consider the advisability of buying regular 
tickets to B.&O.R.R. stations, and there purchasing 
"I.B.S.A." Excursion tickets. Should your ticket agent 
not know of the special rates quoted below, ask him to inquire 
of his General Passenger Agent at his earliest possible convenience:- 

DELAWARE Laurel 7.10 

Newark $9.10 Mt. Airy 6.10 

Wilmington 9.45 Relay 7.10 

Rockville 6.10 

DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA Rohersville 5.05 

Washington 6.60 Sykesville 6.40 

Washington Grove 5.95 

ILLINOIS Washington Junction 5.05 

Chicago 15.50 

NEW YORK 
INDIANA New York City 

Auburn Junction 13.05 (Through us) 12.90 

Aurora 11.85 

Garrett 13.10 OHIO 

Jeffersonville 14.35 Akron 8.15 

Lawrenceburg 1 1.75 Athens 6.40 

New Albany 14.35 Barnesville 5.95 

Seymour 13.65 Bellaire 4.87 

Wellsboro 15.10 Blanchester 9.95 

Cambridge 6.65 

KENTUCKY Canal Dover 7.05 

Louisville 14.35 Canton 8.15 

Chicago Junction 9.40 

MARYLAND Chillicothe 8.20 

Aberdeen 8.30 Cincinnati 11.10 

Annapolis 7.60 Cleveland 9.00 

Baltimore 7.40 Columbus 8.75 

Barnesville 5.60 Cuyahoga Falls 8.15 

Bradshaw 7.90 Defiance 11.95 

Brunswick 4.90 Deshler 11.20 

Cumberland 1.80 Dundas 7.20 

Ellicott City 6.95 Elyria 9.25 

Frederick 5.50 Fostoria 10.50 

Gaithersburg 5.95 Gallipolis 7.95 

Germantown 5.80 Girard 8.15 



Hagerstown 5.50 

Havre de Grace 8.30 

Hyattsville 6.80 

Keedysville 5.20 

page 239 

Jackson 7.70 

Kent 8.15 

Lorain 9.45 

Loveland 10.40 

Mansfield 9.40 

Marietta 5.30 

Massillon 7.55 

Medina 8.60 

Midland City 9.80 

Monroeville 9.75 

Mount Sterling 9.15 

Mount Vernon 8.90 

Newark 8.15 

New Philadelphia 7.05 

Portsmouth 9.00 

Ravenna 8.15 

Sabina 9.45 

Sandusky 10.20 

Shelby 9.40 

Sterling 8.25 

Tiffin 10.15 

Uhrichsville 6.75 

Warren 8.15 

Warwick 7.90 

Washington C.H 9.15 

Wellston 7.40 

West Farmington 8.55 

Wilmington 9.80 

Youngstown 8.15 

Zanesville 7.40 



Grafton 9.00 

Greenfield 8.90 

Hamden 7.35 

Hillsboro 10.55 



Foxburg 8.90 

Hyndman 2.20 

Johnstown 4.60 

McKeesport 5.85 

Meyersville 2.90 

New Castle 7.65 

Philadelphia 10.20 

Pittsburg 6.30 

Scott Haven 5.35 

Uniontown 4.25 

Washington 5.70 

West Newton 5.40 

VIRGINIA 

Norfolk 10.60 

Old Point Comfort 10.60 

Portsmouth 10.60 

Strasburg Junction 6.35 

Winchester 5.75 



PENNSYLVANIA 

Berlin 3.30 

Braddock 6.00 

Butler 7.55 

Chester 9.85 

Connellsville 4.65 

EllwoodCity 7.65 



WEST VIRGINIA 

Berkeley Springs 3.75 

Cameron 3.90 

Charlestown 5.05 

Clarksburg 2.40 

Fairmont 2.45 

Grafton 1.75 

Harpers Ferry 4.70 

Huntington 8.80 

Kenova 9.05 

Mannington 2.95 

Martinsburg 4.15 

Morgantown 3.30 

Moundsville 4.40 

Parkersburg 4.85 

Point Pleasant 7.50 

Shenandoah Junction 4.45 

Wheeling 4.75 



Other railroads have granted our Convention round-trip 
tickets for one fare and a half. These tickets are straight and 
require no validation or stamping at destination. Some railroads 
grant a "Summer Tourist Excursion" rate to Mt. Lake 
Park from distant points, such as California, Texas, etc. 
Inquire fully before purchasing tickets. 

Chicago friends expect to have a special train. There will 
quite probably be a special car from St. Louis, Mo., and other 
large cities— Pittsburg, Cleveland, etc. Boston friends expect 
to come to New York by boat, here to join New York City 



Delegation on a special train, due to leave New York City 
Thursday morning, August 31. Bring with you plenty of 
warm clothing. 

For particulars re board and lodging see second page. 

B.&O.R.R. folders, with Convention Program, we will 
supply on request. 

Address all communications to "Entertainment Committee, 
I.B.S.A.," 17 Hicks St., Brooklyn, N.Y. 



page 337 

SEMI-MONTHLY 