Vol, XXXVIII 


BROOKLYN, N. Y., AUGUST 1, 1917 


No. 15 


"WALK CIRCUMSPECTLY BECAUSE THE DAYS ARE EVIL" 

[This article with the exception of the paragraphs below, was a reprint of that published in issue of July 15, 1905, which please 

see.] 


It poorly befits an instructed child of God to denounce 
with scorn and contempt those of the poor world whose failings
 and lacks in character may be apparent to us. If in 
some respects we have been more nobly born than are many 
others, have we anything whereof to boast in this regard? 
"What hast thou that thou hast not received? And if thou 
hast received it, wherefore shouldst thou boast?*' Since we 
realize more and more as we go on in the narrow way how 
many and how humiliating are our own infirmities, we should 
learn to be very pitiful toward the infirmities of the poor, 
fallen world. And since the Lord is graciously willing to cover 
our many blemishes with the merit of the precious blood, we 
cannot do less than manifest this same spirit, if we hope to 
be pleasing and acceptable to him. Self-righteousness and a 
"holier than thou" attitude will surely separate us from the 
favor of the Lord to whatever extent we harbor such a spirit. 
Let us search our hearts carefully along this line, for we have 
a wily adversary, and our own flesh is very deceitful. 


Even though the failings and weaknesses of some of the 
brethren or of the members of our own family be different 
from our own, who shall judge that they are less acceptable 
to the Lord than are we? "To his own Master each servant 
standeth or falleth." A captious spirit of criticism and of 
magnifying the faults of others, a desire to show them up in 
their worst light, may be far more culpable in the eyes of 
the Lord than are the faults that seem so reprehensible to us. 

Let parents and children, brethren in the church — all who 
name the name of Christ — be of tender compassion toward one 
another. All have inherited and acquired weaknesses. Our 
own may be as serious as are those of some whose faults 
grate upon our sensibilities. Do our best, yet none of us 
can measure nearly up to the perfect standard. Who, then, 
are we, that we should sit in severe judgment upon others, 
whether of the brethren or of those outside, whose responsibility
 would be far less than ours? 


APPLICATION FOR EXEMPTION 

The Government is putting into motion ite machinery re- and states that he resides at in the City 

lating to Selective Draft for military service. Local boards of . ; that he has had notice of call to 

have been selected for each county and for various districts in military service under the Selective Draft Act; that he has 

the cities. The drawing is now made. presented himself for physical examination, and being adIf
 you are on the list of the called ones you will first vised that he is physically qualified, he now makes applicareport
 for physical examination on the date named in the tion for exemption from military service under the provisions 

call. If you are found physically disqualified you will re- of said Selective Draft Act, and claims exemption upon the 

ceive a certificate to that effect, with further instructions following grounds, to wit: 
from the Board as to what to do. (1) Because this applicant was, on and prior to the 18th 

If you are found physically qualified and you desire to day of May, 1917, a member of the International Bible 

claim exemption from military service, then you should file Students Association, a well-recognized religious organizayour
 application for exemption. After having been found tion, which has been such religious organization and existing 

to be physically qualified you will have seven days in which for a period of more than thirty years, the creed or teaching 

to file your application for exemption ; and you will be given of which said religious organization forbids its members to 

ten days' time after the filing of your application in which participate in war in any form; that the religious convictions 

to file proof in support of your claims for exemption. of the undersigned, this applicant, are against war or particiWe
 have been expecting the Government to publish a pation therein in any form, in accordance with the creed or 

form of application for exemption, but up to this time none principles of said International Bible Students Assn. 
has been published. As the calling of the men under the (2) This applicant therefore prays that he be exempted 

selective Draft Act has now been made, and knowing that from military service under the provision of said Selective 

many of our brethren will be desirous of filing application for Draft Act. 

exemption, and as many have written the Society for a form (Signed) 

of application, we have prepared one, which we publish be- State of SS: 

low, and which may be used, provided the Government fur- County of 

nishes no form for that purpose. t being duly sworn, upon his 

APPLICATION oath says that he has read the above and foregoing applicato
 the local board of exemption under the tion for exemption, and is fully acquainted with the contents 

selective draft act: thereof, and that the matters and things stated therein are 

Comes now the undersigned No. true. 

( here insert your name and serial number ) , 

[6121] (221-231) 


(231-232) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, N. V. 


Subscribed and sworn to before 
me this day of . . . ., 1917 

Notary Public. 

If you can procure a form of application for exemption 
use and insert the grounds named in this application. 

If you claim exemption on any other ground than that 
of religious conviction, then insert such additional ground 
under paragraph marked "2" in the application; and if you 
claim exemption upon any further additional grounds, insert
 a third paragraph, and so on. Such other ground or 
grounds for claiming exemption are set forth in a bulletin 
issued by the office of the Provost Marshal General and are 
published in the July 1 issue of The Tower, page 204, 

HOW TO PROVE CLAIMS 

Proof must be made by affidavits. Go to the Local 
Board and consult the regulations to find out the form number
 of the aflidavits that you must submit for your particular 
claim. 

Ask the Board for the blank affidavits that are necessary 
in presenting your proof ; if the Board has not the forms ask 
to consult the pamphlet of forms. 

Have the affidavits properly accomplished and return them 
to the Board within the time limit assigned you — ten days 
from the filing of your claim. 

Set out in your affidavit the following: that the International
 Bihlk Students Association is a well-recognized 
religious organization and lias existed for more than 
thirty years; that said Association has a branch or church 
at (the place where you live) ; that you are a member 
of said Association and associated with said church; that you 
ace fully consecrated to the Lord, and that you follow the 
teachings of Jesus and the apostles as set forth and explained 
in the Bible and in the publications of the International 
Bible Students Association and the Watch Toweb Bible 
and Tract Society; that you are in harmony with and believe
 the teachings of said Association, which forbids its members
 to participate in war in any form, and that your religious 
convictions are against war or participation therein in any 
form, in accordance with the creed or principles of said International
 Bible Students Association ; that the teachings of 
said International Bible Students Association, in harmony
 with those of Jesus and the 'apostles, are briefly epitomized
 in the following: "Thou shalt not kill." (Romans 
13:9) "All they that take the sword shall perish by the 
sword." (Matt. 26:52) "For even hereunto were ye called, 
because Christ also suffered for us, leaving us an example 
that ye should follow in his steps." {1 Peter 2:21) il For the 
Son of Man is not come to destroy men's lives, but to save 
them." (Luke 0:56) "No murderer hath eternal life abiding 
in him." (1 John 3:15) "Follow peace with all men, and 
holiness, without which no man shall see the Lord." (Heb. 
12:14) "As we have opportunity, let us do good unto all 
men."— Or], 6:10. 

You may further add to your affidavit the quotation 
from The Watch Tower of September 1, 1915, page 260, 
column 2, which is quoted in the May 15, 1917, issue of The 
Watch Towi:k, page 151. 

W T ithin three days after the production of this proof before
 the Local Board, that Board will decide the question of 
exemption one way or the other. Appeal may be made to the 
District Board, and must be taken within ten days after notice
 that exemption claim has been denied by the Local Board. 
The Local Board may grant longer time to perfect appeal, in 
its discretion. 

Because of the fact that many of these exemption cases 
are apt to arise at the same time in different parts of the 
country, we make the above general statement in the interests
 of all of our brethren of the Association who may desire
 to avail themselves of the provisions of the law for exemption
. If any one feels that he should have a lawyer to 
assist him, then if might be wise to employ some local 
counsel to advise and conduct his case before the Board. We 
stand ready to advise and assist any of the brethren at any 
time to the extent of our ability. 

Let us all trust in the Lord for his guidance, and claim 
the promise that he will cause all things to work together 
for our good, because we love him and have been called according
 to his purpose. Be calm and sober of mind, and having 
done all you can, stand fast in the faith. Hia blessings be with 
you! 


"UNTO THE END!" 

"Having loved his own which were in the world, he loved them unto the end. M 


'"Unto the end!* What strange, 
Sweet, wondrous love! .How deep, how fond and true! 

For love that knows no change 
We seek, but seek in vain, the wide world through. 

Until the end he loved 
The frail, weak, timid ones he called 'his own.' 

Nor ever heard unmoved 
Their cry for help, in sorrow's plaintive tone. 

'"Unto the end!* AH, all 
Who are his own are known to him by name; 

No tear of theirs can fall 
But Jesus knows the source from whence it came. 

Unto the end, though 
Faithless and wayward we may be, 

With calm and ceaseless flow 
The tide of love divine rolls strong and free! 

'"Unto the end!' Though wide 
And high along our way dark barriers frown, 

This truth will still abide 
To comfort and sustain. We are his own 


Unto the end. His own ! 
Not death itself from him our souls can part; 

His hand has overthrown 
All that divides us from his home and heart. 

' "Unto the end!' With arms 
Outstretched, he waits to clasp us to his breast; 

Where, safe from all alarms, 
He offers us our shelter and our rest, 

'Unto the end' to live 
And know that we are his, and only his ! 

The joys that life can give, 
Its sweetest and its best, yield no such bliss. 

"'Unto the end!!' Thine own! 
dear and blessed Master! Can it be 

That, never more alone, 
Our weary hearts may dwell in peace with thee, 

Knowing that to the end 
Thou wilt be with us, walking by our side, 

Our Guardian, Guide and Friend, 
Until in heaven we shall with thee abide!" 


THE CAPTIVITY OF JUDAH 

[The first and fifth paragraphs of this article were reprinted from article entitled "A Broken Vow a Fulfilled Penalty/ 
lished in issue of September 1, 1905. Paragraphs 2, 3, 8 and 9 were reprinted from article entitled ''The Holy 
Land Desolated, ' > published in issue of December 3, 1898. The remainder appears below.) 


pubAfter
 King Nebuchadnezzar had taken a part of the 
Jews captive, he left King Zedekiah in control as his vassal 
under tribute. But Zedekiah treacherously entered into a 
league with the king of Egypt in a vain attempt to throw off 
the Babylonian yoke. When Nebuchadnezzar learned of the 
rebellion he came again to besiege Jerusalem. Famine and 
pestilence resulted; and ultimately the city was captured and 
utterly destroyed. The king's eyes were put out; and he was 
taken captive to Babylon, with all the people except a few of 
the poorest and leas* competent. Subsequently these went 

[61 


down into Egypt, so that Jerusalem and the country round 
about lay "desolate without inhabitant for seventy year*, to 
fulfil the word of the Lord at the mouth of the Prophet 
Jeremiah." 

The folly of King Zedekiah in violating his oath of allegiance
 to the Babylonian king is only an illustration of the 
general folly of all who reject the counsel' of the Lord. 
Through the Prophet Jeremiah the Lord had warned Zedekiah
 respecting the keeping of his oath and the certainty 
that the king of Babylon would vanquish him. But the self- 

221 


August 1, 1917 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(232-233) 


willed, unbelieving king, abetted by his princes and counsellors
, took the course which proved to be the way of folly, 
and which led to the utter overthrow of the nation. The Lord 
permitted the natural consequences of his wrong course to 
overtake the king; and they were severe indeed. His sons were 
slain before his very eyes. Then he was blinded and carried 
to Babylon, where he remained a prisoner until his death. 

From these facts we infer that King Zedekiah never came 
to a proper repentant attitude of heart before the Lord. On 
the contrary, Jehoiachin, the previous king of Judah, who 
had been taken captive to Babylon eleven years before, was 
subsequently released from prison and granted many favors 
at the hand of Evil-Merod«rh. (Jornviah .V2:31-34) Properly 
enough these high ones in natural Israel may represent the 
more highly favored ones of the Lord's people in spiritual 
Israel; and we may draw the lesson that the unfaithful, like 
Jehoiachin, might be chastened and afterward treated with 
leniency, but that those who violate the oath of their covenant 
with God by breaking that vow will suffer I0S3 in every sense 
of the word — that thenceforth they shall be blinded by the 
adversary to the blessings once enjoyed, and that subsequently 
they shall die the second death. 

Everywhere the Scriptures uphold the thought that a vow, 
a solemn compact with the Lord, ia a most binding obligation. 
Under such a solemn obligation all the members of the new 
creation have been granted the first-fruits of the holy Spirit. 
Therefore disloyalty or renouncement of this vow could to lis 
mean nothing short of the second death, from which there is 
no redemption. 

Judah represented those Israelites who were faithful to 
the Lord, those who trusted in the promises, all of which 
centered in the tribe of Judah; and many of the faithful of the 
ten tribes had moved into the territory of the smaller kingdom
. Yet with all these lessons, and with the instructions of 
the prophets, the history of the nation is one long record of 
unfaithfulness to their great King, Jehovah God. Now the 
time had come for the change which God saw best to bring 
upon them; and nothing could divert the impending doom. 
Nevertheless, they were given a hope that at the end of a certain
 period — after seventy years of chastisement — the Lord 
would graciously bring those back who reverenced him. 
"THE TIMES OF THE GENTILES" 

When God gave the law to Israel he plainly told them the 
terms and conditions upon which he would receive them as 
his people. If they would be obedient to the divine requirements
, all would be well with them. They would be prosperous
, a rich nation, blessed of the Lord. But if they should 
neglect the divine law and become idolatrous, the Lord would 
oppose them and would deliver them into the hand of their enemies
 for chastisement. If they persisted in following the 
wrong course, He would finally punish them "seven times 
more/'— Leviticus 26; 18, 21, 24, 28. 

Of course God knew the end from the beginning. Nevertheless
, divine patience was manifested throughout the experiences
 of the nation leading up to the overthrow of King 
Zedekiah's government; for he was the last king of the Davidic 
dynasty to sit upon the throne of Israel. We have seen how 
evil followed good, both in the kings and in the practises 
of the nation ; and how divine providence chastened the people, 
yet repeatedly brought them back from idolatry. Now had 
come the time for the complete overthrow of the national 
polity, for a period of "seven times," as foretold by Moses, 
the mediator of the Law Covenant. In this case, however, the 
"times," or years, must have been symbolic; for frequently 
the nation had had captivities for more than seven years each. 


Accepting the fact that these seven years, or "times," 
were symbolic years, we now proceed to determine how long a 
period they would indicate. We find that it is an accepted 
fact that in Bible symbolism a day represents a year; and 
that the Jewish year had twelve months of thirty days each. 
Thus each year symbolically represented three hundred and 
sixty years; and the seven years of chastisement foretold by 
Moses would represent 7 X 36 ^ year3, or 2520 years. When 
therefore we read the Prophet EzekieFs statement that the 
kingdom would be "overturned, overturned, overturned," until 
Messiah should come, we are to understand that the period of 
the overturned condition of the Jewish polity would be 2,520 
years, beginning with the time when the crown was removed 
from King Zedekiah— in 606 B. C, seventy years prior to the 
proclamation of Cyrus, king of Persia, permitting the people 
to return— 536 B. C. 

A LOOK AT THE FACTS OF THE CASE 

It is always both interesting and profitable to Bible students
 to note the fulfilment of prophecy; for thus are the 
divine promises made more real, and we are assured of divine 
supervision respecting the affairs of Israel — both natural and 
spiritual. As we glance back over the pages of Jewish history
, we see the fulfilment of the declaration that the nation 
of Israel would be overturned three times. After its restoration
 by King Cyrus, 536 B. C, it continued to have a sort 
of national existence for six hundred years. Yet in all that 
time it did not have one king of the line of David. On the contrary
, it was ruled over by the various adjoining nations. 
As it is written: "Jerusalem shall be trodden down of the 
Gentiles' until the times [years] of the Gentiles be filled 
full." 

Some may point to the Maccahaean kings as an offset to 
this declaration that Israel has had no king since the overthrow
 of King Zedekiah. We answer that the Maccahaean 
kings were not divinely appointed nor of the royal family. 
Others may remind us of the reign of the Herods at the 
beginning of the Christian era. We reply that the Herods 
not only were not of the line of David, but were not Jews at 
all; that they were, Kdomites — descendants of Esau, who ruled 
over 'the children of Israel as representatives of the Roman 
Empire. 

THE PROPHET DANIEL'S TESTIMONY 

When God removed the typical kingdom of Israel and 
his typical throne in the world, he gave over the lease of 
earthly dominion to the Gentiles. This lease of power, as set 
forth in the prophecy of Daniel, was to continue for "seven 
times" — 2,520 years. * In other words, during the same period 
in which Israel would be undergoing tribulation and subjection
, the Gentiles would be having "sVven times" of prosperity; 
and both periods would of necessity terminate at the same 
time. Since both began in the fall of 606 B. C, and since 
both were ''seven times," or 2,520 years long, both must have 
ended in the fall of 1914 A. D. 

During this period the world has been under the dominion 
of four universal empires; (1) Babylonia, (2) Medo-Persia, 
(3) Greece and (4) Rome. According to the Scriptural view 
of the matter, the fourth universal empire is still represented 
hi the various so-called Christian governments of the world. 
These have practised and prospered during the long period of 
Israel's subjection and the overturned condition of God's 
typical kingdom. After the expiration of the "seven times," 
the next feature of the divine program will be the establishment
 of the Messianic kingdom and its recognition by the children
 of Israel. Then will follow the long-promised blessing 
of all the families of the earth. — Genesis 12:3; Galatians 3:8. 
16, 29. 


NEW CREATURES IN CHRIST 


The new will begins when we turn from sin to the Redeemer
, desiring to be his followers. But the new will is not 
then the new creature. We do not become new creatures until 
the Redeemer has accepted our offering, covered it with the 
merit of his own sacrifice, and presented it as a part of his 
sacrifice, to the Father. The Father, accepting all who thus 
come unto him through the Son — up to the full limit of the 
number of the elect — begets them through the holy Spirit. 
Then, and not until then, is there a itew creature — a spiritbegotten
 beinj^— ■ whose development will be in the school of 
Christ, and whose full entrance upon the spirit plane as a 
new creature will come through the resurrection change. 

The new creature does not sacrifice itself; for, as we have 
just seen, it did not come into existence until the sacrifice 
had teen made and accepted by the Father. The new creature
 is in full accord with the consecration made originally 
by the new will, and with the sacrifice of its earthly rights 
and interests made to the Lord. The new creature therefore 


cooperates with the Lord, and manifest? this in profiting 
itself daily, hourly, a living sacrifice to the will of the Lord. 
It is the flesh that is to be sacrificed, and not the new 
creature. The High Priest, our glorified Lord, alone is able 
to offer the sacrifice acceptably; and we, as new creatures, 
merely cooperate with him, and thus make our calling and 
election sure. Any holding back on our part would spoil 
the matter aa a sacrifice; and the best thing that could be done 
with it would be to destroy the flesh that the spirit might be 
saved. The Scriptures seem to indicate that this will be 
the experience of the great company class. Any drawing back 
from the Lord in the sense of the repudiation of him and 
his work of righteousness in them, would signify what the 
Apostle calls "the drawing back unto perdition" — untG destruction
. (Hebrews 10:39) In that event the new creature
 would die; and it would be the second death, from which 
there would be no recovery. As we have before shown, the 
new creature never sacrifices itself. It merely cooperates 


[6128] 


(234-236) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, >. Y. 


with the great High Priest in the sacrifice of its flesh in 
which, for the time, it tabernacles.^ Prior to the harvest 
time, the new creature, at the death of the body, slept; for 
except in the case of wilful sin, the new creature is never to 
die. Since the Spring of 1878, however, the new creature 


does not sleep, but passes immediately into the new body. 
Tn the case of Jesus and the apostles the new creature slept 
for a longer or shorter time, awaiting the divine intervention 
and power for its perfecting on the spirit plane through the 
resurrection change. 


THE SHEPHERD OF CAPTIVE ISRAEL 

September 2. — Ezekiel 34. 
[This article, with the exception of the paragraph below, was a reprint of article entitled "Prophecy Against the Shepherds/' 

published in issue of May 15, 1915, which please see.] 


Verses 10-12 assert that at a certain time the Lord comes 
to the rescue of his sheep, and casts aside the unfaithful 
shepherds, Mark well that this time of his presence will be 
"in the cloudy and dark day" — in the time of trouble, already 
upon the nations and upon the unfaithful shepherds. Surely 
we have ample evidence that we are in this "cloudy and dark 
day" — that the Chief Shepherd is now present! Otherwise, 
whence comes the food upon which his flock has been feeding 
all the^e years and the refreshing rest of faith which they 


may enjoy even amidst the turmoil of the time of trouble 
now upon the world? During the past forty years the Chief 
Shepherd has been feeding his people upon the richest ot 
food: and all who have been strengthened thereby should be 
aware that he is gathering his sheep. Although the sheep 
have been scattered all over the hills of sectarianism, he calls 
them his own : and those who hear his voice are being gathered 
into the one fold — the true church — even as in the beginning 
of the Gospel age. 


INTERESTING 

THE LORD'S DIRECTION OF OCR AFT AIRS 

Question. — To what extent does the Lord actively direct our 
affairs, and guide us in thought, word and deed? When two 
courses perplex us, how may we know the divine will concerning
 us? 

Answer.— The Christian's relationship to God is based 
wholly upon faith. The Apostle declares, "According as it is 
written, 'I believed, and therefore have I spoken'; we also believe
, and therefore speak." So likewise, we believe, and 
therefore we speak; we believe and therefore we act. "He 
that cometh unto God must believe that he is, and that he is a 
rewarded of them that diligently seek him." — 2 Cor. 4:13: 
Heb. 11:6. 

Christians are those who have approached God along this 
line through Christ, who have turned from sin and have accepted
 the merit of Christ as their propitiation, and the- divine 
will aft their will; and who have embraced the divine promises 
respecting the rewards of righteousness, truth, holiness, instead
 of the rewards and delusive pleasures of sin. They have 
made their consecration unto death, have been begotten to a 
new nature, and have received the anointing of the holy 
Spirit. They then recognize themselves as children of God, 
because God has said eo. They know that all things will 
work together for good to them; for God has so informed them. 
—Rom. 8:28. 

The whole matter, then, is one of faith. It is for the 
Christian to perform his part and to trust that God will perform
 his part. God's part is to instruct him, and develop him 
in faith and obedience. Sometimes the way in which God will 
guide his people will he very contrary to the one we would 
naturally prefer. We are to remember, however, that we have 
fully given ourselves to the Lord; and that we are to abide 
in this condition loyally, and to accept in perfect faith all the 
experiences of life — the things that seem favorable and the 
things that seem unfavorable — and to bear in mind that all 
things will work out for good to us, who are the called according
 to God's purpose; and that "the steps of a good man 
are ordered by the Lord," if we continually seek his guidance
. 

If, therefore, trials and difficulties come, we are to look 
to the Lord and go to him in prayer and seek to know his 
will. How can we know that his will shall be done? We must 
make sure that we desire his will above all things — whether 
it be pleasant or unpleasant to us. After earnest prayer that 
we may be shown his will, we are to use our best judgment 
in the matter. We have asked God's wisdom and blessing, and 
we are to expect that the Lord will overrule the results for 
good. And we are to accept these results as of divine overruling
, divine providence, whether the matter turn out as we 
have expected or some other way. 

ASKING HIS BLESSING UPON OUR FOOD 

Question. — Why do we ask the Lord's blessing upon our 
food unless we expect him to bless it? 

Answer. — A very sensible question. Our bodies are a part 
of our endowment of the Lord; and we are responsible for 
these bodies, to keep them in as good order as possible, in 
addition to asking his blessing. We are to eat to his glory, 
and so far as possible, only foods which agree with us. The 
blessing we ask is supposed to be that we may have cooperation
 on God's part with our own endeavor. But we are to 
endeavor so to eat and drink aa to keep our bodies in the 
best possible condition to render the most effective service to 
Jum, Then we should expect his blessing. 


QUESTIONS 

COMPROMISING THE TBUTH 

Question. — Since the Lord's people are to be "wise as serpentB
 and harmless as doves,'* and not unnecessarily to bring 
upon themselves persecution, might it have been a lack of 
wisdom on the part of the three young Hebrews to refuse to 
bow down before the image set up 'by Nebuchadnezzar, king of 
Babylon ? Could they not, while bowing before the image, have 
in their hearts worshiped God? 

Answer. — It would be quite contrary to the teaching of 
God's Word to suppose that the Hebrews who were cast into 
the fiery furnace because of not worshiping the image of 
Nebuchadnezzar were unwise. We believe that they were very 
wise not to compromise the truth in respect to Nebuchadnezzar 
and the image which he had made. A careful reading of the 
Bible story should convince one of this. Whoever compromises
 the truth is very likely to have it taken from him. 

If the three Hebrews had been disloyal to God in this 
matter, then there would probahly have arisen other circumstances
 of like nature; an d they would have been likely to be 
finally swallowed up. They could not have made a reservation
 in bowing the knee in this -instance. The king had declared
 that any one who would fail in this matter should be 
thrown into the fiery furnace; that all must bow down 
and worship the golden image. If they had bowed down, it 
would have implied that they were worshiping the image. 
God surely set his seal of approval on their course! Any other 
course would have been disloyal to Jehovah. 

Applying this principle to our day, we see that churchianity
 is coming to be worshiped. The book of Revelation pictures 
the condition of things as we believe it soon will be. Whoever
 will not worship the first beast, nor his image, and will 
not receive the mark of the two-horned beast, or the number 
of his name, will come into a disadvantageous position. 
(Revelation 13:15-17) The question then would he, What 
shall be our attitude regarding such unfavorable arrangements
? We do not ourselves take the position of some that 
it would be wrong to enter a Catholic church building because
 we would feel that we were thus worshiping the images. 
Neither would we think it wrong to enter a Protestant church. 
We would not by so doing be thought to be accepting their 
doctrine. 

It we happened to go to a church where the congregation 
were partaking of their communion, doubtless we would commune
 with them, if they were willing. The fact that they did 
not understand the matter as we do would not affect us unfavorable
 at all. The Presbyterians, for instance, claim to 
recognize the great fundamentals of Christianity — the 
heavenly Father and the Lord Jesus as Savior; they affect to 
believe, at least. 

Going, therefore, on that broad platform, we might be 
able to enjoy ourselves with them. We could not mean that 
we were palming ourself off as a Presbyterian, a Lutheran or 
a Methodist, etc. To our understanding none of these denominations
 are up to the divine standard of the Word of God, none 
of them are recognized of the Lord. But we can fellowship 
with those who worship there, if they profess belief in the 
fundamental doctrines of the Bible. We can be interdenominational
 on the subject and can see their good points, while we 
need not be influenced by their wrong doctrines. 

We would not feel justified in giving any one the impression
 that we belonged to any of these denominations, by attending
 their church regularly or frequently. One might 


[6124] 


August 1, 1917 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(237-238) 


drop into any church, at any time, without being understood 
to be a devotee. 

But when the time shall come that church federation will 
make a test, and every other belief than theirs will be banned
, then we think it would be wrong for us to worship at all 
in any of their services; that it would be more or Jess upholding
 or supporting the errors for which they will be 
standing. We would consider it our duty then to stand out 
clearly and plainly, as did the young Hebrews of old, and refuse
 under any circumstances to bow down or worship among 
them. 

SINS BLOTTED OTJT 

Question. — Acts 3:19 refers to a blotting out of sins. Will 
the sins themselves be actually blotted from memory? 

Answer. — The Apostle Feter was not preaching restitution, 
although he mentioned restitution. He could not, therefore, 
be calling on the Jews as a nation to repent, for at that time 
repentance would not have been possible. Not until after 
Israel had been accepted could the Deliverer come out of Zion 
and turn away godliness from Jacob. (Romans 11:25-27) 
To have preached restitution at that time would have been 
premature by more than eighteen hundred years. 

But the Apostle's words were designed to reach those Jews 
who might become members of the church. The sins would 
be blotted out at the second coming of Christ. Our sins are 
now covered, and because of this we are treated as sons. God 
gives us the spirit of adoption, brings us into his family. This 
present relationship shows us still sinners so far as the flesh 
is concerned, but righteous bo far as the new creature is concerned
. 

However, in the second presence of Christ, he will change 
this vile body, the body of sin, and give us a body fashioned 
like unto his glorious body. We shall have none of these sins 
then, in any sense of the word. The sins will be absolutely 
blotted out — gone. God will remember them no more; that is, 
he will utterly ignore them, as though they had never been. He 
has never recognized these sins as belonging to the new creature
, although the new creature has been charged up with 
everything derelict on the part of the body. But after we 
have received our "change," from that time onward there will 
be no sins to be remembered. 

THE NEW CREATURE NOT A SINNER 

We read in Psalm 32:1, "Blessed is he . . . whose sin 
is covered." We understand that this class whose sins were 
covered typically during the Jewish Age were the Jewish 
people, whose sins were covered year by year under the arrangement
 God made with them. We understand that the 
church's sins are actually covered by the special arrangement 
God makes with them through Jesus Christ. Ours is not a 
covenant which is renewed year by year, as was the Law Covenant
 with the Jews. With us, God's covenant is perpetual, 
so long as we abide in him. Nevertheless, though our sins are 
thus covered by our Lord, there is not an actual blotting out 
of the sins ; it is a covering with the robe of righteousness, an 
imputation of the merit of Christ's sacrifice for Adamic sin. 

There is a difference between the covering we now receive 
through faith, and the blotting out of sin which we shall receive
 later, and which the world also will ultimately enjoy. 
When our sins are thus covered according to the divine arrangement
, our wills, which we determined to consecrate in 
sacrifice to God, are received of him through our great Advocate
; and we are begotten of the holy Spirit as new creatures
. The new creature never was a sinner. The new creature
 is in full accord with God. If he is a young new creature
, he is, it may be, not as yet fully established in his harmony
 with God. If an older new creature his character jb 
crystallized. 

So it could not be the new creature that would be 
referred to as having the sins blotted out at the second coming
 of Christ. But since the new creature is the possessor, or 
owner, of the fiesh, he is responsible for the things done by 
the flesh; just as a man who owns a dog is held responsible 
for what that dog does. The new creature reigns over the 
body of flesh; but sometimes the flesh slips the leash, as it 
were. As the Apostle Paul expresses it, "In my flesh dwelleth 
no good thing; for to will is present with me; but how to perform
 that which is good I find not. For the good that I 
would, I do not; but the evil which I would not, that I do."— 
Romans 7:18, 19. 

The trespasses of the flesh are those for which we ask 
forgiveness when we pray, "Forgive us our trespasses!" A 
trespass is something which is done contrary to law, and yet 
in this ease it is something disapproved oi by us. But so 
long as we have the flesh, the mortal body is marred by blemishes
, by the imperfections of sin. Not, then, until the members
 of the body of Christ shall have passed beyond the veil 
will their sins be blotted out>— be no more. Meantime they 
are all covered and graciously arranged for in God's plan. 

We understand that all those sins that were ours up to the 
time we gave ourselves to the Lord were fully covered — that 
Christ assumed those for us at the moment of our consecration
. The Apostle refers to those as "sins that are past, by 
the forbearance of God." But we still have the flesh and are 
still liable to trespass, and all trespasses are offenses against 
the divine law. 

God could say: I will just count these as something that 
Jesus has arranged for. But he evidently did not see fit to do 
this, but to allow these trespasses to be counted up against 
the diseiple of Christ. Thus the child of God is continually 
reminded of his own shortcomings, and must go daily to the 
throne of grace to obtain mercy and find grace to help in time 
of need, and he becomes much more fortified against these 
weaknesses. It is these infirmities of the flesh that need to 
be settled for. These weaknesses still remain with the individual
, and he has the responsibility with him unto death. 
This is our thought; and it is all in God's record. In God's 
accounting, each trespass must be reckoned for. And so we 
do not pray to the Lord Jesus, "Forgive us our trespasses," 
but we go to the Father. And we think they are still in the 
divine record until forgiveness is sought through Christ; for 
we still need the Advocate. But the blotting out of these 
imperfections will not be accomplished for the church until 
they; shall have passed into glory, at the second coming of 
Christ. 

The new creature can sin, but in the act ceases to be a new 
creature. If we, the new creature, sin wilfully, there remaineth
 no more a sacrifice for sins. But in such a case the 
sin is unto death. But the new creature might sin partially, 
through beguilement of the flesh; through the weakness of the 
flesh it might participate to some extent — might not properly 
resist sin—and therefore would he more or less of a conniver 
and participant in sin. In such a case we understand the 
Scriptures to teach that the stripes which would follow would 
be for that element of participation into which the new creature
 had entered. 

The part for which the flesh would be responsible would 
be forgivable. Our Lord said: "If any blaspheme the Son 
of Man, it shall be forgiven him; hut blasphemy against the 
holy Spirit shall not he forgiven," Christ never made atonement
 for the sins of the new creature. Anything that is not 
clearly attributable to the Adamic sin is punishable. There 
can be no sacrifice for it. 


SOME LETTERS OF INTEREST 


BIN-OFrEEING— RANSOM— TBE8PASS OFTEWNG 
Dear Bbbthben: — 

In our Study of Tabernacle Shadows the point has come 
out that on page 105 it is stated that the red heifer is not an 
"offering" at all. But in both the Revised and the American 
Revised Bibles it is called a sin-offering {see verses 9 and 17 
of the 19th of Numbers) ; Strong's Concordance also bears this 
out. It seems to me that this point might help some to see 
that the word "sin-offering" is not synonymous with "ransom
." Maybe you can explain the apparent contradiction 
between this statement and that of Numbers 19. 

With Christian love, R. E. B. N. 


We are not to assume that the revisers were any more 
inspired than were the translators of the King James Version. 
There is a haziness connected with the subject which very few 


VII— 20 


escape until they come to a knowledge of that which we term 
"present truth." 

From our viewpoint, the sin-offerings were those of the 
Atonement Day, which typified the satisfaction of justice in 
respect to the sin of Adam and its penalty, which rested upon 
Adam and descended by laws of heredity to all of his children. 
We distinguish between this original sin and subsequent 
wrong-doings by styling the latter "trespasses," as they are 
called in our Lord's prayer. 

From this viewpoint, the red heifer was not a sin-offering — 
not offered for the original sin, either typically or otherwise; 
not offered on the Bay of Atonement; nor connected with the 
Atonement in any sense. 

The word ransom is separate and apart from either the 
trespass-offerings or the sin-offerings. It brings to our attention
 a different arrangement, with which we have nothing 


[6125] 


(238-2J9) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Bkookmn, N. \. 


w hate\ er to do — the arrangement that the one life of the Man 
Christ Jesus should constitute the basis for the satisfaction of 
Justice in respect to the original sin of the first man. The 
sin-offerings of the Bay of Atonement are not to be confused
 with the ransom, for they are separate pictures. 
"THAT THEY MAY SEE YOUB GOOD WORKS" 
Dear Brethren : 

May I have a moment of your valuable time to call attention
 to the habit many of" the friends have of "patting 
themselves on the back" and calling the attention of hotelkeepers
 and others, where considerable numbers are stopping, 
to their wonderfully good behavior, etc. ? 

I was privileged to attend a two-day I. B. S. A. convention 
recently, in a small town, where there was only one hotel, 
which was pretty well filled. The landlady had evidently 
put forth a great effort to please, in which she was successful
 to quite a degree, and she seemed anxious to know how 
her labors were appreciated. 

But the slightest query would be met with, "Well, what do 
you think of these people? are they hard to please?" and, 
"Are they hard to get along with?" *eto. Of course, the poor 
woman felt obliged to praise them, telling how nice they were, 
etc. 

Now, would it not be much better to keep our "lamps'* 
filled, and "trimmed and - burning," so that all could plainly 
see the light; and not be calling attention to it. as though 
people would not know we are good and well-behaved if we 
did not tell them? 

It looks to outsiders as though we are proud and boastful
 of our goodness. One man in our home-town, I am told, 
says he doesn't like our people because they are boastful 
and think themselves better than others. 

It it meets with your approval, perhaps a line in The 
Watch Tower would be well, calling the attention of the 
dear friends to these little oversights. I am sure a hint 
would be sufficient. 

Your brother in the service, Kans. 

"BROTHER TO HIM THAT IS A GREAT WASTER" 
Dear Friend: : — 

During the past six years I have visited many different ecclesias
 in Illinois, Iowa, Missouri, Texas, etc., and amongst 
other things, one thing has impressed me more and more and 
has pained me much — the careless way the Lord's tracts are 
treated by many of the consecrated children of God, and also 
by some of the ecclesias as a whole. 

Just a few samples : (1)1 was boarding with a prominent 
brother and sister in the truth during the year 1916, and at 
different times I picked up truth literature which was thrown 
down on the ground and scattered over the lawn and hack 
yard. I also picked up quite a number of colporteur envelopes
 in good condition. Finally I took the whole assortment
 and showed it to the brother, and asked him to take 
better care of the Lord's literature. He promised me to be 
more faithful in the future, 

(2) Recently 7 noticed several thousand copies of the 
Lord's literature going to waste in an upstairs store room in 
the home of a sister. A little ecclesia of about nine members 
met at said home three times a week. Pilgrim brothers from 
the Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society conduct meetings
 there when they come to town. 

I have noticed similar conditions in other ecclesias. I feel 
it my duty to notify those in charge at headquarters of these 
deplorable conditions. From time to time we read glowing 
accounts in The Watch Tower of the great amount of tracts 
sent out and distributed by the members of the International 
Bible Students Association — some years as high as 50,000,000 
copies. To know that some of that quantity remain piled up 
in basements, garrets, barns, woodsheds, closets, etc., dusty 
and time-worn, in many of the homes of the friends in the 
United States and Canada, is a shame! (Luke 16:10) I am 
sorrowfully, 

Your hrother in Christ, Lorenzo Traub. — Ky. 

GREAT HELP RECEIVED FROM V. D. M. QUESTIONS 
Drab Brethren: — 

Your favor of the 9tlv, re my answers to V. D. M. questions
, received. I wish to express my appreciation of the 
same and my increasing love for God and his great -plan and 
gratitude for all the privileges of study atnd helps in growth 
afforded hy the dear servants of the Lord at Brooklyn, and 
elsewhere. " 

I have received great inspiration in the study of the 
V. D. M. Questions, and spent not one or two days in the 
study of them, but all the time I could spare for a month. 
They are indeed deep questions, and require skill in answering
 briefly. I feared I had fallen far short of the required 
percentage. 


I thank you for your patience in considering them. I 
will endeavor to continue their study, so as to become more 
proficient in expression of these great truths. I desire, too, 
the character growth necessary to please him and to attain 
the kingdom. 

May the dear Father continue his blessing upon you all 
and his work in your hands. With much Christian love 
in him, " Mrs. E, S, Webster. — S. Dakota. 

LEAVES AN EVERLASTING MONUMENT 
Dear Friends: — 

Our heart rejoices as we think of the glorious reward 
which has now come to our dear Brother Russell. Surely 
he did a noble work, and has left behind an everlasting 
monument to his fidelity, in the six volumes of Scripture 
Studies, in all the faithful warnings and exhortations in 
The Watch Tower and his sermons! 

We loved him for his faithful service, his untiring energy, 
and his devoted loyalty to the glorious cause to which he 
had consecrated his life. We are glad that he rests from 
his labors, and we are sure that his works do follow him. 
All the friends are calm and feel sure that the Lord is still at 
the helm and that Romans 8:28 is still true. 

Doubtless other and more varied experiences and problems
 face the Lord's dear qnes on this side the veil, to still 
further test our faith and patience ; but we need not fear, 
for the "Lord is for us." 

We should all heed carefully the noble words of warning
 left us by our dear Pastor in the November 1 Watch 
Tower. In the meantime let us also heed our Master's words, 
"Let not your heart be troubled!" Very soon, if faithful, we 
also shall join the ranks of those who have gone before; and 
what a blessed reunion that will he! How glad we will be 
to meet all those dear saints, our faithful devoted Pastor and 
our glorious Lord and Head! 

We are praying for all at headquarters, that each one 
may have the "grace sufficient" to wisely and properly meet 
the new duties and responsibilities thus suddenly thrust upon 
them. May the dear Lord richly bless your hearts. Brethren, 
pray for us also. 

Your brother and servant in His service, 

R. H. Barber. 
OREATEST BLESSING OF HIS CONSECRATED LIFE 
Dear Brethren: — 

The spiritual joy and refreshment of study and recording 
the great divine plan of God as outlined by the enclosed v. 
D. M. Question blanks has been the greatest blessing of my 
consecrated life. How thankful I feel to God that he has seen 
fit to grant me, even me, a knowledge of his glorious plan for 
the blessing of all. 

My heart fills with gratitude and praise; for although I 
have been a consecrated being, a "new creature in Christ," 
since 1908, yet never before has the effulgence of the light of 
the Gospel been so gloriously mine. If the answering of these 
questions has brought as much joy to all who have so far answered
 them, there should be the greatest rejoicing in the 
church that has ever been experienced. 

Surely all who have not answered them do well to do so 
speedily I 

I anxiously await your decision as to granting the degree 
"V. D. M."; for I do want to be corrected should I be incorrect
 even in only one little item. In joy and expectancy. 
By his grace, Elbert Thompson. — Wash. 

AWAKE TO THE NEARNESS OT THE KINGDOM 
Dear Brethren: — 

Resolved, That our heart -felt sympathy be expressed to the 
members of the Bethel family and Brooklyn Tabernacle, who 
because of their fellowship with our departed Pastor are most 
keenly affected by the finishing of his labors. Be it further 

Resolved, That while confident that our beloved Pastor is 
now among the glorified with Christ, we awaken more keenly 
to the nearness of the Messianic kingdom, increasing our 
zeal; and that recognizing the manner in which the work of 
the Society has been arranged, we will in every way possible 
cooperate with the work, continuing the promulgation of the 
Gospel of good tidings. Reading Ecclesia. — Pa. 

APPRECIATIVE WORDS TROM A STRANGER 
Gentlemen: — 

I condole with you in the great loss you have sustained an 
losing dear Pastor Russell. I was ill at the time with an attack
 of heart trouble. It was a shock to me; I never felt so 
bad about a stranger. I was in hopes of hearing him some 
time. He was a man of God. 

I thank you for the book and paper you so kindly sent 
me. T will buy another book some time, when I can. 

Very cordially yours, Mas. S. Roberts.— Maw. 


[6126] 


Aur.ttsT 1, 1917 


Tim WATCH TOWER 


(239 226) 


ONE YEAR'S BETEOSPECTION 

Dear Brethren in Cubist: — 

It is about a year since I became interested in Pastor 
Russell's Studies in the Scriptures, having first read his 
lectures in the San Francisco Bulletin, and almost immediately 
following, I ordered the first volume, and 1 think the fourth 
and fifth; then the whole six. I have since had a few of the 
first volumes circulating, with the hope that they will be appreciated
 as I appreciate the light. There has been a continual 
flow of light as I read volume after volume. Am now reading
 the sixth and still progressing, and anticipate more pleasure
, truth and strength as I peruse them again. But all this 
lias not been without its trials. I can now see my own weak 
ness and unworthiness. 1 can see the pitiful condition of the 
world, the confusion, the egotism of man. Romans 1:25 — 
what a meaning and what a picture! 

A year ago, in my estimation the Bible was not much of 
a book. I thought it something of a history, but not to be 
taken too seriously. No doubt I gave my opinion in that way 
many times, and I had never read it; in fact, I knew nothing 
about it, but was willing to express my opinion just the same! 
Perhaps this came from the fact that I was reared a Iloman 
Catholic. Jn my boyhood days we had Bible History, a book 
of its own kind,* and no doubt for its own purpose. 

What a difference in one year! All the years before I 
began to read Scripture Studies, I was aimlessly knocking
 about, in mental slavery and full of self-conceit. I was 
seeking truth, and I thought I saw truth in Socialism that 
was better than our churches of today. In Christian Science, 
I thought I saw something better than the hell of torment, 
but could not see how Mrs. Eddy could take what she wanted 
of the Bible and leave out the rest! I could not see real 
Christianity in a capitalized Christianity. I mean, I thought 
Christ's church should be where his people are; and then I 
could not see anything very definite in Christian Science; yet 
I was trying to "master it when I read Pastor Russell's lectures
 and began sending for his books. Now I see how logical
 and reasonable the law of God is — just what it should 
be! How could a Master Builder be without a definite plan! 
And how corroborative the Bible is of this wonderful and yet 
so reasonable plan! The higher critics in their conceit have 


caused a world of confusion. 1 shudder when I think of the 
blindness in Catholicism, Surely Catholicism is closely related 
to heathenism! Last-hour repentance is one of the strong 
points of the Roman Catholic church. That in itself showb 
the blindness that is upon Catholics; and the others are very 
much the same. 

Sincerely yours in Christ, C. J. Fry.— Calif. 

WILL CONTINUE TO CO-OPERATE IN THE WOBK 

Resolved, That we feel keenly the loss of our Pastor and 
friend, but rejoice* in the assurance that he is now with the 
Lord in glory; and that his passing into the heavenly courts 
has quickened our zeal to press more faithfully along the 
"narrow way" that we, too, may join that happy throng. 
And be it further 

Resolved, That we hereby assure the faithful officers of 
the W. T. B. & T. Society of our continued cooperation and 
hearty support in the advancement of the glad tidings so long 
as this work is conducted in the manner and spirit as exemplified
 by our beloved Pastor; and be it further 

Resolved, That we will continue to pray for the general 
interests of the work, that while we cannot now ask God 
to bless our dear Pastor as we have formerly done, yet we 
can and will ask him to bless the memory of our dear Brother 
Russell. Atlanta Ecclesia. — Ga. 

"THINKING MOBE EABNESLY THAN EVEB BEFORE' 1 
Bear Brethren: — 

The reading of the article about the V. D. M. Questions 
in the June 1 Watch Tower set me at thinking more earnestly
 than ever before, what a great responsibility, as well as 
a privilege, it is to be a servant of the Lord and the brethren. 
By studying those questions more carefully, I came to the 
conclusion that I could not have the Lord's approval in letting 
this opportunity go by to give testimony of what I have 
learned in the school of Christ, since he has called me out 
of darkness into his marvelous light. 

So, dear Brethren, I kindly ask you to send me one of 
those V. D. M. Question blanks, so that by trying to answer 
them, I may show forth his praises. With much Christian 
love. 

Your brother and servant in Christ, C. Nousen. — Wis. 


LONG-LOOKED-FOR SEVENTH VOLUME 


Last winter, under the supervision of the Society, the 
compilation of the matter for the Seventh Volume was begun. 
A short time ago the work was finished and sent to the 
printer. It was learned that, in order to get the volume out 
this summer at all on account of other heavy contracts which 
might later interfere, the publication must be put upon the 
press at on^e. Hence it was rushed; and when the printing 
was about done, it was thought that the volume might be 
placed in a carton and sent to Tower subscribers, so that 
everyone might receive it at the same time; this was done. 
The price is sixty cents per volume. Increased cost of paper 
and labor makes the cost of the book more. 

Brother Russell often spoke about writing the seventh 
volume, and one of his last utterances about it was to this 
effect: "Whenever I find the key, I will write the seventh 
volume; and if the Lord gives the key to someone else, he 
can write it" — or words to that effect. Brother Russell's 
modesty and humility may have prevented him from seeing 
the key. When you read the seventh volume, you may readily 


discover that Brother Russell himself is the key. This volume 
shows Brother Russell's relationship to the church as the 
seventh messenger. It is quite wonderful to see how this 
is shown both in Revelation and in Ezekiel, and both books 
are herein harmonized. 

The Society feels quite sure that the friends in reading 
this volume will greatly rejoice and it hopes that the book 
will be a strength and comfort to the church in the hour 
of need. To colporteurs and others the price of the volume, 
in lots of fifty, will be forty cents, carriage added. The Society
 hopes that the colporteurs will take up the sale of it 
quickly. 

We take this method of acknowledging receipt cl remittances
 for the volume, and also for orders for it and to give 
assurance that these will be rilled as rapidly as possible. 

Orders for Karatol and India paper editions are being 
entered on the books. These orders will be filled as soon aa 
these editions are ready — about six weeks. Karatol, 60c 
India paper, leather bound, $1 postpaid. 

