Do You Remember?
Have you given careful thought to recent issues of The Watchtower? If so, you will probably find it interesting to recall the following:
▫ What is the “sign meaning goodness” that Jehovah works out for Jesus’ footstep followers? (Psalm 86:17)
It was “joy of holy spirit” that strengthened early Christians to endure the various forms of persecution that befell them. (1 Thessalonians 1:6) It is the same today, and Jehovah, the Giver of “every good gift and every perfect present,” is pleased to “give holy spirit to those asking him.” (James 1:17; Luke 11:13) So it is joy of holy spirit that works out for Jesus’ followers “a sign meaning goodness.”​—12/15, pages 18-19.
▫ Why is it vital for us to accept God’s view of lying?
Psalm 5:6 says that God “will destroy those speaking a lie.” Revelation 21:8 further says that the destiny of all liars is “the second death.” Hence, accepting God’s view of lying gives us strong reason to speak the truth and so receive his gift of life.​—12/15, page 23.
▫ What constituted the Samaritan form of worship? (John 4:20)
The Samaritans, in their mixed worship, accepted as Scripture only the first five books of Moses, the Pentateuch. About the fourth century B.C.E., they put up a temple on Mount Gerizim, in competition with God’s temple in Jerusalem. Although the Samaritans’ temple was destroyed, to this day they hold an annual Passover celebration on Gerizim.​—1/1, page 25.
▫ Are Christians required to promote antipollution or clean-up measures?
When he was on earth, Jesus did not try to solve all the social problems of his day. When Jehovah by means of his Messianic Kingdom enforces his righteous principles on a global scale, environmental problems will be permanently solved. Hence, Jehovah’s Witnesses take a balanced view. Love of neighbor moves them to show respect for the property of others, but they rightfully put preaching the message of God’s Kingdom first. (Matthew 6:33)​—1/1, page 31.
▫ In what ways did Jesus serve as a light bearer? (John 8:12)
Jesus devoted himself to preaching the good news of the Kingdom of God. (Luke 4:43; John 18:37) He also laid bare religious falsehoods and thus provided spiritual freedom for those held in religious bondage. (Matthew 15:3-9) Outstandingly, he proved to be the light of the world by laying down his perfect human life as a ransom. (Matthew 20:28; John 3:16)​—1/15, pages 10-11.
▫ What are some reasons why we owe Jehovah God subjection?
Jehovah is the Universal Sovereign, and for this reason we owe him our subjection. Also, since Jehovah is almighty, no one can successfully oppose him, so we cannot ignore our subjection to him. All intelligent creatures were created to serve the purpose of their Maker, and this places all under obligation to subject themselves to God in all respects.​—2/1, pages 10-11.
▫ What helped Joseph to resist committing fornication with Potiphar’s wife?
Joseph had a powerful force actuating his mind. He was conscious of his relationship with Jehovah and appreciated that an act of fornication would be sinning not only against her husband but, more important, against God.​—2/15, page 21.
▫ What did Jesus mean when he said: “I am . . . the truth”? (John 14:6)
Jesus did not just speak and teach the truth; he lived and personified it. Thus, Christianity is not merely an idea; it is a way of life.​—3/1, page 15.
▫ What comforting lesson is contained in Psalm 51?
This psalm helps us to realize that if we stumble into sin but are truly repentant, our loving heavenly Father will hear our cry for mercy and save us from despair. However, we should primarily be concerned about any reproach brought on Jehovah’s name.​—3/15, page 18.
▫ What is symbolized by water baptism?
Baptism is an outward symbol of one’s dedication to Jehovah God. Being dipped under the water shows that those being baptized are dying to a life course centering on themselves. Being raised up out of the water symbolizes that they are now alive to the doing of God’s will, putting it first in their lives. (Matthew 16:24)​—4/1, pages 5-6.

