





Right and Wrong: A Choice You Must Make

The moral standards we choose to live by will greatly affect how our life turns out. Jehovah God knows that. This is why he wants us to live by his standards.



Jehovah wants us to enjoy a peaceful and happy life.


“I, Jehovah, am your God, the One teaching you to benefit yourself, the One guiding you in the way you should walk. If only you would pay attention to my commandments! Then your peace would become just like a river and your righteousness like the waves of the sea.”​—Isaiah 48:17, 18.

As our Creator, God knows the best way we should live. He invites us to follow his guidance because it will be for our good. When we follow God’s commands, we will not have to wonder whether our choice will result in good. We will always be making the right choice, the one that leads to peace and happiness.

Jehovah does not ask us to do the impossible.


“This commandment that I am commanding you today is not too difficult for you, nor is it beyond your reach.”​—Deuteronomy 30:11.

Living by God’s moral standards may require changes in how we think and act. However, Jehovah is not asking too much of us. After all, as our Creator, he knows what we are capable of. And as we come to know Jehovah, we will find that “his commandments are not burdensome.”​—1 John 5:3.






Jehovah promises to help those who choose to live by his standards.


“I, Jehovah your God, am grasping your right hand, the One saying to you, ‘Do not be afraid. I will help you.’”​—Isaiah 41:13.

We can measure up to God’s moral standards because he will help us. He can assist us through his Word, the Bible, which gives us encouragement and hope.
Millions of people around the world have found that living by Bible standards has improved their lives. Why not learn more about the good advice the Bible has to offer? You can begin by considering the Bible-based brochure Enjoy Life Forever! available free of charge on jw.org. It contains these lessons:
  How Can the Bible Help You?

  The Bible Gives Hope

  Can You Trust the Bible?


As you investigate God’s Word, the Bible, you will discover that it is not out-of-date; it is “always reliable, now and forever.” (Psalm 111:8) Following the moral standards found in the Bible is the best way for us to live. However, God will not force us to do so. (Deuteronomy 30:19, 20; Joshua 24:15) It is a choice that each of us must make.

