
Right and Wrong: The Bible​—A Reliable Guide

We cannot be sure that our moral choices will turn out well if we base them only on how we or other people feel. The Bible reveals why, but it also does more. It contains reliable moral guidance​—the key to enjoying a happy and fulfilling life.


GUIDANCE WE NEED
In the Bible, Jehovaha God explains that he intended for humans to look to him for guidance, not to guide, or direct, themselves. (Jeremiah 10:23) That is why he has provided the moral guidelines found in the Bible. He loves the human family and wants to spare us from experiencing the harmful consequences and frustration of making important life decisions based on trial and error. (Deuteronomy 5:29; 1 John 4:8) More than that, as our Creator, he has the wisdom and knowledge needed to give us the best possible moral advice. (Psalm 100:3; 104:24) Yet, God never forces people to live by his standards.
Jehovah gave the first man and woman, Adam and Eve, everything they needed to be truly happy. (Genesis 1:28, 29; 2:8, 15) He also gave them simple instructions that he expected them to obey. However, he let them choose for themselves whether they would follow those instructions or not. (Genesis 2:9, 16, 17) Sadly, Adam and Eve chose to live by their own standards rather than God’s standards. (Genesis 3:6) What has been the result? Is the human family better off deciding for themselves what is right and wrong? No. History proves that ignoring God’s standards does not bring lasting peace and happiness.​—Ecclesiastes 8:9.
The Bible provides the guidance we need in order to make wise moral choices, regardless of our background. (2 Timothy 3:16, 17; see the box “A Book for All People.”) Consider how the Bible does this.







Learn more about why the Bible can rightly be called “the word of God.”​—1 Thessalonians 2:13. Watch the video Who Is the Author of the Bible? on jw.org.



A BOOK FOR ALL PEOPLE

We would expect a wise and loving Creator to make his moral guidance available to everyone. Consider these facts about the Bible:







  3,500+ The number of languages in which at least a portion of the Bible is available, making it the most widely translated book ever.

  5,000,000,000+ The number of copies of the Bible that have been produced, making it the most widely distributed book in history.


The Bible does not exalt one race, nation, tribe, or culture over another. It truly is a book for all people.
Read the Bible online (available in over 250 languages) on jw.org









WHY SOME DISMISS THE BIBLE

Some people claim that the Bible cannot be a good source for moral guidance. They may raise the following objections.


Objection: “The Bible contradicts itself.”
Fact: The relatively few passages that may appear contradictory can be resolved by taking into account the context, historical facts and customs, the writer’s viewpoint, and other factors.

To see some specific examples, read the article “Are There Contradictions in the Bible?” on jw.org.



Objection: “People who claim to follow the Bible do bad things, so it must not be a good moral guide.”
Fact: The Bible is not to blame for the bad conduct of those who do not apply its teachings. It foretold that many people​—including religious leaders—​who claim to follow the Bible would act contrary to what it says. It also says that as a result, Bible teachings would be “spoken of abusively.”​—2 Peter 2:1, 2.

For one example of the ways many religious leaders have strayed from what the Bible really teaches, read the article “Is Religion Just Another Big Business?” on jw.org.



Objection: “The Bible promotes an intolerant view of others.”
Fact: The Bible encourages treating other people with respect. It does not condone. . .
  considering oneself superior to others.​—Philippians 2:3.

  disrespecting people who have different values or beliefs.​—1 Peter 2:17.

  forcing others to adopt one’s views.​—Matthew 10:14.


The Bible shows that God always treats people kindly and fairly and that God wants us to do the same.​—Romans 9:14.

For more information, read the article “Tolerance​—How the Bible Can Help” on jw.org.




HOW THE BIBLE REVEALS GOD’S GUIDANCE
The Bible is an accurate record of Jehovah’s dealings with humankind. What it contains helps us to discern what God views as right and wrong, beneficial and harmful. (Psalm 19:7, 11) We learn timeless principles that help us to make wise moral choices in our daily lives.
For example, consider the advice found at Proverbs 13:20: “The one walking with the wise will become wise, but the one who has dealings with the stupid will fare badly.” That principle is just as applicable in our modern world as it was in ancient times. The Bible is full of such practical and valuable principles.​—See the box “The Bible’s Timeless Wisdom.”
But you may wonder, ‘How can I be sure that the Bible’s moral guidance works today?’ The next article will consider some real-life examples.

a Jehovah is the personal name of God.​—Psalm 83:18.

THE BIBLE’S TIMELESS WISDOM

Although the Bible was completed almost 2,000 years ago, it continues to be relevant today. Basic human nature has not changed​—we still seek fulfillment and happiness in life. (Ecclesiastes 1:9) The Bible’s timeless wisdom can help us to reach that goal.

Honesty
  “We wish to conduct ourselves honestly in all things.”​—Hebrews 13:18.

  “Let the one who steals steal no more; rather, let him do hard work.”​—Ephesians 4:28.


Relationships
  “Let each one keep seeking, not his own advantage, but that of the other person.”​—1 Corinthians 10:24.

  “Continue putting up with one another and forgiving one another freely.”​—Colossians 3:13.


Making Decisions
  “The naive person believes every word, but the shrewd one ponders each step.”​—Proverbs 14:15.

  “The shrewd one sees the danger and conceals himself, but the inexperienced keep right on going and suffer the consequences.”​—Proverbs 22:3.




