
Right and Wrong: Guidance That Works

Consider four areas of life in which millions have learned that the Bible’s guidance works and can be trusted.


1. Marriage





People have different views about marriage and about what it takes to have a happy marriage.

THE BIBLE SAYS: “Each one of you must love his wife as he does himself; on the other hand, the wife should have deep respect for her husband.”​—Ephesians 5:33.

MEANING: Marriage is an arrangement that God originated, so he knows what is needed for a couple to be happy. (Mark 10:6-9) Happiness results when marriage mates focus, not on what each one gets, but on what each one can give to strengthen their marriage. A husband who loves his wife will show it by the way he treats her and cares for her. And a wife who respects her husband will show it by the way she speaks and acts.
BIBLE GUIDANCE WORKS: Quang and Thi, from Vietnam, felt trapped in their unhappy marriage. Quang was often unkind. He says: “I didn’t care about Thi’s feelings and often humiliated her.” Thi wanted a divorce. She said: “I felt that I could no longer trust or respect my husband.”
Eventually, Quang and Thi learned what the Bible teaches and how to apply Ephesians 5:33 in their marriage. “This verse helped me to see the need to be kind,” says Quang, “and to make Thi feel loved and cared for materially, physically, and emotionally. When I act that way, I gain her love and respect.” And Thi says, “The more I apply Ephesians 5:33 and show my husband respect, the more he makes me feel loved, protected, and at peace.”
For more information on marriage, read Awake! No. 2 2018, entitled “12 Secrets of Successful Families” on jw.org.






2. How to Treat Others
People often mistreat others because of their race, nationality, appearance, religion, or sexual orientation.

THE BIBLE SAYS: “Honor men of all sorts.”​—1 Peter 2:17.

MEANING: The Bible does not condone racism, homophobia, or xenophobia. Instead, it encourages us to be respectful of all people, regardless of their race, nationality, or social standing. (Acts 10:34) Even if we disagree with what others believe or how they act, we can still treat them with kindness and respect.​—Matthew 7:12.
BIBLE GUIDANCE WORKS: Daniel was taught to view people from Asia as a threat to his country. He came to hate anyone from an Asian background and would often insult them in public. “I justified my behavior as ‘patriotism,’” says Daniel. “I didn’t even consider that the way I thought or acted was wrong.”
Daniel eventually learned what the Bible teaches. “I had to change my thinking totally,” says Daniel. “I had to see people the way God does​—that we are all the same no matter where we come from.” Daniel describes how he feels now when he meets people. He says: “I often don’t even think about where they are from. I love people of all sorts now and have close friends from all over the world.”






For more information, read Awake! No. 3 2020, entitled “Is There a Cure for Prejudice?” on jw.org.







3. Money
Many people pursue wealth in order to be happy and have a better future.

THE BIBLE SAYS: “Wisdom is a protection just as money is a protection, but the advantage of knowledge is this: Wisdom preserves the life of its owner.”​—Ecclesiastes 7:12.

MEANING: We need money, but it cannot guarantee our happiness or our future. (Proverbs 18:11; 23:4, 5) Instead, genuine happiness and a secure future depend on applying wisdom from God as found in the Bible.​—1 Timothy 6:17-19.
BIBLE GUIDANCE WORKS: Cardo, a man in Indonesia, focused on acquiring wealth. “I enjoyed what most people dream of,” he said. “I was able to travel and to buy luxury goods, cars, and houses.” Such prosperity did not last. “I was defrauded, and the money I had worked so hard for all those years was gone in the blink of an eye,” says Cardo. “I had spent my life pursuing wealth, but in the end, all I got were feelings of emptiness, worthlessness, and disappointment.”
Cardo began to apply the Bible’s advice on money. He no longer focuses all his energy on building wealth but chooses to lead a simpler life. “The true and lasting treasure is of a spiritual nature,” he says. “I can sleep well every night, and I am truly happy.”






For information on the Bible’s view of money, read the article “Can Education and Money Guarantee a Secure Future?” in The Watchtower No. 3 2021, on jw.org.


4. Sex
People have a wide variety of opinions on what is sexually acceptable.

THE BIBLE SAYS: “Abstain from sexual immorality. Each one of you should know how to control his own body in holiness and honor, not with greedy, uncontrolled sexual passion like the nations have that do not know God.”​—1 Thessalonians 4:3-5.

MEANING: The Bible limits how we are to express our sexual desires. The term “sexual immorality” includes adultery, prostitution, sexual relations between unmarried individuals, homosexuality, and bestiality. (1 Corinthians 6:9, 10) Sexual relations are a gift from God that he intended exclusively for a man and woman who are married to each other.​—Proverbs 5:18, 19.
BIBLE GUIDANCE WORKS: A woman in Australia named Kylie says: “As a single person, I thought that if I had sex, I would then feel loved and secure. But the opposite happened. I felt insecure and heartbroken.”
Later, Kylie learned and applied what the Bible teaches about sex. “I can see that God’s standards are there to prevent pain and hurt,” she says. “I now feel secure and loved because of doing things in the way Jehovah wants us to. Applying the Bible’s guidance has saved me from so much heartache!”
For more information, read the article “What Does the Bible Say About Living Together Without Marriage?” on jw.org.

Our Creator helps us to know what is right and wrong. Although sticking to his moral guidelines is not always easy, it is worth the effort. We can trust that it will always result in our long-term happiness.







