Kingdom News No. 23
Why So Much Suffering—If God Cares?
HOW COULD A GOOD GOD ALLOW . . .
◆ Mass starvation?
◆ Heartless crime?
◆ Corruption and injustice?
◆ Senseless, blood-spilling wars?
DOES THIS MAKE YOU DOUBT GOD EXISTS?
Many say Yes. But, then — How can we account for . . .
Earth’s splendor
Fruitful fields
Ability to love
Life itself
A CONTRADICTION? CAN YOU EXPLAIN IT?
Some say: “Things evolved this way”; others, “God doesn’t care”; still others, “It is the will of God.” Are any of these answers satisfying? Not really.
But there is an explanation that does come to grips with the issue.
It is found only in the Bible. Do you balk at this? Yet, have you found the answer anywhere else?
Then why not at least consider what the Bible says?
THE REASONABLE EXPLANATION
The Bible and creation both testify that an intelligent Maker purposed for mankind to live on earth in peace and happiness. (Genesis 1:28-31; Acts 14:16, 17)
As their Life-Giver, Jehovah God had the right to govern his creatures. Still, he gave them freedom of choice, to accept or reject his authority. (Revelation 4:11; Genesis 2:16, 17)
Humans, however, chose to govern themselves. “God made mankind upright, but they themselves have sought out many plans.” (Ecclesiastes 7:29; Deuteronomy 32:5)
God could have crushed their rebellion immediately. However, an issue had been raised that must be settled. Hence, God allowed humans enough time to try out their “many plans.” With what result?
Starvation, crime, corruption, injustice and wars—this is man’s sad history. How true the Bible statements:
◆ “Man has dominated man to his injury.” (Ecclesiastes 8:9)
◆ “It does not belong.to man who is walking even to direct his step.” (Jeremiah 10:23)
The conclusion is plain:
Human suffering is of man’s own making. It does not come from God. Rather, it stems from man’s rejecting God as ruler.
Hence, God has allowed suffering temporarily to settle this issue once and for all.
How, then, will human suffering finally end?
HOW SUFFERING WILL END
The Bible shows that God will soon restore the peace and happiness he purposed for mankind.
By means of his Son’s kingdom, God will wipe out all oppressive rulerships and eliminate all causes of human suffering. (Daniel 2:44; 1 Corinthians 15:25, 26)
◆ Instead of famine—Plenty!
◆ Instead of crime—Security!
◆ Instead of corruption—Justice!
◆ Instead of war—Peace!
But when will God do these things? Can you and your family live to see and enjoy such a paradise earth?
GET MORE INFORMATION—FREE!
Send the coupon below or write for the 32-page booklet—
Is There a God Who Cares?
Please send me, postpaid, the FREE 32-page booklet “Is There a God Who Cares?”

