Getting the Most Out of the New Book On Ezekiel’s Prophecy
We will begin using the book “The Nations Shall Know that I Am Jehovah”​—How? In the congregation book studies, starting November 1, 1971. We look forward to this study in which we can fully enjoy Ezekiel’s prophecies dealing with our times and even reaching forward into the new order. But we believe that a brief overall view of the main points will provide a good foundation for all of us and will make the detailed study more profitable. With this in view, a special arrangement is being made for November and December. In each congregation the book will be covered in a series of eight public talks. This arrangement will be of special help to newly interested ones, making the advanced information in the book readily understandable to them.
Your Part in the Program
The talks will progressively cover the book, two or three chapters each week. (The exact schedule is contained in the following instructions for the speakers.) You will get the greatest benefit from the talks by reading the appropriate chapters in advance. If that is not always possible, be sure to attend, nevertheless. And bring your personal copy of the book, for in that way you can follow the speaker when he calls attention to certain pictures or charts, or occasionally asks for certain paragraphs to be read in their entirety. Also, having your book with you will aid you to answer if the speaker invites voluntary comments from the audience.
Scheduling the Talks
It will be most beneficial to have these special public talks in the congregation as soon as possible, preferably in November and December. Many congregations likely have their talks for those two months already scheduled. If so, you may go ahead with these if you so desire, but it may be more advantageous to change the schedule in order to allow these special talks to be given in November and December. Besides whetting our appetites for the more detailed study of the book, having this early coverage will help us to present the book more intelligently in the field during these two months, and all who come to hear the talks will be greatly benefited spiritually.
What about handbills? Some congregations use the type of handbill that lists all the meetings for the week but does not show the title of the public talk. These can be used for the special talks too. Or, handbills that show the titles of the special talks may be ordered, but please do so IMMEDIATELY. Under normal circumstances it is requested that handbill orders be submitted six weeks in advance. However, for this special series of talks, the Society will gladly put forth special effort to print and ship handbills as quickly as possible. So if handbills with the talk titles are desired, they should be ordered IMMEDIATELY.
If your congregation has a circuit assembly or the circuit servant’s visit scheduled during those two months, the special talk from this series that would be given that week can be given the following week. The chairman each week should announce the title of the talk for the following week, stating which chapters of the book will be covered and reminding the audience to bring their personal copies. He may also mention that the book is being studied currently at the congregation book studies, giving an invitation to all to attend.
Speakers
Because of the nature of the material, it is recommended that each congregation use only their best public speakers for these talks, even if this means that some brothers will give one talk early in the series and another near its conclusion. These are not talks for new speakers. Any of the talks can be given by just one speaker, but a symposium of two (or, rarely, three) speakers could be used, each covering a chapter.
As a speaker delivering one of these talks, strive for simplicity. The new book is filled with excellent details. The brothers will enjoy covering these details in the book study. Do not try to bring them all out in your talk. Keep simplicity and clarity in mind throughout. If you used expressions such as “anointed remnant,” “Babylon the Great,” “great crowd” or other terms not readily understandable to the public, qualify or define them so that all will readily understand.
Keep in mind the talk’s title, or subject. Refer back to it and stress this theme throughout the talk. Also, try to keep to the fore the present-day meaning of the prophecies and pictorial events being discussed. Enthusiastically point out their value to the audience and strive to stimulate appreciation and action. In your introduction you will usually give the audience an indication of the direction your discussion will take and the importance of the material, in harmony with the title or subject of the talk. In showing the failure of Christendom and its doom, always remember to make plain the reasons. Highlight the justice of Jehovah, his mercy and his provision for those who want righteousness. Make the talk warm and encouraging. Let the audience leave with an optimistic viewpoint and a determination to orient their lives so as to serve God more fully.
We do not believe that these talks lend themselves well to demonstrations. Maps, illustrations and charts in the book should be used. If you find a paragraph that you think should be read in its entirety, this can be done. If you desire, you may have a brother on the platform or a qualified person in the audience read it. Certain scriptures may also be handled in this way, or the speaker himself may read them. You can decide whether you want to have three or four review questions for the audience during the talk or near the conclusion.
We are sure that the series of talks will better acquaint all of us with the prophecy of Ezekiel and will increase our appreciation of Jehovah’s provisions for his people now and in the near future.
1. Why Get to Know Who God Is?
Chapter 1: (17 min.) Throughout talk emphasize life-or-death importance of getting to know who Jehovah is and what his name stands for. Points to highlight with this theme in mind are: (1) Why God’s name should be known. (2) All will eventually have to recognize it. (3) Illustrated in ancient example. This is not merely past history, for issues same now as then. Explain issue back in Egypt (par. 6), how and why God raised up Moses (pars, 11, 16, 17). Do not go into details, but show what first three plagues accomplished. Highlight God’s protection and deliverance of Israel, who knew their God, while Egyptian military forces came to know Jehovah, but at cost of their lives.​—Ex. 14:21-30.
Chapter 2: (18 min.) In this portion emphasize that in our hearts we must know God and his fine qualities; then we will want to serve him, will receive his favor, protection and life. (1) God’s dealings with Israel, his “witnesses,” reveal his qualities of love, care and protectiveness as well as his justice. (Read, explain Exodus 6:2, 3; see pars. 1, 4, 7.) (2) God’s revelation to Moses shows His deservedness to be worshiped. (Read Exodus 34:4-7 and explain, putting stress on fine qualities that distinguish Jehovah from all so-called gods.) (3) Those in our day who claim to worship Jehovah but who do not will be forced to know who he is in a way not desirable to them. We want to know God now in order to avoid this calamity (pars. 33-35).
Chapter 3: (20 min.) This portion should emphasize importance of seeing clearly Jehovah’s heavenly organization and understanding our relationship to it. Call attention to picture on page 44. Read Ezekiel 1:1-10, then verses 15-21, speaker commenting after each reading. Then verses 25-28, speaker stressing glory, serenity of God, and his attributes. Emphasize that we should love, appreciate, serve him because of these. Show in what sense Jehovah “rides” his heavenly organization. Highlight peacefulness, cooperation of that organization, and that it is reflected in his people on earth (pars. 31-34). Conclude by encouraging all to associate with modern-day Ezekiel class and get to know the true God Jehovah now as only way to protection and life in happiness. Appreciate the fine protection and help of his heavenly organization (pars. 39, 40). Tell newer ones in audience briefly how they can do this by home Bible study.
2. Are Christendom’s Days Numbered?
Chapter 4: (20 min.) Jehovah does not take action until ample warning is given. This is illustrated in case of ancient Jerusalem, which entered its time of the end in 647 B.C.E. One of the prophets raised up in that time of the end was Ezekiel. In this portion show that the existence of the modern Ezekiel proves that Christendom’s days are numbered. Bible chronology indicates that the nations, including those of Christendom, entered their time of the end in 1914 C.E. (par. 7). Has someone like Ezekiel appeared? Show why modern Ezekiel must be a composite body but could not be natural Jews as a body nor the churches of Christendom (pars. 9-16). Identify the modern Ezekiel as being the composite body of anointed followers of Jesus, commissioned by Jehovah God to go to Christendom (pars. 17, 24). (In recounting remnant’s history avoid fine details; give main points.) (Incorporate points from pages 68 and 69 about Christendom’s being rebellious “nations.”) What message did Ezekiel class, under heavy opposition, have for Christendom?
Chapter 5: (15 min.) In this portion show that the bitter message of Ezekiel class and their having to speak despite attempts to restrain them are two additional proofs that Christendom’s days are numbered. Read Ezekiel 3:1-3, 12-15 and discuss significance of “roll” and effect on Ezekiel class (pars. 6, 9, 10, 23, 25, 26). The life of Ezekiel class depends on faithfully discharging their commission as watchman (Ezek. 3:16-21), therefore they must speak despite attempts to restrain them (Ezek. 3:24-27). Give examples of such attempts.
Chapter 6: (20 min.) In this portion show that conditions existing in Christendom prove that her days are numbered. Jehovah will not tolerate religious unfaithfulness, as shown in case of Jerusalem. Destruction came as result of religious error. (Read Ezekiel 4:4-8.) Briefly draw attention to unfaithfulness of ten-tribe and two-tribe kingdom in explaining text. Then highlight guilt of Christendom. Her guilt through idolatry and bloodshed makes it certain that her end is near. She will experience the horrors that came upon Jerusalem, as indicated beforehand by Ezekiel. Epitomize Ezekiel 4:10-17 and proceed to show what will happen to Christendom. Encourage right action in support of the Ezekiel class and their work in view of Christendom’s approaching end. Emphasize main points in paragraphs 49-51.
3. Why Do Jehovah’s Witnesses Call at Your Door?
Chapter 7: (20 min.) Jehovah’s witnesses bear message of warning and message of hope. Develop the following points: Jehovah’s witnesses call so that (1) people are made aware of Christendom’s guilt in defiling God’s creation the earth, (2) they are informed that Jehovah will not continue to tolerate this, and (3) when destruction comes upon Christendom people will know that the executioner is really Jehovah. Read Ezekiel 6:1-7 and, after briefly explaining its significance in Ezekiel’s time, point out Christendom’s guilt (par. 15). Read Ezekiel 7:1-4, 9 and show the certainty of Jehovah’s taking action against Christendom. There will be no escape from the rod. (Read Ezekiel 7:10; explain.) Riches will be of no avail; Christendom will be abandoned, her ‘sacred things’ not spared. (Read, explain Ezekiel 7:19-22.) Stubborn, unheeding ones will know that Jehovah is the executioner when destruction comes (par. 33). Christendom, which claims to represent God, must answer to him. (Read, explain Ezekiel 7:27; [pars. 63, 64]; read paragraph 67.) But do Jehovah’s witnesses proclaim only a message of condemnation?
Chapter 8: (15 min.) Another reason for Jehovah’s witnesses calling is to reach the hearts of rightly-disposed persons so that these might be saddened in a godly way over the detestable things committed in Christendom. Just how detestable some of these things are cannot be appreciated without help of God’s servants, enlightened by holy spirit. Using Ezekiel 8:7-17, show up Christendom’s guilt. Explain symbol of jealousy, worship of representation of creeping things and beasts, worship of sun and weeping for Tammuz, particularly as fulfilled in modern times. (Deal with only main points of comparison between actions of Jerusalem and those of Christendom. Avoid complicated detail.) Emphasize that the badness of these things from God’s viewpoint would not be discerned by honest-hearted ones were it not for the calls made by Jehovah’s witnesses.
Chapter 9: (20 min.) Jehovah’s witnesses also call to assist persons to escape destruction. In discussing Ezekiel chapter 9, be very brief in explaining application to unfaithful Jerusalem, spending more time on application for our day. Identify the six men with weapons for smashing (par. 5), the man with the secretary’s inkhorn (par. 26), the ones marked (par. 27) and the mark (par. 32). Emphasize the teaching and discipling work necessary to produce the “mark.” Show success of marking work and value of the mark. Review why Jehovah’s witnesses call and encourage all to acquire and/​or maintain the mark to be preserved alive.
4. It is Dangerous Not to Care
Chapter 10: (15 min.) Indifference, complacency, a “wait-and-see” attitude prevails today, even among religious persons. Focus attention on the reason to care: Christendom is definitely in line for fiery destruction because of following the course of unfaithful ancient Jerusalem. What threatens Christendom is something far more awesome than the greatest array of military strength; she is facing God’s celestial chariot. Explain the fiery coals. Christians only announce judgment on Christendom; they have no share in actual destruction. Read Ezekiel 10:1, 2, 6, 7 and explain the part the linen-clad man played and the forces God will use to destroy Christendom (pars. 4, 14, 18, 19) Mourners and rejoicers over Christendom’s and symbolic Babylon’s fall (pars. 21, 22). What is in store for those who scoff at this message of warning now?
Chapter 11: (20 min.) Point out how the leaders and some others in Christendom feel, using the picture at Ezekiel 11:1-3 (pars. 1-3). Present the reasons for Christendom’s overconfidence (pars. 13-15). It is terribly dangerous now to be complacent (pars. 16, 17). But when Christendom is wiped out, is it the end for Christianity? (pars. 18, 19) No (pars. 29-32). But individuals in Christendom will not escape unless they forsake her, even if persecuted for doing so. They must receive the ‘mark in the forehead,’ identifying themselves with true Christianity, which will survive (pars. 35-37). They must also tell others about God’s merciful arrangement.​—Ezek. 11:25; par. 44.
Chapter 12: (20 min.) There is also reason for persons outside Christendom to care, as the destruction will extend to all of Babylon the Great. Read Ezekiel 21:3-5, with emphasis on verse 5; explain the significance of the sword and its effect (pars. 6-12). Point out the error of religionist in thinking that they are God’s people and will escape that sword. To be unconcerned is to invite calamity; it is folly to imagine that disaster will not come (Ezek. 21:10-13; pars. 16-21). Explain why God overthrew kingdom of Judah; then began long period of Gentile rule, which nations think will continue forever. But God let his “throne” be a ruin only until “he comes who has the legal right.” (Ezek. 21:21-23; read verses 25-27.) As foretold, Gentile Times have ended. The Kingdom has been restored in the hands of the one having the legal right, Jesus Christ. Destruction of Christendom and Babylon the Great very near (pars. 53, 54). Political nations come next (Ezek. 21:28-32; pars. 55-57). Emphasize need for individual action, as Satan’s entire system will go down in shameful defeat.
5. Will the Political Rulers Destroy Religion?
Chapter 13: (20 min.) Communist bloc against religion now, democratic bloc supports religion. Will both blocs come to same thought toward religion? (After these remarks, may follow with paragraphs 1-3 or substance thereof.) With audience having Bibles open to Ezekiel chapter 23, give brief account of two sisters. First Oholah, calling attention to key scriptures (verses 1, 4-6, 9, 10), then Oholibah (verses 11, 17, 18, 22-24). Verses 28-31, 46-49 summarize Jehovah’s purpose toward Oholibah. To apply these verses show origin (par. 6), meaning of names and to whom applied (pars. 8, 9), how “married” to Jehovah (par. 10). Recount what Oholah (Northern Kingdom) and Oholibah (Southern Kingdom) did as “prostitutes.” Show means God used to execute judgment (pars. 27-29). Go back to same high points and apply to “Babylon the Great” dwelling specifically on Christendom (pars. 56-58). In doing so, stress the individual’s danger and responsibility if he hangs on to symbolic Babylon (pars. 39, 42, 49). Politicians, military forces, big business turn on Christendom (pars. 54, 55, 62, 65). Purpose behind her destruction (par. 66).
Chapter 14: (15 min.) Effect on religionists of the attack on Christendom (pars. 1, 2). With Bibles open to Ezekiel chapter 24 discuss verses 3-5 (par. 8), 6-8 (par. 10), 9-12 (par. 14). Show application to Christendom. Sad state of religionists must come in order that they may know “I am the Sovereign Lord Jehovah” (Ezek. 24:18-24; pars. 25, 34). However, Jehovah will not profane or desolate his great antitypical spiritual “temple” in the heavens into which Christ entered, nor his temple of “living stones” (note distinction between these two temples of God). But he will destroy the imitation temple class of hypocritical religionists (pars. 26-28). Emphasize that false religion, not the religion of the true God, will be annihilated.
Chapter 15: (20 min.) Prophecy of Christendom’s desolation constitutes warning to us. We are inexcusable if we ignore “watchman’s” warning. Why do we speak of a “watchman”? Who is he? Ezekiel was, to Jerusalem. Identify modern-day “watchman.” Principles involved (Ezek. 33:1-6; par. 7). “Watchman” and those turning to true worship will survive. Quote or give substance of paragraphs 1, 10. With sword of divine execution hanging over Christendom, as the “watchman” class warns, what opportunity is there for others? “Great crowd” take right action (pars. 12-14, 16, 17). Destruction of Christendom assured by Jerusalem’s fall. “Watchman” will survive, vindicated (par. 23). Next, destroyers of Babylon the Great and other secular elements who survive Christendom’s fall will suffer annihilation, having to know “I am Jehovah” (par. 31). Do not be complacent, as many are (par. 34). Do not wait undecided (par. 36). Get into God’s place of favor now before political rulers attack false religion. Take your Bible, let the “watchman” inform you, and survive the fall of false religion and, afterward, of the secular elements.
6. What Kind of Leader Does Mankind Need?
Chapter 16: (25 min.) Mankind needs a leader who is not too proud to be a loving shepherd, one who is genuinely interested in mankind’s welfare. Men have suffered long enough at the hands of selfish, uncompassionate rulers like those of Ezekiel’s time (par. 1; read Ezekiel 34:2-6). In making application focus attention on what the political rulers of Christendom have done. There is need for a leader who will free mankind from such oppressive rulers or shepherds. (Ezek. 34:7-10). The one to provide such a shepherd is Jehovah, who demonstrates loving care for his scattered “sheep” (Ezek. 34:11-14). Discuss what God has done in behalf of the anointed, using Ezekiel 34:15, 16; point out the condition prevailing among the restored “sheep” (Ezek. 34:17-22; read pars. 23, 26). The “one shepherd” whom Jehovah has chosen as King is his “servant David,” Jesus Christ (Ezek. 34:23, 24; make the identification clear; pars. 31, 32). What is being enjoyed by Jesus’ “sheep” now proves that he is the leader mankind needs. (Read and explain Ezekiel 34:25-28.) Read paragraph 40 and conclude showing that this opportunity is open to all right-hearted persons today.
Chapter 17: (15 min.) After a period of increase among the anointed, a great crowd of persons have come to appreciate that Jesus Christ is a desirable leader and have, therefore, joined the anointed remnant in growing numbers. (Refer audience to chart on page 321.) Contrast the condition of Christendom with that of God’s people to highlight the desirability of having Jesus as Leader (Ezek. 36:6-12). Persons wanting Jesus to be their Leader must prove themselves to be the kind of people God approves. This means having the right attitude toward God’s name, viewing its vindication as the most important thing. Using Ezekiel 36:23-28, show what God has done in behalf of his name, directing particular attention to the marvelous restoration.
Chapter 18: (15 min.) There is every reason to be confident that Jehovah’s choice of Jesus Christ is best. Rulership by Jesus is no imagination; already a once dead nation has come to life and is subjecting itself to him as King. This amazing resurrection was foretold. Discuss Ezekiel chapter 37, making brief reference to ancient Israel, and developing the application to spiritual Israel. Show that what this restored nation of spiritual Israelites and their companions are enjoying confirms that Jesus’ rulership is good. Stress the unity and peace among them, as in paragraphs 29, 30, 33. This holds forth promise of even grander things ahead when earthly governments will be no more. Even the nations today see that the God of Jehovah’s witnesses is superior. Conclude encouraging all to learn more about Christ’s kingdom rule, applying Matthew 6:33.
7. Earth’s Greatest War and Its Outcome
Chapter 19: (25 min.) Paraphrase Ezekiel chapter 38 to give a picture of the war and the ones involved. Thereafter identify: (1) Gog (use Ezekiel 38:2, 4 and explanatory points from paragraphs 9, 10), (2) Israel as the object of Gog’s attack (show that it could not be natural Israel, but must be spiritual Israel [Gal. 6:16]), (3) Gog’s reason for attacking (use points from paragraphs 20-23), identify the center of the earth (par. 24), (4) the forces under Gog (read Revelation 16:14, 16 and explain [pars. 34-36]). Describe the manner in which Jehovah will defeat Gog (read, explain Ezekiel 38:21, 22; may read either paragraph 45 or 46, or both, as conclusion, if desired).
Chapter 20: (30 min.) But is there any hope for the forces under Gog? Will they be resurrected in the future? What will happen to the land of Magog, the base from which Gog launched his attack? These questions are answered in Ezekiel chapter 39. Read and explain Ezekiel 39:4, 6 and make identification of land of Magog clear (pars. 3, 4, 6). Paraphrase Ezekiel 39:8-16 and explain significance of burying the bones and of the city Hamonah (pars. 11, 13, 14, 16, 17; read portions of these paragraphs if desired). Paraphrase Ezekiel 39:17-20 and use paragraph 22 in explanation. Point out that the vital issue involved in the defeat of Gog is the vindication of God’s name. We should not be horrified, or think this destruction too severe (pars. 23, 24). The very same issue was involved in liberating the anointed remnant of spiritual Israel (read, explain Ezekiel 39:28, 29). In concluding, encourage all to take their stand firmly for Jehovah along with the anointed; the defeat of Gog and his forces is a certainty, and life in security under Messiah’s reign is near at hand.
8. Life in Security and Happiness Under Messiah’s Reign
Chapter 21: (25 min.) Earth not to be depopulated by God’s destruction of all his earthly enemies. Those dwelling under divine protection will be there, fully free to carry on true worship earth wide (par. 1). Vision of temple. What is pictured (pars. 6-8). (Readers turn to picture, page 385.) What the vision guarantees (pars. 10, 11 [may read par. 11]). Read Ezekiel 47:1 and explain “water” (pars. 13, 14). (May use map of “Holy Contribution and the Twelve Tribes” in back of book.) Read Ezekiel 47:2-5; explain increasing depth of waters (pars. 17, 18), water for resurrected ones also (pars. 21-23). Read verses 6-10; explain healing of Dead Sea waters. (Note that fishermen and nets do not mean catching men to become disciples [pars. 29, 30].) What is represented by salt waters and their sweetening (pars. 31-35). Read verse 11; explain “swampy places” (par. 36). Read verse 12; explain trees, and compare with Revelation picture (pars. 37-40) It is true worship of Jehovah by which these good things come. Such worshipers will see in reality the fulfillment of Revelation 21:3, 4.
Chapter 22: (30 min.) The God we worship is “the happy God” (1 Tim. 1:11). What this means to his creatures. Ezekiel chapter 48 gives glimpse of God’s arrangement for mankind in new order. (Audience turn to map of “Holy Contribution” at end of book, inside cover.) Briefly show how tribes located, Levi being within administrative strip in which “holy contribution” located (par. 2). Priests’ section in middle of “holy contribution,” where sanctuary also located. (Direct attention to insert, “Enlargement of Holy Contribution.”) “City” in bottom or southern section. Strip on each side of “city” in “holy contribution” for workers from all tribes. Rest of administrative strip (return to large chart) for “chieftain.” Note that the city, although having twelve gates, as does the heavenly New Jerusalem, is not the sanctuary or temple. It is separate from the temple. No priests or Levites were in the “city.” The “city” pictures the earthly, visible seat of administration in the new order. Who the “chieftain” is (par. 12). Read Psalm 45:16; Isaiah 32:1, 2, 16-18 (quoted in book, pages 404, 405). Work accomplished through “city” for redeemed mankind (pars. 13-15). Primary purpose of “city” to exalt Jehovah’s name, as shown by name “Jehovah-shammah” (par. 16; also read Habakkuk 2:14 with audience). Conclude with appeal to read God’s Word and call upon his name through Jesus Christ for survival and life in new order. Explain how this can be done.

