Let Them Know in November
1 November is the month we have all been waiting for! A month-long campaign in which to offer to the public the new book “The Nations Shall Know that I Am Jehovah”​—How? And as an added blessing, during November we will begin studying this textbook at our congregation book studies. What a delightful double treat!
2 This new book is certainly a powerful, forthright denunciation of Christendom, and also a mighty shout of praise to our God Jehovah. But some may wonder, Is this the type of book the public will understand? Would it not be better to offer them something not so deep, something simpler like the Truth book?
3 There is no question that the Truth book is simple to understand, and excellent for home Bible studies. However, we should be just as realistic in our appraisal of the “Know” book. No one who reads this new book can fail to realize that it exposes Christendom as being condemned by God and that it urges them to get out of Christendom quickly and to serve Jehovah, the only true God. These are things that need to be made known. Rather than being over the heads of people, it is down to earth, touching on many points of common knowledge. For example, what person in this country does not know about the “Apollo” moon landings? So when the new book (pp. 157, 158) refers to these and explains that Apollo was the sun-god of the Greeks, the reader has no difficulty in seeing how Christendom is involved in the sun worship referred to in Ezekiel’s vision.
4 Of course, we are free to offer whatever publication we think will best help the householder. However, the Society really believes that in view of the time in which we are living everyone should be given the opportunity to obtain this new book.
5 As far as the “Know” book is concerned, all our territory is new, untouched. Why not, then, for at least one coverage of the territory, enthusiastically offer this book at every door. If we only hold it up and read the title, why, this alone is a powerful witness. Who knows how many times, after we leave, these words will ring in the householder’s ears, “The nations shall know that I am Jehovah”?
6 Others, in addition to those we meet in the house-to-house work, specially need this new book, and in many cases they will be very glad to obtain it. Who are these? Why, those we occasionally call back on, those to whom we regularly deliver the Society’s magazines, and those with whom we are now conducting Bible studies. Let’s give all of these an opportunity in November to benefit from the powerful message in this book.
7 And here is something special to keep in mind: Why not give everyone who receives a “Know” book a special invitation to attend the congregation book study? Here is a wonderful opportunity for them to join the group study right from the beginning of its consideration of Ezekiel’s prophecy.
8 The Society suggests that all congregations in the United States start studying the “Know” book the first week in November, regardless of what publication is now being used. Seven or eight pages should be covered each week, thus completing the book in about a year. As time permits, look up and read the scriptures cited but not quoted.
9 What a fine program for using this new book during November! Let’s all enthusiastically share, to our blessing, to the blessing of others and to Jehovah’s praise.

