Make Them Feel Welcome
1 How happy all of us are to have so many interested persons attending meetings with us at the Kingdom Hall! Watchtower study attendance averages about 110 percent when compared with the number of publishers, with even greater numbers attending the public talks. Many congregation servants in various parts of the country have informed the Society that hardly a week goes by without someone calling to ask the time of meetings or if someone would please come and study the Bible with them. How thrilling to see so many interested persons studying and attending meetings with us!
2 We want all attending our meetings to feel welcome, for, indeed, they are welcome. What can we individually do to let them know how we feel about their being with us? First, on noting a person or persons alone, we can approach them, warmly introduce ourselves and tell them we are happy to have them with us. Even if we have other duties to care for, we can greet them and then introduce them to others so they will get acquainted and have their questions answered. Most important of all, make them feel welcome.
3 Many who have started attending our meetings have no one studying with them. A goodly number of experiences are coming to the Society such as the following one sent in by a congregation servant in Texas: “I observed a new person step into the Kingdom Hall. I approached her, introduced myself and welcomed her. I asked if she was studying with Jehovah’s witnesses. She said, no, but needed to and that her husband would like to study also.” The name and address were noted and the next day the congregation servant and his wife visited the couple, got acquainted, discussed some basic truths and made arrangements to return and study the Bible systematically using the Truth book.
4 In addition to the joy of making these persons feel welcome, it is also our pleasure to make one another feel welcome at our meetings. How happy we are for the privilege of meeting together, to learn more of Jehovah, to encourage and incite one another to love and fine works. (Heb. 10:24, 25) As we take the initiative to approach ones who are just beginning to attend our meetings, and continue showing our brotherly love for one another, all will feel welcome and will be glad that they were able to attend.​—John 13:34, 35.

