Our Concern
1 In the little time that remains, our concern is to take advantage of all opportunities to declare Jehovah’s name and to help others to become disciples. What can we do during October to show our concern in this regard?
2 This month we have special issues of the Awake! and Watchtower magazines to use in our ministry. Something “special” is “distinguished by some unusual quality”; it is “unique,” “extra” and “designed for a particular purpose or occasion.” Our special magazines this month are all of these things and more, for they will be instrumental in aiding many world wide to become disciples.
3 “Relief from Today’s Pressures​—How?” is the appealing title of the October 8 issue, and this special issue of Awake! contains information that will bring refreshment and comfort to all who read it. It will be easy to arouse interest in the subject. People today are tense and feel the pressures of this wicked system of things. This is true whether people are young or old, rich or poor, regardless of race or nationality. Awake! shows them the real solution and how to benefit from it. Offer it to everyone you meet​—whether from house to house or elsewhere—​along with the special Watchtower, which contains the inspiring district assembly public talk, “When All Nations Collide, Head On, with God.” From fulfillment of Bible prophecy we know that this time draws near and that people do not have much time left to learn of Jehovah’s loving provisions for salvation. Our concern is to make known that only Jehovah deserves our worship and to help those persons who want to be helped in the time that remains.
4 What is happening in the world today is a source of deep concern to sincere persons. Awake! can help them because it analyzes the problems of life and gives a sound basis for hope for the future, a hope based on God’s own Word. During October, at every opportunity let’s offer a year’s subscription for Awake! on a contribution of $1.50. Three free booklets will be given to new subscribers. If you desire, you may offer a year’s subscription for both magazines, with six booklets, for $3. Remember, these magazines are two of the most widely circulated magazines in the world, and they definitely are the most beneficial ones that are published anywhere. So we have good reason to be positive and enthusiastic about offering the subscriptions.
5 Many who accepted special issues and subscribed for Awake! last October are our brothers this October, fellow servants of Jehovah. And they, along with us, will be showing their concern this month​—a concern that moves them to talk about Jehovah and to help others to come to know and serve him.
[Blurb on page 1]
Make known the God to be worshiped.
[Blurb on page 8]
Share with others the special magazines.

