Presenting the Good News​—To Those Not Easily Contacted
1 What can be done to contact personally those who are not found home even after several calls have been made? It is good to try calling at different times during the week, evenings and on the weekend. But if they are still not at home, what can be done to make personal contact with these persons?
2 Some publishers take the householder’s name when it is shown on the doorbell or mailbox and, having this information, look up the householder’s phone number and try to make personal contact by calling at reasonable times. One can tactfully explain over the telephone that a number of attempts have been made to find them at home, but without success, and due to the importance of what the Bible tells us regarding these critical times, it seemed appropriate to contact them in this way. Good judgment and brevity are important.
3 If a magazine was left or a study folder, this can be brought into the discussion. A brief but thoughtful presentation over the phone may produce excellent results and allow a specific appointment to be made for when they will be home. This suggestion has been used with some fine results, not only on not-at-home calls, but also where apartment dwellers’ names are obtainable, though the doorman would not allow one in to witness.
4 How many of us have made numerous back-calls, only to find no one at home? Again, the telephone can be used to good advantage in making appointments for back-calls. A sister writes: ‘One afternoon I got all my back-call records together. I made a list of the names and telephone numbers of all those I once studied with and also those I obtained subscriptions from. I called on the phone and made arrangements to call on them.’ Most individuals kept their appointment. This enabled her to accomplish much in the time she had available to spend in field service. Among other things, a number of subscriptions were obtained.
5 If a householder does not have a telephone, or if a publisher prefers, a neatly written letter can be sent to ones who cannot be contacted personally. Some publishers whose infirmities do not permit them to share in the house-to-house ministry commendably write letters to not-at-homes listed by other publishers. Also, some publishers write such letters when circumstances temporarily confine them to their home.
6 Another avenue effectively used to reach persons not easily contacted at home is street witnessing. Writes a pioneer congregation servant: “During the past few months I have had some wonderful experiences while engaged in magazine street work. Witnessing to people I have met on the street has resulted in placing many magazines, obtaining subscriptions and the starting of three Bible studies.” He also made this fine suggestion: “In doing street witnessing I find it is better to stand at a corner or location that is not too busy. When you stand alone the people see you and you can approach them with a smile and cheery ‘Hello.’ They are more friendly and many will stop and talk to you.”
7 Utilizing these suggestions to the extent possible will enable us to give a witness to many persons not easily contacted.

