Learn From God’s Word
What Is the Good News About Religion?
This article considers questions you may have raised and shows where you can read the answers in your Bible. Jehovah’s Witnesses would be pleased to discuss these answers with you.
 1. Is all religion good?
Many religious groups include sincere people who want to please God. He sees those people and cares about them. Sadly, though, some people have used religion for evil purposes. In the past, religious leaders have even tortured their opponents. (2 Corinthians 4:3, 4; 11:13-15) Today, according to news reports, some religious leaders have encouraged terrorism or supported war, or they have been involved in child abuse.—Read Matthew 24:3-5, 11, 12.
The Bible teaches that there are two types of religion—true religion and false religion. False religion does not teach the truth about God. Nevertheless, Jehovah God wants people to know the truth about him.—Read 1 Timothy 2:3-5.
 2. What is the good news about religion?
God does not want people to be deceived by religions that claim to love him but misrepresent him. In fact, adherents of those religions love being friends with the world that is controlled by Satan the Devil. (James 4:4; 1 John 5:19) God’s Word describes religions that give their allegiance to human governments rather than to God as being like a prostitute. The Bible calls this harlot by the name “Babylon the Great,” after the ancient city where false religion began after the Flood of Noah’s day. Soon, God will bring a sudden end to religion that deceives and oppresses mankind.—Read Revelation 17:1, 2, 5, 17; 18:8, 23, 24.
 3. How will God bring joy to every land?
The coming judgment on false religion is good news. It will bring worldwide relief from oppression. Never again will false religions mislead and divide mankind. Everyone living will be united in worship of the only true God.—Read Isaiah 11:9; Revelation 18:20, 21; 21:3, 4.
 4. What should sincere people do?
Jehovah has not forgotten the sincere people who are scattered among false religions worldwide. He is now gathering such people into unity by teaching them the truth.—Read Micah 4:2, 5.
Jehovah welcomes into his family those who want to serve him. Even if our friends and relatives are upset when we start to serve Jehovah, we gain much. We gain friendship with God, a new and loving “family,” and the prospect of having everlasting life.—Read Mark 10:29, 30; 2 Corinthians 6:17, 18.
For more information, see chapters 15 and 16 of this book, What Does the Bible Really Teach?, published by Jehovah’s Witnesses.
[Picture Credit Line on page 16]
The Complete Encyclopedia of Illustration/J. G. Heck

