Courageous Faith of Our Rwandan Brothers
EARLY in 1994 the world was stunned as reports of large-scale massacres emerged from the African country of Rwanda. A brutal civil war had erupted​—the culmination of centuries of animosity.
Faced with the total collapse of law and order, the 2,000-and-more Witnesses of Jehovah in Rwanda were forced to flee for their lives. About 1,300 found sanctuary in refugee camps in nearby Zaire and Tanzania, but some were not able to escape in time. We are saddened to report that about 400 of our brothers and sisters​—both adults and children, all civilians of course—​have perished in the mad violence. Christians the world over mourn the loss of these courageous integrity keepers and take comfort in the Bible’s promise of a resurrection.​—John 11:25.
How have the surviving Rwandan brothers and sisters fared? Elders were dispatched from a number of countries to investigate matters firsthand. One report said that the Rwandan brothers have faced the situation “with much dignity and courage.” For example, one of the first requests the brothers made was for Bible literature. ‘They seem more concerned about receiving spiritual food than material help, although they are in dire need of many things,’ the report concludes. And though conditions in the camps are primitive, ‘the cleanest part is where our brothers live.’
The Watch Tower Society has made funds available for the purchase of food, blankets, clothes, shoes, and medicine. Our brothers in France contributed generously, and by early June, almost two tons of supplies had been shipped to our needy Rwandan brothers.
Not surprisingly, these circumstances have resulted in a fine witness. Observers have been touched by the fact that our Rwandan brothers received such help and support from fellow Witnesses, and it has been possible to share this help with others. Some have commented that the Witnesses are the only ones in the camps who have been visited by members of their religion!
The plight of our Rwandan brothers reminds us that in these “last days,” men will be “fierce” and “violent.” (2 Timothy 3:1-5; Today’s English Version) And while Jehovah does not promise his people miraculous protection from physical dangers, he does promise to safeguard their spirituality and relationship with him and, during Christ’s Millennial rule, to resurrect those who now perish. (Psalm 91:1-10) May our prayers that Jehovah sustain and help our surviving Rwandan brothers during this trialsome time continue to be offered up in their behalf.​—Psalm 46:1.

