Do You See a Need?
1 Jehovah is described as a Helper and a Refuge. We know we can go to him in time of need and he will help us. (Ps. 18:2; 46:1) We can imitate this empathetic quality by offering to assist others when we see a need.
2 What motivates a person to go out of his way to help someone else? Most people recognize this as the loving, humane thing to do. Certainly God’s Word encourages it. (Rom. 15:1) Paul urged us to keep ‘an eye, not in personal interest upon just our own matters, but also in personal interest upon those of the others.’​—Phil. 2:4.
3 This is something we can all find joy in doing. (Acts 20:35) Paul singled out young Timothy as an example of one who would “genuinely care for the things pertaining to” his brothers. (Phil. 2:20) It is good that we have many young people in the congregations today with a similar disposition. But whether we are young or old, there are things that we can do if we see a need.
4 Have you ever felt that some have needs that could be given better attention? Perhaps a brother or a sister was in the hospital, and few came to visit; or someone became incapacitated, but there was no one to run errands or assist with household chores. Jesus views those serving Jehovah as members of a family who genuinely care for one another. (Mark 3:33-35) In the parable of the sheep and the goats, he showed that those who enjoy the right hand of the King’s favor do so because of their helpfulness to the King’s brothers.​—Matt. 25:40.
5 How Can I Help? What can be done to provide help when there is an obvious need? Could we take the initiative to assist in some way? Perhaps there are older ones who need encouragement, but they have no close associates to help them. There may be young people who need a helping hand. A newly interested family with several children may show up at the Kingdom Hall when the publisher who studies with them is not present. They may appreciate having someone volunteer to help them with the children.
6 As we grow in love for the truth and for Jehovah’s organization, we also grow in appreciation and concern for others in the congregation. Paul encouraged us to widen out in this regard. (2 Cor. 6:11-13) Jesus emphasized that our showing love to one another is the primary way we demonstrate that we are truly his followers.​—John 13:35.
7 So when we see a need, genuine love for our brothers and for the congregation should motivate us to take the initiative and assist in whatever way we can. (Gal. 6:9, 10) This concern for others draws us together in close bonds of love and unity. (1 Cor. 10:24) In this way, we do our part to help fill a need in the congregation.

