Maintaining Our Kingdom Unity
1 God’s Kingdom is a real government, having power and authority. It was the theme of Jesus’ preaching. (Matt. 4:17) Teaching others and bearing witness to Kingdom truth was the main part of Jesus’ ministry. He taught us to pray for the Kingdom and to keep on seeking it first. (Matt. 6:9, 10, 33) Remaining close to Jehovah and his organization, fulfilling our preaching commission, and keeping separate from the world enable us to maintain our Kingdom unity. By our actions and words, we show that we are on the side of the Kingdom.​—John 18:37.
2 Since 1914, the Kingdom has become a reality for millions of subjects. The unity demonstrated by these subjects of the Kingdom stands in stark contrast to a divided world. We must make the Kingdom real in our lives if it is to be a unifying force. What makes it real to us?
3 Like other governments, the Kingdom has a set of laws. Yet, it differs in that its laws are found in the Bible. Regular reading of God’s Word gives us needed reminders of what is required of us as Kingdom subjects. Personal study of our publications and direction from “the faithful and discreet slave” help us apply God’s laws in our everyday lives. (Matt. 24:45) As we make such personal application, the Kingdom becomes increasingly real to us, drawing us closer together in the worldwide brotherhood, making us a united family of worshipers under Jesus’ rulership.
4 Unity Through Kingdom Preaching: Our commission is to preach the good news of the Kingdom “to the most distant part of the earth.” (Acts 1:8) Preaching “with one accord” unifies us as we strive to “glorify” Jehovah. (Rom. 15:5, 6) Zealously participating with our fellow workers earth wide strengthens our faith and permits Jehovah’s spirit to work through us to accomplish his will. “Having plenty to do in the work of the Lord” makes us “steadfast, unmovable.”​—1 Cor. 15:58.
5 In many lands Satan tries to disrupt our unity by interfering with our preaching work. He uses every means at his disposal to sow discord and create misunderstandings, to try to produce contention and strife. (Prov. 6:19; Gal. 5:19-21, 26) He would like us to get involved in the world’s controversies and even to take sides on political and social issues. (Jas. 3:14-16) The Scriptures exhort us to resist his influence; otherwise, he will devour us as his prey. (1 Pet. 5:8, 9) The reality of the Kingdom hope must not be allowed to fade from our hearts and minds.
6 Maintaining our unity requires soundness of mind and wisdom from above. When difficulties arise, especially if they involve our brothers, we must manifest the fruitage of the spirit to keep peace. Worldly traits, such as pride, envy, and egotism, are divisive and must be overcome. (Eph. 4:1-3; Col. 3:5-10, 12-14) We need to keep our minds filled with positive, upbuilding thoughts. The Kingdom is a reality in our lives! But we have to be vigilant to keep it that way!​—Eph. 6:11, 13.
7 The reality of our marvelous Kingdom hope unites us in a spirit of oneness that will never end.​—Ps. 133:1.

