Search for the Teachable Ones
1 “No man can come to me unless the Father, who sent me, draws him.” (John 6:44) Jehovah, who searches the heart, will reward those who are teachable and act on what they learn. (Jer. 17:10; John 6:45) We have the privilege of being his fellow workers in searching for meek ones who yearn for a new world.​—Ps. 37:11; 1 Cor. 3:9.
2 Jesus described his disciples as “fishers of men.” (Matt. 4:19) While that type of work can sometimes be strenuous, there is much satisfaction in getting good results. Instead of working for our personal gain, we are actually rescuing the “fish” from certain destruction. A successful fisherman has to know what to do to attract the fish. Likewise, we must present the Kingdom message in an appealing manner that will arouse the interest of our hearers. This is especially true when we make return visits. What can we say?
3 If interest was shown in the “Watchtower” articles dealing with religion, you might say:
▪ “Previously we spoke about why many people do not like to discuss religion. Don’t you feel that’s rather strange, since most of our neighbors claim to be Christian? Perhaps you wonder why religion is such a divisive and controversial subject.” Allow for response. Turn to page 322 in the Reasoning book, and share a few thoughts under the heading “Why Are There So Many Religions?”
4 You might use this similar approach to start a discussion on the subject of religion:
▪ “Is there some way we can be sure that we have the true religion? [Allow for response.] Because there are so many different religions, many people feel confused and uncertain.” Turn to the Reasoning book, pages 328-9, where it discusses the question “How can a person know which religion is right?” Comment briefly on question number 5, “Do its members truly love one another?” Explain how more can be learned through a personal Bible study.
5 If the householder seemed concerned about world conditions, you might want to try this:
▪ “Apparently you feel concerned about the bad conditions we have to cope with in living and in raising our families. The Bible reveals a wonderful promise that God will fulfill in the near future.” Read Proverbs 2:21, 22, and explain how Jehovah has promised a world of lasting peace.
6 When making return visits after the special Kingdom News campaign has begun, please be sure to leave a copy of the Kingdom News with householders who do not have one. What you might say on return visits when following up placements of the Kingdom News will be discussed in the May issue of Our Kingdom Ministry.
7 Since the Word of God “exerts power,” we should try to use it in our presentations. (Heb. 4:12) Make it a point to encourage the householder to read the Bible for himself. (Compare Acts 17:11.) If we diligently do our part, Jehovah will bless our efforts.

