Service Meetings for April
Week Starting April 3
Song 203
10 min: Local announcements and selected Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry. Review “Get Things Ready for the Memorial.”
15 min: “Thankful for What We Have.” Questions and answers. As time permits, make additional comments based on August 1, 1990, Watchtower, pages 19-20, paragraphs 15-20.
20 min: “The Watchtower and Awake!​—Magazines for Our Urgent Times!” Discuss with audience. Relate experience expressing appreciation for the magazines. (g91 7/22 p. 9) Have two publishers show how to prepare a presentation using the suggestions given, and then have them demonstrate by giving their presentations to each other.
Song 219 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting April 10
Song 212
10 min: Local announcements. Accounts report and donation acknowledgments. Theocratic News. Remind everyone about the need to help interested ones to attend the Memorial. Urge all to make a special effort to share in field service this weekend.
15 min: “Maintaining Our Kingdom Unity.” Discuss with audience.
20 min: “Plenty to Do in the Work of the Lord.” Question-and-answer coverage by the service overseer. Review expanded arrangements for house-to-house distribution of the special Kingdom News. Discuss plans for covering all the local congregation’s assigned territory. Explain what should be done to help new ones to share in service for the first time. (See the March 1995 Our Kingdom Ministry, page 1.)
Song 150 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting April 17
Song 214
13 min: Local announcements. Relate encouraging highlights of the Memorial observance, and review ways that further assistance can be given to new ones who attended. Urge all to attend the special talk on April 23 and also to help newly interested ones to return. Review field service arrangements for Kingdom News distribution.
15 min: “Do You See a Need?” Questions and answers. Briefly relate current goals elders are trying to achieve in their shepherding work. Explain what individuals can do to help.
17 min: “Search for the Teachable Ones.” Discuss the importance of making return visits. Encourage use of the Bible. Have one or two presentations briefly demonstrated.
Song 197 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting April 24
Song 167
15 min: Local announcements. Review progress of Kingdom News distribution in the territory. Invite publishers to relate experiences enjoyed offering the Kingdom News. Suggest magazine presentations that would be appropriate in local territory. Announce any arrangements for the congregation to share in evening witnessing as daylight hours increase.
12 min: Local needs. Or give a talk, Be Encouraging to Others, based on the January 15, 1995, Watchtower, pages 21-3.
18 min: Conduct Your Family Study Regularly. Husband and wife express concern about a lack of spiritual progress on the part of their children. Husband acknowledges that he has been negligent when it comes to conducting the family study; sometimes several weeks go by without any family instruction. They review the admonition and direction provided in the School Guidebook, pages 37-8, paragraphs 12-14. Both agree to give priority to the family study each week, not allowing other activities to interfere.
Song 142 and concluding prayer.

