Thankful for What We Have
1 “God recommends his own love to us in that, while we were yet sinners, Christ died for us.” (Rom. 5:8) How thankful all of us should be for the supreme sacrifice made both by Jehovah God and by his Son in our behalf! By means of Christ’s shed blood, we are given the opportunity for everlasting life, something that no human can give us.
2 How can we show our appreciation? There are many people who are thirsting for true knowledge, which can only be found in God’s Sacred Word. It is Jehovah’s will that they come to a knowledge of the truth. (1 Tim. 2:4) We show our appreciation for the truth by ‘declaring the good news of the Kingdom of God.’ (Luke 4:43) Wholehearted participation in this work shows that we appreciate that Christ died for us and that we want to imitate him by faithfully obeying his command to make disciples of others.​—Matt. 28:19, 20.
3 What are some avenues of preaching open to us? Is it possible for us to enroll as auxiliary pioneers from time to time? After counting the cost, some may be able to take up the regular pioneer service. By taking advantage of these fine opportunities, we can increase the amount of time we spend in spreading the Kingdom good news. In times past you may have considered enrolling, but there were obstacles. Perhaps your circumstances have changed. If so, have you given serious thought to entering the pioneer service or serving as an auxiliary pioneer?
4 Our thankfulness becomes more intense when we look at what is taking place around us. There is increasing violence, hatred, and strife worldwide. Paul well described our times as “critical” and “hard to deal with.” (2 Tim. 3:1) In the midst of these distressing conditions, we have good news in abundance to share with others. We have two fine magazines, The Watchtower and Awake! This month we can offer individual copies or subscriptions. We also have brochures on a number of subjects. These publications can bring genuine refreshment to those who read them. Thankfulness for what we have should move us to be liberal in sharing them with others.​—Heb. 13:16.
5 It may be that in the area where you live, people demonstrate little interest in spiritual things. In contrast with that, there are territories that are fruitful. Much interest is being found among foreign-language groups. If you are able to speak more than one language, is it possible that you can serve in an area in this country where there is a real need for your help? Your circuit overseer may have some suggestions along these lines.
6 There is every reason to be thankful for what we have, truly an abundance of good things. Our thanks to Jehovah can be best expressed by making known his name and purposes to others.​—Isa. 12:4, 5.

