The Watchtower and Awake!​—Magazines for Our Urgent Times!
1 In fulfillment of Bible prophecy, world-shaking events are taking place! As we contemplate what is happening around us in the world and also within the theocratic organization, we can appreciate how urgent it is that we preach “the good news” of the Kingdom. (Mark 13:10) This gives us reason to carry on our ministry with zeal during the month of April.
2 The importance of our message is being emphasized by the special work we will undertake this month. With eager anticipation we await the release of the Kingdom News that we will distribute during April and May. To build our enthusiasm for this work as well as cultivate interest in our territory, The Watchtower and Awake! will carry timely articles that emphasize the prophetic significance of disturbing world events. How can we prepare a presentation that will stimulate interest in the magazines?
3 Likely you will be able to develop an effective presentation by following these basic steps: (1) Select an article in one of the magazines that you feel will appeal to people in your community. (2) Pick out a statement or a quoted scripture in this article that you believe will stimulate the interest of the householder. (3) Prepare a brief presentation that includes a friendly greeting, a question or statement that highlights an interesting Scriptural thought, and a sincere invitation to accept the magazines. As you can see, this is quite simple and uncomplicated. Perhaps you could get together with another publisher whom you work with in the ministry and prepare a presentation.
4 Since the April 22 “Awake!” raises the question, “Are These the Last Days?,” you could review the material under the heading “Last Days” on page 13 of the “Reasoning” book. You might begin by saying:
▪ “We’re calling to discuss the meaning of the turbulent events taking place around us. Note what this article says . . .”
5 The April 1 “Watchtower” raises the question: “Religion​—A Taboo Subject?” When offering the magazine, you could say:
▪ “It’s often said that religion is one subject that should not be discussed because it’s so controversial. What do you think about that?” Then refer to a statement in the article.
6 You may be using the April 15 “Watchtower” with the article “Is Religious Truth Attainable?” You might get a good response with this introduction:
▪ “Because there are so many religions today, some people wonder if religious truth is attainable. This article reveals a way that you and I can find a satisfying answer to this question. . . .”
7 Before going out in the work, why not practice your presentation with another publisher to get the feel of it? Likely you will be able to share helpful suggestions with each other that will increase your effectiveness and give you greater confidence.
8 As the end of this system draws nearer, may we quicken our pace to help honesthearted ones to escape from Babylon the Great. (Rev. 18:4) The Watchtower and Awake! play a vital role in this never-to-be-repeated work. We are thankful that Jehovah has provided these fine instruments for our use!

