“Plenty to Do in the Work of the Lord”
1 We certainly have a full schedule of theocratic activities to look forward to during April and May! On April 14 we will celebrate the Memorial of Christ’s death. As many people as possible should be encouraged to be present for that important occasion: business acquaintances, unbelieving relatives, schoolmates, newly interested persons, and Bible students. Make a list of those you plan to invite so that none are missed.
2 The following week we will encourage all who attended the Memorial to hear the special public talk on April 23, on the subject “False Religion’s End Is Near.” It is hoped that many interested ones who hear this forthright message will see the need to associate with the congregation on a regular basis, not just on special occasions.
3 Special Kingdom News to Be Released: A highlight of the meeting on April 23 will be the release of a timely four-page Kingdom News No. 34 that will be given wide distribution through May 14. Do you not agree that there will be “plenty to do in the work of the Lord” during this Memorial season?​—1 Cor. 15:58.
4 A supply of Kingdom News will be consigned to each congregation. The cartons containing the Kingdom News should be stored in a safe place and should not be opened until the conclusion of the program on April 23. At that time the Kingdom News will become available for distribution to the brothers and to the public. At the conclusion of the congregation meetings, circuit assemblies, or special assembly day programs on April 23, those in attendance will each receive a copy so that they can become acquainted with its contents and be equipped for its distribution.
5 Elders Will Have Plenty to Do: Early this month the body of elders should meet to discuss details of the special campaign. Congregations should endeavor to cover all their assigned territory. Before the campaign ends, make special effort to work those territories that have not been covered in the past six months. In view of the importance of the work, we will want to set aside as much time as possible for the ministry. No doubt more publishers than usual will enroll as auxiliary pioneers. Quite likely many Bible students will also be joining us as newly approved unbaptized publishers. What an enjoyable time we will have as we labor together in the Lord’s work!
6 Congregation Book Study conductors should make definite arrangements for group witnessing on Saturdays and on Sundays. Everyone should be encouraged to have an active share. In addition to activity on the weekend, evening witnessing should be scheduled at least once a week during the campaign. Some may wish to meet for service after school to accommodate students who would like to have an extra share.
7 Meetings for field service should be scheduled so that publishers and pioneers can get an early start in the ministry each day. These meetings should be brief. Each should feature a simple presentation of the Kingdom News. Afternoon meetings for service may include a suggestion or two for making return visits on those who have accepted the Kingdom News. However, some publishers may prefer to engage in the distribution both morning and afternoon. To that end, the service overseer will want to ensure that enough territory is available. The name and address of everyone who shows interest should be noted on a house-to-house record. The main points of the brief discussion may be included in the remarks column. This will pave the way for a return visit later in the week or month.
8 If one congregation helps another to cover its territory, names and addresses of interested persons should be turned in to the congregation holding the territory.
9 Parents, are your children working toward becoming unbaptized publishers? It has been observed that in some congregations, well-behaved children have accompanied their dedicated parents in the ministry for a number of years, and the children do very well, although they are not yet publishers of the good news. Parents ought to consider whether their children really do qualify for this privilege. Two of the elders can discuss all the factors with the family head and determine whether the child can be counted as an unbaptized publisher.​—om pp. 99-100.
10 Are any publishers in your congregation’s territory no longer active in offering a sacrifice of praise to Jehovah? (Heb. 13:15) Some who are inactive may have been overcome by discouragement or by the anxieties of life, although continuing to adhere to the Bible’s moral standards. A friendly visit by one of the elders may move them to return to regular association with the congregation and, at an appropriate time, to renewed activity in the ministry.
11 All Who Qualify Can Share in This Enjoyable Work: Do some of you children or teenagers find it difficult to share in the house-to-house ministry? What about you new ones whose experience in the preaching work is quite limited? You will find working with this special Kingdom News to be most enjoyable! A simple presentation is all that is needed.
You might say something like this:
▪ “This month we’re distributing an important message in 232 lands around the world. The message is important because it gives us solid reasons to believe that there is a solution to the problems we face today. We would like you to have your personal copy.”
Or you might try this:
▪ “This month about five million volunteers are distributing an important message in scores of languages. It has been prepared for people who would like to see an end to the problems all of us face today. This is your personal copy.”
This simple presentation may suit you:
▪ “We’re encouraging everyone to read this important message entitled [read title of Kingdom News]. Notice what it states here on page 2 concerning the increasing problems of . . . [read selected sentence from Kingdom News]. We’re sure you’ll enjoy reading the rest of this timely message. This is your copy.”
12 Take a personal interest in each one who accepts the Kingdom News. Speak slowly and clearly; there is no need to hurry your presentation. We want to be thorough in covering our territory and see that all who express an interest in reading the Kingdom News are given a personal copy. When no one is at home, carefully mark your house-to-house record so that you can return at an appropriate time to offer the Kingdom News to the householder. This Kingdom News may be used in street witnessing when an individual shows an interest in reading the material. Copies should not be handed out indiscriminately as if they were handbills. Rather, approach passersby, and explain the importance of the message being featured. Use the Kingdom News in informal witnessing, such as while traveling or when witnessing to fellow employees during your lunch break. Those who are shut-ins or otherwise indisposed may offer them to visitors, doctors and nurses, salesmen, and others who come to their home.
13 How many return visits will you make during the campaign? No doubt a great many, since all those who have shown interest in the Kingdom News should be revisited. On the initial call, it is best to feature only the Kingdom News. Then, when you return, make a few comments about the timeliness of the message in the Kingdom News. Listen carefully as the householder expresses his opinion on what he has read. His comments will help you to know what to offer in the latest magazines and perhaps how to prepare for further discussions. If you get a favorable response on the return visit, try to start a Bible study.​—1 Cor. 3:6, 7.
14 “Your Labor Is Not in Vain”: Will all this work be worthwhile? Paul assured the Corinthians: “Your labor is not in vain in connection with the Lord.” (1 Cor. 15:58) Over the years, our efforts to distribute Kingdom News have been greatly blessed. One couple who were moving into an empty apartment found an older copy of Kingdom News in a drawer. It was the only thing left in the whole apartment. After reading it, they contacted the local congregation and requested a Bible study. They began attending all the meetings and later expressed a desire to be baptized. Perhaps a copy you leave will bring similar results!​—km 11/74 p. 1; see also Awake!, November 8, 1976, page 15.
15 We have a tremendous task ahead of us. Our goal is for each congregation to cover its assignment of territory by May 14 or by the end of the month if it is necessary to extend the time for the Kingdom News distribution. Consignments have been made so that each regular and auxiliary pioneer will receive 250 copies of Kingdom News. Each congregation publisher will get up to 50 copies. Publishers and pioneers should accept only as many copies as they will be able to distribute and should return any extras for others to use. Good cooperation in this regard will ensure the widest distribution possible of this important message. If because of having a large territory assignment some congregations have not covered their territory by mid-May and copies are still available, it may be practical to invite nearby congregations to help. In other congregations the need may be filled locally if publishers increase their activity by enrolling as auxiliary pioneers or by engaging in the ministry more often.
16 Whole-souled devotion to Jehovah will be required if we are going to accomplish our work. (Col. 3:23) Lives are involved. People cannot afford to ignore the meaning of world conditions today. Time is running out. They must face the fact that man does not have the solution to this world’s problems. God does. Those who wish to obtain God’s blessing must act decisively, without delay, in harmony with his requirements.
17 At the conclusion of the special campaign on May 14, will we let our hand rest? No! We will keep busy in harmony with Paul’s inspired counsel.

