Organized to Fight Hard for the Faith
HOW thankful we should be to Jehovah God that his modern witnesses are properly organized to fight hard for the true faith! Organizationally they are well equipped to heed the words of Jude: “Beloved ones, . . . I . . . exhort you to put up a hard fight for the faith that was once for all time delivered to the holy ones.”—Jude 3.a
Today we have mature brothers, appointed by the “faithful and discreet slave” and serving under its direction, that see to it that the organization is kept clean. (Matt. 24:45-47) The district servants, the circuit servants and, in particular, the congregation committees, made up of mature brothers, put up a hard fight to keep the organization clean. They see to it that willfully unclean ones are cast out by disfellowshiping, while those overtaken in sin and sincerely repentant are put on probation.—1 Cor. 5:13; Gal. 6:1.
As we had called to our attention recently, God is long-suffering; he does not desire that any of his little ones should perish. (Matt. 18:14) But let us ever be on guard that we do not receive the undeserved kindness of God and miss its purpose by turning it into an excuse for loose conduct. (2 Cor. 6:1; Jude 4) How easily we could fall we can appreciate when we remember that the human heart is “more treacherous than anything else.”—Jer. 17:9.
How shall we put up this hard fight individually? By staying close to Jehovah’s organization and his Word, in particular making good use of the precious privilege of prayer, for we cannot do it in our own strength. We must discipline our minds and hearts to dwell on lovable, chaste, upbuilding things.—Prov. 4:23; Phil. 4:6-8.
Keeping busy in Christian activities is one of the best ways for us to stay free from the corrupting influences of Satan’s tools. Not only do such activities serve protectively, keeping us from doing what is bad, but they also provide us with many joys, such as the joy of learning new truths, the joy of association and the joys of sowing seed, watering it and then seeing it grow to maturity! Truly, blessed are all they that share in the organized hard fight for the faith!
[Footnotes]
For details see The Watchtower, July 15, October 1, 1965.

