





Are Jehovah’s Witnesses Opposed to Vaccination?




No. Jehovah’s Witnesses are not opposed to vaccination. We view vaccination as a personal decision for each Christian to make. Many of Jehovah’s Witnesses choose to get vaccinated.
We seek quality medical care and appreciate the many advancements of medical science to reduce the risk of serious illness. We are grateful for the commitment and dedication of health-care professionals, especially in times of crises.
Jehovah’s Witnesses cooperate with public health officials. For example, since the COVID-19 pandemic broke out, Jehovah’s Witnesses have continued to publish reminders in hundreds of languages on this website, encouraging adherence to local safety guidelines. These include the importance of physical distancing and of following regulations on public gatherings, quarantining, hand washing, and the wearing of face coverings as well as other practical measures required or recommended by the authorities.—Romans 13:1, 2.
For decades, the publications of Jehovah’s Witnesses have emphasized the following principles:
  Health-care decisions are a personal matter.—Galatians 6:5.
“[This magazine] does not recommend any one type of medicine or therapy over another and does not offer medical advice. Its aim is simply to present facts and to leave it to the reader to make judgments and decisions.”—Awake!, February 8, 1987.

“The question as to whether you and your children should be vaccinated is something for personal decision.”—Awake!, August 22, 1965.



  We seek medical treatment because we place a high value on life.—Acts 17:28.
“Witnesses avail themselves of the various medical skills to assist them with their health problems. They love life and want to do whatever is reasonable and Scriptural to prolong it.”—The Watchtower, July 1, 1975.

“Jehovah’s Witnesses gladly accept medicine and medical treatment. They want to maintain good health and to prolong life. In fact, like the first-century Christian Luke, some of Jehovah’s Witnesses are physicians. . . . Jehovah’s Witnesses certainly appreciate the hard work and dedication of those who provide medical care. They are also grateful for the welcome relief from illness that those individuals provide.”—The Watchtower, February 1, 2011.






