





How Is the Work of Jehovah’s Witnesses Financed?




Our worldwide work is primarily financed by voluntary donations from individuals who are Jehovah’s Witnesses.a Contribution boxes are provided in our meeting places, and other ways to donate are listed on our Donations page. Separate options are provided so that a person can choose to donate for our worldwide work, for local expenses, or for both.
Jehovah’s Witnesses are not expected to tithe or to donate any specific amount or percentage of their income. (2 Corinthians 9:7) We never take collections or charge admission at our meetings, nor do our ministers charge fees for baptisms, funerals, weddings, or other religious services. We do not raise money through bake sales, bazaars, bingo games, carnivals, dinners, raffles, or similar events, nor do we solicit donations. Donors’ information is never shared or made available to the public. (Matthew 6:2-4) Our websites and publications do not contain revenue-generating advertisements.
Every congregation of Jehovah’s Witnesses provides monthly financial reports at its meetings, which are open to the public. The accounting records of each congregation are audited regularly to ensure that donated funds are being handled properly.—2 Corinthians 8:20, 21.



Ways to Donate

  Contribution boxes: You may place donations of cash or checks in contribution boxes at Kingdom Halls, Assembly Halls, or other locations where our meetings are held.

  Online donations: In many countries, you may use the page “Donate to Jehovah’s Witnesses” to make donations by means of credit cards, debit cards, bank transfers, and other electronic methods.b Some Witnesses choose to “set something aside” each month by scheduling recurring donations using one of these methods.—1 Corinthians 16:2.






  Planned giving: Some donation methods require advance planning and/or legal advice. Such planning may allow you to take advantage of tax benefits in your country. Many individuals have benefited by becoming better informed about charitable gifts that may be made during life or that take effect at death. Please contact the local branch office of Jehovah’s Witnesses for further details if you would like to make a donation that involves:
  bank accounts

  insurance and retirement plans

  real estate

  stocks and bonds

  wills and trusts




For more information on the donation methods available in your area, see the page “Donate to Jehovah’s Witnesses.”



a Some non-Witnesses are also pleased to donate to support our work.
b See the video Tutorial for Making Donations Electronically for more information.

