1988 “Divine Justice” District Convention
1 Although the term “justice” has legal associations, basically justice is closely linked to righteousness. The Supreme Judge and Statute-Giver, Jehovah God, “is a lover of righteousness and justice.” (Ps. 33:5) This guarantees that he will never abandon his loyal ones but will impartially accept all those fearing him and practicing righteousness and bestow his blessing on them. Since Jehovah’s wisdom is far superior to that of imperfect humans, man must humble himself to learn “the path of justice.” (Isa. 40:14) He must learn to conform his thinking to the standard of justice that Jehovah, the Creator, has revealed in his Word. Jehovah has always rightly required that those seeking his approval acquaint themselves with his standard of justice and follow it.
2 Since justice is a divine quality, loyal Witnesses will want always to exercise it in balance with other Christian virtues, even as Micah 6:8 admonishes: “[Jehovah] has told you, O earthling man, what is good. And what is Jehovah asking back from you but to exercise justice and to love kindness and to be modest in walking with your God?” (See also Psalm 106:3.) Would you like to learn more about Jehovah’s standard of justice and how we all may conform to it so as to receive his smile of approval? To help us do this, arrangements have been made for many four-day “Divine Justice” District Conventions in the United States branch territory. Undoubtedly your efforts to attend and be instructed in divine justice will be richly rewarded.
ROOMING ARRANGEMENTS
3 During the announcement period of the Service Meeting for the week of January 3, the letter from the Society dated December 15, 1987, will be read, informing each congregation of the convention it is assigned to attend. Following this Service Meeting, the elders will post on the congregation’s information board the Recommended Lodging Locations list that has been received from the District Convention Committee. This list gives all the motels presently cooperating with the Society’s rooming arrangement. By cooperating with these arrangements, the congregations will help the convention organization in its efforts to provide sufficient seats, food, literature, and rooming accommodations for everyone. As you make your plans to be in attendance, lovingly include others who need assistance, especially newly interested ones, so they can attend every session as well. (Gal. 6:10) The program will start at 1:20 p.m. on Thursday.
4 WHAT YOU SHOULD DO: As soon as your congregation posts the Recommended Lodging Locations list containing the addresses of the motels, their agreed-upon rates, and the phone numbers, you should IMMEDIATELY phone the motel of your choice, identify yourself as one of Jehovah’s Witnesses and as a delegate attending the Watchtower Convention, and make reservations. Doing so will qualify you for the rates listed, which in most cases have been greatly reduced since the convention has negotiated for a large number of rooms. One night’s DEPOSIT will be required at all locations in order to hold the room and should be sent directly to the motel AS SOON AS you make your reservations. Do not make reservations at more than one motel or at motels that you do not intend to use. (Matt. 5:37) MOTELS ARE NOT OBLIGATED TO HOLD THE ROOMS OR EXTEND THE SPECIAL RATES BEYOND THE CUTOFF DATE WITHOUT A DEPOSIT. If you must cancel your reservations, you should notify the motel directly, doing so as far in advance as possible. This makes the room available for other delegates. If the motel you call first is filled, call your next selection from the list, and so on. The convention Rooming Department will continue to provide the congregations with revised lists as long as necessary, deleting motels that have been filled and including additional motels until everyone has a room. Thus, if all the motels on a list are filled, please wait patiently for the next list, and you will be able to obtain a room.
5 DORMITORIES: A few conventions use school dormitories in order to accommodate all those attending. Usually congregations will receive information on these a month or so after the first motel listing. Those needing accommodations of this type should follow the instructions on the list that is sent to the congregations by the convention.
6 SPECIAL NEEDS: Arrangements to care for those with special needs should be made by the congregation where these attend. Elders and others aware of the individual circumstances can lovingly extend help. This often involves publishers taking those in full-time service, the elderly, the infirm, the deaf, or perhaps others with them in their own group. Also, they may care for such ones in other ways. (Jas. 2:15-17; 1 John 3:17, 18) Of course, the convention Rooming Department will endeavor to provide rooming accommodations for publishers with special needs who are unable to care for themselves or who cannot be assisted by those from the congregation where they attend. These may ask the convention coordinator in their congregation for a Special Needs Room Request form, discussing their situation with him at that time. Those with special needs are the only ones that should fill out this form. It is to be returned to the convention coordinator and checked for completeness, accuracy, and verification of the circumstances that would qualify them for special needs consideration. This should be done well ahead of the convention. The convention coordinator then forwards the form to the convention Rooming Department and the individual will be notified directly about the accommodations. Those with special needs should NOT go to the convention and request a room when they arrive, because the convention Rooming Department needs the verification of the congregation’s convention coordinator.
7 Private home accommodations are usually set aside for those who have limited funds and who would experience real hardship if such accommodations were not available. They are not intended for those who can afford motel rooms but who want free or inexpensive rooms just to save money. Nor is it proper for delegates to presume upon the hospitality of our brothers by expecting to be accommodated extra days so they can visit vacation spots or do other things before or after the convention. These rooms are for the convention period only. Those receiving such accommodations should see that they and their children act respectfully toward the home of their host and do not damage anything or rummage through the possessions or private areas of the home.
8 DELEGATES ATTENDING FROM OUTSIDE THE ASSIGNED AREA: In nearly every case, the location assigned for you to attend is the one nearest to your congregation. Seating, literature, food orders, and so forth, are planned on the premise that the majority will attend the convention to which they are assigned. However, if for some reason you will be attending a convention other than the one assigned and need accommodations, please see your congregation’s convention coordinator for the address of the convention headquarters where you desire to attend. These addresses are listed on the back of the Special Needs Room Request form. Then write to that convention headquarters and request a copy of the motel listing for that location, sending along a stamped, self-addressed envelope. Upon receipt of this list, use it to make your reservation.
9 YOUR COOPERATION NEEDED: The smoothness and success with which this rooming arrangement functions depends on the cooperation of everyone involved. (Compare Genesis 6:22.) Unless everyone cooperates by using ONLY the motels on the list, the Society may have to discontinue the present rooming arrangement. Thus, we are asking everyone to cooperate with the Society’s rooming arrangement so as to avoid major difficulties in our negotiations. Because a number of complaints have been received, it is necessary to list the following requests:
1) Do not make reservations before the congregations receive the Recommended Lodging Locations list from the convention or try to make reservations for the next year while attending the current convention.
2) Do not make reservations with motels not on the list or accept a higher price for a listed motel than what is quoted on the list.
3) Do not make reservations at more than one motel, and after arriving, check each one and then take the best one, canceling the others.
4) Do not reserve rooms for others without giving names and sending the deposits for each room immediately.
5) Do not put more people in the room than the law and the management allow.
6) Do not check in before 1:00 p.m. or so, which generally is motel policy. (You may check in after the program that day since your deposit guarantees your room.)
7) Do not cook or heat food in the room unless it has a kitchenette for that purpose.
8) Do not get food on floor, walls, beds, or towels.
9) Do not allow children in hallways, elevators, or swimming pools without proper supervision.
10 Such abuses are selfish and unloving. They not only make it difficult to negotiate for good rates at the motels but also bring reproach on Jehovah’s name and organization. The convention organization is working hard to save our brothers as much expense as possible, so it is in the best interests of all for everyone to cooperate fully with the Society’s rooming arrangement. The listing is broad enough to give a choice of good-quality accommodations and yet give preference to the motels that cooperate. Our aim with this arrangement is to help delegates to be accommodated as comfortably and economically as possible so they will be refreshed and fully able to enjoy the fine spiritual program.
SIMPLIFIED FOOD SERVICE AT THE 1988 CONVENTIONS
11 As you know, the Society further simplified the food service arrangement at the district conventions last summer by eliminating hot foods and serving only cold food items along with hot and cold beverages. A similar food service arrangement is planned for 1988. This greatly eased the work load and allowed more attention to be given to the spiritual aspects of the convention, with the workers being able to enjoy more of the program. (Ex. 12:16b; Deut. 31:12; ad pp. 375, 574; compare Luke 10:38-42.) The adjusted menu was well received by those in attendance and although somewhat limited, it provided sufficient sustenance for the morning and noon periods. (Compare Matthew 14:14-20.) For evening meals everyone was free to make his own arrangements.
12 The Society appreciates very much the fine support you brothers and sisters have been giving to the food service arrangements at the district conventions over the years. This has made it possible to rent good buildings and care for the convention expenses. It has also enabled you to remain at the convention site during the short noon break and to be present, on time and refreshed, for the more important spiritual program.
SIGN LANGUAGE SESSIONS
13 As you will note in the February 15, 1988, Watchtower, sign language translation will be provided only at 16 specific convention cities. (NO provision will be made at any other conventions for sign language.) We know this will prove to be a real blessing to those with this special need by providing good-quality translating and larger groups with which to enjoy upbuilding fellowship. Those who are signers should let the deaf in their congregations know of the arrangements and help them to attend where the sign language provision is made by the Society.
[NOTE TO THE BODY OF ELDERS: Please read the Society’s convention assignment letter for your congregation, dated December 15, 1987, at your Service Meeting during the week of January 3 and post on the information board the Recommended Lodging Locations list. (NO ONE, INCLUDING THE ELDERS, SHOULD MAKE ANY MOTEL RESERVATIONS BEFORE THIS SERVICE MEETING.) Please read the assignment letter again at your next meeting and then post it on the information board. In this way all the congregations will receive the information the same week.
The elder serving as the convention coordinator should conduct the first of the Service Meeting parts that cover this insert, as well as handle other convention-related material and announcements on future meetings. All elders will want to cooperate fully to ensure the prompt, enthusiastic, and effective handling of convention-related material.]

