Announcements
● Literature offer for January and February: Any two of the older pocket-size books the congregation has in stock for a contribution of $1.00. May include Choosing, Commentary on James, “Eternal Purpose,” Evolution (old edition), Good News, Holy Spirit, Peace and Security (old edition), This Life, Truth, and World Government. (Congregations may request credit for books obtained by publishers and pioneers for the January and February offer. During this campaign only, the rate for regular and special pioneers for the pocket-size books is 30¢. For congregation publishers and auxiliary pioneers, the rate is 50¢ each.) March: Life​—How Did It Get Here? By Evolution or by Creation? for a contribution of $2.50. Small-size books are $1.25. April: Watchtower subscription.
● Starting in February the new public talk for circuit overseers will be “Persevering in Fine Works Brings Rewards.”
● The special public talk for the 1988 Memorial season will be given worldwide on Sunday, April 10, 1988. The subject of this talk will be “Why Live by Bible Standards?” An outline will be provided soon. Those congregations having the visit of the circuit overseer, a circuit assembly, or a Sunday special assembly day scheduled that week will have the special talk the following week. No congregation should have the special talk before April 10.
● Selective Service regulations require that all men register when reaching 18 years of age. All of those required to do so should take care of the matter promptly, viewing it as a Christian’s obligation to the superior authorities. Elders will want to have this in mind when young brothers are nearing the age of 18 and give them appropriate reminders. Questions as to the young Christian’s responsibilities in this regard may be answered by the elders.
● As announced at the “Trust in Jehovah” District Convention last summer, 16 new public talk outlines have been prepared. As soon as these are received, they should be assigned to qualified speakers and scheduled to be given in the congregations.
● New Publications Available:
New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures​—1987 Edition (Deluxe; DLbi12 with marginal references); available in black or maroon​—French
My Book of Bible Stories​—Ukrainian
Watch Tower Publications Index 1981-1985​—French, Portuguese
You Can Live Forever in Paradise on Earth​—Persian
Enjoy Life on Earth Forever!​—Haitian Creole
Tract No. 13​—Hungarian, Romanian
Tract No. 14​—Chinese, Croatian, Dutch, German, Greek, Japanese, Korean, Norwegian, Portuguese, Swedish
● New Cassette Recordings Available:
Jeremiah, Lamentations (set of four; congregation and public: $6.00; pioneers: $5.00)​—English
Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, The Song of Solomon (set of two; congregation and public: $3.00; pioneers: $2.50)​—French
Jehovah Delivers Those Calling Upon His Name​—Drama (single cassette; congregation and public: $2.00; pioneers: $1.75)​—French

