Do Not Let Your Hand Rest
1 The 1988 Yearbook report gives us reason to rejoice greatly as we reflect on the spiritual prosperity of Jehovah’s people everywhere. At the same time it shows that there is still “plenty to do in the work of the Lord.”​—1 Cor. 15:58.
2 In this country alone, a total of 1,778,066 attended the Memorial on April 12, 1987, and 13,562 were baptized at the “Trust in Jehovah” District Conventions. Since this fruitage was brought about in part by a diligent, systematic coverage of territory, should we not continue giving our territory thorough coverage during the 1988 service year? Our labors will not be in vain.
INCREASED EFFORTS TO COVER SELDOM-WORKED TERRITORY
3 If your congregation has seldom-worked territory, you may request one of these as a personal territory assignment. Your requesting such may allow the congregation to cover areas that are not often worked.
4 Additionally, in such congregations elders can make appropriate group arrangements to cover the seldom-worked territory. It may be that publishers could take along a lunch and spend a whole day working distant portions of the congregation’s territory. Why not make it a goal to cover as many of these territories as possible this year?
5 If your congregation regularly covers all its territory, on a temporary basis you may have the opportunity to assist congregations in other areas in the coverage of their territory. During the past service year 120 groups of publishers did so, resulting in many promising return visits and Bible studies. The presiding overseer of one congregation receiving such help stated that 14 publishers “did in ten days what the congregation would do in one month.” Can you assist in such a way this year?
6 There are also those who could request to work one or more of the approximately 240 unassigned territories in the United States. While many served in this way last year, not all these territories were worked. Consequently, we invite you to apply for an assignment this year and increase your share in ‘declaring abroad the kingdom of God.’​—Luke 9:60.
7 Finally, there are those who plan to serve where the need is greater. If that is your desire, we encourage you to discuss the matter with the elders in your congregation. You will also want to review what was written on page 7 of the January 1985 issue of Our Kingdom Ministry.
SHARE IN SOWING KINGDOM SEED
8 Any who would like to assist a congregation in the coverage of its territory or work unassigned territory should review the Society’s letter dated January 1, 1988, on this subject. Please keep in mind that, if at all possible, you should be willing to work territory at least 1,200 miles inland from either the east coast or the west coast of the United States.
9 We have every reason to put our hand to the plow of increased activity and look to the things ahead. (Luke 9:62) Remember, we do not know from where further increase will come. (Eccl. 11:6) Therefore, like Philip, let us place ourselves as willing instruments in the hands of Jehovah and his organization, prepared to sow Kingdom seed wherever it is necessary before the end comes.​—Acts 8:26, 27; Matt. 28:20.

