Helping New Publishers
1 Jehovah continues to bless his people by bringing in “the desirable things of all the nations.” (Hag. 2:7) Thus, many new ones are joining with us in true worship. Last service year saw an increase of over 45,000 new publishers in the United States. While we rejoice to see this increase, it is now our desire to help these become more effective “fishers of men” as they share with us in publishing the good news.​—Mark 1:17.
2 When can a Bible student be invited to join us in the field service? Before identifying himself publicly with Jehovah’s Witnesses, he must first meet the Scriptural and organizational requirements stated in the Our Ministry book on pages 98 and 99. The questions provided there will help you to determine whether the Bible student meets these requirements. If he qualifies, he may be invited to share in the public preaching work and report his field activity to the congregation.
3 New publishers may have zeal and enthusiasm but lack experience. Perhaps you can help them to begin having a part in the house-to-house work by offering a tract or the magazines, or you may ask them to read a scripture. Commend them for their effort and eagerness to share. Remind them of the apostle Paul’s encouragement for all to “press on to maturity.” (Heb. 6:1) Help them to do this.
MAKING PROGRESS
4 Just as children learn to walk by taking one step at a time, new publishers can be helped to make progress step-by-step. If you are training a new publisher, could you progressively help him to give the introduction at the door, to use the Topic for Conversation, and to present the regular literature offer? Is he ready now to begin referring to the Reasoning book, using questions to draw the householder into the conversation or to lay the basis for an effective return visit and eventual Bible study? Having practice sessions and working with a new one in service will help him to take these progressive steps.
5 If you are a parent, are you helping your children who meet the Scriptural requirements to make progress in the field ministry? Follow the suggestions in the paragraphs above as you endeavor to aid them. Do not underestimate the ability of your children to make progress in the ministry. Many young ones have shown commendable ability in placing literature and in starting and conducting Bible studies. Work closely with your children. Start them at an early age. Help them to develop according to their abilities. Commend them for their effort and progress.​—See Our Ministry, pages 99-100.
6 All dedicated servants of Jehovah should endeavor to make advancement in effectively presenting the good news. Help new ones to make progress too.

