Meetings to Help Us Make Disciples
WEEK STARTING JANUARY 3
Song 104
 5 min: Local announcements. Discuss highlights of current magazines to be offered. Encourage all to share in magazine work on Saturday.
10 min: Offer for January. Display and comment on older pocket-size books available locally for field service in January. Encourage brothers to get a good supply. Two books can be offered for $1.00 or four for $2.00; more books can be offered if desired. Demonstration: Publisher makes transition from last scripture in Topic for Conversation and presents two of the older books, featuring just one in presentation.
15 min: “1988 ‘Divine Justice’ District Convention”​—Part One. Question-and-answer consideration of insert, paragraphs 1-8 by convention coordinator. Read ONLY paragraph 4 and make application of scriptures as time allows.
15 min: “1988 ‘Divine Justice’ District Convention”​—Part Two. Talk on paragraphs 9-13 of insert. Highlight need to select accommodations from “Recommended Lodging Locations List,” and avoid abuses; otherwise Society’s rooming arrangement will become ineffective and may have to be discontinued. To be handled by presiding overseer. Conclude with announcement that all baptized Witnesses should make special effort to be present at Service Meeting next week.
Song 122 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING JANUARY 10
Song 136
 8 min: Local announcements and selected Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry. Theocratic News. Accounts report; read appreciatively Society’s acknowledgments of all contributions to the Society, including those to the Society Kingdom Hall Fund and those for helping missionaries to attend the 1988 conventions in their home country.
15 min: Medical Directive and Identity Card. (Secretary will distribute cards prior to meeting to all baptized Witnesses present.) Presiding overseer will read to congregation Society’s letter of December 21, 1987, regarding use of these cards. He will use information on reverse side of Society’s letter to explain clearly how cards are to be filled out. Baptized Witnesses not present at meeting may request these cards from presiding overseer. Brothers are encouraged to fill out cards promptly and see that they are properly signed and dated.
10 min: “Sowing Kingdom Seed.” Questions and answers. Include expressions from two or three publishers who have had good success in placing the older pocket-size books.
12 min: “Helping New Publishers.” Questions and answers. When considering paragraph 4, include brief demonstration of practice session between pioneer and Bible student who now qualifies for field service. New publisher presents Topic for Conversation and literature offer. Pioneer makes practical suggestion for improvement, commends and encourages new publisher to continue to make advancement in field ministry.
Song 224 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING JANUARY 17
Song 209
10 min: Local announcements. Suggest talking points in current magazines and demonstrate a brief presentation of Awake! or The Watchtower. Encourage all to share in magazine work this Saturday.
20 min: “Presenting the Good News​—To Everyone.” Questions and answers. Brief demonstrations: (1) presentation of magazines in street work; (2) making current offer in store-to-store work; and (3) presenting tract to busy householder in house-to-house work. Encourage all to have a full share in the field service this weekend.
15 min: Local needs or talk based on article “Young People Ask . . . Does Being God’s Friend Matter?” in November 22, 1987, issue of Awake!
Song 216 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING JANUARY 24
Song 225
10 min: Local announcements. Mention locations and times of all meetings for field service for the remainder of the week. Encourage all who can to share in the witness work.
15 min: “We All Need to Study.” Questions and answers. Conclude with expressions (1) from publishers who buy out the opportune time and have a good schedule for study, and (2) concerning the benefits derived from reading the older publications mentioned in paragraph 5.
20 min: “Do Not Let Your Hand Rest.” Service overseer discusses article with audience. Make appropriate references to January 1, 1988, letter regarding territory seldom worked. Make local application of information.
Song 1 and concluding prayer.

