Presenting the Good News​—To Everyone
1 As Jesus Christ preached he showed intense interest in reaching as many people as possible. (Mark 6:34; John 4:7, 40, 41) We too must try to reach as many people as we can. Lives are at stake​—theirs and ours. (1 Tim. 4:16) We want to help others to come to know Jehovah so that they too can call on his name to be saved.​—Acts 2:21.
2 A common problem many of us face, whether working in urban or rural territory, is locating those who are not at home when we first call. Have you tried to call later the same day? Many have had good success in doing so. Or try calling on a different day. Those persistently not at home might be reached by means of a letter. In working urban territory, take the initiative to speak with those you see in the hallways and lobbies of apartment houses or on the sidewalk. If your conversation must be brief, you may find it beneficial to present at least one of the four new tracts: Why You Can Trust the Bible, What Do Jehovah’s Witnesses Believe?, Life in a Peaceful New World, and What Hope for Dead Loved Ones?
STREET AND STORE-TO-STORE WORK
3 Sharing in street work may help you to reach individuals ordinarily not at home when we call. When approaching people, it is beneficial to be friendly and direct as you endeavor to start a conversation. Posing a brief, pointed question may help you to arouse interest. You will likely find it easiest to approach those who are not moving along hurriedly. Some have had success in walking a few steps with a person as they briefly present the magazines. If the street is crowded, some have found it practical to speak to those on the fringes of the crowd. Store-to-store work may help you to reach proprietors and employees who are often missed when we call at their homes. Thoughtfully try to call at a time when there are few customers in the store.​—km 5/85 p. 8.
4 When in street work and store-to-store work, do not feel that you are limited to presenting magazines. Books and brochures can also be offered. One successful publisher begins the conversation by asking, “Have you seen our latest book?” Another simply says, “I have something that I would like to show you.”
5 How can interest found in street and store-to-store work be further cultivated? Many have had success in asking interested ones for their address so that they can speak to them further at a more convenient time. If you find that they do not live in your territory, the call can be referred to the appropriate congregation. The presiding overseer in your congregation will be happy to assist you in this regard.
6 It is Jehovah’s will that all be given an opportunity to hear the truth. “Let anyone thirsting come; let anyone that wishes take life’s water free.” (Rev. 22:17) When we make a sincere effort to contact all persons, we show that we love others as Jehovah does.​—John 3:16.

