Sowing Kingdom Seed
1 Psalm 126:6 speaks of sowing literal seed and says: “The one that without fail goes forth, . . . carrying along a bagful of seed, will without fail come in with a joyful cry, carrying along his sheaves.” At Ecclesiastes 11:6 the sower of seed is encouraged with the words: “In the morning sow your seed and until the evening do not let your hand rest; for you are not knowing where this will have success, either here or there, or whether both of them will alike be good.”
2 When we share in the field ministry we, too, in effect carry a bagful of seed but of a spiritual kind. The effectiveness of our sowing spiritual seed is enhanced by literature that features the Kingdom good news. This literature discusses subjects of concern to many persons and shows how vital it is for them to learn about the Kingdom good news. Jehovah, through the faithful slave, has provided us with a fine supply of Bible literature to use in the work of sowing Kingdom seed during this time of the end.
AN ABUNDANT SUPPLY
3 In our field ministry during January, we will be featuring some of the older publications that have proved to be effective in helping people to grow spiritually, including Choosing, Commentary on James, “Eternal Purpose,” Evolution (old edition), Good News, Holy Spirit, Peace and Security (old edition), This Life, Truth, and World Government. You may offer any two of these publications for $1.00. Some may find it beneficial to offer four or more of these publications to those they meet in their ministry.
PREPARATION ESSENTIAL
4 Take a few minutes to review the contents of the older publications that are available to you for field service. You will find that This Life discusses such subjects as “Can You Talk with the Dead?” “How Did Old Age and Death Come About?” and “Why Many Now Living Have Opportunity Never to Die.”
5 Some may appreciate having a verse-by-verse commentary on the book of James, and this is available in the Commentary on James. In offering the Choosing book, you may find it effective to read the statement from the publishers on page 2: “Many sincere persons would like to find a way of life that brings peace and contentment now and assures the enjoyment of a secure future. This book has been published in the hope that it will aid honest-hearted ones to identify the truly superior course of life and then to pursue it.”
6 If the congregation’s supply of older books is depleted quickly, the service overseer may check with neighboring congregations to see if they have additional supplies. Choosing, Commentary on James, and Holy Spirit books may still be ordered from the Society.
7 As you plant and water the seeds of truth, pray constantly for Jehovah’s direction and blessing because it is ‘God who makes it grow.’​—1 Cor. 3:6.

