We All Need to Study
1 It was in the presence of his disciples that Jesus prayed to Jehovah, saying: “This means everlasting life, their taking in knowledge of you, the only true God, and of the one whom you sent forth, Jesus Christ.” (John 17:3) Yes, all of Christ’s disciples, as well as newly interested ones, need to take in such knowledge. We can do this through personal and family study, and by attending congregation meetings. Do you adhere to a practical schedule for regular personal study?
2 Newly interested persons are greatly benefited by having a personal home Bible study. To grow spiritually, however, they must continue to take in knowledge and then apply what they learn. (Heb. 5:13, 14) Are you doing that?
3 Young servants of Jehovah are in a fine position to take in knowledge. Their minds are eager to absorb vast quantities of information, and they often desire to know the reasons why things are so. Jehovah created us with this desire. Use your time wisely to take in spiritual knowledge. Do as the apostle Paul said and ‘buy out the opportune time’ for such enriching and faith-strengthening personal study.​—Col. 4:5.
PERSONAL LIBRARY
4 Do you have a personal or a family library? Does it contain volumes of Awake! and The Watchtower, the Aid book, and the publications we use at the Congregation Book Study and meetings at the Kingdom Hall? Do you have the Watch Tower Publications Index 1930-1985 and the available older publications of the Society?
5 You will find valuable information in the older publications. Have you read or studied the booklet Jehovah’s Witnesses and the Question of Blood? The 1975 Yearbook of Jehovah’s Witnesses gives a history of Jehovah’s people from Brother Russell’s time up until our present time and answers many of the questions that have been asked about Jehovah’s Witnesses.
6 There is a need for individual and family study in order to be both spiritually strong and well equipped for the field service. How are you doing in this? Do you prepare for congregation meetings? Do you prepare for the field ministry in an effort to be as effective as possible? Are you reading your copy of Reasoning From the Scriptures? Have you been using it in the field service?
7 Use the Watch Tower Publications Index 1930-1985 to find answers to your own questions and those presented to you by persons you meet in the field service. Elders will find the Index to be a most valuable tool to use in locating information that is encouraging and appropriate for those who come to them seeking spiritual assistance.
8 Second Timothy 2:15 counsels: “Do your utmost to present yourself approved to God, a workman with nothing to be ashamed of, handling the word of the truth aright.” To do this we all need to study and apply what we learn.

