Announcements
◆ The Literature Offer:
August: The Great Teacher book for 25c.
September: Evolution book for 25c.
October: Awake! subscription and 3 booklets for $1.50.
◆ The October 8 issue of Awake! and the October 15 issue of The Watchtower will be special issues. Please order early the extra copies you will need.
◆ The Society now has a limited supply of the tract Life in God’s New Order in grade-one Spanish Braille available on a loan basis. You may receive this tract free of charge by writing the Braille Desk. It must be returned to the Braille Desk after completion of reading. This tract in Spanish Braille is not to be stocked by the congregation.
◆ With the July monthly statement each congregation was sent two copies of Presiding Overseer’s Report on Congregation (S-10) and form S-2, which the body of elders will use in September to make any needed recommendations to the governing body for new appointments of elders and ministerial servants. The S-10 form and the S-2 form (if recommendations are being made) should be sent to the Society at the same time. It would be appreciated if you would not mail these separately. Duplicates of these will be retained in the congregation file.
◆ New publications available:
The Truth That Leads to Eternal Life​—Serbian
◆ Out of stock in U.S.A.:
New World Translation (Deluxe edition)​—English
The Approaching Peace of a Thousand Years​—English
From Paradise Lost to Paradise Regained​—Portuguese
◆ Each congregation will receive two Literature Inventory forms and should take an actual count of campaign literature at the end of August. Please do not include cash items such as the Aid book and large-print Bible (bi8) in value of literature in stock. We would appreciate your filling out the forms and returning the original to us no later than September 6. You may keep the duplicate copy.
◆ It has been brought to our attention that in some congregations the length of the Watchtower study is exceeding an hour by as much as fifteen or more minutes on many weeks. It would be best ordinarily to keep the study itself within an hour, with about ten additional minutes for the opening and closing as outlined in the Organization book, page 94.

