Are You Building One Another Up Spiritually?
1 The past year has seen some tremendous advances in theocratic worship and in the number of those associating actively with Jehovah’s organization. With a Memorial attendance in the United States of 1,046,346, with 33,626 new ones baptized from September through May and a peak to date of 454,779 ministers proclaiming the good news, we can all attest to the fact that Jehovah has opened the floodgates of the heavens and has poured out a rich blessing. (Mal. 3:10) Now in the months ahead we want to assist those associated to grow stronger spiritually. How can we do this?
2 We can aid one another to share fully in the field ministry. Are you planning to spend additional time in the field service during this warm summer month? Had you thought of inviting others to work along with you? This would be a fine way to assist them to enjoy the blessings and happiness that come from sharing the truth with others. And during August we have such a fine offer, one that is easy to present​—the Great Teacher book.​—Acts 20:35.
3 Many who have recently been baptized still need much help to grow stronger spiritually. Are there spiritual matters that you know they need to consider further? Could they sit in on your family study or could you sit in on theirs as you consider these matters? Do you need to continue a personal Bible study with them? If you studied with them or have associated closely with them, you know many of their spiritual needs and can no doubt do much to assist them. Take the initiative in this. Do they need assistance to share regularly in the field ministry and to make progress? Take them with you. Help them to apply practical suggestions they have heard at the service meeting. You can be sure that your working with them in the field service will be of great encouragement to them.​—Gal. 6:10.
4 And, you parents, are you continuing to study regularly with your children? If your children are sharing in the field ministry, do you regularly go with them and help them? They continue to need your association, interest and training. While they may enjoy working in the service with other young folks from time to time, they need to share regularly in the ministry with you, to receive your continued direction and encouragement.
5 We also love our brothers and sisters who have been serving Jehovah for many years and who now may not be able to do as much as they used to do. Do you approach them at the Kingdom Hall? share in conversation with them? express appreciation for their faithful example? When appropriate, do you visit them? Would it help them if you read the Bible or one of the Society’s publications to them? Are there some who need assistance in shopping, or someone to run an errand? Young publishers can often aid older brothers and sisters in some of these ways. Do some need help in getting into the field service? Could you assist with transportation? Or assist by working with them from house to house or on return visits for short periods of time? Would some appreciate your assistance in aiding them to share in the service by letter writing or by using the telephone?
6 There are so many ways that we can build one another up spiritually. “Keep comforting one another and building one another up, just as you are in fact doing,” and may Jehovah’s blessing go with you as you do.​—1 Thess. 5:11.
[Blurb on page 1]
Recommending Ourselves to Every Human Conscience in God’s Sight.

