Presenting the Good News​—Offering the Great Teacher Book
1 “Do you like to hear stories?​—Well, then, I’m going to tell you one about a man who told better stories than anyone else who has ever lived on earth. His name is Jesus Christ.” Does that sound familiar to you? Those are the opening words of the first chapter of the book Listening to the Great Teacher. To date there have been ten million copies of this fine publication printed in twelve languages. During August we are once again going to feature it in our field ministry. Are you prepared to use it in the Kingdom activity? It is assisting young and old to learn the truth of God’s Word.
2 The Kingdom activity takes in many different features of our ministerial work. We will, of course, want to use this publication in the house-to-house ministry, offering it for twenty-five cents. When you offer magazines, the Great Teacher book can be offered with the latest Watchtower and Awake! for thirty-five cents. Some of you will want to use it in your street magazine work. One circuit overseer recently informed the Society of an experience he had in this activity: He approached an elderly lady who was walking down the street and in the course of the conversation asked, “Do you have any grandchildren?” She replied: “I have a number of them.” He took out four Great Teacher books and told her: “I have just what you need to help these young folks.” And he briefly explained the book. She was happy to contribute for them for her grandchildren. This circuit overseer observed: ‘Parents and grandparents get this book for their children, and it is just what they need to help these young folks to get on the way of everlasting life.’ In a month’s time this circuit overseer and his wife placed 470 Great Teacher books with interested ones.
3 When we go from house to house and find that in a family there are several children, why not suggest to the parents, or to the grandparents if you speak to them, that they obtain a copy of the book for each child to read; the cost is so small, and children appreciate having their own copy. No doubt many children who get the publication will want to know more about what they read, and this may open up the way for you to discuss the truth with other members of the family. Offer the book everywhere you can. Any of the other twenty-five-cent publications can be offered if your supply of the Great Teacher book becomes exhausted.
4 There are other fields to consider too. How about friends and relatives with children? Would you like to give them the book as a gift? You may wish to write a small message of a personal nature on the front page of the book when making such a gift. Such kindness and thoughtfulness will no doubt be deeply appreciated by many. And those who take time to read the book will be richly blessed.
5 Do not hesitate to offer the book to adults for their reading. Many will appreciate its direct, easy-to-understand language and may be aided to get a clear grasp of the truth.
6 Whether you are young in years, or an adult, keep in mind those who have shown interest and let them know that they can enjoy a free home Bible study. Many young publishers will find it possible to conduct Bible studies in the Great Teacher book. One young publisher six years of age is regularly conducting a study with one of her schoolmates who is seven years of age. This young publisher observed how her mother conducted Bible studies and how she used the Great Teacher book to read to her, so she is following her mother’s example in reading it with her young schoolmate. Could some of you young publishers do the same and read the Great Teacher book with some of your schoolmates?
7 “Will you listen to the Great Teacher? — That is what we all should do. We will be happy if we do. And it will also bring us happiness if we tell our friends the good things we learn.” These concluding words of chapter one of the Great Teacher book encourage all of us to share fully in the Kingdom activity now.
[Blurb on page 4]
Are You Helping Members of Your Family to Copy the Great Teacher?

