Your Service Meetings
WEEK STARTING AUGUST 12
10 min: Song 56. Introduction, text and comments.
15 min: “Presenting the Good News​—Offering the ‘Great Teacher’ Book.” Questions and answers. Also ask audience for further suggestions on how and where they plan to present the book.
25 min: Benefiting from the Life Pattern of Moses, a Servant of Jehovah. Audience participation. Have audience read scriptures and comment on them. Particularly call for comments on how the material applies to us and what we can learn from it.
Moses is an outstanding example of a humble, faithful servant of Jehovah. Born when Jews were slaves in Egypt. Read Exodus 1:8-10, 12-14, 22. Life of young Moses was preserved. Read Exodus 2:1-10. You can be sure that during those few years Moses’ mother taught her son all she could about Jehovah and his people.
In Pharaoh’s court Moses had all the advantages of the ‘good life’ of the Egyptians​—education, wealth, “security.” He knew of the struggle the Jews were having in Egypt as slaves. When he saw a certain Egyptian striking a Hebrew brother he took action and thus identified himself as being on the side of Jehovah’s people. Read Exodus 2:11, 12, 15. Moses had to flee Egypt. For many years his relatives continued in slavery. Read Exodus 2:23-25.
God called Moses to use him in the deliverance of Israel from Egypt. Read Exodus 3:7, 10. Moses felt apprehensive and unqualified for the assignment. Jehovah assured Moses; he was to go in Jehovah’s name and was given extraordinary power. Read Exodus 3:11-13, 15, 16. Briefly summarize Exodus 4:1-9. Jehovah reproved Moses. He gave him the assignment. Read Exodus 4:10-17. While it may not have been an easy assignment for Moses, he went. Under Jehovah’s direction he led Israel out of Egypt and he faithfully taught them God’s law for forty years until his death.
What can we learn from Moses’ life pattern? Ask audience to comment on the value of each of these lessons.
1. We should not let material possessions keep us from doing Jehovah’s will. We need to watch that educational background or financial position does not entice us to be neglectful of carrying out Jehovah’s will, being identified with Jehovah’s people or hesitant to step forward in their behalf.
2. Parents should follow example of Moses’ mother and train their children well at an early age. Use God’s Word to mold minds of your children and to fortify them. Build a deep love for Jehovah in them, a love for truth and a hatred for what is bad, so they can withstand the pressures of the old system.
3. When called upon to handle ‘difficult assignment,’ do not beg off. Rely on the wisdom and strength Jehovah gives.
4. Remembering Moses can help us as we handle assignments in the ministry school. Our brothers can help us and so can Jehovah if we ask him.
5. Be courageous in working territory where you see few results from your efforts. Remember Moses’ assignment to go repeatedly to Pharaoh.
(As time permits, ask audience for other good lessons they have learned from the life pattern of Moses.)
10 min: Concluding comments. Include accounts report. Song 59.
WEEK STARTING AUGUST 19
10 min: Song 67. Introduction, text and comments, and “‘Will You Be Away?”
15 min: Are You Using the “Great Teacher” Book? Demonstration: Family scene with father or mother reading and discussing the book with children. Cover the last four paragraphs in chapter seven.
Chairman: Briefly interview parents. How many times have you been through this book with your children? Why do you feel it is wise to go over the material more than once? How long do you study? (Some parents find it best to study for short periods of time and to study often.) When do you study? (Should be done regularly at convenient times, if possible.) Do you recommend that other parents study regularly with their children? Why? Are you and other family members having success in offering the book to others?
20 min: Consideration of “Watchtower” article from June 15 issue “Motivated by a Godly Conscience.” This can be handled by a talk or a discussion between elder and ministerial servant, or by family group.
15 min: Concluding comments. Encourage good support of field service as individual circumstances permit. Include appropriate items from “Announcements” and “Theocratic News.” Song 61.
WEEK STARTING AUGUST 26
 5 min: Song 70. Introduction, text and comments.
10 min: September’s Offer, the “Evolution” Book.
(4 min.) Make brief comments on value of this book in the field ministry. Highlight especially chapters 12-15.
(6 min.) Call on audience to comment on how they will present it and portions of the book they will draw to attention of householder.
Ask for suggestions of parents and children on offering the publication at school, to teachers and students.
10 min: Question Box. Discuss reasons for zealous share in field ministry.
25 min: Gideon and the Faithful Three Hundred. Use audience to read scriptures, comment on them and make personal application of the material.
Gideon became one of the judges in Israel after the death of Joshua and before there were kings in Israel. Israel was not holding to true worship; so Jehovah permitted them to become oppressed by Midian. Jehovah chose Gideon. Read Judges 6:1, 7-12, 15, 16.
Jehovah called on him to tear down an altar of Baal belonging to his father Joash and to erect an altar to Jehovah. Read Judges 6:25-27. The men of the city were incensed; they wanted to put Gideon to death. However, his father countered that they should let Baal come to his own defense if he could. Read Judges 6:28-31. Though the assignment was not easy, Gideon proved himself to be an obedient worshiper of Jehovah.
When the Midianites came to make war against Israel, Jehovah’s spirit moved Gideon to gather forces to defend Israel. But it was not by great numbers that Jehovah would deliver Israel. Read Judges 6:34; 7:2-4, 7. Jehovah gave Gideon further assurances. Read Judges 7:9-15. Gideon acted with faith, and Jehovah gave victory. Read Judges 7:16-22.
What do we learn from the faithful course followed by Gideon and the three hundred? Invite audience to comment on the following points.
1. Gideon put faith in Jehovah and his ability to save; we need to do this too. Israel was doing what was bad in Jehovah’s eyes. Baal worship predominated. Gideon had to be very loyal to Jehovah to follow the command to tear down the Baal altar belonging to his father and to champion true worship of Jehovah.
2. We today often face great obstacles in our territory where false religion has a strong hold on people. We need faith like that of Gideon and need to act obediently in spiritual warfare.
3. Gideon was called upon to exercise further faith in that Jehovah was using a group small in number to accomplish his will. He was told to send home all in army who were afraid and trembling; 22,000 went home, leaving 10,000. The force was further reduced to 300, which left odds of 450 to 1. Gideon’s obedience showed implicit trust in Jehovah. Today we face similar odds in our Christian ministry, our spiritual warfare. As we continue our ministry faithfully we, too, need to show implicit trust in Jehovah.
4. The weapons Gideon and the three hundred had were a horn, a large empty jar and a torch. Jehovah was the one who gave final victory.
Today the weapons of our warfare are not carnal. Rather, we use the truth, the good news of peace, the shield of faith, and the sword of the spirit, which is God’s Word, to cut away false religious teachings and then to build up appreciation for true worship.​—Eph. 6:10, 14-18.
5. Gideon’s attitude about prominence is an example to us. Read Judges 8:22, 23. It is important that we keep our relative positions inside Jehovah’s organization and always seek to exalt our God Jehovah rather than ourselves.
10 min: Concluding comments. Include Branch Letter. Song 116.
WEEK STARTING SEPTEMBER 2
10 min: Song 108. Introduction, text and comments.
15 min: “Are You Building One Another Up Spiritually?” Questions and answers. Audience may be invited to comment on additional ways they can build up one another locally. Mention literature offer for September.
20 min: Consideration of “Watchtower” article of July 1, 1973, “Conscientious in Doing Good Toward All” by one or two elders.
15 min: Concluding comments. Encourage the brothers to be alert to opportunities to present the “Evolution” book to all who will hear. Song 110.

