Announcements
“ANNOUNCING MESSIAH’S PRESENCE” TESTIMONY PERIOD
April closes the 1950 campaign of taking subscriptions for the Watchtower magazine. This final month has been set aside as “Announcing Messiah’s Presence” Testimony Period and will be a month of special effort and activity world-wide in this behalf. When first published in July, 1879, our magazine was called “Zion’s Watch Tower and Herald of Christ’s Presence”. It is still a herald of the invisible presence of Christ or Messiah, with more proof of this now than ever before since 1914. Very fittingly, then, subscriptions for The Watchtower are to be taken during the Testimony Period thus designated. For each subscription for a year at the regular rate of $1.00 a set of 8 booklets is to be given as a premium. Where people are already subscribers for The Watchtower, they may be offered, instead, our companion magazine Awake! but without the booklet premium. We should like this twelfth Watchtower campaign to realize a peak of subscriptions. If you are in favor of that, join us in the campaign. Write us, should you need any assistance to that end. Each one’s report will enhance the world-wide total. So submit your report on our form for such.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDY
Week of May 14: “Divine Education Bears Good Fruit,” ¶1-22 inclusive, The Watchtower April 1, 1950. (See also page 103)
MEMORIAL FOR 1950
The new moon nearest the spring equinox in the north temperate zone determines the first month of the year according to Jehovah’s decree. (Ex. 12:1, 2) This year the month Nisan begins at sunset of March 19, and hence the fourteenth day of Nisan would begin at sundown of Saturday, April 1, 1950. This agrees with the date nineteen years previous according to the metonic cycle. That day, after 6 p.m., Standard Time, would be the correct time for the annual observance of Christ’s death according to his command. At an appointed hour that night companies, units, and groups of the consecrated people of God should assemble. After an opening song and prayer, some appointed consecrated person, preferably one of Jehovah’s anointed ones, should present extemporaneously or read a discussion upon the meaning of the Memorial emblems. Then prayer should be offered over the emblems and they should be served, for any of the remnant of the anointed members of Christ’s body to partake of. The emblems should be unleavened bread and red wine, to copy our Lord’s example. All persons of good-will, whether consecrated or not, are cordially invited to attend this significant and blessed celebration, even though they are not authorized to partake of the emblems as members of Christ’s body. After the Memorial appropriate service announcements for the group may be made, a closing song sung, and the meeting dismissed with prayer. A report should be made to the Society of the entire number attending at each gathering, and the number of those partaking of the emblems.

