From Our Readers
Child Molesting
I think your articles on “Child Molesting” (January 22, 1985) do much more damage than good. You say that parents should tell their children about “wrong places” on their body where strangers should not touch them. I think this will give the children a totally unnatural concept of their own body. Will they not be unhappy and hung up about sexuality when they grow up? Children know by instinct what is wrong and don’t have to be told.
S. Aa. N., Denmark
If children are told in a proper way that certain parts of their body are private and not for other people to touch, this need not give them an unnatural concept of their own body. It need not hinder a healthful view of their sexuality as such develops, but it could protect the child from being molested. It is molesting, not proper instruction, that gives sexual hang-ups. Giving proper instruction to children in this way is recommended by almost all authorities on the subject of child molesting.​—ED.
Thank you very much for the article on child molesting. It was truly a wonderful discussion, straightforward and honest. As a victim of this selfish crime, I was tormented with many feelings. These articles helped me to cope. I’m so glad that you stressed the need to help children see that no one has a right to touch them improperly. This could have saved me from the terrible ordeal I experienced. Your article has helped my husband and me to discuss this thoroughly with our children.
T. C., Ohio
I’m 13 and a girl. I have been molested for many years. I want to thank you for your issue on child molesting. It helped me to tell my parents. Now the molesting has been stopped. Your article saved my life because I almost killed myself. I did not know what to do. I was so frightened.
H. H., Tennessee
Finding Happiness
In your issue of March 22, 1985, you show a picture of genuine pleasures (page 8). Included is a picture of a man teaching a boy to fish. Is there a difference between fishing for sport and fishing for pleasure?
W. H., Alabama
We surely did not intend to encourage fishing for mere sport. We visualized that the boy’s grandfather had for many years caught fish for the family table. Now he is teaching his grandchild the skill of baiting the hook, fishing, and likely how to clean the fish. Both grandfather and grandson are finding pleasure in this simple experience they are sharing, down by the water under the shade of a tree on a warm summer day. We do not see illustrated that the man is teaching the boy the thrill of the hunt and the fight, and pride in the catch and in the eventual trophy, which would be involved in sportfishing.​—ED.
Thank you so much for the issue “Happiness​—What It Takes to Find It.” (March 22, 1985) It has that special depth of understanding that singles out an article as truly unique. Happiness is definitely measured by the will to communicate and share. This article will surely help us all to look for opportunities to give and share our time with one another.
S. N., England

