The Bible’s Viewpoint . . .
Lotteries​—Who Wins?
“IF YOU want to win you’ve got to play.” “Two jackpots for the price of 1.” “More blast for a buck than ever before!” The tension and thrills build up. Spurred on by these slogans, men, women, and even youths, everywhere dig deep into their pockets and purses. Even wedding receptions are interrupted for it. You are witnessing the lottery stampede!
Finally, the “lucky number” is announced. Elation for the chosen few. Thousands, perhaps millions, of dollars are instantly theirs. Winning a million-dollar lottery, boasts one winner, is “‘just the frosting on the cake’ of a fulfilling life.” Says another, “It is so relaxing to know that you are never going to be short of money anymore.” But for the vast majority​—the losers—​life’s activities lapse back to their normal pace.
Has the lure of the lottery attracted you? How can you and your future be affected by it? Who really wins?
Moving to Easy Street?
Lotteries can stir up in the hearts of players the desire to be rich. However, the Bible states that this “love of money is a root of all sorts of injurious things, and by reaching out for this love some have . . . stabbed themselves all over with many pains.” Lotteries are no exception.​—1 Timothy 6:9, 10.
The players can become gambling addicts. Dr. John Watt, medical director of Homewood Sanitarium in Guelph, Canada, says that an individual can become a ‘compulsive lottery player, just as a person can become an alcoholic,’ in an attempt to escape reality. He calls it lotteryitis.
And when one wins, new problems crop up. “I thought I’d be on easy street the rest of my life,” says Erika, a million-dollar lottery winner. But after two divorces and the constant demands of the taxman, she laments: “If I had known what was going to happen, I’d have torn up that ticket.” Others comment that winning ‘the lottery was the beginning of a life plagued with sickness, fear, and finally hatred.’ “All the fanfare of winning was replaced by heavy weights on my shoulders.” “I do not trust people anymore​—that is what winning the lottery did to me.” For lottery winners, officials are even suggesting hiring a bodyguard and a business manager to protect their “prizes and themselves.” Yes, even winners can be losers.
Higher Stakes
Some, including prominent religious leaders, argue that playing the lottery is all right as long as it is legal. Yet, the fact that the lottery is legal in some countries does not make it right. To illustrate: If your local government were to legalize prostitution, would that make it proper? Not according to the Bible. (1 Corinthians 6:9, 10) A person desiring to please God is concerned principally with what His Word, the Bible, indicates. Likely that is your main concern too. But does the Bible have anything to say about the lottery?
Not directly, but since the lottery’s prime lure is love of money, it is rooted in greed. Greed produces only bad fruits. The Bible counsels us not to cultivate greed in our hearts. (1 John 2:15, 16) “Let . . . greediness not even be mentioned among you.”​—Ephesians 5:3.
Love of lotteries is based on selfishness. Does not each participant seek his own advantage, that of winning what his neighbor has paid out? The Bible, however, urges each one to “keep seeking, not his own advantage, but that of the other person.” Thus, would it not be wrong to draw pleasure and profit from other people’s losses?​—1 Corinthians 10:24; Proverbs 17:5.
The lottery can also become a poor man’s trap, taking from him the very thing he or his family needs​—money. The odds are mountainous against an individual’s winning. Authorities say that you are more likely to be struck by lightning than to win a lottery. And according to the Lightning Protection Institute, the odds against lightning’s striking anyone are a million to one. Therefore, the odds against winning a big take may be several million to one!
But there is still further reason for concern. Lottery players count on luck and not skill, on intuition and not logic. As a result, many are inclined to be superstitious. What could this lead to? The Bible speaks of those who are “setting in order a table for the god of Good Luck.” Idolatry is the name for it. Therefore, not only are the odds against them as far as winning the lottery itself, but it may be the first step toward idolatry, which would set them at odds with Jehovah God.​—Isaiah 65:11-14.
Better Than a Good Gamble
The Bible reminds us that there is “more happiness in giving than there is in receiving.” Certainly, the lottery frenzy does not promote the spirit of unselfish giving, which is truly rewarding.​—Acts 20:35.
True happiness can be found if we rest our hope “not on uncertain riches, but on God, who furnishes us all things richly for our enjoyment; to work at good, to be rich in fine works, . . . ready to share.” Thus, we can safely treasure up for ourselves “a fine foundation for the future” and “get a firm hold on the real life.”​—1 Timothy 6:17-19.
In this way, you can be a guaranteed winner. And it will not be a matter of chance or holding a “lucky number.” Rather, as Jesus Christ clearly stated, you must ‘take in knowledge of the only true God’ and of his purposes. Then, act on it. Live in harmony with his Word. Your future depends on it, “for he gives us the victory.” The reward is more valuable than some lottery jackpot. It is “everlasting life”!​—John 17:3; 1 Corinthians 15:57.
[Blurb on page 22]
Even winners can be losers
[Blurb on page 23]
You are more likely to be struck by lightning than to win a lottery

