Young People Ask . . .
Why Read the Bible?
‘A mere carpenter, Jesus of Nazareth, shook the world with his message!’ exclaimed the professor. No, he was not teaching the Bible but was comparing it with a literary work named Don Quixote. Aaron (20 years old), however, listened intently. For this professor, though not religious, valued the Bible as literature​—as he said, a book that ‘every educated man and woman ought to have read.’
COULD the Bible really educate a person? And what was so earthshaking about a carpenter’s message? Aaron wanted to know, so he decided to read the Bible.
George (12 years old) came across a Bible quotation: “Remember, now, your Grand Creator in the days of your young manhood.” (Ecclesiastes 12:1) So he asked himself: ‘How can I remember the Creator if I do not know him in the first place?’ He, too, began to see a need to read the Bible.
Kelvin (21 years old) is one of Jehovah’s Witnesses and regularly engages in door-to-door preaching. He enjoys telling others what he has learned about the Bible. He found, though, that some of the people he meets have already read parts of the Bible. And because Kelvin wants to have intelligent conversations with them, he prepares himself by diligent Bible study. In his words, “You have to read your Bible to know what they are talking about.”
Aaron, George, and Kelvin became serious students of the Bible. But what about you? Shouldn’t you, too, read the Bible? Like many young people, you might respond:
‘Isn’t the Bible Boring?’
Some feel that way. But really, they do not know what they are missing. The Bible is God’s revelation to man. It tells us how we got here and where we are going. How can that be boring?
True, some parts seem to move more quickly than others. David (19 years old) observes: “In the Bible books of Numbers and Deuteronomy, there are some events, but mostly there are laws and the reasons for the laws. It’s not that these are boring, but in Joshua, the following book, there are more events; you get into the scenes. From Joshua on, it really picks up.” As David progresses in his reading, however, his opinion of the so-called slow parts of the Bible will likely change. Why? Consider your own experience.
Have you ever watched a movie that you first saw when you were much younger? At that time, you probably didn’t understand much of it, and as a result, few scenes seemed exciting. But now that you have grown older, you can understand much more. The story takes on more meaning, and the scenes move faster. Something similar takes place as you grow in understanding of the world’s best-seller. (Hebrews 5:14) Each time you read it, those laws and the reasons for the laws take on greater meaning. You gain an appreciation for details.
But why are details so important? Well, consider a radio sportscaster. His job is to make a ball game real to his audience. And how does he do that? He gives many details​—how the ball is hit, the distance, the play, scores, statistics, stories about the players. Is that boring? Of course not! Likewise, the Bible is rich in details​—genealogies, figures, measurements, laws. How these details make the accounts live!
Further, these laws reveal God’s personality. At Exodus 22:21, 22 and Leviticus 19:32, for instance, God commands fair treatment for widows, fatherless boys, and elderly people. Yes, Jehovah wants everybody to be treated with respect, regardless of sex or age. Doesn’t that make you want to know him better? This is the way that a young woman named Georgie feels. Regarding her Bible reading, she says: “It brings you closer to Jehovah.”
You, too, can discover that God’s Word is “alive and exerts power.” (Hebrews 4:12) How so?
The Bible Is Alive!
“Reading the Bible is different from picking up a newspaper or a magazine,” observes Marvin (19 years old). “Your thoughts have to be channeled into what you are reading. Your mind can’t just stray and drift as you turn the pages. Reading the Bible takes concerted effort. I try to picture the setting and put myself there when I read about the parting of the Red Sea or the heavens opening up and Jehovah speaking.”
You can do this! When you read the account of Daniel in the lion’s pit, put yourself there! Imagine being alone and unarmed in a pit of hungry lions! (Daniel 6:16-23) Or what about the account of Queen Esther? Her people are about to become victims of mass murder. What a desperate situation! To save them she must employ a series of maneuvers that will put her own life at risk and bring her face-to-face with the enemy. Can you feel the tension?​—Esther 3:6–5:4; 2:10; 8:3-6.
There is something else you can do to make the Bible more exciting and mentally stimulating. As you read, notice how the different parts of the Bible connect. For example, what do the accounts of Daniel and Esther have in common? Both prove the truthfulness of Psalm 34:7: “The angel of Jehovah is camping all around those fearing him, and he rescues them.”
Another theme that connects different parts of the Bible is God’s Kingdom. Daniel 2:44 says: “The God of heaven will set up a kingdom.” But what will this Kingdom do? From the beginning to the end, the Bible shows that Jehovah will use this Kingdom​—his government—​to bring about permanent peace. “He is making wars to cease to the extremity of the earth,” says Psalm 46:9. And by means of the Kingdom, “he will wipe out every tear from their eyes, and death will be no more, neither will mourning nor outcry nor pain be anymore.”​—Revelation 21:4.
Everything ties together. God’s government will put an end to sickness, suffering, and even death. Injustice will be a thing of the past. Everybody will be treated with fairness and respect. No wonder that Jesus said to pray, “Let your kingdom come”! (Matthew 6:10) That Kingdom message shook the world back then and is shaking it right now! Isn’t it therefore worth your while to investigate this life-giving message? You can, by reading the Bible!
‘But How Can I Get It Read?’
If you are in school, you may feel that you are too busy with your homework. But is it really so hard to do your homework and read the Bible? Not for Richard (17 years old): “In the afternoons when I have homework, I get to it and finish it. In our house there is no TV during the week.” If you do likewise, you may be surprised to see how much time you have left for Bible reading. Why, if you read just 15 minutes a day, you may finish the entire Bible in about a year!
It Can Help You Right Now!
You are growing up in times that are truly “hard to deal with.” (2 Timothy 3:1) However, the Bible is helping these young people to cope:
“Sometimes I get depressed over how the world is. I look up scriptures such as Revelation 21:4, and it gives me something to hope for.”​—Prentice.
“Reading the Bible is very beneficial, especially when I have a problem. Often, there is a character in the Bible who had that same problem, and that helps me to deal with it.”​—Myrtie.
“I see myself growing through reading the Bible.”​—Theresa.
You, too, can see yourself grow. Experience the satisfaction of starting something worth while, sticking to it, and finishing it. Even more rewarding is coming to know the Grand Creator. (Ecclesiastes 12:1) In time, you will want to use the Bible to help others. Truly, reading the Bible is one of the most worthwhile projects you can undertake!
[Blurb on page 20]
“Reading the Bible is very beneficial, especially when I have a problem”
[Pictures on page 19]
Try to picture the events as you read

