Cuban Refugees Tell Their Story
TYPICAL of Jehovah’s Witnesses who were forced to leave Cuba was José Tunidor. He relates the following:
“In December 1978, police came to my house, and I was taken away without any explanation. They put me in prison with another of Jehovah’s Witnesses, Ernesto Alfonso. He, too, did not know why he had been put there.
“Later on, they took me back to my house to inspect it. They confiscated the literature explaining the Bible that I had. They also took my typewriter. Back at the prison, I learned that Ernesto had his typewriter and literature confiscated too. Why? We were accused of being antisocial simply because we believed the Bible and talked about its truths to others. We were accused of being dangerous, and the court sentenced us to three years in jail.”
Tunidor was sent to a prison in Aguica, near Colón, in Matanzas province. There he worked in prison until he was transferred to the fields to cut sugarcane. Then he was expelled from the country. He was taken to La Cabaña, a famous prison in Havana, and then to a location near Port Mariel, where he was put on a ship headed for the United States.
Although many of Jehovah’s Witnesses were forced out of the country while they were prisoners, others were collected from their homes and deported. They could not take any of their possessions with them, and, at times, could not even say farewell to their relatives. Herminio Arroyo recounts:
“The police came to our house about three o’clock in the morning, when we were asleep in bed. They had extradition papers with them and told us to get dressed. We were taken to the immigration office immediately and stripped in a search for any valuables. At about 6 p.m. that same day, we and 300 others were put on a shrimp boat to start our trip to the United States.”
Many others of Jehovah’s Witnesses had similar experiences, being visited by authorities at dawn, or before, to force them out of the country. They had to leave with, literally, only the clothes on their backs. Even wedding rings, as well as other valuables, were taken from them.
It can be understood that a government would want to be rid of criminals and undesirable people. But why the urgency to put out of the country this sincere group of Christians? What is the background of this situation?
Persecution Begins
In 1962 the Cuban government cut off the importation of Bible literature by Jehovah’s Witnesses. The State decreed that such publications were “harmful, reactionary and pro-imperialist.” Of course, those who are familiar with the work of Jehovah’s Witnesses know that this could not be true. Jehovah’s Witnesses in Cuba are the same class of decent and honest people that have a good record of behavior worldwide.
However, the persecution continued to grow. Luis Alcantur, one of the refugees now in the United States, recalls: “In November 1965, a massive attack was hurled against Jehovah’s Witnesses in Cuba, especially, at that time, against the young ones of military age. Hundreds of these young Christians ended up in various concentration camps, the majority of them in the province of Camagüey.”
Regarding the beginning of those years in prison, Alcantur says: “We were deprived of food for 12 consecutive days. They gave us water only once a day. We were kept standing, at the mercy of the sun, rain, mosquitoes and gnats. On the 11th day they plunged us into a cistern full of water.”
At that time, Alcantur was 19 years old. He had been taken prisoner for refusing to participate in military service due to his being a conscientious objector.
Another refugee, Alberto Sanchez, says of his treatment: “Because we would not compromise our faith, we were beaten, cold water was thrown on us at night, and some were tied and dragged with oxen yokes around their necks. On one occasion they aimed a gun at my head and told me to march, otherwise they would shoot. On two occasions they prepared firing squads, and we were asked to stand before them. The orders for firing were even given, but they did not shoot.
“Some Witnesses were forced to live in barracks where there were only homosexuals. But upon talking to them and explaining their Bible-based Christian position, the Witnesses were respected. This only increased the hatred expressed toward the Witnesses by the military men.”
At other camps, many more Witnesses were horribly abused. They were kept hungry, experienced nakedness, were at the mercy of mosquitoes, suffered the coldness of night in winter, were kept in isolation and were under constant threat of death. One Witness, Ursulo Brito, was hung by his feet from the ceiling for a period of time.
Persecution Mounts
In 1968 the government intensified its persecution. Jehovah’s Witnesses were constantly attacked in the press, over the radio and on television, being misrepresented as assassins, subversives and fanatics. Many other vile and untrue accusations were made. As a result, conditions became very strained even at places of employment. Many Witnesses lost good jobs and had nowhere they could appeal. They were forced to take jobs that nobody else wanted, and at very low wages.
Adding to the systematic attack, the government passed new laws imposing prison sentences on any father, mother or teacher who would instruct children in what was called “a lack of respect for patriotic organizations or symbols.” Jehovah’s Witnesses do not teach such “lack of respect.” But the government has construed as disrespectful their teaching what the Bible says, namely: “It is Jehovah your God you must worship, and it is to him alone you must render sacred service,” also: “Little children, guard yourselves from idols.”​—Matt. 4:10; 1 John 5:21.
Thus many mothers and fathers were put in prison for following the instructions of God’s Word to ‘train up a child according to the way for him’ by inculcating in the young the principles of true worship. (Prov. 22:6; Eph. 6:4) For example, one of the daughters of Herminio Arroyo recalls: “When the children refused to salute the flag, they were mistreated by other students, and teachers would often call the authorities, which led to the parents’ receiving a sentence of three to six months in jail.”
Searching the Houses
On numerous occasions, authorities carried out sudden searches of Witness homes. They were looking for something to incriminate the Witnesses. For example, Luis Alcantur says of one of these searches:
“On March 30, 1977, security agents of the State came to my house at 5 p.m. At that time they had a method of entering and searching whereby many of them would come into the house at once. Then one of them would place objects such as weapons or drugs in some place. Another agent would pretend to find them. In this way they would accuse us falsely.
“The searching of my house on that occasion ended at about 11 p.m. They took as many things as they pleased, including items of a personal nature, such as an electric shaver, clothing and money. They also took my typewriter and Bible literature. I was accused of possessing a counter-revolutionary document, but it never appeared during my trial.”
Attacked Despite Constitution
Thus it is clear that over the past two decades the government of Cuba has tried to crush Jehovah’s Witnesses. Refugee Cristo Leon called it “a systematic attack by the Cuban government against our worship.” Jehovah’s Witnesses have been banned, forbidden to import or print literature, their branch office has been shut down, their places of meeting for worship have been closed, their public ministry has been outlawed, and thousands of prison sentences have been handed out.
This 20-year-long assault clearly violates the constitution of the Republic of Cuba. That constitution “guarantees” freedom of religion. Article 54 clearly stipulates: “The socialist state, which bases its activity and educates the people in the scientific materialist concept of the universe, recognizes and guarantees freedom of conscience and the right of everyone to profess any religion and to practice, within the framework of respect for the law, the belief of his preference.”
Those who are familiar with Jehovah’s Witnesses know that such respect for law is part of their religious beliefs. Indeed, they are known worldwide for their respect for law. Hence, they should certainly have been allowed to ‘profess their religion and to practice it,’ as they are allowed to do in most other countries.
Against Other Religions?
The actions of the Cuban government against Jehovah’s Witnesses raise this question: Does the government also persecute other religions?
In Cuba there are many Catholic churches. Their doors are open to the public. The same is true of Protestant churches. But the meeting places of Jehovah’s Witnesses are closed by governmental decree. Why the double standard?
True, for a time some of the other religious groups received government pressure. But they soon compromised and allowed themselves to be used politically. But Jehovah’s Witnesses cannot do that, as it would violate their faith. Hence, they have had to bear the brunt of persecution during all these years.
Yet a question still remains unanswered. Why do Jehovah’s Witnesses follow a religious way of life that causes them so much suffering in a country such as Cuba? And how is it possible for them to endure so much hardship for so long a period of time, all the while sticking faithfully to their beliefs?
[Blurb on page 5]
“We were accused of being antisocial simply because we believed the Bible and talked about its truths to others”
[Blurb on page 6]
They had to leave with, literally, only the clothes on their backs. Even wedding rings, as well as other valuables, were taken
[Blurb on page 7]
Many mothers and fathers were put in prison for following the instructions of God’s Word to ‘train up a child according to the way for him’

