Announcements
INCREASING INTERNATIONAL PRAISE TO THE ONE GOD—Ps. 117:1.
“Praise Jehovah, all you nations; commend him, all you clans,” sings the inspired psalmist. Those who know and love him desire to see praise of him increase internationally. They strive to make known his almighty power and saving truth to peoples far and wide, with the result that in all quarters of the earth the name of Jehovah is becoming known. This month Jehovah’s witnesses will continue to carry forward their international service of praise by offering to all persons the Watchtower magazine as an aid to a better understanding and a deeper appreciation of Jehovah and his Word of truth. A year’s subscription may be had for just $1, and to each new subscriber will be given three booklets with arresting Bible messages. All who rejoice in knowledge of Jehovah are invited to join in the happy work of increasing Jehovah’s international praise.
A REPORT OF FAITHFUL ACTIVITY
Today Jehovah’s judgments are filling the earth. They began at his own house and are now proceeding to the nations. All individuals are being gathered to his right hand of favor or are being abandoned at his left for destruction. Those of his own house who have received favorable judgment are commissioned to share in the program by proclaiming Jehovah’s judgment message. Is the “good news of God’s kingdom” being preached? How far has the dividing work progressed? The answer is found in the world-wide activity of Jehovah’s witnesses as reported in the 1958 Yearbook of Jehovah’s Witnesses. It is a hard-bound book of 416 pages, packed full of fascinating experiences in preaching in 164 lands, as well as Scriptural information to provide inspirational reading for every day of the year. You will want your copy immediately. Send only 50c. Write also for the new 1958 calendar. It depicts the ingathering and the faithful reliance of Jehovah’s servants on God’s means of salvation and preservation, illustrating the year’s text: “As for me, in my integrity I shall walk.” (Ps. 26:11) Send 25c for the calendar.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES FOR THE WEEKS
February 2: The Confidence of the Upright, ¶1-21. Page 8.
February 9: The Confidence of the Upright, ¶22-28, and Qualified to Teach with Confidence, ¶1-16. Page 14.
February 16: Qualified to Teach with Confidence, ¶17-25, and Endurance Serves to Prove Integrity. Page 21.

