Increasing International Praise to the One God
“PRAISE Jehovah, all you nations; commend him, all you clans.” That call to international praise has met with remarkable response in this generation, even as seen by the 1957 field service report published in this issue of The Watchtower; and the end is not yet.—Ps. 117:1.a
That this command should be found in the book of Psalms is most apropos, for it is the book of praises, its Hebrew name Te·hil·limʹ meaning “Praises.” Its 150 psalms were composed by various writers, known and unknown, among those known being Moses, Asaph, Heman and David, the latter accounting for seventy-three of them. That these psalms are by no means merely sentimental poetry but inspired prophecy is apparent from the application of them made by Jesus and his apostles and early disciples. In fact, the eight writers of the Christian Greek Scriptures quote from 103 different psalms.
In a remarkable way the book of Psalms makes reference to the whole program of events from creation on down through our day and to the complete vindication of Jehovah’s name. It properly gives Jehovah’s name the place due it, mentioning it 848 times. Twenty-four beatitudes or happinesses are found in this book, and in its final portion twenty-three times it gives the call to “Praise Jah,” or Hallelujah! And each of its five main sections or “books” ends with a doxology or expression of blessing upon God.
With the release of the New World Translation of the five poetical books at the 1957 “Life-giving Wisdom” district assemblies, the psalms have become even more beautiful and precious to all lovers of God’s Word and praisers of Jehovah.
In Psalms we find many reasons given for praising Jehovah: because of his goodness and loving-kindness; because of his greatness, power and majesty; because of his mercy and forgiveness; because of his great acts of deliverance and salvation; and because of the blessings and honors he bestowed upon his people and, in particular, upon Jerusalem and Mount Zion.
If Jehovah’s servants back there had many reasons for praising Jehovah, and they certainly did, how much greater cause do we today have for praising him in view of the fulfillment of many of these prophetic psalms!
What effect can an understanding and appreciation of these truths have but to impel us to do all we can to cause the international praise to the one God Jehovah to increase yet more and more? Does your activity show that you have such understanding and appreciation?
[Footnotes]
For details see The Watchtower, October 15, 1957.

